 = = = Morris County = = = 
 Route 124 begins at the intersection of US 202 and CR 510 at the Park Place square in the downtown of Morristown , Morris County . From here , it heads to the southeast as South Street , a two @-@ lane undivided road that passes businesses . At the intersection with CR 663 , the road widens to four lanes . A short distance later , CR 601 continues southeast on South Street and Route 124 bears left to head east on Madison Avenue , coming to an interchange with Interstate 287 . Past this interchange , the road passes Morristown Memorial Hospital and continues through mainly commercial areas with some homes . At the intersection with Normandy Parkway , the route turns to the southeast and enters Morris Township , where it narrows to two lanes again , with New Jersey Transit ’ s Morristown Line running a short distance to the northeast of the route near the Morris County Golf Club . Route 124 continues into more residential areas and crosses into Madison . 
 Here , the route passes near some business parks before intersecting CR 636 , where it is briefly a four @-@ lane road . Past this intersection , the road passes between residential neighborhoods to the northeast and Drew University to the southwest . Route 124 crosses over the Morristown Line near James Park and becomes Main Street , heading southeast through the commercial downtown of Madison . Here , the road intersects CR 647 and CR 608 . Past the Rosedale Avenue intersection , the route heads into a mix of residential and business areas . Route 124 enters Chatham at the intersection with <unk> Road / Division Avenue . In the center of the town , the route intersects CR 638 and CR 607 before continuing east . 
 = = = Essex and Union counties = = = 
 Route 124 crosses the Passaic River and runs along the border of Millburn , Essex County to the north and Summit , Union County , coming to a large interchange with the Route 24 freeway and CR 649 ( John F. Kennedy Parkway ) . Here , the route becomes a frontage road for the Route 24 freeway that has two lanes in each direction . The road passes to the south of The Mall at Short Hills before running through the Canoe Brook Country Club . It heads southeast into wooded residential neighborhoods and intersects Union CR 657 , where the Route 124 frontage road has ramps to Route 24 . A short distance later , the route passes an overpass to nowhere that crosses over Route 24 at Brantwood Drive which was closed and walled off . The Route 124 frontage road has since eliminated the intersection at Brantwood Drive . In 2013 , City of Summit vacated the 50 @-@ foot public right of way of the old road section from Route 124 into the current Brantwood Drive . In a short distant , Route 124 intersects Essex CR 608 , at which point the route has an eastbound ramp to eastbound Route 24 and a westbound ramp from westbound Route 24 . Past this intersection , the Route 124 frontage road along Route 24 ends and the route becomes a two @-@ lane undivided road called South Service Road that closely parallels the north side of Route 24 , passing under the Morristown Line . The route heads past businesses and forms the border of Millburn to the north and Springfield Township , Union County to the south , coming to an intersection with CR 512 near an interchange with Route 24 . There is a direct ramp from westbound Route 124 to Route 24 a short distance to the northwest of this intersection . 
 From here , the route passes more commercial establishments as a four @-@ lane road , heading farther from Route 24 , before crossing CR 527 . At this intersection , Route 124 entirely enters Springfield Township and becomes Morris Avenue , passing a mix of residences and businesses . The route passes under I @-@ 78 without an interchange and becomes a two @-@ lane road that passes through the downtown of Springfield , eventually widening to four lanes again . In this area , it intersects CR 635 . Route 124 comes to a circular junction with Route 82 , County Route 509 Spur ( CR 509 Spur ) , and CR 577 . Here , Route 82 continues southeast on Morris Avenue , CR 509 Spur heads south , and CR 577 heads north . Route 124 , meanwhile , briefly splits into a one @-@ way pair here . The eastbound direction heads south on Meisel Avenue before turning north along Maple Avenue while the westbound direction follows Springfield Avenue . The two directions of Route 124 rejoin and follow four @-@ lane divided Springfield Avenue northeast to a partial interchange with I @-@ 78 . Here , there are ramps from the local lanes of eastbound I @-@ 78 to both directions of Route 124 , to the local lanes of westbound I @-@ 78 and Route 24 from both directions of Route 124 , and to the express lanes of westbound Interstate 78 from westbound Route 124 . 
 Past this interchange , the route enters Union Township and continues east through developed areas , intersecting CR 638 before narrowing into a two @-@ lane undivided road and intersecting CR 630 . It continues through more urban commercial areas before intersecting CR 630 again . At this point , Route 124 crosses into Maplewood , Essex County and becomes a three @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane that is locally maintained . This road heads east through the downtown of Maplewood , coming to an intersection with CR 601 . A short distance later , the Route 124 designation ends at the border of Maplewood and Irvington , with Springfield Avenue continuing east into Irvington as CR 603 toward Newark . 
 = = History = = 
 What is modern @-@ day Route 124 was designated as a part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 5 , a route that was legislated in 1916 to run from Delaware in Warren County east to Newark . In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , this portion of pre @-@ 1927 Route 5 became a part of Route 24 , a road that was to run from Phillipsburg to Newark . In the 1950s , plans were made to bypass this portion of Route 24 with a freeway running from Interstate 287 in Hanover Township to Interstate 78 in Springfield Township ; this was approved of in 1960 . This freeway was completed between Interstate 78 and the John F. Kennedy Parkway in 1972 . The Route 24 designation was moved to the new freeway and Route 124 was designated along the former alignment of Route 24 east of this point , which included frontage roads built where the new freeway ran along the old alignment of the road . Following the completion of the Route 24 freeway to Interstate 287 in 1992 , Route 124 was extended west along the former alignment of Route 24 between the John F. Kennedy Parkway and U.S. Route 202 in Morristown . In 2002 , maintenance of the portion of Route 124 in Maplewood was transferred to the municipality from the New Jersey Department of Transportation . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Boden Professor of Sanskrit election , 1860 = 
 The election in 1860 for the position of Boden Professor of Sanskrit at the University of Oxford was a hotly contested affair between two rival candidates offering different approaches to Sanskrit scholarship . One was Monier Williams , an Oxford @-@ educated Englishman who had spent 14 years teaching Sanskrit to those preparing to work in British India for the East India Company . The other , Max Müller , was a German @-@ born lecturer at Oxford specialising in comparative philology , the science of language . He had spent many years working on an edition of the Rig Veda ( an ancient collection of Vedic Sanskrit hymns ) , and had gained an international reputation for his scholarship . Williams , in contrast , worked on later material and had little time for the " continental " school of Sanskrit scholarship that Müller exemplified . Williams regarded the study of Sanskrit as a means to an end , namely the conversion of India to Christianity . For Müller , his work , while it would assist missionaries , was also valuable as an end in itself . 
 The election came at a time of public debate about Britain 's role in India in the wake of the Indian Rebellion of 1857 . Opinions were divided on whether greater efforts should be made to convert India or whether to remain sensitive to local culture and traditions . Both men battled for the votes of the electorate ( the Convocation of the university , consisting of over 3 @,@ 700 graduates ) through manifestos and newspaper correspondence . Williams laid great stress in his campaign on the intention of the original founder of the chair , that the holder should assist in converting India through dissemination of the Christian scriptures . Müller 's view was that his work on the Rig Veda was of great value for missionary work , and published testimonials accordingly . He also wanted to teach wider subjects such as Indian history and literature to assist missionaries , scholars , and civil servants – a proposal that Williams criticised as not in accordance with the original benefactor 's wishes . The rival campaigns took out newspaper advertisements and circulated manifestos , and different newspapers backed each man . Although generally regarded as the superior to Williams in scholarship , Müller had the double disadvantage ( in the eyes of some ) of being German and having liberal Christian views . Some of the newspaper pronouncements in favour of Williams were based on a claimed national interest of having an Englishman as Boden professor to assist with the work of governing and converting India . 
 Special trains to Oxford were provided on the day of the election , 7 December 1860 , for non @-@ residents to cast their votes . At the end of the hard @-@ fought campaign , Williams won by a majority of over 220 votes . Thereafter , he helped to establish the Indian Institute at Oxford , received a knighthood , and held the chair until his death in 1899 . Müller , although deeply disappointed by his defeat , remained in Oxford for the rest of his career , but never taught Sanskrit there . The 1860 election was the last time that Convocation chose the Boden professor , as this power was removed in 1882 as a result of reforms imposed by Parliament . As of 2016 , the professorship is still in existence , and is now the last remaining Sanskrit professorship in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Background = = 
 The position of Boden professor at the University of Oxford was established by the bequest of Lieutenant Colonel Joseph Boden of the Bombay Native Infantry , who died in 1811 . His will provided that on the death of his daughter ( which occurred in 1827 ) , his estate should pass to the university to fund a Sanskrit professorship . His purpose was to convert the people of India to Christianity " by disseminating a knowledge of the Sacred scriptures among them " . The university statutes governing the chair provided that the professor should be chosen by the members of Convocation – all those who had obtained the Oxford degree of Master of Arts , whether or not they taught in the university – rather than by the professors and college fellows . At the time of the 1860 election , there were 3 @,@ 786 members of Convocation . According to the religious historian Gwilym Beckerlegge , the professorship was regarded at the time as " prestigious and handsomely remunerated " . An editorial in the British national newspaper The Times in 1860 said that the professorship was " one of the most important , most influential , and most widely known institutions at Oxford , not to say in the whole civilised world . " It paid between £ 900 and £ 1 @,@ 000 per year for life . 
 The first Boden professor , Horace Hayman Wilson , was elected in 1832 and died on 8 May 1860 . The election for his successor came at a time of public debate about the nature of British missionary work in India , particularly after the Indian Rebellion of 1857 . The East India Company , which controlled the British territories until they were absorbed into the British Empire in 1858 , had had a general policy until 1813 of non @-@ interference with Indian customs , including religion . Christian missionaries required a licence to proselytize . In practice , most could operate without a licence , except for Evangelicals , who were regarded as too radical in an age when Christians from other backgrounds were more prepared to be tolerant of other faiths . As the Evangelical movement grew in strength , it pressed for greater efforts to bring Christianity to India , and so the company relaxed its approach to missionaries in 1813 . After 1858 , the British government was reluctant to provoke further unrest by interference with local traditions and religion , but many of those charged with running India were themselves Evangelicals sympathetic to efforts to convert the country . As Beckerlegge has commented , " the furtherance of Christian mission had become inextricably bound up with attempts to define Britain 's role in India and indeed to justify Britain 's presence in India . " The issue was whether Britain was there simply to govern India or to " civilise " it , and if the latter , whether to draw up or destroy India 's existing culture and religion . Many of those who supported increased missionary work in India , says Beckerlegge , regarded the events of 1857 as " nothing less than a divine judgment " on Britain 's failure to bring Christianity to the country . 
 There were two schools of thought on whether Sanskrit should be taught for the purpose of assisting the administration and conversion of India , or for its own merits . The East India Company had provided instruction in Sanskrit to its employees at its college at Haileybury , Hertfordshire , and the College of Fort William in Calcutta , to educate them in local culture . For some , this led to an interest in Indian religion and culture as revealed in the Sanskrit texts . This was in contrast to the situation in continental Europe , where scholars examined Sanskrit as part of the " science of language " , comparative philology , rather than for reasons of imperial administration . Fewer European scholars visited India , but many British <unk> had lived and worked there . Some British scholars in other fields had strong doubts in any event about Sanskrit , as a " crude linguistic forgery pieced out of Latin and Greek " , or as proving little " except a thoroughly unwelcome kinship between Briton and Brahmin " , in the words of the American academic Linda Dowling . 
 = = Candidates = = 
 Although five men indicated their intent to seek the chair in 1860 or were proposed in their absence , in the end the two who contested the election were Monier Williams and Max Müller . Williams ( known later in life as Sir Monier Monier @-@ Williams ) was the son of an army officer and was born in India . He studied briefly at Balliol College , Oxford , before training at Haileybury for the civil service in India . The death of his brother in battle in India led to him to return to Oxford to complete his degree . He also studied Sanskrit with Wilson before teaching this and other languages at Haileybury from 1844 until 1858 , when it closed following the Indian rebellion . He prepared an English – Sanskrit dictionary , at Wilson 's prompting , which the East India Company published in 1851 ; his Sanskrit – English dictionary was supported by the Secretary of State for India . As the Dutch anthropologist Peter van der Veer has written , Williams " had an Evangelical zeal " according with the views that had inspired Boden to establish the chair . 
 Müller was from the German duchy of Anhalt @-@ Dessau and took up Sanskrit at university as a fresh intellectual challenge after mastering Greek and Latin . At this time , Sanskrit was a comparatively new subject of study in Europe , and its connections with the traditional classical languages had attracted interest from those examining the nature and history of languages . He obtained his doctorate from Leipzig University in 1843 , aged 19 , and after a year studying in Berlin he began work in Paris on the first printed edition of the Rig Veda ( an ancient collection of Vedic Sanskrit hymns ) . What was supposed to be a brief visit to England for research in 1846 turned into a lifelong stay . The Prussian diplomat Baron von Bunsen and Wilson persuaded the directors of the East India Company to provide financial support for Oxford University Press to publish the Rig Veda . Müller settled in Oxford in 1848 and continued his Sanskrit research , becoming <unk> Professor of Modern European Languages in 1854 after three years as the deputy professor ; in this post he was paid £ 500 per year , half the stipend of the Boden chair . A British citizen from 1855 , he was elected a Fellow of All Souls College in 1858 , " an unprecedented honour for a foreigner at that time " , in the words of his biographer , the Indian writer <unk> C. Chaudhuri . 
 Three other scholars indicated an intention to stand for the chair , or were nominated by others , but withdrew before the ballot . The candidacy of Edward Cowell , Professor of Sanskrit at the Government College in Calcutta , was announced in The Times on 28 May 1860 , where it was said that Wilson had pronounced him " eminently qualified " to succeed him . He later wrote from India refusing to stand against Müller . Ralph Griffith , a former Boden scholar who was a professor at the Government Sanskrit College in Benares , announced his candidacy in August 1860 , but withdrew in November . James R. Ballantyne , principal of the college in Benares , was proposed in June 1860 by friends based in England , who described him as the " chief of British Sanscrit scholars " . 
 = = = Müller 's manifesto = = = 
 Müller announced his candidacy on 14 May 1860 , six days after Wilson 's death . His submission to Convocation referred to his work in editing the Rig Veda , saying that without it missionaries could not fully learn about the teachings of Hinduism , which impeded their work . As a result , he had , he considered , " spent the principal part of my life in promoting the object of the Founder of the Chair of Sanskrit . " He promised to work exclusively on Sanskrit , and said that he would provide testimonials from " the most eminent Sanskrit scholars in Europe and India " and from missionaries who had used his publications to help " overthrow the ancient systems of idolatry " in India . In due course , he was able to provide a list of missionary societies that had requested copies of the Rig Veda from the East India Company , including the Church Missionary Society and the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel . 
 = = = Williams 's manifesto = = = 
 Williams declared his intention to stand for election on 15 May 1860 , one day after Müller . In his written submission to Convocation , he emphasised his suitability for appointment in the light of Boden 's missionary wishes . After giving details of his life and career , particularly his experience in Sanskrit obtained at Haileybury , he stated that for the past 14 years " the one idea of my life has been to make myself thoroughly conversant with Sanskrit , and by every means in my power to facilitate the study of its literature . " He assured voters that , if elected , " my utmost energies shall be devoted to the one object which its Founder had in view ; — namely ' The promotion of a more general and critical knowledge of the Sanskrit language , as a means of enabling Englishmen to proceed in the conversion of the natives of India to the Christian religion . ' " Unlike Müller , he regarded the study of Sanskrit " as chiefly a means to the missionary conversion of the Hindus rather than as an end in itself " , as Dowling puts it . In this way , Dowling says , he could attempt to deflect attention from his " modest abilities in classical Sanskrit " when compared to Müller 's " internationally acknowledged achievements " . Moreover , the appeal to Boden 's original intentions came during a period when Convocation tended to pay little attention to the expressed wishes of benefactors . 
 = = Rival campaigns = = 
 In August 1860 , Müller wrote to the members of Convocation about his plans to teach a broad range of topics in addition to Sanskrit , including comparative philology , Indian history , and literature . Simply teaching the language " would be but a mean return " for Boden 's generosity , he wrote . In this way , he would help to supply " efficient " missionaries , " useful " civil servants , and " distinguished " Boden scholars . 
 In turn , Williams wrote that if Boden had left instructions that the man elected should be the one " most likely to secure a world @-@ wide reputation for the Sanskrit Chair , I confess that I should have hesitated to prosecute my design . " However , this was not the case and it would be " unjustifiable " in terms of the statutes governing the chair if the professor were to lecture on wider topics . In his view , the Vedic literature was " of less importance " and the philosophical literature was " very mystical and abstruse " , whereas " the classical or modern " period ( the laws , two heroic poems , and the plays ) was the " most important " . Reminding his readers that he had edited two Sanskrit plays , he stated that the literature of the third period constituted the Sanskrit scriptures , not ( " as has hitherto been believed " ) the Veda , " still less the Rig Veda " . He commented that Müller 's edition of the Rig Veda was requiring " an expenditure of time , labour , money , and erudition far greater than was ever bestowed on any edition of the Holy Bible " , adding that Boden did not intend to " aid in the missionary work by perpetuating and diffusing the obsolescent Vedic Scriptures . " He claimed that his own approach to Sanskrit scholarship , with his dictionaries and grammar books , was " suited to English minds " , unlike Müller 's " continental " and " philosophical " approach , which dealt with texts no longer relevant to modern Hindus that missionaries would not benefit from studying . 
 In a letter to The Times published on 29 October 1860 , Müller took issue with Williams . To the claim that it would be unjustifiable to teach history , philosophy , and other subjects as Boden professor , he quoted from one of Wilson 's public lectures in which he had said that it had always been his intention to offer " a general view of the institutions and social condition , the literature , and religion of the Hindus . " He noted that he had published in all three areas into which Williams divided Sanskrit literature , and disputed Williams 's views on the relative importance of Vedic literature with reference to a review of one of his publications by Wilson . Williams , he said , " stands as yet alone " in asserting that the heroic poems and the plays , not the Vedas , were the real scriptures . He refused to accept Williams 's estimate of the labour involved in the edition of the Rig Veda , and said that to compare his little effort with that carried out on the Bible was " almost irreverent . " He concluded by attempting to rebut the claim that Boden would not have wanted the Vedic scriptures to be supported . He noted that the Bishop of Calcutta ( George Cotton ) had written that it was of " the greatest importance " for missionaries to study Sanskrit and its scriptures " to be able to meet the Pundits on their own ground " , and that the bishop 's view was that nothing could be more valuable in this work that Müller 's edition , and Wilson 's translation , of the Rig @-@ Veda . " 
 After this letter , Williams complained about Müller conducting his campaign in the newspapers and misrepresenting what Williams was saying . Müller asked three professors and the Provost of Queen 's College to consider the accuracy of his letter , and they pronounced in his favour . In Beckerlegge 's view , all these replies and counter @-@ replies did was " illustrate the increasingly heated tone of the exchanges " between the two men and their supporters . It was " as if the protagonists were prospective members of Parliament " , in the words of one modern scholar . Terence Thomas , a British lecturer in religious studies , records " insults regarding the nationality of Max Müller and the proficiency of Monier Williams as a <unk> being bandied back and forth by their supporters . " For example , one of the Boden scholars at Oxford , Robinson Ellis , claimed that Williams had not been able to prove that he could read a Sanskrit text . When challenged , he later amended this to a claim that Williams could only read a text when he could compare it to another one , describing this as " mechanical labour which is paid for at the public libraries at Paris and Berlin at the rate of half a crown a year . " 
 Each had a committee of helpers ; Williams had two , one in London , the other in Oxford . He spent over £ 1 @,@ 000 on his campaign – as much as the Boden professor was paid in a year . In June 1860 , Müller complained in a letter to his mother about having to write to each one of the " 4 @,@ 000 electors , scattered all over England " ; he said that sometimes he wished he had not thought of standing for election , adding " if I don 't win , I shall be very cross ! " . 
 = = Supporters and newspapers = = 
 According to Beckerlegge , there was a view held by many of those involved in the keenly fought struggle between Williams and Müller that more depended on the result than simply one man 's career – missionary success or failure in India , " and even the future stability of British rule in this region " ( in the light of events in India a few years previously ) might depend on the abilities of the Boden professor . Victory would depend on each side 's ability to persuade non @-@ resident members of Convocation to return to Oxford to cast their votes . Each candidate had their supporters : Müller was backed by scholars of international merit , whereas Williams was able to call upon Oxford @-@ based academics and those who had served in India as administrators or missionaries . Both candidates claimed support from Wilson – " as if the principle of apostolic succession was involved in the appointment " , says Chaudhuri . The Times reported on 23 May that friends of Williams placed considerable weight upon a private letter to him from Wilson , " indicating Mr. Williams as his probable successor . " In return , Wilson was revealed to have said " two months before his death " that " Mr. Max Müller was the first Sanskrit scholar in Europe " . The source of this information was W. S. W. Vaux , of the British Museum , who described his conversation with Wilson in a letter to Müller in May 1860 . In reply to Vaux 's comment that he and others wanted Wilson 's successor to be " the finest man we could procure " , Vaux quoted Wilson as saying that " You will be quite right if your choice should fall on Max Müller . " 
 The Times published a list of leading supporters for each candidate on 27 June 1860 , noting that many people were not declaring support for either " since they wish to see whether any person of real eminence announces himself from India " . Müller was backed by Francis Leighton , Henry Liddell and William Thomson ( the heads of the colleges of All Souls , Christ Church , and Queen 's ) , Edward Pusey , William Jacobson and Henry Acland ( the Regius Professors of Hebrew , of Divinity , and of Medicine ) and others . Williams had the declared support of the heads of University and Balliol colleges ( Frederick Charles Plumptre and Robert Scott ) , and fellows from ten different colleges . 
 On 5 December 1860 , two days before the election , friends of Müller took out an advertisement in The Times to list his supporters , in response to a similar record circulated on behalf of Williams . By then , Müller 's list included the heads of 11 colleges or halls of the university , 27 professors , over 40 college fellows and tutors , and many non @-@ resident members of the university including Samuel Wilberforce ( the Bishop of Oxford ) and Sir Charles Wood ( the Secretary of State for India ) . A list published on the following day added the name of Charles Longley , Archbishop of York , to Müller 's supporters . Overall , the public supporters for each candidate were about the same in number , but while Müller was backed by " all the noted Orientalists of Europe of the age " , Williams 's supporters " were not so distinguished " , according to Chaudhuri . 
 Newspapers and journals joined the debate , some in strong terms . One evangelical publication , The Record , contrasted the two candidates : Müller 's writings were " familiar to all persons interested in literature , while they have destroyed confidence in his religious opinions " ; Williams was described as " a man of sincere piety , and one who is likely , by the blessing of God on his labours , to promote the ultimate object which the founder of the Professorship had in view . " Other newspapers highlighted the nationalities of the candidates ; as Beckerlegge has put it , " voting for the Boden Chair was increasingly taking on the appearance of being a test of patriotism . " The Homeward Mail ( a London @-@ based newspaper that concentrated on news from , and relating to , India ) asked its readers whether they wanted " a stranger and a foreigner " to win , or " one of your own body " . A writer in The Morning Post said that voters should " keep the great prizes of the English universities for English students " . The Morning Herald said that it was " a question of national interest " , since it would affect the education of civil servants and missionaries and therefore " the progress of Christianity in India and the maintenance of British authority in that empire " . It anticipated that Britain would be ridiculed if it had to appoint a German to its leading academic Sanskrit position . 
 Müller was not without support in the press . An editorial in The Times on 29 October 1860 called him " nothing more nor less than the best Sanscrit scholar in the world . " It compared the situation to the 1832 election , when there had also been a choice between the best scholar ( Wilson ) and a good scholar " who was held to have made the most Christian use of the gift " ( William Hodge Mill ) . Williams , it said , appeared as " the University man ... , the man sufficiently qualified for the post , and , above all , as the man in whose hands , it is whispered , the interests of Christianity will be perfectly safe . " His proposal not to teach history , philosophy , mythology or comparative philology " seems to strip the subject very bare " and would , it thought , leave the post as " an empty chair . " It stated that Müller " best answers to the terms of Colonel Boden 's foundation . " His field of study – the oldest period of Sanskrit literature – " must be the key of the whole position " , whereas Williams was only familiar with the later , " less authentic , and less sacred " writings . The editorial ended by saying that Oxford " will not choose the less learned candidate ; at all events , it will not accept from him that this is the true principle of a sound Christian election . " 
 Pusey , the influential " high church " Anglican theologian associated with the Oxford Movement , wrote a letter of support to Müller , reproduced in The Times . In his view , Boden 's intentions would be best advanced by electing Müller . Missionaries could not win converts without knowing the details of the religion of those with whom they were dealing , he wrote , and Müller 's publications were " the greatest gifts which have yet been bestowed " on those in such work . He added that Oxford would gain by electing him to a position where Müller could spend all his time on work " of such primary and lasting importance for the conversion of India . " Beckerlegge finds Pusey 's support noteworthy , since Pusey would not have agreed with Müller 's particular " broad " approach to Christianity , and was thus providing a judgment on the academic abilities of the candidate best placed to advance missionary work in India . One anonymous writer of a letter to the press in support of Müller , shortly before the election , expressed it thus : " A man 's personal character must stand very high , and his theological opinions can afford but little ground for <unk> on either hand , when he unites as his unhesitating supporters Dr. Pusey and Dr. Macbride " – a reference to John Macbride , described in the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography as " a profoundly religious layman of the ' old ' evangelical school " . However , Dowling describes Müller as " <unk> of the subtle twists of theological argument , the fine shadings and <unk> of Victorian religious feeling " – a weakness that was held against him . 
 = = Election = = 
 The election was held on 7 December 1860 in the Sheldonian Theatre . Three special trains were laid on between Didcot and Oxford that afternoon to meet passengers travelling from the west of England , and one additional train was provided between Oxford and London via Didcot in the evening . A London @-@ bound train from the north of England called additionally at Bletchley to allow onward connections to Oxford for passengers from places such as Liverpool , Manchester and Birkenhead . Evangelical clergymen turned out in force to vote . Over about five and a half hours of voting , 833 members of Congregation declared for Williams , 610 for Müller . 
 Historians have advanced various views as to why , even though Müller was generally regarded as the superior scholar , he lost to Williams . Beckerlegge suggests several possible factors : unlike Williams , Müller was known as a writer and translator rather than a teacher of Sanskrit , he did not have links to the East India Company or the Indian Civil Service that he could call upon for supporters , and he had not been educated at Oxford . In his obituary of Müller , Arthur Macdonell ( Boden professor 1899 – 1926 ) said that the election " came to turn on the political and religious opinions of the candidates rather than on their merits as Sanskrit scholars " , adding that " party feeling ran high and large numbers came up to vote . " Similarly , Dowling has written that " in the less cosmopolitan precincts outside Oxford ... the argument that Müller was ' not English ' told heavily against him " since " the argument was ( and was meant to be , of course ) unanswerable . " She adds that Tories opposed him for his liberal political views , traditionalist factions within Oxford rejected " Germanizing " reform , and " the Anglican clergy ... detected <unk> lurking in his umlaut " . The American historian Marjorie Wheeler @-@ Barclay takes the view that the three motives for people voting against Müller cannot be disentangled . Those who supported Indian missionary work , Dowling writes , saw it as the key to continued British rule , and there was no need to take a chance by electing Müller , who had " a reputation for unsound religious opinions " , since Williams was a scholar " of distinction known for his conservatism and piety . " 
 Müller attributed his defeat to his German background and suspicions that his Christianity was insufficiently orthodox , factors that had been used to influence in particular those voters who were no longer resident members of the university . He had lost , he wrote , because of " <unk> falsehood and vulgar electioneering tactics " Williams wrote in his unpublished autobiography that he had been " favoured by circumstances " and that , unlike Müller , he had been regarded as politically and religiously conservative . 
 = = Subsequent events = = 
 Williams was Boden professor until his death in 1899 , although he retired from teaching ( while retaining the title ) in 1887 because of his health . He took as the title for his inaugural lecture " The Study of Sanskrit in Relation to Missionary Work " , in keeping with his views as to the role of the chair . Thomas notes that as the East India Company had switched to using English rather than Sanskrit or Persian for its work , " a natural source of students had already dried up not long after the Boden Chair was inaugurated [ in 1832 ] " . Williams helped establish the Indian Institute at Oxford , proposing the idea in 1875 and helping to raise funds for the project on his visits to India , and persuaded the university to add a degree course in oriental studies . His publications included translations of plays and grammatical works . He received a knighthood in 1886 , and was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the Indian Empire in 1887 , when he changed his surname to become Sir Monier Monier @-@ Williams . 
 Robinson Ellis was required to attend Williams 's lectures despite his low opinions of the new professor 's abilities . Williams said that Ellis 's " whole demeanour was that of a person who would have welcomed an earthquake or any convulsion of nature which would have opened a way for him to sink out of my sight " . Overall , Williams won over most of those who had opposed his election , with the exception of Müller . 
 For Müller , losing the election was " a decisive turning point in his scholarly and intellectual life " , according to Chaudhuri . It meant that Müller was never to teach Sanskrit at Oxford , although he remained there until his death in 1900 ; nor did he ever visit India . Greatly disappointed by not winning the chair , Müller " regularly avoided or snubbed Monier Williams and his family on the streets of Oxford " , according to Williams . He was appointed to a chair of comparative philology in 1868 , the first Oxford professorship to be established by the university itself without money from royal or private donations . He wrote a letter of resignation in 1875 when the university proposed to award an honorary doctorate to Williams , giving as his reason that he wanted to spend more time studying Sanskrit . Friends attempted to talk him out of it , and the university then appointed a deputy professor to discharge his duties , an honour he greatly appreciated . 
 The Indian historian Rajesh <unk> , noting the East India Company 's support for Müller , commented that " Oxford professors may have had their own reasons for their assessment of him , but the Company and the natives both found him very relevant . " Despite his electoral defeat , he enjoyed a high reputation at Oxford and beyond : he " occupied a central role in the intellectual life of the nation " , according to Beckerlegge , and was " viewed by the world as a model of academic success " ( as Dowling puts it ) . Dowling considers that " [ w ] <unk> his own lifetime , Müller was discredited as a linguistic scientist " and has " little relevance " to later models of the study of language . In Beckerlegge 's opinion , Müller 's views about the nature of Christian missionary work showed the difficulty at that time for Christian academics " actively working to promote a more tolerant and even @-@ handed study of other religious traditions " . 
 Of the other candidates , Cowell was elected as the first Sanskrit professor at the University of Cambridge in 1867 , supported by Müller and others . Griffith was principal of his college from 1861 until 1878 ( succeeding Ballantyne ) ; he carried out further work in India after his retirement , and died there . Ballantyne resigned as principal because of health problems and returned to England , where he served as librarian to the India Office ( a position that Wilson had held in addition to the professorship ) until his death in 1864 . 
 The academic Jeremy Dibble ( in his biography of the composer John Stainer , a friend of Müller ) has written that the election " amply foreshadowed the ensuing battle between contemporary sacred and secular forces in the university , the anachronism of Oxford 's systems of academic election and the burning need for reform " . The Universities of Oxford and Cambridge Act 1877 continued a process of change imposed by Parliament that had begun in the middle of the 19th century , and empowered a group of commissioners to lay down new statutes for the university and its colleges . The commissioners ' powers included the ability to rewrite trusts and directions attached to gifts that were 50 years old or more . The statutes governing the Boden chair were revised by the commissioners in 1882 ; Joseph Boden 's original proselytising purpose was no longer mentioned , nor was the professor to be chosen by Convocation . The commissioners ' new statutes for Balliol College in 1881 included a provision that the holder of the Boden professorship was to be appointed as a fellow of the college , creating a link between the chair and Balliol that is still in place . As with other professorships , the University Council now makes arrangements for convening a board of electors , upon which Balliol has two representatives , in the event of a vacancy . As of 2016 , the Sanskrit professor is Christopher Minkowski , appointed in 2005 . His predecessor Richard Gombrich has said that he had to " fight a great battle " in 2004 to ensure that another professor was appointed after he retired , and credited his victory to the university 's realisation that it was the last chair in Sanskrit left in the United Kingdom . 
 = NLRB v. J. Weingarten , Inc . = 
 NLRB v. J. Weingarten , Inc . , 420 U.S. 251 ( 1975 ) is a US labor law case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States . It held that employees in unionized workplaces have the right under the National Labor Relations Act to the presence of a union steward during any management inquiry that the employee reasonably believes may result in discipline . 
 = = Facts = = 
 In 1972 , J. Weingarten , Inc . ( Weingarten ) operated a chain of food outlets . Weingarten operated two types of food establishments : stores with lunch counters and lobby food operations . Weingarten 's purported policy was to allow employees at stores with lunch counters a free lunch , but employees at lobby food operations were not allowed a free lunch ; this distinction ( and what the actual policy was ) would figure in the controversy to follow . 
 Beginning in 1961 , Leura Collins was employed as a sales person at Store No. 2 , which was a store with a lunch counter . Then in 1970 , she was transferred to Store No. 98 , which was a lobby food operation , where she again worked as a sales person . As a Weingarten sales person , Collins was represented under a collective bargaining agreement by Local Union No 455 of the Retail Clerks Union , which later became part of United Food and Commercial Workers . After a report that Collins was taking money from the cash register , an internal Weingarten investigator spent two days in June 1972 observing the store without the knowledge of Store No. 98 's manager . After completing the surveillance , the investigator informed the store manager of his presence and reported that he could find nothing wrong . The store manager then told the investigator that one coworker had reported that Collins failed to pay full price for a box of chicken she had purchased . 
 The manager and investigator summoned Collins for an interview and questioned her . Collins asked for the presence of a union representative several times but was refused by the manager each time . Upon questioning , Collins explained that she had put four pieces of chicken ( which cost $ 1 total ) into a larger box ( one which could hold $ 2 @.@ 98 of chicken ) because the store had run out of the four @-@ piece sized boxes . To check Collins 's story , the investigator left to ask the coworker who had reported her . The coworker confirmed that the store had run out of $ 1 size boxes and admitted she did not know how much chicken Collins had placed in the larger box . The investigator returned to the interview , apologized to Collins , and prepared to let her go . 
 Collins then burst into tears and exclaimed that the only thing she had ever gotten from the store without paying was her free lunch . This prompted renewed questioning from the investigator and manager because of the differing policies regarding free lunches at lobby food operations ( not allowed ) versus stores with lunch counters ( allowed ) . Collins again requested and was refused the presence of a union representative . Based on the questioning , the investigator prepared a statement that Collins owed $ 160 for lunches but she refused to sign the statement . It was later found that most ( if not all ) of the employees at Store No. 98 ( including the manager ) took free lunches because they had never been informed of the policy prohibiting it . When the investigator contacted company headquarters during the interview , the company itself was uncertain whether the policy against free lunches was even in effect at that store . 
 As a result , the investigator terminated the questioning and the store manager asked Collins to keep the inquiry private . However , Collins reported the interview to her shop steward and other union representatives . As a result , an unfair labor practice proceeding was brought before the National Labor Relations Board ( NLRB ) . 
 = = Judgment = = 
 = = = National Labor Relations Board = = = 
 The NLRB applied a right it had recently announced in Quality <unk> . Co. and then clarified in Mobil Oil Corp. that employees in unionized workplaces had a right under Section 7 of the National Labor Relations Act ( NLRA ) to the presence of a union representative during any inquiry where the employee 's job might be in jeopardy . The NLRB had explained in those decisions that having a union representative present was an exercise of the right to the ' mutual aid and protection ' protected by Section 7 . Therefore , an employer 's refusal of such presence was an unfair labor practice and actionable under the NLRA . As a result , the NLRB found that Weingarten had engaged in an unfair labor practice by refusing Collins a representative and Weingarten appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit . 
 = = = Fifth Circuit = = = 
 The Fifth Circuit held that this interpretation of Section 7 was impermissible and refused to enforce the NLRB order . The Fifth Circuit followed the lead of the Seventh and Fourth circuits which had refused to enforce the NLRB 's previous decisions in Mobil Oil Corp. and Quality <unk> . Co. respectively . The Fifth Circuit argued that no union presence was necessary in Collins ' questioning because the company was not attempting to bargain with her in any way . Additionally , the court argued that requiring a union representative any time the threat of discipline was present would extend the scope of the NLRA far too broadly . The NLRB appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States , which granted certiorari to hear the case . 
 = = = US Supreme Court = = = 
 The Supreme Court , reversing the Fifth Circuit , held that the NLRB decision was appropriate because its interpretation of the NLRA was permissible . The Court explained that the NLRB is entrusted with the responsibility to adapt the NLRA to changing times and that as a result courts reviewing its decisions only have the authority to reject its interpretations of the NLRA if those decisions are impermissible under it . This also led to the Court 's observation that the NLRB can change its interpretation of the NLRA over time and is not required to comply with its earlier decisions . 
 The Court held that in this case the NLRB 's interpretation of Section 7 was permissible because union representation at employer inquiries constitutes " concerted activity for mutual aid or protection " under the statute . While a particular inquiry might only have implications for one worker , each employee has an interest in the outcome as it establishes rules they will have to follow in the future . The Court further pointed out that having a representative present will help the employee who may be too " fearful or inarticulate " to accurately participate in the investigation as well as the employer by eliciting facts and helping find other sources for the investigation . The Court also pointed out that requiring a union representative at inquiries was consistent with actual labor practice as something already found in many workplaces . As a result , the Court reversed and remanded directing the Fifth Circuit to enter a judgment enforcing the NLRB order . Justice Brennan said the following . 
 Justice Burger dissented arguing that the NLRB had not adequately explained and justified its decision to impose the union representative presence requirement . He argued that the Court was not required to accept the NLRB decision because it was not adequately explained . Justice Burger stated that he would remand the case to the NLRB for a fuller explanation of its decision . 
 Justice Powell argued that the NLRB 's interpretation of Section 7 was impermissible because having a union representative present during an investigation is a matter left by the NLRA to the bargaining process . He argued that the NLRA only creates the framework in which employers and unions bargain for employment benefits and does not cover specific benefits like the right to have a union representative present . He further explained that Section 7 only " protects those rights that are essential to employee self @-@ organization " which did not include the right at issue in the case . As a result , he would have affirmed the Fifth Circuit because the right to the presence of a union representative was not covered by Section 7 . 
 Justice Powell also prophetically noted that the rationales relied upon by the majority and the NLRB were applicable not only to unionized workplaces , but also to situations where there is no union . 
 = = Significance = = 
 Since Weingarten was decided , the NLRB has extended and retracted its protections several times . While the right announced in the case has never been removed , the NLRB has changed its mind several times as to whether or not the right to have a representative present during investigations applies to non @-@ union workplaces . In 1982 in the case of Materials Research Corp. , the NLRB extended the right to workplaces that did not have unions . The NLRB reasoned that the right was derived from Section 7 of the NLRA rather than Section 9 . While Section 9 covers the exclusive rights of unions to act in the collective bargaining process and are thus only available in unionized workplaces , Section 7 rights are available to employees without a union and thus do not vary based on whether the workplace is unionized . The NLRB further explained that the right to have another employee present during interviews that might lead to discipline helped to reduce the inequality between employees and management as intended by the NLRA . This would also be true regardless of whether a workplace was unionized . 
 However , the NLRB removed this right from non @-@ unionized workplaces only three years later in the 1985 of Sears , Roebuck & Co . In that case , the NLRB explained that the right to a union representative during inquiries that could lead to discipline was appropriate because a union protects the rights of all workers by safeguarding the terms and conditions for each individual worker . However , when there is no union present the right is inappropriate because employers have the authority to deal with employees on an individual basis and the right to the presence of another employee interferes with that . The NLRB further explained that a representative protects the interests not just of the individual employee , but of the entire collective bargaining unit . As a result , giving employees in non @-@ unionized workplaces is like requiring the employer to deal with the equivalent of a union representative which is not intended by the NLRA . As a result , employees who are not represented by unions do not have the right to a representative during inquiries . 
 In the 2001 case of Epilepsy <unk> of Ne . Ohio , the NLRB again extended the right to non @-@ unionized workplaces , and this decision was affirmed by the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit . Then , the NLRB again withdrew the right in the 2004 case of IBM Corp. The NLRB noted that either interpretation of the NLRA , extending the right to representation during investigations that may lead to discipline or not doing so , was permissible . Therefore , whether or not to extend the right is purely a policy decision for the NLRB to make . After considering the policy issues on both sides , the NLRB decided that the “ employer ’ s right to conduct prompt , efficient , thorough , and confidential workplace investigations ” outweighed the employee ’ s right to representation during those investigations and withdrew the right from workplaces without unions . 
 As of 2007 , workers who are not union members do not have the right to the presence of a representative during management inquiries . However , since the NLRB has changed its decision on this issue over time , it is unclear whether that will be true in the future . 
 = Barry Zito = 
 Barry William Zito ( born May 13 , 1978 ) is an American former professional baseball pitcher . He played 15 seasons in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) for the Oakland Athletics and San Francisco Giants . His pitching repertoire consisted of a curveball ( his strikeout pitch ) , a four @-@ seam fastball , a two @-@ seam fastball , a circle changeup , and a cutter – slider . 
 Zito attended the University of California , Santa Barbara , Los Angeles Pierce College , and the University of Southern California . Drafted three times while in college , Zito signed with the Athletics when they chose him in the first round of the 1999 MLB draft . A year later , he was in the major leagues , finishing fifth in American League ( AL ) Rookie of the Year Award . He struggled to begin the 2001 season but improved greatly down the stretch , finishing the year with an 11 – 1 win – loss record over his final two months . He won 23 games ( while only losing five ) in 2002 and won the Cy Young Award . His record was only 14 – 12 in 2003 , but he still made the All @-@ Star team for the second year in a row . In 2004 , he had his worst season at the time , going 11 – 11 with a career @-@ high 4 @.@ 48 earned run average . He became Oakland 's Opening Day starter in 2005 and finished fifth in the AL with 171 strikeouts . In 2006 , he made the All @-@ Star team and posted a 15 – 1 record when receiving two or more runs of support . 
 Following his seventh season with the Athletics , Zito signed a seven @-@ year deal with the Giants in December 2006 . At the time , it was the largest contract ever given to a pitcher . He posted double @-@ digit wins in his first three seasons , and in 2010 he helped San Francisco win their first championship since 1954 . However , he struggled the last month of the season and he was left off the postseason roster . After sitting out much of the 2011 season with a foot and ankle injury , he came back in 2012 and flourished , finishing with a 15 – 8 record , his best season in a Giants uniform . The same October , Zito helped lead the Giants to their second World Series title in San Francisco history by going 2 – 0 with a 1 @.@ 69 ERA in three postseason starts . In his first career World Series start , he outdueled Tigers ' ace Justin Verlander in Game 1 , setting the stage for San Francisco 's sweep to their seventh World Series title in franchise history . Zito struggled in 2013 but received a standing ovation from the fans in his final appearance as a Giant . Following the year , he became a free agent . Zito , a philanthropist , founded Strikeouts For Troops , a national non @-@ profit that provides comforts of home and lifts the spirits and morale of injured troops as well as offering support to military families . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Zito was born May 13 , 1978 , in Las Vegas , Nevada . His family moved to San Diego , California , to help him concentrate on his baseball career . His father even stopped working to coach him . He transferred from El Cajon 's Grossmont High School to University of San Diego High School , a Roman Catholic school . 
 Zito then attended UC Santa Barbara where he earned Freshman All @-@ America Honors with 125 strikeouts in 85 ⅓ innings . In his sophomore season , Zito transferred to Los Angeles Pierce College so that he could be eligible for the Major League Baseball draft . At Pierce , he posted a 2 @.@ 62 earned run average ( ERA ) , went 9 – 2 with 135 strikeouts in 103 innings , and was named to the all @-@ state and all @-@ conference teams . He then transferred to the University of Southern California ( USC ) , where he was a first @-@ team All @-@ America selected by USA Today Baseball Weekly , Collegiate Baseball , and Baseball America . With a 12 – 3 record , a 3 @.@ 28 ERA , and 154 strikeouts in 113 ⅔ innings , Zito was named Pac @-@ 10 Pitcher of the Year . 
 Zito also played in the Cape Cod Baseball League , a summer wooden bat league which showcases the nation 's top amateur prospects . He led the Wareham <unk> to the league championship in 1997 , and a runner @-@ up finish in 1998 . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Major League Baseball Draft = = = 
 Zito was taken by the Seattle Mariners in the 59th round ( <unk> overall ) of the 1996 Major League Baseball ( MLB ) draft , and in the third round ( 83rd overall ) by the Texas Rangers in 1998 , but did not sign with either team . In the 1999 draft , he was selected by the Oakland Athletics with the ninth pick of the first round , and signed for a $ 1 @.@ 59 million bonus . 
 = = = Minor leagues = = = 
 In 1999 , Zito began his professional career with the Visalia Oaks , Oakland 's A team . He went 3 – 0 with a 2 @.@ 45 ERA in eight starts . He struck out 62 in 40 ⅓ innings . Zito was promoted to the Midland RockHounds , and went 2 – 1 with a 4 @.@ 91 ERA to finish the AA schedule . He then got one start for the AAA Vancouver Canadians , allowing a lone run with six strikeouts in six innings . 
 Zito began the 2000 season in AAA with the Sacramento River Cats ( the Canadians franchise had moved to Sacramento ) . He pitched 101 ⅔ innings in 18 starts , going 8 – 5 with a 3 @.@ 19 ERA , 91 strikeouts , and 41 walks . 
 = = = Major leagues = = = 
 = = = = Oakland Athletics ( 2000 – 06 ) = = = = 
 = = = = = 2000 = = = = = 
 Zito made his major league debut on July 22 , 2000 , against the Anaheim Angels wearing # 53 . He allowed one run in five innings , and got the win . In his next start , Zito went seven innings while giving up three runs to the Boston Red Sox . Zito continued to have great success early in his rookie season . In his third career start , he went seven innings and gave up one run against the Toronto Blue Jays . On September 10 , Zito pitched his first complete game shutout against the Tampa Bay Devil Rays . He threw 110 pitches , struck out eight , and allowed five hits . During the month of September , he went 5 – 1 with a 1 @.@ 73 ERA . Zito finished with a 7 – 4 record and a 2 @.@ 72 earned run average in 14 starts . Despite his late start to the season , Zito still finished fifth in American League ( AL ) Rookie of the Year Award voting . 
 Zito made his postseason debut in Game 4 of the AL Division Series ( ALDS ) against the New York Yankees . He went 5 @.@ 2 innings , struck out 5 , walked 2 , and allowed an earned run . Zito earned the win , <unk> Roger Clemens . However , the Yankees would win the series , 3 – 2 , and would go on to win their third straight World Series . 
 = = = = = 2001 = = = = = 
 In 2001 , Zito Switched his Uniform Number to 75 ( which he would wear throughout the rest of his career ) finished third in the American League ( AL ) in strikeouts per nine innings ( 8 @.@ 61 ) , fourth in strikeouts ( 205 ) , sixth in wins ( 17 ) , eighth in ERA ( 3 @.@ 49 ) , and tenth in winning percentage ( <unk> ) . Zito became the sixth lefty aged 23 or younger since 1902 to strike out at least 200 batters in a season . After a great rookie season , Zito struggled through the early part of the 2001 season , posting a 6 – 7 record with a 5 @.@ 01 ERA in his first 22 starts . However , he rebounded nicely and by August , he was putting up good pitching numbers . Zito was named Pitcher of the Month in August , going 5 – 1 with a 1 @.@ 02 ERA . Zito won Pitcher of the Month again in September , going 6 – 0 with a 1 @.@ 89 ERA . During those last two months of the season , Zito went a combined 11 – 1 with a 1 @.@ 32 ERA , best in baseball . 
 The Athletics made the postseason and again played the Yankees in the ALDS . Zito pitched in Game 3 against Mike Mussina . He went eight innings , striking out six , walking one , and allowing an earned run . But Zito took the loss as the Yankees won the game , 1 – 0 . The Yankees would end up taking the series , 3 – 2 . 
 = = = = = 2002 = = = = = 
 In 2002 , Zito became one of the best pitchers in baseball . On June 22 , Zito won his 10th game of the season . It was the earliest that an A 's pitcher had reached the 10 @-@ win mark since Bob Welch got there on June 15 , 1990 . Zito was named to the All @-@ Star team for the first time in his career . On July 18 , he went 7 @.@ 1 innings while giving up no runs against the Angels . That win gave Zito a team @-@ record 16th straight win at home . Zito again faced the Angels in his next start and produced similar results . He went 6 @.@ 1 innings and gave up just one run . That win gave Zito the most wins by an AL pitcher ( 14 ) . Zito would become the AL 's first 15 @-@ game winner when he beat the Rangers . On August 23 , Zito recorded his 18th win of the season , giving him one more than his previous career high of 17 , in a game against the Detroit Tigers . 
 On August 28 , Zito earned his 19th win of the season against the Kansas City Royals . However , he lost his bid for a perfect game in the sixth inning when Neifi Pérez singled with one out . Zito gave credit to Pérez . " I wasn 't pitching to maintain a no @-@ hitter or something " , Zito said . " I left the ball up over the middle to Pérez , and he hit it up the middle . It was a good piece of hitting . " 
 On September 8 , Zito became the first pitcher in the AL to win 20 games when he pitched seven innings and allowed no earned runs against the Minnesota Twins . " I 'm not pitching for the Cy Young " , Zito said . " I 'm pitching to get the Oakland A 's into the playoffs and to the World Series . " In his next start , against the Seattle Mariners , Zito took a no @-@ hitter into the eighth inning before John Olerud singled to leadoff the inning . Seattle manager Lou Piniella said if he could vote for the Cy Young Award winner , " It would go to that young man who pitched for the Oakland team . There are other deserving pitchers , but [ Zito ] has won 21 games and he competes well . " 
 In his last start of the season , Zito went six innings and allowed just a run against the Texas Rangers . In his last 10 starts , Zito went 8 – 0 , boosting his chances of winning the AL Cy Young Award . " Barry pitched another gem " , said Oakland manager Art Howe . " He 's certainly had a Cy Young @-@ type season . He 's just been steady all season long . " 
 In Game 3 of the ALDS , Zito went six innings and gave up three earned runs against the Twins , earning the win . However , the Twins defeated the Athletics in five games , making the Athletics the first team to lose the deciding game of a series three years in a row . 
 Zito would go on to win the AL Cy Young Award with a 23 – 5 record , narrowly defeating Pedro Martínez in the voting . He led the league with 23 wins , was second in winning percentage ( <unk> ) , and third in both ERA ( 2 @.@ 75 ) and strikeouts ( 182 ) . Zito 's 23 wins were the most by an AL left @-@ hander since Frank Viola had 24 wins for Minnesota in 1988 . Zito also allowed a .185 average to opposing hitters , the lowest in the AL . Martínez , who 'd led the AL in ERA ( 2 @.@ 26 ) , strikeouts ( 239 ) , and winning percentage ( <unk> ) , became the first pitcher since the introduction of the award to lead his league in each of the three categories and not win the award . Zito became the first A 's pitcher to win the Cy Young Award since Dennis Eckersley did it in 1992 . Zito was also named AL TSN Pitcher of the Year . 
 = = = = = 2003 = = = = = 
 In 2003 , Zito started off with a win against the Mariners . He went 6 innings and allowed an earned run , an RBI single by Olerud in the first inning . In his next start , Zito went 7 innings , struck out 7 , walked 4 , and allowed one run against Texas . In the process , he became only the fifth A 's pitcher to win 10 straight games , the first since Welch in 1990 . On April 18 , Zito went nine innings , allowing six hits and no runs in a start against the Rangers . Zito improved to 9 – 0 in his career against Texas . After the game , Texas manager Buck Showalter said , " I got the feeling he made it look pretty easy . When he has that kind of command , you can see what happens . " Zito struggled in his second @-@ to last start before the All @-@ Star Break on July 8 . He allowed seven earned runs and 15 hits against the Devil Rays . The 15 hits allowed were a career high . Devil Rays manager Piniella was stunned by Zito 's bad start . He said , " If you 'd have told me we 'd get 15 hits off Zito in five or six innings , I would have looked at you a little funny . " Nevertheless , Zito bounced back in his next start . He went eight innings without surrendering a run against the Baltimore Orioles . Zito was again named to the All Star team , the second time he has been named to the team . 
 In 2003 , Zito was seventh in the AL in ERA ( 3 @.@ 30 ) . He had a 14 – 12 record and 146 strikeouts over a career @-@ high 231 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . 
 In Game 2 of the ALDS against the Red Sox , Zito went seven innings , striking out nine , walking two , allowing one earned run , and earning the win in Oakland 's 5 – 1 triumph . In Game 5 , Zito went six innings and allowed four earned runs , taking the loss as the Red Sox won the game and the series . 
 = = = = = 2004 = = = = = 
 In 2004 , Zito struggled and posted the worst numbers of his career at the time . Zito went 2 – 3 with a 6 @.@ 83 ERA in the month of April . On May 28 , facing Cliff Lee , he threw eight shutout innings but received a no @-@ decision in a 1 – 0 loss to the Cleveland Indians . He threw eight shutout innings of four @-@ hit ball in a 5 – 0 victory over the Devil Rays on August 21 . Oakland manager Ken Macha would have let him throw a complete game , but Zito said , " I was worrying about being fresh for the next game . I didn 't want to end up [ throwing ] 115 – 120 [ pitches ] , so I took advantage of the situation and shut it down . " On September 12 , he threw seven shutout innings and had 10 strikeouts , earning the win in a 1 – 0 victory over the Indians . For the season , he went 11 – 11 with a 4 @.@ 48 ERA . That was his only year with the Athletics that his ERA was more than 4 @.@ 00 . He still finished 10th in the league in strikeouts with 163 . 
 = = = = = 2005 = = = = = 
 Following the departure of Tim Hudson and Mark Mulder , Zito was given his first Opening Day assignment in 2005 . He allowed four runs over six innings in a 4 – 0 loss to the Orioles on April 4 . In 2005 , Zito again struggled in the month of April , going 0 – 4 with a 6 @.@ 60 ERA . In his first 16 starts of the campaign , he was 3 – 8 with a 4 @.@ 41 ERA . However , Zito pitched better the rest of the season . He had a streak of 14 consecutive starts from May 17 through July 25 ( and 20 out of 21 through August 30 ) in which he gave up fewer hits than innings pitched . From June 28 through August 4 , he earned the win in eight consecutive starts . On June 6 , Zito allowed two runs in six innings in a 2 – 1 loss to the Washington Nationals . During the game , he collected his first major league hit , against Tony Armas , Jr .. Zito was named Pitcher of the Month in July , going 6 – 0 with a 2 @.@ 51 ERA . In 35 starts , Zito went 14 – 13 with a 3 @.@ 86 ERA . Zito 's 35 starts were the most in Major League Baseball that season , demonstrating his durability as a pitcher . He also had 171 strikeouts , good for fifth in the league . 
 = = = = = 2006 = = = = = 
 In 2006 , Zito went 1 @.@ 1 innings and allowed seven earned runs on Opening Day ( April 3 ) against the Yankees . It was the shortest outing of his career . However , Zito quickly rebounded from that bad start . On June 1 , he allowed four hits over seven innings in a 4 – 0 victory over the Twins . During the game , he recorded his 1,000th career strikeout by punching out Lew Ford . On July 2 , Zito and Brandon Webb both allowed one run through eight innings before Zito gave up two unearned runs while only getting two outs in the ninth ; Webb threw a complete game as the Arizona Diamondbacks beat the Athletics 3 – 1 . When the All @-@ Star Break rolled around , Zito was 8 – 6 with a 3 @.@ 29 earned run average . He was named to the 2006 All @-@ Star Game . On August 25 , Zito earned his 100th career win when he defeated the Rangers 9 – 3 . He had a no @-@ hitter going into the eighth inning , but Mark DeRosa singled to lead it off . In 35 starts ( first in the league again ) , he had a 16 – 10 record , a 3 @.@ 83 ERA , and 151 strikeouts . Zito was tied for eighth in the league in wins , he ranked tenth in ERA , and he was third in innings pitched ( 221 ) . He had the eighth @-@ lowest run support of AL pitchers ( 4 @.@ 97 ) but had a 15 – 1 record if he received at least two runs of support . 
 Zito helped the Athletics reach the postseason . In Game 1 of the ALDS , he allowed one run and four hits over eight innings , <unk> Johan Santana and earning the win in a 3 – 2 victory over the Twins and setting the stage for an Oakland sweep . Zito did not fare as well in Game 1 of the AL Championship Series ( ALCS ) against the Tigers , allowing five runs over 3 2 ⁄ 3 innings in a 5 – 1 defeat . The Tigers went on to sweep the Athletics in four games . 
 Zito replaced his agent Arn Tellem with Scott Boras in July 2006 . Zito was a focal point of the 2006 trade deadline , and was widely rumored to be headed to the Mets in a potential deal for prospect <unk> Milledge . Susan <unk> of the San Francisco Chronicle wrote that if the Mets were unwilling to trade Milledge , the Athletics might be interested in Aaron Heilman and John Maine . However , Athletics ' general manager Billy Beane decided to keep Zito for the rest of the season . 
 = = = = San Francisco Giants ( 2007 – 2013 ) = = = = 
 = = = = = 2007 = = = = = 
 Following his seventh season with the Athletics , Zito signed a seven @-@ year deal with the San Francisco Giants worth $ 126 million , plus $ 18 million option for 2014 with a $ 7 million buyout . Zito 's contract on December 29 , 2006 , became the highest for any pitcher in Major League history at the time . 
 During spring training in 2007 , he and Barry Bonds made shirts that read " Don 't ask me , ask Barry " with an arrow pointing to the other Barry . By all accounts , Zito and Bonds got along well during their short time as teammates , and Zito made a point of saying he would stand by Bonds through onslaughts from the media . 
 In his first start as a member of the Giants , Opening Day ( April 3 ) , Zito went five innings and allowed two earned runs against the San Diego Padres . He would take the loss . In his next start , Zito struggled . He went six innings but allowed eight earned runs against the Los Angeles Dodgers . Zito would earn his first win as a member of the Giants in his next start on April 16 when he went six innings , gave up three hits , and allowed no runs to the Colorado Rockies . " I 've been trying to have a good game " , Zito said . " You can 't try to do anything . You either do or you don 't . I tried to get too fine with my pitches . I wasn 't aggressive . " Rockies manager Clint Hurdle gave Zito credit by saying , " We faced a tough pitcher . We are not playing the way that we believe we can play . We have to continue to believe what we believe in , but you can 't let your confidence get swayed . " 
 On May 18 , Zito made his return to Oakland as a Giant . He lasted only four innings as he gave up seven runs while walking seven , including two bases @-@ loaded walks . The A 's beat the Giants , 15 – 3 . He faced his old team again on June 9 , this time in San Francisco . Zito pitched four innings while giving up three earned runs on nine hits in a 6 – 0 defeat . 
 Zito made his first Major League relief appearance on August 5 against the Padres due to an early exit by starter Noah Lowry and an overworked bullpen . He pitched a scoreless seventh inning . He recorded his first career run batted in ( RBI ) two days later against the Nationals ' Mike Bacsik , in the same game that Barry Bonds hit his record @-@ breaking 756th career home run . 
 After Zito 's start on August 12 , his ERA was 5 @.@ 13 . Over his final nine starts , he posted the fifth @-@ best ERA in the NL , at 3 @.@ 10 . He also had a 3 – 2 record . He admitted that he had put pressure on himself to perform because of the large contract and was learning that he just needed to be himself . Zito also said that it had been difficult for him to adjust to a new league , team , and ballpark . On the final day of the season , in Los Angeles against the Dodgers , Zito allowed two runs on five hits and had four strikeouts in an 11 – 2 win . For the first time in his career , Zito had a losing record , as he finished the season at 11 – 13 . He failed to reach 200 innings ( 196 2 ⁄ 3 ) for the first time since 2000 and posted a career @-@ high 4 @.@ 53 ERA . 
 = = = = = 2008 = = = = = 
 Zito began the 2008 season as the oldest starter and the veteran presence in the Giants ' starting rotation . In April , Zito went 0 – 6 with a 7 @.@ 53 ERA and 11 strikeouts . He was the third pitcher in the last 52 years to go 0 – 6 before May 1 . On April 28 , the Giants moved him to the bullpen . Zito did not make an appearance out of the bullpen and returned to the rotation on May 7 against the Pittsburgh Pirates . In that game , Zito allowed five hits and two earned runs over five innings and took the loss , his seventh of the season . On May 23 , Zito collected his first win of the 2008 season against the Florida Marlins . On June 13 , Zito became the first pitcher to record 10 losses in the Major Leagues following a 5 – 1 loss to Oakland . His 5 @.@ 1 walks per nine innings pitched for the season , 51 @.@ 5 % first @-@ pitch @-@ strike percentage , and 14 sacrifice flies allowed , were all the worst in the majors . Beginning June 25 , Zito saw some improvement , as he posted an 8 – 6 record for the rest of the season to go along with a 4 @.@ 33 ERA . He finished the year 10 – 17 with a career @-@ high 5 @.@ 15 ERA and 120 strikeouts . His 17 losses led the National League and were the second @-@ worst total in San Francisco history ( Ray <unk> lost 18 games in 1968 ) . 
 = = = = = 2009 = = = = = 
 The 2009 season seemed to mark a rebound in Zito 's pitching performance . Though starting the season 0 – 2 with an ERA of 10 , Zito ended the season with an ERA of 4 @.@ 03 . His ERA would have been 3 @.@ 74 had it not been for his first two starts . Though going only 10 – 13 in the season , Zito 's record was much more the fault of his spotty run support ( the second @-@ lowest in the major leagues ) than his performance on the mound . On June 21 , Zito pitched a no @-@ hitter through six innings against Texas before giving up a home run to Andruw Jones in the seventh inning . He won the game , his fourth win of the season . On July 7 , Zito pitched what could be considered his best game of the season . He pitched 8 ⅓ innings against the Florida Marlins , allowing one run on four hits , striking out six , and walking one . He won the game , his fifth win of the season . 
 = = = = = 2010 = = = = = 
 Zito started the 2010 season by pitching six shutout innings against the Houston Astros to earn a win ; it was the first time he had won his season opening start since 2003 . On April 24 , Zito stifled the St. Louis Cardinals , throwing eight shutout innings with ten strikeouts for his third victory of the season , en route to starting the season 5 – 0 for the first time in his career . It was the best start by a Giants ' pitcher since 2004 , when Lowry started 6 – 0 . On June 12 , 2010 , Zito earned his first win against his former team , the Athletics , which gave him victories against every MLB team . 
 Through June 12 , Zito was 7 – 2 with a 3 @.@ 10 ERA . After a strong start to the season , Zito regressed down the stretch , going 2 – 12 with a 4 @.@ 97 ERA the rest of the way . He finished the season 9 – 14 with a 4 @.@ 15 ERA , snapping a streak of nine straight seasons in which he had 10 or more wins . In a rotation featuring Tim Lincecum , Matt Cain , Jonathan Sánchez , and Madison Bumgarner , Zito was the odd man out for the playoffs . In fact , he was left completely off the Giants ' 25 @-@ man active roster for the postseason . Zito worked out throughout the playoffs so that he would be ready to join the roster in case of an injury , but he was never needed and remained on the secondary squad . Nevertheless , he won his first World Series ring as a member of the full roster . 
 = = = = = 2011 = = = = = 
 Early in the 2011 season Zito experienced his first trip to the disabled list after an injury to his right foot during a fielding play . His replacement , Ryan Vogelsong , excelled , but Zito was able to rejoin the rotation when he returned in June because Sánchez was placed on the disabled list with left biceps tendinitis . Zito pitched well in his first few starts back , pitching well against the Tigers , Chicago Cubs , and Padres en route to three Giants wins , but later resumed his struggle , going 0 – 3 with a 10 @.@ 91 ERA over his next three starts . He returned to the disabled list after aggravating his right foot injury ; ironically , his trip to the DL made room for Sánchez to return to the rotation . On August 13 , Zito injured his right ankle on another fielding play in a Triple @-@ A rehab start , sidelining him for another month . Zito returned from the DL on September 11 but was used out of the bullpen for the rest of the year ; he posted a 9 @.@ 00 ERA over his final four games . In a career @-@ low 13 games ( nine starts ) , he had a 3 – 4 record , a career @-@ high 5 @.@ 87 ERA , 32 strikeouts , and 24 walks in a career @-@ low 53 2 ⁄ 3 innings . 
 = = = = = 2012 = = = = = 
 After struggling mightily during spring training in which he threw with a new crouched delivery , Zito began the 2012 season with a start against the Rockies on April 9 . He threw arguably one of the best games of his career , throwing a complete game shutout while giving up just 4 hits in the 7 – 0 Giants victory . It was his first shutout since 2003 when he was a member of the Oakland Athletics . In a June 3 home game matchup with the Cubs , Zito pitched four @-@ hit shutout ball into the ninth inning for a 2 – 0 Giants win and brought his season ERA below 3 @.@ 00 . In earning the win , Zito earned his 150th career win , becoming the 246th pitcher to hit the mark . Zito had a hand in the Giants ' second road shutout win of the season when he pitched seven innings , allowing three hits and recording four strikeouts , in a July 17 game versus the Atlanta Braves . The win pushed his season record to 8 – 6 . Zito would go on to finish the season with a 15 – 8 record , his most wins in a season with the Giants , while sporting a 4 @.@ 15 ERA . 
 Zito faced off against the Reds in Game 4 of the National League Division Series ( NLDS ) on October 10 and struggled , being pulled in the third inning after allowing two runs . However , the Giants went on to win 8 – 3 . The Giants , after losing the first two games of the series , became the first team to rally from a 2 – 0 deficit in an NLDS , winning the series in five games . On October 19 , 2012 , Zito rebounded and pitched arguably the best game of his career , tossing 72 ⁄ 3 shutout innings against the St. Louis Cardinals in Game 5 of the National League Championship Series ( NLCS ) , earning the win . It was his first postseason win since 2006 and according to Zito himself , was the biggest win of his career . That same day , Zito inspired the Twitter hashtag # <unk> , which , behind the efforts of Giants fans , was trending worldwide on the social networking site . The Giants , after trailing 3 – 1 in the series , prevailed in seven games . 
 On October 24 , 2012 , Zito pitched in the first World Series of his career . As the Game 1 starter , Zito earned the win , <unk> Detroit 's Justin Verlander by tossing 5 2 / 3 innings of one @-@ run ball . Zito also added an RBI single en route to an 8 – 3 Giants win . The Giants went on to sweep the Tigers in the World Series , and Zito went 2 – 0 with a 1 @.@ 69 earned run average in the postseason . Zito did not lose a single game after August 2 against the Mets , and San Francisco won his last 14 starts . 
 = = = = = 2013 = = = = = 
 On April 5 , 2013 , during the Giants ' home opener , Zito held the Cardinals scoreless over seven shutout innings , earning the 1 – 0 win . He followed this performance with seven more shutout innings and some personal offensive contribution at the plate against the Rockies in a 10 – 0 win to complete a 3 @-@ game series sweep . It was the Giants ' 16th straight victory in a row in games started by Zito ( including the 2012 regular season and postseason ) , the longest such streak by a Giants pitcher since 1936 by Hall of Fame left @-@ handed pitcher Carl Hubbell . However , Zito struggled for the rest of the season , going 2 – 10 with a 6 @.@ 24 ERA after April 21 and losing his rotation spot a couple times late in the year . 
 On September 25 , manager Bruce Bochy decided to give Zito one final start with the Giants as a tribute to his tenure with the team . Zito responded by allowing two runs ( one earned ) over five innings and earning the win in a 7 – 4 victory over the Dodgers . However , because Zito was removed between innings during the Dodger game , Bochy sent him in to pitch in relief in the final game of the year so that Giants ' fans could give him a standing ovation . Zito entered with two outs in the eighth inning on September 29 and struck out Mark Kotsay ( playing his final game ) as the Giants beat the Padres 7 – 6 . He finished the 2013 season at 5 – 11 with a 5 @.@ 74 ERA in 30 games , 25 of which were starts . Following the season , Zito took out a full @-@ page ad in the San Francisco Chronicle thanking Giants fans for their support . The Giants declined Zito 's 2014 option , buying it out for $ 7 million . 
 = = = Second stint with the Athletics = = = 
 After taking a year off from baseball , Zito signed a minor league contract to return to the Athletics on February 16 , 2015 . In spring training , Zito competed for a role on the Athletics ' 25 @-@ man roster , possibly as a long reliever . On April 4 , 2015 , Zito accepted an assignment to the Triple @-@ A Nashville Sounds . Zito 's Nashville teammates lauded him for embracing the Triple @-@ A lifestyle and for his commitment to the team : charting pitches between starts , coaching first base , and even buying dinner for the entire team on his birthday . Zito spent the entire season with Nashville , including about a month on the disabled list with left shoulder tendinitis . He was activated on the next @-@ to @-@ last day of the season on which he pitched one scoreless inning of relief . In a total of 24 appearances ( 22 starts ) , he accrued an 8 – 7 record with a 3 @.@ 46 ERA and 91 strikeouts . 
 Zito revealed in an interview that he had learned the Athletics would not be bringing him up to the major league club in September . However , following a season @-@ ending injury to Jesse Chavez , Oakland purchased Zito 's contract from Triple @-@ A on September 16 , placing him on the major league roster . Zito made his first major league appearance on September 20 , pitching an inning in relief . On September 26 , 2015 , Zito started for the Athletics against Hudson and the Giants in a matchup that was arranged as a tribute to the A 's " Big Three " of the early 2000s . Both pitchers received lengthy standing ovations from the sold @-@ out Coliseum crowd ( which included the third Big Three member , Mulder ) upon leaving the game . 
 On October 19 , 2015 , Zito announced his retirement from baseball in an article for The Players ' Tribune . 
 = = Pitching style = = 
 Zito 's fastball has hovered between 84 miles per hour ( 135 km / h ) and 88 miles per hour ( 142 km / h ) . He augments it with a circle changeup and a curveball that he uses as a strikeout pitch . His curveball was voted the best in the Major Leagues in a player poll conducted by Sports Illustrated in 2005 . Alex Rodriguez once stated that he had never seen anything like Zito 's curveball , commenting : " It 's such a high one , and it drops three to four feet . You might as well not even look for it because you 're not going to hit it . " 
 Since mid @-@ 2004 , Zito has added a two @-@ seam fastball and a cutter – slider hybrid to his arsenal . In the 2009 season , this cutter @-@ slider became a prominent part of his repertoire , being used more frequently than his changeup . Zito 's diminished velocity at the start of the 2007 season ( his fastball velocity slowed to 83 – 85 miles per hour ( 134 – 137 km / h ) ) and loss of command were the key mechanical reasons for his struggles that year , as he more often got behind in the count and had to rely more on his fastball . During the 2009 season , Zito made changes to his delivery , lowering his arm slot from an over the top angle to a three quarters delivery . This change helped his fastball velocity go back up to the 86 – 89 miles per hour ( 138 – 143 km / h ) range as well as sharpening the break of his curveball . However , in 2011 , he was once again in the 84 – 87 miles per hour ( 135 – 140 km / h ) range with his fastball . In 2012 , Zito relied mostly on his two @-@ seam fastball and cutter , and reduced his reliance on the four @-@ seamer , which was the slowest four @-@ seamer in MLB among starting pitchers that year , at 84 @.@ 6 miles per hour ( 136 @.@ 2 km / h ) . 
 Addressing his finesse pitching style , Zito said , " My fastball is set up by my offspeed , that 's no secret . So if I can command my fastball to both sides of the plate and throw most of my offspeed for strikes , I 'll get them to miss the barrel . That 's what I 'm going for . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 From 2000 through 2004 with the Athletics , Zito , Hudson , and Mulder were known as the " Big Three . " Of the three , Zito had the highest single @-@ season win total and was the only one to win the Cy Young Award . Zito 's .618 winning percentage is 10th all @-@ time in Athletics history . His 6 @.@ 896 strikeouts per 9 innings pitched ranks seventh , his 1 @,@ 096 strikeouts rank eighth , and his 222 games started rank 10th . Zito also holds a couple more dubious positions on Oakland 's list : his 148 home runs allowed rank fifth , and his 65 hit by pitches rank fourth ( although he trails Eddie Plank , Chief Bender , and Rube Waddell in that category ) . Zito 's <unk> winning percentage in 2002 is tied with Bender 's in 1910 for 10th among Athletics ' single @-@ season totals . His 8 @.@ 608 strikeouts per 9 innings pitched in 2001 rank seventh , and his 205 strikeouts in 2001 are tied for 10th ( with Dave Stewart 's 1987 total and Todd <unk> 's 1995 total ) . 
 Zito 's regular season performance with the Giants was less successful ; he went 63 – 80 with a 4 @.@ 62 ERA . However , he had significantly more playoff success with them . Aided by his contributions in 2010 , the team won its first World Series since 1954 . Zito did not pitch in the playoffs that year , but did pitch in the 2012 postseason , saving the Giants ' season by pitching them to a Game 5 victory in the NLCS against the Cardinals , and then <unk> Tigers ' ace Justin Verlander in Game 1 of the 2012 World Series . The Giants went on to win their second World Series in three years . 
 = = Awards = = 
 1999 – Pac @-@ 10 Pitcher of the Year 
 1999 – First @-@ Team College All @-@ American 
 1999 – Pac @-@ 10 Conference All @-@ Star 
 2000 – Triple @-@ A All @-@ Star 
 2002 – Baseball America First @-@ Team Major League All @-@ Star 
 2002 – Cy Young Award ( AL ) 
 2002 – Sporting News AL Pitcher of the Year 
 2002 – All @-@ Star ( AL ) 
 2003 – All @-@ Star ( AL ) 
 2006 – All @-@ Star ( AL ) 
 2012 – ML Hutch Award 
 2012 – ML Lou Gehrig Memorial Award 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Zito became engaged to former Miss Missouri Amber <unk> in April 2011 , and they were married on December 3 , 2011 . His father , Joe Zito , who died June 19 , 2013 , at the age of 84 , composed and arranged music for Nat King Cole in the early 1960s ( <unk> – 64 ) and arranged for the Buffalo Symphony Orchestra . Zito 's mother Roberta was a musician who sang in a choral group known as The Merry Young Souls and with Nat King Cole and his band . Zito is also a musician . He plays guitar , and he co @-@ wrote the song " Butterflies " that was used in the Eddie Murphy film A Thousand Words . Zito 's uncle is television actor Patrick Duffy . 
 Zito and wife Amber gave birth to their first child , a son , in July 2014 . 
 Zito is known for his idiosyncrasies and his offbeat personality . Early in his career , Zito dyed his hair blue . He earned the nicknames " Planet Zito " and " Captain Quirk " when with Oakland . Zito says he likes the way his uniform number 75 looks because the 7 and the 5 are like a " shelf " to hold the name " Zito " up . He surfs and practices yoga . He has done yoga poses in the outfield , and meditated before games . Zito practices Transcendental Meditation and supports the David Lynch Foundation . Zito has said , however , that he believes terms such as " flaky " or " hippie " have been applied to him by people who do not know him well enough to know better . 
 Zito was raised in a " spiritual , metaphysical type church " that was founded by his grandmother and that his mother , Roberta , who died in 2008 , formerly preached at . In 2001 , Zito espoused a universal life force that he credited with his midseason turnaround . He said that he discovered this force by reading Creative Mind by Ernest Holmes . 
 However , in August 2011 , Zito became a Christian , saying he " committed to Jesus Christ as his Lord and Savior . " Zito explained that God got his attention through his being left off the 2010 Giants postseason roster and a car accident and freak foot injury in early 2011 . He got a tattoo ( his only one ) of a golden calf on the inside of his right bicep as a reminder for him to " not worship false idols " and to remember that God comes first . Zito said that his wife is a Christian as well . 
 Zito founded the charity Strikeouts For Troops . The charity provides comforts of home and works to lift the spirits and morale of injured US troops and offers support to military families . In 2010 , Zito announced that he would donate $ 1 @,@ 500 for every strikeout in the Giants – Padres game on September 11 . There were a total of 14 strikeouts in the game . 
 In 2003 , Zito portrayed a United States Navy petty officer in an episode of JAG on CBS . Zito 's character , a pitcher , faced assault charges after hitting a Marine with a ball during the annual Navy @-@ Marine all @-@ star baseball game . 
 = Effects of Hurricane Mitch in Honduras = 
 The effects of Hurricane Mitch in Honduras included the worst flooding in Honduras in the 20th century . Hurricane Mitch , the strongest storm of the 1998 Atlantic hurricane season , formed on October 22 , and after becoming a Category 5 hurricane , it weakened and struck Honduras on October 29 . While near peak intensity , Mitch struck the offshore Guanaja island , where it nearly destroyed the mangrove forest . On the mainland , the hurricane dropped torrential rainfall , and many gauges were washed away in mountainous areas where unofficial rainfall totals were as high as 1900 mm ( 75 in ) . The highest official total was 928 mm ( 36 @.@ 5 in ) at Choluteca in southern Honduras , which was more than half of the annual precipitation average there . The rains caused widespread flooding and landslides , although impact from winds was not as severe . 
 The President of Honduras estimated that Mitch set back 50 years of economic development . The storm wrecked about 35 @,@ 000 houses and damaged another 50 @,@ 000 , leaving up to 1 @.@ 5 million people homeless , or about 20 % of the country 's population . Mitch directly caused $ 2 @.@ 005 billion in damage , with an additional $ 1 @.@ 8 billion in indirect costs . Most of the damage was ruined crops , and cash crop exports were cut by 9 @.@ 4 % in 1999 , largely due to the storm . Over 70 % of the transportation infrastructure was damaged , mostly damaged highways and bridges . Widespread areas experienced power outages , and about 70 % of the country lost water after the storm . In the capital , Tegucigalpa , a large landslide affected three neighborhoods and formed a temporary dam . Floods in the city damaged buildings that were over 350 years old . Throughout the country , there were at least 7 @,@ 000 fatalities , some reported in each department . 
 Following the storm , officials in Honduras requested international assistance , which totaled $ 2 @.@ 8 billion over a several year period . Despite this , the gross domestic product began decreasing at the end of 1998 , and contracted by 1 @.@ 9 % in 1999 . Officials enacted a widespread curfew following the storm , and for 15 days temporarily restricted constitutional rights to maintain order . There were outbreaks in various diseases , and many residents faced food and water shortages . Due to the heavy damage , the name Mitch was retired from the Atlantic hurricane naming list . 
 = = Preparations and background = = 
 Hurricane Mitch formed on October 22 in the southwestern Caribbean Sea , and it eventually intensified into a Category 5 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale by October 26 . By that time , the hurricane was just north of the coast of Honduras , and was expected by the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) and various tropical cyclone forecast models to turn to the north . When the track was more westward than expected , the NHC recommended early on October 26 for a hurricane warning to be issued for the northeastern Honduran coast , although difficulties in communications prevented their immediate implementation . Within a few hours , a hurricane warning was in place between Limón to the Honduras and Nicaragua border , including the offshore Swan Island . When Mitch still failed to turn to the north , the government of Honduras issued a hurricane warning for the remainder of their coastline . The hurricane weakened while turning to the south , and made landfall in Honduras 134 km ( 83 mi ) east of La Ceiba , with estimated winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) . Mitch continued to weaken while moving slowly westward across the country . 
 On October 26 , the Honduran Permanent Contingency Commission coordinated with neighboring countries regarding the storm . Officials initially issued a state of emergency for the offshore islands and five coastal departments , which was later extended to the rest of the country . The government increased emergency spending and created a National Emergency Commission . Officials advised residents to evacuate in flood @-@ prone areas , although many people stayed for fear of being looted . Some left to stay with relatives during the hurricane . Prisoners in Tegucigalpa Central Penitentiary were evacuated to the national stadium . 
 Before the storm struck , Honduras was facing decreased food supplies due to ongoing El Niño conditions . The economy had been growing at a rate similar to the previous year until Mitch struck , and was largely dependent on exports . About 73 % of the population was living in poverty when the storm struck . Hurricane Mitch set back the economies of various countries in the region , including Honduras , Nicaragua , Guatemala , and El Salvador , after they had improved throughout the 1990s . 
 = = Meteorological effects = = 
 Due to weak steering currents , Hurricane Mitch moved slowly for about a week , both offshore and while moving through Honduras . Rainbands drew moisture from the Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean Sea , producing high amounts of rainfall of over 300 mm ( 12 in ) per day , beginning on October 26 . In some areas , high mountain peaks contributed to high precipitation totals , and the highest amounts occurred in southern Honduras . The highest official total was 928 mm ( 36 @.@ 5 in ) at Choluteca , which represented more than half of the annual precipitation average ; at the same location , 466 @.@ 7 mm ( 18 @.@ 37 in ) fell in a 24 @-@ hour period on October 31 , which was more than double the previous record set in 1985 . At Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Honduras in the capital Tegucigalpa , rainfall totaled 294 mm ( 11 @.@ 58 in ) . The total of 120 @.@ 4 mm ( 4 @.@ 74 in ) on October 30 broke the record set in 1966 for the wettest day . At La Ceiba near where the storm made landfall , Mitch produced 874 mm ( 34 @.@ 4 in ) of rainfall , which is 30 % of its annual rainfall ; of the total , 284 @.@ 1 mm ( 11 @.@ 19 in ) fell on October 27 , which was the third highest amount there on record . There were unofficial rainfall totals in Central America as high as 1900 mm ( 75 in ) ; rain gauges in mountainous areas were washed away . 
 The high rainfall caused many rivers in the country to overflow " to an unprecedented extent this century " , as described by the United Nations . The flooding caused the Choluteca River to change its course , forming an avulsion . Widespread flooding near the northern coast left behind about 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) of sediment , which ruined forests and shrimp ponds . Flooding also affected the Pacific coast along the Gulf of Fonseca , leaving behind debris and sediment . In the country 's interior , particularly the southern portion , the high rainfall caused hundreds of landslides , many of them shallow and about 95 % in the form of debris flow . However , two earthflows caused significant damage near Tegucigalpa . 
 In mainland Honduras , the winds were not as damaging as the rainfall , although offshore islands sustained heavy damage due to high winds . Offshore northern Honduras , it was estimated that Mitch produced waves as high as 13 m ( 44 ft ) . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Overall , Hurricane Mitch caused an estimated $ 3 @.@ 8 billion in damage , of which $ 2 @.@ 005 billion was from direct damages and the remainder from indirect costs . The overall impact represented about 70 % of Honduras 's annual gross domestic product ( GDP ) . 
 = = = Offshore = = = 
 On October 27 , the Fantome , a schooner , last reported its location to the south of Guanaja , while trying to escape the brunt of the storm . The United States Coast Guard searched until November 4 , when they observed the debris from the ship . All 31 people on board were presumed killed . 
 On the offshore Guanaja island , waters rose about 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) during the storm . The combination of storm surge and high winds severely damaged offshore islands . High waves eroded northern coastlines and damaged lagoons . Most of the Bay Islands had damage to their water facilities . Two days of winds exceeding 200 km / h ( 120 mph ) destroyed nearly all of the plants and trees on Guanaja , uprooting or knocking down almost the entire mangrove forest . Most mangrove trees were an average of 11 @.@ 2 m ( 37 ft ) in height before they fell . Those remaining standing were damaged internally and unable to regrow . All trees lost their leaves on the island , and 70 % of conifer trees were knocked down . Montane trees likewise experienced severe damage , although they made a recovery within a year . However , no mangrove trees had regrown there by three years after the storm struck , indicating the level of destruction . Tree damage also occurred on nearby Roatán island , although to a much lesser degree , and occurring on the eastern end . Winds there were generally less than 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) , and the tree damage was more random . 
 = = = Mainland = = = 
 Hurricane Mitch wrought significant damage to Honduras , affecting nearly the entire population and causing damage in all 18 departments . High winds near the coast knocked down trees , particularly in mountainous areas . The United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean estimated that Mitch caused the worst floods of the 20th century in the country . Severe flooding occurred in the northern region , which washed away more than 25 entire villages . In San Pedro Sula in northwestern Honduras , flooding covered several neighborhoods and the international airport . Near the coast , high waves destroyed hotels and houses while swollen rivers flooded nearby areas . Damage was heaviest in Colón and Atlántida departments . In the latter department , the <unk> River left heavy damage along its path after it flooded . In Choluteca and Valle departments in the southern portion of the country , river flooding swept away houses and affected neighborhoods . 
 An estimated 70 – 80 % of transportation network was destroyed , including most bridges and secondary roads , amounting to $ 236 million in damage . In mountainous areas , floods carrying debris damaged roads and bridges . A total of 9 @,@ 198 m ( 30 @,@ 177 ft ) of bridges were damaged or destroyed , and an additional 2 @,@ 045 m ( 6 @,@ 709 ft ) of approach roads were likewise damaged . Several vehicles were washed away due to the floods . In contrast to roads , there was little railway damage . There was minor impact to the nation 's airports , limited to some damage to air traffic equipment . Seaports also sustained minor damage , although many lost electronic equipment . Hurricane Mitch left widespread power outages after damaging more than 385 km ( 239 mi ) of power lines and several power plants . About 11 % of Honduras 's telephone lines were damaged during the storm . Landslides and flooding contaminated aqueducts in several cities , including 1 @,@ 600 systems in rural areas . Many cities sustained damage to their water network , and about 70 % of Honduras lost access to fresh water after the storm , although many rural areas had already been experiencing water shortages . The combined damage to transportation , communication , utilities , including power and water , was estimated at $ 665 million . Communications were disrupted after power outages , and there were also fuel and water shortages . Flooding damaged or destroyed industrial areas of Honduras , which affected exports and domestic products . Six <unk> factories were damaged in the northern portion of the country , and one was destroyed in La Ceiba . Many businesses shut down , leaving many people unemployed who already lost their homes . Mitch also destroyed 123 health facilities nationwide and wrecked 4 @,@ 835 classrooms , or 23 % , of the classrooms . As a result , most classes that would have gone until November 30 were ended about a month early , allowing teachers to assist in helping others . 
 High water levels along the Choluteca River affected the capital , Tegucigalpa , reaching levels 10 m ( 33 ft ) above their banks . Mitch largely destroyed the center of the city , including many residential buildings along river banks . The floods damaged about one @-@ third of buildings , including some more than 350 years old . The storm destroyed the primary water mains in Tegucigalpa and neighboring <unk> , and 23 km ( 14 mi ) of water piping had to be repaired . In central Tegucigalpa , there was a large <unk> along Cerro El <unk> mountain that weighed 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ( 210 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cu ft ) . This landslide , the largest generated by Mitch in the country , destroyed the Colonia Soto section and damaged portions of two other neighborhoods . It carried debris , trees , and rocks , forming a temporary dam along the Choluteca River laden with sewage . Because the landslide was slow @-@ moving , officials were able to evacuate before the river was stopped due to the temporary dam . Another smaller landslide destroyed several houses in the Colonia El <unk> section of the capital , although it was also slow @-@ moving , and the residents were able to evacuate . Other landslides destroyed over 20 houses along the rivers in the city due to erosion along river banks . 
 Across Honduras , agriculture sustained serious damage , with initial estimates of 70 % of crops destroyed . Flooding affected about 29 % of the country 's arable land , much of covered for an extended period of time . This washed away large areas of topsoil , which would take a long period of time to recover . About 85 % of the banana crop was lost , along with the loss of 60 % of melons , 60 % of sugar cane , and 58 % of corn . About one @-@ third of the corn crop had already been harvested . About 50 @,@ 000 bovine were killed , as were 60 % of the fowl population . Crop and agricultural damage totaled about $ 1 billion , which would take the country years to recover . Poor road conditions following the storm prevented crops from being dried , which caused further damage . 
 Honduras 's Social Fund for Housing estimated that 35 @,@ 000 houses nationwide were destroyed with another 50 @,@ 000 damaged , many of which were poorly built or in flood @-@ prone areas . This left up to 1 @.@ 5 million people homeless – about 20 % of the total population – and was the highest number of victims from any natural disaster in Honduras 's history . Over 30 % of the populations of Choluteca , Colón , and Cortés departments were left homeless . Housing costs were estimated at $ 344 million , including $ 221 million in housing damage ; the rest included the costs for shelters , removal of debris , and loss of rent . 
 = = = Deaths and injuries = = = 
 Overall , Hurricane Mitch killed about 7 @,@ 000 people in Honduras , with 11 @,@ 000 missing in the months after the storm . There were 8 @,@ 000 people listed as missing about ten days after Mitch struck , although problems with record @-@ keeping made it difficult to determine the exact total . Choluteca Department in the southern portion of the country had the most deaths , with 1 @,@ 200 fatalities . Francisco Morazán Department , which includes Tegucigalpa , had about 1 @,@ 000 deaths , and Yoro Department had 911 fatalities . There were deaths in every department , however . Many of the dead were buried in mass graves or were cremated . The storm injured 12 @,@ 272 people nationwide , mostly in Choluteca and Cortés departments . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Then @-@ president Carlos Roberto Flores estimated that Mitch reversed 50 years of progress in the country . Officials estimated it would take at least 15 years to rebuild completely . The national gross domestic product ( GDP ) only grew at a rate of 3 % due to the storm , compared with 5 @.@ 1 % in 1997 , due to damaged infrastructure and lingering effects . In 1999 , the economy of Honduras contracted by 1 @.@ 9 % , largely due to the storm . The Honduran government increased spending by 24 @.@ 7 % , . much of it emergency funds to restore communications and provide relief , which caused economic deficits . This caused inflation to increase from 13 @.@ 6 % to 15 @.@ 7 % . The Honduran government adjusted its economic plan , including privatization of various federal entities . For two years , the government temporarily halted taxes to businesses affected by the hurricane . 
 In the storm 's immediate aftermath , officials enacted a widespread curfew after reports of looting and vandalism . The government temporarily restricted constitutional rights for 15 days . Officials urged residents to restrict water and fuel use , and alcohol sales were halted . The widespread flooding and the crippled infrastructure forced officials to rely on a limited number of helicopters to operate search and rescue missions and deliver supplies . A helicopter carrying four people , including Tegucigalpa mayor and potential presidential candidate César Castellanos , crashed on November 1 while touring flood damage , killing everyone aboard . In some areas , residents did not receive assistance until November 12 , more than two weeks after Mitch 's landfall . About 285 @,@ 000 people remained in 1 @,@ 375 shelters , many of them schools , by three weeks after the hurricane struck . Some sports stadiums and churches were also used as makeshift shelters . Overcrowding at shelters caused various diseases . 
 Due to the hurricane and the widespread destruction , the hurricane caused outbreaks of malaria , dengue , cholera , and various fever and respiratory illnesses . Ongoing flooding caused an outbreak of <unk> , notably in Cortés Department . There were widespread food and water shortages , leaving villagers near @-@ starvation . Damaged crops also prevented the export of cash crops , and exports decreased by 9 @.@ 4 % in 1999 . Many of the people left homeless also became unemployed , and there were reductions in exports and economic growth . Officials set up shelters that housed 285 @,@ 000 people for about a month . In Tegucigalpa , where the Choluteca River was dammed by a landslide , a temporary lagoon filled with sewage persisted for about two months , until a crew from the United States Army Corps of Engineers and United States Geological Survey dug a channel to drain the water . 
 Even before the storm struck , the government of Honduras issued an appeal for international assistance . In the immediate aftermath , the United States provided $ 875 @,@ 000 in aid . A portion went to purchasing and delivering food , while the majority utilized airplanes to participate in rescue missions and deliver supplies , such as plastic sheets and water . The United States ultimately gave $ 15 million in aid to Honduras through various United Nations organizations . Mexico donated food , medicine , and clothing , and Cuba sent a team of doctors and mobile hospitals . Uruguay donated a pump for the city of Choluteca to restore water there . Several European Countries sent aid to Honduras , in addition to donations from the European Union . France sent medical equipment , and the government of Japan provided a field hospital that helped 300 patients per day in the center of Tegucigalpa . Following the storm , the United Nations Development Programme sent a team to Honduras and El Salvador to determine the needs of the population . The Honduran government requested the team to assess the socio @-@ economic impact of the storm . The World Food Programme provided $ 17 million worth of food to the country . The Pan American Health Organization focused on restoring water systems by providing latrines , while UNICEF sent large water tanks . 
 The Inter @-@ American Development Bank approved $ 197 @.@ 4 million in loans in 1998 , most of which due to Hurricane Mitch . The loans were to assist in rebuilding damaged infrastructure , including for water systems , transportation , and houses . Various countries provided nearly $ 2 @.@ 8 billion to the country in aid , which limited the annual debt following the hurricane 's damage . The foreign aid due to the storm largely ended by 2003 . 
 Overall cost for reconstruction was estimated at $ 2 @.@ 5 billion , which was estimated to take four years . The cost for repairing the damaged houses was estimated at $ 484 @.@ 8 million . Following the storm , workers made emergency repairs to the destroyed bridges and roads . The cost for rebuilding roads was higher than their damage cost due to planning for future flooding . Within a month , there were repairs to the power grid to a level of 550 MW , or 91 @.@ 7 % of what it was before Mitch struck . Water companies restored water to 60 % of Tegucigalpa within a month of the storm striking . 
 The Honduras delegation to the World Meteorological Organization requested the name " Mitch " be retired , following the hurricane . The 25 member committee voted in support to replace the name with " Matthew " , which was first used in 2004 . 
 = Burns Verkaufen der Kraftwerk = 
 " Burns Verkaufen der Kraftwerk " ( German pronunciation : [ <unk> ̯ ns <unk> ̯ <unk> ̯ <unk> <unk> ̯ <unk> ̯ k ] ) is the eleventh episode of The Simpsons ' third season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 5 , 1991 . In the episode , Mr. Burns wishes to pursue other interests and therefore decides to sell his power plant to two German investors for $ 100 million . Safety inspector Homer is immediately fired by the Germans because of his incompetence . Later , Burns realizes that he has lost all his respectability because he can no longer control anyone . 
 The episode was written by Jon Vitti and directed by Mark Kirkland . Originally , the writers wanted to have Burns sell the plant to the Japanese , but they decided that it would have been too clichéd ; the plot , however , remained the same with the Germans . The title is a literal , but inaccurate German translation of " Burns sells the power plant " , the correct version being Burns <unk> das Kraftwerk . 
 In its original airing on the Fox network , the episode had a 12 @.@ 6 Nielsen rating , finishing the week ranked 38th . " Burns Verkaufen der Kraftwerk " received generally positive reviews from critics and was praised for several scenes , particularly the " Land of Chocolate " sequence in which Homer dances around in an imaginary land made entirely out of chocolate . The sequence was also remaking cutscenes from the episode in The Simpsons Game . 
 = = Plot = = 
 One night , Mr. Burns tells his assistant Waylon Smithers that he is considering selling the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant so he can pursue other interests . Meanwhile , unconfirmed takeover rumors boost the plant 's stock , which rises for the first time in ten years . Homer learns he owns stock in the company and sells his 100 shares for 25 cents apiece to a shady stockbroker , netting $ 25 , which he spends on beer . Soon after the sale he learns that the value of the stock has shot up to $ 52 per share . While Homer misses out on the windfall — he could have made $ 5 @,@ 200 — other employees make small fortunes . Two German businessmen , Hans and Fritz , learn that the plant might be for sale . They offer Burns $ 100 million , which he immediately accepts . Burns leaves , seeking adventure , while Smithers remains an employee at the plant . 
 The new owners immediately begin a thorough evaluation of the plant and its employees , their more friendly demeanor pleasing all the workers save for Homer , who worries his lax work ethic as safety inspector will cost him his job . When they interview Homer , he is unable to intelligently answer their questions and begins slipping into a fantasy about cavorting through " The Land of Chocolate " . The owners announce shortly after that Homer will be the only employee fired . A depressed Homer hangs around the Simpsons ' house , insisting he is a competent safety @-@ minded worker while the rest of the family makes budget cuts until Homer can find a new job . Meanwhile , Burns is having a good time in retirement and decides to get together with Smithers for a drink . They decide to go to Moe 's Tavern , where Homer has been drinking . Homer lashes out at Burns , calling him greedy ole reptile , asking him about his money and saying nobody loves him . The other bar patrons join in and taunt Burns , including Bart who stamps on Mr. Burns ' foot and starts singing " Na Na Hey Hey Kiss Him Goodbye " where everyone except Smithers joins in . Feeling humiliated , Burns and Smithers walk out of Moe 's . Burns realizes that his former employees no longer fear him , concludes that only his ownership of the plant gave him power over ordinary men , and decides to buy the plant back . 
 The German investors , meanwhile , discover that the plant is in bad need of repairs and decide to sell before they sink too much money into it . Burns , noting their desperation to sell , offers them $ 50 million for the plant , and they reluctantly accept half of what they paid him . Now back in charge , Burns orders that Homer be rehired . He tells Smithers " I keep my friends close , and my enemies closer " and vows revenge on Homer at some unspecified point in the future for humiliating him at the bar . The episode ends with Homer cheering to his family that he got his job back . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Jon Vitti and directed by Mark Kirkland . It features several German elements , including a reference to John F. Kennedy 's " ich bin ein Berliner " speech . The title " Burns Verkaufen der Kraftwerk " is an inaccurate German translation of " Burns sells the power plant " , the correct version being Burns <unk> das Kraftwerk . Originally , the writers decided to have Burns sell the plant to the Japanese , but they decided that it would have been too clichéd ; the plot , however , remained the same with the Germans . The writers and animators based one of the two German buyers on the German character Sergeant Schultz from the American television show Hogan 's Heroes . By coincidence , frequent Simpsons guest star Phil Hartman happened to know a little German so he helped out with the conversations . Hartman also guest @-@ starred in the episode as Horst and the stockbroker . 
 The writers had a tough time coming up with Bart 's prank call to Moe 's Tavern and Moe 's reply , in which they could not include any foul language . The writer also wanted to include a longer portion of Burns 's sworn vengeance , but had to trim it in the end . In this episode , the producers decided to start stressing the relationship between Smithers and Burns . Originally , there was a two @-@ minute scene involving the two , but the writers cut it down considerably . The producers also noted the constant flux of the Simpsons ' economic state ; one moment Homer appears to have his wallet full of cash , and the next , they do not even have a saving account . The animators also included a character other than Lenny or Homer with a beardline , something the producers did not like . Originally , when The Simpsons shorts aired on The Tracy Ullman Show , all the male characters had <unk> similar to Homer 's ; however , after the Simpsons became their own show , they decided to drop the beardline for the majority of the characters to make Homer unique . After Homer gets fired , Bart feeds his cat a mixture of 88 % ash and 12 % carrots . The gag came from a real @-@ life experience when Vitti tried to feed his cat a mixture of carrots and ash ; however , the cat simply ate and regurgitated it . The sequence with the Frosty Chocolate <unk> in which Bart dreams what he would do with the money from the stocks is a reference to The Tracey Ullman Show shorts . 
 = = = " The Land of Chocolate " = = = 
 In the original script , the " Land of Chocolate " sequence was absent , though the dialog that set it up was present ( Homer complains to his new German bosses about the candy machines not working , to which one of them replies : " We understand , Homer . After all , we are from the land of chocolate ! " ) . Executive producer Sam Simon was the one who suggested that they actually do a sequence in which Homer 's mind wanders off into an imaginary land made of chocolate . The sequence was storyboarded by animator Kevin O 'Brien , who designed it to be a parody of The Sound of Music , but supervising director David Silverman suggested that it be more original . Silverman storyboarded the revised sequence , and tried to make Homer " deliriously happy " as he skipped through the town . He later recalled , " I animated that scene frame by frame , I needed to draw the skip I wanted . Homer 's skipping sets the tone for that show . " 
 In the sequence there was supposed to be a road sign that read " Hershey Highway " ( Hershey 's is a chocolate manufacturer , but the term " <unk> highway " refers to anal sex ) . However , the censors objected and the writers replaced it with " <unk> " . The " Land of Chocolate " sequence was set to a song based on music from the film Tucker . Composed by Alf Clausen , the song was later included in the 1999 compilation album Go Simpsonic with The Simpsons . " The Land of Chocolate " was also featured as a level in The Simpsons Game , which was released in 2007 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original airing on the Fox network , the episode acquired a 12 @.@ 6 Nielsen rating and was viewed in approximately 11 @.@ 60 million homes . It finished 38th in the ratings for the week of December 2 – 8 , 1991 , down from the season 's average rank of 37th . It finished second in its timeslot behind The Cosby Show , which came in at 11th with a 16 @.@ 8 rating . The Simpsons was the highest rated show on Fox that week . 
 Since airing , " Burns Verkaufen der Kraftwerk " has received generally positive reviews from critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , praised the episode , most notably " Homer in the land of chocolate and Smithers counselling Mr. Burns with the aid of his sock @-@ puppet friend , Mr. <unk> the Alligator " . Writing for the Star Tribune , Neal Justin rated the episode as one of his ten favorite episodes , commenting that the scene where " Homer dreams about prancing across a literal ' land of chocolate ' [ was ] perhaps the most outrageous moment in Simpsons history . " In a list of Homer 's best gluttony moments , Herald Sun 's Mikey Cahill ranked " The Land of Chocolate " as number one . The sequence was also named one of the twenty best moments in the history of the show by Daily Record 's Brian McIver . In 2012 , Johnny Dee of The Guardian listed the episode as one of his five favorite episodes in the history of The Simpsons , noting that it was the " Land of Chocolate " segment that " makes this episode such a classic " . Jon Greenberg of ESPN said the episode is one of his favorites , calling it " hardly an average episode " . He commented that " the sarcastic heart of the story comes at the end , when Mr. Burns realizes that wealth and time do not buy him happiness because no one , not even the scourge of Sector 7G [ Homer ] , is scared of a powerless despot . " 
 The episode was study material for a sociology course at University of California Berkeley , where it was used to " examine issues of the production and reception of cultural objects , in this case , a satirical cartoon show " , and to figure out what it was " trying to tell audiences about aspects primarily of American society , and , to a lesser extent , about other societies . " 
 = Mortimer Grimshaw = 
 Mortimer Grimshaw ( 1824 or 1825 – 22 December 1869 ) was an English political activist , strike leader and cotton weaver . He briefly attained national fame in the 1850s due to his part in the Preston strike of 1853 – 54 . A large man whose face was marked by smallpox , he was renowned for his oratory , which earned him the nickname of the " Thunderer of Lancashire " . 
 The son of a radical public speaker and orator , Grimshaw 's early campaigns were centred on the improvement of working conditions for the mill @-@ workers in the village of Royton and enforcement of the Factory Acts . He was an outspoken critic of the Whig Party and an advocate of the Chartist movement , in particular of their anti @-@ Whig alliance with the Tory Party . Strikes among mill @-@ workers began to break out during the early 1850s and Grimshaw one of the leaders , along with George Cowell , of the strike in Preston in 1853 . The strikers were fruitless in their demands for a ten per cent wage increase , and Grimshaw found himself with no further role in the workers ' unions . He and his fellow conspirators were charged with conspiring to prevent people working in the mills , although the charges were later dropped . 
 Following the defeat in Preston , Grimshaw emigrated to the United States , where he became a supporter of the Confederacy . In 1861 , he and Cowell attempted to intervene in a strike in Clitheroe but were branded " notorious scoundrels " by the weavers there for their parts in the Preston strike . The following year he joined a small group of Lancashire men who unsuccessfully attempted to rally support for the Confederates in northern England . After a period as a freelance industrial mediator , selling his services to mill owners and working against the unions he had once aligned with , he returned to his job as a power @-@ loom weaver until his death from tuberculosis in 1869 . Grimshaw and his activities were the basis for two of the author Charles Dickens ' characters . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Grimshaw was born in or around Great Harwood , Lancashire , in 1824 or 1825 and was one of six children brought up in a working @-@ class family . His father , Thomas , had a reputation as a radical public speaker in the early part of the 19th century . Grimshaw initially worked as a cotton weaver before becoming a full @-@ time activist and agitator . He first came to prominence in the village of Royton , near Oldham , in 1852 as a campaigner for the improvement and enforcement of the Factory Acts , to improve the working conditions of those employed in the cotton mills . In the same year he became editor of the anti @-@ Whig broadsheet , the Royton Vindicator . He criticised the suppression of local political activists and supported the alliance of the Chartist movement with the Tories against the Whigs . 
 Mill workers in England became increasingly disenchanted with improper practices by factory owners , long working hours and unsatisfactory conditions . During the early 1850s workers throughout the country began to campaign for higher wages and strikes were held in several towns and cities ; brickmakers in Manchester struck in January while woollen mill operatives in the West Riding of Yorkshire went on strike two months later . Grimshaw himself was involved in a strike in Stockport , where workers were demanding a ten percent wage increase , in March 1853 . 
 = = The Preston strike of 1853 = = 
 When cotton weavers in Preston struck in September of that year , again demanding a wage increase of ten percent , he and fellow activist George Cowell became the most prominent leaders at the mass meetings of the workers . Grimshaw would often wear a white hat at meetings in the style of politicians Henry Hunt and William Cobbett . According to local journalist Charles Hardwick , he was a strong advocate of the liberation of oppressed " factory slaves " but it was noted that his judgement in arguments could often be overpowered by his enthusiasm and emotions . In the seven months that Grimshaw was involved with the Preston strike he travelled throughout Lancashire and Yorkshire , speaking at more than 60 public meetings . 
 At one meeting in October 1853 , he shared the platform with John B. Horsfall and Chartist leader Ernest Jones , whose Labour Parliament Grimshaw was involved in the following year as one of the two delegates from Preston , along with Wallace <unk> . The Labour Parliament was partly a response to a lock @-@ out of around 20 @,@ 000 mill workers by the employers in Preston ; its aim was to organise a levy on wages to support operatives who went on strike or were locked out . Those paying the levy were to elect a committee to buy and look after land and factories and the Parliament would meet on a yearly basis . However , the plan did not gain support among all Chartists and the plans never materialised . 
 The Preston strike ended in defeat for Grimshaw , Cowell and the operatives and as a result there were no suitable jobs for him in the unions ; his characteristics would not have lent themselves to a secretarial role . On 10 August 1854 , the pair were indicted along with nine other men for conspiring to " prevent certain persons working in the mills in [ Preston ] " . Although the charges were dropped by the prosecution , the judge presiding implied he would otherwise have felt compelled to pass down a severe sentence and expressed his hope that none of the 11 would engage in such conspiracy again . Two years later , Grimshaw and Horsfall raised funds to enable them to emigrate and he subsequently spent some time living in the northern United States . Upon his return to England , Grimshaw , Cowell and two other weavers were involved in a dispute between mill @-@ owners and workers in Clitheroe , Lancashire , in 1861 . However , due to their lack of success in Preston the group were branded a " gang of notorious scoundrels " by strike leader John O 'Neil and were treated with hostility by the gathered crowds of weavers . 
 = = Later career = = 
 During his time in America , Grimshaw had developed pro @-@ Confederacy tendencies . In general , there was some support for the Confederacy among people who were affected by the shortage in cotton from America caused by the American Civil War , such as traders and mill @-@ owners . On a personal level , Grimshaw was opposed to the growth of capitalism in the United States and described the notions of American freedom and liberty as " farce and humbug " . In 1862 he became part of a small group of working @-@ class Lancashire men , all of whom had been involved in various strikes in the 1850s , assembled by Liverpool @-@ based tin plate merchant James Spence . The group held meetings with the intention of rallying support for the Confederates within northern England , particularly in Lancashire and Cheshire . However , when a vote regarding the support of British mediation in America was taken at one meeting in Blackburn , only 12 out of more than 4 @,@ 000 workers voted in favour of Grimshaw . The local Weavers ' Association consequently declared themselves in favour of Abraham Lincoln and his Union . Ultimately , the group 's efforts were handicapped by an inability to maintain activity throughout the duration of the Civil War ; by 1864 only two of the original company remained . 
 By the end of his career , Grimshaw had become a freelance political adventurer , industrial mediator and anti @-@ union agitator selling his services to mill @-@ owners and employers . In an 1864 letter to George Wilson , former president of the Anti @-@ Corn Law League during the 1840s , he described himself as " destitute and <unk> [ sic ] " and begged the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway chairman for money or employment . This was the last public record of Grimshaw ; he returned to work as a power @-@ loom weaver until his death in <unk> from the lung disease tuberculosis on 22 December 1869 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Two of Charles Dickens ' characters , <unk> in the article On Strike and <unk> , the " unscrupulous demagogue " from the novel Hard Times , were based on Grimshaw . 
 = Infamous 2 = 
 Infamous 2 ( stylized as inFAMOUS 2 ) is a 2011 action @-@ adventure , open world video game developed by Sucker Punch Productions and published by Sony Computer Entertainment for the PlayStation 3 video game console . It is a sequel to the 2009 video game Infamous . Announced on June 4 , 2010 , the game was released on June 7 , 2011 . 
 The story follows protagonist Cole MacGrath on his quest in New Marais to grow powerful enough to be able to face his nemesis , the Beast . Cole possesses electricity @-@ based superpowers which are used in combat and navigating the city . The player is given several opportunities to use these powers for good or selfish purposes in the game 's Karma system . The Karma system affects what powers become available , the reaction of the city 's populace towards Cole , and the story . 
 Development on Infamous 2 began immediately after Sucker Punch finished the first Infamous , led by returning game director Nate Fox . The game 's music was composed by James Dooley , Bryan <unk> , the band Galactic , and Jonathan Mayer . Both the game 's music and fictional city were inspired by New Orleans . The original voice actor for Cole was replaced by Eric Ladin as Sucker Punch wanted somebody who could perform Cole 's physical reactions with motion capture , a new addition to the series . 
 The game was generally well received by gaming media upon release . Praise was particularly directed at its city @-@ design , traversal , and graphics , though it was criticized for its Karma system and camera . A stand @-@ alone expansion titled Infamous : Festival of Blood was released on October 25 , 2011 . Infamous Second Son , a sequel for the PlayStation 4 , was released worldwide on March 21 , 2014 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Infamous 2 is an action @-@ adventure open world video game played from a third @-@ person view . The player controls Cole in the world of New Marais . Cole 's electricity @-@ based powers are used in movement , offense and defense in combat , and either for better or worse in dealing with the citizens of New Marais . Cole can climb buildings and other structures , grind along power cables and powered train rails , and hover for a short time . Cole can engage in melee combat with enemies using a weapon called the Amp . The game features many different powers , ranging from simple electric bolts to large electric rockets . 
 In order for Cole to use his powers , he must have stored electrical power , represented by an energy meter on the player 's heads @-@ up display ( HUD ) . The player can recharge Cole by draining electricity from powered sources , recharging also restores Cole 's health , though Cole 's health can regenerate over time without recharging . Many powers are acquired over the course of the game . The player can use experience points to increase powers ' effectiveness or unlock new powers . Experience points are awarded for actions including defeating enemies , healing citizens and completing missions . The player can use such powers to destroy environmental scenery such as towers and stone columns . Depending on the player 's choices , the player can gain ice or fire powers from the game 's female protagonists , Kuo and Nix . Additionally , passive abilities based on Karma level called <unk> Boosts can be unlocked . 
 Starting in a neutral position , Karma can reach up to Hero on the Good side or Infamous on the Evil side . Certain actions , such as stopping to help injured citizens or killing them to restore Cole 's health , will affect the Karma level in either direction . Normal story missions may also alter the Karma level . During the game the player will encounter Karma moments , the Karma moments are delivered with 3D cutscenes and character @-@ driven dialogue , the action pauses and the player has two actions that can be taken , always a Good and Evil option . There are also Good and Evil side missions in the game as well as random events which provide Karma decisions . Completion of Karma awarding missions helps gain access to unique powers based on the Karma level . The player is not locked into choosing either Karma path , and may opt to play towards one extreme and later switch to the other mid @-@ game . Karma also influences the way that citizens view Cole in addition to altering Cole 's appearance and certain aspects of the game 's story . Citizens may throw rocks at and turn on Cole if he has Evil Karma or take pictures of and compliment Cole if he has Good Karma . 
 New Marais is built on two islands , and the player must work through main story missions on the first island before being able to access the next one , though future missions may involve the first island . The player can undertake side missions to make the city safer . A feature called User Generated Content , or UGC , allows players to make their own missions and share them through PlayStation Network for others to play . Scattered around the city are hundreds of " Blast Shards " which Cole can collect to increase the amount of electricity he can store . There are also " Dead Drops " that help to reveal more of the back @-@ story in the game . A mini @-@ map on the player 's HUD shows their location in New Marais and what is nearby . The mini @-@ map can be used to locate Blast Shards , Dead Drops and power sources . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 In Infamous 2 , people with superhuman abilities , called Conduits , exist — created by a device called the Ray Sphere . The Ray Sphere unlocks these abilities in rare humans who possess the Conduit gene by siphoning away the energy of and killing regular humans . The first such event granted electricity @-@ based abilities to Cole MacGrath , but devastated his home of Empire City . The event is part of a scheme instigated by Kessler , revealed to be Cole from an alternate future where a creature known only as the Beast has ravaged the world . Kessler fled the Beast with his family and they died as a result , forcing Kessler to use his newest power to go back in time and better prepare the Cole of the present for the Beast . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Following the events of Infamous , Cole ( Eric Ladin ) prepares to face the Beast , an entity of untold power whose coming was foretold by Kessler . Cole and his friend Zeke ( Caleb Moody ) meet with NSA agent Lucy Kuo ( Dawn Olivieri ) who tells them she can lead them to Dr. Sebastian Wolfe ( Michael Ensign ) , a scientist who helped develop the Ray Sphere which granted Cole his powers , and claims he can make Cole even stronger . As they are about to leave , they are confronted by the Beast . Cole fights the Beast but is no match and is severely weakened as a result . Cole , Zeke and Kuo escape to New Marais to find Wolfe while the Beast pursues them , destroying everything in its path . 
 In New Marais , wealthy industrialist Joseph Bertrand III ( Graham McTavish ) and his anti @-@ Conduit militia control the city . Aware of Cole 's arrival and abilities , Bertrand wages a propaganda campaign against him . Before Cole can meet Wolfe , Wolfe 's lab is destroyed by the Militia . Wolfe survives the explosion and explains to Cole that by finding and absorbing the power of Blast Cores he can gain enough power to activate the Ray Field Inhibitor ( RFI ) , a device which would defeat the Beast . Wolfe is captured by the Militia and a rescue attempt by Cole and Kuo fails , resulting in Wolfe 's death and Kuo 's capture . Cole and Zeke meet two new allies : Laroche , leader of an anti @-@ militia resistance group , and Nix ( Nika Futterman ) , a Conduit who dwells in the swamp . Together they locate Kuo trapped in a facility and discover she is a Conduit and has had her abilities activated . Cole frees her but inadvertently unleashes an army of Conduit mercenaries imbued with her ice @-@ powers . 
 Cole and his allies attack Bertrand 's operations before eventually learning that Bertrand is a Conduit , able to transform into a building @-@ sized monster and convert humans into monsters . In the past , he used a Ray Sphere to gain abilities . The activated Ray Sphere killed many but also granted Nix her abilities . Disgusted by the powers he received and believing Conduits to be evil , he attempts to incite a Conduit genocide using the power of the Conduit mercenaries he developed to instill fear in the populace . Meanwhile , he uses his monsters to justify the protection of his militia in New Marais . Cole and his allies are able to kill Bertrand , ending his plan . 
 During this time , the Beast is near New Marais and Cole encounters John White ( Phil LaMarr ) , an NSA agent who had seemingly died in a Ray Sphere explosion in Empire City . John reveals himself as the Beast and shows Cole that a plague , created when the first Ray Sphere was activated in Empire City , has been spreading across the country . The plague is killing humans but Conduits are immune once they have been activated . John acts like a Ray Sphere , using his powers to activate inactive Conduits , sparing them at the cost of countless human lives each time . Believing humanity is lost , John implores Cole to help him find and convert inactive Conduits so that some may survive . After finding all of the Blast Cores , Cole prepares to activate the RFI . However , he learns that the device will not just kill the Beast but all Conduits , though it could also nullify the Ray Sphere radiation , ending the plague . The story diverges from this point dependent on whether the player chooses to activate the RFI or work with the Beast . 
 = = = = Ending = = = = 
 If Cole chooses to save humanity , Kuo leaves to join the Beast . While Cole and Zeke attempt to fully charge the RFI , the Beast begins his attack . Laroche and many of his men die in the battle and Cole is attacked by Kuo . Kuo retreats while Nix sacrifices her life to weaken the Beast and give Cole more time . Cole gets the RFI fully charged before Kuo appears and apologizes to Cole . Cole then activates the RFI , clearing the plague and saving humanity , but killing all Conduits , including inactive ones carrying the Conduit gene . Aware of Cole 's actions , the people of New Marais revere him as " The Patron Saint of New Marais " . Zeke then sails Cole 's body offshore to bid him farewell . A lightning bolt strikes the sea in the distance as the boat sails away . 
 If Cole chooses to work with the Beast to save the Conduits , Nix refuses to work with them , steals the RFI and leaves . Kuo gives chase while Cole and the Beast rampage through New Marais in pursuit . Nix attempts to use the RFI to stop them and Cole is forced to kill her , Zeke then confronts Cole and is also killed . Cole then destroys the RFI . The Beast states that he can no longer continue , being weary from the killing . Cole is initially angry but the Beast transfers Cole all of his power and dies . In the aftermath , Cole begins activating Conduits at the expense of humanity . Cole realizes that he was originally granted powers to defeat the Beast , yet has become the Beast . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Gaming journals reported the likelihood of a sequel to Infamous due to a Twitter post made by actor David Sullivan reporting on auditioning for the role of Cole in the game 's sequel . In April 2010 , Sony purchased the domain name " <unk> " , increasing speculation that a sequel was in development . The game was unveiled on June 4 , 2010 when Game Informer released the cover for their July 2010 issue which featured a preview of the game . Development of Infamous 2 started immediately after the first Infamous had finished development . Sucker Punch hired their own QA staff to test and report bugs for the game . Game director Nate Fox , director of the original , also directed Infamous 2 . The core development team consisted of 65 to 75 people , an amount considered " small " . 
 When designing Infamous 2 , Sucker Punch decided to look at everything that could be improved , saying " everything was on the table " . Due to negative feedback from fans , they redesigned the main character , Cole . Cole initially underwent many changes , to the extent of making him look like a different character . However , after being " taken aback by the uproar of fan support for the original Cole , " Sucker Punch combined elements of the original with the new design . Some of Cole 's clothing was changed to suit the new setting of the game . Eric Ladin was also brought in to replace Jason Cottle as the voice of Cole because Sucker Punch felt that they needed someone who could perform Cole 's physical reactions as well as his voice with the use of their new motion capture technology . 
 The 3D cutscenes were improved with motion capture technology to create a more cinematic experience . The stylized comic @-@ like cut scenes from the first game carried over into the sequel , though they were reserved for bigger moments in the game . The 3D cutscenes were used to tell the story going on in the moment , while the comic @-@ like cutscenes were used to tell a large piece of the story in a short amount of time . In addition to the cut scenes , the moral element of the original also transferred to the sequel . When incorporating the player 's Karma decisions from the first game into the second , it was found challenging to balance the effects of importing saves from the original Infamous and keeping the game interesting for those who did not . The melee combat in the game was redesigned from the original with finishing moves being added . A large focus on the melee combat was the presentation , which was meant to make the player feel super @-@ powered . 
 The game 's fictional city , New Marais , was inspired by New Orleans , though many other southern influences were mixed and matched . It was thought New Orleans was architecturally the " coolest city in America " and well suited to a superhero who climbs and also allowed Sucker Punch to have environmental variety . New Marais was designed to have distinct neighborhoods with tonal as well as architectural shifts between them . Parkour elements , such as the game 's grind rails , were integrated more into the environment to improve the flow of it , while powers such as the vertical grind , were incorporated into the parkour . The goal of the city was to have a " big old jungle gym " . Street musicians were added to the city because they were considered an integral part of the New Orleans vibe . Gabriel Knight : Sins of the Fathers was seen by game director Nate Fox as extremely inspirational and stated that the city 's role in the story was something they wanted to replicate in Infamous 2 . 
 The game 's music was composed by James Dooley , Bryan " Brain " <unk> , the New Orleans band Galactic , and Jonathan Mayer . All of the music was recorded live with a total of four hours of music being recorded . Starting from the first day of recording , the music was composed in a year . Many of the music 's sounds were produced unconventionally , with some of the largest percussion coming from things such as fingernails on an amplified tin plate . Collaboration was considered a major part of writing the music , with the composers " ripping each other off . " Themes were composed for the main characters , such as Cole and Nix . A dynamic music system was developed for non @-@ mission gameplay . The game would track a music tension value with thresholds set to determine what the music would be . While missions used the dynamic music system too , the music was laid out more like a movie with set music occurring for specific events . The music of the game was inspired by the city , meant to be " organic " compared to the industrial and electronic music of the first Infamous . The score was released as two soundtracks , Infamous 2 The Blue Soundtrack and Infamous 2 The Red Soundtrack . 
 Sucker Punch was using around 30 % of the Cell processor by the end of Infamous , and for Infamous 2 , they were " creeping up over 50 and 60 % , because [ they ] know how to put things on to the Cell processor . " With the additional power , Sucker Punch was able to " have more characters on @-@ screen , more complicated shaders , and much greater layering " . For the game , a new method of ambient occlusion ( AO ) was developed , a hybrid of <unk> AO and dynamic AO . The new method was used to render contact shadows and self @-@ occlusion for moveable objects and was meant to complement the other methods of AO already used . 
 On March 1 , 2011 Sucker Punch announced a mission creation feature for Infamous 2 that had been in development since 2009 . A limited beta for testing this feature was released in April 2011 . Sucker Punch wanted to give players a way to continue enjoying the game after completing it and felt there was immense pressure to incorporate multiplayer and that many games were tacking it on . They considered cooperative gameplay , though found it did not make for an experience you wanted to keep playing , saying " ultimately , the game still ends . " 
 On October 2011 , it was announced that PlayStation Move support would cover the whole game as part of an update which would come out sometime after Infamous : Festival of Blood was released , along with a new cutscene creation tool for the UGC creator . The update was released on November 2 , 2011 . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 The game was released in North America on June 7 , 2011 , in Europe on June 8 , 2011 , in Australia on June 9 , 2011 , in the United Kingdom , Ireland , and Germany on June 10 , 2011 , and in Japan on July 7 , 2011 . On February 18 , 2011 , before the game 's release , Special Edition and Hero Edition versions of Infamous 2 were announced for pre @-@ order . The Special Edition included an Original Cole skin , a Golden Amp skin , and the Electrocution Grenade power . The Hero Edition included everything from the Special Edition but also included : a Cole MacGrath statue , a <unk> sling pack modeled after Cole ’ s , a Kessler skin , the Lightning Hook power , a Reaper skin , a Sly Cooper 's cane skin , a samurai sword skin , a caveman club skin , the Infamous # 1 comic , and Infamous 2 The Red Soundtrack . The Hero Edition came with all of the DLC except for the Stalker Grenades and the Sniper Blast powers , and the three extra Subway Missions , which are now all available via the PlayStation Store . 
 Infamous 2 – along with Infamous and Infamous : Festival of Blood – was released on August 28 , 2012 as part of the Infamous Collection under Sony 's new line of PlayStation Collections for the PlayStation 3 . 
 = = = Collaborations = = = 
 A six issue Infamous comic series , which bridges the stories of the first Infamous and Infamous 2 , was published by DC Comics . Cole appeared as a guest character for the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Vita versions of Street Fighter X Tekken . Additionally , Good and Evil Cole appeared as playable characters in the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Vita exclusive PlayStation All @-@ Stars Battle Royale . An Infamous 2 mini @-@ pack was released as downloadable content to LittleBigPlanet 2 , containing Good and Evil Cole costumes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Infamous 2 received generally positive reviews from critics . Based on 90 reviews , Metacritic calculated an average score of 83 out of 100 , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . The game received an average score of 84 @.@ 37 % from GameRankings based on 64 reviews . 
 The story of Infamous 2 was divisive . Sterling McGarvey from GameSpy thought the story was a " pulpy comic book narrative " , Colin Moriarty of IGN found the story well @-@ delivered and " incredible " , and Eurogamer 's Christian Donlan found the endings of the game to be " genuinely satisfying " and an improvement on the overarching storyline of the series . Conversely , Andrew Reiner of Game Informer found the story disengaging with confusing narrative threads , Giant Bomb 's Brad Shoemaker felt the story was scattered and had too much going to find its center , and Tom Mc Shea from GameSpot described the story as bland and lacking a hook to invest the player in Cole 's affairs . 
 IGN 's Moriarty thought that New Marais was more living and breathing than Empire City and the overall look of the game was improved over the original . Game Informer 's Reiner saw the city as a " sightseeing marvel . " GameSpy 's <unk> found the game was much cleaner @-@ looking than the first . GameSpot 's Mc Shea noted the city 's neighborhoods were varied and felt alive , and found the visuals " great @-@ looking " . Eurogamer 's Donlan wrote " New Marais is every bit as good at its job as Empire City was " . 
 GameSpot 's Mc Shea considered movement through the city a pleasure , but many fights tedious . Eurogamer 's Donlan stated Infamous 2 is " video games ' true master of parkour " and found the combat struggled to match the thrills of traversal but that the combat had improved since the original . Game Informer 's Reiner enjoyed combat , describing the situations as " amazing open @-@ world superhero fights . " Giant Bomb 's Brad Shoemaker felt enemies were overwhelming at times during combat like in the original Infamous . Mc Shea found the pacing uneven and the morality system " laughable " . Shoemaker felt the powers of Good and Evil Cole were better balanced than in the first game and saw morality as only a gateway to cutscenes and the possible powers . GameTrailers 's reviewer said the morality system did not provide tough decisions , but provided two dramatically different gameplay experiences . Both Mc Shea and Reiner thought UGC was a " great " addition to the game . 1UP reviewer Thierry Nguyen hoped Sucker Punch would mix the combat and traversal of the game with the pacing and storytelling of the first Infamous to create an " utterly fantastic " superhero game . 
 GameSpot 's Mc Shea found that problems would occur during precise climbing because of Cole getting " sucked " towards objects during climbing , though found it made climbing easier in other aspects . Giant Bomb 's Brad Shoemaker also appreciated the way Cole would be drawn to things while climbing but found that it led to frustrating moments where Cole would grab onto the wrong area . IGN 's Moriarty criticized the game 's camera , calling it " wonky " , while GameSpy 's McGarvey thought the game needed a better targeting system as the camera could not consistently keep up with the action . Eurogamer 's Donlan found the draw distance was low , though the frame rate improved from the first game . Shoemaker also noticed the frame rate had been mostly corrected since the first , making the game more fluid . 
 The game was listed on IGN 's Top 25 PlayStation 3 Games , achieving rank 14 . The game was nominated for Outstanding Achievement in Original Music Composition at the 15th D.I.C.E. Awards and nominated for Best PS3 Game at the 2011 Spike Video Game Awards . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 According to the NPD Group , Infamous 2 sold 369 @,@ 200 copies in North America during the month of June and was the third highest selling game of the month , though the best selling SKU of the month according to Sony . 
 = = = Series continuation = = = 
 A stand @-@ alone expansion for Infamous 2 , titled Infamous : Festival of Blood , was announced at Gamescom and released on October 25 , 2011 . A vampire @-@ themed spinoff , Infamous : Festival of Blood features a non @-@ canon story set in New Marais . The story follows an infected Cole that must kill the vampire which bit him in order to save his soul . The game featured new enemies and powers . A sequel to Infamous 2 , titled Infamous Second Son was announced at PlayStation Meeting 2013 for PlayStation 4 and was released on March 31 , 2014 worldwide . The game takes place seven years after Infamous 2 and follows a new protagonist in the city of Seattle . 
 = Borscht = 
 Borscht is a tart soup popular in several East European cuisines , including Ukrainian , Russian , Polish , Belarusian , Lithuanian , Romanian and Ashkenazi Jewish . The variety most commonly associated with the name in English is of Ukrainian origin and includes beetroots as one of the main ingredients , which gives the dish a distinctive red color . It shares the name , however , with a wide selection of sour @-@ tasting soups without beetroots , such as sorrel @-@ based green borscht , rye @-@ based white borscht , cabbage borscht , etc . 
 Borscht derives from an ancient soup originally cooked from pickled stems , leaves and umbels of common hogweed , a herbaceous plant growing in damp meadows , which lent the dish its Slavic name . With time , it evolved into a diverse array of tart soups , among which the beet @-@ based red borscht has become the most popular . It is typically made by combining meat or bone stock with sautéed vegetables , which – as well as beetroots – usually include cabbage , carrots , onions , potatoes and tomatoes . Depending on the recipe , borscht may include meat or fish , or be purely vegetarian ; it may be served either hot or cold ; and it may range from a hearty one @-@ pot meal to a dainty clear broth or a smooth refreshing drink . It is often served with smetana or sour cream , hard @-@ boiled eggs and / or potatoes , but there exists an ample choice of more involved garnishes and side dishes , such as uszka or pampushky , that can be served with the soup . 
 Its popularity has spread throughout Eastern Europe and the former Russian Empire , and – by way of migration – to other continents . In North America , borscht is often linked with either Jews or Mennonites , the groups who first brought it there from Europe . Today , several ethnic groups claim borscht , in its variegated local guises , as their own national dish and consume it as part of ritual meals within Eastern Orthodox , Greek Catholic , Roman Catholic , and Jewish religious traditions . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The English word borscht , also spelled borsch , borsht , or bortsch , comes from Yiddish <unk> ( borsht ) . The latter derives from the word <unk> ( borshch ) , which is common to East Slavic languages , such as Ukrainian or Russian . Together with cognates in other Slavic languages , it comes from Proto @-@ Slavic * <unk> ' hogweed ' and ultimately from Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European * <unk> ̥ <unk> < * <unk> / <unk> ' point , stubble ' . Common hogweed ( Heracleum sphondylium ) was the soup 's principal ingredient before it was replaced with other vegetables , notably beetroot . The beetroot borscht was invented in what is now Ukraine and first popularized in North America by Yiddish @-@ speaking Ashkenazi Jews from Eastern Europe . 
 = = Ingredients and preparation = = 
 Typical Ukrainian borscht is traditionally made from meat and / or bone stock , sautéed vegetables , and beet sour , that is , fermented beetroot juice . Depending on the recipe , some of these components may be omitted or substituted . 
 The stock is typically made by boiling meat , bones , or both . Beef , pork or a combination of both are most commonly used , with brisket , ribs , shank and chuck considered to give the most flavorful results , especially if cooked on a high flame . Marrow bones are considered best for the bone stock . Meat stock is usually cooked for about two hours , whereas bone stock takes four to six hours to prepare . Meat and bones are usually removed afterwards and the meat is only added back into the soup about 10 – 15 minutes before the borscht is done . Some recipes call for smoked meats , resulting in a distinctively smoky borscht , while others use poultry or mutton stock . Fasting varieties are typically made with fish stock to avoid the use of meat , while purely vegetarian recipes often substitute the stock with forest mushroom broth . 
 The vegetables most commonly added to borscht are beetroots , white cabbage , carrots , parsley root , potatoes , onions and tomatoes . Some recipes may also call for beans , tart apples , turnip , celeriac , zucchini or bell peppers . Parsnip may be used as a substitute for parsley root , and tomato paste is often used as well as or instead of fresh tomatoes . The traditional technique of preparing the soup is to <unk> the vegetables – by sautéing , braising , boiling or baking – separately from the meat and only then to combine them with the stock . This distinctive feature of borscht derives from the practice of slow cooking in the Russian oven ( traditional masonry stove , used for both cooking and heating ) , wherein the differences in cooking times of individual ingredients had to be taken into account in order to ensure that all components reach doneness at the same time . The importance of this method is reflected in the Russian language , where a variant in which all vegetables are added raw directly into the stock is referred to by the diminutive form <unk> rather than borshch . Vegetables are usually julienned , except for potatoes and zucchini , which are diced . The beetroots may be partially baked before being sprinkled with vinegar or lemon juice to preserve the color and braised separately from other vegetables . Onions , carrots , parsley root , turnip and other root vegetables are sautéed ( traditionally in animal fat , especially lard or butter ) and then mixed with tomatoes or tomato paste . Dry beans are boiled separately . Potatoes and cabbage are boiled in the stock for about 15 minutes before the <unk> vegetables are added . 
 The dominant tastes in borscht are sweet and sour . This combination is traditionally obtained by adding beet sour . It is made by covering sliced beetroots with lukewarm <unk> water and allowing bacteria to ferment some of the sugars present in beetroots into <unk> ( which gives the liquid a slightly viscous consistency ) , mannitol , acetic acid and lactic acid . Stale rye bread is often added to hasten the process , but usually omitted in Jewish recipes , as chametz ( leavened bread ) would make the sour unfit for Passover meals . Sugar , salt and lemon juice may be also added to balance the flavor . After about 2 – 5 days ( or 2 – 3 weeks without the bread ) , the deep red , sweet and sour liquid may be strained and is ready to use . It is added to borscht shortly before the soup is done , as prolonged boiling would cause the tart flavor to dissipate . The beet sour is known in Slavic languages as <unk> ( literally ' sour , acid ' ; compare kvass ) and in Yiddish as <unk> ( from a Slavic word originally referring to any brine obtained by steeping salted meat or vegetables in water ; compare Russian <unk> ' pickle juice ' , Polish <unk> ' broth ' ) . Apart from its employment in borscht , it may be also added to prepared horseradish or used as pot roast marinade . 
 As the traditional method of making borscht with beet sour often requires planning at least several days ahead , many recipes for quicker borscht replace the beet sour with fresh beetroot juice , while the sour taste is imparted by other ingredients , such as vinegar , lemon juice or citric acid , tomatoes , tart apples , dry red wine , dill pickle juice , sauerkraut juice , fermented rye flour and water mixture , etc . The soup is typically flavored with a wide selection of herbs , spices and condiments . Salt , black pepper , garlic , bay leaves and dill are among the most commonly used . Other aromatics often added to borscht include allspice , celery stalks , parsley , marjoram , hot peppers , saffron , horseradish , ginger and prunes . Some recipes require flour or roux to further thicken the borscht . A common opinion is that a good borscht should be thick enough for a spoon to stand upright in it . 
 = = Varieties = = 
 As the home country of beetroot borscht , Ukraine boasts great diversity of the soup 's regional variants , with virtually every district having its own recipe . Differences between particular varieties may regard the type of stock used ( meat , bone , or both ) , the kind of meat ( beef , pork , poultry , etc . ) , the choice of vegetables and the method of cutting and cooking them . For example , although the typical recipe calls for beef and pork , the Kiev variant uses mutton or lamb as well as beef , while in the Poltava region , the stock for borscht is cooked on poultry meat , that is , chicken , duck or goose . The use of zucchini , beans and apples is characteristic of the Chernihiv borscht ; in this variant , beetroots are sautéed in vegetable oil rather than lard , and the sour taste comes solely from tomatoes and tart apples . The Lviv borscht is based on bone stock and is served with chunks of Vienna sausages . 
 Many regional recipes for borscht have also developed in Russian cuisine . Examples include the Moscow borscht , served with pieces of beef , ham and Vienna sausages ; Siberian borscht with meatballs ; and Pskov borscht with dried smelt from the local lakes . Other unique Russian variants include a monastic Lenten borscht with marinated kelp instead of cabbage and the Russian Navy borscht ( <unk> borshch ) , the defining characteristic of which is that the vegetables are cut into square or diamond @-@ shaped chunks rather than julienned . 
 As well as the thick <unk> described above , Polish cuisine offers a ruby @-@ colored beetroot bouillon known as barszcz <unk> <unk> , or clear red borscht . It is made by combining strained meat @-@ and @-@ vegetable stock with wild mushroom broth and beet sour . In some versions , smoked meat may be used for the stock and the tartness may be obtained or enhanced by adding lemon juice , dill pickle brine , or dry red wine . It may be served either in a soup bowl or – especially at dinner parties – as a hot beverage in a twin @-@ handled cup , with a croquette or a filled pastry on the side . Unlike other types of borscht , it is not whitened with sour cream . <unk> <unk> , or Christmas Eve borscht , is a variant of the clear borscht that is traditionally served during the Polish Christmas Eve supper . In this version , meat stock is either omitted or replaced with fish broth , usually made by boiling the heads cut off from fish used in other Christmas Eve dishes . The mushrooms used for cooking the mushroom broth are reserved for uszka ( small filled dumplings ) , which are then served with the borscht . 
 In the summertime , cold borscht is a popular , refreshing alternative to the aforementioned variants , which are normally served hot . It consists of beet sour or beet juice blended with sour cream , buttermilk , soured milk , kefir and / or yogurt , and is refrigerated . The mixture has a distinctive pink or magenta color . It is typically served over finely chopped beetroot , cucumbers , radishes and green onion , together with halves of a hard @-@ boiled egg and sprinkled with fresh dill . Chopped veal , ham , or crawfish tails may be added as well . This soup probably originated in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania , which comprised the territories of modern @-@ day Lithuania and Belarus , and it is still part of the culinary traditions of these and neighboring nations . The Lithuanian language is the only one in the region which actually refers to it as ' cold borscht ' ( <unk> ) . In Belarusian it is known simply as <unk> , or ' cold soup ' ; in Polish as <unk> litewski , or ' Lithuanian cold soup ' ; and in Russian as <unk> , or ' beetroot soup ' . 
 Ashkenazi Jews living in Eastern Europe adopted beetroot borscht from their Slavic neighbors and adapted it to their taste and religious requirements . As combining meat with milk is proscribed by kosher dietary laws , Jews have developed two variants of the soup : meat ( <unk> ) and dairy ( <unk> ) . The meat variant is typically made from beef brisket ( pork is never used ) and cabbage , while the dairy one is vegetarian , blended with sour cream or a mixture of milk and egg yolks . Both variants typically contain beetroots and onions , and are flavored with beet sour , vinegar or citric acid for tartness and beet sugar for sweetness . Galician Jews traditionally liked their borscht particularly sweet . Jewish borscht may be served either hot or cold , typically with a hot boiled potato on the side . In prewar Eastern Europe it was traditionally put up to ferment around Purim so that it would be ready four weeks later for the Passover holiday . 
 = = = Without beets = = = 
 Although in the English language borscht refers almost invariably to a beet @-@ based soup , in some culinary cultures there exist soups with the same or similar names where beetroots are absent or merely optional . The principal common trait among them is a tart flavor obtained by adding various sour @-@ tasting ingredients . 
 Green borscht ( <unk> borshch ) , a light soup made from leaf vegetables , is an example common in Ukrainian and Russian cuisines . The naturally tart @-@ tasting sorrel is most commonly used , but spinach , chard , nettle , garden orache and occasionally dandelion , <unk> or ramsons , may be added as well , especially after the spring season for sorrel has passed . Like beetroot borscht , it is based on meat or vegetable broth and is typically served with boiled potatoes and hard @-@ boiled eggs , sprinkled with dill . There is also a variety of Ukrainian green borscht which includes both sorrel and beetroots . 
 In Polish cuisine , white borscht ( barszcz biały , also known as żur or <unk> , ' sour soup ' ) is made from a fermented mixture of rye flour or oatmeal and water . It is typically flavored with garlic and marjoram , and served over eggs and boiled fresh sausage ; the water in which the sausage was boiled is often used instead of meat stock . In the Carpathian Mountains of southern Poland , variants of borscht are also made in which the tart taste comes from fermented milk products , such as whey or buttermilk . Although the deep red color of beetroot borscht may remind those unfamiliar with Polish cuisine of blood , the kind of borscht that does contain animal ( usually poultry ) blood mixed with vinegar is dark brownish @-@ gray in color and aptly called " gray borscht " ( barszcz <unk> ) , which is a regional name of the Polish blood soup better known as <unk> . 
 In Romanian and Moldovan cuisines , a mixture of wheat bran or cornmeal with water that has been left to ferment , similar to that used in Polish white borscht , is called borș . It is used to impart a sour taste to a variety of tangy Romanian soups , known as either also borș or ciorbă . Variants include ciorbă de <unk> ( with meatballs ) , ciorbă de <unk> ( with tripe ) , borş de <unk> ( with fish ) and borş de <unk> <unk> ( with beetroots ) . 
 The Armenian version of borscht is a hot soup made with beef stock , green peppers and other vegetables , which may or may not include beetroots , and flavored with parsley and cilantro . In Chinese cuisine , a soup known as <unk> sòng <unk> , or " Russian soup " , is based on red cabbage and tomatoes , and lacks beetroots altogether ; also known as " Chinese borscht " , it originated in Harbin , close to the Russian border in northeast China . In ethnic Mennonite cuisine , borscht refers to a whole range of seasonal vegetable soups based on beef or chicken stock – from spring borscht made with spinach , sorrel and chard to summer borscht with cabbage , tomatoes , corn and squash to fall and winter borscht with cabbage , beets and potatoes . 
 = = <unk> and sides = = 
 The diversity of borscht styles is matched by the wide choice of garnishes and side dishes with which various kinds of borscht may be served . 
 Most often , borscht is dished up with sour cream , the East European version of which , known as smetana , is <unk> than its American counterpart . The sour cream may be served in a separate pitcher for the diners to add the desired amount themselves or the borscht may come already " whitened " , that is , blended with sour cream . Sometimes the cream is thickened with flour before being added to the soup . Yogurt and a mixture of milk and yolks are possible substitutes . 
 Chopped herbs are often sprinkled on the surface of the soup ; dill is most common , but parsley , chives or scallion are often added as well . Individual helpings may be spiced up with minced hot peppers or garlic . Many kinds of borscht are served over halves or quarters of hard @-@ boiled chicken or quail eggs . Navy beans , broad beans or string beans are also a common addition . 
 Meat , removed from the stock on which the borscht was based , may be cut into smaller chunks and either added back into the soup or served on the side with horseradish or mustard . Bacon and sausages are also commonly used as borscht garnishes . Borscht based on bone stock may be served Old Polish style , with marrow from the bones . 
 Some kinds of the soup , such as Poltava borscht , may be served with <unk> , or thick noodles of wheat or buckwheat flour . Siberian borscht is eaten with boiled meatballs ( <unk> ) of minced beef and onion . In Poland and parts of western Ukraine , borscht is typically ladled over uszka , or bite @-@ sized ear @-@ shaped dumplings made from pasta dough wrapped around mushroom , buckwheat or meat filling . Mushroom @-@ filled uszka are particularly associated with Polish Christmas Eve borscht . 
 Borscht , like any other soup in East Slavic cuisines , is seldom eaten by itself , but rather accompanied by a side dish . At a minimum , spoonfuls of borscht are alternated with bites of a slice of bread . Buckwheat groats or boiled potatoes , often topped with pork <unk> , are other simple possibilities , but a range of more involved sides exists as well . 
 In Ukraine , borscht is often accompanied with pampushky , or savory , puffy yeast @-@ raised rolls glazed with oil and crushed garlic . In Russian cuisine , borscht may be served with any of assorted side dishes based on <unk> , or the East European variant of farmer cheese , such as <unk> , syrniki or <unk> . <unk> are baked round cheese @-@ filled tarts ; syrniki are small pancakes wherein the cheese is mixed into the batter ; and a <unk> is a casserole of buckwheat groats baked with cheese . 
 <unk> , or baked dumplings with fillings as for uszka , are another common side for both hearty and clear variants of borscht . Polish clear borscht may be also served with a croquette or paszteciki . A typical Polish croquette ( <unk> ) is made by wrapping a crêpe ( thin pancake ) around a filling and coating it in breadcrumbs before <unk> ; paszteciki ( literally , ' little pâtés ' ) are variously shaped filled hand @-@ held pastries of yeast @-@ raised or flaky dough . An even more exquisite way to serve borscht is with a coulibiac , or a large loaf @-@ shaped pie . Possible fillings for croquettes , paszteciki and <unk> include mushrooms , sauerkraut and minced meat . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 Borscht derives from a soup originally made by the Slavs from common hogweed ( Heracleum sphondylium , also known as cow parsnip ) , which lent the dish its Slavic name . Growing commonly in damp meadows throughout the north temperate zone , hogweed was used not only as fodder ( as its English names suggest ) , but also for human consumption – from Eastern Europe to Siberia , to northwestern North America . 
 The Slavs collected hogweed in May and used its roots for stewing with meat , while the stems , leaves and umbels were chopped , covered with water and left in a warm place to ferment . After a few days , lactic and alcoholic fermentation produced a mixture described as " something between beer and sauerkraut " . This concoction was then used for cooking a soup characterized by a mouth @-@ puckering sour taste and pungent smell . As the Polish ethnographer Łukasz <unk> wrote in 1830 , " Poles have been always partial to tart dishes , which are somewhat peculiar to their homeland and vital to their health . " 
 The earliest written reference to the Slavic hogweed soup can be found in <unk> ( Domestic Order ) , a 16th @-@ century Russian compendium of moral rules and homemaking advice . It recommends growing the plant " by the fence , around the whole garden , where the nettle grows " , to cook a soup of it in springtime and reminds the reader to , " for the Lord 's sake , share it with those in need " . Simon <unk> ( Szymon <unk> ) , a 17th @-@ century Polish botanist , described " our Polish hogweed " as a vegetable that was well known throughout Poland , Rus ' , Lithuania and Samogitia ( that is , most of the northern part of Eastern Europe ) , typically used for cooking a " tasty and graceful soup " with capon stock , eggs , sour cream and millet . More interested in the plant 's medicinal properties than its culinary use , he also recommended pickled hogweed juice as a cure for fever or hangover . 
 Hogweed borscht was mostly a poor man 's food . The soup 's humble beginnings are still reflected in Polish fixed expressions , where " cheap like borscht " is the equivalent of " dirt cheap " ( also attested as a calque in Yiddish and Canadian English ) , whereas adding " two mushrooms into borscht " is synonymous with excess . For the professors of the University of Kraków , who led a monastic way of life in the 17th century , hogweed borscht was a fasting dish which they ate regularly ( sometimes with deviled eggs ) from Lent till Rogation days . It was uncommon on the royal table , although according to the 16th @-@ century Polish botanist Marcin of Urzędów – citing Giovanni <unk> , a court physician to the Jagiellonian kings of Hungary – the Polish @-@ born King Vladislaus II used to have a Polish hogweed @-@ based dish prepared for him at his court in Buda . 
 = = = Diversification = = = 
 With time , other ingredients were added to the soup , eventually replacing hogweed altogether , and the names borshch or barszcz became generic terms for any sour @-@ tasting soup . In 19th @-@ century rural Poland , this term included soups made from barberries , currants , gooseberries , cranberries , celery or plums . 
 When describing the uses of common hogweed , John Gerard , a 17th @-@ century English botanist , observed that " the people of [ Poland ] and Lithuania use to make [ a ] drink with the decoction of this herb and leaven or some other thing made of meal , which is used instead of beer and other ordinary drink . " It may suggest that hogweed soup was on some occasions combined with a fermented mixture of water and barley flour , oatmeal or rye flour . Such soured , gelatinous flour @-@ and @-@ water mixture , originally known as kissel ( from the Proto @-@ Slavic root * <unk> , ' sour ' ) had been already mentioned in The Tale of <unk> Years , a 12th @-@ century chronicle of Kievan Rus ' , and continued to be a staple of Ukrainian and Russian cooking until the middle of the 19th century . In Poland , a soup based on diluted kissel became known as either żur ( from Middle High German sur ' sour ' ) or barszcz and later – to distinguish it from the red beetroot borscht – as barszcz biały ' white borscht ' . 
 The earliest known Polish recipes for borscht , written by chefs catering to Polish magnates ( aristocrats ) , are from the late 17th century . Stanisław <unk> , head chef to Prince Aleksander Michał Lubomirski , included several borscht recipes in his Compendium <unk> ( A Collection of Dishes ) , the first cookbook published originally in Polish , in 1682 . They include such sour soups as lemon borscht and " royal borscht " , the latter made from assorted dried , smoked or fresh fish and fermented rye bran . A manuscript recipe collection from the Radziwiłł family court , dating back to ca . 1686 , contains an instruction for making hogweed borscht mixed with poppy seeds or ground almonds . As this was a Lenten dish , it was garnished , in a trompe @-@ l 'œil fashion typical of Baroque cuisine , with mock eggs made from finely chopped pike that was partly dyed with saffron and formed into oval balls . An alternative recipe for the almond borscht replaced pickled hogweed with vinegar . 
 Borscht also evolved into a variety of sour soups to the east of Poland . Examples include onion borscht , a recipe for which was included in a 1905 Russian cookbook , and sorrel @-@ based green borscht , which is still a popular summer soup in Ukraine and Russia . A Gift to Young Housewives by Elena <unk> , the best @-@ selling Russian cookbook of the 19th century , first published in 1861 , contains nine recipes for borscht , some of which are based on kvass , a traditional Slavic fermented beverage made from rye bread . Kvass @-@ based variants were also known in Ukraine at that time ; some of them were types of green borscht , while others were similar to the Russian <unk> . 
 Before the advent of beet @-@ based borscht , cabbage borscht was of particular importance . Made from either fresh cabbage or sauerkraut , it could be indistinguishable from the Russian shchi . Indeed , the mid @-@ 19th @-@ century Explanatory Dictionary of the Living Great Russian Language defines borshch as " a kind of shchi " with beet sour added for tartness . The significance of cabbage as an essential ingredient of borscht is manifest in the Ukrainian proverb , " without bread , it 's no lunch ; without cabbage , it 's no borscht . " 
 = = = Novel ingredients = = = 
 Beet ( Beta vulgaris ) , a plant native to the Mediterranean Basin , was already grown in antiquity . Only the leaves were of culinary use , as the tapered , tough , whitish and bitter @-@ tasting root was considered unfit for human consumption . It is likely that beet greens were used in variants of green borscht long before the invention of the beetroot @-@ based red borscht . Beet varieties with round , red , sweet taproots , known as beetroots , were not reliably reported until the 12th century and did not spread to Eastern Europe before the 16th century . Mikołaj Rej , a Polish Renaissance poet and moralist , included the earliest known Polish recipe for pickled beetroots in his 1568 book , Life of an Honest Man . It would later evolve into <unk> , or <unk> mit <unk> , a beet @-@ and @-@ horseradish relish popular in Polish and Jewish cuisines . Rej also recommended the " very tasty brine " left over from beetroot pickling , which was an early version of beet sour . The sour found some applications in Polish folk medicine as a cure for hangover and – mixed with honey – as a sore throat remedy . 
 It may never be known who first thought of using beet sour to flavor borscht , which also gave the soup its now @-@ familiar red color . Jerzy Samuel Bandtkie 's Polish @-@ German dictionary published in 1806 was the first to define barszcz as a tart soup made from pickled beetroots . The fact that certain 19th @-@ century Russian and Polish cookbooks , such as Handbook of the Experienced Russian Housewife ( 1842 ) by Yekaterina <unk> and The Lithuanian Cook ( 1854 ) by <unk> <unk> , refer to beetroot @-@ based borscht as " Little Russian borscht " ( where " Little Russian " is a term used at the time for ethnic Ukrainians under imperial Russian rule ) suggests that this innovation took place in what is now Ukraine , whose soils and climate are particularly well suited to beet cultivation . Ukrainian legends , probably of 19th @-@ century origin , attribute the invention of beetroot borscht either to Zaporozhian Cossacks , serving in the Polish army , on their way to break the siege of Vienna in 1683 , or to Don Cossacks , serving in the Russian army , while laying siege to Azov in 1695 . 
 Spanish conquistadors brought potatoes and tomatoes from the Americas to Europe in the 16th century , but these vegetables only became commonly grown and consumed in Eastern Europe in the 19th century . Eventually , both became staples of peasant diet and essential ingredients of Ukrainian and Russian borscht . Potatoes replaced turnips in borscht recipes , and tomatoes – fresh , canned or paste – took over from beet sour as the source of tartness . The turnip is rarely found in modern recipes , and even then , together with potatoes . In Ukraine , beet sour and tomatoes were both used for some time until the latter ultimately prevailed during the last third of the 19th century . 
 = = = Spread = = = 
 Over the course of the 19th and 20th centuries , borscht 's popularity spread beyond its Slavic homeland , largely due to such factors as territorial expansion of the Russian Empire , Russia 's growing political clout and cultural stature , and waves of emigration out of the country . As Russia grew to cover most of northern and central Eurasia , borscht was introduced to the cuisines of various peoples inhabiting the territories both within and adjacent to the empire , from Finland to the Caucasus and Iran , to Central Asia and China , and to Alaska ( Russian America ) . 
 Borscht 's westward expansion was less successful ; Germans used to scoff at the soup along with other East European fare . What helped familiarize Western Europe with borscht was the practice of Russian emperors , as well as Russian and Polish aristocrats , to employ celebrated French chefs , who later presented their own versions of the dish as a foreign curiosity back in France . One of the first French chefs to do so was Marie @-@ Antoine Carême , who worked briefly for Emperor Alexander I in 1819 . In his take on borscht , the original Russian soup served only as inspiration for an extravagant haute cuisine dish with an air of eastern exoticism . Apart from vegetables and beet sour , his recipe calls for a roast chicken , a fried chicken , a duck , a piece of veal , an <unk> , a marrow bone , one pound of bacon , and six large sausages , and suggests serving with beef quenelles , deviled eggs , and <unk> . Auguste Escoffier , Carême 's apprentice , who was mostly fascinated by the soup 's vivid ruby @-@ red color , simplified his master 's recipe , while also securing the place of potage bortsch ( " borscht soup " ) in French cuisine . Urbain Dubois and Émile Bernard , both of whom had been employed at Polish aristocratic courts , presented borscht to the French public as a Polish soup ; their cookbook , La cuisine classique , published in 1856 , contains a borscht recipe under the descriptive name , potage au jus de <unk> à la polonaise ( " Polish @-@ style beet @-@ juice soup " ) , which had been changed to potage <unk> à la polonaise by the third edition in 1868 . In 1867 , beetroot borscht was served , along with herrings , sturgeon , coulibiac , Pozharsky cutlets and vinaigrette salad , at a Russian @-@ themed dinner at the International Exposition in Paris , strengthening its international association with Russian culture . 
 Mass migration from the Russian Empire to North America – initially <unk> by members of persecuted religious minorities – was instrumental in bringing borscht across the Atlantic . The earliest waves of migration occurred at a time when cabbage @-@ based borscht was still the dominant variant of the soup in at least parts of Russia . The Mennonites , who began arriving in Canada and the United States from Russia 's Volga region in the 1870s , still eschew beetroots in their borscht ; instead , Mennonite varieties include <unk> Borscht ( with cabbage or sauerkraut ) and Somma Borscht ( sorrel @-@ based " summer borscht " ) . According to the Jewish Encyclopedia published in 1906 , cabbage @-@ based <unk> borscht was also more popular than the beet @-@ based variant in American Jewish cuisine at the time . Subsequent Jewish immigration helped popularize the red borscht in America . 
 In the 1930s , when most American hotels refused to accept Jewish guests due to widespread anti @-@ Semitism , New York Jews began flocking to Jewish @-@ owned resorts in the Catskill Mountains for their summer vacations . The area grew into a major center of Jewish entertainment , with restaurants offering all @-@ you @-@ can @-@ eat Ashkenazi Jewish fare , including copious amounts of borscht . Grossinger 's , one of the largest resorts , served borscht throughout the day , every day of the year . The region became known , initially in derision , as the " Borscht Belt " , reinforcing the popular association between borscht and American Jewish culture . As most visitors arrived in the summertime , the borscht was typically served cold . Marc Gold was one of its largest suppliers , producing 1 @,@ 750 short tons ( 1 @,@ 590 t ) a year in his business 's heyday . Gold 's borscht consists of puréed beetroots seasoned with sugar , salt and citric acid ; it is usually blended with sour cream and served as a refreshing beverage , more aptly described as a " beet smoothie " . Such kind of " purplish , watery broth " is , according to Nikolai Burlakoff , author of The World of Russian Borsch , " associated in America with borsch , in general , and Jewish borsch in particular . " 
 In the Soviet Union , borscht was one of the most popular everyday dishes . It was described by James Meek , a British correspondent in Kiev and Moscow , as " the common denominator of the Soviet kitchen , the dish that tied together ... the high table of the Kremlin and the meanest canteen in the <unk> of the Urals , ... the beetroot soup that pumped like a main artery through the kitchens of the east Slav lands " . Among Soviet leaders , the Ukrainian @-@ born Leonid Brezhnev was especially partial to borscht , which his wife continued to personally cook for him even after they had moved into the Kremlin . 
 The soup has even played a role in the Soviet space program . In March 1961 , as part of a communications equipment test , a pre @-@ recorded recipe for borscht was broadcast from the Korabl @-@ Sputnik 4 spacecraft . The craft , carrying animals and a mannequin , had been launched into low Earth orbit in preparation for manned space flights . Actual borscht eventually made its way into outer space as space food for Soviet and , later , Russian cosmonauts . Originally , a puréed version of borscht was supplied in tubes . All ingredients for the space borscht ( which include beef , beetroots , cabbage , potatoes , carrots , onions , parsley root and tomato paste ) were cooked separately , then combined one by one in strictly controlled order , sterilized , packed into tubes , sealed airtight and autoclaved . In the 1970s , the tubes were replaced with packages of <unk> freeze @-@ dried borscht with regular @-@ size bits of cooked vegetables . 
 = = In culture = = 
 = = = As a ritual dish = = = 
 Borscht is often associated with its role in religious traditions of various denominations ( Eastern Orthodox , Greek and Roman Catholic , and Jewish ) that are common in Eastern Europe . In East Slavic countries , " memorial borscht " is served as the first course at a post @-@ funeral wake . According to a traditional belief , the soul of the departed either feeds on or is carried up to heaven by puffs of steam rising from bowls of borscht and other hot dishes , such as <unk> , porridge , boiled potatoes or freshly baked bread . In the region of Polesye , straddling the Belarusian @-@ Ukrainian border , the same steaming @-@ hot dishes , including borscht , are given as an offering to the souls of deceased ancestors during the annual semi @-@ pagan remembrance ceremony known as <unk> , or Forefathers ' Night . 
 In Poland and Ukraine , borscht is usually one of the dishes served at a Christmas Eve dinner . Celebrated after the first star has appeared in the sky on December 25 ( Roman Catholic ) or January 6 ( Greek Catholic ) , it is a meal which is at the same time festive and fasting , a <unk> affair ( traditionally , with twelve distinct dishes ) that excludes ingredients of land @-@ animal origin . Christmas Eve borscht is , therefore , either vegetarian or based on fish stock and is not typically mixed with sour cream . In Ukraine , the soup contains vegetables that are sautéed in vegetable oil rather than lard , as well as beans and mushrooms . It may be also thickened with wheat flour dry @-@ roasted in a pan instead of the usual roux . The Polish version of Christmas Eve borscht is a clear ruby @-@ red broth . Both Ukrainian and Polish variants are often served with uszka . 
 While Christmas in Poland is traditionally linked to red borscht , Lent – the fasting period that leads up to Easter – is associated with a meatless version of white borscht , or żur . Youths used to celebrate Holy Saturday , the last day of the fast , with a mock " funeral " of the white borscht , in which a pot of the soup was either buried in the ground or broken , sometimes – to the crowd 's amusement – while being carried by an unsuspecting boy on his head . On the next day , the white borscht would reappear on the Easter table , but this time , in its more coveted , meat @-@ based guise with sausage , bacon and eggs . 
 In Eastern European Ashkenazi Jewish tradition , vegetarian borscht served with sour cream and boiled potatoes on the side , known as <unk> borsht , is considered an essential dish during the Passover period . As the holiday is observed in spring ( March or April ) , the preparation of Passover borscht used to provide an opportunity to use up the beet sour left over from pickled beetroots that had been consumed during winter , remaining potatoes that had been stored throughout the winter and sour cream that was readily available in the new calving season . Cold borscht blended with sour cream is also popular on Shavuot ( Feast of Weeks ) , a holiday customarily associated with dairy foods , observed in late May or early June . <unk> <unk> , or the third meal of the Shabbat , often includes borscht as well . 
 = = = As an ethnic dish = = = 
 Borscht is associated with and claimed by several ethnic groups , especially Ukrainians , Russians , Poles , Lithuanians and Ashkenazi Jews , as their own national or ethnic dish and cultural icon . Such claims are not necessarily mutually exclusive , as the soup 's history predates the emergence of modern nation states , with their ever @-@ shifting borders , in Eastern Europe . Borscht , in the words of Burlakoff , " is perfectly suited to a global culture . " He describes it as " a global phenomenon " , in which " local variants are so numerous and diverse that it is hard sometimes for a non @-@ specialist to grasp that any single example of it is something that is part of a unified tradition . " In his view , borscht " is an almost perfect example of ... ' <unk> ' – a phenomenon that is global in distribution but reflective of local needs and ways in its variants and adaptation ; ... a highly localized product that became globalized , and in the process adapted to conditions other than the original ones . " However , according to Irina <unk> , a Russian linguist and anthropologist , " people tend to be very <unk> about their food and proud of it . " A " connection between culinary and territorial claims " may be observed , which results in the culinary area turning into " a battlefield generating and proliferating all kinds of myths . " 
 In its currently most popular , beet @-@ based version , borscht most likely originated in what is now Ukraine . Borscht 's role as a staple of everyday Ukrainian diet is reflected in the Ukrainian saying , " borscht and porridge are our food " ( compare the equivalent Russian saying , where borscht is replaced with shchi ) . The hearty soup in which the beetroot is just one of sundry vegetables , as opposed to the typically Polish clear beet broth , is still known in Poland as " Ukrainian borscht " . 
 In the Soviet Union , government @-@ sponsored cookbooks , such as The Book of Tasty and Healthy Food curated by Anastas Mikoyan , Cookery and Directory of Recipes and Culinary Production , promoted a unified Soviet cuisine with standardized and nutritionally " rational " versions of traditional dishes . The same cooking techniques and recipes were taught in culinary vocational schools throughout the country , establishing a common cooking style in Soviet cafés and restaurants . Though inspired by the cuisines of the country 's various ethnic groups , many recipes were presented as part of an overall Soviet heritage , disassociated from their individual geographic origins . By many people both inside and outside the Soviet Union , borscht was increasingly seen not as an ethnic Ukrainian soup , but as a Soviet or – metonymically – Russian dish . This approach was criticized by William Pokhlebkin , a preeminent Russian food writer , who unequivocally described beet @-@ based borscht as one of the " dishes of Ukrainian cookery " which " have entered the menu of international cuisine " . " One could understand " , he wrote , " and forgive foreigners for calling borscht or <unk> Russian national dishes , but when it turns out that they gleaned the information from Soviet cookbooks or from restaurant menus , one is embarrassed for our authors and chefs , who popularize the national cuisines of our peoples [ that is , the ethnic groups of the Soviet Union ] with such ignorance . " 
 According to Meek , 
 Pokhlebkin and the Soviet Union are dead , yet <unk> lives on . Recipes , like birds , ignore political boundaries ... The faint outline of the Tsarist @-@ Soviet imperium still glimmers in the collective steam off bowls of beetroot and cabbage in meat stock , and the soft sound of dollops of sour cream slipping into soup , from the Black Sea to the Sea of Japan and , in emigration , from Brooklyn to Berlin . 
 = = = Secondary = = = 
 = = = Primary = = = 
 = = = Reference works = = = 
 = The Revival = 
 The Revival is the second studio album by American R & B group Tony ! Toni ! Toné ! , released on May 8 , 1990 , by Wing Records . It is the follow @-@ up to their modestly successful debut album Who ? ( 1988 ) . The album was produced and arranged primarily by Tony ! Toni ! Toné ! , with additional production by Foster & McElroy , who previously produced Who ? . The group recorded The Revival at several studios in California and used a Synclavier music workstation . 
 A new jack swing album , The Revival features R & B music that draws on funk and older soul influences . Its songs incorporate eccentric sounds and stylistic elements from jazz and hip hop , including improvisational sounds , conversational vocals , and digital samples . The group 's lyrics exhibit contemporary hip hop attitudes and traditional soul themes , with songs about unruly women , low @-@ key ballads , and more danceable tracks . 
 The Revival was well received by contemporary critics , who wrote favorably of the group 's songwriting and appropriation of older sounds with contemporary R & B. It charted for 64 weeks and peaked at number 34 on the Billboard Top Pop Albums . The album was promoted with four singles , including the top 40 @-@ hit " It Never Rains ( In Southern California ) " and the gold @-@ certified " Feels Good " . The Revival was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America and , according to Nielsen SoundScan , had sold two million copies by 1992 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Revival is the follow @-@ up to Tony ! Toni ! Toné ! ' s 1988 debut album Who ? , which was a modest success for the group and acquainted them with production and songwriting team Foster & McElroy . Originally friends from Oakland , the group moved to Sacramento after finishing Who ? with Foster & McElroy and began to record The Revival . 
 Recording sessions for the album took place at several studios in California — The Plant in San Francisco , Eve @-@ Jims Studio and Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles , Can @-@ Am Studio in Tarzana , Live Oak Studio in Berkeley , and J @-@ Jam Studio in Oakland . Tony ! Toni ! Toné ! primarily produced and arranged The Revival , with additional production by Foster & McElroy . The group also worked with engineers Toby Wright and Gerry Brown , musician Keith Crouch , and singer Vanessa Williams , who sang on the song " Oakland Stroke " . They recorded the album by using a Synclavier music workstation . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 A new jack swing record , The Revival features R & B music with elements from hip hop , funk , jazz , and pop styles . Musically and lyrically , it fuses older soul influences and contemporary hip hop attitudes , along with the latter genre 's use of samples and digital rhythm tracks . Funk songs such as " The Blues " , " Oakland Stroke " , " Let 's Have a Good Time " , and " Feels Good " incorporate digital production technology . Janine McAdams of Spin finds most of the songs to be " embellished with an allusion , an imitation or an out @-@ and @-@ out sample " , and writes that the group draws on " various musical influences — Parliament , Duke Ellington , Pointer Sisters , James Brown , among others . " " Let 's Have a Good Time " samples the Pointer Sisters ' 1973 song " Yes We Can Can " , and " Oakland Stroke " , a paean to the group 's hometown , has " Jungle Boogie " -like horn riffs . The " sardonic " song veers stylistically from hip hop to swing , incorporating a 1940s jazz break . 
 According to McAdams , Tony ! Toni ! Toné ! ' s songwriting on The Revival eschewed " social commentary or political posturing " in favor of " the preservation of R & B 's signature , the perpetuation of the soul tradition , and — on the lighter side — the glorification of barbeque , the boogaloo and the booty on a Saturday night . " Described by the group as " Baptist shout music that makes you wanna dance " , " Feels Good " incorporates a popular sample from James Brown 's 1970 song " Funky Drummer " and gospel musical themes . " Don 't Talk About Me " is a warning to a mouthy woman , while " The Blues " features the narrator 's spiteful complaints about an ungrateful girlfriend . The latter song features aggressive bass , a funky break , doo @-@ wop verses , a blues riff that the group 's guitarist D 'wayne Wiggins learned from his father , and ideas from pianist Vince Guaraldi 's music for Peanuts television specials . 
 The album 's songs also feature offbeat sounds , improvisational elements , and conversational vocals derived from rap . The Revival begins with a directive from a grave voice : " Play this record as frequently as possible , Then , as it becomes easier for you , play the record once a day , or as needed . " The album also features dialogue between an old lady who asks the group whether it will be like their last album , on which she was also featured ; they respond to her question " No , ma 'am " . " All the Way " has a scrambling beat , whistle sounds , and the rhythmic call and response " What are we , what are we , what are we ? ... Just a bunch of brothers having a party " . The end of " Feels Good " features witty jazz keyboard playing behind a lively voice saying " it feels good ... in the hands , feet , bones , heart , and soul " . Ed Hogan of Allmusic writes that " the last part sounds like a Sunday morning testimonial . " 
 After the first five songs , The Revival features songs at a calmer tempo and more conventional style , with ballads that are more relaxed and low @-@ key . " It Never Rains ( In Southern California ) " was titled after an oft @-@ repeated phrase from one of Tony ! Toni ! Toné ! ' s attorneys , who used it in response to the group wearing heavy coats after returning from visits on the East Coast . Group drummer Timothy Christian played most of the song 's instruments , and bassist Raphael Wiggins wrote its lyrics about a man longing for a woman who was in southern California . The ballads are followed by " Those Were the Days " , which features <unk> banjo , trumpet , and wistful lyrics reminiscing about simpler times " when a dollar was worth a dollar , and you didn 't have to carry a gun when you left your house . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Released on May 8 , 1990 , by Wing Records , The Revival charted for 64 weeks on the Billboard Top Pop Albums , peaking at number 34 on the chart . The album 's second single " Feels Good " was released on June 19 and certified gold on November 13 after it had shipped 500 @,@ 000 copies . The single topped the R & B chart for two weeks and reached number nine on the Billboard Hot 100 in the fall of 1990 , going on to sell over one million copies . In late 1990 , the album 's fourth single " It Never Rains ( In Southern California ) " became a number @-@ one R & B hit and also peaked at number 34 on the Hot 100 . On January 28 , 1991 , The Revival was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , for shipments of one million copies in the United States . By 1992 , it had sold two million copies , according to Nielsen SoundScan , which began tracking sales data in 1991 . 
 In a contemporary review for the Chicago Tribune , Greg Kot wrote that The Revival 's " lull " adult contemporary ballads were redeemed by songs with " Sly Stone , Ray Charles , doo @-@ wop and Motown influences ... Add a dash of loopy humor and you have a terrific ' 60s @-@ meets @-@ <unk> ' 90s recipe " . Greg Sandow from Entertainment Weekly commended the group for " building momentum by adding new elements as the songs proceed " and " setting the course for whatever future the [ R & B ] genre is likely to have " . Dennis Hunt of the Los Angeles Times said although their " offbeat R & B hybrids " are occasionally " too busy and intentionally oddball " , " the Tonys ' explorations ... are mostly successful " . Orlando Sentinel writer Parry Gettelman said the dance @-@ oriented tracks " have great grooves and a warmth , humor and vocal finesse sadly lacking in the Top 40 " . Janine McAdams from Spin said they " transformed the simplest ditties into jammin ' anthems that assault the ear and move the feet " while writing : 
 According to Yahoo ! Music 's Scott Wilson , The Revival was Tony ! Toni ! Toné ! ' s " breakthrough " because of how its series of hit singles and the group 's exceptional songwriting and production " assured them their place in the musical hierarchy " . AllMusic editor Alex Henderson said the group " managed to appeal to urban contemporary audiences while expressing a love of 1970s soul and funk " with artistic merit and distinction from the largely unambitious R & B records released in 1990 . In the opinion of Jason Heller from The A.V. Club , The Revival was the " masterpiece " of new jack swing , " an artistic triumph in a genre that generally coasted on impeccable craft " . Sam Chennault from Rhapsody felt in spite of its new jack swing hit " Feels Good " , most of the album embraced " Bay Area funk and hinted at the subsequent innovations of key member Raphael Saadiq " . Robert Christgau was somewhat less enthusiastic and gave it a two @-@ star honorable mention , indicating a " likable effort consumers attuned to its overriding aesthetic or individual vision may well enjoy " . He singled out " Feels Good " and " Oakland Stroke " as highlights and quipped , " who says a love band can 't play funk music ? " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = = Tony ! Toni ! Toné ! = = = 
 Timothy Christian Riley – drums 
 D <unk> Wiggins – guitar , vocals 
 Raphael Wiggins – bass , vocals 
 = = = Additional personnel = = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = M @-@ 69 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 69 is an east – west state trunkline highway in the Upper Peninsula ( UP ) of the U.S. state of Michigan . It connects with US Highway 2 ( US 2 ) on both ends in Crystal Falls and near Bark River . In between , the highway runs for 65 @.@ 260 miles ( 105 @.@ 026 km ) in rural UP forest lands . 
 Before the creation of the U.S. Highway System , the current M @-@ 69 was a portion of M @-@ 12 . The original M @-@ 69 was replaced by US 102 and the M @-@ 69 designation was reused on a section of M @-@ 12 not replaced by US 2 . Further changes to the current highway truncated it for three decades . The eastern section removed from M @-@ 69 was given the County @-@ Designated Highway name of G @-@ 30 until the change was reversed . In 2002 , the historic Paint River Bridge in Crystal Falls was rehabilitated , repairing it and restoring it to the original appearance . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 69 starts at the intersection of 5th Street and Superior Avenue in Crystal Falls , where it meets US 2 / US 141 . The Iron County Courthouse is located at the head of Superior Avenue and overlooks a steep hill headed east through downtown . The City of Crystal Falls states that the courthouse offers " a view of the main street of the City and the scenic panorama of the valley at its feet " . On a clear day , Iron Mountain can be seen from the courthouse tower . It is from this starting point that M @-@ 69 descends Superior Avenue through downtown toward the Paint River in Iron County . The highway crosses the river on a historic bridge built in 1929 that features decorative lamp posts and railings . The bridge was rehabilitated for five months in 2002 . This rehabilitation involved replacing the bridge deck , repairing the bridge 's substructure , and restoring the lighting and railings to original designs . Because this bridge is listed on Michigan 's list of historic bridges , the construction work had to preserve the original historic character of the bridge . Final construction was completed at a cost of $ 1 @,@ 130 @,@ 545 ( equivalent to $ 1 @.@ 65 million in 2015 ) . A complete bridge replacement would have cost 25 % more without saving the historic bridge . 
 On the opposite bank of the river , Superior Avenue climbs a hill past the Evergreen Cemetery at the top . The section of roadway up to this point carries the highest levels of traffic as measured by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) in their annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) surveys . Some 3 @,@ 900 vehicles used this segment of trunkline daily in 2007 . Outside of town , the trunkline runs south of Runkle Lake through hilly , wooded terrain . The roadway crosses the southern section of the Michigamme River west of the Dickinson County line . 
 Running around two miles ( 32 @.@ km ) east of the county line , M @-@ 69 meets M @-@ 95 in the unincorporated community of Sagola . The post office in Sagola was established in 1889 to serve the timber @-@ harvesting community . M @-@ 69 turns south along M @-@ 95 , and together the two highways run south for 5 @.@ 956 miles ( 9 @.@ 585 km ) concurrently to the unincorporated community of Randville . This segment of the trunkline had the highest commercial traffic in the state 's AADT surveys . Some 560 trucks used this roadway daily in 2007 , according to MDOT . This second unincorporated community was settled for iron mining at the adjacent Groveland Mine at the turn of the century . M @-@ 69 and M @-@ 95 separate in Randville as the former turns east and the latter continues southward . 
 Between Randville and the former community of Metropolitan , M @-@ 69 runs along the West Branch of the Sturgeon River through more hilly terrain . The trunkline continues east to the twin communities of Theodore and Felch . The river and the road part ways until meeting again at Foster City . This is also the location of a unique junction of highways . M @-@ 69 meets G @-@ 69 , a County @-@ Designated Highway that runs south to Loretto in southern Dickinson County . The intersection in unique because some states , such as California , do not allow two highways to share a common number . 
 The highway continues to follow the river until crossing it at Hardwood before curving southeasterly and crossing into northern Menominee County . The highway crosses the northern end of the county through relatively flat terrain . The lowest AADT counts were measured here in 2007 at 550 vehicles . Near the unincorporated community of <unk> , the roadway runs through hills near a crossing of the Ten Mile Creek west of the county line . Continuing to the southeast , M @-@ 69 meets the community of Schaffer at the Delta County line . This line marks the transition from the Central Time Zone to the Eastern Time Zone . In Delta County , M @-@ 69 turns south along the Bark River and crosses its north branch . Just after running 5 @.@ 229 miles ( 8 @.@ 415 km ) into the county , M @-@ 69 crosses a set of railroad tracks from the Canadian National Railway 's Wisconsin Central . There it meets US 2 / US 41 east of the community of Bark River , home to the <unk> Indian Community . This marks the western end of the highway , halfway between Bark River and Hyde , west of Escanaba . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1919 , M @-@ 69 started at the state line south of Crystal Falls . It ran north through Crystal Falls , where it intersected M @-@ 12 , to end in Covington at an intersection with M @-@ 28 . This roadway was redesignated with the creation of the U.S. Highway System in 1926 . US 2 replaced M @-@ 69 south and M @-@ 12 west of Crystal Falls . US 102 replaced M @-@ 69 north of Crystal Falls , and the latter designation was reused on the section of M @-@ 12 east of town . Where the roadway intersected M @-@ 45 ( now M @-@ 95 ) in Sagola , M @-@ 69 joined it to Randville and then replaced M @-@ 90 east to Foster City by 1927 . By 1930 , the highway was extended through Menominee County into Delta County to end at an intersection with US 2 / US 41 east of Bark River . This extension gave M @-@ 69 its current routing . 
 In the late 1930s , the state had a general program to abandon some 250 miles ( 400 km ) of state highways with a daily traffic level of less than 300 vehicles . On July 26 , 1939 , the state turned over 5 @.@ 8 miles ( 9 @.@ 3 km ) of M @-@ 69 in Delta County , but the Delta County Road Commission immediately filed a protest to block the transfer . The Dickinson County Road Commission had already protested the abandonment of 23 @.@ 5 miles ( 37 @.@ 8 km ) of M @-@ 69 in that county . Maps published later that year do not indicate any change in jurisdiction to the highway . 
 In 1960 , the section of M @-@ 69 east of Randville was decommissioned , and the concurrency with M @-@ 95 was removed . This truncated the highway to 12 @.@ 834 miles ( 20 @.@ 654 km ) , approximately one @-@ fifth of its previous length . The transfer to county control was part of a program to reduce the total state highway mileage in the state . After October 5 , 1970 , this section was renamed G @-@ 30 with the beginning of the County @-@ Designated Highway program in Michigan . 
 At various points , the road commissions in Dickinson , Menominee and Delta counties tried to give the roadway back to the state for maintenance . Menominee County made the request in 1974 and 1982 , both times rejected because the road did not carry enough traffic to be a state highway . The road was a maintenance issue for the counties because of its relative isolation and high truck traffic carrying pulpwood to the paper mill in Escanaba and potatoes from farms near Felch . The roadway was in a relative state of disrepair in 1982 , and the counties wanted the state to fix it . Menominee County estimated that it would cost $ 500 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 1 @.@ 94 million in 2015 ) for their 18 @-@ mile ( 29 km ) stretch , while Dickinson estimated that it would cost $ 1 million ( equivalent to $ 3 @.@ 87 million in 2015 ) for their 27 miles ( 43 km ) . 
 This county road designation lasted until 1993 . That year , the changes made in 1960 were reversed and M @-@ 69 was re @-@ extended along M @-@ 95 and back to the Bark River area . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Helen Rollason = 
 Helen Frances Rollason MBE ( née Grindley : 11 March 1956 – 9 August 1999 ) was a British sports journalist and television presenter , who in 1990 became the first female presenter of the BBC 's sports programme Grandstand . She was also a regular presenter of Sport on Friday , and of the children 's programme Newsround during the 1980s . 
 Born in London , Rollason studied to become a PE teacher before entering radio broadcasting in 1980 . After directing sport related content for Channel 4 , where she helped to bring American football to British television , she anchored coverage of the 1987 World Student Games and 1988 Summer Olympics . Her work on Grandstand proved popular with viewers , and led to a number of other sports presenting roles for Rollason throughout the 1990s . As well as covering mainstream events such as the 1996 Summer Olympics , she became a champion of disability sports , helping to raise its profile and change its public and media perception . She presented sports bulletins for BBC Breakfast News and BBC News , and in 1996 was named as Sports Presenter of the Year . 
 Rollason was diagnosed with colon cancer in 1997 , and fought a two @-@ year battle with the disease . A 1998 documentary , Hope for Helen , followed her treatment , and won her much public support for her courage . She continued to work throughout her illness , and shortly before her death was awarded an MBE in the 1999 Birthday Honours . Later that year , the BBC established an award in her memory which is presented at the annual Sports Personality of the Year awards ceremony . A cancer charity was also founded in her name . Rollason 's television career also helped to open up the way for other women to enter the world of sports broadcasting , with presenters such as Sue Barker and Gabby Yorath following in her footsteps . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Helen Grindley was born in London on 11 March 1956 , and adopted at the age of nine months . Raised in a family where she was the second of three children , she spent her childhood in Northamptonshire and Bath . Her father was an engineer who later became a lecturer at Bath College , and her mother a biology teacher . She attended the Bath High School for Girls , and after developing an early interest in sport , was a member of Bath Athletics Club , as well as playing hockey for Somerset . Although she was keen to follow a career in broadcasting , careers advisors at school steered her towards teaching instead . 
 After leaving school she studied at the University of Brighton 's Chelsea College of Physical Education in Eastbourne , where she became Vice @-@ President of the Students Union . During her second year at the college she spent a term as an exchange student at Dalhousie University in Halifax , Nova Scotia . She graduated in 1977 . After completing her studies she became a PE teacher , and spent three years teaching the subject to secondary school students . She worked initially at Henry Beaufort School in Winchester , Hampshire , before moving to Essex , where she was a supply teacher . It was while she was teaching PE that she met her future husband , a fellow teacher named John Rollason . The couple were married in 1980 . Their daughter , Nikki , was born in 1983 . The couple divorced in 1991 . 
 = = Broadcasting career = = 
 Rollason continued to aspire to a career in broadcasting , and while still teaching did screen tests for BBC Wales and BBC South , but she was unsuccessful in both auditions . In 1980 , she took a holiday job as a volunteer presenter at Basildon Community Radio after seeing an advertisement in Basildon town centre and offering her services to them . A year later she joined the team of Essex Radio as a sports reporter when the commercial station went on air . She was subsequently appointed as the station 's deputy sports editor . Three years later she became a producer @-@ director for Cheerleader Productions , making sports content for Channel 4 . Among the events for which she helped to provide coverage were the final of the 1984 Davis Cup , held in Sweden , and Super Bowl XIX , which took place in 1985 . Additionally , she worked on the US Masters and US Open . 
 After just over a year with Cheerleader , Rollason left the company to concentrate on her broadcasting career , and became a freelance reporter . She covered the 1987 World Student Games from Zagreb for Thames Television , and then presented the 1988 World Junior Athletics championships from Sudbury , Ontario for Channel 4 . Later on in 1988 , she provided coverage of that year 's Summer Olympics , held in Seoul , for ITV . During the mid @-@ 1980s , she also joined the presenting team of the BBC children 's news programme , Newsround , with a view to increasing its sports coverage , and presented several features on topics such as gymnastics and female jockeys , as well as presenting Newsround Extra , a show that covered a specific issue in more detail . One such programme was a report on the street children of Bogotá , a subject that deeply moved her and reduced her to tears on screen . 
 In 1990 , Rollason joined BBC Sport and became the first female presenter of Grandstand , where her down @-@ to @-@ earth presenting style quickly made her popular with viewers , and earned her a regular presenting role on BBC Two 's Sport on Friday , as well as a raft of other sporting programmes . Among her credits with the BBC are coverage of the Wimbledon Championships , the 1992 Summer Olympics from Barcelona and 1996 Summer Olympics from Atlanta , together with the 1994 Commonwealth Games , which were held in Victoria , British Columbia . She was an advocate of disability sports , and helped to alter its public and media perception with her coverage of the 1996 Summer Paralympics . Britain 's Olympic team had been fairly unsuccessful at that year 's Olympics , prompting Rollason to urge viewers and the media to support what she called the " real " Olympics . Jane Swan , General Secretary of the British Paralympic Association later described how Rollason 's support for the event had helped to change its image . " Until then , the Paralympics had been treated as documentary material , focusing mainly on disability . Helen made people realise that it was sport . " Other disability sporting events she covered include the 1990 World Disabled Championships , 1991 Blind Golfers ' Championships , and the 1992 Summer Paralympics . She also fronted sports bulletins for BBC Breakfast News . In 1996 , she was named as the Television and Radio Industries Sports Presenter of the Year . 
 = = Later career , illness and death = = 
 Rollason began feeling unwell in 1996 during an eight @-@ week assignment to the US , where she was covering that year 's Olympic and Paralympic Games . She was diagnosed with cancer of the colon in August 1997 , which she was told had also spread to her liver . She was initially given three months to live , but confounded medical opinion by fighting the disease long after that . She underwent treatment with chemotherapy , but also used a combination of holistic therapies and diet to treat her condition . The cancer later <unk> to her lungs . Rollason continued to work throughout her illness , despite sessions of chemotherapy that left her feeling weak , and cited her work as the thing that had kept her going throughout her treatment . " I stay working because I love it , and because I feel best on the days when I 'm busy . I 'd far rather work than hang around the house – even though there are days when I can hardly get out of bed . " She presented sports bulletins for BBC News , wrote a weekly column about her illness for the Sunday Mirror Magazine and worked on a book about her experience that she hoped would help others diagnosed with the disease . She cited the determination of the many disabled athletes she had got to know through her work as having given her the strength of mind to fight her illness . In October 1998 , the BBC aired a special edition of its QED documentary series titled Hope for Helen , which followed her as she underwent a course of treatment . The film earned her much support from the public for her <unk> in December 1998 , colleagues paid tribute to an emotional @-@ looking Rollason during the BBC 's Sports Review of the Year , a compliment that produced mixed feelings for the presenter . She later wrote of the incident , " I felt a mixture of horror , embarrassment and incredible warmth towards my colleagues that they should think of doing this " . 
 In April 1999 , the BBC announced plans to overhaul its Six O 'Clock News bulletin , and that an in @-@ depth sports preview fronted by Rollason would be included in the programme 's Friday edition . She began presenting the slot in May , and made her last onscreen appearance on 18 June . Rollason was awarded an MBE in the 1999 Birthday Honours for her services to broadcasting and charities , and in July 1999 attended a ceremony at Buckingham Palace to be presented with the honour by the Queen . Speaking about the occasion , Rollason said , " I cried when I received the news . I don 't feel I deserve it but I 'm very thrilled that so many women are coming through in sport broadcasting now . " Also in July , she received an honorary degree from the University of Brighton , which was presented to her at her home after she became too ill to attend the ceremony . Shortly before that she was honoured with an award for courage at the 1999 Pride of Britain Awards . 
 Rollason became involved in charity work , raising £ 5 million for a cancer wing at North Middlesex Hospital , which was named in her honour . She died on 9 August 1999 at the age of 43 , in Brentwood , Essex . On 17 August , a service of thanksgiving was held for Rollason at a church near her home , and attended by friends and colleagues . Later that month , the BBC aired Helen Rollason : The Bravest Fight , a 30 @-@ minute documentary presented by Peter Sissons in which friends and colleagues paid tribute to her . Her autobiography , Life 's Too Short , was published posthumously in 2000 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 As the first female presenter of Grandstand , Helen Rollason was a pioneer of British sports broadcasting , an industry that was predominantly male at the time , and she established a precedent that allowed others to follow . Sue Barker , Hazel Irvine , Gail McKenna , Shelley Webb and Gabby Yorath all followed in Rollason 's footsteps to become noted UK sports presenters , with Yorath joining ITV as their first female sports presenter in the late 1990s , where she co @-@ hosted the football show On the Ball and was a contributor to The Premiership . Yorath paid tribute to Rollason shortly after her death , saying she would be " an icon for young girls who want to go into that field because she showed what could be done . She was a great example to everyone . " 
 On 4 November 1999 , the BBC announced the establishment of a Helen Rollason Award , to be given at the BBC Sports Personality of the Year ceremony in recognition of " outstanding achievement in the face of adversity " . Its first recipient was retired National Hunt trainer Jenny Pitman , who was herself diagnosed with cancer , and was presented with the award at that year 's ceremony on 12 December . Other Helen Rollason Award recipients include <unk> Ellen MacArthur in 2001 for her courage in becoming the fastest woman to circumnavigate the globe , footballer Geoff Thomas in 2005 for raising in excess of £ 150 @,@ 000 for the Leukaemia Research charity by cycling , following his own battle with the disease , and in 2014 , the competitors of the inaugural Invictus Games , a multi @-@ sport event for sick and injured service personnel , which made its debut that year . 
 The Sunday Times created the Helen Rollason Award for Inspiration as part of their <unk> of the Year Awards . Jenny Pitman was its first recipient in 1999 . Others to receive the award include student Joanna Gardiner in 2007 for her work with Football for Peace , a charity that provides football coaching to children from Jewish and Palestinian communities in Israel , Claire Lomas in 2012 who , having been paralysed following a riding accident completed that year 's London Marathon with the aid of a robotic suit , and Mel <unk> in 2014 , chair of the Somerset @-@ based Milton Nomads junior football club who established a local football league for children . 
 The Helen Rollason Cancer Charity was established in her name in 1999 . The charity funds and operates three cancer support centres – in Essex , Hertfordshire and London . Lord Coe , who had known Rollason since her days in radio broadcasting , is the charity 's patron . The first Helen Rollason Cancer Care Centre was opened in Chelmsford , Essex in April 2002 @.@ in 2011 , a new research centre named after Rollason and offering treatment for patients as part of clinical trials of new cancer therapies was opened at Chelmsford 's Broomfield Hospital . 
 In April 2006 , Brentwood Borough Council announced that a new housing development would include a road named Rollason Way in her memory . Additionally , eleven apartment blocks within the development would be named after people associated with Rollason or winners of the BBC Sports Personality of the Year . The building names on Rollason Way include Adlington House , Boardman Place , Radcliffe House , Christie Court , Redgrave Court , Botham House , Faldo Court , Whitbread Place , Torvill Court , and MacArthur Place . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Rollason , Helen ( 2000 ) . Life 's Too Short . Hodder & Stoughton . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 772 @-@ 6 . 
 = Beyond Good & Evil ( video game ) = 
 Beyond Good & Evil is a 2003 action @-@ adventure video game developed and published by Ubisoft for the PlayStation 2 , Microsoft Windows , Xbox and GameCube platforms . A full HD re @-@ mastered version of the game was released on Xbox Live Arcade in March 2011 and on PlayStation Network in June 2011 . The story follows the adventures of Jade , an investigative reporter and martial artist , who works with a resistance movement to reveal a planet @-@ wide alien conspiracy . The player controls Jade and allies , solving puzzles , fighting enemies , and obtaining photographic evidence . 
 Michel Ancel , creator of the Rayman series , envisioned the game as the first part of a trilogy . Beyond Good & Evil was a commercial failure , but was critically acclaimed , receiving a nomination for " Game of the Year " at the 2004 Game Developers Choice Awards . A sequel , Beyond Good & Evil 2 , is currently in development . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Beyond Good & Evil is an action @-@ adventure game with elements of puzzle @-@ solving and stealth @-@ based games . The player controls the protagonist , Jade , from a third @-@ person perspective . Jade can run , move stealthily , jump over obstacles and pits , climb ladders , push or bash doors and objects , and flatten herself against walls . As Jade , the player investigates a number of installations in search of the truth about a war with an alien threat . 
 In the game 's interior spaces , the player solves puzzles and makes their way past enemies in order to reach areas containing photographic evidence . Jade 's main tools are her Jō combat staff ( a melee weapon ) , discs for attacking at range , and a camera . Jade 's health , represented by hearts , decreases when hit by enemy attacks . It can be restored using fictional food items and can be increased beyond the maximum with " PA @-@ 1s " that , when held by Jade or her companions , increases their life gauge by one heart . If Jade 's health is depleted , the game will restart at the last checkpoint . Certain stealth segments later in the game automatically kill Jade if she is detected . 
 At times , it is only possible to advance in the game with the help of other characters . These characters are computer @-@ controlled , and players direct them via contextual commands . For example , the player can order them to perform a " super attack " , either pounding the ground to bounce enemies into the air , allowing the player to hit them from long distances , or knocking them off balance , making them vulnerable to attack . These allies possess a health bar and are incapacitated if it is depleted . Jade can share some of her items , such as PA @-@ 1s , with these characters . 
 In addition to obtaining evidence and completing assignments , Jade 's camera can take pictures of animal species in exchange for currency , and scan objects to reveal more information about the environment . When the " <unk> Glove " is obtained , Jade can attack enemies or activate devices from a distance by using the camera interface . There are also various minigames and sub @-@ missions offered by NPCs scattered throughout the world . 
 A hovercraft is used to travel around the world , and also used for racing and in other minigames . Later , the spaceship Beluga is acquired . The hovercraft can dock with the spaceship . Both vehicles require upgrades in order to reach new areas and progress through the game . Upgrades are purchased using pearls that are collected throughout the game , by completing missions , exploring areas , filling in the animal directory or by trading credits for them . The vehicles have a boost ability , and can be repaired using a " Repair Pod " if damaged by enemies . 
 The main city serves as a hub , giving the player access to the various areas that must be explored in order to expose the conspiracy . Jade can earn credits by defeating enemies , taking pictures , or completing assignments , which can be used to purchase additional items for both Jade and her vehicles . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Beyond Good & Evil takes place in the year <unk> on the mining planet of Hillys , located in a remote section of the galaxy . The architecture of the city around which the game takes place is rustic European in style . The world itself combines modern elements , such as email and credit cards , with those of science fiction and fantasy , such as spaceships and anthropomorphic animals coexisting with humans . As the game begins , Hillys is under siege by aliens called the " DomZ " , who abduct beings and either drain their life force for power or implant them with spores to convert them into slaves . Prior to the opening of the game , a military dictatorship called the " Alpha Sections " has come to power on Hillys , promising to defend the populace . However , the Alpha Sections seem unable to stop the DomZ despite its public assurances . An underground resistance movement , the IRIS Network , fights the Alpha Sections , believing it to be in league with the DomZ . 
 Beyond Good & Evil 's main protagonist , Jade ( voiced by Jodi Forrest ) , is a young photojournalist . She resides in an island lighthouse that doubles as a home for children orphaned by DomZ attacks . Pey 'j ( voiced by David <unk> ) , a boar @-@ like creature , is Jade 's " uncle " and guardian figure . Double H , a heavily built human IRIS operative , assists Jade during missions . He wears a military @-@ issue suit of armor at all times . <unk> , an artificial intelligence built into Jade 's storage unit , the " Synthetic @-@ Atomic @-@ Compressor " ( SAC ) , offers advice and " digitizes " items . The main antagonists are the DomZ High Priest , who is the chief architect of the invasion , and Alpha Sections leader General <unk> , who uses propaganda to gain the <unk> ' trust , even as he abducts citizens to sustain the DomZ . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Jade and Pey 'j are care @-@ taking the children of Hillys orphaned by the DomZ . When Jade runs out of money to run the shield that protects them , she finds a photography job , cataloguing all the species on Hillys for a science museum . She is recruited by the IRIS Network , which suspects that the Alpha Sections are behind planet @-@ wide disappearances . Jade 's first target of investigation is an Alpha Sections factory . She discovers evidence of human trafficking orchestrated by the DomZ under the Alpha Sections ' authority . Along the way she rescues Double H , who was kidnapped and tortured by the DomZ . Pey 'j is abducted by the DomZ and taken to a slaughterhouse that is to be launched to a lunar base . After failing to extract Pey 'j from the slaughterhouse in time , Jade learns that Pey 'j was , in fact , the secret chief of the IRIS Network . 
 Jade learns that the Alpha Sections are being possessed and manipulated by the DomZ . Using Beluga , the ship Pey 'j used to travel to Hillys , Jade and Double H go to the DomZ lunar base . There , Jade finds Pey 'j dead , but a strange power inside her brings back his soul , reviving him . After rescuing Pey 'j , transmitting her final report , and sparking a revolution , Jade confronts the DomZ High Priest . She learns that her human form is the latest container to hide a power stolen from the DomZ centuries ago in the hope that the High Priest , who must have spirit energy to survive , would starve to death . The High Priest managed to find a substitute energy in the souls of all those kidnapped from Hillys . Using the stolen power within her , Jade is able to destroy the DomZ High Priest , though nearly losing control of her soul in the process , and then revive and rescue those that have been abducted . In a post @-@ credits scene back on Hillys , a DomZ spore grows on Pey <unk> hand . 
 = = Development = = 
 Beyond Good & Evil was developed by Michel Ancel , the creator of the Rayman video game , at Ubisoft 's Montpellier studios in France . The game was developed under the codename " Project BG & E " , with production lasting more than three years . A group of 30 employees comprised the development team . Ubisoft 's chief executive officer , Yves Guillemot , fully supported the project and frequently met with the team . After years working on Rayman , Ancel wanted to move on to something different . He recalled that the goal of Beyond Good & Evil was to " pack a whole universe onto a single CD — mountains , planets , towns . The idea was to make the player feel like an explorer , with a sense of absolute freedom . " 
 A second goal behind Beyond Good & Evil 's design was to create a meaningful story amid player freedom . Ancel said that the linear nature of the gameplay was necessary to convey the story ; player freedom was an experience between parts of the plot . He also strove to create a rhythm similar to a movie to engage and delight players . The game drew on many influences and inspirations , including the Miyazaki universe , politics and the media , and the aftermath of the September 11 attacks . In creating the lead character , Ancel 's wife reportedly inspired the designer , who wanted to portray a persona with whom players could identify . 
 Beyond Good & Evil was first shown publicly at the 2002 Electronic Entertainment Expo , where it received a negative reception . Originally more " artistically ambitious " and resembling games like Ico , the game was substantially changed in order to make it more commercially appealing . Jade , originally a teenage girl , was redesigned to be more powerful and befitting of her job . The game was also shortened by removing long periods of exploration , due to Ancel 's dislike of this aspect of gameplay in The Legend of Zelda : The Wind Waker . The development team was " demoralized " by the changes , with Ancel commenting that the finished game resembled a sequel more than a reworking . Prior to release , playable previews of the game were offered in movie theaters . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 The soundtrack of Beyond Good & Evil was composed by Christophe Héral , who was hired by Ancel because of his background in film . Hubert <unk> , a director with whom Ancel had worked in the past , had also worked with Héral on a television special , The Pantin <unk> , and referred him to Ancel . Héral was assisted by Laetitia <unk> , who orchestrated the pieces , and his brother Patrice Héral , who performed some of the sound effects and singing . 
 The soundtrack incorporates a wide variety of languages and instruments from around the world . Mainly Bulgarian lyrics were chosen for the song " Propaganda " , which plays in the game 's <unk> Bar , to allude to the Soviet propaganda of the Cold War . It uses a recording of a telephone conversation by Héral with a female Bulgarian friend to represent the government 's control of the media . It also incorporates Arabic string instruments and Indian percussion . A song called " Funky Mullah " was originally planned for the <unk> Bar , but it was replaced by " Propaganda " because Héral decided that its muezzin vocals , recorded on September 8 , 2001 , would have been in bad taste in the wake of the September 11 attacks . " Fun and Mini @-@ games " , a song that plays during hovercraft races and other minigames , includes Spanish lyrics . The lyrics for DomZ music were created from a fictional language with prominent rolling " r " sounds . The crashing metal sound effects of " Metal Gear DomZ " , the music played during a boss fight , were recorded from the son of Héral 's neighbor playing with scrap metal . The voices in the city of Hillys were also recorded by Héral himself . The music has never been published as an album , though it has been released in its entirety as a free download by Ubisoft . The soundtrack is featured in the Video Games Live international concert tour . 
 = = = HD edition = = = 
 A full HD re @-@ mastered version of the game was released on Xbox Live Arcade in March 2011 and on PlayStation Network in June 2011 . It features improved character models and textures , as well as a modified soundtrack . Achievements , trophies and online leaderboards were also added . 
 Ubisoft released Beyond Good & Evil HD Collection in Europe on September 21 , 2012 . The collection includes Beyond Good & Evil HD , Outland and From Dust . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Prior to its release , Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine and PlayStation Magazine praised the game 's showing at the 2003 Electronic Entertainment Expo and described it as one of the best titles on display . 
 Beyond Good & Evil received generally positive reviews from critics . Aggregating review websites GameRankings and Metacritic gave the Xbox version 88 @.@ 61 % and 87 / 100 , the GameCube version 88 @.@ 14 % and 87 / 100 , the PlayStation 2 version 87 @.@ 09 % and 86 / 100 , the Xbox 360 version 85 @.@ 08 % and 84 / 100 , the PlayStation 3 version 84 @.@ 42 % and 83 / 100 and the PC version 83 @.@ 22 % and 83 / 100 . 
 The game 's graphics were generally well received . In reviewing the GameCube version , Game Informer wrote that " Every moment of Beyond Good & Evil looks as good as a traditional RPG cutscene " and that the game 's effects and character animations were " amazing . " On the other hand , Jon Hicks of PC Format wrote that while some effects were excellent , the game 's otherwise unspectacular graphics were unwelcome reminders of the game 's console roots . 1UP.com and Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine cited glitches such as frame rate as irksome , because the game did not appear to tax the console 's hardware . 
 Edge commended the game for its storytelling and design , but criticized its plot as unable to " match Jade 's initial appeal , " becoming " fairly mundane " without " the darkness and moral ambiguity suggested by the title , " with Jade 's everyman appeal undermined by the revelation of her " mysterious hidden identity . " Dan Toose of SMH called the game 's setting " dark , baroque and earthy , a far cry from the squeaky @-@ clean action of the Final Fantasy games , " and described the game as " a very European take on the role @-@ playing genre " and " one of the best adventure games in years . " Star Dingo of GamePro commented that the game was a " jack of all trades , master of none " that " never really lives up to its title , " adding that its vision could have been more focused . Among complaints were control issues and a lack of gameplay depth . Game Informer 's Lisa Mason wrote that the game 's controls were serviceable , but simplistic , and that she wished she could do more with the character . PC Gamer 's Kevin Rice found most of the gameplay and its exploration refreshing , but called hovercraft races " not much fun " and felt combat was the game 's weakest element . Edge called the gameplay interaction " hollowed out , " as an unintended consequence of Ancel 's attempt to streamline the game . 
 Beyond Good & Evil was not a commercial success . The game saw poor sales upon its release in the 2003 Christmas and holiday season . Retailers quickly decreased the price by up to 80 percent . Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine staff attributed the poor sales of the game — among many other 2003 releases — to an over @-@ saturated market , and labeled Beyond Good & Evil as a commercial " disappointment " . In retrospect , Ancel noted that consumers at the time were interested in established franchises and technologically impressive games . Coupled with the number of " big titles " available , he stated that the market was a poor environment for Beyond Good & Evil and that it would take time to be appreciated . The Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine staff further commented that the lack of marketing from Ubisoft and the game 's odd premise naturally reserved it to obscurity . Part of the disappointing sales stemmed from Ubisoft not knowing how to market the title , something that Ubisoft North America CEO Laurent Detoc labeled as one of his worst business decisions . At the time , Ubisoft 's marketing efforts were more focused on the release of Prince of Persia : The Sands of Time . Ubisoft 's former North American vice @-@ president of publishing , Jay Cohen , and its European managing director , <unk> Corre , attributed the commercial failure of the game to a lack of marketing . " The game play was there , the technical excellence was there but perhaps the target audience was not there , " Corre told the BBC . Corre later commented that the Xbox 360 release " did extremely well " , but considered this success " too late " to make a difference in the game 's poor sales . The game was intended to be the first part of a trilogy , but its poor sales placed those plans on hold at the time . 
 = = = Awards and legacy = = = 
 Beyond Good & Evil was nominated for and won many gaming awards . The International Game Developers Association nominated the title for three honors at the 2004 Game Developers Choice Awards : " Game of the Year " , " Original Game Character of the Year " ( Jade ) and " Excellence in Game Design " . Ubisoft titles garnered six of eleven awards at the 2004 <unk> Festival in France , with Beyond Good & Evil winning " Best Writer " and " Game of the Year Team Award . " The Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences nominated the game for " Outstanding Achievement in Character or Story Development " at the 2004 Interactive Achievement Awards . In IGN 's " The Best of 2003 " , the PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) version won " Best Adventure Game , " while the GameCube version received " Best Story . " Beyond Good & Evil 's audio was also recognized . The game was nominated for the " Audio of the Year " , " Music of the Year " , " Best Interactive Score " , and " Best Sound Design " awards at the second annual Game Audio Network Guild awards . It was similarly nominated for the " Outstanding Achievement in Original Music Composition " and " Outstanding Achievement in Sound Design " awards at the 2004 Interactive Achievement Awards . 
 In 2007 , Beyond Good & Evil was named 22nd @-@ best Xbox game and 12th @-@ best GameCube game of all time by IGN . Game Informer listed the title 12th on its " Top 25 GameCube Games " list . In another list , " Top 200 Games of all Time " , Game Informer placed the PS2 , Xbox , and GameCube versions of Beyond Good & Evil as the 200th best . The Official Nintendo Magazine ranked it as the 91st @-@ best Nintendo game , while Nintendo Power ranked it 29th . Nintendo Power placed the GameCube version as the 11th @-@ best GameCube game of all time in its 20th anniversary issue . Destructoid ranked the GameCube , PlayStation 2 , and Xbox versions as the 6th @-@ best game of the decade . In 2010 , IGN listed it at # 34 in their " Top 100 PlayStation 2 Games " . GamesRadar placed it as the 70th best game of all time . 
 = = = Sequel = = = 
 Ancel stated his desire to produce a sequel to the game . Ubisoft announced at the <unk> 2008 opening conference that there would be a second game . A sequel , tentatively titled Beyond Good & Evil 2 , is currently in development , although the project was temporarily halted to focus on Rayman Origins . The game is being developed for the PlayStation 4 , Xbox One , Wii U , and PC . 
 = Naomi Watts = 
 Naomi Ellen Watts ( born 28 September 1968 ) is a British actress and film producer . She made her screen debut in the Australian drama film For Love Alone ( 1986 ) and then appeared in the Australian television series Hey Dad .. ! ( 1990 ) , Brides of Christ ( 1991 ) and Home and Away ( 1991 ) and alongside Nicole Kidman and Thandie Newton in the coming @-@ of @-@ age comedy @-@ drama film Flirting ( 1991 ) . After moving to America , Watts appeared in films , including Tank Girl ( 1995 ) , Children of the Corn IV : The Gathering ( 1996 ) and Dangerous Beauty ( 1998 ) and had the lead role in the television series Sleepwalkers ( 1997 – 1998 ) . 
 After years as a struggling actress , Watts came to attention in David Lynch 's psychological thriller Mulholland Drive ( 2001 ) . The following year she enjoyed box @-@ office success with The Ring ( 2002 ) , the remake of a successful Japanese horror film . She then received nominations at the Academy Awards and the Screen Actors ' Guild Awards in the Best Actress categories for her portrayal of Cristina Peck in Alejandro González Iñárritu 's neo @-@ noir 21 Grams ( 2003 ) . Her subsequent films include David O. Russell 's comedy I Heart Huckabees ( 2004 ) , the 2005 remake of King Kong , the crime @-@ thriller Eastern Promises ( 2007 ) and the Tom Tykwer @-@ directed thriller The International ( 2009 ) . Since then , Watts has portrayed Valerie Plame Wilson in the biographical drama Fair Game ( 2010 ) and Helen Gandy in Clint Eastwood 's biographical drama J. Edgar ( 2011 ) . For her leading role as Maria Bennett in the disaster film The Impossible ( 2012 ) , she received second nominations for the Academy Award and Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actress and a nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress . 
 In 2002 , Watts was included in People magazine 's 50 Most Beautiful People . In 2006 , she became a goodwill ambassador for Joint United Nations Programme on HIV / AIDS , which helps to raise awareness of AIDS @-@ related issues . She has participated in several fundraisers for the cause , and she is presented as an inaugural member of AIDS Red Ribbon Awards . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Watts was born 28 September 1968 , in Shoreham , Kent , England . She is the daughter of Myfanwy ( " <unk> " ) Edwards ( née Roberts ) , an antiques dealer and costume and set designer , and Peter Watts ( 1946 – 1976 ) , a road manager and sound engineer who worked with Pink Floyd . <unk> was born in England but lived in Australia between the ages of one and seven . Her maternal grandfather was Welsh and her maternal grandmother was Australian . 
 Watts ' parents divorced when she was four years old . After the divorce , Watts and her elder brother , Ben Watts , moved several times across South East England with their mother . Peter Watts left Pink Floyd in 1974 , and he and Myfanwy were later reconciled . Two years later , in August 1976 , he was found dead in a flat in Notting Hill , of an apparent heroin overdose . 
 Following his death , Watts ' mother moved the family to <unk> Farm in Llangefni and <unk> , towns on the island of Anglesey in North Wales , where they lived with Watts ' maternal grandparents , Nikki and Hugh Roberts , for three years . During this time , Watts attended a Welsh language school , Ysgol <unk> Llangefni , where she carried out her studies . She later said of her time in Wales : " We took Welsh lessons in a school in the middle of nowhere while everyone else was taking English . Wherever we moved , I would adapt and pick up the regional accent . It 's obviously significant now , me being an actress . Anyway , there was quite a lot of sadness in my childhood , but no lack of love . " In 1978 , her mother remarried ( though she would later be divorced again ) and Watts and her brother then moved to Suffolk where she attended Thomas Mills High School . Watts has stated that she wanted to become an actress after seeing her mother performing on stage and from the time she watched the 1980 film Fame . 
 In 1982 , when Watts was 14 , she moved to Sydney , New South Wales in Australia with her mother , brother and stepfather . Myfanwy established a career in the burgeoning film business , working as a stylist for television commercials , then turning to costume design , ultimately working for the soap opera Return to Eden . After emigrating , Watts was enrolled in acting lessons by her mother ; she auditioned for numerous television advertisements , where she met and befriended actress Nicole Kidman . Watts obtained her first role in the 1986 drama film , For Love Alone , based on the novel of the same name by Christina Stead , and produced by Margaret Fink . 
 In Australia , Watts attended Mosman High School and North Sydney Girls High School . She failed to graduate from school , afterwards working as a <unk> , a negative cutter and managing a <unk> store in Sydney 's affluent North Shore . 
 She decided to become a model when she was 18 . She signed with a models agency that sent her to Japan , but after several failed auditions , she returned to Sydney . There , she was hired to work in advertising for a department store , that exposed her to the attention of Follow Me , a magazine which hired her as an assistant fashion editor . A casual invitation to participate in a drama workshop inspired Watts to quit her job and to pursue her acting ambitions . 
 Regarding her nationality , Watts has stated : " I consider myself British and have very happy memories of the UK . I spent the first 14 years of my life in England and Wales and never wanted to leave . When I was in Australia I went back to England a lot . " She also has expressed her ties to Australia , declaring : " I consider myself very connected to Australia , in fact when people say where is home , I say Australia , because those are my most powerful memories . " 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1986 – 2000 : Early work and struggling career = = = 
 Watts ' career began in television , where she made brief appearances in commercials . The 1986 film For Love Alone , set in the 1930s and based on Christina Stead 's 1945 best @-@ selling novel of the same name , marked her debut in film . She then appeared in two episodes of the fourth season of the Australian sitcom Hey Dad .. ! in 1990 . After a five @-@ year absence from films , Watts met director John Duigan during the 1989 premiere of her friend Nicole Kidman 's film Dead Calm and he invited her to take a supporting role in his 1991 indie film Flirting . She starred opposite future Hollywood up @-@ and @-@ comers Kidman and Thandie Newton . The film received critical acclaim and was featured on Roger Ebert 's list of the 10 best films of 1992 . Also in 1991 , she took the part of Frances Heffernan , a girl who struggles to find friends behind the walls of a Sydney Catholic school , in the award winning mini @-@ series Brides of Christ and had a recurring role in the soap opera Home and Away as the handicapped Julie Gibson . Watts was then offered a role in the drama series A Country Practice but turned it down , not wanting to " get stuck on a soap for two or three years " , a decision she later called " naïve " . 
 Watts then took a year off to travel , visiting Los Angeles and being introduced to agents through Kidman . Encouraged , Watts decided to move to America , to pursue her career further . In 1993 she had a small role in the John Goodman film Matinee and temporarily returned to Australia to star in three Australian films : another of Duigan 's pictures , Wide Sargasso Sea ; the drama The Custodian ; and had her first leading role in the film Gross Misconduct , as a student who accuses one of her teachers ( played by Jimmy Smits ) of raping her . Watts then moved back to America for good but the difficulty of finding agents , producers and directors willing to hire her during that period frustrated her initial efforts . Though her financial situation never led her to taking a job out of the film industry , she experienced problems like being unable to pay the rent of her apartment and losing her medical insurance . " At first , everything was fantastic and doors were opened to me . But some people who I met through Nicole [ Kidman ] , who had been all over me , had difficulty remembering my name when we next met . There were a lot of promises , but nothing actually came off . I ran out of money and became quite lonely , but Nic gave me company and encouragement to carry on . " 
 She then won a supporting role in the futuristic 1995 film Tank Girl , winning the role of " Jet Girl " after nine auditions . While the film was met with mixed reviews , it flopped at the box office , although it has gone on to become something of a cult classic . Throughout the rest of the decade , she took mostly supporting roles in films and occasionally considered leaving the business , but : " there were always little bites . Whenever I felt I was at the end of my rope , something would come up . Something bad . But for me it was ' work begets work ' ; that was my motto . " In 1996 , she starred alongside Joe Mantegna , Kelly Lynch and J.T. Walsh in George Hickenlooper 's action @-@ thriller Persons Unknown ; alongside James Earl Jones , Kevin Kilner and Ellen Burstyn in the period drama <unk> ; in Bermuda Triangle , a TV pilot that was not picked up for a full series , where she played a former documentary filmmaker who disappears in the Bermuda Triangle ; and as the lead role in Children of the Corn IV : The Gathering , in which children in a small town become possessed under the command of a wrongfully murdered child preacher . 
 In 1997 , she starred in the Australian ensemble romantic drama Under the Lighthouse Dancing and also played the lead role in the short @-@ lived television series Sleepwalkers . In 1998 , she starred alongside Neil Patrick Harris and Debbie Reynolds in the TV film The Christmas Wish , played the supporting role of Giulia De <unk> in Dangerous Beauty , and provided some voice work for Babe : Pig in the City . She said in an interview in 2012 , " That really should not be on my résumé ! I think that was early on in the day , when I was trying to beef up my résumé . I came in and did a couple days ' work of voiceovers and we had to suck on [ helium ] and then do a little mouse voice . But I was one in a hundred , so I 'm sure you would never be able to identify my voice . I probably couldn 't either ! " In 1999 , she played Alice in the romantic comedy Strange Planet and the Texan student Holly Maddux in The Hunt for the Unicorn Killer , which was based on the real life effort to capture Ira Einhorn , who was charged with Maddux 's murder . In 2000 , while David Lynch was expanding the rejected pilot of Mulholland Drive into a feature film , Watts starred alongside Derek Jacobi , Jack Davenport and Iain Glen in the BBC TV film The Wyvern Mystery , an adaptation of the novel of the same name by Sheridan Le Fanu that was broadcast in March of that year . 
 Much of her early career is filled with near misses in casting , as she was up for significant roles in films such as 1997 's The Postman and The Devil 's Advocate and 2000 's Meet the Parents , which eventually went to other actresses . In an interview in 2012 , Watts said , " I came to New York and auditioned at least five times for Meet the Parents . I think the director liked me but the studio didn 't . I heard every piece of feedback you could imagine , and in this case , it was ' not sexy enough ' . " Watts recalled her early career in an interview in 2002 , saying , " It is a tough town . I think my spirit has taken a beating . The most painful thing has been the endless auditions . Knowing that you have something to offer , but not being able to show it , is so frustrating . As an unknown , you get treated badly . I auditioned and waited for things I did not have any belief in , but I needed the work and had to accept horrendous pieces of shit . " Watts studied the Meisner Technique . 
 = = = 2001 – 02 : Breakthrough with Mulholland Drive = = = 
 In 1999 , director David Lynch began casting for his psychological thriller Mulholland Drive . He interviewed Watts after looking at her headshot , without having seen any of her previous work , and offered her the lead role . Lynch later said about his selection of Watts , " I saw someone that I felt had a tremendous talent , and I saw someone who had a beautiful soul , an intelligence — possibilities for a lot of different roles , so it was a beautiful full package . " Conceived as a pilot for a television series , Lynch shot a large portion of it in February 1999 , planning to keep it open @-@ ended for a potential series . However , the pilot was rejected . Watts recalled thinking at the time , " just my dumb luck , that I 'm in the only David Lynch programme that never sees the light of day . " Instead , Lynch filmed an ending in October 2000 , turning it into a feature film which was picked up for distribution . 
 The film , which also starred Laura Harring and Justin Theroux , was highly acclaimed by critics and would become Watts ' breakthrough . She was praised by critics , including Peter Bradshaw from The Guardian , who said , " Watts 's face metamorphoses miraculously from fresh @-@ faced beauty to a frenzied , teary scowl of ugliness . " and Emanuel Levy , who wrote , " ... Naomi Watts , in a brilliant performance , a young , wide @-@ eyed and grotesquely cheerful blonde , full of high hopes to make it big in Hollywood . " The film premiered at the 2001 Cannes Film Festival and received a large number of awards and nominations , including the Best Actress Award for Watts from the National Society of Film Critics and a nomination for Best Actress from the American Film Institute . The surrealist film following the story of the aspiring actress Betty Elms , played by Watts , attracted controversy with its strong lesbian theme . 
 Also in 2001 , she starred in two short films , Never Date an Actress and Ellie Parker , and the horror film The Shaft , director Dick Maas ' remake of his 1983 film De Lift . In 2002 , she starred in one of the biggest box office hits of that year , The Ring , the English language remake of the Japanese horror film Ringu . Directed by Gore Verbinski , the film , which also starred Martin Henderson and Brian Cox , received favourable reviews and grossed around US $ 129 million domestically ( equivalent to US $ 169 @.@ 7 million in 2016 ) . Watts portrayed Rachel Keller , a journalist investigating the strange deaths of her niece and other teenagers after watching a mysterious videotape , and receiving a phone call announcing their deaths in seven days . Her performance was praised by critics , including Paul Clinton of CNN.com , who stated that she " is excellent in this leading role , which proves that her stellar performance in Mulholland Drive was not a fluke . She strikes a perfect balance between scepticism and the slow realisation of the truth in regard to the deadly power of the videotape . " That year , she also starred in Rabbits , a series of short films directed by David Lynch ; alongside several other famous British actors in the black comedy Plots with a View ; and with Tim Daly in the western The Outsider . 
 = = = 2003 – 07 : Steady success = = = 
 The following year , she took the part of Julia Cook in Gregor Jordan 's Australian film Ned Kelly opposite Heath Ledger , Orlando Bloom and Geoffrey Rush ; as well as starring in the Merchant @-@ Ivory film Le Divorce , portraying <unk> de <unk> , a poet who is abandoned by her husband Charles @-@ Henri de <unk> at the time she is pregnant . <unk> and her sister Isabel ( Kate Hudson ) dispute the ownership of a painting by Georges de La Tour with the family of Henri 's lover . Entertainment Weekly gave the film a " C " rating and lamented Watts ' performance : " I 'm disappointed to report that Hudson and Watts have no chemistry as sisters , perhaps because Watts never seems like the expatriate artiste she 's supposed to be playing " . 
 Conversely , her performance opposite Sean Penn and Benicio del Toro in director Alejandro González Iñárritu 's 2003 drama 21 Grams earned Watts an Academy Award nomination as Best Actress later that year . In the story , told in a non @-@ lineal manner , she portrayed Cristina Peck , a grief @-@ stricken woman living a suburban life after the killing of her husband and two children by Jack Jordan ( Benicio del Toro ) , who started a relationship with the critically ill academic mathematician Paul Rivers ( Sean Penn ) . She said of the nomination , " It 's far beyond what I ever dreamed for – that would have been too far fetched " . She also was nominated for Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role , as well as many other nominations and acclaim . The New York Times praised her : " Because Ms. Watts reinvents herself with each performance , it 's easy to forget how brilliant she is . She has a boldness that comes from a lack of overemphasis , something actresses sometimes do to keep up with Mr. Penn " . The San Francisco Chronicle wrote : " Watts is riveting , but she 's much better in scenes of extreme emotion than in those requiring subtlety . " 
 She then starred alongside Mark Ruffalo in the 2004 independent film We Don 't Live Here Anymore . The film is a drama which was based on the short stories We Don 't Live Here Anymore and Adultery by Andre <unk> , and depicts the crisis of two married couples . She reunited with Sean Penn in The Assassination of Richard Nixon , which was set in 1974 . She played Marie Andersen <unk> , the wife of the would @-@ be presidential assassin Samuel <unk> ( Penn ) . Finally in 2004 , she teamed up with Jude Law and Dustin Hoffman in David O. Russell 's ensemble comedy I Heart Huckabees . Watts next starred and co @-@ produced with director / screenwriter Scott Coffey her film , the semi @-@ autobiographical drama Ellie Parker ( 2005 ) , which depicted the struggle of an Australian actress in Hollywood . The film began as a short film that was screened at the Sundance Film Festival in 2001 and was expanded into a feature @-@ length production over the next four years . Film critic Roger Ebert praised Watts ' performance : " The character is played by Watts with courage , fearless observation and a gift for timing that is so uncanny it can make points all by itself . " 
 Watts returned in the lead role in the sequel to The Ring , The Ring Two . The film received several negative reviews , but was a major success at the box office , with an over US $ 161 million worldwide gross ( equivalent to US $ 195 @.@ 1 million in 2016 ) and Watts was once again praised for her performance . Her third film of the year was Marc Forster 's psychological thriller Stay . Written by David Benioff , it also starred Ewan McGregor , Ryan Gosling and Bob Hoskins . Watts then starred in the 2005 remake of King Kong as Ann Darrow . Watts was the first choice for the role , portrayed by Fay Wray in the original film , with no other actors considered . In preparation for her role , Watts met with Wray , who was to make a cameo appearance and say the final line of dialogue , but she died during pre @-@ production at the age of 96 . King Kong proved to be Watts ' most commercially successful film yet . <unk> by The Lord of the Rings director Peter Jackson , the film won high praise and grossed US $ 550 million worldwide ( equivalent to US $ 666 @.@ 4 million in 2016 ) . The Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer praised her performance : " The third act becomes a star @-@ crossed , " Beauty and the Beast " parable far more operatic and tragic than anything the original filmmakers could have imagined , exquisitely <unk> by Watts with a poignancy and passion that rates Oscar consideration . " 
 Her next film was The Painted Veil with Edward Norton and Liev Schreiber . Watts played Kitty Garstin , the daughter of a lawyer , who marries Walter Fane ( Norton ) for his reputation as a physician and bacteriologist . The film centres on the relationship of the couple at the time they move to China , where Fane is stationed to study infectious diseases . Comparing her portrayal with Greta Garbo 's in the original movie , The San Francisco Chronicle wrote " Watts makes the role work on her own terms – her Kitty is more desperate , more foolish , more miserable and more driven ... and her spiritual journey is greater . For her only other film of that year , she provided the voice of a small role , Suzie Rabbit , in David Lynch 's psychological thriller Inland Empire . Also that year , she was announced as the new face of the jewellers David <unk> and completed a photoshoot which was featured in the 2007 Pirelli Calendar . 
 She later appeared in David Cronenberg 's crime thriller Eastern Promises with Viggo Mortensen , which premiered at the 2007 Toronto International Film Festival , to critical acclaim . As the movie , Watts also generated positive feedback among critics ; Slate magazine remarked in its review that she " brings a wounded radiance to the <unk> midwife Anna . Though it 's a bit of a one @-@ note role , it 's a note she 's long specialised in , a kind of flustered moral <unk> " . Eastern Promises grossed US $ 56 million worldwide , ( equivalent to US $ 67 @.@ 9 million in 2016 ) . 
 She appeared with Tim Roth in Michael Haneke 's Funny Games ( 2007 ) , a remake of Haneke 's 1997 film of the same name that opened at the London Film Festival . The director said that he agreed to make the film on condition that he be allowed to cast Watts , according to UK 's The Daily Telegraph . In the picture , she portrayed Ann Farber , who with her husband and son are held hostage by a pair of sociopathic teenagers . Watts also served as a producer , as this charge was for her " one way to spice up the deal and be involved in all the creative decisions " . The movie generated mixed reviews and received a limited theatrical release in the United States , grossing $ 7 million , on a $ 15 million budget . Newsweek felt that Watts " hurls herself into her physically demanding role with heroic conviction " . David Stratton , from At the Movies concluded that she was " as usual , really fine " . However , New York Daily News criticised her part for being half @-@ naked throughout most of her appearance , considering that it was " an awfully strange way to make a righteous point about exploitation " . 
 = = = 2009 – 14 : <unk> and arthouse films = = = 
 After a short hiatus from acting following the birth of her two children , Watts returned to acting in 2009 , starring alongside Clive Owen in the political thriller The International . She played a Manhattan assistant district attorney who partners with an Interpol agent to take down a merchant bank . The picture was well received by critics , and grossed over US $ 60 million ( equivalent to $ 66 @.@ 2 million in 2016 ) worldwide . The same year , she appeared in the drama Mother and Child , which premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival . She portrayed the role of Elizabeth , a lawyer who never knew her biological mother . Watts co @-@ starred the film along with Annette Bening , Kerry Washington and Samuel L. Jackson . Mother and Child received mainly favourable reviews , with <unk> remarking that Watts " is terrific as Elizabeth , delivering a powerful performance that [ ... ] isn 't afraid to be unsympathetic " . She was nominated for the Best Actress award at the Australian Film Institute Awards and was also nominated for an Independent Spirit Award in the category of Best Supporting Female . 
 Her next film , the Woody Allen dramedy You Will Meet a Tall Dark Stranger , opened at the 2010 Cannes Film Festival . She portrayed Sally , a woman who has a troubled marriage with author Roy ( played by Josh Brolin ) . Antonio Banderas , Freida Pinto , Lucy Punch and Anthony Hopkins also co @-@ starred in the film , which received mixed reviews from critics and grossed over US $ 26 million ( equivalent to $ 28 @.@ 2 million in 2016 ) . Later in 2010 , she starred as Valerie Plame in the biographical thriller Fair Game , which was given a November theatrical release in the US . Based on Plame 's memoir , Fair Game : My Life as a Spy , My Betrayal by the White House , the movie also marked the third pairing of Watts with Sean Penn after 21 Grams and The Assassination of Richard Nixon . The movie was acclaimed by critics and earned Watts a Satellite Award nomination for Best Actress . 
 Watts appeared opposite Daniel Craig and Rachel Weisz in Jim Sheridan 's psychological thriller Dream House , which was released in September 2011 , to a lackluster critical and commercial response . Watts ' following film role was in Clint Eastwood 's biopic J. Edgar , alongside Leonardo DiCaprio in the title character . Watts played Edgar 's secretary Helen Gandy . The film was released in December 2011 and rated average with reviewers . About Watts ' performance , The Hollywood Reporter remarked that she " has little opportunity to express much beyond dogged loyalty " and while Los Angeles Times called her " talented " , it also noted that her part was a " thankless one " for the actress . 
 Watts starred in The Impossible ( 2012 ) , a disaster drama based on the true story of María <unk> and her family 's experience of the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami ; she played the lead role , with her name changed to Maria Bennett . Critical response towards the movie and Watts ' performance was <unk> positive . Deborah Young of The Hollywood Reporter said that " Watts packs a huge charge of emotion as the battered , ever @-@ weakening Maria whose tears of pain and fear never appear fake or idealised . " Justin Chang of Variety magazine noted that " Watts has few equals at conveying physical and emotional extremis , something she again demonstrates in a mostly bedridden role . " Damon Wise of The Guardian said that " Watts is both brave and vulnerable , and her scenes with the young Lucas ... are among the film 's best . " Watts went on to be nominated for the Academy Award , Golden Globe and Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actress . 
 In the Australian drama Adore , Watts co @-@ starred with Robin Wright , playing two childhood friends who fall in love with each other 's sons . The movie premiered at the 2013 Sundance Film Festival as Two Mothers , and later opened in selected cinemas . It received a mixed feedback from critics , who concluded that Watts and co @-@ star Wright " give it their all , but they can 't quite make Adore 's trashy , absurd plot believable " . She obtained the <unk> Award for Best Actress in 2014 , for her role . Her next release was Movie 43 , an independent anthology black comedy film that featured 14 different storylines , with each segment having a different director . Watts ' segment , titled " <unk> " , was directed by Will Graham and revolved around two devoted parents ( Watts and Liev Schreiber ) attempting to replicate their son 's whole high school experience . This marked Watts ' second collaboration with Schreiber , following the 2006 drama The Painted Veil . The portmanteau film was universally panned by critics , with Richard Roeper calling it " the Citizen Kane of awful " . 
 She appeared opposite Matt Dillon in Laurie Collyer 's Sunlight Jr . , an indie drama about a struggling working @-@ class couple . The movie premiered at the 12th Tribeca Film Festival , and was given a limited US theatrical run in November 2013 . Reviewers expressed a warm reception for the film and the San Francisco Chronicle , praising Watts and co @-@ star Dillon , stated that they are " formidable actors at the top of their game here [ ... ] exhibiting a remarkable chemistry " . Also in 2013 , she portrayed the title role in Oliver <unk> 's Diana , a biographical drama about the last two years of the life of Diana , Princess of Wales . The picture , released amid much controversy given its subject , was a box office bomb and received largely mediocre reviews from critics . James Berardinelli found the film to be a " dull , pointless " production and remarked that while Watts did a " decent job encapsulating the look and feel of Diana " , her portrayal was " a two @-@ dimensional recreation " . 
 Alejandro González Iñárritu 's 2014 dark comedy Birdman or ( The Unexpected Virtue of Ignorance ) saw Watts play an actress and the partner of stage co @-@ star Edward Norton . The film , about a faded Hollywood actor ( Michael Keaton ) struggling to mount a Broadway play , opened the 71st Venice International Film Festival and received an October theatrical release in specialty theaters , generating widespread critical acclaim . Cinemablend felt that Watts and Norton shared an " explosive chemistry " as " warring " lovers , and San Francisco Chronicle found the actress to be " poignant and funny " in her role . Birdman won four awards at the 87th Academy Awards including Best Picture , and Watts and the other cast members earned the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Cast in a Motion Picture . 
 Watts appeared in the comedy @-@ drama St. Vincent , as a Russian prostitute . She learnt the accent by spending time with Russian women in a West Village spa during a six @-@ week period . The film , co @-@ starring Bill Murray and Melissa McCarthy , was screened at the 39th Toronto International Film Festival and released to theaters on October 10 , 2014 , one week before Birdman . The dramedy garnered favorable reviews as a whole , but Los Angeles Times reported a dividing reaction towards Watts ' role , asserting that her part " put off some critics with its outrageousness " , but " earned plenty of plaudits too " . Watts later nabbed a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actress . In the comedy @-@ drama While We 're Young , Watts co @-@ starred with Ben Stiller as a New York @-@ based married couple who begin hanging out with a couple in their 20s . Like St. Vincent , While We 're Young was screened at the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival , receiving an US release the following year . The movie was an arthouse success and Watts was highly acclaimed for her on @-@ screen chemistry with Stiller . 
 = = = 2015 – present : Film and television balance = = = 
 She will also appear in filmmaker Gracie Otto 's upcoming documentary film Chalky about British film and theatre producer Michael White , who is a close friend of Watts ' . Watts played rebel leader Evelyn Johnson @-@ Eaton in the sequel The Divergent Series : Insurgent ( 2015 ) . The film was a commercial success , grossing $ 274 @.@ 5 million worldwide , but received mainly mixed reviews from critics . Watts reprised her role in the series ' final two installments , The Divergent Series : Allegiant , released on 18 March 2016 , and The Divergent Series : Ascendant , scheduled to be released on 9 June 2017 . Watts then starred in Gus Van Sant 's mystery drama The Sea of Trees , opposite Matthew McConaughey . The film premiered at the 2015 Cannes Film Festival where it competed for the Palme d 'Or . The film was heavily panned by both critics and audiences , who reportedly booed and laughed during its screening . Critic Richard <unk> stated the audience reaction should " give the film ’ s creative team pause for reflection about exactly where they went so badly awry . " Justin Chang of Variety also criticised the film , but commended Watts ' performance for being " solidly moving and sometimes awesomely passive @-@ aggressive . " Watts was confirmed to be involved in the revival of the TV series Twin Peaks that will air in 2017 . In 2017 , Watts will star in the television drama Gypsy and will also serve as an executive producer on the series . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Her father 's laugh can be heard in the Pink Floyd songs " Speak to Me " and " Brain Damage " from their 1973 album The Dark Side of the Moon . Watts is pictured in her mother 's arms with her father , brother , the band and other crew members , in the hardback / softcover edition of drummer Nick Mason 's autobiography of the band Inside Out . 
 Watts was in a relationship with actor Heath Ledger from August 2002 to May 2004 . Since the spring of 2005 , Watts has been in a relationship with actor Liev Schreiber . She confirmed in an interview in late January 2009 that Schreiber had in fact given her a ring ( which she was not wearing at the time ) but that neither of them wanted to rush into marriage . Schreiber , known to play tricks on the media , had once before called her his wife in 2007 , but later revealed that it was a joke . 
 The couple 's first son , Alexander " Sasha " Pete , was born in July 2007 in Los Angeles , and their second son , Samuel " Sammy " Kai , in December 2008 in New York City . After a temporary hiatus from acting , she returned to work with The International , her first project since becoming a mother . Watts stated in April 2010 that she would have a third child if she could guarantee a baby girl . 
 She considered converting to Buddhism after having gained interest for that religion during the shooting of The Painted Veil . She said of her religious beliefs , " I have some belief but I am not a strict Buddhist or anything yet " . She practices the Transcendental Meditation technique . In 2002 , she was featured in People magazine 's 50 Most Beautiful People . 
 In February 2016 , it was reported that she had agreed to become the honorary president of <unk> FC , a small football club in Malltraeth , Anglesey , Wales , near to her grandparents ' farm , where she spent time as a child . 
 = = = Charity work = = = 
 In 2006 , Watts became a goodwill ambassador for Joint United Nations Programme on HIV / AIDS , it helps to raise awareness of AIDS issues . She has used her high profile and celebrity to call attention to the needs of people living with this disease . Watts participated in events and activities , including the 21st Annual AIDS Walk . She is presented as an inaugural member of AIDS Red Ribbon Awards . She has participated in campaigns for fundraising . On 1 December 2009 , Watts was meeting with United Nations Secretary @-@ General Ban Ki @-@ moon and joined the AIDS response at a dramatic public event commemorating World AIDS Day 2009 . During the event , she said : " It has been both unfortunate and unfair for HIV infection to be considered a shameful disease , for people living with HIV to be judged as blameworthy , and for AIDS to be equated with certain death . I have personally seen that dignity and hope have been strongest among those whose lives were changed by HIV . " 
 In 2011 , she attended a charity polo match in New York City along with Australian actors Hugh Jackman and Isla Fisher , which was intended to raise money to help victims of the 2010 Haiti earthquake . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Sonatas and Interludes = 
 Sonatas and Interludes is a collection of twenty pieces for prepared piano by American avant @-@ garde composer John Cage ( 1912 – 1992 ) . It was composed in 1946 – 48 , shortly after Cage 's introduction to Indian philosophy and the teachings of art historian Ananda K. Coomaraswamy , both of which became major influences on the composer 's later work . Significantly more complex than his other works for prepared piano , Sonatas and Interludes is generally recognized as one of Cage 's finest achievements . 
 The cycle consists of sixteen sonatas ( thirteen of which are cast in binary form , the remaining three in ternary form ) and four more freely structured interludes . The aim of the pieces is to express the eight permanent emotions of the rasa Indian tradition . In Sonatas and Interludes , Cage elevated his technique of rhythmic proportions to a new level of complexity . In each sonata a short sequence of natural numbers and fractions defines the structure of the work and that of its parts , informing structures as localized as individual melodic lines . 
 = = History of composition = = 
 Cage underwent an artistic crisis in the early 1940s . His compositions were rarely accepted by the public , and he grew more and more disillusioned with the idea of art as communication . He later gave an account of the reasons : " Frequently I misunderstood what another composer was saying simply because I had little understanding of his language . And I found other people misunderstanding what I myself was saying when I was saying something pointed and direct " . At the beginning of 1946 , Cage met Gita Sarabhai , an Indian musician who came to the United States concerned about Western influence on the music of her country . Sarabhai wanted to spend several months in the US , studying Western music . She took lessons in counterpoint and contemporary music with Cage , who offered to teach her for free if she taught him about Indian music in return . Sarabhai agreed and through her Cage became acquainted with Indian music and philosophy . The purpose of music , according to Sarabhai 's teacher in India , was " to sober and quiet the mind , thus rendering it susceptible to divine influences " , and this definition became one of the cornerstones of Cage 's view on music and art in general . 
 At around the same time , Cage began studying the writings of the Indian art historian Ananda K. Coomaraswamy . Among the ideas that influenced Cage was the description of the rasa aesthetic and of its eight " permanent emotions " . These emotions are divided into two groups : four white ( humor , wonder , erotic , and heroic — " accepting one 's experience " , in Cage 's words ) and four black ( anger , fear , disgust , and sorrow ) . They are the first eight of the <unk> or <unk> ( " nine emotions " ) , and they have a common tendency towards the ninth of the <unk> : tranquility . Cage never specified which of the pieces relate to which emotions , or whether there even exists such direct correspondence between them . He mentioned , though , that the " pieces with bell @-@ like sounds suggest Europe and others with a drum @-@ like resonance suggest the East " . ( A short excerpt from Sonata II , which is clearly inspired by Eastern music : listen . ) Cage also stated that Sonata XVI , the last of the cycle ( listen ) , is " clearly European . It was the signature of a composer from the West . " 
 Cage started working on the cycle in February 1946 , while living in New York City . The idea of a collection of short pieces was apparently prompted by the poet Edwin Denby , who had remarked that short pieces " can have in them just as much as long pieces can " . The choice of materials and the technique of piano preparation in Sonatas and Interludes were largely dependent on improvisation : Cage later wrote that the cycle was composed " by playing the piano , listening to differences [ and ] making a choice " . On several accounts he offered a poetic metaphor for this process , comparing it with collecting shells while walking along a beach . Work on the project was interrupted in early 1947 , when Cage made a break to compose The Seasons , a ballet in one act also inspired by ideas from Indian philosophy . Immediately after The Seasons Cage returned to Sonatas and Interludes , and by March 1948 it was completed . 
 Cage dedicated Sonatas and Interludes to Maro Ajemian , a pianist and friend . Ajemian performed the work many times since 1949 , including one of the first performances of the complete cycle on January 12 , 1949 , in Carnegie Hall . On many other occasions in the late 1940s and early 1950s , Cage performed it himself . Critical reaction was uneven , but mostly positive , and the success of Sonatas and Interludes led to a grant from the Guggenheim Foundation , which Cage received in 1949 , allowing him to make a six @-@ month trip to Europe . There he met Olivier Messiaen , who helped organize a performance of the work for his students in Paris on June 7 , 1949 ; and he befriended Pierre Boulez , who became an early admirer of the work and wrote a lecture about it for the June 17 , 1949 performance at the salon of Suzanne <unk> in Paris . While still living in Paris , Cage began writing String Quartet in Four Parts , yet another work influenced by Indian philosophy . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 = = = Piano preparation = = = 
 In the text accompanying the first recording of Sonatas and Interludes , Cage specifically stated that the use of preparations is not a criticism of the instrument , but a simple practical measure . Cage started composing for prepared piano in 1940 , when he wrote a piece called Bacchanale for a dance by <unk> Fort , and by 1946 had already composed a large number of works for the instrument . However , in Sonatas and Interludes the preparation is very complex , more so than in any of the earlier pieces . Forty @-@ five notes are prepared , mostly using screws and various types of bolts , but also with fifteen pieces of rubber , four pieces of plastic , several nuts and one eraser . It takes about two or three hours to prepare a piano for performance . Despite the detailed instructions , any preparation is bound to be different from any other , and Cage himself suggested that there is no strict plan to adhere to : " if you enjoy playing the Sonatas and Interludes then do it so that it seems right to you " . 
 For the most part Cage avoids using lower registers of the piano , and much of the music 's melodic foreground lies in the soprano range . Of the forty @-@ five prepared notes , only three belong to the three lowest octaves below F # 3 : D3 , D2 and D1 . Furthermore , D2 is prepared in such a way that the resulting sound has the frequency of a D4 ( resulting in two variants of D4 available , one more prepared than the other ) . The portion of the keyboard above F # 3 is divided into roughly three registers : low , middle , and high . The low register has the heaviest preparation , and the high register the lightest . Different methods are used : certain notes produce sounds that retain the original frequency and a pianistic character ; others become drum @-@ like sounds , detuned versions of the original notes , or metallic , rattling sounds that have no sense of the fundamental frequency at all . The use of the soft pedal , which makes the hammers strike only two of the three strings of each note ( or one , for notes with only two strings ) , complicates the matter further . For example , the note C5 is a metallic sound with no fundamental discernible when the soft pedal is depressed , but it sounds fairly normal if the pedal is released . It appears that Cage was fully aware of the implications of this : certain sonatas feature interplay between two versions of one note , others place special emphasis on particular notes , and still others are very dependent on particular note combinations . 
 = = = Structure = = = 
 The cycle comprises sixteen sonatas and four interludes , arranged symmetrically . Four groups of four sonatas each are separated by interludes in the following way : 
 Sonatas I – IV Interlude 1 Sonatas V – VIII 
 Interludes 2 – 3 
 Sonatas IX – XII Interlude 4 Sonatas XIII – XVI 
 Cage refers to his pieces as sonata in the sense that these works are cast in the form that early classical keyboard sonatas ( such as those of Scarlatti ) were : AABB . The works are not cast in the later sonata form which is far more elaborate . The only exceptions are sonatas IX – XI , which feature three sections : prelude , interlude , and postlude . Sonatas XIV – XV follow the AABB scheme but are paired and given the joint title Gemini — after the work of Richard Lippold , referring to a sculpture by Lippold . The interludes , on the other hand , do not have a unifying scheme . The first two are free @-@ form movements , whereas interludes 3 and 4 have a four @-@ section structure with repeats for each section . 
 The main technique Cage used for composition is that of nested proportions : an arbitrary sequence of numbers defines the structure of a piece on both the macroscopic and the microscopic level , so that the larger parts of each piece are in the same relation to the whole as the smaller parts are to a single unit of it . For instance , the proportion for Sonata III is 1 , 1 , 3 ¼ , 3 ¼ ( in whole notes ) , and a unit here is equal to 8 ½ bars ( the end of a unit is marked with a double barline in the score , unless it coincides with the end of a section ) . The structure of this sonata is AABB . Section A consists of a single unit , composed according to the given proportion : correlation on the microscopic level . A is repeated , and AA forms the first part of the proportion on the macroscopic level : 1 , 1 . B consists of three units and an appendix of ¼ of a unit . B is also repeated , and BB gives the second half of the proportion : 3 ¼ , 3 ¼ . Therefore , AABB has proportions 1 , 1 , 3 ¼ , 3 ¼ : correlation on the macroscopic level . The musical phrases within each unit are also governed by the same proportion . See Example 2 for a graph of the structure of Sonata III . 
 The proportions were chosen arbitrarily in all but the last four pieces in the cycle : sonatas XIII and XVI use symmetrical proportions , and sonatas XIV and XV share the 2 , 2 , 3 , 3 proportion . This symmetry , and the adherence of all four sonatas to the ten @-@ bar unit , were explained by Cage as an expression of tranquility . The complexity of proportions prompted Cage to use asymmetric musical phrases and somewhat frequent changes of time signature to achieve both microscopic and macroscopic correlation . For example , unit length of 8 ½ in the first section of Sonata III is achieved by using six bars in 2 / 2 time and two in 5 / 4 ( rather than eight bars in 2 / 2 and one in 1 / 2 ) . In many sonatas the microstructure — how the melodic lines are constructed — deviates slightly from the pre @-@ defined proportion . 
 Cage had frequently used the nested proportions technique and its variations before , most notably in First Construction ( in Metal ) ( 1939 ) , which was the first piece to use it , and numerous dance @-@ related works for prepared piano . In Sonatas and Interludes , however , the proportions are more complex , partly because fractions are used . In his 1949 lecture on Sonatas and Interludes Pierre Boulez specifically emphasized the connection between tradition and innovation in Sonatas and Interludes : " The structure of these sonatas brings together a pre @-@ Classical structure and a rhythmic structure which belong to two entirely different worlds . " 
 = = Recordings = = 
 Sonatas and Interludes has been recorded many times , both in its complete form and in parts . This list is organized chronologically and presents only the complete recordings . Years of recording are given , not years of release . Catalogue numbers are indicated for the latest available CD versions . For the complete discography with reissues and partial recordings listed , see the link to the John Cage database below . 
 Maro Ajemian – 1951 , Dial Records 20 – 21 . Reissued in the 1960s , Composers Recordings Inc . CRI 700 . Reissued on CD , <unk> records <unk> 
 Yuji Takahashi : 
 1965 , <unk> Records <unk> 1010 ( mono ) 
 1975 , Denon <unk> <unk> ( stereo , digital ) 
 John Damgaard – 1971 , <unk> <unk> <unk> @-@ 444 ( <unk> , incl. many other works ) 
 John Tilbury – 1974 , Explore Records <unk> 
 Joshua Pierce : 
 1975 , <unk> <unk> <unk> @-@ 50 
 1988 , Newport Classic NPD <unk> 
 1999 , Ants Records AG 06 ( 2CD , live recording ) 
 2000 , <unk> Records SLR 0303 ( live recording ) 
 Gérard Frémy – 1980 , <unk> PIA 521 @-@ 2 , <unk> Records <unk> @-@ 2 , <unk> Records <unk> 2001 
 Nada Kolundžija – c . 1981 , <unk> LPD @-@ 930 ( <unk> ) 
 Darryl Rosenberg – c . 1986 , <unk> Digital <unk> 2001 ( LP ) 
 Mario <unk> – 1991 , released 2001 as Edition RZ 20001 ( Parallele 20001 ) 
 Nigel Butterley – 1992 , Tall Poppies <unk> 
 Herbert <unk> – 1993 , ECM New Series 1842 ( 2CD , incl . <unk> 's <unk> <unk> ) 
 Louis Goldstein – 1994 , <unk> Music <unk> ( incl . Dream ) 
 Philipp <unk> – 1994 , Mode 50 ( according to the liner notes , this is the first recording made on a Steinway " O " -type baby grand piano , the model Cage originally composed the piece on ) 
 Julie Steinberg – 1995 , Music & Arts 937 
 Markus <unk> – 1996 , Col <unk> WWE <unk> 20001 
 Steffen Schleiermacher – 1996 , MDG 613 <unk> @-@ 2 ( 3CD , part of John Cage : Complete Piano Works <unk> series ) 
 Aleck Karis – 1997 , Bridge <unk> A / B ( 2CD , incl . Cage 's lecture Composition in Retrospect ) 
 Jean Pierre Dupuy – 1997 , Stradivarius <unk> 
 Boris Berman – 1998 , Naxos 8 @.@ <unk> or Naxos 8 @.@ <unk> 
 Joanna MacGregor – 1998 , <unk> SC 003 ( 2CD , includes miscellaneous other works by Cage and other composers ) 
 Giancarlo <unk> – 1999 , <unk> <unk> 
 Kumi <unk> – 1999 , <unk> <unk> @-@ 0011 
 Tim Ovens – c . 2002 , <unk> <unk> 566 ( incl. a multimedia CD ) 
 Margaret Leng Tan – 2003 , Mode 158 ( CD and DVD , incl. many other works and several documentaries ) 
 Nora <unk> – 2004 , <unk> Records HV 0011 @-@ 2 @-@ 131 ( SACD ) 
 Giancarlo <unk> – 2005 , Brilliant Classics <unk> ( 3CD , part of Complete Music for Prepared Piano ) 
 Antonis <unk> – 2014 , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) 
 = = = Books = = = 
 John Cage . Silence : Lectures and Writings , Wesleyan Paperback , 1973 ( first edition 1961 ) . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 
 Richard Kostelanetz . <unk> with John Cage , Routledge , 2003 . ISBN 0 @-@ 415 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 David Nicholls . The Cambridge Companion to John Cage , Cambridge University Press , 2002 . ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 
 James Pritchett . The Music of John Cage , Cambridge University Press , 1993 . ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 
 James Pritchett , Laura Kuhn . " John Cage " . In Macy , Laura . Grove Music Online . Oxford Music Online . Oxford University Press . ( subscription required ) 
 = = = Dissertations and articles = = = 
 E.S. Baumgartner . Sonatas and Interludes , by John Cage : A Structural Analysis , Mills College , 1994 . 
 Gregory Jay Clough . Sonatas and Interludes for Prepared Piano ( 1946 – 48 ) by John Cage : An Analytical Basis for Interpretation , MM University of Arkansas , Fayetteville , 1968 . 
 Jeffrey Perry . " Cage 's Sonatas and Interludes for prepared piano : performance , hearing and analysis " , Music Theory Spectrum , Spring 2005 , Vol . 27 , No. 1 , pp. 35 – 66 . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Sonata V performed by Bobby Mitchell , YouTube link 
 4 ' 33 " and Sonatas and Interludes for prepared piano performed by James Tenney at <unk> sound , concert archive ( streaming QuickTime format ) . 
 = 2014 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 2014 Atlantic hurricane season was a below average season in terms of named storms , and an average season in terms of both hurricanes and major hurricanes . It produced nine tropical cyclones , eight named storms , the fewest since the 1997 Atlantic hurricane season , six hurricanes and two major hurricanes . It officially began on June 1 , 2014 , and ended on November 30 , 2014 . These dates historically describe the period each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . The first storm of the season , Arthur , developed on July 1 , while the final storm , Hanna , dissipated on October 28 . 
 Although every named storm impacted land , overall effects were minimal . Arthur caused one indirect fatality and $ 22 @.@ 7 million ( 2014 USD ) in damage after striking North Carolina and becoming the first Category 2 hurricane to landfall in the United States since 2008 's Hurricane Ike , and its remnants moving across Atlantic Canada . Hurricane Bertha brushed the Lesser Antilles but its impacts were relatively minor . Three deaths occurred offshore the United States and one fatal injury was reported off the coast of the United Kingdom . Hurricane Cristobal caused two deaths each in Haiti and the Dominican Republic and one in Turks and Caicos Islands , all due to flooding . Rip currents affected Maryland and New Jersey , resulting in one fatality in each state . The remnants of Cristobal were responsible for three indirect deaths in the United Kingdom . Tropical Storm Dolly made landfall in eastern Mexico and triggered flooding due to heavy rains , leaving minor impact . Hurricane Edouard caused two deaths near the coast of Maryland due to strong rip currents . 
 Fay caused about $ 3 @.@ 8 million in damage in Bermuda after striking the island . Hurricane Gonzalo was the most intense hurricane of the season . A powerful Atlantic hurricane , Gonzalo had destructive impacts in the Lesser Antilles and Bermuda , and it was also the first Category 4 hurricane since Ophelia in 2011 and the strongest hurricane since Igor in 2010 . It caused three fatalities in the Lesser Antilles and at least $ 200 million in damage in Bermuda . The remnants brought flooding and strong winds in Europe , causing three deaths in the United Kingdom . With two hurricanes striking Bermuda , this was the first season featuring more than one hurricane landfall on the island . The last storm of the season , Tropical Storm Hanna , made landfall over Central America in late October producing minimal impact . 
 Most major forecasting agencies predicted below @-@ average activity to occur this season due to an expected strong El Niño ; however , the El Niño had failed to materialize . 
 = = Seasonal forecasts = = 
 In advance of , and during , each hurricane season , several forecasts of hurricane activity are issued by national meteorological services , scientific agencies , and noted hurricane experts . These include forecasters from the United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) ' s National Hurricane and Climate Prediction Center , Tropical Storm Risk , the United Kingdom 's Met Office , and Philip J. Klotzbach , William M. Gray and their associates at Colorado State University ( CSU ) . The forecasts include weekly and monthly changes in significant factors that help determine the number of tropical storms , hurricanes , and major hurricanes within a particular year . According to NOAA and CSU , the average Atlantic hurricane season between 1981 and 2010 contained roughly 12 tropical storms , six hurricanes , three major hurricanes , and an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) index of 66 – 103 units . NOAA typically categorizes a season as either above @-@ average , average , or below @-@ average based on the cumulative ACE Index , but the number of tropical storms , hurricanes , and major hurricanes within a hurricane season are considered occasionally as well . 
 = = = Pre @-@ season forecasts = = = 
 On December 13 , 2013 , Tropical Storm Risk ( TSR ) , a public consortium consisting of experts on insurance , risk management , and seasonal climate forecasting at University College London , issued their first outlook on seasonal hurricane activity during the 2014 season . Their report called for a near @-@ normal year , with 14 ( ± 4 ) tropical storms , 6 ( ± 3 ) hurricanes , 3 ( ± 2 ) intense hurricanes , and a cumulative ACE index of 106 ( ± 58 ) units . The basis for such included slightly stronger than normal trade winds and slightly warmer than normal sea surface temperatures across the Caribbean Sea and tropical North Atlantic . A few months later , on March 24 , 2014 , Weather Services International ( WSI ) , a subsidiary company of The Weather Channel , released their first outlook , calling for 11 named storms , 5 hurricanes , and 2 major hurricanes . Two factors — cooler @-@ than @-@ average waters in the eastern Atlantic , and the likelihood of an El Niño developing during the summer of 2014 — were expected to negate high seasonal activity . 
 On April 7 , TSR issued their second extended @-@ range forecast for the season , lowering the predicted numbers to 12 ( ± 4 ) named storms , 5 ( ± 3 ) hurricanes , 2 ( ± 2 ) major hurricanes , and an ACE index of 75 ( ± 57 ) units . Three days later , CSU issued their first outlook for the year , predicting activity below the 1981 – 2010 average . Citing a likely El Niño of at least moderate intensity and cooler @-@ than @-@ average tropical Atlantic sea surface temperatures , the organization predicted nine named storms , three hurricanes , one major hurricane , and an ACE index of 55 units . The probability of a major hurricane making landfall on the United States or tracking through the Caribbean Sea was expected to be lower than average . 
 On May 16 , the United Kingdom Met Office ( UKMO ) issued a forecast of a slightly below @-@ average season . It predicted 10 named storms with a 70 % chance that the number would be between 7 and 13 and 6 hurricanes with a 70 % chance that the number would be between 3 and 9 . It also predicted an ACE index of 84 with a 70 % chance that the index would be in the range 47 to 121 . NOAA released their pre @-@ season forecasts on May 22 and called for a 70 % chance that there would be between 8 and 13 named storms , 3 to 6 hurricanes , and 1 to 2 major hurricanes . On May 29 , the Florida State University Center for Ocean @-@ Atmospheric Prediction Studies , FSU COAPS , issued its first and only prediction for the season . The organization called for five to nine named storms , of which two to six would further intensify into hurricanes ; one to two of the hurricanes would reach major hurricane intensity . In addition , an ACE index of 60 units was forecast . 
 = = = Mid @-@ season predictions = = = 
 In July and August , CSU , TSR , and NOAA released similar outlooks for the remainder of the season . CSU increased its prediction on July 31 to ten named storms , four hurricanes , and one major hurricane , which was unchanged from its forecast on May 23 . The forecast team noted that conditions for tropical cyclogenesis appeared " detrimental " , with abnormally cold sea surface temperatures , higher than average sea @-@ level pressures , and strong vertical wind shear . TSR issued another forecast on July 5 , indicated that there would be nine to fifteen named storms , four to eight hurricanes , and one to three major hurricanes , citing conditions similar to those forecast by CSU . Two days later , NOAA revised its predictions and called for seven to twelve named storms , three to six hurricanes , and zero to two major hurricanes . NOAA noted similar atmospheric and oceanic conditions , but also indicated a weaker African monsoon , a stable atmosphere , and sinking air . 
 = = Seasonal summary = = 
 The Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 1 , 2014 . It was a below average season in which nine tropical cyclones formed . Eight of the nine designated cyclones attained tropical storm status , the fewest since the 1997 Atlantic hurricane season . Of the eight tropical storms , six reached at least Category 1 hurricane intensity . The 2014 season extended the period without major hurricane landfalls in the United States to nine years , with the last such system being Hurricane Wilma in 2005 . The lack of activity was attributed to an atmospheric circulation that favored dry , sinking air over the Atlantic Ocean and strong wind shear over the Caribbean Sea . Additionally , sea surface temperatures near @-@ average . A few notable events occurred during the season . Arthur made landfall between Cape Lookout and Cape Hatteras as a Category 2 hurricane , becoming the first U.S. landfalling cyclone of that intensity since Hurricane Ike in 2008 . Arthur also became the earliest known hurricane to strike the North Carolina coastline on <unk> doing so on July 4 . In October , Fay became the first hurricane to make landfall on Bermuda since Emily in 1987 . With Gonzalo striking the island only four days later , 2014 became the first season on record in which more than one hurricane struck Bermuda . Four hurricanes and two tropical storms made landfall during the season and caused 21 deaths and at least $ 233 million in damage . Hurricane Cristobal also caused fatalities , though it did not strike land . The Atlantic hurricane season officially ended on November 30 , 2014 . 
 Tropical cyclogenesis began in early July , with the development of Hurricane Arthur on July 1 , ahead of the long @-@ term climatological average of July 9 . Early on July 3 , the system intensified into a hurricane , preceding the climatological average of August 10 . Later that month , a tropical depression developed over the eastern Atlantic , but dissipated after only two days . There were also two tropical cyclones in August , with the development of hurricanes Bertha and Cristobal . Despite being the climatological peak of hurricane season , only two additional systems originated in September - Tropical Storm Dolly and Hurricane Edouard . In October , three storms developed , including hurricane Fay and Gonzalo and Tropical Storm Hanna . The most intense tropical cyclone – Hurricane Gonzalo – peaked with maximum sustained winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) on October 16 which is a Category 4 on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . It was the first Category 4 hurricane since Hurricane Ophelia in 2011 . The final tropical cyclone of the season was Hanna , which dissipated on October 28 . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an Accumulated Cyclone Energy ( ACE ) rating of 67 , which was well below the 1981 – 2010 median of 92 . The ACE value in October was higher than August and September combined , which has not occurred since 1963 . Broadly speaking , ACE is a measure of the power of a tropical or subtropical storm multiplied by the length of time it existed . Therefore , a storm with a longer duration or stronger intensity , such as Gonzalo , will have high values of ACE . It is only calculated for full advisories on specific tropical and subtropical systems reaching or exceeding wind speeds of 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) . Accordingly , tropical depressions are not included here . After the storm has dissipated , typically after the end of the season , the NHC reexamines the data , and produces a final report on each storm . These revisions can lead to a revised ACE total either upward or downward compared to the operational value . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane Arthur = = = 
 On June 25 , a piece of low @-@ level energy formed within a convective complex over the northwestern Gulf of Mexico . After crossing Georgia and South Carolina , it became absorbed by a weak frontal boundary that drifted south @-@ southeastward . An area of low pressure developed off the Southeast United States by June 28 , eventually leading to the formation of a tropical depression by 00 : 00 UTC on July 1 . Amid a generally favorable environment , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Arthur at 12 : 00 UTC that same day and further to a Category 1 hurricane by 00 : 00 UTC on July 3 . An approaching mid @-@ level trough directed the storm north @-@ northeastward as it continued to intensify , and Arthur reached its peak as a Category 2 hurricane with winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) at 00 : 00 UTC on July 4 . A few hours later , it moved ashore just west of Cape Lookout , North Carolina , becoming the earliest landfalling hurricane on record in the state . Following landfall , Arthur accelerated northeast across the western Atlantic while encountering an increasingly unfavorable environment , weakening to a tropical storm at 06 : 00 UTC on July 5 and transitioning into an extratropical cyclone six hours later . The post @-@ tropical low eventually dissipated east of Labrador late on July 9 . 
 As a developing tropical cyclone , Arthur produced minor rainfall across the northwestern Bahamas . In Florida , a dozen swimmers required rescuing as a result of strong rip currents . Maximum sustained winds peaked at 77 mph ( 124 km / h ) , with a peak gust of 101 mph ( 163 km / h ) , at Cape Lookout , and Oregon Inlet recorded a peak storm surge of 4 @.@ 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) . At its height , Arthur knocked out power to 44 @,@ 000 people in North Carolina , triggering Duke Energy to deploy over 500 personnel to restore electricity . Widespread rainfall totals of 6 – 8 in ( 150 – 200 mm ) led to the inundation of numerous buildings in Manteo . As the storm passed offshore New England , sustained winds of 47 mph ( 63 km / h ) and gusts up to 63 mph ( 101 km / h ) were observed . Observed rainfall totals over a half foot required the issuance of a flash flood emergency for New Bedford , Massachusetts , while several roads were shut down in surrounding locations . After transitioning into an extratropical cyclone , Arthur knocked out power to more than 290 @,@ 000 individuals across the Maritimes , with damage to the electrical grid considered the worst since Hurricane Juan in Nova Scotia . One person died after his oxygen support was cut off during a power outage . Hurricane @-@ force gusts were observed in Nova Scotia , with tropical storm @-@ force winds observed as far away as Quebec . Overall , Arthur caused at least $ 22 @.@ 7 million in damage . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Two = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged off the western coast of Africa on July 17 . Steered westward , a small area of low pressure developed in association with the wave two days later . Convection steadily increased and organized , leading to the formation of a tropical depression by 12 : 00 UTC on July 21 . The depression failed to intensify into a tropical storm amid an exceptionally dry and stable environment and instead degenerated into a trough by 18 : 00 UTC on July 23 while located east of the Lesser Antilles . 
 = = = Hurricane Bertha = = = 
 On August 1 , a tropical wave developed into Tropical Storm Bertha while roughly 345 mi ( 555 km ) east @-@ southeast of Barbados . A mostly disorganized cyclone , Bertha quickly moved across the Lesser Antilles , clipping the northern end of Martinique , later that day . During its trek across the eastern Caribbean Sea , its circulation became severely disrupted and it may have degenerated into a tropical wave . On August 3 , it traversed the Mona Passage and moved over the Southeastern Bahamas where conditions favored development . Despite an overall ragged appearance on satellite imagery , data from Hurricane Hunters indicated it intensified to a hurricane on August 4 ; it acquired peak winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) that day . Turning north , and later northeast , Bertha soon weakened as it began to merge with an approaching trough to the west . This merger ultimately took place on August 6 , at which time Bertha was declared extratropical well to the south of Nova Scotia . 
 As a tropical cyclone , Bertha 's impact was relatively minor . In the Lesser Antilles , widespread power outages occurred along its path but no major damage or loss of life took place . Enhanced swells and rip currents associated with the hurricane resulted in three fatalities and dozens of rescues along the East Coast of the United States . After becoming an extratropical system , it had significant effects in Western Europe , with the United Kingdom being particularly hard hit . Unseasonably heavy rains triggered widespread flooding which shut down roads and prompted evacuations . One fatality took place offshore after a man suffered a fatal head injury on his yacht amid rough seas . On mainland Europe , a small tornado outbreak resulted in scattered structural damage in Belgium , France , and Germany . 
 = = = Hurricane Cristobal = = = 
 A tropical wave and attendant region of convection developed into a tropical depression at 18 : 00 UTC on August 23 while located near Mayaguana in the Bahamas ; twelve hours later , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Cristobal . The newly formed cyclone turned northward following formation , directed toward a break in a subtropical ridge . With persistent moderate wind shear and nearby dry air , Cristobal only steadily intensified and was upgrading to a Category 1 hurricane at 00 : 00 UTC on August 26 despite a partially exposed circulation and disorganized cloud pattern . As the hurricane turned east @-@ northeastward the following day , its cloud pattern became much more symmetric and an eye became evident , yielding peak winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . Thereafter , a frontal boundary wrapped around the storm 's circulation , transitioning the system into an extratropical cyclone by 12 : 00 UTC on August 29 . The post @-@ tropical low maintained hurricane @-@ force winds while accelerating across the North Atlantic , finally merging with a second extratropical low north of Iceland by September 2 . 
 The precursor of Cristobal and the storm itself dropped heavy precipitation on Puerto Rico , with 13 @.@ 21 in ( 336 mm ) of rain observed in the municipality of <unk> , bring drought relief to the island . The storm downed many trees and power lines and left more than 23 @,@ 500 people without power and 8 @,@ 720 without water . In Dominican Republic , large amounts of rainfall left several communities isolated , flooded at least 800 homes , and killed two people . Thousands of people were evacuated from their homes . In Haiti , mudslides and flooding rendered 640 families homeless and destroyed or severely damaged at least 34 homes . Two people who went missing were later presumed to have drowned . In the Turks and Caicos Islands , the storm produced over 10 in ( 250 mm ) of precipitation on various islands . The international airport on Providenciales briefly closed due to flooding , where one drowning death occurred . Portions of North Caicos were inundated with up to 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) of water . Along the East Coast of the United States , rip currents resulted in one death each in Maryland and New Jersey . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Dolly = = = 
 An area of low pressure interacted with an atmospheric kelvin wave , leading to the formation of a tropical depression in the Bay of Campeche at 18 : 00 UTC on August 31 . Six hours later , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Dolly . Steered generally westward by a mid @-@ level ridge to its north , the cyclone struggled with strong wind shear and reached peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) at 12 : 00 UTC on September 2 . At 04 : 00 UTC the next day , Dolly moved ashore just south of Tampico , Mexico , with winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . Following landfall , the mountainous terrain of eastern Mexico quickly caused the cyclone to degenerate into a remnant low at 12 : 00 UTC on September 3 . The post @-@ tropical low continued westward prior to dissipating the next day . 
 Heavy rains from the storm triggered flooding that temporarily isolated three communities in Tampico . One fatality was attributed to the storm . The hardest hit area was Cabo Rojo where 210 homes were affected , 80 of which sustained damage . Total losses to the road network in Tamaulipas reached 80 million pesos ( US $ 6 million ) , while structural damage amounted to 7 million pesos ( US $ 500 @,@ 000 ) . In Texas , more than 2 in ( 51 mm ) of rain fell in Brownsville , causing street flooding . Two Mexican fishing vessels ran aground in the Port of Brownsville and a third on South Padre Island . The United States Coast Guard attributed the mishaps to the sudden influx of numerous ships . 
 = = = Hurricane Edouard = = = 
 A tropical wave accompanied by a broad area of low pressure exited the western coast of Africa on September 6 , acquiring sufficient organization to be declared a tropical depression by 12 : 00 UTC on September 11 . Twelve hours later , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Edouard . The newly formed cyclone moved northwest , steered around a subtropical ridge to its northeast . The storm intensified in a generally favorable environment and became a hurricane by 12 : 00 UTC on September 14 . With a well @-@ defined eye surrounded by intense eyewall convection , Edouard further strengthened into a major hurricane early on September 16 , attaining peak winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) at 12 : 00 UTC , the first major hurricane in the Atlantic since Hurricane Sandy in 2012 . The cyclone abruptly weakened thereafter as it curved northeastward in advance of an upper @-@ level trough , falling below hurricane intensity by 00 : 00 UTC on September 19 and degenerating into a remnant low eighteen hours later . The remnant low moved generally southward , merging with a frontal boundary well south @-@ southwest of the Azores on September 21 . 
 Though Edouard remained well away from land throughout its existence , large swells and dangerous rip currents affected much of the East Coast of the United States . Rip current warnings were issued on September 17 for Duval , Flagler , Nassau , and St. Johns counties in Florida and Camden and Glynn counties in Georgia . Waves in the area were forecast to reach 3 to 4 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 to 1 @.@ 22 m ) . On September 17 , two men drowned off the coast of Ocean City , Maryland , due to strong rip currents . The Bermuda Weather Service noted the hurricane as a " potential threat " ; however , Edouard remained several hundred miles away from the islands . 
 On September 16 , several unmanned drones designed by NOAA were launched by Hurricane Hunter aircraft while investigating Edouard . This marked the first time that drones were used in such a manner by NOAA . Unlike the manned aircraft , the drones were able to fly to the lower @-@ levels of hurricanes and investigate the more dangerous areas near the surface . Additionally , a NASA @-@ operated Global Hawk flew into the storm , equipped with two experimental instruments : the Scanning High @-@ resolution Interferometer Sounder ( S @-@ HIS ) and Cloud Physics <unk> ( CPL ) . The S @-@ HIS provided measurements of temperature and relative humidity while the CPL was for studying aerosols and the structure of cloud layers within hurricanes . 
 = = = Hurricane Fay = = = 
 A low @-@ level disturbance was designated as Subtropical Storm Fay at 06 : 00 UTC on October 10 while located about 615 mi ( 990 km ) south Bermuda . Directed north @-@ northwestward around a mid @-@ level ridge across the central Atlantic , the system became dislocated from a cold @-@ core low , allowing for a subsequent transition into a fully tropical storm by early on October 11 . Fay continued to strengthen in spite of excessively strong wind shear as it accelerated north @-@ northeast , becoming a hurricane as it approached Bermuda the next morning . With an asymmetric cloud pattern , the hurricane reached peak winds of 80 mph ( 140 km / h ) and made landfall on the island at 08 : 10 UTC on October 12 . An approaching shortwave further turned the system to the east @-@ northeast while also acting to increase wind shear , causing Fay to begin weakening . It fell below hurricane intensity on October 12 and degenerated into an open trough by 06 : 00 UTC on October 13 . 
 A few tropical cyclone warnings and watches were issued in anticipation of Fay 's impact on Bermuda . Public schools were closed in advance of the storm . Despite its modest strength , Fay produced relatively extensive damage on Bermuda . Winds gusting over 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) clogged roadways with downed trees and power poles , and left a majority of the island 's electricity customers without power . The terminal building at L.F. Wade International Airport was severely flooded after the storm compromised its roof and sprinkler system . Immediately after the storm , 200 Bermuda Regiment soldiers were called to clear debris and assist in initial damage repairs . Cleanup efforts overlapped with preparations for the approach of the stronger Hurricane Gonzalo . There were concerns that debris from Fay could become airborne during Gonzalo and exacerbate future destruction . Overall , it is estimated that the hurricane left at least $ 3 @.@ 8 million in damage . 
 = = = Hurricane Gonzalo = = = 
 A tropical depression formed about 390 mi ( 630 km ) east of the Leeward Islands by 00 : 00 UTC on October 12 from a tropical wave that emerged off Africa on October 4 . Twelve hours later , it intensified into Tropical Storm Gonzalo . Steered west and eventually west @-@ northwest , the cyclone rapidly intensified amid favorable atmospheric dynamics , becoming a minimal hurricane by 12 : 00 UTC on October 13 . After curving northwest and emerging into the southwestern Atlantic , Gonzalo continued its period of rapid intensification , becoming a major hurricane by 18 : 00 UTC on October 14 and a Category 4 hurricane six hours later . The hurricane underwent an eyewall replacement cycle the next day , but ultimately attained peak winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 940 mbar ( 28 inHg ) by 12 : 00 UTC on October 16 . Late that afternoon , the effects of a second eyewall replacement cycle , cooler waters , and increased shear caused the storm to begin a steady weakening trend as it accelerated north @-@ northeast ahead of an approaching trough . Gonzalo weakened below major hurricane intensity by 00 : 00 UTC on October 18 and made landfall on Bermuda with winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) six hours later . The cyclone continued north @-@ northeast , transitioning into an extratropical cyclone by 18 : 00 UTC on October 19 while located roughly 460 mi ( 740 km ) northeast of Cape Race , Newfoundland . The extratropical cyclone turned east @-@ northeast and was absorbed by a cold front early on October 20 . 
 Widespread impact was observed across the northeastern Caribbean Sea as Gonzalo moved through the region . Sustained winds of 67 mph ( 103 km / h ) , with gusts to 88 mph ( 142 km / h ) , were observed on Antigua , where downed trees blocked roads and damaged houses . Numerous fishing boats were destroyed and the island was subject to a widespread power outage . On Saint Martin , 37 docked boats were destroyed and the airport recorded sustained winds of 55 mph ( 88 km / h ) with gusts to 94 mph ( 151 km / h ) . As Gonzalo made landfall on Bermuda , L.F. Wade International Airport recorded sustained winds of 93 mph ( 150 km / h ) and gusts up to 113 mph ( 181 km / h ) ; an elevated observing station at St. Davids reported a peak gust of 144 mph ( 232 km / h ) . At the height of the storm about 86 % of electricity customers on the island lost power . Multiple buildings suffered roof damage , and downed trees and power lines prevented travel across the island . On Bermuda alone , the storm left at least $ 200 million in damage . After transitioning into an extratropical cyclone , Gonzalo delivered strong winds to Newfoundland , with gusts peaking at 66 mph ( 106 km / h ) at Cape Pine . Approximately 100 households lost power , while heavy rain caused localized urban flooding in St. Johns . Upon reaching the United Kingdom on October 21 , heavy rain and strong winds , with gusts reaching 70 mph ( 100 km / h ) in Wales , downed trees and disrupted transportation . Three indirect deaths in the United Kingdom were attributed to the remnants of Gonzalo . The system later contributed to torrential rains over the Balkans , which resulted in severe flooding in Greece and Bulgaria . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Hanna = = = 
 On October 19 , the remnants of Tropical Storm Trudy emerged over the Bay of Campeche after losing its low @-@ level circulation over the mountainous terrain of Mexico . Moving slowly eastward , the system redeveloped a new surface circulation on October 21 , becoming a tropical depression the next day about 175 mi ( 280 km ) west of Campeche , Mexico . A reconnaissance aircraft flight measured a central pressure of 1000 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 53 inHg ) upon its formation , the lowest in relation to the depression . Increasing wind shear and dry air intrusion soon caused the depression to degrade into a remnant low early on October 23 before moving inland over the southwestern Yucatán Peninsula . After crossing the southern Yucatán and northern Belize , the low emerged over the northwestern Caribbean Sea on October 24 . Hostile conditions from a nearby frontal boundary ultimately caused the system to degrade into a trough and become entangled within the front . 
 Subsequent weakening of the frontal system on October 26 allowed the depression 's remnants to become better defined as they moved southeast and later southward . The system regained a closed circulation by 12 : 00 UTC that day as it began turning west . Following the development of deep convection the system regenerated into a tropical depression around 00 : 00 UTC on October 27 roughly 80 mi ( 130 km ) east of the Nicaragua – Honduras border . ASCAT scatterometer data shortly thereafter resulted in the depression being upgraded to Tropical Storm Hanna at 06 : 00 UTC . Just ten hours later Hanna made landfall over extreme northeastern Nicaragua and quickly weakened back to a depression . The system degraded to a remnant low early on October 28 before turning northwestward and emerging over the Gulf of Honduras . Some signs of redevelopment appeared throughout the day , but the remnants of Hanna soon moved inland over Belize early on October 29 . The system finally dissipated over northwest Guatemala on the following day . Hanna and its remnants contributed to an ongoing flood in Nicaragua that was responsible for 28 fatalities , many cattle deaths , and a significant loss in grain . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used to name storms that formed in the North Atlantic in 2014 . This is the same list used in the 2008 season , except for Gonzalo , Isaias , and Paulette , which replaced Gustav , Ike , and Paloma , respectively . The name Gonzalo was used for the first time in 2014 . There were no names retired this year ; thus , the same list will be used again in the 2020 season . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 This is a table of all the storms that have formed during the 2014 Atlantic hurricane season . It includes their duration , names , areas affected , damages , and death totals . Deaths in parentheses are additional and indirect ( an example of an indirect death would be a traffic accident ) , but were still related to that storm . Damage and deaths include totals while the storm was extratropical , a wave , or a low , and all the damage figures are in 2014 USD . 
 = It 's a SpongeBob Christmas ! = 
 " It 's a SpongeBob Christmas ! " is the 23rd episode of the eighth season , and the 175th episode overall , of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants . It originally aired on CBS in the United States on November 23 , 2012 , and on Nickelodeon on December 6 . In the special , Plankton tries to convince SpongeBob to transform everybody in Bikini Bottom into jerks by feeding them his special <unk> @-@ laced fruitcakes in order to get his Christmas wish — the Krabby Patty secret formula . 
 The episode was produced in stop motion animation at Screen Novelties , and was directed by Mark Caballero and Seamus Walsh , two of the founders of the company . The animation style was inspired by those of the classic Rankin / Bass television specials . Written by Luke Brookshier , Marc Ceccarelli , Derek Iversen , and Mr. Lawrence , " It 's a SpongeBob Christmas ! " was based on Tom Kenny and Andy Paley 's 2009 song " Don 't Be a Jerk ( It 's Christmas ) " , which was also featured in the episode . John Goodman guest starred as the voice of Santa Claus . On November 6 , 2012 , the soundtrack album and the DVD for the episode were released simultaneously . 
 Upon premiere , " It 's a SpongeBob Christmas ! " attracted nearly five million viewers and met positive critical reception . It received four nominations at the 40th Annie Awards including Best Animated Television Production for Children ( with Dan Driscoll winning the Character Animation in an Animated Television or other Broadcast Venue Production category ) . It was also nominated for Best Sound Editing in Television at the 60th Golden Reel Awards . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 = = = Patchy the Pirate 's Subplot = = = 
 The special opens with Patchy the Pirate Driving a Mail truck through a snowy mountain area ( and parodying the role of S. D. Kluger from Santa Claus is Comin ' to Town ) with the intention of delivering his letter to Santa himself personally . He stops to wish the viewers a Merry Christmas , and explains that he wanted to make sure Santa Claus got his letter this year , so he has given the mailman the day off ( or so he claims ; in actuality , it is revealed that he stole the truck and the mailman is tied up in the back of the truck ) . His parrot , Potty , however , doubts that Patchy knows the way to the North Pole . As they debate which Christmas song contains the directions in its lyrics , the truck suddenly runs over a ( literal ) fork in the road , which gets stuck in one of the tires and causes the truck to spin out of control . As this happens , Patchy suggests they show the viewers what SpongeBob is up to this Christmas . 
 The mail truck then drives off a cliff , and crashes at the bottom of a canyon , but Patchy and Potty ( and the mailman , still bound and gagged ) manage to survive . Unfortunately , the Truck has a flat tire caused by the fork , preventing Patchy from being able to drive it any further , and he and Potty get lost in the woods and start a campfire . Out of a sense of hunger within over twenty minutes , Patchy hallucinates and imagines Potty as a platter of buffalo wings and nearly eats him , only to snap out of it . Potty then also hallucinates and imagines Patchy 's head as a Suet cake topped with <unk> and pecks on him . 
 In the special 's epilogue , Patchy and Potty find out that they 're at the North Pole , believing they finally made it to Santa 's workshop . Patchy goes inside to read his letter , which says that all he wants for Christmas is meet his hero , SpongeBob SquarePants . However , it is revealed to the viewers that Patchy is hallucinating and has actually wandered into a cave inhabited by a hungry polar bear who starts chasing him ( and presumably nearly eats him ) . Nearby , the real Santa puts Patchy on the naughty list for kidnapping the mailman , and stealing the mail truck in the first place earlier , and Potty agrees with him . The Patchy segments then end as they wish the viewers a merry Christmas . 
 These Segments are cut from special on CBS airings . 
 = = = Main Plot = = = 
 It is Christmas in Bikini Bottom and Plankton is miserable and angry for committing so many naughty deeds , that he always gets puts on Santa 's naughty list , making him unable to receive his Christmas wish — the Krusty Krab 's Krabby Patty secret formula . However , he discovers Jerktonium , a dangerous chemical element which serves as a trap for the citizens of Bikini Bottom and is capable of turning anyone into a jerk . He cooks it into fruitcakes that he intends to feed to all the Bikini <unk> and turn them into jerks . In order to test it , Plankton gives SpongeBob a slice , but nothing seems to work on SpongeBob , who is immune to Jerktonium because of the combination of his tiny brain and his very big heart . Increasingly infuriated that his plan has seemingly failed completely to suffice , Plankton gives his fruitcake dispenser to SpongeBob , who promptly distributes the fruitcakes to all of Bikini Bottom and transforms all the residents into jerks . After realizing that the element works only on other people in Bikini Bottom instead and that SpongeBob is so full of Christmas spirit that he is immune to <unk> , Plankton is forced to send out an evil wind @-@ up robot version of SpongeBob — to commit troublesome deeds to frame the real SpongeBob . 
 The next day , SpongeBob begins to notice that everyone in town is behaving like jerks . SpongeBob and Sandy discover the antidote for Jerktonium to cure the residents in Bikini Bottom is a song called " Don 't Be a Jerk ( It 's Christmas ! ) . " SpongeBob sings it , bringing back the residents ' Christmas spirit . Unfortunately , it is too late when Santa arrives and states that everyone is on his naughty list , except for Plankton , who is the only nice person there is , which has earned him the Krabby Patty formula . SpongeBob tries to convince Santa that this is all a mistake , but Santa refuses to believe him and states that he is in trouble for wreaking havoc in Bikini Bottom . The wind @-@ up robot comes to eliminate Santa and destroy more of Christmas , but SpongeBob fights the robot with the fruitcake dispenser and finally destroys it , clearing his name . Santa thanks SpongeBob for saving him , which shows that SpongeBob is good , but then he finds the robot 's wind @-@ up key by reading " If found , please return to the Chum Bucket , " revealing that Plankton was behind all the chaos , and punishes Plankton by giving him , yet again , a stocking of coal . Santa then leaves Bikini Bottom , only for Patrick Star to capture him in a butterfly net and throw him off @-@ course . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development , writing , and voice casting = = = 
 Luke Brookshier , Marc Ceccarelli , Derek Iversen , and Mr. Lawrence served as the episode 's writers , with Brookshier and Ceccarelli serving as storyboard directors . " It 's a SpongeBob Christmas ! " was based on the 2009 Christmas song " Don 't Be a Jerk ( It 's Christmas ) " written by SpongeBob 's voice actor Tom Kenny and his writing partner Andy Paley . They wrote it as " ... just sort of a little sample calling card of what we were thinking about . " The story of the song was conceived with the help of one of the episode 's writers Mr. Lawrence . Kenny explained , " ... Eventually somebody at Nickelodeon found it [ the song ] on their desk and decided to make it into a holiday special . " The network let Kenny and Paley write three more songs for the upcoming special episode ( Nickelodeon eventually decided to release a soundtrack album , which became It 's a SpongeBob Christmas ! Album , containing the songs to coincide with the episode ) . 
