 " It 's a SpongeBob Christmas ! " was the first full @-@ length episode of the series to be produced in stop motion animation . Mark Caballero , Seamus Walsh , and Christopher Finnegan animated it at Screen Novelties , while Caballero and Walsh served as the directors . Screen Novelties was chosen by the show 's executives to execute the animation because they had already worked with them before in other several smaller projects . These include the revamping of the opening title sequence of the show for 2009 's SpongeBob 's Truth or Square . Walsh explained , " They dug one of our shorts that we 'd done a while back , which was called Graveyard Jamboree with Mysterious Mose , and wanted to have us apply our sensibilities to SpongeBob ... We come from the same planet as far as our sense of humor and comic sensibilities are concerned . But we also wanted to make sure that it felt like a SpongeBob episode . " 
 All the main SpongeBob SquarePants cast members lent their voices to the episode . Series executive producer Paul Tibbitt also had a minor speaking role as the voice of Potty the Parrot . In addition to the regular cast , American actor John Goodman guest starred in the episode as the voice of Santa Claus . 
 = = = Animation and filming = = = 
 The animators cited the classic television specials Rudolph the Red @-@ Nosed Reindeer and Santa Claus Is Comin ' to Town by Rankin / Bass Productions as inspirations for the episode 's animation styles . Caballero said , " Well , we are heavily immersed in that particular Arthur Rankin and Jules Bass style . They are big heroes of ours ... So we tapped into that knowledge for sure . We definitely use modern tricks , though . We shot everything with digital cameras directly to the hard drives of our <unk> . " 
 Production on the episode officially began in October 2011 at Los Angeles , California , after several months of research and development . The animators worked closely with executive producer Paul Tibbitt , creator Stephen Hillenburg , and creative director Vincent Waller to ensure the cartoon characters were properly translated into three @-@ dimensional puppets . Hillenburg and Tibbitt provided hands @-@ on feedback on the production on a weekly basis . " They 'd check out the weeklies and go back and forth with us on the various gags [ ... ] It was really a pleasurable experience when they came to visit , because we come from the same planet . It all felt very easy and natural , " Walsh said . 
 About 30 people — whom Walsh described " ... seemed to be thrilled to work on the show " — worked on the making of the episode over at Screen Novelties . Walsh described the initial stage of production as " a very busy period for all of us ... We came in at about 8 : 30 in the morning and didn 't leave until midnight some days . But it all zipped by pretty quickly . " He said that they " felt pretty lucky because usually executives involved with productions look at the stop @-@ motion process as annoying , but on this special , they were very jazzed and gung @-@ go about it . " To keep the production crew in the Christmas spirit , six months worth of Christmas music was played , which included 83 versions of The Nutcracker suite . According to Finnegan , it took about five months to shoot . 
 = = = = Set construction = = = = 
 Caballero and Walsh had conflicts on making sure the stop motion version of Bikini Bottom will resemble the 2D world of the series . Caballero said that " We didn 't want to make exact sculptural copies of the cartoon drawings and layouts , just because it might 've ended up feeling too ' perfect ' or something . So we chose to re @-@ appropriate real world objects as much as possible . " Art director Kelly <unk> focused on " digging through salvage yards " , picking the right materials to be used in the set . Caballero described this process as " ' <unk> ' the world of Bikini Bottom . " 
 Six sets were constructed on which 60 pounds of baking soda were used as snow ( the crew tried to use real snow but it melted ) , 42 pounds of glitter were used to cover the background , and 20 boxes of breakfast cereal were used to cover the coral rocks . Over 38 different types of foam were used to make the set pieces and the characters ' bodies and heads . To render SpongeBob 's pineapple house , palm fronds from a tree in a school yard were used . Other props and materials used were an actual starfish , three Christmas trees ( for the Patchy the Pirate 's Winter Wonderland scenes ) , six boxes of puff cereal ( to create the fruitcake inside SpongeBob 's mouth ) , 21 pounds of googly eyes ( for rivets , texture pieces , knobs , etc . ) , 22 pounds of woodchips ( to create Sandy 's <unk> floor ) , and 24 bunches of craft flowers ( to create the parade float ) . 
 = = = = Character design = = = = 
 According to Caballero , SpongeBob was the most challenging character to translate to stop motion . It was so " ... just because of the sheer number of parts that needed to be made . We wanted to retain as much of that <unk> @-@ stretchy goofiness as possible , so he had dozens of replacement parts , like arms , noses , even various sizes of cheeks and freckles . Of course , as the main character , you really want to make sure he will charm the audience , which brings a special kind of pressure . " Walsh said , " The most important thing is to capture the spirit of the character , not necessarily a literal copy of the 2D . Puppets have their own kind of energy and you have to be careful about what to include and what to leave out . " On the other hand , Patchy the Pirate became the easiest character to make " because he has the most humanoid proportions . " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 A sneak @-@ peek trailer for the episode was released in June 2012 . On November 23 , 2012 , " It 's a SpongeBob Christmas ! " officially aired on CBS . It also premiered in the United Kingdom and Ireland on December 2 , 2012 . On December 6 , 2012 , " It 's a SpongeBob Christmas ! " aired on Nickelodeon in the United States , twelve years after the original airing of the first SpongeBob SquarePants Christmas special " Christmas Who ? " . According to Caballero , the decision to make the episode a CBS prime time special " came along later " and the crew " were stoked when we heard the news . " He said it may be because " most of the classic Christmas specials like Rudolph [ the Red @-@ Nosed Reindeer ] , Frosty [ the Snowman ] and A Charlie Brown Christmas air on that channel . To be included in that line up was far out ! " 
 = = = Home media and other releases = = = 
 " It 's a SpongeBob Christmas ! " was released on a DVD compilation of the same name on October 30 , 2012 in Canada and on November 6 , 2012 in the United States . The DVD features exclusive content including behind @-@ the @-@ scenes making of the special and interviews with the cast and crew , a pre @-@ color animatic , and yule log . The initial announcement of the DVD release stated that it would contain three Christmas specials from <unk> Puppy , Fanboy & Chum Chum , and The Fairly OddParents as bonus features ; however , these were dropped from the actual release . A Blu @-@ ray release was also announced , but was cancelled a week afterwards for unknown reasons ; however , on July 22 , 2013 , Paramount Home Media Distribution announced that the Blu @-@ ray would be released on October 15 , 2013 . " It 's a SpongeBob Christmas ! " was released for digital download on October 31 , 2012 featuring over 30 minutes of exclusive behind the scenes footage , a sing along version of " Don 't Be a Jerk ( It 's Christmas ) , " and more . On March 12 , 2013 , " It 's a SpongeBob Christmas ! " and other season 8 episodes were released on The Complete Eighth Season DVD . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original airing on CBS on November 23 , the episode was viewed by an estimated 3 @.@ 626 million households and received a 0 @.@ 9 Nielsen rating and a 3 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . On December 8 , Saturday , the airing of the episode on Nickelodeon drew 4 @.@ 8 million viewers making the special win its time period across all television and posted strong , double @-@ digit gains over last year with Kids 2 @-@ 11 ( 7 @.@ 8 / 2 @.@ 6 million , + 30 % ) , Kids 6 @-@ 11 ( 7 @.@ 7 / 1 @.@ 5 million , + 45 % ) , Teens 9 @-@ 14 ( 5 @.@ 7 / 1 @.@ 2 million , + 84 % ) and Adults 18 @-@ 49 ( 1 @.@ 2 / 1 @.@ 3 million , + 33 % ) . Nickelodeon closed the week as the most @-@ watched net in total day with kids 2 @-@ 11 ( 2 @.@ 8 / 936 @,@ 000 ) and total viewers ( 1 @.@ 8 million ) . In the United Kingdom 273 @,@ 000 viewers watched the episode and 78 @,@ 000 viewers watched the timeshift broadcast . The broadcast in Canada received 835 @,@ 000 viewers , the 23rd highest of the week on all Canadian television . In Spain the premiere on December 20 , 2012 received 618 @,@ 000 viewers making it the 44th highest broadcast for that day . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The special episode received positive reviews from media critics . In his review for the Los Angeles Times , Robert Lloyd wrote , " I felt I 'd been somewhere , watching this . When it ended , I was not ready to leave . " David Hinckley of the New York Daily News wrote , " It 's enough to make you want to dream of a yellow Christmas . " Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club called the episode " cute , and goofy and doesn 't have a mean bone in its body . " Mark Frauenfelder of Boing Boing said that " ... they [ the animators ] perfectly captured the look and feel of those delightful old stop motion specials . " Judge Dawn Hunt of DVD Verdict called the episode " a sweet holiday treat , punctuated by musical numbers that 'll leave you smiling . " He added " If you 're looking for a new holiday viewing , ' It 's a SpongeBob Christmas ! ' is definitely worthy of consideration . " Paul Mavis of DVD Talk applauded the episode but has doubts if it will become the classic that will be watched every season . Director Walsh said that " Hopefully this will become a new tradition . " 
 In her review for the About.com , Nancy Basile 's review was mixed to positive and gave the episode a score of four out of five . She wrote , " ... though I disagree with a few of the animator 's choices , this Christmas special is a treat . " Basile criticized its characters especially the use of foam to create the characters and the way Santa Claus was depicted saying " ... he looks like a pig with liver spots . " The animators responded to this comment about their interpretation of Santa Claus , saying " We definitely wanted to keep an element of strangeness , almost scary aspects in the story . " Caballero explained that the idea of making Santa Claus look tired and strange came when they saw a drawing of him by Marc Ceccarelli or Luke Brookshier . Caballero said , " We thought that was a great idea . So we came up with our own little back story where Bikini Bottom is the last stop for Santa . He 's tired , he wants to get home , take his shoes off ... We honed in on the old descriptions of Santa being a jolly old elf . We pictured him as humanoid , but not necessarily directly human . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 A book based on the episode was released on September 10 , 2013 . The book was published by Random House . 
 = Tropical Storm Jerry ( 2001 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Jerry was a short @-@ lived tropical storm that formed in the latter half of the 2001 Atlantic hurricane season . Forming as a tropical depression from a tropical wave on October 6 near Barbados , Jerry intensified into a tropical storm early the following day on October 7 while initially located under an environment of weak vertical wind shear . After reaching its peak of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) , Jerry passed just south of Barbados late on October 7 and through the Windward Islands on October 8 . Shortly after entering the eastern Caribbean Sea , moderate upper @-@ level wind shear affected Jerry 's upper @-@ level outflow , and the cyclone weakened to a depression shortly afterwards . Deterioration in organization continued , and Jerry dissipated while moving rapidly westward well south of Puerto Rico . Jerry caused minimal effects in the Lesser Antilles . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moving westward off the African coast on October 1 , 2001 entered the tropical Atlantic . The wave 's organization changed little until October 4 as it moved westward , when curved banding features began to increase . However , little improvement in the wave 's organization occurred until October 6 after continuing to move westward for two days , when an area of low pressure was identified by the National Hurricane Center . Afterward , the cloudiness became more concentrated , and the system organized into a tropical depression by noon on October 6 , shortly after the first advisory from the NHC was issued at 11 a.m. AST . 
 Located 620 mi ( 1 @,@ 000 km ) east @-@ southeast of Barbados , the twelfth depression of the season moved just north of due west , steered quickly at 20 to 25 mph ( 40 km / h ) by a ridge of high pressure in the lower to middle troposphere . At 5 p.m. AST later on October 6 , the NHC noted that the depression was nearing tropical storm strength . Shortly after , a burst of heavy convective thunderstorms developed over the ill @-@ defined low @-@ level center , and as organization improved , the system was upgraded to 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) Tropical Storm Jerry around midnight on October 7 . Located within an environment of weak vertical wind shear , Jerry strengthened further , with its maximum sustained winds reaching their estimated peak of around 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) as Jerry approached the Windward Islands later on October 7 . Jerry passed just south of Barbados at its peak intensity , followed by a slowing of forward speed and jog to the northwest as Jerry entered the Windward Islands early on October 8 . Reconnaissance aircraft also indicated a possible reformation of the center , as data indicated multiple low @-@ level rotations on a northeast to southwest axis . 
 As Jerry entered the eastern Caribbean Sea early on October 8 after bypassing St. Vincent , its forward speed increased to 25 mph ( 40 km / h ) , and reconnaissance aircraft observations indicated a broad circulation with several small rotations but an ill @-@ defined low @-@ level center . Later , satellite observations indicated that the storm was poorly organized , with an elongated cloud mass and displaced secondary center to the northwest . Moderate vertical wind shear from the northwest developed , disrupting Jerry 's upper @-@ level outflow . Jerry continued to deteriorate , and later on October 8 , aircraft data indicated the system had weakened into a broad area of low pressure with scattered squalls mainly to the east of the remnant center . Jerry then dissipated shortly afterward approximately 230 miles south of Puerto Rico , with the remnants moving westward . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Due to the tropical cyclone 's short life , overall track errors in model guidance were not significant , and most models accurately indicated Jerry 's westward to west @-@ northwest course into the Caribbean Sea . Most models and official forecasts did not anticipate Jerry 's dissipation , and numerous models indicated the system would reach hurricane status within two to three days under favorable conditions . Prior to Jerry 's formation , a tropical storm watch was issued for Barbados at 5 p.m. EDT on October 6 because of forecasts that indicated the depression could intensify to tropical storm intensity . As the depression intensified to tropical storm status and moved closer to the Windward Islands , a tropical storm watch was issued for Tobago by the government of the island nation and for nearby Grenada by the Trinidad and Tobago Meteorological Service at 5 a.m. EDT on October 7 . A tropical storm warning was issued for Barbados at 8 a.m. EDT . 
 Jerry caused minimal damage as it moved through the Windward Islands and Lesser Antilles . A station at Martinique reported sustained one @-@ minute winds of 44 mph ( 72 km / h ) on October 8 . The outer bands of Jerry delivered light rainfall to Grenada on October 8 , but no damage was reported . Some downpours and high winds were reported . No ships reported tropical storm @-@ force winds , though Barbados reported a minimum pressure of 1007 mb . 
 = Cannibal ( EP ) = 
 Cannibal is the debut extended play ( EP ) by American recording artist Kesha , released on November 19 , 2010 . The EP is a follow @-@ up companion to her debut album , Animal . Originally , the record was thought to be released as a deluxe edition of Animal , but was instead sold and released as both an EP and a deluxe edition of Animal . Kesha worked with a variety of producers and writers such as executive producer Dr. Luke , Benny Blanco , Ammo , Max Martin , Bangladesh and others . Musically , the songs on Cannibal are of the dance @-@ pop genre , with some songs incorporating elements of electro and electropop in their production and beats . Throughout the album , the use of Auto @-@ Tune and vocoders is prominent . Lyrically , the songs on Cannibal speak of ignoring judgement or hate and experiences based on love and heartbreak . 
 Cannibal received generally positive reviews from music critics . However , a common complaint amongst critics was the overuse of Auto @-@ Tune , while the album 's production was generally highlighted . The album 's lyrics generally polarized music critics ; some praised her boldness , while others criticized them as being too raunchy . In the United States , the EP reached a peak of fifteen selling 74 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release . In Canada , the album achieved similar success reaching a peak of fourteen on the chart . Cannibal was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of 500 @,@ 000 copies . 
 Two singles were released from the album . The lead single , " We R Who We R " , was a worldwide success , reaching number one in the United States , the United Kingdom and Australia , and charting within the top ten in numerous other countries . In the United States , the song became the seventeenth song in the Billboard Hot 100 's history to debut at number one . The album 's second single , " Blow " , was released on February 8 , 2011 . The song accomplished top ten positions in multiple countries including Australia , New Zealand and the United States . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 Originally believed to only be a re @-@ release of her debut album Animal , Cannibal was instead released both as a deluxe edition of Animal as well as a standalone extended play ( EP ) . The EP has been classified as a follow up " nine @-@ song companion " record to Animal . Cannibal was originally intended to contain anywhere between four and eight tracks with the final outcome instead consisting of eight tracks , and a remix of her debut album 's title track , for a total of nine tracks . 
 Partial recording of the album took place during September 2010 , at Conway Studios with Dr. Luke again as the executive producer . Kesha recorded the abundance of Cannibal over a two @-@ week span with a variety of producers ; the short recording period was due to her only being available for a limited amount of time due to prior commitments . During an interview with Billboard conducted by Chris Willman , one of the potential songs for the album was used as an example of how Luke and Kesha collaborated to create a song for this record : " There 's an unfinished chorus on this new track , in which Gottwald is singing through such distorted Auto @-@ Tune , it 's impossible to tell what he 's saying @-@ which is deliberate , so he won 't unduly influence Ke $ ha when she comes up with her own lyrics . " 
 Like her debut album , Kesha worked with some previous producers and writers that worked with her on her first album , such as : Dr. Luke , Ammo , Benny Blanco and Max Martin . Unlike her debut album though , Kesha enlisted the help of producer Bangladesh . She explained the reason for enlisting his help was that she wanted to " add a tougher edge to her music " . She said that the message she wanted to put out through this album was to create " good , positive , [ danceable ] music " . She elaborated , " I feel like I ’ m creating this hopefully very youthful and irreverent movement of the kids , of like adolescence . I feel like the parents don ’ t get it , but the kids get it . And they deserve to have more good , positive music . ” 
 = = Composition = = 
 Musically , the songs on Cannibal are of the dance @-@ pop genre , while some of its songs incorporate elements of electro and electropop in its production and beats . Throughout the album , the use of Auto @-@ Tune and vocoders are prominent . The album 's title track , " Cannibal " , makes use of synth and dance driven backings while Kesha sings about maneater tendencies and makes a reference to serial @-@ killer , Jeffrey Dahmer . Present throughout the song are snippets of Kesha yodeling . " Blow " shows a darker side of Kesha with lyrics like : " We get what we want / We do what you don 't . " The song is more dominantly an electro infused track that uses a synth beat backing . Vocally the song uses snippets of Kesha 's yodeling , combined with heavy use of auto @-@ tune . " Sleazy " changes pace from Kesha 's normally persistent " talk @-@ singing " vocal style , to a more rap driven style . She raps over a thundering bass line and ticking beat backing , while the song speaks of wealthy men hitting on Kesha , trying to buy her attention . The song has been cited for drawing influence from multiple songs including ; Gwen Stefani 's " Hollaback Girl " for its " swagga " , Jennifer Lopez 's " Love Don 't Cost a Thing " for its " attitude " , as well as combining " a touch of Lil Wayne 's " Milli " . 
 " C U Next Tuesday " is a dance @-@ pop song that talks about " lost and unrequited love " " The Harold Song " has been cited as the album 's power ballad that features a more stripped down vocal style portraying a vulnerable side of Kesha . " Grow a Pear " is an electropop song with lyrical content that has been compared to Katy Perry 's , " Ur So Gay " . The album 's lead single , " We R Who We R " , is a dance @-@ pop song that uses a synth @-@ heavy backing . The song incorporates elements of trance pop and electropop it both its production , and beats . Lyrically , the song has been described as a pride anthem , with Kesha noting the songs lyrics were to be taken as " a celebration of any sort of quirks or eccentricities . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Cannibal received generally positive reviews from music critics upon its release . The album holds a score 73 out of 100 based on 11 critical reviews , according to the music review aggregator Metacritic . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic was positive in the review of Cannibal . Erlewine was somewhat critical of the choice to release the EP noting that the only real reason for the release was that Animal had been " squeezed dry of hits " . Although critical of the re @-@ release , Thomas ' consensus of the album was positive , writing : " aided by the tight focus of an eight @-@ track EP , Cannibal ’ s brevity trumping the scattershot Animal -- but what makes them stick is Kesha , a pop star lacking pop star looks and a pop star voice . She ’ s all ravenous id , spitting at strangers and backstabbing friends , humiliating hotties , and laughing at the wreckage in her wake . She is who she is and she offers no apologies . " Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly commented on Kesha 's writing of the album noting that her " herky @-@ jerky rhymes still sound like they came from the bathroom wall of a reform @-@ school kindergarten " , not citing that as a negative but instead noting that the album had a " sulfurous end @-@ of @-@ days whiff about it " . Greenblatt ended her review of the album giving it a rating of " B + " and called " Sleazy " and " Blow " the standout tracks on the album . Will Hermes from Rolling Stone noted that Kesha 's main pop competitor was Lady Gaga writing , " This EP proves Kesha would kick Gaga 's ass in a freestyle battle " praising her rhyming and production by Dr. Luke calling Kesha the " snap queen of clubland . " Chad Grischow from IGN met the album with a positive review , giving the album a score of 6 @.@ 5 out of 10 . Grischow was critical of the production of the album and overuse of Auto @-@ Tune writing that there was " so much overdubbing and autotune used that most of the songs may as well be sung by a spunky robot " . He also noted that when Kesha 's vocals were stripped down she could actually sing , highlighting the ballads " The Harold Song " and " C U Next Tuesday " in the album 's review . Grischow ended his review writing , " Cannibal proves to be too mired in mindless lyrics and excessive vocal effects to have any lasting appeal . " 
 Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine met the album with a mixed to positive review . Cinquemani wrote that Kesha was able to pull off authentic and unapologetic lyrics with ease , noting that this was something her pop @-@ peers could not do . A complaint on the review was that the album was too similar to Animal , noting that she failed to " branch out in any significant way " and the overuse of processed vocals . Cinquemani ended the review praising the " Animal ( Billboard Remix ) " for its " promise of something deeper , something beyond Dr. Luke 's latest recycled formula . " Gary Graff from Billboard wrote " Kesha sinks her teeth into some fresh flavors on Cannibal , which will certainly enhance her ' Animal ' attraction . " Spin magazine 's Barry Walters reviewed Cannibal with a mixed outcome giving the album five out of a possible ten stars . Walters criticized the album as a whole stating that it was full of contradictions , noting that on " We R Who We R " " she sends out pride vibes to bullied gays , " while on " Grow a Pear " , " she <unk> a potential boyfriend . " The production of the album was stated as a positive , praising Dr. Luke for his consistent club @-@ pop hooks and ability to " render the hypocrisy [ of the album ] nearly irrelevant . " Mesfin Fekadu from The Boston Globe was mixed in his review of the album . Fekadu criticized the album 's lyrical depth and use of auto @-@ tune writing that the album was " filled with vapid lyrics and battles any T @-@ Pain album for most use of the auto @-@ tune . " Kesha 's mother , Pebe , was also targeted in the review criticizing her for helping write the album 's title track , " Cannibal " which was called " disturbing " and " sad " . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 In the United States , Cannibal debuted on the Billboard 200 chart on the week of December 2 , 2010 at number fifteen . The EP sold 74 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release . The following week the album dropped twenty @-@ six positions to position forty @-@ one selling an additional 26 @,@ 200 copies . After being present on the chart for two months the album surpassed 250 @,@ 000 copies in sales . In June 2011 , the album received gold certification by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 units . In Canada , Cannibal entered and peaked at number fourteen on the Canadian Albums Chart . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " We R Who We R " was released as the EP 's lead single on October 22 , 2010 . Kesha said she was affected by the recent teenage suicides , in particular the suicide of Tyler Clementi , a young man who committed suicide after being outed as gay by his roommate . She elaborated , " I was really affected [ .. ] having been subject to very public hatred [ myself ] . I have absolutely no idea how these kids felt . What I 'm going through is nothing compared to what they had to go through . Just know things do get better and you need to celebrate who you are . " With the release , Kesha stated that she hoped that the song would become an anthem for " weirdos " , and said , " Every weird thing about you is beautiful and makes life interesting . Hopefully the song really captures that emotion of celebrating who you are . " " We R Who We R " debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , selling over 280 @,@ 000 digital copies . With this feat , the song became the seventeenth song in the history of the chart to debut at number one . The song also reached number one in Australia , the United Kingdom and number two in Canada , while charting within the top ten in numerous other countries . 
 " Blow " was released as the second single , and impacted U.S. radio on February 8 , 2011 . Critical reception of the song was generally mixed and positive . The song 's hook and opening were generally praised but the song 's chorus was met with mixed reaction , some critics praised the song for its party anthem vibe , while others called it uninspiring . Commercially , " Blow " reached the top ten in the United States and Australia , becoming her sixth straight top ten hit in both countries as a solo artist . The song also reached the top ten in New Zealand , and the top twenty in Canada . 
 = = = Other charted songs = = = 
 " Sleazy " was made available on November 2 , 2010 as part of an iTunes exclusive countdown to the release of Cannibal . In Canada , the song entered the Canadian Hot 100 chart on the issue date entitled November 20 , 2010 at forty @-@ six . In the same week , " Sleazy " entered the Billboard Hot 100 chart at fifty @-@ one . The title track , " Cannibal " , was the next offering and was made available on November 9 , 2010 . In Canada , " Cannibal " entered the Canadian Hot 100 chart on the issue date entitled November 27 , 2010 at sixty @-@ two . In the same week , " Cannibal " entered the Billboard Hot 100 chart at seventy @-@ seven . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 To promote the album , Kesha made several performances worldwide . Her first televised appearance was in Australia , where she performed " We R Who We R " for the time on the Australian X Factor on November 14 , 2010 . Following the performance , Kesha performed the song at the American Music Awards on November 21 , 2010 , in the United States . Kesha opened the performance with " Take it Off " before transitioning into " We R Who We R " . " Blow " and " Animal " were performed live on May 22 , 2011 , at the Billboard Music Awards . The performance opened with " Animal " as Kesha sang suspended over the stage in a structure shaped like a diamond . Midway through the performance she dropped backwards into her crowd of background dancers then transitioned into " Blow " . The performance featured glitter cannons and the dancers wore orange unicorn heads . 
 The album received further promotion from her first headlining world concert tour , entitled the Get Sleazy Tour , which began on February 15 , 2011 , in Portland , Oregon . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ^ A signifies a remix producer 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Cannibal , Dynamite Cop Music / Where Da Kasz at BMI . 
 = = Charts and certification = = 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Harry Murray = 
 Henry William " Harry " Murray , VC , CMG , DSO & Bar , DCM ( 1 December 1880 – 7 January 1966 ) was an Australian recipient of the Victoria Cross , the highest decoration for gallantry " in the face of the enemy " that can be awarded to members of the British and Commonwealth armed forces . Decorated several times throughout his service in the First World War , Murray rose from the rank of private to lieutenant colonel in three and a half years . He is often described as the most highly decorated infantry soldier of the British Empire during the First World War . 
 Born in Tasmania , Murray worked as a farmer , courier and timber cutter before enlisting in September 1914 . Assigned to a machine gun crew , he served during the Gallipoli Campaign , where he was awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal before the withdrawal from the peninsula . He was later transferred along with the rest of his battalion to France for service on the Western Front , where he was awarded the Distinguished Service Order during the Battle of the Somme . In February 1917 , Murray commanded a company during the battalion 's attack on the German position of Stormy Trench . During the engagement , the company was able to capture the position and repulse three fierce counter @-@ attacks , with Murray often leading bayonet and bombing charges himself . For his actions during the battle , Murray was awarded the Victoria Cross . Soon after his Victoria Cross action , he was promoted to major and earned a Bar to his Distinguished Service Order during an attack on the Hindenburg Line near Bullecourt . Promoted to lieutenant colonel in early 1918 , he assumed command of the 4th Machine Gun Battalion , where he would remain until the end of the war . 
 Returning to Australia in 1920 , Murray eventually settled in Queensland , where he purchased the grazing farm that would be his home for the remainder of his life . Re @-@ enlisting for service in the Second World War , he was appointed as commanding officer of the 26th ( Militia ) Battalion . Taking his discharge in 1944 , Murray returned to his farm and died in 1966 at the age of 85 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Murray was born at <unk> , near Evandale , Tasmania , on 1 December 1880 , the eighth of nine children of Edward Kennedy Murray , a farmer , and his wife Clarissa , née Littler . Descended from convicts on his father 's side , Murray was baptised on 23 November 1885 , and attended Evandale State School . When he was fourteen years of age , his parents withdrew him from school to work on the family farm . However , his mother continued his education , placing emphasis on English . The family later moved to Northcote , near St. Leonards , where Edward Murray died in 1904 . Harry Murray joined the Launceston Volunteer Artillery Corps in 1902 , serving until 1908 , when he migrated to Western Australia where his two older brothers had previously settled . 
 Murray initially worked on his brother 's wheat farm , before becoming a courier for a mining company at <unk> , transporting gold and mail by either bicycle or on horseback . He travelled the same track on a fortnightly basis , gaining a reputation for being a crack shot with a .32 carbine that he carried . At the time of his enlistment in 1914 , Murray was working near Manjimup , in the south west of Western Australia , employing timber cutters for the railways . 
 = = First World War = = 
 = = = Enlistment and training = = = 
 Murray enlisted in the Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) in Perth on 30 September 1914 . He declined the offer of a commission , and was posted as a private to A Company of the newly formed 16th Battalion , 4th Brigade . Appointed to one of the unit 's two machine gun crews , he was sent to Blackboy Hill Camp for training , where he became the gun No. 2 , whose job it was to feed ammunition belts through the gun ; Percy Black was No. 1 and the pair soon became firm friends . 
 On 21 November , the battalion entrained for Fremantle , boarding troopships headed for Melbourne ; it was there that the four battalions combined to form the 4th Brigade under the command of Colonel John Monash . After completing their basic training in Victoria , the brigade left Port Melbourne aboard Troopship A40 , Ceramic on 26 December . After a brief stop at Albany , Western Australia , they arrived in Egypt in early February 1915 . The brigade marched from Alexandria to Heliopolis as part of the New Zealand and Australian Division of Major General Alexander Godley . 
 = = = Gallipoli = = = 
 The Allied commanders planned to defeat Turkey and force a supply route through to Russia via the Bosporus and the Black Sea . As such they planned a land invasion on the Gallipoli Peninsula . On the afternoon of 25 April 1915 , Murray 's 16th Battalion landed at Ari Burnu , Gallipoli . Setting their machine gun on Pope 's Hill , Black and Murray fired their gun throughout the afternoon and into the night . The following day , the battalion 's two machine gun crews sniped at the Turkish soldiers on Russell 's Top , and Murray and his gunner continued fighting during the counterattack on 26 – 27 April , despite being wounded . 
 Promoted to lance corporal on 12 May , Murray was evacuated to Egypt eighteen days later , due to a gunshot wound to his right knee . His knee soon stiffened and he was posted to a hospital ship set to return to Australia . Murray , however , had other ideas and made his way to the wharf at Alexandria where he boarded a transport bound for Gallipoli . Arriving at the peninsula on 3 July , both Murray and Black received the Distinguished Conduct Medal for their actions between 9 – 31 May , during which time they tirelessly manned their machine gun , " inflict [ ing ] serious losses upon the enemy " . Murray was again wounded on 8 August when the machine gun section of the 4th Brigade covered the withdrawal after the attack on Hill 971 . On 13 August , he was promoted to sergeant , commissioned as a second lieutenant and transferred to the 13th Battalion . 
 Murray was again evacuated to Egypt on 26 September due to dysentery . After nearly six weeks in the 2nd Australian General Hospital at <unk> , he rejoined the 13th Battalion at Gallipoli on 7 December , before leaving for the last time in the Allied evacuation later that month . 
 Returning to Egypt , the AIF expanded and was reorganised ; the 13th Battalion was split and provided experienced soldiers for the 45th Battalion , while the 4th Brigade was combined with the 12th and 13th Brigades to form the 4th Australian Division . Murray was promoted to lieutenant on 20 January 1916 , and then to captain on 1 March . 
 = = = Western Front : June 1916 to April 1917 = = = 
 On 1 June 1916 , the 13th Battalion embarked at Alexandria for Marseilles , France , before being deployed to the Western Front . In mid @-@ June , the battalion moved into trenches at Bois Grenier near Armentières , and on 13 July they relocated to Bailleul , in time for the Battle of the Somme . 
 On 29 August , Murray commanded A Company — which consisted of fewer than one hundred men — in a successful attack that captured Mouquet Farm under heavy fire . His men repelled four German counterattacks before he ordered them to withdraw . He remained in command until the next morning , when he fainted from loss of blood from two wounds he had sustained during the action . Murray was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for his service during the action , an event that was published in a supplement of the London Gazette dated 14 November 1916 . He was later evacuated to England aboard the hospital ship Asturias , and admitted to the 4th General Hospital , London , where he was to share a ward with Albert Jacka and Percy Black , who were recovering from wounds received at <unk> and Mouquet Farm respectively . After nearly six weeks of recuperation , he returned to the 13th Battalion in France on 19 October . 
 Following a period of patrols and trench raids , the 13th was relieved by the 5th Battalion on 6 December , and marched back to Ribemont , where Murray was granted leave to England . On 4 January 1917 , he was Mentioned in Despatches . The battalion returned to the front in February , relieving the 15th Battalion at Gueudecourt . On 4 February , the battalion 's commanding officer received the order to attack Stormy Trench ; it was during this action that Murray would earn his Victoria Cross . 
 On the night of 4 – 5 February 1917 , the 13th Battalion — with Murray commanding A Company — attacked the German position at Stormy Trench . Preceded by a heavy artillery barrage , A Company seized the right of the position after overcoming stiff resistance , consolidating their gains by setting up a makeshift barricade . The Germans counterattacked , prompting Murray to send an SOS signal to the artillery officer , calling for more support . Although repulsed , the Germans counterattacked twice more . On the third attack , Murray organised a twenty @-@ man grenade bombing party and led them in a charge against their attackers , pushing them back to their original start line . On another occasion when the company lost some ground , Murray rallied his men and retook it . Between midnight and 03 : 00 , the company maintained spasmodic bombing , repelling further assaults with the aid of artillery support . By 20 : 00 on 5 February , the 16th Battalion relieved Murray 's company , which had only 48 survivors from the 140 who had begun the attack . 
 The full citation for Murray 's Victoria Cross appeared in a supplement to the London Gazette on 10 March 1917 , reading : 
 War Office , 10th March , 1917 
 His Majesty the KING has been graciously pleased to approve of the award of the Victoria Cross to the undermentioned Officer and Non @-@ Commissioned Officer : – 
 Capt. Henry William Murray , D.S.O. , <unk> <unk> . 
 For most conspicuous bravery when in command of the right flank company in attack . He led his company to the assault with great skill and courage , and the position was quickly captured . Fighting of a very severe nature followed , and three heavy counter @-@ attacks were beaten back , these successes being due to Captain Murray 's wonderful work . 
 Throughout the night his company suffered heavy casualties through concentrated enemy shell fire , and on one occasion gave ground for a short way . This gallant officer rallied his command and saved the situation by sheer valour . 
 He made his presence felt throughout the line , encouraging his men , heading bombing parties , leading bayonet charges , and carrying wounded to places of safety . 
 His magnificent example inspired his men throughout . 
 In April 1917 , the battalion relocated to Bullecourt in preparation for an attack on the Hindenburg Line . On the night of 11 April , seven battalions of the 4th Australian Division assembled for the advance , which was launched at 04 : 30 . Murray 's company seized a section of German trench , but were quickly isolated . By 07 : 00 , ammunition was running low and casualties were high . Murray sent for artillery support , but conflicting messages meant that it was not provided , so the Australians were forced to withdraw . During the action , the 4th Division lost 2 @,@ 339 of the 3 @,@ 000 men that it had committed , with 1170 captured as prisoners of war . Among the dead was Percy Black , who had been killed while trying to find a gap in the barbwire surrounding the German trenches . Murray was awarded a Bar to his Distinguished Service Order for his efforts during the battle , and was promoted to temporary major . He was later informed by General Birdwood that had the attack at Bullecourt been successful , he would have instead been awarded a Bar to his Victoria Cross . 
 = = = Western Front : April 1917 to repatriation , March 1920 = = = 
 After Bullecourt , the 4th Brigade withdrew to Ribemont , where reinforcements brought it up to strength . During this period , Murray oversaw musketry training before being granted convalescent leave to London in May . While in the capital , he was decorated with his Victoria Cross and Distinguished Service Order by King George V in Hyde Park on 2 June 1917 . Promoted major on 12 July , he rejoined his battalion later in the month , and during the 4th Brigade 's advance to the Hindenburg Line over subsequent months , was involved in actions at Messines , <unk> Wood , Menin Road , Polygon Wood , Broodseinde , Poelcappelle and Passchendaele . For his actions at Passchendaele , Murray garnered a mention in Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig 's dispatch of 7 November 1917 . 
 Following Passchendaele , the 4th Brigade spent three months in reserve . Murray became second in command of the 13th Battalion , frequently assuming temporary command of the unit while the commanding officer was absent . Granted leave to Paris from 12 January to 2 February 1918 , he was promoted to temporary lieutenant colonel on 15 March and assumed command of the 4th Machine Gun Battalion . Commanding the unit during the German Spring Offensive , Murray 's rank was confirmed on 24 May . 
 On 25 June , Murray attended a conference at 4th Divisional Headquarters to discuss a proposed attack on Hamel . Having submitted a plan for the use of machine guns in the battle , five extra sections were attached to Murray 's battalion . The battle commenced on 4 July , and over the period of two days , the 4th Machine Gun Battalion fired 373 @,@ 000 rounds of small arms ammunition , suffering 33 casualties . On 3 August , he attended another divisional conference regarding the planned attack near Amiens scheduled for 8 August . Lieutenant General John Monash 's instructions called for several of the 4th Machine Gun Battalion 's companies to be moved forward by Mark V tanks , accompanying different units during the battle . At the end of the three @-@ day action , German General Erich Ludendorff described the Allied success as " the black day of the German Army in this war " . 
 From 23 September to 3 October 1918 , Murray was seconded to the Headquarters of the United States II Corps as a liaison officer with the 27th Division . The 27th Division , along with the 30th Division , had been attached to Lieutenant General Monash 's Corps for the assault on the Bellicourt Tunnel of the Hindenburg Line . During his service with the Americans , Murray was recommended for the United States ' Distinguished Service Medal by the commander of the 27th , Major General John F. O 'Ryan . The Distinguished Service Medal is the highest non @-@ valorous military and civilian decoration of the United States military , and in General O 'Ryan 's recommendation he stated that Murray 's " ... knowledge , activity and fearlessness ... assisted materially in the control of the attacking forces " . 
 The battle alongside the Americans was Murray 's last of the war , as the Australians were placed in reserve in early October before the signing of the Armistice on 11 November 1918 . On 3 January 1919 , Murray was awarded the French Croix de guerre for his service as commander of the 4th Machine Gun Battalion from 23 March to 24 April and 2 – 7 August 1918 . On 30 May 1919 , he was awarded a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George for his command of the 4th Machine Gun Battalion , the recommendation of which particularly citing his success during attacks on the Hindenburg Line . Murray 's final honour came on 11 July 1919 , when he was Mentioned in Despatches for the fourth time , having received his third mention on 31 December 1918 . 
 From June to September 1919 , Murray — along with fellow Australian Victoria Cross recipient William Donovan Joynt — led parties of AIF members on a tour of the farming districts of Britain and Denmark to study agricultural methods under the education schemes . After touring through France and Belgium , he left England on 19 November 1919 aboard the Orient Line transport , Ormonde , along with Generals Birdwood and Monash . A month later , a large crowd celebrated the arrival of the two generals and Murray at Victoria Quay in Fremantle . Attempting to evade further fanfare , Murray quietly travelled to northern Tasmania and then to his sister 's house in Launceston . He was discharged from the AIF on 9 March 1920 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After his discharge , Murray moved north , buying a grazing property in south @-@ eastern Queensland . On 13 October 1921 , he married estate agent Constance Sophia Cameron at <unk> . The marriage was an unhappy one , and the pair separated in 1925 when Murray went to New Zealand . On 11 November 1927 , with Constance Murray as petitioner , a decree nisi with costs against Henry Murray was granted on the grounds of desertion . Nine days later , at the Auckland Registrar 's Office , Murray married Ellen Perdon " Nell " Cameron ; Constance 's niece . The couple returned to Queensland , and in April 1928 Murray bought <unk> station , Richmond , a 74 @,@ 000 acre ( 29 @,@ 947 ha ) grazing property , where he lived for the rest of his life . 
 The Murrays had two children . Their son Douglas , born in 1930 , was named after Lieutenant Colonel Douglas Grey Marks , the commanding officer of the 13th Battalion from 1917 to 1918 . In 1934 , Nell gave birth to their second child , a girl named Clementine . Between 1929 and 1939 , Murray wrote fifteen articles for Reveille , the magazine of the New South Wales branch of the Returned Sailors and Soldiers Imperial League of Australia ( RSL ) , detailing several of his experiences during the First World War , and praising several of his comrades . 
 On 21 July 1939 , with the Second World War looming , Murray volunteered for military service and was appointed as commanding officer of the 26th ( Militia ) Battalion , 11th Brigade , based in Townsville ; he was mobilised for full @-@ time service on 21 October 1941 . Murray 's second @-@ in @-@ command of the unit during this time was Major Edgar Towner , who had additionally been decorated with the Victoria Cross in 1918 . The 26th became an Australian Imperial Force unit in 1942 , and in August Murray was removed from his post by General Sir Thomas Blamey , Commander in Chief Australian Military Forces , on the grounds of his advancing age . He was instead appointed to command the 23rd Queensland Regiment , Volunteer Defence Corps , which he led until his retirement from active duty on 8 February 1944 . 
 With the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950 , wool prices soared and Murray earned a large income from wool sales , allowing him to regularly travel across Australia . Taking a trip to Brisbane in 1954 , he met Queen Elizabeth II during her Royal Tour of Australia . Despite rarely attending Anzac Day services or functions for Victoria Cross recipients , Murray and his wife travelled to London in 1956 to commemorate the centenary of the Victoria Cross . Following the ceremonies , the Murrays spent five weeks on a motor tour of England and Scotland , before visiting Switzerland and France . However , Murray refused to revisit the battlefields . 
 On 6 January 1966 , Nell was driving the family car with Harry as a passenger ; they were going to the south coast of Queensland for a holiday . A tyre blew out and the car rolled on the Leichhardt Highway near Condamine . Murray was taken to Miles District Hospital with broken ribs . He had suffered heart trouble for some time , and the shock of the accident is believed to have caused his death the following day . Murray was interred at Mount Thompson Crematorium with full military honours after a funeral service at St. Andrew 's Presbyterian Church , Brisbane . 
 On 24 February 2006 in Evandale , Tasmania , Governor @-@ General Michael Jeffery unveiled a statue of Murray by sculptor Peter Corlett . This tribute was facilitated by a small group of volunteers who raised A $ 85 @,@ 000 in two years . The Henry Murray ward at Hollywood Private Hospital has been named in his honour . 
 = St Mary 's Church , Acton = 
 St Mary 's Church is an active Anglican parish church located in Monk 's Lane , Acton , a village to the west of Nantwich , Cheshire , England . Since 1967 it has been designated a Grade I listed building . A church has been present on this site since before the time of the Domesday Survey . The tower is the oldest in Cheshire , although it had to be largely rebuilt after it fell in 1757 . One unusual feature of the interior of the church is that the old stone seating around its sides has been retained . In the south aisle are some ancient carved stones dating back to the Norman era . The architectural historian Alec Clifton @-@ Taylor includes the church in his list of ' best ' English parish churches . In the churchyard is a tall 17th @-@ century sundial . The church is an active Anglican parish church in the diocese of Chester , the archdeaconry of Macclesfield and the deanery of Nantwich . Its benefice is united with those of St David , <unk> , St Oswald , <unk> , and St Bartholomew , Church Minshull . 
 = = History = = 
 The presence of a church with two priests on the site is recorded in the Domesday Book . The church and its lands were given by the second Baron of Wich <unk> to Combermere Abbey early in the 12th century . Following the dissolution of the monasteries , the advowson was granted to Richard Wilbraham and it then passed to the Lords Tollemache . 
 The tower was built about 1180 , which makes it the oldest tower in Cheshire . When it was built it was over 100 feet ( 30 m ) high but its top collapsed in a storm in March 1757 damaging the roof of the church and the clerestory . It was rebuilt but only to a height of 80 feet ( 24 m ) . The north aisle was built in the last quarter of the 14th century in Decorated style and the south aisle and chancel were built early in the 15th century . The internal fittings of the church were damaged in the Civil War . There were restorations in the 17th and 18th centuries . In 1897 – 98 the Lancaster architects Austin and Paley carried out a further restoration . This included <unk> and <unk> the church , removing the plaster ceilings , rebuilding the north wall of the north aisle and the clerestory , installing heating apparatus , and adding a new pulpit , porches , and doors . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The church is built in red sandstone with a lead roof . The tower is within the body of the church with arches leading into the nave and the side aisles . These arches , together with the thin lancet windows and the flat buttresses , date from the 13th century . The authors of the Buildings of England series state that this early date is rare for towers in Cheshire . The upper parts of the tower , built after the collapse of 1757 , are by William Baker in early Gothic Revival style . The nave has four bays , with north and south aisles of six bays . The chancel has three bays with a vestry on its north side . The piers of the arcade date from the 13th century while the capitals are from the 19th @-@ century restoration . The authors of the Buildings of England series state that the body of the church is mostly Perpendicular in style . At the east end of the north aisle is the Mainwaring chapel , which was originally a Lady Chapel ; at the north side of the tower is the Dorfold chantry . Old stone seating remains around the sides of the church , which is unusual . 
 = = = Fittings and furniture = = = 
 In the Mainwaring chapel is the canopied wall tomb of Sir William Mainwaring of <unk> and <unk> who died in 1399 . His effigy is in alabaster , it is recumbent and dressed in plate armour as a knight . His head rests on a helm bearing an ass 's head and around his neck is a gold collar of <unk> . The rest of the monument is in red sandstone . At the east end of the south aisle is a marble tomb commemorating Sir Richard Wilbraham ( 1578 – 1643 ) , his son Sir Thomas Wilbraham ( 1601 – 1660 ) and their wives . It includes the recumbent effigies in marble of Sir Thomas and his wife , Elizabeth . At the east end of the south aisle is an ancient piscina which is in good condition . In the chancel is another piscina and a sedilia , both of which are damaged . The screen in the Dorfold chapel is dated 1685 while that dividing the chancel from the nave is from a later date . The communion rail is also dated 1685 . The brass chandelier dates from the 18th century . Stained glass in the east window and in windows of the south aisle is by Kempe and is dated between 1885 and 1888 . The reredos includes the Ten Commandments to the north of the altar and the Lord 's Prayer and the Creed to the south . The carved oak <unk> a stone base and the oak eagle lectern date from the 19th century . 
 The font has a Norman bowl with lead lining set on a 19th @-@ century base . It consists of a round bowl carved with figures , and simple ornamentation . For many years it had been in the garden of nearby Dorfold Hall before being reinstated in the church . At the east end of the south aisle are carved stones , some in sandstone , others in limestone . The style of the limestone stones suggests a date at the end of the 11th century and that of the sandstone stones around 1100 . They are considered to be among the most significant pieces of Romanesque sculpture in the country . There is a ring of six bells . Five of these were cast by Rudhall of Gloucester in the 18th century and the sixth by John Taylor & Co in 1893 . The parish registers begin in 1653 and the churchwardens ' accounts in 1755 . The two @-@ manual organ was made by Alex Young and Sons of Manchester in 1897 , and was renovated in 1939 , and again in 1997 . 
 = = External features = = 
 In the churchyard is a tall sandstone sundial over 12 feet ( 4 m ) high . It was originally a medieval cross which was made into a sundial in the late 17th century . The remaining parts of the cross consist of an octagonal shaft on three ashlar steps . On top of this has been added a square moulded cap surmounted by a ball finial . On each face of the head is a dial , and the head is surmounted by a globe on a short stem . It is a scheduled monument and is designated as a Grade II listed building . Also listed Grade II is the red sandstone churchyard boundary wall which is probably an 1897 restoration of an earlier wall . The churchyard contains the war graves of five Commonwealth service personnel ; two of World War I and three of World War II . 
 A. N. Hornby ( 1847 – 1925 ) who played for Lancashire and England is buried here . He was the first man ( of only two ) to captain his country in both cricket and rugby , but is also remembered as the England cricket captain whose side lost the Test match which gave rise to the Ashes , at home against the Australians in 1882 . Additionally , he played football for Blackburn Rovers . He was immortalised in one of the best known of all cricket poems , At Lord 's by Francis Thompson which contains the following lines : 
 It is little I repair to the matches of the Southron folk , 
 Though my own red roses there may blow ; 
 It is little I repair to the matches of the Southron folk , 
 Though the red roses crest the caps , I know . 
 For the field is full of shades as I near a shadowy coast , 
 And a ghostly batsman plays to the bowling of a ghost , 
 And I look through my tears on a soundless @-@ clapping host 
 As the run stealers flicker to and fro , 
 To and fro : 
 O my Hornby and my Barlow long ago ! 
 = = Current activities = = 
 St Mary 's continues to be active as an Anglican parish church . It is the most active member of the Cross Country Group of Parish Churches which comprises St Mary 's , St Bartholomew 's , Church Minshull , St Oswald 's , <unk> and St David 's , <unk> . The churches share a vicar and three licensed readers . The vicar is Revd Peter <unk> . St Mary 's holds two or three services each Sunday and a service of Holy Communion each Wednesday . The group of churches is also involved with community activities including Praise & Play for pre @-@ school children and their carers , the Holy Disorder youth club and the 1st <unk> Guides and Brownies . The church is open for visits and private prayers on Wednesday mornings . 
 = Michelle Obama = 
 Michelle LaVaughn Robinson Obama ( born January 17 , 1964 ) is an American lawyer and writer . She is married to the 44th and current President of the United States , Barack Obama , and is the first African @-@ American First Lady of the United States . Raised on the South Side of Chicago , Illinois , Obama is a graduate of Princeton University and Harvard Law School , and spent the early part of her legal career working at the law firm Sidley Austin , where she met her husband . Subsequently , she worked as the Associate Dean of Student Services at the University of Chicago and the Vice President for Community and External Affairs of the University of Chicago Medical Center . Married in 1992 , the couple have two daughters together . 
 Throughout 2007 and 2008 , Obama campaigned for her husband 's presidential bid , delivering a keynote address at the 2008 Democratic National Convention , and speaking at the 2012 Democratic National Convention . She also spoke during the 2016 Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia , where she delivered a speech in support of Hillary Clinton . 
 As First Lady , she has become a fashion icon , a role model for women , and an advocate for poverty awareness , nutrition , physical activity , and healthy eating . 
 = = Family and education = = 
 = = = Early life and ancestry = = = 
 Michelle LaVaughn Robinson was born on January 17 , 1964 , in DeYoung , Illinois , to Fraser Robinson III , a city water plant employee and Democratic precinct captain , and Marian Shields Robinson , a secretary at Spiegel 's catalog store . Her mother was a full @-@ time homemaker until Michelle entered high school . 
 The Robinson and Shields families trace their roots to pre @-@ Civil War African Americans in the American South . On her father 's side , she is descended from the Gullah people of South Carolina 's Low Country region . Her paternal great @-@ great grandfather , Jim Robinson , was a slave on <unk> Plantation in South Carolina , the state where some of her paternal family still reside . Her grandfather Fraser Robinson , Jr. built his own house in South Carolina . He and his wife LaVaughn ( née Johnson ) returned to the Low Country after retirement . 
 Among her maternal ancestors was her great @-@ great @-@ great @-@ grandmother , Melvinia Shields , a slave on Henry Walls Shields ' 200 @-@ acre farm in Clayton County , Georgia . Melvinia 's first son , Dolphus T. Shields , was biracial and born into slavery about 1860 . Based on DNA and other evidence , in 2012 researchers said his father was likely 20 @-@ year @-@ old Charles Marion Shields , son of her master . Melvinia did not talk to relatives about Dolphus ' father . Dolphus Shields moved to Birmingham , Alabama after the Civil War , and some of his children migrated to Cleveland , Ohio and Chicago . 
 All four of her grandparents had multiracial ancestors , reflecting the complex history of the U.S. , but her extended family said that people did not talk about the era of slavery when they were growing up . Her distant ancestry includes Irish and other European roots . In addition , a paternal first cousin once @-@ removed is the African @-@ American Jewish Rabbi Capers <unk> , son of her grandfather 's sister . 
 Robinson grew up in a two @-@ story bungalow on Euclid Avenue in Chicago 's South Shore community area . Her parents rented a small apartment on the second floor from her great @-@ aunt , who lived downstairs . She was raised in what she describes as a " conventional " home , with " the mother at home , the father works , you have dinner around the table . " Her elementary school was down the street . They enjoyed playing games such as Monopoly , reading , and frequently saw extended family on both sides . She played piano , learning from her great @-@ aunt who was a piano teacher . The Robinsons attended services at nearby South Shore Methodist Church . They used to vacation in a rustic cabin in White Cloud , Michigan . She and her 21 @-@ month older brother , Craig , skipped the second grade . 
 Her father suffered from multiple sclerosis which had a profound emotional effect on her as she was growing up . She was determined to stay out of trouble and be a good student , which was what her father wanted for her . By sixth grade , Michelle joined a gifted class at Bryn Mawr Elementary School ( later renamed Bouchet Academy ) . She attended Whitney Young High School , Chicago 's first magnet high school , established as a selective enrollment school , where she was a classmate of Jesse Jackson 's daughter Santita . The round @-@ trip commute from the Robinsons ' South Side home to the Near West Side , where the school was located , took three hours . She recalled being fearful of how others would perceive her , but disregarded any negativity around her and used it " to fuel me , to keep me going . " She recalled experiencing gender discrimination growing up , saying , for example , that rather than asking her for her opinion on a given subject , people commonly tended to ask what her older brother thought . She was on the honor roll for four years , took advanced placement classes , was a member of the National Honor Society , and served as student council treasurer . She graduated in 1981 as the salutatorian of her class . 
 = = = Education and early career = = = 
 She was inspired to follow her brother to Princeton University , where he graduated in 1983 , after which he went on to become a basketball coach at Oregon State University and Brown University . She recalls that some of her teachers in high school tried to dissuade her from applying , that she had been told she was " setting my sights too high " . She believed that her brother 's alumni status may have helped her during the admission process , but she was resolved to demonstrate her own worthiness . She acknowledges that she was overwhelmed when first arriving in first year , attributing this to the fact that neither of her parents had graduated from college , and that she had never spent time on a college campus . The mother of a white roommate reportedly unsuccessfully tried to get her daughter moved because of Michelle 's race . She recalls her time at Princeton being the first time she was made more aware of her ethnicity and that despite the willingness of her classmates and teachers to want to understand her , she still felt " like a visitor on campus . " " I remember being shocked , " she says , " by college students who drove BMWs . I didn 't even know parents who drove BMWs . " 
 While at Princeton , she got involved with the Third World Center ( now known as the Carl A. Fields Center ) , an academic and cultural group that supported minority students , running their day care center , which also included after school tutoring . She challenged the teaching methodology for French because she felt that it should be more conversational . As part of her requirements for graduation , she wrote a thesis titled Princeton @-@ Educated Blacks and the Black Community . She researched her thesis by sending a questionnaire to African American graduates , requesting they specify when and how comfortable they were with their race prior to their enrollment at Princeton and how they felt about it when they were a student and since then . Of the 400 she sent her survey to , only a small number , fewer than 90 , responded and her findings did not support her hope that the black alumni would still identity with the African American community , even though they had attended an elite university with all of the advantages that accrues to its graduates . She majored in sociology and minored in African American studies , graduating cum laude with a Bachelor of Arts in 1985 . 
 Robinson went on to earn her Juris Doctor ( J.D. ) degree from Harvard Law School in 1988 . By the time she applied for Harvard Law , biographer Bond wrote , her confidence had grown ; " This time around , there was no doubt in her mind that she had earned her place " . Her faculty mentor at Harvard Law was Charles Ogletree , who has said that she had answered the question that had plagued her throughout Princeton by the time she arrived at Harvard Law , of whether she would remain the product of her parents or keep the identity she had acquired at Princeton , believing that she concluded she could be " both brilliant and black . " At Harvard she participated in demonstrations advocating the hiring of professors who were members of minorities and worked for the Harvard Legal Aid Bureau , assisting low @-@ income tenants with housing cases . She is the third First Lady with a postgraduate degree , after her two immediate predecessors , Hillary Rodham Clinton and Laura Bush . She would later say her education gave her opportunities beyond what she had ever imagined . In July 2008 , she accepted the invitation to become an honorary member of the 100 @-@ year @-@ old black sorority Alpha Kappa Alpha , which had no active undergraduate chapter at Princeton when she attended . 
 = = = Family life = = = 
 Obama 's father Fraser C. Robinson III died from complications from his illness in March 1991 . She would later say that although he was the " hole in my heart " and " loss in my scar " , the memory of her father has motivated her each day since . Her friend Suzanne <unk> died from cancer around this time as well , Obama later telling Katie Couric that the loss made her think of her contributions toward society and how well she was influencing the world from her law firm . This was seen as a turning point for Michelle . 
 Michelle met Barack Obama when they were among the few African Americans at their law firm , Sidley Austin ( she has sometimes said only two , although others have pointed out there were others in different departments ) , and she was assigned to mentor him while he was a summer associate . Their relationship started with a business lunch and then a community organization meeting where he first impressed her . Before meeting Obama , Michelle had previously told her mother that she would focus solely on her career . The couple 's first date was to the Spike Lee movie Do the Right Thing . Barack Obama opined that he and Michelle had an " opposites attract " scenario in their interest for each other initially since Michelle had stability through her two @-@ parent home while he was " adventurous " . They married in October 1992 , and have two daughters , Malia Ann ( born 1998 ) and Natasha ( known as Sasha , born 2001 ) . After his election to the U.S. Senate , the Obama family continued to live on Chicago 's South Side , choosing to remain there rather than moving to Washington , D.C. Throughout her husband 's 2008 campaign for US President , she made a " commitment to be away overnight only once a week – to campaign only two days a week and be home by the end of the second day " for their two daughters . 
 She once requested that her then @-@ fiancé meet her prospective boss , Valerie Jarrett , when considering her first career move ; Jarrett is now one of her husband 's closest advisors . The marital relationship has had its ebbs and flows ; the combination of an evolving family life and beginning political career led to many arguments about balancing work and family . Barack Obama wrote in his second book , The Audacity of Hope : Thoughts on Reclaiming the American Dream , that " Tired and stressed , we had little time for conversation , much less romance . " However , despite their family obligations and careers , they continued to attempt to schedule date nights while they lived in Chicago . 
 The Obamas ' daughters attended the University of Chicago Laboratory Schools , a private school . As a member of the school 's board , Michelle fought to maintain diversity in the school when other board members connected with the University of Chicago tried to reserve more slots for children of the university faculty . This resulted in a plan to expand the school . Malia and Sasha now attend Sidwell Friends School in Washington , after also considering Georgetown Day School . Michelle stated in an interview on The Ellen DeGeneres Show that they do not intend to have any more children . The Obamas have received advice from past first ladies Laura Bush , Rosalynn Carter and Hillary Rodham Clinton about raising children in the White House . Marian Robinson , Michelle 's mother , has moved into the White House to assist with child care . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Obama is a Protestant Christian . She was raised Methodist and joined the Trinity United Church of Christ , where she and Barack Obama married , performed by Rev. Jeremiah Wright . On May 31 , 2008 , Barack and Michelle Obama announced that they had withdrawn their membership in Trinity United Church of Christ stating that " Our relations with Trinity have been strained by the divisive statements of Reverend Wright , which sharply conflict with our own views . " 
 The Obama family has attended several different Protestant churches since moving to Washington D.C. in 2009 , including Shiloh Baptist Church and St. John 's Episcopal Church . At the 49th African Methodist Episcopal Church 's general conference , Michelle Obama encouraged the attendees to advocate for political awareness , saying , " To anyone who says that church is no place to talk about these issues , you tell them there is no place better – no place better , because ultimately , these are not just political issues – they are moral issues , they 're issues that have to do with human dignity and human potential , and the future we want for our kids and our grandkids . " 
 = = Career = = 
 Following law school , she was an associate at the Chicago office of the law firm Sidley & Austin , where she first met her future husband . At the firm , she worked on marketing and intellectual property . She continues to hold her law license , but as she no longer needs it for her work , it has been on a voluntary inactive status since 1993 . 
 In 1991 , she held public sector positions in the Chicago city government as an Assistant to the Mayor , and as Assistant Commissioner of Planning and Development . In 1993 , she became Executive Director for the Chicago office of Public Allies , a non @-@ profit organization encouraging young people to work on social issues in nonprofit groups and government agencies . She worked there nearly four years and set fundraising records for the organization that still stood 12 years after she left . 
 In 1996 , Obama served as the Associate Dean of Student Services at the University of Chicago , where she developed the University 's Community Service Center . In 2002 , she began working for the University of Chicago Hospitals , first as executive director for community affairs and , beginning May 2005 , as Vice President for Community and External Affairs . She continued to hold the University of Chicago Hospitals position during the primary campaign , but cut back to part @-@ time in order to spend time with her daughters as well as work for her husband 's election ; she subsequently took a leave of absence from her job . According to the couple 's 2006 income tax return , her salary was $ 273 @,@ 618 from the University of Chicago Hospitals , while her husband had a salary of $ 157 @,@ 082 from the United States Senate . The Obamas ' total income , however , was $ 991 @,@ 296 , which included $ 51 @,@ 200 she earned as a member of the board of directors of <unk> Foods , and investments and royalties from his books . Obama reflected that she had never been happier in her life prior to working " to build Public Allies " . 
 Obama served as a salaried board member of <unk> Foods , Inc . ( NYSE : <unk> ) , a major Wal @-@ Mart supplier with which she cut ties immediately after her husband made comments critical of Wal @-@ Mart at an AFL @-@ CIO forum in Trenton , New Jersey , on May 14 , 2007 . She also served on the board of directors of the Chicago Council on Global Affairs . 
 = = Early campaigns = = 
 During an interview in 1996 , Michelle Obama acknowledged that there was a " strong possibility " her husband would begin a political career , but said she was " wary " of the process due to it meaning that their lives would become " an open book " while she was private . 
 Although she has campaigned on her husband 's behalf since early in his political career by handshaking and fund @-@ raising , she did not relish the activity at first . When she campaigned during her husband 's 2000 run for United States House of Representatives , her boss at the University of Chicago asked if there was any single thing about campaigning that she enjoyed ; after some thought , she replied that visiting so many living rooms had given her some new decorating ideas . She reportedly turned down requests by the campaign for her to attend fundraisers . Obama was against her husband 's run for the congressional seat and after his defeat would have preferred her husband tending to the financial needs of the family in what she deemed a more practical way . 
 At first , Obama had reservations about her husband 's presidential campaign , due to fears about a possible negative effect on their daughters . She says that she negotiated an agreement in which her husband was to give up smoking in exchange for her support of his decision to run . About her role in her husband 's presidential campaign she has said : " My job is not a senior adviser . " During the campaign , she has discussed race and education by using motherhood as a framework . 
 In May 2007 , three months after her husband declared his presidential candidacy , Obama reduced her professional responsibilities by 80 percent to support his presidential campaign . Early in the campaign , she had limited involvement in which she traveled to political events only two days a week and rarely traveled overnight ; by early February 2008 her participation had increased significantly , attending thirty @-@ three events in eight days . She made several campaign appearances with Oprah Winfrey . She wrote her own stump speeches for her husband 's presidential campaign and generally spoke without notes . 
 Throughout the campaign , some media often labeled Michelle Obama as an " Angry Black Woman , " and some web sites attempted to propagate this image , prompting her to respond : " Barack and I have been in the public eye for many years now , and we 've developed a thick skin along the way . When you 're out campaigning , there will always be criticism . I just take it in stride , and at the end of the day , I know that it comes with the territory . " By the time of the 2008 Democratic National Convention in August , media outlets observed that her presence on the campaign trail had grown softer than at the start of the race , focusing on soliciting concerns and empathizing with the audience rather than throwing down challenges to them , and giving interviews to shows like The View and publications like Ladies ' Home Journal rather than appearing on news programs . The change was even reflected in her fashion choices , wearing more informal clothes in place of her previous designer pieces . The View appearance was partly intended to help soften her public image , and it was widely covered in the press . 
 The presidential campaign was Obama 's first exposure to the national political scene ; even before the field of Democratic candidates was narrowed to two , she was considered the least famous of the candidates ' spouses . Early in the campaign , she told anecdotes about the Obama family life ; however , as the press began to emphasize her sarcasm , she toned it down . The New York Times op @-@ ed columnist Maureen Dowd wrote : 
 I wince a bit when Michelle Obama chides her husband as a mere mortal – a comic routine that rests on the presumption that we see him as a god ... But it may not be smart politics to mock him in a way that turns him from the glam JFK into the mundane Gerald Ford , toasting his own English muffin . If all Senator Obama is peddling is the Camelot mystique , why debunk this mystique ? 
 On the first night of the 2008 Democratic National Convention , Craig Robinson introduced his younger sister . She delivered her speech , during which she sought to portray herself and her family as the embodiment of the American Dream . Obama said both she and her husband believed " that you work hard for what you want in life , that your word is your bond , and you do what you say you 're going to do , that you treat people with dignity and respect , even if you don 't know them , and even if you don 't agree with them . " She also emphasized loving her country , in response to criticism for her previous statements about feeling proud of her country for the first time , where the original statement was seen as a gaffe . That keynote address was largely well received and drew mostly positive reviews . A Rasmussen Reports poll found that her favorability among Americans reached 55 % . 
 On an October 6 , 2008 broadcast , Larry King asked Obama if the American electorate was past the Bradley effect . She stated that her husband 's achievement of the nomination was a fairly strong indicator that it was . The same night she also was interviewed by Jon Stewart on The Daily Show where she deflected criticism of her husband and his campaign . On Fox News ' America 's Pulse , E. D. Hill referred to the fist bump shared by the Obamas on the night that he clinched the Democratic presidential nomination as a " terrorist fist jab " ; Hill was taken off air and the show itself was cancelled . 
 = = First Lady of the United States = = 
 During her early months as First Lady , Obama visited homeless shelters and soup kitchens . She also sent representatives to schools and advocated public service . 
 Obama advocated for her husband 's policy priorities by promoting bills that support it . She hosted a White House reception for women 's rights advocates in celebration of the enactment of the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009 Pay equity law . She supported the economic stimulus bill in visits to the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and United States Department of Education . Some observers looked favorably upon her legislative activities , while others said that she should be less involved in politics . According to her representatives , she intends to visit all United States Cabinet @-@ level agencies in order to get acquainted with Washington . 
 On June 5 , 2009 , the White House announced that Michelle Obama was replacing her current chief of staff , Jackie Norris , with Susan Sher , a longtime friend and adviser . Norris became a senior adviser to the Corporation for National and Community Service . Another key aide , Spelman College alumna Kristen Jarvis , served from 2008 until 2015 , when she left to become chief of staff to the Ford Foundation president Darren Walker . 
 In 2009 Michelle Obama was named Barbara Walters ' Most Fascinating Person of the year . 
 Some initiatives of First Lady Michelle Obama include advocating on behalf of military families , helping working women balance career and family , encouraging national service , and promoting the arts and arts education . Obama has made supporting military families and spouses a personal mission and has been increasingly bonding with military families . According to her aides , stories of the sacrifice these families make move her to tears . In April 2012 , Obama and husband were awarded the Jerald Washington Memorial Founders ' Award by the National Coalition for Homeless Veterans ( <unk> ) .The award is the highest honor given to homeless veteran advocates . Obama was again honored with the award in May 2015 , accepting with Jill Biden . 
 In November 2013 , a Politico article by Michelle Cottle accusing Obama of being a " feminist nightmare " for not using her position and education to advocate for women 's issues was sharply criticized across the political spectrum . Cottle quoted Linda Hirshman saying of Obama 's trendy styles , promotion of gardening and healthy eating , and support of military families that " She essentially became the English lady of the manor , Tory Party , circa 1830s . " A prominent critic of Cottle was MSNBC host Melissa Harris @-@ Perry , who rhetorically asked " Are you serious ? " Supporters of Obama note that the First Lady has been one of the only people in the administration to address obesity , through promoting good eating habits , which is one of the leading US public health crises . 
 In May 2014 , Obama joined the campaign to bring back school girls who had been kidnapped in Nigeria . The First Lady tweeted a picture of herself holding a poster with the # <unk> campaign hashtag . 
 Over the course of the Obama presidency , particularly during the second term , Michelle Obama was subject to speculation over whether she would run for the presidency herself , similarly to predecessor Hillary Clinton . A potential Michelle Obama candidacy was supported by both Samuel L. Jackson and James Clyburn . On April 6 , 2009 , CNN did a poll on whether she should run for the presidency in 2020 , 83 % of responders being opposed to the idea . A May 2015 Rasmussen poll found Obama had 22 % of support to Clinton 's 56 % of winning the Democratic nomination , higher than that of potential candidates Elizabeth Warren , Martin O 'Malley and Bernie Sanders . Alternatively , another poll from that month found 71 % of Americans believed that Obama should not run for the presidency , only 14 % approving . On January 14 , 2016 , during a town @-@ hall meeting , President Obama was asked if the First Lady could be talked into running . He responded , " There are three things that are certain in life : death , taxes , and Michelle is not running for president . That I can tell you . " On March 16 , 2016 , while speaking in Austin , Texas , Obama denied that she would ever run for the office , citing a desire to " impact as many people as possible in an unbiased way . " 
 = = = Let 's Move ! = = = 
 Obama 's predecessors Hillary Clinton and Laura Bush supported the organic movement by instructing the White House kitchens to buy organic food , and Obama extended their efforts toward healthy eating by planting the White House Kitchen Garden , an organic garden , the first White House vegetable garden since Eleanor Roosevelt served as First Lady , and installing bee hives , on the South Lawn of the White House . The garden supplied organic produce and honey to the First Family and for state dinners and other official gatherings . 
 In January 2010 , Obama undertook her first lead role in an administration @-@ wide initiative , which she named " Let 's Move ! , " to make progress in reversing the 21st century trend of childhood obesity . On February 9 , 2010 , the First Lady announced Let 's Move ! and President Barack Obama created the Task Force on Childhood Obesity to review all current programs and create a national plan towards change . Michelle Obama stated that her goal was to make this effort her legacy : " I want to leave something behind that we can say , ' Because of this time that this person spent here , this thing has changed . ' And my hope is that that 's going to be in the area of childhood obesity . " Her 2012 book American Grown : The Story of the White House Kitchen Garden and Gardens Across America is based on her experiences with the garden and promotes healthy eating . Her call for action on healthy eating has been echoed by the United States Department of Defense , which has been facing an ever expanding problem of recruit obesity . 
 Several Republicans have critiqued or lampooned Obama 's initiative . In October 2014 , senator Rand Paul linked to Michelle Obama 's Twitter account when announcing on the website that he was going to Dunkin ' Donuts . In January 2016 , Republican Governor of New Jersey and presidential candidate Chris Christie condemned the First Lady 's involvement with healthy eating while on the campaign trail in Iowa , arguing that she was using the government to exercise her views on eating . Obama had previously cited Christie as an example of an adult who struggled with obesity , a demographic she sought to diminish by targeting children since Let 's Move ! was " working with kids when they 're young , so that they don 't have these direct challenges when they get older . " In February , Senator Ted Cruz indicated that Obama 's health policies would end under his administration , promising that french fries would return to cafeterias if his wife was First Lady . 
 = = = LGBT rights = = = 
 In the 2008 US presidential election , Obama boasted , to gay Democrat groups , of her husband 's record on LGBT rights : his support of the Illinois Human Rights Act , the Illinois gender violence act , the Employment Non @-@ Discrimination Act , repealing Don 't Ask Don 't Tell , and full repeal of the Defense of Marriage Act , civil unions ; along with hate crimes protection for sexual orientation and gender identity and renewed effort to fight HIV and AIDS . They have both been opponents of constitutional amendments banning same @-@ sex marriage in the federal , California , and Florida constitutions . She said that the US Supreme Court delivered justice in the Lawrence v. Texas case and drew a connection between the struggles for gay rights and civil rights by stating " We are all only here because of those who marched and bled and died , from Selma to Stonewall , in the pursuit of a more perfect union . " 
 After the repeal of Don 't Ask Don 't Tell on September 20 , 2011 , Obama included openly gay service members in her national military families initiative . On May 9 , 2012 , Barack and Michelle Obama came out publicly in favor of same @-@ sex marriage . Prior to this , Michelle Obama had never stated her position on same @-@ sex marriage publicly . Senior White House officials said that Michelle Obama and Senior Adviser Valerie Jarrett had been the two most consistent advocates for same @-@ sex marriage in Barack Obama 's life . Michelle went on to say that " This is an important issue for millions of Americans , and for Barack and me , it really comes down to the values of fairness and equality we want to pass down to our girls . These are basic values that kids learn at a very young age and that we encourage them to apply in all areas of their lives . And in a country where we teach our children that everyone is equal under the law , discriminating against same @-@ sex couples just isn 't right . It 's as simple as that . " At the 2012 DNC Michelle said , " Barack knows the American Dream because he 's lived it ... and he wants everyone in this country to have that same opportunity , no matter who we are , or where we 're from , or what we look like , or who we love . " 
 = = = 2012 presidential election = = = 
 Obama campaigned for her husband 's re @-@ election in 2012 . Beginning in 2011 , Obama became more politically active than she had been since the 2008 election , though avoided discussions about the re @-@ election bid . By the time of the election cycle , she had developed a more open public image , some viewing her as the most popular member of the Obama administration , as her poll numbers having never dropped below 60 % since entering the White House and an Obama senior campaign official even dubbed her " the most popular political figure in America " . The positive assessment was reasoned to have contributed to her active role in the re @-@ election campaign , but it was noted that the challenge for the Obama campaign was using her without tarnishing her popularity . Obama was viewed as a polarizing figure , having both " sharp enmity and deep loyalty " from Americans , but she was also seen as having improved her image since the time of the last election when her husband initially ran for the presidency . It was commented by Isabel Wilkinson of The Daily Beast that her style changed over the course of the campaign to sensitive and economical . 
 Obama expressed confidence in her husband 's debating skills prior to the first debate of the election cycle , though his performance would later be criticized as appearing detached and for looking down when addressing Romney , leading to a consensus that the latter won the debate . After her speech at the 2012 Democratic National Convention , Obama was found through a CBS News / New York Times poll conducted in September to have a 61 % favorably rating with registered voters , the highest favorability she had sustained since April 2009 . Obama aimed to humanize her husband with relating stories about him , attempting to appeal to female voters in swing states . It was commented by Paul Harris of The Guardian that the same tactic was being used by Ann Romney , wife of 2012 Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney . Polls in October showed their husbands tied at 47 % for the female vote . However , Michelle Obama 's favorability ratings remained higher than Ann Romney 's at 69 % to 52 % . Despite Obama 's higher poll numbers , comparisons between Obama and Romney were consistently made by the media until the election , regardless of Michelle Cottle of Newsweek writing , " nobody votes for first lady . " 
 = = = Domestic travels = = = 
 In May 2009 , Obama delivered the commencement speech at a graduating ceremony at UC Merced in Merced County , California , the address being praised afterward by students who found her relatable . Kevin Fagan of the San Francisco Chronicle wrote that there was chemistry between Obama and the students . 
 In August 2013 , Obama attended the 50th anniversary ceremony for the March on Washington at the Lincoln Memorial . Positive attention was brought to Obama 's attire , a black sleeveless dress with red flowers , designed by Tracy Reese . Reese reacted by releasing a public statement that he was honored the First Lady " would choose to wear one of our designs during the celebration of such a deeply significant historical moment " . 
 In March 2015 , Obama traveled to Selma , Alabama , with her family to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the Selma to Montgomery marches . Obama publicly stated her daughter Sasha would have been exposed to the same violence as that of protesters during the Selma marches had she been alive . After President Obama 's remarks there , the Obamas joined original marchers in crossing the Edmund Pettus Bridge . 
 In July 2015 , Obama journeyed to Coachella Valley while coming to Los Angeles for that year 's Special Olympics World Games . 
 In October 2015 , Obama was joined by Jill Biden and Prince Harry in visiting a military base in Fort Belvoir , Virginia , an attempt on the prince 's part to raise awareness to programs supporting harmed service members . In December 2015 , Obama traveled with her husband to San Bernardino , California , to meet with families of the victims of a terrorist attack that occurred two weeks earlier . 
 = = = Foreign trips = = = 
 On April 1 , 2009 , Obama met with Queen Elizabeth II in Buckingham Palace , Obama embracing her before attending an event with world leaders . Obama praised her , though the hug generated controversy for being out of protocol when greeting Elizabeth . 
 In April 2010 , Obama traveled to Mexico , her first solo visit to a nation . In Mexico , Obama spoke to students , encouraging them to take responsibility for their futures . Referring to the underprivileged children , Obama argued that " potential can be found in some of the most unlikely places " , citing herself and her husband as examples . 
 Obama traveled to Africa for the second official trip in June 2011 , touring Johannesburg , Cape Town and Botswana and meeting with <unk> Machel . Obama was also involved with community events in the foreign countries . It was commented by White House staff that her trip to Africa would advance the foreign policy of her husband . 
 In March 2014 , Obama visited China along with her two daughters Malia and Sasha , and her mother Marian Robinson . She met with Peng <unk> , the wife of Chinese President Xi Jinping , visited historic and cultural sites , as well as a university and two high schools . Deputy National Security Adviser Ben Rhodes said that the visit and intent in Obama journeying there was to symbolize " the relationship between the United States and China is not just between leaders , it 's a relationship between peoples " . 
 In January 2015 , Obama traveled to Saudi Arabia alongside her husband , following the death of King Abdullah . She received criticism for not covering her head in a nation where women are forbidden from publicly not doing so , though Obama was defended for being a foreigner and thus not having to submit to Saudi Arabia 's customs , even being praised in some corners . Obama was neither greeted nor acknowledged by King Salman during the encounter . 
 In June 2015 , Obama undertook a weeklong trip to London and three Italian cities . In London , she spoke with students about international education for adolescent girls and met with both British Prime Minister David Cameron and Prince Harry . She was joined by her two daughters and mother . In November , she spent a week in Qatar , her first official visit to the Middle East . She continued advancing her initiative for international education for women by speaking at the 2015 World Innovation Summit for Education for the " Let Girls Learn " initiative in Doha , Qatar and touring a school in Amman , Jordan , where she met with female students . During the Qatar trip , Obama had intended to visit Jordan as well , but the trip was canceled due to weather conditions . In Jordan , Obama had intended to visit an Amman school , which had been constructed with assistance from U.S. funds . 
 In March 2016 , Obama accompanied her husband and children to Cuba in a trip that was seen by the administration as having the possibility of positively impacting relations between the country and America . Later that month , the First Couple and their daughters traveled to Argentina , meeting with Argentine President Mauricio Macri . 
 = = = Midterm elections = = = 
 Obama campaigned for Democratic candidates in the 2010 midterm elections , making her debut on the campaign trail in Milwaukee , Wisconsin . By the time she began campaigning , Obama 's approval rating was 20 percentage points higher than her husband . Though Obama indicated in January 2010 that a consensus had not been made about whether she would campaign , speculation of her involvement came from her large approval rating as well as reports that she had been invited to speak at events with Democrats such as Barbara Boxer , Mary Jo Kilroy and Joe Sestak . She toured seven states in two weeks within October 2010 . Though viewed as essential by the White House , aides reported that she would not become deeply involved with political discussions nor engage Republicans in public disputes . After the elections took place , only six of the thirteen Democratic candidates Obama had campaigned for won . The Los Angeles Times concluded that while Obama was indeed more popular than her husband , her " election scorecard proved no better than his , particularly in her home state . " 
 Obama was a participant in the 2014 midterm elections , held at a time where her popularity superseded her husband 's to such an extent that it was theorized that she would receive a much larger <unk> of support in campaigning . Reporting her travel to Denver , Colorado , David Lightman wrote that while Democrats did not want President Obama to campaign for them , " the first lady is very popular " . In May 2014 , Obama was found to have a 61 % favorable approval rating from a CNN poll , her husband coming in at 43 % . In a video released in July , as part of an effort to encourage voter turnout , she called on voters to be " hungry as you were back in 2008 and 2012 " . Obama appeared at a fundraiser in Georgia in September for Democratic senate candidate Michelle Nunn . Obama 's approach to campaigning in Georgia strayed from discussing current events and instead broadly stressed the importance of registering to vote and turning out during the elections . Obama 's infrequent appearances came from her dislike of being away from her children and Washington politics as well as her distaste for the opposition by Republicans to her husband 's agenda and her view that Democrats in the U.S. Senate had not sufficiently supporters her initiatives to end childhood obesity . Obama raised her profile in October , touring three states in four days . Obama called the elections her husband 's " last campaign " . 
 = = = Public image and style = = = 
 With the ascent of her husband as a prominent national politician , Obama has become a part of popular culture . In May 2006 , Essence listed her among " 25 of the World 's Most Inspiring Women . " In July 2007 , Vanity Fair listed her among " 10 of the World 's Best Dressed People . " She was an honorary guest at Oprah Winfrey 's Legends Ball as a " young 'un " paying tribute to the ' Legends , ' who helped pave the way for African American women . In September 2007 , <unk> magazine listed her 58th of ' The Harvard 100 ' ; a list of the prior year 's most influential Harvard alumni . Her husband was ranked fourth . In July 2008 , she made a repeat appearance on the Vanity Fair international best dressed list . She also appeared on the 2008 People list of best @-@ dressed women and was praised by the magazine for her " classic and confident " look . 
 At the time of her husband 's election , some sources anticipated that as a high @-@ profile African @-@ American woman in a stable marriage Obama would be a positive role model who would influence the view the world has of African @-@ Americans . Her fashion choices were part of the 2009 Fashion week , but Obama 's influence in the field did not have the impact on the paucity of African @-@ American models who participate , that some thought it might . 
 Obama 's public support grew in her early months as First Lady , as she was accepted as a role model . On her first trip abroad in April 2009 , she toured a cancer ward with Sarah Brown , wife of British Prime Minister Gordon Brown . Newsweek described her first trip abroad as an exhibition of her so @-@ called " star power " and MSN described it as a display of sartorial elegance . Questions were raised by some in the American and British media regarding protocol when the Obamas met Queen Elizabeth II and Michelle reciprocated a touch on her back by the Queen during a reception , purportedly against traditional royal etiquette . Palace sources denied that any breach in etiquette had occurred . 
 Obama has been compared to Jacqueline Kennedy due to her sense of style , and also to Barbara Bush for her discipline and decorum . Obama 's style has been described as " fashion populist . " In 2010 , she wore clothes , many high end , from more than 50 design companies with less expensive pieces from J.Crew and Target , and the same year a study found that her patronage was worth an average of $ 14 million to a company . She became a fashion trendsetter , in particular favoring sleeveless dresses , including her first @-@ term official portrait in a dress by Michael Kors , and her ball gowns designed by Jason Wu for both <unk> . 
 Obama appeared on the cover and in a photo spread in the March 2009 issue of Vogue . Every First Lady since Lou Hoover ( except Bess Truman ) has been in Vogue , but only Hillary Clinton had previously appeared on the cover . In August 2011 , she became the first woman ever to appear on the cover of Better Homes and Gardens magazine , and the first person in 48 years . During the 2013 Academy Awards , she became the first First Lady to announce the winner of an Oscar ( Best Picture which went to Argo ) . 
 The media have been criticized for focusing more on the First Lady 's fashion sense than her serious contributions . She said after the 2008 election that she would like to focus attention as First Lady on issues of concern to military and working families . In 2008 U.S. News & World Report blogger , PBS host and Scripps Howard columnist Bonnie <unk> argued that Obama 's own publicists seemed to be feeding the emphasis on style over substance , and has stated that Obama is <unk> herself by overemphasizing style . 
 = Archaeamphora = 
 Archaeamphora longicervia is an extinct species of flowering plant and the only member of the genus Archaeamphora . Fossil material assigned to this taxon originates from the Yixian Formation of northeastern China , dated to the Early Cretaceous ( around 145 to 101 million years ago ) . 
 The species was originally described as a pitcher plant with close affinities to extant members of the family Sarraceniaceae . This would make it the earliest known carnivorous plant and the only known fossil record of pitcher plants ( with the possible exception of some <unk> of uncertain <unk> affinity ) . Archaeamphora is also one of the three oldest known genera of angiosperms ( flowering plants ) . Li ( 2005 ) wrote that " the existence of a so highly derived Angiosperm in the Early Cretaceous suggests that Angiosperms should have originated much earlier , maybe back to 280 mya as the molecular clock studies suggested " . 
 Subsequent authors have questioned the identification of Archaeamphora as a pitcher plant . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The generic name Archaeamphora is derived from the Greek <unk> , <unk> ( " ancient " ; combining form in Latin : <unk> ) , and <unk> , <unk> ( " pitcher " ) . The specific epithet longicervia is derived from the Latin longus ( " long " ) and <unk> ( " with a neck " ) , in reference to the characteristic constriction in the pitcher @-@ like structures of this species . 
 = = Fossil material = = 
 All known fossil material of A. longicervia originates from the <unk> Formation in <unk> , western Liaoning , China . These Early Cretaceous beds constitute the lower part of the Yixian Formation , which is dated at 124 @.@ 6 million years old . Nine specimens of A. longicervia have been found , including holotype <unk> and paratype <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 Archaeamphora longicervia was a herbaceous plant growing to around 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) in height . The stem , at least 21 mm ( 0 @.@ 83 in ) long by 1 @.@ 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 047 in ) wide , bore distinctive vertical ridges and grooves . The pitcher @-@ like structures were <unk> in form and 30 to 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 6 in ) long . Mature pitchers and underdeveloped pitchers or <unk> @-@ like leaves were arranged spirally around the stem . Pitchers consisted of a tubular base , expanded middle section , constriction around the mouth , and a vertical , spoon @-@ shaped lid . A single wing ran down the <unk> side of each pitcher . Three to five parallel major veins were present on the pitchers , along with a few intercostal veins and numerous small <unk> . 
 Two unusual bag @-@ like structures were present on each pitcher , one on either side of the central wing . Similar but semi @-@ circular structures were found on the margin of the lid . These structures exhibited strong yellow @-@ green intrinsic fluorescence when exposed to visible light with a wavelength of 500 nm ( blue @-@ green ) . 
 Tiny glands , approximately 4 µm in diameter , were found on the inner surface of the pitchers and partially embedded in the grooves along the veins . These also showed very strong golden @-@ yellow fluorescence . 
 A single seed was found intimately associated with the fossil material of A. longicervia and is presumed to belong to the same species . It is winged and reticulate @-@ tuberculate in morphology , closely resembling the seeds of Sarraceniaceae taxa . The seed is oval @-@ shaped , covered with black @-@ brown warts , and measures 0 @.@ 9 by 1 @.@ 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 035 by 0 @.@ 049 in ) . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The fossil material of A. longicervia was subjected to chemical analysis for oleanane , considered a key marker differentiating angiosperms from gymnosperms . <unk> was detected in these specimens , suggesting that they belong to the angiosperms . 
 = = = Pitcher plant interpretation = = = 
 According to Li ( 2005 ) , several morphological features of A. longicervia indicate a close relationship to Sarraceniaceae : both taxa exhibit one or two pitcher wings , a smooth peristome , and pitchers that extend vertically from the top of a short petiole . 
 Li ( 2005 ) suggests that A. longicervia is morphologically similar to modern <unk> purpurea . It shares with this species the spiral arrangement of its pitchers and <unk> @-@ like tubular leaves with parallel major veins . Archaeamphora longicervia also shows a resemblance to species of the genus Heliamphora in having pitchers with a long neck and upright lid . Of particular note is the similarity between the thick semi @-@ circular structures on the lid of A. longicervia and the large nectar @-@ secreting " bubble " present on the upper posterior portion of Heliamphora <unk> pitchers . 
 Li ( 2005 ) mentions the discovery of another type of " pitcher plant " from the same formation . This variety differs from the type material of A. longicervia in having pitchers that lack any constriction before the mouth , instead gradually expanding from the petiole into a hollow trumpet @-@ like shape . He suggests that it " should be a different species " from A. longicervia . An intermediate form with a wider neck is also reported , suggesting that these plants were already a diversified group in the Early Cretaceous . 
 = = = Current understanding = = = 
 <unk> & <unk> ( 2010 ) opined that the pitcher plant interpretation of Archaeamphora is " problematic and the fossil is in need of revision " . 
 In their 2011 book , Sarraceniaceae of South America , McPherson et al. summarised current thinking on Archaeamphora as follows : 
 Serious doubt is emerging that reduces the likelihood that Archaeamphora longicervia belongs in the Sarraceniaceae lineage , or was even a pitcher plant at all . [ ... ] Although Archaeamphora might well be a representative of the earliest flowering plants on Earth [ ... ] it is very unlikely that it represents an ancestor of Sarraceniaceae since it is much too old to be part of the advanced " crown group " of <unk> to which Sarraceniaceae belong . [ ... ] Another contradiction is that except for Archaeamphora , there is no other evidence to suggest that Sarraceniaceae evolved outside the New World , to which all extant members of the family are endemic . 
 Wong et al . ( 2015 ) put forward a new perspective [ 16 ] as follows : 
 Archaeamphora longicervia H. Q. Li was described as an herbaceous , Sarraceniaceae @-@ like pitcher plant from the mid Early Cretaceous Yixian Formation of Liaoning Province , northeastern China . Here , a re @-@ investigation of A. longicervia specimens from the Yixian Formation provides new insights into its identity and the morphology of pitcher plants claimed by Li . We demonstrate that putative pitchers of Archaeamphora are insect @-@ induced leaf galls that consist of three components : ( 1 ) an innermost larval chamber ; ( 2 ) an intermediate zone of nutritive tissue ; and ( 3 ) an outermost wall of sclerenchyma . Archaeamphora is not a carnivorous , Sarraceniaceae @-@ like angiosperm , but represents insect @-@ galled leaves of the previously reported gymnosperm <unk> <unk> G. Sun et al. from the Yixian Formation . 
 = = Habitat = = 
 The area inhabited by A. longicervia is thought to have experienced significant climatic fluctuations during the Early Cretaceous , ranging from arid or semi @-@ arid to more humid conditions . The substrate in the region was mostly composed of lacustrine sediments and volcanic rocks . 
 = 901 New York Avenue = 
 901 New York Avenue NW is a high @-@ rise Postmodern high @-@ rise located in Washington , D.C. , in the United States . The structure was developed by Boston Properties in an effort to help to revitalize the Mount Vernon Square neighborhood , and was completed in 2005 . It is located on a roughly triangular parcel bounded by New York Avenue NW , K Street NW , and 10th Street NW , and is north of the <unk> mixed @-@ use residential , office , and retail project . 
 The triangular area was originally home to Victorian housing but in 1977 , the city used eminent domain to purchase the area southwest of Mount Vernon Square itself , and over the next few years , the homes and businesses on these blocks were razed . In the 1980s , Golub Realty and Willco Construction purchased the site and proposed an 11 @-@ floor office block . They sold it to Peterson Co . , who sold it to Monument Realty in May 1999 . Monument Realty had envisaged building either an office and retail complex , or a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ room hotel . They finally sold it to Boston Properties for $ 43 @.@ 2 million in October 2000 . Boston Properties closed the parking lot on the site in late August 2002 , and began construction of the building the following month . 
 The architectural height of the building is 140 feet ( 43 m ) , although the height of the main roof is just 130 @.@ 86 feet ( 39 @.@ 89 m ) and the height of the top floor is 118 @.@ 36 feet ( 36 @.@ 08 m ) . It has 11 stories , and a four @-@ story underground parking garage . Reports of the building 's interior space vary widely , with 540 @,@ 000 square feet ( 50 @,@ 000 m2 ) the most recently reported by the mainstream media . The facade is of polished granite and precast concrete in two colors . An atrium three stories in height with 36 @-@ foot ( 11 m ) long arched steel trusses forms the lobby . Two very small parks exist on the triangular parcel of land , which are owned by the National Park Service . Acadiana , a 185 @-@ seat upscale restaurant on the ground floor which serves Louisiana @-@ and Cajun @-@ style seafood was cited by Esquire magazine as one of the best new restaurants in the entire United States in 2006 . 
 = = History of the site = = 
 Originally , Victorian @-@ style townhomes occupied the triangular area bounded by K Street NW , New York Avenue NW , and 10th Street NW on Mount Vernon Square . The neighborhood was originally a vibrant business district with sizeable Victorian homes , but the area went into a steep decline in the 1930s . During the 1968 Martin Luther King , Jr. riots , the area around the square suffered rioting , arson , and extensive vandalism . 
 In 1977 , the city used eminent domain to purchase the area southwest of Mount Vernon Square itself . Over the next few years , the homes and businesses on these blocks were razed . One of the last businesses to exist on the 901 New York Avenue NW lot was a Chinese restaurant named Nan King ( which was one of the first restaurants in the city to serve dim sum ) . It stayed in business until 1979 . Although the Washington Convention Center was constructed on the blocks just south of 901 New York Avenue , nothing was built on the triangular block itself . In time , it was turned into a parking lot . 
 Golub Realty and Willco Construction purchased the site from the city in the 1980s . Although the site was zoned for residential use only , in 1988 Golub / Willco proposed building an 11 @-@ story office building on the property . Under a city policy known as " residential linkage , " Golub / Willco would be able to construct their office building if they created or renovated low @-@ income housing elsewhere in the city . By May 1992 , Golub / Willco had agreed to purchase a 27 @-@ unit apartment building in Northwest Washington and to restore 149 homes in Southeast Washington , but the proposed office building never was constructed . 
 Golub / Willco sold the lot to the Peterson Co . , but in May 1999 the Peterson Co. sold the land to Monument Realty . Sources vary as to the amount , with reported prices of $ 14 @.@ 5 million , $ 17 @.@ 75 million , and $ 22 million . Monument Realty proposed two uses for the 51 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 4 @,@ 700 m2 ) lot ; a 530 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 49 @,@ 000 m2 ) office and retail complex , or a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ room hotel to serve visitors at the D.C. convention center . Monument estimated that the hotel would cost $ 206 million . But in order to make it profitable , the cost would need to be reduced to $ 169 million . In 1999 , the government of the District of Columbia created a tax increment district to promote downtown redevelopment and housing . Monument sought $ 57 @.@ 3 million in tax @-@ increment financing but never received approval from the city for the funds . 
 = = Construction = = 
 In late October 2000 , Monument Realty sold the parcel for $ 43 @.@ 2 million to Boston Properties . Although media outlets reported that Boston Properties intended to build a hotel on the site , the company stated that it had never seriously considered the possibility . Rather , they had intended to construct an office building for occupancy by government agencies , law firms , and trade associations . The company announced that construction was scheduled to commence in mid @-@ 2001 , and to be open to tenants by mid @-@ 2003 . The architectural firm of Davis Carter Scott was hired to design the structure . The sale to Boston Properties closed on December 8 , 2000 . Meanwhile , the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) had requested proposals from real estate firms for construction of a new 630 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 59 @,@ 000 m2 ) headquarters . Boston Properties submitted its building for consideration by the SEC shortly after the sale closed . But the SEC ruled out the site in mid @-@ February 2001 . 
 Boston Properties had submitted its building design for SEC consideration even though the site had not yet been zoned for office / retail space . About 4 @,@ 000 square feet ( 370 m2 ) of the 1 @.@ 22 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 49 ha ) site was still zoned for residential housing . In April 2009 , the D.C. Zoning Commission approved a " residential linkage " agreement with Boston Properties . The Zoning Commission did so because Monument Realty had agreed two years earlier to pay into a city @-@ run affordable housing construction fund and spend $ 2 million to build three townhouses in a low @-@ income area — satisfying the " residential linkage " requirement . 
 Despite the zoning victory , Boston Properties decided not to begin construction until it had a lead tenant signed . But six months later , in November 2001 , the law firm of Finnegan , Henderson , <unk> , Garrett & <unk> signed a letter of intent to lease 225 @,@ 000 square feet ( 20 @,@ 900 m2 ) of the building . Boston <unk> announced that it intended to build a 535 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 49 @,@ 700 m2 ) , 11 @-@ story structure to accommodate its tenants . In March 2002 , the company said it would begin construction in September . It also announced that the 27 @,@ 000 square feet ( 2 @,@ 500 m2 ) ground floor would be devoted to retail , and there would be four levels of underground parking . The Finnegan firm 's contact was signed in March 2002 , at which time Boston Properties increased the floor space to 535 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 49 @,@ 700 m2 ) and delayed the expected completion date to late 2004 . 
 Boston Properties closed the parking lot in late August 2002 , and began construction the following month . A month after construction began , the law firm of Shea & Gardner signed a lease at 901 New York Avenue for 75 @,@ 000 square feet ( 7 @,@ 000 m2 ) of space . Boston Properties now said the delivery date for the building was September 2004 . In February 2003 , the law firm of Powell Goldstein Frazer & Murphy signed a lease for 75 @,@ 000 square feet ( 7 @,@ 000 m2 ) of space ( even though the media had previously reported that it had turned down Boston Properties ) . By now the building 's square footage was said to be 538 @,@ 461 square feet ( 50 @,@ 024 @.@ 7 m2 ) on 11 stories . By September 2003 , more than 80 percent of the building had been leased , although the delivery date was again delayed to late 2004 . In May 2004 , the law firm of Piper Rudnick reportedly signed a lease for 200 @,@ 000 square feet ( 19 @,@ 000 m2 ) of space in the building , but the firm later opted for a lease for 230 @,@ 000 square feet ( 21 @,@ 000 m2 ) in a Boston Properties building located at 505 Ninth Street NW . 
 In June 2004 , 901 New York Avenue NW was 75 percent leased , at an average cost of $ 36 per square foot . The delivery date was changed once more to September 2004 . The building , however , was eventually delivered in early 2005 . 
 = = = Possible convention center hotel = = = 
 Even as the building was being erected , it was threatened with demolition . The construction of the Walter E. Washington Convention Center left the city with very few hotels rooms to accommodate the greatly expanded number of visitors expected . A convention center " headquarters hotel " was urgently needed , but controversy raged for several years over where to put the hotel . In mid @-@ 2004 , the Washington Convention and Sports Authority ( WCSA ) commissioned a study of potential sites . In the fall of 2004 , the WCSA study stated that one of three options was to seize 901 New York Avenue NW and build a 1 @,@ 500 @-@ room convention center hotel on the site . 
 In June 2005 , the Council of the District of Columbia voted to put the new convention center " headquarters hotel " west of 9th Street NW between L Street NW and Massachusetts Avenue NW . 
 = = Architecture and design = = 
 901 New York Avenue NW is an 11 @-@ story Class A office building with retail space on the ground ( first ) floor . The architectural height of the building is 140 feet ( 43 m ) , although the height of the main roof is just 130 @.@ 86 feet ( 39 @.@ 89 m ) and the height of the top floor is 118 @.@ 36 feet ( 36 @.@ 08 m ) . Reports of the building 's interior space vary widely , with 540 @,@ 000 square feet ( 50 @,@ 000 m2 ) the most recently reported by the mainstream media . However , Clark Construction Group , the general contractor on the $ 54 million building , says the interior space is 530 @,@ 000 square feet ( 49 @,@ 000 m2 ) . There is 25 @,@ 000 square feet ( 2 @,@ 300 m2 ) of retail space on the ground floor , and four underground parking levels . 
 The facade is of polished granite and precast concrete in two colors . An atrium three stories in height with 36 @-@ foot ( 11 m ) long arched steel trusses forms the lobby . The ceiling of the lobby consists of square decorative hollow beams and acrylic panels . 
 Two very small parks exist on the triangular parcel of land , which are owned by the National Park Service . These open spaces were preserved , and overlaid with precast concrete pavers . Benches were added to permit public seating . 
 Clark Construction was the general contractor . <unk> , <unk> & Associates was the structural engineer , and Girard Engineering handled the mechanical engineering . Clark Interiors , a subsidiary of Clark Construction , and Davis Carter Scott designed the Finnegan offices ( which are contained on floors five through 11 ) . A grand staircase surrounded by a curved glass wall extends to all floors . Among the other building features constructed were a cafeteria , computer repair facility , data center , kitchen , mailroom , meeting rooms , offices , reception area , and videotaping facility . 
 Clark Interiors and SKB Architecture & Design designed the Goodwin Procter law offices , which extend from floors six through nine . The four floors are connected by a grand staircase manufactured by glass , stainless steel , stone , and wood . The wall alongside the staircase consists of decorative panels wrapped in fabric , wood trim , and stainless steel accents . 
 Clark Interiors and Gensler ( a Washington , D.C. , design firm ) also designed the offices of Boston Properties , which moved its D.C. offices into the building . The 27 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 500 m2 ) space contains a reception area , conference rooms , and offices . The reception area floor is clad in stone , with carpeting in sections . 
 The building has not been widely reviewed by critics . Hank Steuver , writing for The Washington Post , said the exterior exhibits " a sweep and charm " . 
 = = Ground floor and restaurant tenant = = 
 One of its ground floor tenants has won several awards . Acadiana is a 185 @-@ seat upscale restaurant which serves Louisiana @-@ and Cajun @-@ style seafood . Esquire magazine called it one of the best new restaurants in the entire United States in 2006 . Frommer 's said of the restaurant , " The restaurant 's high ceilings , ornate chandeliers , and oversize urns fit with the prevailing , over @-@ the @-@ top atmosphere . This is New Orleans right here . New Orleanians say the cuisine 's the real thing , starting with the biscuits , served with a pepper jelly and cream cheese condiment , continuing on to deviled eggs , <unk> oysters , and crabmeat and artichoke gratin starters ; and even further to <unk> , <unk> , red snapper in an <unk> sauce and barbecue shrimp . Service is excellent " . 
 = Oh Blue Christmas = 
 Oh Blue Christmas is an EP by the American band A Fine Frenzy , released in November 2009 in the United States by Virgin Records . It was initially released exclusively through Target just two months following the group 's previous studio album Bomb in a Birdcage . The EP contains cover versions of three popular holiday songs ( " Blue Christmas " , " Winter Wonderland " and " Christmas Time Is Here " from A Charlie Brown Christmas ) as well as three original tracks . According to Alison Sudol , A Fine Frenzy 's leader , the collection of songs was recorded in five days at record producer David Bianco 's studio in Los Angeles . 
 The EP , and " Christmas Time Is Here " in particular , received positive critical reception overall . In the United States , Oh Blue Christmas peaked at number 87 on the Billboard 200 , number three on Billboard 's Top Holiday Albums chart and number 28 on the Top Rock Albums chart . A Fine Frenzy was touring throughout the United States around the time Bomb in a Birdcage and Oh Blue Christmas were released . 
 = = Composition = = 
 With a total length at approximately 22 minutes , Oh Blue Christmas contains renditions of three popular holiday songs : " Blue Christmas " ( Billy Hayes , Jay W. Johnson ) , " Winter Wonderland " ( Felix Bernard , Richard B. Smith ) and Vince Guaraldi and Lee Mendelson 's " Christmas Time Is Here " . The latter originally appeared on the 1965 television special A Charlie Brown Christmas and the soundtrack of the same name . Also included are three original tracks , " Redribbon Foxes " , " Winter White " and " Wish You Well " . Of " Redribbon Foxes " , Sudol stated : 
 ... when I was writing it , I was in a cabin covered with snow and it was very quiet outside . This was all in my head , of course . Down a hill there 's a little town , all lit up , <unk> singing . It 's a little bit sad , although it 's very beautiful . There 's a little fox creeping through the snow , a fox that 's very hard to catch . 
 Sudol stated that " Winter White " was the " first genuinely heart @-@ <unk> song " she had ever written and revealed that " Wish You Well " is about a family member . According to Sudol , the group " expand [ ed ] its sound " by incorporating horns , mandolins and pedal steel guitars . The EP was recorded in five days at record producer David Bianco 's studio ( Dave 's Room ) in Los Angeles . She said of the recording process : 
 We all holed up in ( producer ) David Bianco 's lovely studio , which was built in the ' 70s and hasn 't changed much since then — and though it was the sticky , hot LA summer outside , inside , it was snowy , delightful Christmastime . We ... [ recorded ] everything together around an invisible campfire ; everyone picking up different instruments and playing them on a moment 's notice . There was definitely some holiday magic in the air that week . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Cory Frye of the Albany Democrat @-@ Herald described Sudol 's overall performance " sultry " and called " Redribbon Foxes " a standout original track . In his review for AllMusic , Andrew Leahey wrote that the cover songs are " perfectly pleasant " , but insisted that Sudol 's original songs were the highlight of the collection . Leahey complimented Sudol 's " lilting , whimsical " performance and mentioned that songs like " Redribbon Foxes " have a broader appeal . Brian Moore of RedEye , a daily publication put out by the Chicago Tribune , thought the EP contained both traditional and indie qualities and described Sudol 's voice as " smooth , velvety and well @-@ suited for holiday music " . <unk> 's Alex Rawls thought the EP was more " wintry " than " Christmas @-@ y " , more melancholic than celebratory , and only " Wish You Well " evoked a warm , joyous tone . One reviewer for <unk> Magazine described the collection as " whimsical " . 
 " Christmas Time Is Here " in particular received positive critical reception . Moore and Rawls both considered the song to be the best track on the EP . Rawls called it the collection 's " finest moment " , having " evocative sounds that swell and recede " . Frye described the track as " bone @-@ chilling " ; Brandon Ferguson of OC Weekly called it " nostalgia @-@ inducing " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Track listing adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Oh Blue Christmas managed to chart in the United States , peaking at number 87 on the Billboard 200 , number three on Billboard 's Top Holiday Albums chart and number 28 on the Top Rock Albums chart . 
 = Al Khawalid = 
 Al Khawalid ( Arabic : <unk> the <unk> ; literally " the <unk> " ) , also spelled Al <unk> , is a branch of the House of Khalifa , the ruling family of Bahrain . Al Khawalid is most often used to refer collectively to descendants of Khalid bin Ali Al Khalifa , which they are named after . The term also refers to brothers Khalid bin Ahmed Al Khalifa , the Royal Court Minister and Khalifa bin Ahmed Al Khalifa the Commander in Chief of the Bahrain Defence Force . For the purpose of this article , immediate descendants of Khalid bin Ali Al Khalifa will be referred to as " the Khalids " , the aforementioned two brothers will be referred to as " the Khawalid brothers " and the family branch collectively as " Al Khawalid " . 
 The history of Al Khawalid dates to the 1920s , when the Khalids opposed the British @-@ led administrative reforms and launched a military crackdown on the Shia who supported the reforms . The perpetrators were later put before a court that sentenced them to exile . They gradually returned to Bahrain , where they were kept outside government despite developing personal relations with those in power . They regained some influence since the late 1960s , but remained outside the inner decision @-@ making circle . During this period , senior members of the Khalids were critical of the ruling family , opposed political reforms and held a grudge against the British . 
 The Khawalid brothers rose to power during the reign of King Hamad ( 1999 – present ) , who they had a longstanding personal relationship with and whose mother belonged to their branch . They took up leading positions and controlled important institutions , becoming increasingly influential , with their power reportedly surpassing that of the Prime Minister ( PM ) . The House of Khalifa is reported to have been split into a " moderate " faction led by the Crown Prince ( CP ) and a " hardline " faction led by the Khawalid brothers who share the same " anti @-@ reform " agenda with the PM . In 2006 , a report revealed an alleged secret plan by the Khawalid brothers which aimed to marginalize the Shia majority and identified one of their cousins as leader of the alleged conspiracy . 
 During the Bahraini uprising of 2011 , the Khawalid brothers objected to compromise with the opposition and instead preferred crackdown . After a failed round of negotiations led by the CP , the Khawalid brothers led the crackdown , described as the widest in Bahrain 's modern history . The Commander in Chief of the army , Khalifa bin Ahmed , was given wide authority with the announcement of martial law ; he led a main crackdown operation , presided over military courts and made several interviews with regional and local media . Another Al Khawalid involved in the crackdown was the then @-@ director of the National Security Agency , which was found to be responsible for arbitrary arrests and systematic torture . The crackdown empowered the Khawalid brothers faction further and marginalized the CP , who found himself and allies stripped from their powers . 
 The Khawalid brothers share an anti @-@ West conservative ideology . They believe that the West is conspiring with Iran against Bahrain and other Gulf Cooperation Council countries and often accuse the United States of secretly supporting the Bahraini opposition . They are allied with Saudi Arabia and Sunni Islamist groups , and hold an anti @-@ Shia ideology , viewing them as a fifth column to Iran . Based on their beliefs , the Khawalid brothers have pushed a security approach to deal with the Shia instead of political reforms , and have allegedly used sectarianism as a political tool . 
 = = Nomenclature and genealogy = = 
 Al Khawalid , which literally means " the Khalids " is used mostly to refer to descendants of Khalid bin Ali Al Khalifa ( 1853 – 1925 ) , the half @-@ brother of Isa ibn Ali Al Khalifa ( 1848 – 1932 ) , Bahrain 's ruler between 1869 and 1923 . They are a branch of the House of Khalifa that had ruled Bahrain since they led a coalition of Sunni tribes that invaded the country in 1783 . Khalid , the eponymous forebear of Al Khawalid , was married to four women and had four sons and a daughter that survived him , Ibrahim ( b . 1873 ) , Salman ( b . 1893 ) , Ali ( b . 1900 ) , Najla ( 1901 – 39 ) and Abdulla ( b . 1921 or 1922 ) . He also had two other sons who had died by 1900 , Ahmed ( b . 1874 ) and an older Ali ( b . 1876 ) . 
 The term is also sometimes used to refer specifically to brothers Khalid ( b . 1942 ) and Khalifa ( b . 1946 ) , sons of Ahmed bin Salman bin Khalid ( died 2007 ) . The latter two are usually connected with their maternal cousins , Mohamed and Ahmed ( b . 1966 ) bin Ateyatalla Al Khalifa . The four of them are sometimes collectively known as sons of Al Suwaidi daughters ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) as their mothers , Mariam and <unk> bint Nasser Al Suwaidi , belong to the Al Suwaidi family . The two aforementioned sons of Ateyatalla Al Khalifa along with their half @-@ brothers Salman and Abdulaziz bin Ateyatalla are sometimes included within the Khawalid brothers faction . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Administrative reforms = = = 
 = = = = Context = = = = 
 The history of Al Khawalid dates back to the 1920s when the British were pushing for administrative reforms . The nature of the reforms , sometimes referred to as " reforms of the twenties " was administrative only , leaving out political issues such as legitimacy and public representation . They were mainly focused on reshuffling of public offices and economic resources . By 1921 , the country was divided into two camps . The first supporting the reforms was composed of the elder son of the ruler and the heir apparent , Hamad ibn Isa Al Khalifa ( 1872 – 1942 ) , the British political agent , Major C. K. Daly ( 1920 – 26 ) and the Shia , who at time composed about half of population . The opposing faction was composed of the ruler , Isa ibn Ali Al Khalifa , his younger son Abdulla , the Khalids and tribesmen of Sunni origin . 
 The heavily taxed Shia were desperate to get rid of the tribal regime and together with Major Daly claimed to be victims of corruption , mismanagement as well as " atrocities and oppression " . The opposing faction rejected the reforms on the basis that equity and standardization of law would remove their advantages such as exemption from taxes and sovereignty over estates . A series of pro and anti reform petitions were submitted by the two factions to different British officials including the Foreign Office . However , the situation remained unchanged for two years as the British were hesitating . 
 = = = = Role of the Khalids = = = = 
 Khalid bin Ali , the Al Khawalid ancestor , was the governor of Riffa and ruled over Sitra and <unk> Saleh islands , and his elder son Ibrahim controlled Jabalah Habashi . The Khalids were known for being hard on the Shia . In 1923 , the events took a new turn . Wanting to end the calls for reform , the Khalids and Al <unk> tribe used armed tactics to intimidate reform supporters . The former 's paramilitary forces numbered 100 , about 20 percent of the total Al Khalifa manpower , while the latter had about 400 men . 
 Al <unk> attacked Shia villages of Barbar and A 'ali , while the Khalids attacked Sitra island . The attacks resulted in the killing of 12 villagers , burning of several houses and raping of women . The violence settled after Colonel Knox , the British acting Political Resident arrived in Bahrain in two gunships . Knox forced Isa bin Ali to abdicate in favor of his elder son , Hamad . The Khalids had agreed to reduce taxes on residents of Sitra following the visit . However , as soon as Knox left , taxes were increased again , and Shia residents continued to be subjected to forced labor . The situation prompted some 500 Shia to hold a protest in front of the British Agency demanding a solution to the situation and equal taxation of citizens ( taxes were only imposed on the Shia ) . 
 Writing for the Journal of Arabian Studies , Justin Gengler argues that the reason behind the involvement of the Khalids was probably their father 's ambition to hold a senior position if they succeeded in stopping reforms and placing Abdulla bin Isa as ruler . Gengler added : 
 When in 1869 the British selected Shaikh <unk> bin ʿAlī as the next ruler of Bahrain ... Shaikh Khālid , was obliged to accept the governorship of <unk> ... [ he ] could hope to gain immensely if the final defeat of the reforms were accompanied ... thereby rectifying the historical accident by which he was sidelined from power more than fifty years earlier . 
 The petitions and political crisis continued to the reign of Hamad ( 1923 – 42 ) who — encouraged by the British — began it by setting up a criminal court to try those involved in the violence including his first cousins , the Khalids . The ruler was put in a dilemma between his tribal alignment and public law , and so he exiled his cousins , but paid their expenses . The Khalids , however , held a deep grudge against residents of Sitra who witnessed against them , and in 1924 attacked the island before their exile , killing several Shia men , women and children . The attackers were sentenced to death following major Shia protests and a lengthy second trial , but managed to escape before the sentence was carried out . Their father was confined to Manama . The trials marked the first time in Bahrain 's history that members of the ruling family were convicted . 
 = = = 1924 – 99 = = = 
 Gradually , the Khalids were pardoned and allowed back to Bahrain after the leaders of the Shia community in Sitra were persuaded that the Khalids would not attack their villages again . Ibrahim bin Khalid , the eldest of the Khalids , who was exiled to <unk> ( Qatar ) for 10 years , was convicted in 1929 of being responsible for a failed assassination attempt on the ruler , his first cousin , in 1926 . Instead of getting tried , the ruler appointed Ibrahim at his Sakhir Palace . His brother Salman , originally exiled for 10 years , was allowed back in 1928 , while Abdulla was probably not exiled as he was an infant when the 1923 and 1924 incidents occurred . 
 Still , the Khalids were kept outside the inner decision @-@ making circle until the reign of Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa ( 1999 – present ) . They were also kept away from government positions when Charles Belgrave was the adviser of the ruler ( 1926 – 57 ) as " the colonial administration [ did ] not see fit to re @-@ empower the most militant opponents of [ the administrative reforms ] , " Gengler explained . Other factors that kept the Khalids away from power was their relative lack of efficiency to head the new specialized offices and their self @-@ isolation due to " lingering enmity toward the British as well as to some in the ruling branch of the <unk> <unk> " . They however had personal links with the center of power as two rulers , Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa I ( 1942 – 61 ) and his son Isa bin Salman Al Khalifa ( 1961 – 99 ) had married from them : <unk> bint Ibrahim bin Khalid and <unk> bint Salman bin Ibrahim bin Khalid respectively . The latter is the mother of the current King of Bahrain , Hamad bin Isa . 
 The first return of the Khalids to government was in 1967 , when Abdulla bin Khalid was appointed as Minister of Municipalities and Rural Affairs . In 1973 , he was given the Ministry of Justice and Islamic Affairs which he kept until a cabinet reshuffle in November 2002 . During the 1970s , Abdulla opposed the constitutional reforms that paved the road to the short @-@ lived 1973 – 5 parliament . He was also critical of the ruling family , highlighting their " rampant economic exploitation " and " <unk> [ ion ] [ of Shia farmers ] properties " . Abdulla 's older brother , Salman was also critical of the ruling family . Salman and his sons however did not head top positions during the reign of Isa bin Salman , either due to refusing such positions or to not being offered them as a result of Salman 's criticism of the family . Salman was particularly noted to hate the British and parts of the ruling family . 
 = = Return to power = = 
 Following the sudden death of his father in March 1999 , Hamad bin Isa became the ruler of Bahrain . The new leader 's mother , <unk> belonged to the Al Khawalid branch . During the early years of his reign , Hamad initiated a series of reforms including releasing of political prisoners and allowing exiles to return . However , by 2007 he had retracted from " many of his earlier reforms " . The Khawalid brothers ( Khalid and Khalifa , sons of Ahmed bin Salman bin Khalid ) had strong relations with the king , that date to 1965 . According to The Wall Street Journal ( WSJ ) , Hamad , then 15 years old , was the heir apparent , when Khalid bin Ahmed , then 21 years old was named the vizier ( head ) of Crown Prince 's Court . Abdulhadi Khalaf dismissed this statement as " too fanciful " . In 1968 , Hamad tasked Khalid 's younger brother , Khalifa — who is said to have bicycled with Hamad during college years — with helping build the Bahrain Defence Force . During the 1973 Arab – Israeli War , Khalifa was promoted to the position of Chief @-@ of @-@ Staff of the army . In his 1994 book First Light : Modern Bahrain and Its Heritage , Hamad introduced Khalifa as " my brother and colleague " . 
 It was during Hamad 's reign ( 1999 – present ) that Al Khawalid had regained their influence in the inner decision @-@ making circle . " Shaikh Hamad ... oversaw and ... has continued to oversee their empowerment , " Gengler wrote . They occupied leading positions and led important institutions , including the National Security Agency ( NSA ) , the Judiciary and Central Informatics Organization . Abdulla bin Khalid , the youngest son of Khalid bin Ali , headed the " supreme committee " tasked with drafting the National Action Charter of Bahrain between 1999 and 2000 . In 2002 , he was removed from his position as Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs which he headed since the 1970s and instead placed as Minister of Islamic Affairs and second Deputy Prime Minister . In 2006 , he lost his cabinet positions and headed the Supreme Council for Islamic Affairs . Abdulla is a senior member of House of Khalifa , being one of only three to have the title His Highness . 
 Khalid bin Ahmed became the Royal Court Minister in 1999 . In a 2007 leaked Wikileaks cable , the U.S. ambassador noted that King Hamad " [ did ] little to reign in Shaikh Khalid " and instead allowed him to " call the shots " and " crack down hard on the demonstrators " . It also named Khalid as " one of the key hard @-@ liners " . The same cable quoted Mansoor al @-@ Jamri , the editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Al @-@ Wasat newspaper , as calling Khalid the " de facto PM " . Michael Field mentioned that Khalid was very powerful and " control [ led ] access to the King " . 
 Khalid 's younger brother , <unk> , became the Defence Minister and Commander in Chief of the army . He was later promoted to Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces and given the rank of Field Marshal ( al @-@ Mushīr ; Arabic : <unk> ) by which he is widely known . The defense budget rose from US $ 406 million in 2001 to US $ 883 million in 2011 . The ~ 118 % increase is unmatched by any country in the region except for the war @-@ torn Iraq . Bahraini writer Abbas Al @-@ Murshed cited a 2008 royal order that prevented the Parliament from questioning al @-@ Mushīr about the military budget as a sign for the growing influence of the Khawalid brothers . 
 Frederic Wehrey wrote that the Khawalid brothers were now even stronger than the Prime Minister ( PM ) . Nabeel Rajab said that the two were now the de facto rulers of Bahrain . Bahrain Mirror said the Khawalid brothers were so strong that they represented a " new royal family " . The same source referred to Khalid bin Ahmed as the " Minister King " . The Khawalid brothers , their grand uncle Abdulla bin Khalid and his son Khalid are also members of the Royal Family Council . 
 Other notable Al Khawalid who occupied leading positions include Mohamed bin Khalifa bin Ahmed , the CEO of National Oil and Gas Authority and director of Central Bank of Bahrain , Mohamed bin Abdulla bin Khalid , the Chairman of the Supreme Council of Health and Minister of State for Defense Affairs , his brother Khalid , the Deputy PM and the chairman of Bahrain <unk> Holding Company , Al Khalifa Housing Committee and Seef Mall . The latter is said to be Al Khawalid candidate for succeeding the PM . Their nephew Khalid bin Ali is the current Minister of Justice who lived most of his life in Egypt where he was born to an Egyptian mother before returning to Bahrain in 1999 . From <unk> of Ibrahim bin Khalid , notable Al Khawalid include Khalifa bin Abdulla bin Mohamed , the Secretary General of Supreme Defence Council and previously head of NSA ( 2008 – 11 ) . 
 Khalifa 's brother , Hamad , is the chairman of Bahrain Telecommunications Company ; their cousin , Ibrahim bin Khalid , is the General Director of Ruling Family Council ; and finally , Salman bin Ibrahim bin Hamad bin Abdulla is the current President of the Asian Football Federation . From sons of Ateyatalla Al Khalifa , Abdulaziz , a security adviser in Prime Minister ’ s Court became the head of NSA ( 2002 – 5 ) , Mohamed became the president of Central Statistics Bureau and Royal Court until 2010 , Ahmed became Minister of Cabinet Affairs and Director of Central Statistics Bureau until 2011 , and Salman became head of Bahrain Defence Force Hospital , later head of King Hamad University Hospital and member of Supreme Council of Health . 
 = = = Internal rift = = = 
 Following their return to leading positions , the Khawalid brothers became " engaged in a huge battle for control of the family " , said Kristian Coates @-@ Ulrichsen of London 's Chatham House . Foreign observers such as Emile <unk> as well as palace insiders expressed their concern that the Khawalid brothers might go as far as shifting the royal succession line towards themselves . Unnamed U.S. officials downplayed the likelihood of such a change . The division in the ruling family became very clear when an anonymous non @-@ Al Khawalid " senior royal " made an interview with the Wall Street Journal , saying " surrounding the king are all powerful <unk> . " 
 King of Bahrain and several Al <unk> declined to comment on the story . However , one of the king 's top advisers said to be close to Al Khawalid told the Wall Street Journal that it was exaggerated and it was probably no more than competition for succession of the elderly PM . " This is healthy debate , not a blood vendetta from fairy tales , " he added . An investigation committee was reportedly formed to identify the sources that leaked out the information to the WSJ . 
 On one hand the Khawalid brothers faction , led by Khalid bin Ahmed , represent the " hard @-@ liners " , while on the other hand , the Crown Prince ( CP ) Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa is seen as leader of the " moderates " , the Los Angeles Times ( <unk> ) reported . According to Jane Kinninmont of Chatham House , the " king is not seen as leaning towards any particular ideology , but as the ruler he is the key person whom the other factions seek to influence " . It was previously thought that the PM , Khalifa bin Salman Al Khalifa was the head of the first camp ; however in recent years with the rise of the Khawalid brothers , this picture " now appears over @-@ simplistic , " Kinninmont added . The Economist Intelligence Unit mentioned that the royal family was now split into three factions , one led by the CP , one led by the PM and one led by the Khawalid brothers . Khalil al @-@ Marzooq of Al Wefaq supported the aforementioned statement and named Khalid bin Ahmed as head of the third faction . 
 Before the 2011 uprising , the Khawalid brothers had tense relations with the PM and both sides hated each other . Bahrain Mirror reported that the PM has expressed his hate for the Khawalid brothers several times to the audience of his council and refused to cooperate with ministers under their influence such as Ahmed bin Ateyatalla . However , following the start of the uprising , their relations are reported to have been improved . Brothers Khalid and Khalifa , and the PM are said to form an " anti @-@ reform troika " . The latter , however , is considered to be " more politically flexible " . 
 = = = Al Bandar report = = = 
 In 2006 , Salah Al Bandar , then an adviser to the Cabinet Affairs Ministry distributed a 240 – page scandalous report , revealing an alleged Khawalid @-@ led political conspiracy aiming to disenfranchise and marginalize the Shia majority , and to minimize the influence of " reformers in the ruling family " . One of the strategies of the alleged conspiracy was to naturalize Sunnis in order to re @-@ shift the demographic balance . Other strategies included stroking sectarianism in the media , use of <unk> and rigging the parliamentary election . The report named Ahmed bin Ateyatalla as head of the conspiracy by leading an " underground network " that aims " to override the legal legitimacy , falsify popular will and vilify civil organizations " . The latter was described as being an " influential hardliner " and a " protégé " of Khalid bin Ahmed . 
 A total of US $ 2 @.@ 65 million was reportedly dispersed to various contributors . The report said the origins of the conspiracy stemmed from a secret study by an Iraqi academic in 2005 that recommended marginalizing the Shia to the government . Al Bandar was deported and his report banned from any mention in the media and Parliament . Ateyatalla denied the allegations and called them " an Iran @-@ backed effort to destabilize Bahrain " . The government however charged Al Bandar in absentia with " possessing stolen government documents " . Kinninmont said the charge " only added to perceptions that the documents were credible " . She added that the claim gained more credence in 2008 when the government published new demographic data which showed that over 70 @,@ 000 were naturalized in the previous seven years . The Los Angeles Times said Al Bandar report was the first evidence " of government support for Sunni extremists " . 
 = = Bahraini uprising = = 
 = = = Context = = = 
 Inspired by popular uprisings in Tunisia and Egypt , protesters in Bahrain took to the streets in a " Day of Rage " on 14 February 2011 . Security forces responded by firing tear gas , rubber bullets , sound bombs and birdshot into the crowd of protesters , killing one of them . The next day another protester was killed and thousands of demonstrators occupied Pearl Roundabout in the capital Manama . On 17 February , authorities launched a pre @-@ dawn raid on protesters makeshift camp in Pearl Roundabout , which left four protesters dead and more than 300 injured . 
 The following day , army forces stationed in the Pearl Roundabout fired live ammunition on hundreds of protesters who tried to re @-@ occupy the site . At least 120 protesters were hurt and one was fatally wounded , bringing the number of deaths to seven . The CP offered dialogue with opposition parties . On 19 February , tens of thousands of protesters re @-@ occupied Pearl Roundabout after the army was ordered to withdraw . In March , martial law was declared and Saudi troops were called in . Despite the hard crackdown and official ban , the protests continued . 
 = = = Role of the Khawalid brothers = = = 
 The divisions within the royal family of Al Khalifa came to public during the uprising . The king with his elder son and heir apparent , Salman were responding positively to U.S. pressure to compromise with the opposition , while the Khawalid brothers preferred crackdown . In February and March 2011 , the CP was authorized by his father to lead " semi @-@ secret " negotiations with the opposition in which he offered them " historic concessions , including a bigger share in parliament . " According to Bahrain Mirror , the CP move surprised the Khawalid brothers and aimed among other things to limit their influence . During this period , Ahmed bin Ateyatalla lost his position as Minister of Cabinet Affairs in a limited cabinet reshuffle aimed to satisfy the opposition which has repeatedly accused him of discriminating against Shia . The cabinet reshuffle also introduced Majeed Al Alawi , an adviser to the CP as Minister of Housing . 
 According to sources interviewed by the WSJ , the Khawalid brothers rejected the CP deal , which led to a " confrontation between the crown prince and the Royal Court Minister at a family meeting " . According to same sources , Khalid bin Ahmed then went to Saudi Arabia and convinced their king to oppose the deal secured by the CP . After that , the sources mention , the Khawalid brothers @-@ led security forces attacked protesters and the talks fell apart . A source close to the Khawalid brothers dismissed the aforementioned narrative and blamed the failure of talks on the opposition rejection of the CP deal . Ali Salman , the head of Al Wefaq main opposition party said they had accepted the CP initiative , but " 12 hours later , GCC troops came in and severed the dialogue . " According to the WSJ , the Khawalid brothers also effectively blocked any direct dialogue between the CP and the opposition beyond the failed February – March 2011 talks . 
 On 15 March , the king announced a three @-@ month " State of National Safety " , granting al @-@ Mushīr , Khalifa bin Ahmed wide @-@ ranging powers including the authority " to issue regulations governing all manner of conduct " . The aforementioned Royal Decree also authorized al @-@ Mushīr " to oversee the implementation of this decree by all the agencies of the Government of Bahrain " . He led the operation to clear Pearl Roundabout of protesters in the early hours of 16 March . Eight people had died that day , five by gunshot , one by birdshot and two police reportedly run over by an SUV . 
 Al @-@ Mushīr frequently appeared on local and regional media . In one interview he called protesters " traitors " . In another , he echoed Muammar Gaddafi by accusing protesters of using drugs . " [ Protesters were ] given pills which affected their minds and made them do unusual things , " Al @-@ Mushīr said . He also had a warning for protesters : " I say to those who did not get the message , ' If you return we will come back , stronger this time ' . " He said that the Bahraini uprising was " by all measures a conspiracy involving Iran with the support of the United States " . He also said that the uprising which he called a " coup plot " was supported by more than a dozed of <unk> and an unnamed Gulf country @-@ funded NGOs . 
 In later days , Bahrain was engulfed in the Khawalid brothers @-@ led @-@ crackdown with almost daily clashes between security forces and opposition activists . The crackdown was the widest against the opposition in Bahrain 's modern history ; dozens of protesters were killed , some due to torture in police custody . Thousands of Shia were expelled from their jobs and dozens of their mosques were demolished . Al @-@ Mushīr also <unk> over the Court of National Safety , a military court that convicted more than 500 defendants , including all opposition leaders outside Al Wefaq ( i.e. Bahrain Thirteen ) . " The different style of the crackdown reflected a different leadership calling the shots , " said Kinninmont . The Independent reported that continued crackdown and the Saudi @-@ led intervention has increased the influence of al @-@ Mushīr , which it named " the leading hardliner within the royal family " . Professor Michael Hudson said that the " crackdown mark [ ed ] the victory of the hard @-@ liners within the royal establishment " . 
 The NSA , then led by a member of Al Khawalid branch , Khalifa bin Abdulla Al Khalifa , played an important role in crackdown . It was found by the Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry ( BICI ) that the NSA had executed hundreds of arbitrary arrests during which they used " unnecessary excessive force " , " terror @-@ inspiring behaviour " and damaged properties . The BICI also found that NSA had subjected detainees to systematic torture which led to the death of four detainees , among them journalists Karim <unk> and Zakariya al @-@ <unk> . Following the release of the BICI report , Khalifa bin Abdulla was removed from his position and given the positions of king adviser and Secretary General of the Supreme Defense Council . According to Kinninmont , " he is believed still to be closely involved with the agency " . 
 Martial law was lifted on 1 June and was followed by a call from the king to a national dialogue . The failure of the dialogue had only served to deepen the divide between the Al Khalifa branches , Ulrichsen wrote . According to Kinninmont and WSJ sources , the CP was sidelined as his allies were removed from their influential positions and his " de facto parallel cabinet " ( known as the Economic Development Board ) was stripped from its powers . Wehrey writes that the king himself " has been similarly overshadowed " . The Khawalid brothers influence had increased even more after the uprising . Ateyatalla , who had lost his cabinet position during the early days of the uprising was now appointed Minister of Follow Up at the Royal Court . In January 2012 , the Khawalid brothers wanted to initiate talks , however they soon abandoned the idea after opposition from " pro @-@ government Sunni radicals " . 
 The CP finally called for a renewed dialogue in December , yet his speech " contained generous nods to the Khawalid [ brothers ' ] influence " . The new dialogue began in February 2013 , however the CP did not participate , despite opposition calls for him . Al @-@ Mushīr 's spokesman tweeted that participants in the talks were " donkeys " and warned that any concession would amount to a " coup " . The appointment of CP as Deputy PM in March raised some hopes ; it was <unk> by al @-@ Jamri and a " moderate " government adviser . " This is an important step that could represent the starting point for meaningful reform later on , " al @-@ Jamri said . The Economist Intelligence Unit mentioned that this placed the CP as first candidate to succeed the PM . However , the CP remained " utterly sidelined , " Gengler said . Christopher Davidson cautioned that the move can be used as a public relations stunt . " [ W ] hether this is a meaningful political concession remains to be seen , " he added . 
 = = Ideology and political allies = = 
 = = = Anti @-@ West conservatives = = = 
 According to Freedom House , the Khawalid brothers represent and promote " an ideological orientation that sees Bahrain as the target of Iranian @-@ and Western @-@ backed conspiracies to empower Bahraini Shiites at the expense of the ruling family and other Gulf Sunnis " . The U.S. toppling of Sunni leaders in Afghanistan ( Taliban ) and Iraq ( Saddam Hussein ) , and its relative military inaction towards nuclear @-@ ambitious Iran have only deepened the Khawalid brothers ideology , which is already rich with the experience of the 1920s British @-@ driven administrative reforms that came at their expense . 
 In an interview with al @-@ Rai Kuwaiti newspaper , Al @-@ Mushīr considered the Arab Spring movements in Tunisia , Egypt , Yemen , Bahrain and Libya to be a " Western conspiracy " . He only acknowledged the Syrian civil war as true popular revolution and hinted that GCC troops may get involved there . " If Iran 's mercenaries are not defeated in Syria , they will come to us in the Gulf , " he added . In a March 2012 interview , al @-@ Mushīr accused the U.S. of secretly supporting the Bahraini opposition and " sow [ ing ] discord among the Gulf states " . He protested the U.S. halting their supply of crowd @-@ control weapons by denying U.S. aircraft basing access . The move was described by Wehrey as " effectively overruling the king " . 
 The Khawalid brothers were classified by the WSJ as " anti @-@ American hard @-@ liners " . The Independent said the " ultraconservative " Khawalid had close tries with Saudi Arabia , " vehemently opposed to any concessions " to the opposition and " pushed an increasingly sectarian and conservative agenda " . " Bahrain ’ s chief allies in London and Washington are beginning to fear that the normally pro @-@ West monarchy is being usurped by a group with virulently anti @-@ American and anti @-@ British views , " the London @-@ based newspaper added . 
 Al @-@ Monitor mentioned that brothers Khalid and Khalifa bin Ahmed were allied with Sunni Islamists groups including Al Asalah ( Salafist ) , Al @-@ <unk> Islamic Society ( Muslim Brotherhood ) and the National Unity Assembly ( Independent ) . Saeed al @-@ Shehabi of the London @-@ based Bahrain Freedom Movement said the UK preferred to deal with moderates instead of the Khawalid brothers . " But the Khawalid [ brothers ] get their support from Saudi Arabia which has left the British in a sort of limbo , " he added . According to <unk> , the Khawalid brothers faction " believes in suppressing Shiite aspirations , even if it means supporting Sunni groups propelled by the same ideologies that inspire Osama bin Laden " . The Los Angeles @-@ based newspaper added that Akhbar Al Khaleej , a pro @-@ government newspaper " refers to Bin Laden as a ' sheik , ' a title of honor " . 
 A newspaper controlled by the Khawalid brothers published the name and image of a U.S. diplomat after he had given doughnuts to protesters outside the U.S. embassy in Manama . The newspaper portrayed him as an Israeli @-@ Irani intelligence agent , forcing the embassy to send him home " out of safety fears " . The same newspaper criticized the U.S. alleged support to protesters by featuring a series of articles on the President of the United States titled " Ayatollah Obama and Bahrain " . Gengler identified the aforementioned paper as Al @-@ Watan and added that the writer of " Ayatollah Obama " series was praised by al @-@ Mushīr and promoted to Editor @-@ in @-@ Chief a year later . 
 The Khawalid brothers rising influence and divisions within House of Khalifa prompted two former U.S. officials to say that " it may not be viable to continue to base thousands of U.S. service members and their families there " and the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace called the U.S. to " prepare plans for the gradual relocation of the Fifth Fleet 's assets and functions " . On the other hand , Simon Henderson wrote that relocating the fifth fleet would only serve to embolden the Khawalid brothers . " The Khawalid [ brothers ] faction in Manama may even relish that prospect as a means of clarifying the royal family 's predicament and justifying the hardline path , " he added . 
 = = = Sectarianism = = = 
 In 1995 , one year after the start of the Shia @-@ led 1990s uprising in Bahrain , Khalid bin Ahmed publicly distributed a " politically charged poem " that contained " racist and hateful views " of the Shia . One verse of the poem called for " spill [ ing ] their bloods until they all die " , another called for " <unk> [ ing ] them from every sensitive position " . Khalaf said the poem was " part of the tribal @-@ cum @-@ ethnic @-@ cum @-@ political mobilization and counter mobilization " . According to Michael Field , Khalid " [ h ] as reputation for being very hard on the Shias " . Freedom House mentioned that the Khawalid brothers " espouse a decidedly anti @-@ Shiite agenda , conceiving of the community as a veritable fifth column to be dealt with in the framework of security , rather than through political bargaining " . The sectarian violence and rise of Shia powers in Iraq have only strengthened this belief . This view of Shia as a security problem led the Khawalid brothers to consider any economic and political reforms as invalid . Instead they thought that these reforms would only lead the Shia to demand even more . 
 " [ B ] y this view , the state [ is ] trapped in a veritable catch @-@ 22 , wherein the very attempt to purchase political stability in fact serves only to open the door to increased instability , " Gengler wrote . The Khawalid brothers have allegedly undertaken preemptive measures to limit the Shia majority influence via excluding them from sensitive positions ( sovereign ministries , police and army ) , naturalizing Sunnis to re @-@ balance the demographics , gerrymandering electoral districts and mobilizing the Sunni public opinion against the Shia . The first evidence of these policies was presented by al @-@ Jamri in 1998 , later in 2006 they were further exposed by Al Bandar report . " While the exclusion of the Shiite minority from the public sphere has been accomplished in Saudi Arabia through <unk> of Wahhabi ideology and institutions , the exclusion of a majority within Bahrain will likely be much more difficult to sustain , " Diwan said . 
 Wehrey wrote that during the Bahraini uprising , the Khawalid brothers — aided by their Sunni allies , the Muslim Brotherhood and Salafists — made good use of sectarianism to delegitimize the Shia opposition and prevent any " broad @-@ based , grassroots movement " from forming . He added that they employed the state @-@ controlled and Khawalid @-@ funded newspaper , Al @-@ Watan to portrait " Al Wefaq as a proxy of Hezbollah and Iran " . The opposition said that sectarian groups were mainly supported by Khalid bin Ahmed , who they considered " particularly potent and harmful " . A Congressional Research Service report mentioned that the Khawalid brothers " are considered disparaging of and implacably opposed to compromise with the Shiites " . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Gengler argued that King Hamad 's empowerment of the Khawalid brothers was not because he was unaware of their anti @-@ reform ideology and actions , nor was it due to him being a wolf in sheep 's clothing . Instead Gengler wrote that King Hamad probably wanted to counter the influence of his uncle , the strong un @-@ elected PM , Khalifa bin Salman who was an " effective co @-@ ruler " between 1971 and 1999 . Gengler concludes that the rise of the Khawalid brothers " owes therefore to a combination of personal relationships , shared background in the military , and political expediency " . Other explanations Gengler offered include that " [ King Hamad ] simply never took an interest in ruling " and instead occupied himself with " recreation and hobbies " or that he had begun the security approach in parallel with reforms as a " precautionary measure " in case they failed . 
 Bahrain Mirror mentioned that the king has delegated " [ a ] <unk> and affairs of the state " to the Khawalid brothers " to fully manage them as they wish " . Gwynne Dyer wrote that as long as Al <unk> remained in power " there will be no compromise , even though more than 80 Shia protesters have already been killed " . Writing for Bahrain Mirror , Bahraini researcher Yousif Makki argued that the role of the Khawalid brothers was amplified and that they did not constitute a faction of their own . Instead Makki said they were within the faction led by the PM . 
 On the other hand , Bahraini writer Abbas <unk> argued that the Khawalid brothers are the king 's crew and allegations made against them , including Al Bandar report are no more than the king 's own projects . He argued that the early reforms initiated by the king ( known as " the reform project " ) only aim was " re @-@ concentrating power in his hand , away from the PM , and not for the creation of a popular partnership and a democratic life " . <unk> added that Khalid bin Ahmed and Ahmed bin Ateyatalla were responsible for the formation and implementation of what he called the " Hamad strategy " . He did not <unk> the CP a moderate , instead he said the CP was " unable to form a balance with the powerful Al @-@ <unk> " . 
 = Robert White ( West Virginia senator ) = 
 Robert White ( May 28 , 1876 – August 15 , 1935 ) was an American lawyer and Democratic politician in the U.S. state of West Virginia . White served four consecutive terms as the Prosecuting Attorney for Hampshire County ( 1912 – 1928 ) , and served one term in the West Virginia Senate ( 1930 – 1934 ) representing the state 's Fifteenth Senatorial District in the 40th and 41st Sessions of the West Virginia Legislature . During the 1933 legislative year , White served as the floor leader for the Democratic Party members of the West Virginia Senate . 
 White was born in Romney , West Virginia in 1876 to Hampshire County Clerk of Court Christian Streit White ( 1839 – 1917 ) and his second wife Catharine Steele White ( 1837 – 1869 ) and was the grandson of Hampshire County Clerk of Court John Baker White ( 1794 – 1862 ) . White was educated at Potomac Academy and began his career in public service at the age of 16 as Deputy Clerk of Court in his father 's law office . He studied jurisprudence at the West Virginia University College of Law graduating in 1899 . 
 He began practicing law in Romney and was elected Prosecuting Attorney of Hampshire County in 1912 . White was elected to the position four times , and served terms from 1912 to 1928 . In addition , he served as the Commissioner of School Lands and as one of the Chancery Commissioners for Hampshire County . White was elected to represent the Fifteenth Senatorial District in the West Virginia Senate in 1930 and served in the senate until 1934 . In 1933 , White was chairman of the senate 's Judiciary Committee and he was also appointed to two special committees : one on economy and efficiency to study state and municipal government spending , and another to investigate the road commission 's awarding of a contract for gasoline , oil , and grease to the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey over the Elk Refining Company . 
 Following a prolonged illness , White died in Romney in 1935 at the age of 59 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Robert White was born on May 28 , 1876 in Romney , West Virginia . He was the second child of Hampshire County Clerk of Court Christian Streit White ( 1839 – 1917 ) and his second wife Catharine Steele White ( 1837 – 1869 ) , and the third eldest of his father 's five children . White was a grandson of Hampshire County Clerk of Court John Baker White ( 1794 – 1862 ) and a great @-@ grandson of the prominent Virginia judge Robert White ( 1759 – 1831 ) . His uncle Robert White ( 1833 @-@ 1915 ) served as Attorney General of West Virginia and his brother John Baker White ( 1868 – 1944 ) was a military officer and later served as a Charleston city councilman and president of the West Virginia Board of Control . 
 White received his early education in the public schools of Romney , and attended Romney 's Potomac Academy . At the age of 16 , he began his career in public service serving as the Deputy Clerk of Court in the office of his father , Christian Streit White , who was then serving as Clerk of Court for Hampshire County . In 1894 , White graduated from Potomac Academy at the age of 18 . Two years later , he began studying jurisprudence at the West Virginia University College of Law in Morgantown . He graduated from the West Virginia University College of Law in 1899 , earning a Bachelor of Laws degree . White cast his first vote for Democratic Party presidential nominee William Jennings Bryan in the United States presidential election of 1900 . 
 = = Law career = = 
 Following his graduation in 1899 from West Virginia University , White returned to Romney and established a law practice . In 1903 , he became associated with his father Christian Streit White in a law practice , following the conclusion of his father 's term as Hampshire County Clerk of Court . White continued to practice law with his father until 1912 , when he was elected to his first term as prosecuting attorney for Hampshire County . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Before the age of 21 , White represented Hampshire County as a delegate to a West Virginia Democratic Party state convention . 
 In 1912 , he was first elected to serve as the prosecuting attorney for Hampshire County and was re @-@ elected to the position four times , serving four , four @-@ year terms from 1912 to 1928 . While serving in this position , White was a strong proponent of the Good Roads Movement and under his leadership , the first concrete bridge was constructed in Hampshire County by the County Court . 
 Between 1917 and 1922 , in addition to serving as the county 's prosecuting attorney , White served as the commissioner of school lands and as one of the chancery commissioners for Hampshire County , along with Joshua Soule Zimmerman and James Sloan Kuykendall . 
 = = = West Virginia Senate = = = 
 In 1930 , White was elected to serve in the West Virginia Senate representing the state 's Fifteenth Senatorial District . He served in the 40th and 41st Sessions of the West Virginia Legislature and completed his term in 1934 . During the 1932 legislative year , the West Virginia Senate was led by the Republican Party majority . The following legislative year in 1933 , White served as the floor leader for the West Virginia Senate 's Democratic Party members . The West Virginia Senate 's majority had shifted to the Democrats in 1933 , and in January 1933 , White was selected by A. G. Mathews , President of the West Virginia Senate , as chairman of the senate 's Judiciary Committee . In this position , White introduced twelve bills in 1933 to correct errors and omissions in existing statutes . Also in the 1933 legislative year , White served as a member on the Finance ; Roads and Navigation ; Counties , Municipal Corporations ; Rules ; Medicine and Sanitation ; Education ; Privileges and Elections ; and Redistricting committees . In the same year White was also appointed as a member on two special senate committees . 
 On January 19 , 1933 , White sponsored a resolution for the creation of a special committee on economy and efficiency to study state and municipal government spending . The committee was charged with making investigations , developing recommendations , and drafting bills to empower its recommendations . It was further permitted to summon witnesses , examine records , and to investigate all state and local government organizations to recommend further mechanisms to affect efficiency and economy . White was appointed to the committee , which consisted of the speaker of the House of Delegates , the president of the West Virginia Senate , and two members from each house . 
 In February 1933 , White was one of four senate Democrats appointed to serve on a special committee to investigate the road commission 's awarding of a contract for gasoline , oil , and grease to the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey over the Elk Refining Company of Charleston . The committee 's creation and investigation was in response to the Elk Refining Company 's protest of the commission 's decision , and the company 's advertisement in which it claimed that its contract bid was $ 10 @,@ 387 @.@ 50 lower than that of Standard Oil . The committee not only investigated the commission 's decision , but also examined the Elk Refining Company 's advertisement . White questioned the advertisement 's merit and commented that the committee was " entitled to know what the motive behind this advertisement was . " " If there isn 't anything to investigate we shouldn 't be here investigating , " he concluded . 
 On February 28 , 1933 , White was a member of a subcommittee which drafted a bill calling for a special state referendum on the repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution . Under the plan , which was submitted by White , West Virginia would register its official stand on the proposed Twenty @-@ first Amendment to end Prohibition in the United States at the federal level . The referendum was to choose a slate of 20 " wet " and 20 " dry " candidates for delegates to a state convention , which would present its final vote on the national repeal of Prohibition . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Marriage and issue = = = 
 White married Mabel <unk> Fitch , the only child and daughter of E. H. Fitch and his wife Laura <unk> Fitch , on January 7 , 1903 in Washington , D.C .. Fitch was a native of <unk> , Kentucky and she attended Marshall College while her family resided in Huntington . She completed her education in Washington , D.C. White and his wife Mabel had five children : 
 John Baker White ( born February 11 , 1904 ) 
 Mabel Glasgow White Cornwell ( born February 18 , 1906 ) , married James Leighton Cornwell on August 25 , 1926 in Hampshire County 
 Elizabeth Steele White ( born April 23 , 1908 ) 
 Roberta Huston White McFarland ( born June 18 , 1912 ) , married Dr. William Franklin McFarland on June 13 , 1936 in New Cumberland 
 Robert White , Jr . 
 White 's wife Mabel was an active member of the Presbyterian Church . While a passenger on a Baltimore and Ohio Railroad South Branch line train , Mabel took ill and died at the Wappocomo home of Garrett Williams Parsons on July 5 , 1915 . She was interred at Indian Mound Cemetery in Romney . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 White never remarried following his wife 's death in 1915 . In addition to White 's church activities , he served as a master of the Masonic Lodge , and was affiliated with the Odd Fellows . Beginning in 1934 , White endured 18 months of illness , and on August 14 , 1935 , his physician Dr. R. W. Dailey reported to the Cumberland Evening Times that he was in critical condition and was unlikely to recover . White succumbed to his illness and died at his residence in Romney on August 15 , 1935 at the age of 59 as a result of arteriosclerosis . <unk> also contributed to his prolonged illness but was not the cause of his death . White was interred with Masonic rites on Saturday afternoon , August 17 , 1935 at Indian Mound Cemetery in Romney . A number of state officials attended his funeral . 
 = Spirit Fruit Society = 
 The Spirit Fruit Society was a communitarian group in the United States that was organized after a period of repeated business depressions during the 1890s . The society had its beginnings in Lisbon , Ohio and , over the years of its existence moved to Ingleside , Illinois and , finally , to California . Plagued by rumor , suspicion , and attacks in the press during its early years , the group remained active until 1930 . Although it never numbered more than a handful of adherents , the Spirit Fruit Society existed longer and more successfully than any other American utopian group . 
 The name is derived from the group 's belief that mankind 's spiritual state is that of a bud or blossom on a plant and that man 's soul has not yet developed into a fruit from a blossom . The goal of the society was to bring the soul to fruition . As the society 's founder , Jacob Beilhart , said in documents for incorporation of the society , " ... as yet , man is an underdeveloped ' plant ' which has not manifested the final fruit , which he is to produce . " The essential philosophy of the group was based upon a belief in self @-@ renunciation , hard work , tolerance , and peace . 
 = = Jacob L. Beilhart , founder = = 
 The Spirit Fruit Society was started by Jacob Beilhart ( 4 March 1867 – 24 November 1908 ) , who was born in Columbiana County , Ohio , to a Lutheran father and a Mennonite mother . Beilhart was raised in the Lutheran church and his early home environment was strictly religious . 
 When he was 18 , Beilhart moved to Kansas , where he met and married Olive Louema Blow , whose family belonged to the Seventh @-@ day Adventist church , which Beilhart then joined . Jacob and Louema traveled to California to attend the Adventist College at Healdsburg . Jacob received a preacher 's license and the couple returned to Kansas where he began preaching . After two years , however , faced with the prospect of being sent to work in other areas of the country , Beilhart left preaching , maintaining that he wanted to do something " besides talk " . Beilhart felt a strong need to help the sick so he enrolled in a nursing program at the Battle Creek Sanitarium , which was run by Dr. John Harvey Kellogg . 
 Beilhart became friends with C. W. Post , who had been a patient at the sanitarium . Post 's health improved dramatically while under the care of a Christian Science " faith healer " , Mrs. Elizabeth K. Gregory . In 1892 , Post started La Vita Inn , a sanitorium of his own , and hired Beilhart as an associate . The two men took instruction in Christian Science while Beilhart worked at the inn and helped develop Post 's cereal drink , Postum . Post and Beilhart rejected much of the Christian Science doctrine , but embraced the religion 's view that illness was an illusion and could be overcome by mental suggestion and self @-@ sacrifice . 
 During his time in Kansas , Beilhart obsessively investigated a variety of beliefs , including Christian Science , Divine Science , Spiritualism , and Theosophy . He found , however , that none of these religions held his interest . In time , he came to the realization that he would not adhere to any one denomination , but develop a faith of his own by combining aspects of several different religions . 
 = = Philosophy = = 
 Beilhart rejected materialism and disavowed personal property . He held that jealousy , doubt , and the fear of losing the love of another caused much of the disease people experienced . He felt that rejecting personal possessions was a means of attaining the Fruit of the Universal Spirit . 
 Members of the Spirit Fruit Society lived according to the following basic principles : seek happiness through selflessness ; follow one 's conscience ; take responsibility for one 's actions — and develop an awareness of the consequences of one 's actions on others ; and accept whatever happens . Beilhart believed very strongly in the individual 's right to guide his own actions , and not be dictated to by others . While there was no mention of any kind of organization or hierarchy in any documents , as the leader , Beilhart likely made important decisions concerning the group . There is no record of any kind of internal conflict between members . 
 Newspapers of the time reported that the society promoted free love , but the society promoted free love only in the sense that consenting adults had a right to change partners and even to have more than one partner at a time . Rather than <unk> , though , the society promoted tolerance , including tolerance of homosexuality . The Spirit Fruit Society , unlike most other communitarian groups of that time , did not seek to convert or recruit others to the group . Members were permitted to come and go as they pleased . The goal of the commune was not to convert or to expand membership in the society — it was simply to live as the adherents wished to live . 
 Very little exists in the way of firsthand accounts of life within the society . In an effort to dispel some of the misconceptions and rumors about the society , Beilhart wrote extensively for newspapers to explain the workings of the group . 
 The members worked together and shared all property . If a member of the society needed money for some purpose , they were free to take it from a community supply . Women of the society worked in the house sewing , setting type for newsletters , and general housework , while the men worked the farm . One of the founding principles of the society was that of the " free gift " . It dictated that , if anyone wanted something that they had to give — printed materials in particular — they had only to ask and it would be given to them without charge . After reading or seeing the society in practice , those people were free to contribute if they wished , but it was stressed that this was a " free gift " and not payment . In order to rise from their lower , selfish nature into an unselfish , spiritual nature , the society taught , everyone should obey the law of their being and subdue passions and impulses that control them by nature . The society believed in business and societal laws , but they felt that man would rise above those laws when they gained full control of their lower nature . They maintained , however , that they should still be obedient to those laws . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Lisbon , Ohio , the beginning = = = 
 In 1896 , Beilhart returned to Ohio and settled in Lisbon , close to where he was reared . Paramount among the reasons for his return was the confession of Louema Beilhart that her two children were not his , but C. W. Post 's . She soon left Lisbon for her home in La Cygne , Kansas . In 1899 , Beilhart decided to create an intentional community to practice his newly developed beliefs and to demonstrate this practice to others . In the aftermath of the Civil War , a number of communitarian groups were started around the United States . The rise in activism was further promoted by the effects of the depression at end of the 19th century . By this time , however , McKinley prosperity had developed and , in any case , Beilhart never displayed a particular interest in politics or economics . At this time he started two newspapers , Spirit Fruit and Spirit Voice , which were widely distributed and supported by donations . The Spirit Fruit Society was officially incorporated as a religious organization in 1901 . The stated goal in the incorporation documents was to " teach mankind how to apply the truths taught by Jesus Christ . " Beilhart made no attempt to solicit members for his commune and sometimes rejected applicants when he felt they were not fit candidates . As a result , the commune only attracted about a dozen residents , mostly from outside the area . 
 The group did not beg or in any way disturb their neighbors . Beilhart preached in Chicago and elsewhere , but was not known to proselytize strongly . While the group typically kept to themselves , their mysterious nature led to misconceptions and suspicion in the press . Specifically , the birth of Beilhart 's niece , Evelyn , was cause for concern as her mother , Mary Beilhart ( Jacob 's sister ) , was not married to the child 's father , Ralph E. Galbreath ( cousin of Ohio State Librarian Charles Burleigh Galbreath and State Senator Asher A. Galbreath ) . Dubbed the " Love Child " , this birth prompted newspapers to characterize the group as a free @-@ love society of promiscuity . The arrival of " Blessed " Katherine <unk> , a teenager from Chicago , also gave concern . It was reported in the press that " Blessed " was either held against her will or brainwashed by the society . Her father and brother came and ' rescued ' her and she was forced to leave the society against her wishes . Additional negative publicity occurred when Beilhart objected to his wife 's petition for alimony . 
 In 1904 , numerous newspaper articles and editorials were written , mostly in Chicago , about the society . Those articles were often sensationalist and tended to put the society in a bad light . The views of the society , particularly those against marriage and promoting free love , were not accepted well in the small Ohio village of Lisbon . In fact , a local newspaper reprinted a warning that had been distributed in the community : " Wanted – Fifty good women , over twenty and under fifty years of age ; also fifty good honest @-@ hearted men with families , to meet upon the Square when called upon , and go to the Spirit Fruit farm and tell them to take their departure at once or take the consequences , as tar is cheap and feathers plentiful . " 
 In June 1904 , Beilhart invited the public to an ' open house ' where he attempted to explain the motives and beliefs of the society . Over 400 people attended the gathering ; Among them , it has been claimed , were Clarence Darrow and Elbert Hubbard but this has not been documented , although Beilhart is known to have visited Hubbard in East Aurora and Darrow was a frequent visitor to the society during the Chicago and Ingleside years . In the end , the society 's rejection of marriage on the grounds that it made a ' slave of the woman ' , and the misinterpretations of their views on free @-@ love were too much for the people of Lisbon to accept . In late 1904 , the group left Lisbon for Chicago , in the hope that their progressive ideas might be better tolerated there . 
 = = = Ingleside , Illinois , and the death of Beilhart = = = 
 In 1905 , Beilhart purchased 90 acres ( 36 ha ) near Ingleside , Illinois , along Wooster Lake , a tract known as the Dalziel Farm . About a dozen established members of the Spirit Fruit Society moved with Beilhart to Illinois , along with a few new members . Over the next two years the society built a spacious house and later a large barn entirely by hand . They were better received by their Illinois neighbors than they had been in Lisbon . On the property by the lake , the society 's members hand @-@ built a concrete @-@ block home that they called the " Spirit Fruit Temple " . The 2 ½ <unk> residence had 32 rooms , a full basement , and modern ( for the time ) conveniences . The dining room accommodated up to 100 people . The society continued to live peacefully in Ingleside for several years . They provided for themselves from what came to be known as the " Spirit Fruit Farm " , opened the farm and temple to visitors , and produced their newsletter . Beilhart continued to speak to groups in Chicago promoting the ideals of the society . 
 In November 1908 , Beilhart became ill from acute appendicitis . Despite attention from a surgeon who performed an appendectomy , Beilhart developed peritonitis and died three days later . In keeping with the society 's beliefs in simplicity , Beilhart was buried in a plain coffin in an unmarked grave overlooking Wooster Lake . None of the buildings remain , having been covered by a housing development , although Beilhart 's grave remains in a brush @-@ obscured corner of the tract . 
 The loss of a charismatic and dominant leader often precipitates the decline of such groups , but the Spirit Fruit Society persevered . This made the society unique among other groups of this time . Though the commune continued after his death , their two publications , Spirit Voice and Spirit Fruit , ceased to be produced . Virginia Moore was chosen president of the society upon Beilhart 's death , and the community stayed together and carried on its activities as before . In 1911 , the society put an advertisement in the local papers seeking to sell their lakefront property and ' temple ' . Virginia Moore stated that the Illinois climate was not suitable for their activities and the decision had been made to move to California , . In the winter of 1914 – 1915 , the society moved west . 
 = = = California and the end = = = 
 In 1915 , the society purchased 80 acres ( 32 ha ) of land in Soquel , California , which they named " Hilltop Ranch " . At this point , only 12 of the society 's members remained . They included Mary Beilhart 's two ' illegitimate ' children born in Ohio , now 11 and 15 years old . Just as in Ohio and Illinois , the group made no efforts at recruiting new members , although three new members did join during this time . 
 The primary focus of the society at this time was simple subsistence . To continue as a group , they had to focus all of their energies on producing food . This was problematic because many of the members were becoming old and several suffered illnesses . Since the beginning , Beilhart and the other members had not actively sought out new members , believing that a small group was more viable . This proved to be their undoing as there were no younger members to sustain the farm . The original members , who had stayed with the group since its inception , began to leave and by 1928 , only six were left . Financial strains forced them to relinquish the ranch and move to a house in the village of Soquel . 
 The group finally disbanded in 1930 when Virginia Moore died of cancer . After her death , the remaining members of the Spirit Fruit Society dispersed to various homes of friends and family . Despite the small membership , the society had been in existence for almost 30 years – 20 years beyond the death of its founder . 
 = = Success of the society = = 
 Throughout its existence , the society never claimed more than a couple dozen members . They never actively recruited new members nor proselytized in the communities . Like many such organizations , they were often persecuted by the press and were the subject of dubious reports . Despite this , and , more significantly , despite the loss of their spiritual leader , Beilhart , the society continued to exist longer than most other communes at that time . 
 Though rooted in Christianity yet exhibiting traits of communalism , the members of the society were not bound by either set of beliefs or values . Murphy suggests that this is one of the reasons for the society 's longevity - that , rather than be confined by one belief system , the members could easily adapt to , and solve , everyday issues arising within the community as well as threats from outside . 
 = Battle of Towton = 
 The Battle of Towton was fought during the English Wars of the Roses on 29 March 1461 , near the village of Towton in Yorkshire . It brought about a change of monarchs in England , with the victor , the Yorkist Edward , Duke of York — who became King Edward IV ( 1461 – 1483 ) having displaced the Lancastrian King Henry VI ( 1422 – 1461 ) as king , and thus drove the head of the Lancastrians and his key supporters out of the country . 
 It is described as " probably the largest and bloodiest battle ever fought on English soil " , though Boudicca 's defeat at the Battle of Watling Street is also a contender . According to chroniclers , more than 50 @,@ 000 soldiers from the Houses of York and Lancaster fought for hours amidst a snowstorm on that day , which was Palm Sunday . A newsletter circulated a week after the battle reported that 28 @,@ 000 died on the battlefield . 
 Contemporary accounts described Henry VI as peaceful and pious , not suited for the violent dynastic civil wars , such as the War of the Roses . He had periods of insanity while his inherent benevolence eventually required his wife , Margaret of Anjou , to assume control of his kingdom , which contributed to his own downfall . His ineffectual rule had encouraged the nobles ' schemes to establish control over him , and the situation deteriorated into a civil war between the supporters of his house and those of Richard , Duke of York . After the Yorkists captured Henry in 1460 , the English parliament passed an Act of Accord to let York and his line succeed Henry as king . Henry 's consort , Margaret of Anjou , refused to accept the dispossession of her son 's right to the throne and , along with fellow Lancastrian malcontents , raised an army . Richard of York was killed at the Battle of Wakefield and his titles , including the claim to the throne , passed to his eldest son Edward . Nobles who were previously hesitant to support Richard 's claim to the throne considered the Lancastrians to have reneged on the Act — a legal agreement — and Edward found enough backing to denounce Henry and declare himself king . The Battle of Towton was to affirm the victor 's right to rule over England through force of arms . 
 On reaching the battlefield , the Yorkists found themselves heavily outnumbered . Part of their force under the Duke of Norfolk had yet to arrive . The Yorkist leader Lord Fauconberg turned the tables by ordering his archers to take advantage of the strong wind to outrange their enemies . The one @-@ sided missile exchange , with Lancastrian arrows falling short of the Yorkist ranks , provoked the Lancastrians into abandoning their defensive positions . The ensuing hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat lasted hours , exhausting the combatants . The arrival of Norfolk 's men reinvigorated the Yorkists and , encouraged by Edward , they routed their foes . Many Lancastrians were killed while fleeing ; some trampled each other and others drowned in the rivers , which are said to have made them run red with blood for several days . Several who were taken as prisoners were executed . 
 The power of the House of Lancaster was severely reduced after this battle . Henry fled the country , and many of his most powerful followers were dead or in exile after the engagement , letting Edward rule England uninterrupted for nine years , before a brief restoration of Henry to the throne . Later generations remembered the battle as depicted in William Shakespeare 's dramatic adaptation of Henry 's life — Henry VI , Part 3 , Act 2 , Scene 5 . In 1929 , the Towton Cross was erected on the battlefield to commemorate the event . Various archaeological remains and mass graves related to the battle were found in the area centuries after the engagement . 
 = = Setting = = 
 In 1461 , England was in the sixth year of the Wars of the Roses , a series of civil wars between the Houses of York and Lancaster over the English throne . The Lancastrians backed the reigning King of England , Henry VI , an indecisive man who had bouts of madness . The leader of the Yorkists was initially Richard , Duke of York , who resented the dominance of a small number of aristocrats favoured by the king , principally his close relatives the Beaufort family . Fuelled by rivalries between influential supporters of both factions , York 's attempts to displace Henry 's favourites from power escalated into a full @-@ blown conflict . After capturing Henry at the Battle of Northampton in 1460 , the duke , who was of royal blood , issued his own claim to the throne . Even York 's closest supporters among the nobility were reluctant to usurp an established royal lineage ; instead , the nobles passed by a majority vote the Act of Accord , which ruled that the duke and his heirs would succeed the throne upon Henry 's death . 
 The Queen of England , Margaret of Anjou , refused to accept an arrangement that deprived her son — Edward of Westminster — of his birthright . She had fled to Scotland after the Yorkist victory at Northampton ; there she began raising an army , promising her followers the freedom to plunder on the march south through England . Her Lancastrian supporters also mustered in the north of England , preparing for her arrival . York marched with his army to meet this threat , but he was lured into a trap at Wakefield and killed . The duke and his second son Edmund , Earl of Rutland , were decapitated by the Lancastrians and their heads were impaled on spikes atop the Micklegate Bar , a gatehouse of the city of York . The leadership of the House of York passed onto the duke 's heir , Edward . 
 The victors of Wakefield were joined by Margaret 's army and they marched south , plundering settlements in their wake . They liberated Henry after defeating the Yorkist army of Richard Neville , 16th Earl of Warwick , in the Second Battle of St Albans , and continued pillaging on their way to London . As a result , the city of London refused to open its gates to Henry and Margaret for fear of being looted . The Lancastrian army was short on supplies and had no adequate means to replenish them . When Margaret learned that Richard of York 's eldest son Edward , Earl of March and his army had won the Battle of Mortimer 's Cross in Herefordshire and were marching towards London , she withdrew the Lancastrians to the city of York . Warwick and the remnants of his army marched from St Albans to join Edward 's men and the Yorkists were welcomed into London . Having lost custody of Henry , the Yorkists needed a justification to continue taking up arms against the king and his Lancastrian followers . On 4 March , Warwick proclaimed the young Yorkist leader as King Edward IV . The proclamation gained greater acceptance than Richard of York 's earlier claim , as several nobles previously opposed to letting Edward 's father ascend the throne viewed the Lancastrian actions as a betrayal of the legally established Accord . 
 The country now had two kings — a situation that could not be allowed to persist , especially if Edward was to be formally crowned . Edward offered amnesty to any Lancastrian supporter who renounced Henry . The move was intended to win over the commoners ; his offer did not extend to wealthy Lancastrians ( mostly the nobles ) . The young king summoned and ordered his followers to march towards York to take back his family 's city and to formally depose Henry through force of arms . The Yorkist army moved along three routes . Warwick 's uncle , Lord Fauconberg , led a group to clear the way to York for the main body , which was led by Edward . The Duke of Norfolk was sent east to raise forces and rejoin Edward before the battle . Warwick 's group moved to the west of the main body , through the English Midlands , gathering men as they went . On 28 March , the leading elements of the Yorkist army came upon the remains of the crossing in Ferrybridge that spanned the River Aire . They were rebuilding the bridge when they were attacked and routed by a small band of Lancastrians , consisting of approximately 500 men led by Lord Clifford . 
 Learning of the encounter , Edward led the Yorkist main army to the bridge and was forced into a gruelling battle ; although the Yorkists were superior in numbers , the narrow bridge was a bottleneck , forcing them to confront Clifford 's men on equal terms . Edward sent Fauconberg and his horsemen to ford the river at Castleford , which should have been guarded by Henry Earl of Northumberland , but he arrived late , by which time the Yorkists had crossed the ford and were heading to attack the Lancastrians at Ferrybridge from the side . The Lancastrians retreated but were chased to <unk> Dale where they were all killed . Clifford was slain by an arrow to his throat . Having cleared the vicinity of enemy forces , the Yorkists repaired the bridge and pressed onwards to camp overnight at Sherburn @-@ in @-@ Elmet . The Lancastrian army marched to Tadcaster , approximately 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north of Towton , and made camp there . As dawn broke on the next day , the two rival armies packed up their camps under dark skies and in strong winds . Although it was Palm Sunday , a day of holy significance to Christians , the forces prepared for the battle ahead . As a result of this , a few documents named the engagement as the Battle of Palme <unk> <unk> , but the name did not gain wide acceptance . Popular opinion favoured naming the battle after the village of Towton because of the battlefield 's proximity to the settlement , which was the most prominent in the area at that time . 
 = = Force compositions = = 
 Contemporary sources declare that the two armies were huge , stating that more than 100 @,@ 000 men fought in the battle . One of the sources , an account in William Gregory 's Chronicle of London ( 15th century ) by a soldier who had served in the Wars , claimed that the Yorkists had 200 @,@ 000 soldiers , while the Lancastrian army had even more . Later historians believe that these figures were exaggerated , and that a combined figure of around 50 @,@ 000 is more likely . Nevertheless , the armies gathered at Towton were among the largest at the time . An analysis of skeletons found in a mass grave in 1996 showed that the soldiers came from all walks of life at that time ; they were on average 30 years old , and several were veterans of previous engagements . Many knights and noblemen , approximately three @-@ quarters of the English peers at that time , fought in the battle . Eight of them were sworn to the Yorkist cause whereas the Lancastrians had at least 19 . 
 The battle would decide which of the two kings would rule over England , but while Edward fought beside his men , Henry remained in York with Margaret . The Lancastrians regarded their king as a mere puppet of his wife and were wary of his mental instability . In comparison , Edward was inspirational to his followers . Eighteen years old , he was 6 @-@ foot @-@ 3 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 92 m ) tall and was an imposing sight in armour . Skilled in combat , Edward led his men from the front , motivating them to do their best and uplifting their spirits . Edward 's preference for bold offensive tactics would dictate the Yorkist plan of action for this engagement . 
 The Yorkists had other prominent leaders . Warwick had a flamboyant appeal to his followers . Edward Hall , a 16th @-@ century chronicler , attributed to Warwick an inspirational scene before the Battle of Towton ; Hall wrote that Warwick , wounded at Ferrybridge , slew his horse and cried , " Let him fly that will , for surely I will tarry with him that will tarry with me " , daring any Yorkist to quit the fight ahead . The description is likely apocryphal ; military historian Christopher Gravett said that the tale demonstrates Warwick 's loyalty to Edward and his fellow men if it is true . Warwick placed great value on his uncle , Lord Fauconberg , whom Hall called a " man of great policy , and of much experience in martial feats " . Small in stature and a veteran of the Anglo @-@ French wars , Fauconberg was highly esteemed by his peers in matters of military affairs . He was quick to adapt to new situations ; among his previous achievements were the administration of the French town of Calais , leading several piracy expeditions of import , and the command of the vanguard at the Battle of Northampton . Of those appointed to raise men for the battle , Norfolk likely never made it to the engagement due to his advanced age , and his knights — Walter Blount and Robert Horne — would have taken command of his contingent . In any event , Norfolk was an " unpredictable ally " ; he had joined the Yorkists to establish a power base for himself in eastern England , and wavered in his support for their cause on various occasions . 
 Without their king on the battlefield , the Lancastrians relied on Henry Beaufort , Duke of Somerset , to command their army . He was fairly experienced in matters of war and is credited with clever manoeuvres that led the Lancastrians to victory at Wakefield and St Albans . According to several historians , however , Sir Andrew Trollope , and not Somerset , was the Lancastrians ' primary strategist . Trollope formerly served under Warwick in Calais before defecting to the Lancastrians in the early stages of the Wars of the Roses . His change of allegiance was a major blow to the Yorkists , for he was familiar with their men and had played a key role in their victories in France . Other notable Lancastrian leaders included Henry Holland , Duke of Exeter , and the northern magnates Henry Percy , Earl of Northumberland , Lord de Ros and Ralph Dacre , who also accompanied the army . Another leading northern Lancastrian was Lord Clifford , who had died earlier in the retreat from Ferrybridge . 
 = = Deployment = = 
 Very few historical sources give detailed accounts of the battle and they do not describe the exact deployments of the armies . The paucity of such primary sources led early historians to adopt Hall 's chronicle as their main resource for the engagement , despite its authorship 70 years after the event and questions over the origin of his information . The Burgundian chronicler Jehan de Waurin ( 1398 – 1474 ) was a more contemporary source , but his chronicle was made available to the public only from 1891 , and several mistakes in it discouraged historians at that time from using it . Later reconstructions of the battle were based on Hall 's version , supplemented by minor details from other sources . 
 The battle took place on a plateau between the villages of Saxton ( to the south ) and Towton ( to the north ) . The region was agricultural land , with plenty of wide open areas and small roads on which to manoeuvre the armies . Two roads ran through the area : the Old London Road , which connected Towton to the English capital , and a direct road between Saxton and Towton . The steeply banked Cock Beck flowed in an S @-@ shaped course around the plateau from the north to west . The plateau was bisected by the Towton Dale , which ran from the west and extended into the North Acres in the east . Woodlands were scattered along the beck ; Renshaw Woods lined the river on the north @-@ western side of the plateau , and south of Towton Dale , Castle Hill Wood grew on the west side of the plateau at a bend in the beck . The area to the north @-@ east of this forest would be known as Bloody Meadow after the battle . 
 According to Gravett and fellow military enthusiast Trevor James Halsall , Somerset 's decision to engage the Yorkist army on this plateau was sound . Defending the ground just before Towton would block any enemy advance towards the city of York , whether they moved along the London – Towton road or an old Roman road to the west . The Lancastrians deployed on the north side of the dale , using the valley as a " protective ditch " ; the disadvantage of this position was that they could not see beyond the southern ridge of the dale . The Lancastrian flanks were protected by marshes ; their right was further secured by the steep banks of the Cock Beck . The width of their deployment area did not allow for a longer front line , depriving the Lancastrians of the opportunity to use their numerical superiority . Waurin 's account gave rise to the suggestion that Somerset ordered a force of mounted spearmen to conceal itself in Castle Hill Wood , ready to charge into the Yorkist left flank at an opportune time in battle . 
 The Yorkists appeared as the Lancastrians finished deployment . Line after line of soldiers crested the southern ridge of the dale and formed up in ranks opposite their enemies as snow began to fall . Edward 's army was outnumbered and Norfolk 's troops had yet to arrive to join them . 
 = = Fighting = = 
 As Somerset was content to stand and let his foes come to him , the opening move of the battle was made by the Yorkists . Noticing the direction and strength of the wind , Fauconberg ordered all Yorkist archers to step forward and unleash a volley of their arrows from what would be the standard maximum range of their longbows . With the wind behind them , the Yorkist missiles travelled farther than usual , plunging deep into the masses of soldiers on the hill slope . Many of the shafts bore <unk> arrowheads , capable of piercing plate armour and penetrating into the flesh underneath . The response from the Lancastrian archers was ineffective as the heavy wind blew snow in their faces . They found it difficult to judge the range and pick out their targets and their arrows fell short of the Yorkist ranks ; Fauconberg had ordered his men to retreat after loosing one volley , thus avoiding any casualties . Unable to observe their results , the Lancastrians shot until they had used up most of their arrows , leaving a thick , prickly carpet of arrows in the ground in front of the Yorkists . 
 After the Lancastrians had ceased shooting their arrows , Fauconberg ordered his archers to step forward again to shoot . When they had exhausted their ammunition , the Yorkists plucked arrows off the ground in front of them — arrows shot by their foes — and continued shooting . Coming under attack without any effective response of its own , the Lancastrian army moved from its position to engage the Yorkists in close combat . Seeing the advancing mass of men , the Yorkist archers shot a few more volleys before retreating behind their ranks of men @-@ at @-@ arms , leaving thousands of arrows in the ground to hinder the Lancastrian attack . 
 As the Yorkists reformed their ranks to receive the Lancastrian charge , their left flank came under attack by the horsemen from Castle Hill Wood mentioned by Waurin . The Yorkist left wing fell into disarray and several men started to flee . Edward had to take command of the left wing to save the situation . By engaging in the fight and encouraging his followers , his example inspired many to stand their ground . The armies clashed and archers shot into the mass of men at short range . The Lancastrians continuously threw fresher men into the fray and gradually the numerically inferior Yorkist army was forced to give ground and retreat up the southern ridge . Gravett thought that the Lancastrian left had less momentum than the rest of its formation , skewing the line of battle such that its western end tilted towards Saxton . 
 The fighting continued for three hours , according to research by English Heritage , a government body in charge of conservation of historic sites . It was indecisive until the arrival of Norfolk 's men . Marching up the Old London Road , Norfolk 's contingent was hidden from view until they crested the ridge and attacked the Lancastrian left flank . The Lancastrians continued to give fight but the advantage had shifted to the Yorkists . By the end of the day , the Lancastrian line had broken up , as small groups of men began fleeing for their lives . Polydore Vergil , chronicler for Henry VII of England , claimed that combat lasted for a total of 10 hours . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The tired Lancastrians flung off their helmets and armour to run faster . Without such protection , they were much more vulnerable to the attacks of the Yorkists . Norfolk 's troops were much fresher and faster . Fleeing across what would later become known as Bloody Meadow , many Lancastrians were cut down from behind or were slain after they had surrendered . Before the battle , both sides had issued the order to give no quarter and the Yorkists were in no mood to spare anyone after the long , gruelling fight . A number of Lancastrians , such as Trollope , also had substantial bounties on their heads . Gregory 's chronicle stated 42 knights were killed after they were taken prisoner . 
 Archaeological findings in the late 20th century shed light on the final moments of the battle . In 1996 workmen at a construction site in the town of Towton uncovered a mass grave , which archaeologists believed to contain the remains of men who were slain during or after the battle in 1461 . The bodies showed severe injuries to their upper torsos ; arms and skulls were cracked or shattered . One exhumed specimen , known as Towton 25 , had the front of his skull bisected : a weapon had slashed across his face , cutting a deep wound that split the bone . The skull was also pierced by another deep wound , a horizontal cut from a blade across the back . 
 The Lancastrians lost more in their rout from the battlefield . Men struggling across the river were dragged down by currents and drowned . Those floundering were stepped on and pushed under water by their comrades behind them as they rushed to get away from the Yorkists . As the Lancastrians struggled across the river , Yorkist archers rode to high vantage points and shot arrows at them . The dead began to pile up and the chronicles state that the Lancastrians eventually fled across these " bridges " of bodies . The chase continued northwards across the River Wharfe , which was larger than Cock Beck . A bridge over the river collapsed under the flood of men and many drowned trying to cross . Those who hid in Tadcaster and York were hunted down and killed . 
 A newsletter dated 4 April 1461 reported a widely circulated figure of 28 @,@ 000 casualties in the battle , which Charles Ross and other historians believe was exaggerated . The number was taken from the heralds ' estimate of the dead and appeared in letters from Edward and the Bishop of Salisbury , Richard Beauchamp . Other contemporary sources gave higher numbers , ranging from 30 @,@ 000 to 38 @,@ 000 ; Hall quoted an exact figure of 36 @,@ 776 . An exception was the Annales rerum <unk> , which stated the Lancastrians had 9 @,@ 000 casualties — an estimate Ross found to be more believable . The Lancastrian nobility had heavy losses . Trollope and Northumberland fell in battle , and Lord Dacre was said to have been killed by an archer who was perched in a " bur tree " ( a local term for an elder ) . Conversely , the Yorkists lost only one notable member of the gentry — Horne — at Towton . 
 On receiving news of their army 's defeat , Henry fled into exile in Scotland with his wife and son . They were later joined by Somerset , Roos , Exeter , and the few Lancastrian nobles who escaped from the battlefield . The Battle of Towton severely reduced the power of the House of Lancaster in England ; the linchpins of their power at court ( Northumberland , Clifford , Roos , and Dacre ) had died or fled the country , ending the house 's domination over the north of England . Edward further exploited the situation , naming 14 Lancastrian peers as traitors . Approximately 96 Lancastrians of the rank of knight and below were also attainted — 24 of them members of parliament . The new king preferred winning over his enemies to his cause ; the nobles he attainted either died in the battle or had refused to submit to him . The estates of a few of these nobles were confiscated by the crown but the rest were untouched , remaining in the care of their families . Edward also pardoned many of those he attainted after they submitted to his rule . 
 Although Henry was at large in Scotland with his son , the battle put an end ( for the time being ) to disputes over the country 's state of leadership since the Act of Accord . The English people were assured that there was now one true king — Edward . He turned his attention to consolidating his rule over the country , winning over the people and putting down the rebellions raised by the few remaining Lancastrian diehards . He knighted several of his supporters and elevated several of his gentry supporters to the peerage ; Fauconberg was made the Earl of Kent . Warwick benefited from Edward 's rule after the battle . He received parts of Northumberland 's and Clifford 's holdings , and was made " the king 's lieutenant in the North and admiral of England . " Sir David ap Mathew ( Sir David Mathew ) of Llandaff ( 1400 – 1484 ) , a loyal Yorkist and Seneschal , was named Grand Standard Bearer of England , and is credited with saving the life of Edward IV in the battle ; as a result , he was granted the right to use ' Towton ' on the Mathew family arms . 
 By 1464 , the Yorkists had " wiped out all effective Lancastrian resistance in the north of England . " Edward 's reign was not interrupted until 1470 ; by then , his relationship with Warwick had deteriorated to such an extent that the earl defected to the Lancastrians and forced Edward to flee England , restoring Henry to the throne . The interruption of Yorkist rule was brief , as Edward regained his throne after defeating Warwick and his Lancastrian cohorts at the Battle of Barnet in 1471 . 
 = = Literature = = 
 In the sixteenth century William Shakespeare wrote a number of dramatisations of historic figures . The use of history as a backdrop , against which the familiar characters act out Shakespeare 's drama , lends a sense of realism to his plays . Shakespeare wrote a three @-@ part play about Henry VI , relying heavily on Hall 's chronicle as a source . His vision of the Battle of Towton ( Henry VI , Part 3 , Act 2 , Scene 5 ) , touted as the " bloodiest " engagement in the Wars of the Roses , became a set piece about the " terror of civil war , a national terror that is essentially familial " . Historian Bertram <unk> said it was thanks to Shakespeare 's dramatisation of the battle that the weak and ineffectual Henry was at least remembered by English society , albeit for his pining to have been born a shepherd rather than a king . 
 Shakespeare 's version of the battle presents a notable scene that comes immediately after Henry 's soliloquy . Henry witnesses the laments of two soldiers in the battle . One slays his opponent in hope of plunder , only to find the victim is his son ; the other kills his enemy , who turns out to be his father . Both killers have acted out of greed and fell into a state of deep grieving after discovering their misdeeds . Shakespearian scholar Arthur Percival Rossiter names the scene as the most notable of the playwright 's written " rituals " . The delivery of the event follows the pattern of an opera : after a long speech , the actors alternate among one another to deliver single @-@ line asides to the audience . In this scene of grief — in a reversal of the approach adopted in his later historical plays — Shakespeare uses anonymous fictional characters to illustrate the ills of civil war while a historical king reflects on their fates . Emeritus Professor of English Literature Michael Hattaway comments that Shakespeare intended to show Henry 's sadness over the war , to elicit the same emotion among the audience and to expose Henry 's ineptness as king . 
 The Battle of Towton was re @-@ examined by Geoffrey Hill in his poem " Funeral Music " ( 1968 ) . Hill presents the historical event through the voices of its combatants , looking at the turmoil of the era through their eyes . The common soldiers grouse about their physical discomforts and the sacrifices that they had made for the ideas glorified by their leaders . They share their superiors ' determination to seek the destruction of their opponents , even at the cost of their lives . Hill depicts the participants ' belief that the event was pre @-@ destined and of utmost importance as a farce ; the world went about its business regardless of the Battle of Towton . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1483 Richard III , younger brother of Edward IV , started to build a chapel to commemorate the battle . Richard died at the Battle of Bosworth in 1485 and the building was never completed . It eventually fell into disrepair and collapsed . The ruins of the structure were evident five centuries later . In 1929 , a stone cross supposedly from the chapel was used to create the Towton Cross ( also known as Lord Dacre 's Cross ) to commemorate those who died in the battle . Several mounds on the battlefield were thought to contain casualties of the battle , although historians believe these to be tumuli of much earlier origin . More burial sites related to the battle are found on Chapel Hill and around Saxton . Lord Dacre was buried at the Church of All Saints in Saxton and his tomb was reported in the late 19th century to be well maintained , although several of its panels had been weathered away . The bur tree from which Dacre 's killer shot his arrow was cut down by the late 19th century , leaving its stump on the battlefield . Centuries after the battle , relics that have been found in the area include rings , arrowheads and coins . 
 The people of Elizabethan @-@ era England remembered the battle as dramatised by Shakespeare , and the image of the engagement as the charnel house where many sons of England were cut down endured for centuries . However , at the start of the 21st century , the " largest and bloodiest battle ever fought on English soil " was no longer prominent in the public consciousness . British journalists lamented that people were ignorant of the Battle of Towton and of its significance . According to English Heritage , the battle was of the " greatest importance " ; it was one of the largest , if not the largest , fought in England and it resulted in the replacement of one royal dynasty by another . Hill expressed a different opinion . Although impressed with the casualty figures touted by the chroniclers , he believed the battle brought no monumental changes to the lives of the English people . 
 The Battle of Towton was associated with a tradition previously upheld in the villages of <unk> , Warwickshire . For centuries the villagers had made it a point to clear an area on a slope of the Vale of the Red Horse on each anniversary of the engagement , exposing a large figure of a horse cut into the red soil . They claimed to do this to honour the Earl of Warwick 's inspirational deed of slaying his horse to show his resolve to stand and fight with the common soldiers . Local historian Mary Dormer Harris believed that the villagers modified the original Red Horse , which dated to pre @-@ historic times , to a version that reflected mediaeval horses . The tradition died in 1798 when the Inclosure Acts implemented by the English government redesignated the common land , on which the equine figure was located , as private property . The scouring was revived during the early 20th century but has since stopped . 
 = The Beast Below = 
 " The Beast Below " is the second episode of the fifth series of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who . It was written by executive producer and head writer Steven Moffat and broadcast on BBC One and BBC HD on 10 April 2010 . 
 In the episode , the Doctor — a time travelling alien played by Matt Smith — and his new companion Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) arrive in the distant future aboard the Starship UK , a ship constructed to transport the population and major cultural artifacts of the United Kingdom away from Earth to escape the death of the sun . However , they discover that the government of the ship secretly tortures a Star Whale that guides the ship , the abandonment of which is believed will destroy the ship and kill everyone on board . 
 The episode , which featured the first time Amy was away from her home world , was designed to show how important she was to the Doctor and his need for a companion . As part of the second production block of the series , the episode 's production took place in Autumn 2009 . " The Beast Below " was seen by 8 @.@ 42 million viewers on BBC One and BBC HD , the fifth most @-@ watched programme in the week it was broadcast . It was met with a positive to mixed reception from critics ; many praised the chemistry between Smith and Gillan , but some thought that there were too many imaginative concepts that did not make a satisfying conclusion , or that the message of the episode was not as strong as it should have been . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 In the distant future , the Doctor and Amy arrive on the Starship UK , a colony spaceship containing the population of the United Kingdom who have left the planet to escape deadly solar flares . They come across a crying girl , Mandy , whom all the other adults aboard consciously ignore . The Doctor , having discovered that the ship does not seem to be powered by normal engines , tells Amy to follow Mandy while he explores the engine room . There , he finds the engine controls to be a false front , and encounters a masked woman called Liz 10 , who also is aware of the ship 's oddness and of the Doctor 's identity . 
 Meanwhile , Amy confronts Mandy , who explains she had lost her friend to the " beast below " after he refused to follow Starship UK rules and ran afoul of the robot @-@ like Smilers that watch over the ship . Ignoring Mandy 's warnings , Amy enters a tent which covers a hole in the ship . There she finds a tentacle @-@ like creature reaching up from the pit and quickly backs out of the tent into the monk @-@ like Winders , who police the ship . Amy is taken to one of the many voting booths on the ship , where an automated video explains that each adult votes after being shown the truth of Starship UK . After the video , Amy is given the opportunity to either protest the truth or have the booth make her forget it . Amy chooses to forget , but not before recording a video to show herself after the memory wipe , urging her to get the Doctor off the ship before he learns its nature . The Doctor and Mandy arrive ; Mandy explains that the voting takes place every five years and everyone chooses to " forget " . The Doctor , however , triggers the " protest " sequence , sending him and Amy into the bowels of the ship . 
 Finding himself and Amy in the mouth of a giant creature , the Doctor uses his sonic screwdriver to make the creature throw them up ; with Liz 10 's help , they evade the Smilers waiting for them upon their escape . Liz 10 reveals herself to be Queen Elizabeth X and the Doctor begins to question her age , which she believes is around 50 , although her body clock was slowed to retain its youthful appearance . The Winders arrive and take Liz 10 , the Doctor , Amy and Mandy to the Tower of London , where it is revealed that all of Starship UK rides atop a giant Star Whale that provides the ship 's locomotion . The Star Whale , believed to be the last of its kind , arrived at Earth at the time of the solar flares ; it was captured and the ship was constructed around it . However , in order to direct the whale , the pain center of its brain has been exposed to receive frequent jolts of electricity . The Winders show Liz 10 that she ordered this centuries ago , but every ten years she finds her way to the Tower and chooses to have her memory wiped to prevent herself from remembering . She implemented the voting programme to do the same to the population , out of fear that remembering the truth would lead to the populace demanding the whale be freed , destroying the ship and killing everyone aboard . 
 The Doctor is furious , realising to his despair that he has to choose between saving the humans or the Star Whale , and angrily chastises Amy for choosing to forget about the whale so he would not face such a choice , telling her he is taking her home after they are finished there . Liz 10 says there has to be another way , but the Doctor slams his fist on the control pad and angrily tells them not to talk to him , because " nobody human has anything to say to [ him ] " . He then decides to alter the controlling device programming to render the Star Whale brain @-@ dead , allowing it to continue through space but no longer feel the pain . As the Doctor works , Amy sees Mandy has found her friend alive , as the whale refuses to eat children . Amy , considering all she has seen and heard , takes control and uses Liz 10 's hand to strike the " abdicate " button that disables the controlling device and allows the Star Whale to break free . To everyone 's surprise , the Whale does not leave , and in fact the ship moves faster . Amy explains to the Doctor that she saw the similarities between him and the Star Whale , and deduced that the Whale came to Earth willingly at the time of crisis . The Doctor and Amy reconcile and return to the TARDIS . Amy is about to tell the Doctor of her impending wedding when she is interrupted by a call to the TARDIS from Winston Churchill , who is face @-@ to @-@ face with a Dalek . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 It is noted that the Earth was abandoned in the 29th century due to solar flares ; this was a central plot point of the classic serials The Ark in Space and The Sontaran Experiment . Liz 10 mentions the Doctor 's previous encounters with British monarchs , including Victoria ( " Tooth and Claw " ) , Elizabeth I ( seen in " The Shakespeare Code " and referenced in The End of Time ) and Elizabeth II ( Silver Nemesis ) . Liz 10 herself is seen again in " The Pandorica Opens " confronting an intruder in the Royal Collection in the 52nd century . The workman 's tent investigated by Amy is in front of a shop called " Magpie Electricals " ; a shop that first appears in " The Idiot 's Lantern " . The episode also continues the story arc of the crack pattern , where it appears at the end of the episode on the side of the Starship UK . 
 = = Production = = 
 Executive producer and head writer Steven Moffat wrote the episode as an introduction for Amy into the role of the Doctor 's companion . The episode showcases her first adventure away from her home world and her first time in space . The climax of the episode , where the Doctor decides the best thing he can do is kill the Star Whale as painlessly as possible but Amy comes up with an alternative solution that is more humane , was designed to stand out in the Doctor 's memory as a failure of a huge scale . It also reinforced the Doctor 's need for a companion and showed how important Amy would be to him . 
 " The Beast Below " was in the second production block of the series . The read @-@ through for the episode took place 20 August 2009 . Scenes set in Liz 10 's Buckingham Palace were filmed at Margam Country Park , Port Talbot on a night shoot on 22 September 2009 . The interior of the orangery was used as the Palace . The room in the Tower of London where the climax takes place was filmed at Neath Abbey . The industrial streets of Starship UK were filmed in a disused factory in <unk> , with the art department designing it in accordance to Moffat 's specific description in the script . Gillan put in some of her own wonder at the set into Amy 's actions when she admires the street for the first time . 
 The set for the whale 's tongue was challenging for both the art department and the actors . With guidance from the stunt co @-@ ordinator , Smith and Gillan were required to slide down a short slide before dropping six feet . Gillan stated that this was the " most bizarre " moment of filming for her . For the opening scene in which the Doctor holds Amy 's ankle while she is suspended in space , Gillan was hoisted on wires above the TARDIS prop in front of a greenscreen while a wind machine created the effects of being in space . 
 Both Sophie Okonedo and Terence Hardiman , who played Liz 10 and government head Hawthorne respectively , have had experience in Doctor Who related roles . Okonedo previously portrayed Alison Cheney , a companion of the alternate Ninth Doctor known as the Shalka Doctor in the online flash @-@ animated serial Scream of the Shalka . Hardiman later voiced King Sitric in the Big Finish audio play The Book of Kells . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Beast Below " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on 10 April 2010 . Unofficial overnight viewing figures stated that 6 @.@ 4 million viewers watched on BBC One with an additional 330 @,@ 000 watching a simulcast on BBC HD . This meant that the show was the most watched show of the day . When time @-@ shifted figures were added , the viewing figures on BBC One were 7 @.@ 93 million while BBC HD 's ratings rose to 494 @,@ 000 , making the final consolidated figures for the episode 8 @.@ 42 million . It was the fifth most @-@ watched programme on BBC One for the week ending 11 April 2010 and the 11th for the week across all UK channels . The episode received an Appreciation Index of 86 , considered " excellent " . 
 " The Beast Below " was released in Region 2 on DVD and Blu @-@ ray with the episodes " The Eleventh Hour " and " Victory of the Daleks " and special features on 7 June 2010 . It was then re @-@ released as part of the complete series five DVD on 8 November 2010 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received positive to mixed reviews by television critics . Andrew Billen , writing in The Times , awarded the episode five stars , praising Matt Smith 's " mercurial " Doctor , Sophie Okonedo 's acting , and the concept of the episode . However , he worried that Moffat " may not be as interested in the Time Lord as the rest of his fans " , referring to a scene in which the Doctor dismisses the death of his people as a " bad day " . Keith Watson in Metro praised the developing relationship between the Doctor and Amy . Sam Wollaston in The Guardian noted the parallels between the future UK and modern Britain , and also confessed to " being in love with Amy Pond " . 
 SFX Magazine 's Russell Lewin gave " The Beast Below " four out of five stars , calling it " immensely satisfying " . He particularly praised the two lead performances and Amy 's characterisation as companion , as well as the writing and dialogue . Dan Martin , also of The Guardian , praised the story for testing the characters ' relationships rather than being just a visit to the Starship UK to make it better , though he commented that the " anti @-@ vivisection message " seemed to be lost along the way . He praised the way the Doctor was portrayed in terms of his more inhumane instincts in contrast to the Tenth Doctor and rated the episode as " four out of five " . Radio Times reviewer Patrick Mulkern said that the episode " neither moved [ him ] to wave a Save the <unk> banner nor reach for the nearest harpoon " and made him feel " out of the loop " as it seemed more directed at children than adults . However , he praised the acting of Smith , Gillan , and Sophie Okonedo , as well as the creation of the Smilers . 
 IGN 's Matt Wales had a more mixed opinion about the episode , rating it a " good " 7 out of 10 . He considered it imaginative with " more brilliant ideas ... than most other shows can muster in an entire season " , but he thought the episode " never quite brought its cacophony of ideas together to form a satisfying whole " , and the conclusion " failed to resonate effectively against the hodgepodge of insane ideas and action " . Because of the large amount of ideas , Wales also pointed out that the characterisation was " scant " , especially on Liz 10 and the Smilers . However , he praised Smith 's and Gillan 's chemistry and Moffat 's " crackling dialogue " . In February 2013 , Moffat cited " The Beast Below " as his least @-@ favourite among the episodes he wrote , describing it as " a bit of a mess " . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " The Beast Below " reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide 
 = Persoonia terminalis = 
 Persoonia terminalis , also known as the Torrington geebung , is a rare shrub belonging to the family Proteaceae , and native to northern New South Wales and southern Queensland in eastern Australia . Reported as a subspecies of Persoonia nutans in 1981 , it was described as a species by Lawrie Johnson and his colleague Peter Weston in 1991 . Two subspecies ‍ — ‌ P. t. terminalis and P. t. recurva ‍ — ‌ are recognised ; both are found on well @-@ drained acidic soils in sclerophyll forests , and P. t. terminalis is also found on granite outcrops . Although similar in appearance , they differ in leaf length and curvature . Both have a restricted range , with P. t. terminalis found in an area of under 100 square kilometres ( 39 square miles ) . 
 P. terminalis grows to 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 5 feet ) , with an upright or spreading habit , and narrow short leaves up to 1 centimetre ( 0 @.@ 4 inches ) in length . The yellow flowers mainly appear in December and January ( Australia 's temperate zone summer ) , and are followed by purple @-@ striped green drupes ( stone fruit ) . The fruit of <unk> are edible , and dispersed by wild vertebrates . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Persoonia terminalis was first reported by Lawrie Johnson of the Royal Botanic Gardens , Sydney , in the 1981 edition of Flora of New South Wales . He viewed it as a distinctive subspecies of Persoonia nutans , a broadly defined species that included many forms since classified as distinct . Queensland botanists Trevor Donald Stanley and Estelle M. Ross classed P. terminalis as part of Persoonia oxycoccoides in their 1983 work Flora of South @-@ eastern Queensland . They considered it more likely a species in its own right , as they believed the description of the Queensland populations did not match the P. oxycoccoides from central New South Wales . Upon re @-@ examining Persoonia nutans and Persoonia oxycoccoides , Johnson and Peter Weston concluded that there were in fact several distinct species , and that Persoonia terminalis was described as such in 1991 . The type specimen was collected 3 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 1 mi ) south of the Torrington pub on the Emmaville – Torrington road by Weston and ecologist Peter Richards , and is now housed in the National Herbarium of New South Wales , which is part of the Royal Botanic Gardens and Domain Trust Sydney and Office of Environment and Heritage . The Herbarium houses over 1 @.@ 2 million other specimens . The generic name Persoonia is derived from the name of South African botanist Christiaan Hendrik Persoon . The specific name terminalis refers to the inflorescences ( clusters of flowers ) that are in this species at the ends of the branchlets . Its common name is the Torrington geebung . 
 It is classified within the genus as within the Lanceolata group , which consists of 58 closely related species with similar flowers but very different foliage . These species will often interbreed with each other in areas where two members of the group occur . P. terminalis has been reported to interbreed with Persoonia <unk> and Persoonia sericea , two other members of the group . 
 Two subspecies are recognised : P. t. recurva has shorter leaves , with margins more curved downwards , that reach a maximum of 0 @.@ 75 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 30 in ) in length , while P. t. terminalis has longer , straighter leaves measuring a maximum of 1 centimetre ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) long . 
 = = Description = = 
 Persoonia terminalis grows as a shrub reaching a height of 0 @.@ 7 – 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 2 1 ⁄ 4 – 5 ft ) , with an upright or spreading habit . It has smooth bark , although new growth is covered in fine hair . The small , narrow leaves are 1 @.@ 2 – 2 millimetres ( 1 ⁄ 16 – 3 ⁄ 32 inch ) wide and 3 @.@ 5 – 10 millimetres ( 1 ⁄ 8 – 3 ⁄ 8 in ) long , with a convex upper surface and margins curved downwards . New leaves can be hairless or slightly hairy ; if the latter , they lose the hair with age . They are concolorous ‍ — ‌ that is , both leaf surfaces are the same colour , or slightly <unk> . The leaves are rougher than those of other <unk> . 
 The yellow flowers mainly appear in December and January ( summer in the temperate zone of Australia ) , although occasional flowers have been seen as late as July . They are terminal , that is , arising at the ends of branchlets , where they appear in groups of one to five . P. terminalis is described as mostly <unk> , which means each stalk bears an individual flower that is subtended by a scale leaf at its junction with the stem . A proportion of flowers have a true leaf at this junction instead , and are described as auxotelic . Each individual flower consists of a cylindrical perianth that splits into four segments or tepals , and contains both male and female parts . Within this , the central style is surrounded by the anther , which splits into four segments ; these curl back and resemble a cross when viewed from above . They provide a landing area for insects attending to the stigma , which is located at the tip of the style . Flowers are followed by the development of the fleshy purple @-@ striped green drupes . These are 1 – 1 @.@ 2 centimetres ( 3 ⁄ 8 – 1 ⁄ 2 in ) long by 30 @.@ 7 – 0 @.@ 8 centimetres ( 12 1 ⁄ 8 – 3 ⁄ 8 in ) wide , with the remnant style at the end . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 P. t. terminalis is found in the Torrington @-@ <unk> area on the western parts of the far Northern Tablelands in New South Wales , roughly halfway between Glen Innes and the Queensland border , at an altitude of between 900 and 1 @,@ 100 metres ( 3 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 600 ft ) above sea level . It grows on acidic , sandy or stony granite soils in dry sclerophyll forest . The region is dotted with granite outcrops , where the subspecies is a component of <unk> <unk> – Brachyloma saxicola shrubland and <unk> <unk> – Kunzea <unk> low shrubland in the Torrington area , and Allocasuarina <unk> shrubland in the Severn River Reserve . It is rated 2R on the ROTAP list . 
 P. t. recurva has two disjunct populations . One is found on the North Western Slopes in New South Wales , near <unk> north west of Inverell , and the other is southwest of Inglewood in southeastern Queensland , between 350 and 450 metres ( 1 @,@ 150 and 1 @,@ 480 ft ) above sea level . It grows on acidic sandstone @-@ based sandy soils in dry sclerophyll forest . Within the <unk> State Conservation Area , it is found in black cypress pine ( Callitris <unk> ) ‍ — ‌ dirty gum ( Eucalyptus <unk> ) woodland and smooth @-@ barked apple ( Angophora <unk> ) ‍ — ‌ black cypress pine woodland . Although P. t. recurva has not been recorded from Kings Plains National Park , it could be expected to be found there due to the availability of suitable habitat . It is rated as 3R on the ROTAP list . 
 Both subspecies are commonly found near the Severn River Nature Preserve , as well as in the <unk> Nature Reserve , where they are components of a woodland ecological community dominated by smooth @-@ barked apple and long @-@ fruited bloodwood ( Corymbia <unk> ) , which grows on sandstone soils . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 P. terminalis grows in a bushfire @-@ prone habitat , where fire is essential for many species to regenerate . P. t. terminalis is killed by bushfire and regenerates from seed , which lies dormant in the soil . Large numbers of Persoonia seedlings appear after fire . However , rocky outcrop habitat is vulnerable to fires occurring at too @-@ frequent intervals of less than five years , which puts many species that regenerate by seed at risk of local extinction as plants are unable to mature to set seed before the next fire . 
 Colletid bees of subgenus Cladocerapis within the genus Leioproctus exclusively forage on and pollinate flowers of many species of Persoonia . Bees of subgenus Filiglossa in the same genus also specialise in feeding on Persoonia flowers , but do not appear to be effective pollinators . The fruit are adapted to be eaten by vertebrates , such as kangaroos and possums , as well as currawongs and other large birds . 
 = = Cultivation potential = = 
 Horticulturists and scientists Rodger Elliot and David L. Jones have proposed that cultivating the plant would aid in its conservation . Cultivating the plant would most likely require good water drainage , a sunny or part @-@ shaded position and acidic soil . P. terminalis is hardy to heavy frosts , and is expected to fare better in a temperate rather than subtropical garden climate . Propagation would theoretically be by seed or by taking cuttings of new growth , though plants of the genus Persoonia as a genus are generally difficult to propagate by any means in cultivation . 
 = The Haunting ( 1963 film ) = 
 The Haunting is a 1963 British supernatural horror film directed and produced by Robert Wise and adapted by Nelson Gidding from the 1959 novel The Haunting of Hill House by Shirley Jackson . It stars Julie Harris , Claire Bloom , Richard Johnson , and Russ Tamblyn . The film depicts the experiences of a small group of people invited by a paranormal investigator to investigate a purportedly haunted house . 
 Screenwriter Gidding , who had worked with director Wise on the 1958 film I Want to Live ! , began a six @-@ month write of the script after reading the book , which Wise had given to him . He perceived the book to be more about mental breakdown than ghosts , and although he was informed after meeting author Shirley Jackson that it was very much a supernatural novel , elements of mental breakdown were introduced into the film . The film was shot at MGM @-@ British Studios in the United Kingdom on a budget of $ 1 @.@ 050 million , with exteriors and the grounds shot at Ettington Park ( now the Ettington Park Hotel ) in the village of Ettington , Warwickshire . Julie Harris was cast by Wise who found her ideal for the psychologically fragile Eleanor , though during production she suffered from depression and had an uneasy relationship with her co @-@ stars . The interior sets were by Elliot Scott , credited by Wise as instrumental in the making of The Haunting . They were designed to be brightly lit , with no dark corners or recesses , and decorated in a Rococo style ; all the rooms had ceilings to create a claustrophobic effect on film . Numerous devices and tricks were used in the filming . Wise used a 30mm anamorphic , wide @-@ angle lens Panavision camera that was not technically ready for use and caused distortions . It was only given to Wise on condition that he sign a memorandum in which he acknowledged that the lens was imperfect . Wise and cinematographer Davis Boulton planned sequences that kept the camera moving , utilizing low @-@ angle takes , and incorporating unusual pans and tracking shots . 
 The Haunting is notable for its lesbian character , Theodora . Although her character 's sexual orientation is left ambiguous in the source novel , the film makes it known subtly and it is one of the few motion pictures of that era to depict a lesbian as feminine and not predatory . According to Harris , however , film censors demanded that Theo never be shown to touch Eleanor in a sensual or suggestive way , to keep the lesbianism less obvious . 
 Upon release on 18 September 1963 , the film performed moderately at the box office and was well received , although the plot was widely criticized for being incoherent . Today it has achieved cult status and is considered by many to be one of the best horror films in cinematic history , and one of the most unsettling . In 2010 , The Guardian newspaper ranked it as the 13th best horror film of all time . Director Martin Scorsese has placed The Haunting first on his list of the 11 scariest horror films of all time . The Haunting was released on DVD in its original screen format with commentary in 2003 , and was released on Blu @-@ ray on 15 October 2013 . The film was remade in 1999 by director Jan de Bont , starring Liam Neeson , Lili Taylor , Catherine Zeta Jones and Owen Wilson , but this version was heavily panned by critics and audiences alike . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dr. John Markway narrates the history of the 90 @-@ year @-@ old Hill House , which was constructed by Hugh Crain as a home for his wife . She died when her carriage crashed against a tree as she approached the house for the first time . Crain remarried , but his second wife died in the house from a fall down the stairs . Crain 's daughter Abigail lived in the house for the rest of her life , never moving out of the nursery . She died calling for her nurse @-@ companion . The companion inherited the house , but later hanged herself from a spiral staircase in the library . Hill House was eventually inherited by a Mrs. Sanderson , although it has stood empty for some time . 
 Markway wishes to study the reported paranormal activity at Hill House . He secures a lease from Mrs. Sanderson to occupy the mansion for the duration of his investigation ; conditional to his acceptance is that he take Luke Sanderson , her heir , with him . Markway has chosen two individuals to accompany him — a psychic , Theodora , also known as Theo , and the meek Eleanor Lance , who experienced poltergeist activity as a child . Eleanor spent her adult life caring for her invalid mother , whose recent death has left Eleanor with severe guilt . 
 The large , maze @-@ like mansion 's walls were constructed with angles slightly askew , resulting in off @-@ center perspectives and doors that open and close by themselves . The immense library contains the ramshackle spiral staircase from which the previous owner hanged herself ; the vast conservatory is adorned with eerie statues . During their first night in the house , Eleanor and Theo are terrified by supernatural occurrences outside Theo 's bedroom door . <unk> banging is heard against the door and the voice of a young girl is heard echoing with laughter . Despite the turbulence , Eleanor feels a tentative affinity to Hill House . 
 The team explores the house the next day , discovering a cold spot outside the nursery and encountering other supernatural phenomena . Markway reveals more about the hauntings that have allegedly occurred . Following another night of loud disturbances the team discovers the words " HELP , <unk> , COME HOME " on a wall , which causes Eleanor severe distress . 
 That night , Theo moves into Eleanor 's room and they fall asleep in the same bed . Eleanor is awakened by the sounds of a man speaking indistinctly and a woman laughing . Fearful , Eleanor asks Theo to hold her hand and she feels it being crushed . As Eleanor hears the sound of a young girl crying , she shouts at whoever is causing the child pain . Theo awakens with a start and turns on the light . Eleanor then sees that Theo had moved from the bed to the couch , and was not the one she felt holding her hand . 
 The following day Dr. Markway 's wife Grace arrives at Hill House to warn her husband that a reporter has learned of Markway 's investigation of Hill House . Markway is concerned when Grace announces that she plans to join the group for the duration of the investigation . She demands a bed in the nursery despite her husband 's warning that it is likely the center of the disturbances . That night the group experiences loud banging and an unseen force attempting to force its way through the living room in which they are staying . The banging then proceeds to move its way up towards the nursery , where the sounds of it destroying the room are heard . This prompts Eleanor to run towards the source ; however Grace is nowhere to be found . Her disappearance is then confirmed the following morning . Eleanor 's mental instability worsens as she falls further under the spell of Hill House . She enters the library and climbs the dilapidated spiral staircase . Once she reaches the top , Grace appears unexpectedly at a trap door and the startled Eleanor nearly falls to her death . Markway rescues Eleanor but just misses seeing Grace , who has disappeared back into the house . 
 Markway becomes alarmed at Eleanor 's obsession with Hill House in spite of the dangers it poses for her . Despite Eleanor 's pleas to stay , Markway insists that she leave at once and asks Luke to accompany her home . Before he can join her in the car , Eleanor drives off and speeds down the road toward the front gates . She soon feels the steering wheel move by itself and the car advances erratically . At first she struggles to regain control but then surrenders to the unseen force . Suddenly Grace appears from behind a tree and steps in front of the car . Eleanor crashes into the tree and is killed . Luke observes it seemed that Eleanor deliberately aimed the car at the tree , but Markway asserts that something was in the car with her . He notes that the tree that claimed Eleanor 's life is the same one that killed the first Mrs. Crain . Theo remarks that Eleanor got what she wanted — to remain with the house . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 Robert Wise was in post @-@ production on West Side Story when he read a review in Time magazine of author Shirley Jackson 's novel , The Haunting of Hill House . Wise read the book and found it frightening ; he passed it to screenwriter friend Nelson Gidding , whom he had worked with on the 1958 film I Want to Live ! . Gidding did a full story treatment for Wise before proceeding to work on the adaptation . As Gidding crafted the screenplay , he came to believe that the novel was not a ghost story at all , but rather a compilation of the insane thoughts of the lead character , Eleanor Vance . He theorised that Vance was having a nervous breakdown , envisaging a scenario in which Hill House is the hospital where she is held , Markway is her psychiatrist , the cold , banging , and violence are the results of shock treatment , and the opening and closing of doors reflected the opening and closing of hospital doors . Wise and Gidding traveled to Bennington , Vermont to meet Shirley Jackson who told them that it was a good idea , but the novel was definitely about the supernatural . Nonetheless , elements of the insanity concept remained in the script , so that the audience was left wondering whether the supernatural events in the film were in Eleanor 's mind or whether they were real . It was also during their visit with Jackson that Wise and Gidding chose the title for the film . As they did not want to keep the book title , they asked Jackson if she had considered an alternative title . She suggested The Haunting , which Wise and Gidding immediately adopted . 
 = = = Script = = = 
 Writing the screenplay took about six months . During this period , Gidding worked alone , and although he passed some of his work to Wise to show him that work on the screenplay was progressing well , he and Wise did not otherwise collaborate on the screenplay . The screenplay made other changes to the story . The number of characters was cut down , the back story was significantly shortened , most of the supernatural events depicted in the novel were kept off @-@ screen , and the greater part of the action was set inside the house to heighten the audience 's feeling of claustrophobia . Eleanor 's role as an outcast was also emphasised . The character of Theodora was given a sharper , slightly more cruel sense of humor in order to make her a foil for Eleanor but also to heighten Eleanor 's outsider status . The role of Luke was made more flippant , and Dr. Markway ( Montague in the novel ) was made a more confident character . The screenplay was finished just after Wise completed work on West Side Story . 
 Wise approached United Artists with the project , but after much delay they turned him down . Wise 's agent then suggested that , since Wise owed Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( MGM ) a film under an old contract , Wise should take the project there . MGM agreed , but would only give Wise a $ 1 million budget . Wise knew he could not do the film at MGM 's Culver City Studios ( now the Sony Pictures Studios ) , so took it to England , as the Eady Levy gave tax breaks and financing to films made there as a way of subsidizing and promoting the British film industry . Someone suggested to Wise that he approach MGM 's Borehamwood Studios subsidiary . Wise had been asked to come to the United Kingdom for a Royal Command Performance of West Side Story , and during the trip made the financing pitch to MGM Borehamwood . They offered a budget of $ 1 @.@ 050 million . With the Eady Levy support , this allowed the film to go forward with production in the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Although Susan Hayward was reported to be in the running for one of the two female leads , Julie Harris was chosen for the role of Eleanor Lance . Wise had seen Harris on stage , and felt she was right for the part of the psychologically fragile Eleanor . Harris agreed to do the film in part because the role was complex and the idea of the house taking over Eleanor 's mind was interesting . But she also chose it because she had a long @-@ standing interest in parapsychology . English actress Claire Bloom was cast as Theo . In part , however , the decision to cast Bloom and Johnson was because of Eady Levy requirements that the cast be partly British . To make Bloom 's character appear more bohemian , beatnik clothing designer Mary Quant was hired to design mod clothing specifically for the Theodora character . 
 Richard Johnson , under contract to MGM , was cast as Dr. Markway . Wise saw Johnson in a Royal Shakespeare Company production of The Devils . Impressed with his acting , he offered him the role . Johnson later said he received invaluable film acting advice from Wise . Wise told him to keep his eyes steady , to blink less , and to try not to time his acting ( Wise said he would take care of that in the editing room ) . Johnson also credited Wise with helping him to craft a much more natural acting performance . Russ Tamblyn , also under contract with MGM , initially turned down the role as Luke because he felt that the character was " a jerk " , although he thought that the script was very good . The studio forced him to reconsider , threatening him with suspension . Tamblyn told the British cinema magazine Film Review in 1995 that while reading the script a second time , he realised the character was much more interesting . " This is the ironic part , " he said , " it turned out to be one of my favourite films that I 've been in ! " 
 Stunt performer Connie Tilton appears twice in the film . She portrays the death of the " Second Mrs. Crain " by flinging herself backward down a flight of stairs . Uncredited actress Freda Knorr is seen in shots before and after the fall ; it is her face audiences associate with the " Second Mrs. Crain " . Tilton also appears when Abigail Crain 's Nurse @-@ Companion hangs herself at the top of the spiral staircase in the library . Although uncredited actress Rosemary Dorken is seen climbing the stairs and going past the camera , it is Tilton 's body that suddenly appears in shot again as the Nurse @-@ Companion hangs herself . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Wise called The Haunting one of his top ten or twelve favorites among the films he made , commenting that it was his favorite filmmaking experience . Ettington Park , ( now the Ettington Park Hotel ) , with its grounds near the village of Ettington , Warwickshire , was used for exterior shots of Hill House . According to actor Russ Tamblyn , Wise approached a society that kept track of British haunted houses , and they gave him a list of such places . Production designer Elliot Scott was sent around the country to look at each house , and Wise personally selected Ettington Park . Some of the cast and crew were housed in Ettington Park during exterior shooting . However , the location did not sit well with Harris and Bloom who upon arriving at Ettington Park thought it was " scary looking outside " , and Wise had to reassure them . Interior sets were constructed and shot at the MGM @-@ British Studios in Borehamwood , Hertfordshire . The interior sets were designed by Elliot Scott , credited by Wise as a " major contributor " to The Haunting . The sets were designed to be brightly lit , with no dark corners or recesses , and decorated in a Rococo style . All rooms had ceilings to create a claustrophobic effect on film . Actor Richard Johnson said that the sets created a subdued feeling among the cast and crew . 
 Wise says that his contract with MGM specified that the picture could only be shot in black @-@ and @-@ white , which Wise preferred for this genre of film . He attempted to make Ettington Park look more sinister through various lighting effects and camera settings , but this failed . Wise and Boulton then hit on the idea of using infrared film for establishing shots of the house . Infrared film stocks were quickly rushed to the location shoot from Belgium . The new film worked . Wise felt the infrared film brought out the " striations of the stone " and made the mansion look like " more of a monster house " . Wise very much wanted to make The Haunting a tribute to Val Lewton , the producer and writer under whom Wise had directed his first film ( the supernatural horror picture Curse of the Cat People ) . Wise says that Lewton 's theory of horror was that people were more afraid of the unknown than things they could see . The decision to show little that was supernatural was made very early in the picture 's pre @-@ production . Wise and cinematographer Davis Boulton also wanted to make distances in the film ( such as hallways ) look longer and darker than the audience would anticipate . Wise approached the Panavision company , and wanted an anamorphic , wide @-@ angle lens . The only lens Panavision had was a 40mm . Wise learned that the company was working on a 30mm lens , but it contained distortions and was not ready . Wise kept pressing , and eventually Panavision turned over the 30mm lens on the condition that Wise signed a memorandum in which he acknowledged it was imperfect . Wise and Boulton also planned shots that kept the camera moving , utilised low @-@ angle shots , and incorporated unusual pans and tracking shots . This led to some of the most active camera movements in Wise 's film career . To accentuate the feeling that the house was alive , exterior shots were filmed so that the windows appeared to be eyes . 
 During the shoot , Harris suffered from depression , and believed that her co @-@ stars did not take the film as seriously as she did . At times , she would cry in her makeup chair prior to the day 's shoot . Bloom did not speak to Harris while filming continued , which worsened her depression . Afterward , Bloom told Harris that the lack of interaction had helped her build her own performance and the two women reconciled . Harris incorporated her own depression into her performance . Wise heightened the sense of character conflict by having the characters " step on one another 's lines " , allowing one character to begin talking before the other had finished . On occasion , the characters simply talk at the same time . 
 To enhance the actors ' performances during scenes in which they react to off @-@ stage voices or sounds , Wise and his sound editors created a " pre @-@ scored " soundtrack of voices and noises . These were played back during filming , and Wise says they greatly enhanced the acting performances . Although some sounds were replaced during post @-@ production , the " pre @-@ scored " sounds were left on the soundtrack just as the actors heard them . Sound editors collected and created sounds in an empty manor house for a week to create the pre @-@ score . Some of the sounds are very low in the bass range , which can cause physical sensations at high volume . 
 = = = Effects and editing = = = 
 Some effects were achieved in ways that are not immediately obvious . In one scene , a supernatural force pushes against the parlor door and bends it inward repeatedly . Though the door appears to some viewers to have been made of latex , it was in fact made of laminated wood ( with a strong crew member pushing a piece of timber hard against the door ) . Two physical effects were used to make the spiral staircase in the library appear frightening . In one scene , the camera appears to ascend the staircase at a rapid rate . However , the point of view is backward , looking down the staircase , as the camera used the staircase 's handrail as a dolly track , being lowered slowly by means of a wire . When the sequence was run in reverse at high speed , the effect was frightening . In another scene , the staircase appears to become unstable and give way as Luke Sanderson ascends it . Later , Eleanor goes up the staircase in a trance @-@ like state . She is rescued by Dr. Markway , even as the staircase seems ready to collapse . The collapsing staircase effect was designed by a metalworker at the Borehamwood studios . The effect was created by tying portions of the steps and railing to a cable that ran inside the staircase 's central pole . When the cable was slackened , these elements moved freely . When tightened , the staircase appeared solid and stable . The effect was so disturbing to the cast that Robert Wise had to ascend the staircase while it was shaking in order to prove it was safe . Other effects also relied on simple cinema tricks . Early in the film , the audience sees Abigail Crain lying in bed , aging from a young child to an old woman . A camera was fixed over the bed , and four different actresses ( each a different age ) posed in the bed beneath the camera . <unk> were used to show the aging process . In another scene , the characters come across a " cold spot " in the haunted mansion . To show the physical effect on the characters , the makeup department applied special makeup to the characters that appeared invisible in normal light . To show the effect of cold on the skin , filters were gradually drawn over the lights on the set , revealing the " cold effect " makeup . 
 The camera work and editing work together to further heighten the frightening qualities of the film . Eleanor is often viewed from above , and in one scene the camera closes in so tightly on her that she is forced backward over a railing . Eleanor 's viewpoint is often juxtaposed with eerie views of the house , as if both viewpoints were the same . Many of the editing choices in the film are also used to heighten the audience 's discomfort . There are a number of rapid cuts in the film that throw off the viewer 's sense of spatial orientation , and Dutch angles are used to imply that reality is off @-@ kilter . Cutting on action — showing the characters exiting a room to the right , only to show them entering the next room from the left — is often violated , so that the viewer cannot get a clear sense of which rooms and hallways are connected to one another . The audience also lacks temporal clues . There are few shots in which they can see out a window to determine whether it 's night or day . When Eleanor is rescued by Dr. Markway on the unstable spiral staircase , some of the windows nearby show strong sunlight streaming in , while others show darkness outside . 
 The Haunting is notable for its lesbian character , Theodora . Although the character 's lesbianism is subtly mentioned in the novel , the film makes it explicit . The film is also one of the few Hollywood motion pictures to depict a lesbian as feminine and not predatory . Theodora 's lesbianism helps to create conflict in the picture . Had Theodora been heterosexual , Eleanor 's growing attraction to Markway would not have threatened her . But with Theodora a clear lesbian , Markway becomes a threat that causes conflict between the psychic and the investigator . Originally , Gidding 's script had contained a scene early in the film in which Theodora is shown in her apartment in the city . It is clear from the context that she has just broken off with her female lover : " I hate you " is written on the mirror in lipstick . Theodora is yelling curses at her out the window and more . However , Wise decided to cut the scene , believing it to be too explicit for a film that worked hard to make things implicit . According to Harris , film censors demanded that Theo never be shown to touch Eleanor , in order to keep the lesbianism less obvious . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Haunting was released on 18 September 1963 . Audiences were frightened by it . Film critic Dora Jane Hamblin related how four of her female friends , expecting a ho @-@ hum film , took out make @-@ up during the film 's first few minutes with the intention of fixing their faces . The film proved so frightening , she said , that the women were jumping out of their seats and losing their items . In Houston , Texas , a local cinema promoted the film as so chilling that it held a contest to see which of four patrons could sit all the way through a midnight screening ; the prize was $ 100 . Despite these stunts , The Haunting was only an average success at the box office . 
 The Haunting opened to mixed reception , the consensus generally being that it was a stylish film but had major flaws in the plot and lacked excitement . Variety called the acting effective , Davis Boulton 's cinematography extraordinarily dexterous and visually exciting , and Elliott Scott 's production design of the " monstrous " house most decidedly the star of the film . However , the unnamed reviewer felt Gidding 's screenplay had " major shortcomings " in that the plot was incomprehensible at points , and the motivation for the characters was poor . Bosley Crowther of The New York Times cited The Haunting as " one of the most highly regarded haunted house films ever produced " but surmised that " there is really no point to it " . Writing in The Atlantic magazine , critic Pauline Kael called the film " moderately elegant and literate and expensive " , but criticised Russ Tamblyn for being " feeble [ and ] cowardly @-@ comic " . She considered the film to be superior to Alfred Hitchcock 's The Birds , also released in 1963 , yet didn 't consider it to be a great film . Kael said of it , " It wasn 't a great movie but I certainly wouldn 't have thought that it could offend anyone . Yet part of the audience at The Haunting wasn 't merely bored , it was <unk> as if the movie , by assuming interests they didn 't have , made them feel resentful or inferior . I 've never felt this in an audience toward crude , bad movies ... But the few scattered people at The Haunting were restless and talkative , the couple sitting near me arguing @-@ the man threatening to leave , the woman assuring him that something would happen . In their terms , they were cheated : nothing happened . And , of course , they missed what was happening all along , perhaps because of nervous impatience or a primitive notion that the real things are physical . " 
 The film 's stature and following has grown steadily since its original release , and it now has cult movie status . Director Martin Scorsese placed The Haunting first on his list of the 11 scariest horror films of all time . Richard Johnson says that Steven Spielberg considers The Haunting one of the " seminal films " of his youth , and Robert Wise says that Spielberg told him The Haunting was " the scariest film ever made ! " Richard Armstrong in Rough Guide to Film ( 2007 ) called it " one of the most frightening films ever made " , and said Julie Harris ' performance is played " with an intensity that is frightening in itself " . In 2010 , The Guardian newspaper ranked it as the 13th best horror film of all time . However , not all critics think so highly of the film ; Yoram Allon and Neil <unk> have stated that they believe the film is " frankly overrated " , and professional filmmaker Russell Evans has argued that few people truly find the film shocking or disturbing . As of October 2014 , review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes scores the film with an 86 % rating based on 36 reviews . The film was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Director ( Robert Wise ) . 
 In 2010 , Cinema Retro magazine hosted a screening of the film at Ettington Park . Richard Johnson was a special guest at the event and participated in a Q & A prior to the screening . Johnson said that he had never actually stepped foot in the hall during filming , and that this was the first occasion he had actually been inside the premises . The movie was mentioned in Dan Simmons ' 2002 novel A Winter Haunting . 
 = = Remakes = = 
 A remake of the film was attempted in the early 1990s by noted horror author Stephen King . King pitched the project under the name Rose Red to Steven Spielberg . The project went into turnaround and a complete script was written , but Spielberg demanded more thrills and action sequences while King wanted more horror . King and Spielberg mutually agreed to shelve the project after several years of work , and King bought back the rights to the script . King returned to the project in 1999 , completed a revised script , and successfully pitched the script to producer Mark <unk> . King 's revised script aired as a miniseries titled Rose Red in 2002 , but bears only superficial resemblance to The Haunting . 
 The Haunting was formally remade in 1999 under the same title . Legendary horror director Wes Craven initially worked on the project , but abandoned it . This adaptation , directed by Jan de Bont and starring Liam Neeson , Catherine Zeta @-@ Jones , Owen Wilson , and Lili Taylor in the roles of Markway ( now named Marrow ) , Theo , Luke , and Eleanor , was widely panned . 
 = = Home media = = 
 In 1990 , media mogul Ted Turner announced he would begin colorizing black @-@ and @-@ white motion pictures to make them more pleasing to audiences watching his cable networks . The announcement generated extensive controversy . Touring Turner 's colorization facilities as a member of the Directors Guild , Wise learned that Turner was colorizing The Haunting . Wise was able to prevent the colorization by pointing to his contract , which stated the picture could only be in black @-@ and @-@ white . 
 Warner Home Video released the film on VHS in pan @-@ and @-@ scan format in 1998 . It was released on DVD in its original screen format in 2003 . The DVD release included voice @-@ over commentary from Wise , Gidding , Bloom , Harris , Johnson , and Tamblyn . The film was released on Blu @-@ ray with the same commentary track on 15 October 2013 . 
 = Roman – Parthian War of 58 – 63 = 
 The Roman – Parthian War of 58 – 63 was fought between the Roman Empire and the Parthian Empire over control of Armenia , a vital buffer state between the two realms . Armenia had been a Roman client state since the days of Emperor Augustus , but in 52 / 53 , the Parthians succeeded in installing their own candidate , Tiridates , on the Armenian throne . 
 These events coincided with the accession of Nero to the imperial throne in Rome , and the young emperor decided to react vigorously . The war , which was the only major foreign campaign of his reign , began with rapid success for the Roman forces , led by the able general Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo . They overcame the forces loyal to Tiridates , installed their own candidate , Tigranes VI , on the Armenian throne , and left the country . The Romans were aided by the fact that the Parthian king Vologases was embroiled in the suppression of a series of revolts in his own country . As soon as these had been dealt with , however , the Parthians turned their attention to Armenia , and after a couple of years of inconclusive campaigning , inflicted a heavy defeat on the Romans in the Battle of Rhandeia . 
 The conflict ended soon after , in an effective stalemate and a formal compromise : a Parthian prince of the Arsacid line would henceforth sit on the Armenian throne , but his nomination had to be approved by the Roman emperor . This conflict was the first direct confrontation between Parthia and the Romans since Crassus ' disastrous expedition and Mark Antony 's campaigns a century earlier , and would be the first of a long series of wars between Rome and Iranian powers over Armenia ( see Roman – Persian Wars ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 Ever since the expanding Roman Republic and the Parthian Empire had come into contact in the mid @-@ 1st century BC , there had been friction between the two great powers over the control of the various states lying between them . The largest and most important of these was the Kingdom of Armenia . In 20 BC , Augustus succeeded in establishing a Roman protectorate over the country , when Tigranes III was enthroned as king of Armenia . Roman influence was secured through a series of Roman @-@ sponsored kings until 37 AD , when a Parthian @-@ supported candidate , Orodes , assumed the throne . The Roman @-@ supported king , Mithridates , recovered his throne with the support of Emperor Claudius in 42 AD , but was deposed in 51 AD by his nephew Rhadamistus of Iberia . His rule quickly became unpopular however , and this gave the newly crowned king Vologases I of Parthia the opportunity to intervene . His forces quickly seized the two capitals of Armenia , Artaxata and Tigranocerta , and put his younger brother Tiridates on the throne . The onset of a bitter winter and the outbreak of an epidemic forced the Parthians forces to withdraw , allowing Rhadamistus to retake control of the country . His behavior towards his subjects , however , was even worse than before , and they rose in rebellion against him . Thus in 54 AD Rhadamistus fled to his father 's court in Iberia , and Tiridates re @-@ established himself in Armenia . 
 In the same year , in Rome , Emperor Claudius died and was succeeded by his stepson Nero . The Parthian encroachment in an area regarded as lying within the Roman sphere of influence worried the Roman leadership , and was widely seen as a major test of the new emperor 's ability . Nero reacted vigorously , appointing Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo , a general who had distinguished himself in Germania and now served as governor of Asia , to supreme command in the East . 
 = = Diplomatic maneuvers and preparations = = 
 Corbulo was given control over two provinces , Cappadocia and Galatia ( modern @-@ day central Turkey ) , with <unk> and later proconsular authority or imperium . Although Galatia was considered a good recruiting @-@ ground and Cappadocia had a few units of auxiliaries , the bulk of his army came from Syria , where half the garrison of four legions and several units of auxiliaries was transferred to his command . 
 Initially , the Romans hoped to resolve the situation by diplomatic means : Corbulo and Ummidius Quadratus , the governor of Syria , both sent embassies to Vologases , proposing that he give up hostages , as was customary during negotiations , to ensure good faith . Vologases , himself preoccupied by the revolt of his son Vardanes which forced him to withdrew his troops from Armenia , readily complied . A period of inactivity ensued , while the Armenian issue remained in limbo . Corbulo used this lull to restore his troops ' discipline and combat readiness , which had diminished in the peaceful garrisons of the East . According to Tacitus , Corbulo discharged all who were old or in ill health , kept the entire army under canvas in the harsh winters of the Anatolian plateau to acclimatize them to the snows of Armenia , and enforced a strict discipline , punishing deserters by death . At the same time however , he took care to be constantly present amongst his men , sharing their hardships . 
 In the meantime , Tiridates , backed by his brother , refused to go to Rome , and even engaged in operations against those Armenians whom he deemed were loyal to Rome . Tension mounted and finally , in the early spring of 58 , war broke out . 
 = = Outbreak of the war — The Roman offensive = = 
 Corbulo had placed a large number of his auxiliaries in a line of forts near the Armenian frontier under a former primus pilus , <unk> <unk> . Disobeying Corbulo 's orders , he used some newly arrived auxiliary cavalry alae to stage a raid against the Armenians , who appeared to be unprepared . In the event , his raid failed , and the retreating troops even spread their panic amongst the garrisons of the other forts . It was an inauspicious start for a campaign , and Corbulo severely punished the survivors and their commanders . 
 Having drilled his army for two years Corbulo , despite this misadventure , was ready . He had three legions at his disposal ( III Gallica and VI Ferrata from Syria and IV Scythica ) , to which were added a large number of auxiliaries and allied contingents from Eastern client kings like Aristobulus of Lesser Armenia and Polemon II of Pontus . The situation was furthermore favorable to the Romans : Vologases faced a serious revolt by the Hyrcanians in the region of the Caspian Sea as well as incursions of <unk> and <unk> nomads from Central Asia , and was unable to support his brother . 
 The war thus far had featured mostly skirmishing along the Roman – Armenian border . Corbulo tried to protect the pro @-@ Roman Armenian settlements from attack , and simultaneously retaliated against the Parthians ' supporters . Given that Tiridates avoided confrontation in a pitched battle , Corbulo divided his force , so that they could attack several places simultaneously , and instructed his allies , Kings Antiochus IV of Commagene and Pharasmanes I of Iberia to raid Armenia from their own territories . In addition , an alliance was concluded with the <unk> , a tribe living in northwestern Armenia . 
 Tiridates reacted by sending envoys to ask why he was under attack , since hostages had been given . To this , Corbulo reiterated the demand to seek the recognition of his crown from Nero . Eventually , the two sides agreed on a meeting . Tiridates announced that he would bring 1 @,@ 000 men to the meeting , implying that Corbulo should bring the same number of men " in peaceful fashion , without breastplates and helmets " . Tacitus suggests that Tiridates intended to overwhelm the Romans , as the Parthian cavalry would be superior to an equal number of Roman infantry in any case . At any rate , in a show of force Corbulo decided to take with him the larger part of his force , not only IV Ferrata , but also 3 @,@ 000 men from III Gallica plus the auxiliaries . Tiridates also appeared at the agreed site , but , seeing the Romans in full battle array , and in turn distrusting their intentions , he did not come closer and withdrew during the night . Tiridates then resorted to a tactic that had worked well a century earlier against Mark Antony : he sent forces to raid the Roman army 's supply route , which stretched over the mountains back to <unk> in the Black Sea . They failed however , since the Romans had taken care to secure the mountain routes by a series of forts . 
 = = = Fall of Artaxata = = = 
 Corbulo now resolved to directly attack Tiridates ' fortified strongholds . Not only were they instrumental in controlling the surrounding country and sources of revenue and soldiers , but in addition , a threat to them might force Tiridates to risk a pitched battle , since , in the words of historian A. Goldsworthy , " a king who could not defend communities loyal to him [ ... ] lost prestige . " Corbulo and his subordinates successfully stormed three of these forts , including <unk> ( possibly modern Iğdır ) , " the strongest of all in that province " according to Tacitus , within a day with minimal casualties , and massacred their garrisons . Terrified by this display of Roman might , several towns and villages surrendered , and the Romans prepared to move against the northern Armenian capital , Artaxata . 
 This forced Tiridates to confront the Romans with his army , as they approached Artaxata . The Roman force , reinforced by a <unk> of X Fretensis , marched in a hollow square , with the legions supported by auxiliary horsemen and foot archers . The Roman soldiers were under strict orders not to break formation , and despite repeated probing attacks and feigned retreats by the Parthian horse archers , they held together until nightfall . During the night , Tiridates withdrew his army , abandoning his capital ; its inhabitants promptly surrendered and were allowed to leave unmolested , but the city was torched , since the Romans could not spare sufficient men for garrisoning it . 
 = = = Fall of Tigranocerta = = = 
 In 59 , the Romans marched to the south , towards Tigranocerta , Armenia 's second capital city . On their way , Corbulo 's men punished those who withstood or hid from them , while leniency was shown to those who surrendered . In the harsh , dry terrain of northern Mesopotamia , the army suffered from lack of provisions , especially water , until they reached the more fertile areas near Tigranocerta . During that time , a plot to murder Corbulo was uncovered and suppressed . Several Armenian nobles who had joined the Roman camp were implicated and executed . According to a story provided by Frontinus , when the Roman army arrived at Tigranocerta , they launched the severed head of one of the conspirators into the city . By chance , it landed right where the city council was assembled ; they immediately decided to surrender the city , which was consequently spared . Shortly after , an attempt by the Parthian army under king Vologases to enter Armenia was blocked by <unk> Severus , the commander of the auxiliaries . 
 The Romans were now in control of Armenia , and they promptly installed its new king , Tigranes VI , the last descendant of the Cappadocian royal house , in Tigranocerta . Some outlying western parts of Armenia were also ceded to the Roman vassals . Corbulo left 1 @,@ 000 legionaries , three auxiliary cohorts and two cavalry alae ( ca . 3 @-@ 4 @,@ 000 men ) behind to support the new monarch , and retired with the rest of his army to Syria , whose governorship he now ( in 60 AD ) assumed as a reward for his success . 
 = = Parthian counterattack = = 
 The Romans were well aware that their victory was still fragile , and that as soon as the Parthian king had dealt with the <unk> rebellion , he would turn his attention to Armenia . Despite Vologases ' reluctance to risk an all @-@ out conflict with Rome , in the end , he was forced to act when Tigranes raided the Parthian province of Adiabene in 61 . The enraged protests of its governor <unk> , and his pleas for protection , could not be ignored by Vologases , whose prestige and royal authority were at stake . Vologases therefore hastily concluded a treaty with the Hyrcanians so as to be free to campaign against Rome , and called an assembly of the grandees of his realm . There he publicly reaffirmed Tiridates ' position as king of Armenia by crowning him with a diadem . In order to reinstall his brother on the Armenian throne , the Parthian king assembled a force of picked cavalry under Monaeses , complemented by infantry from Adiabene . 
 In response , Corbulo sent the legions IV Scythica and XII Fulminata to Armenia , while he detailed the three other legions under his command ( III Gallica , VI Ferrata and XV Apollinaris ) to fortify the line of the river Euphrates , fearing that the Parthians might invade Syria . At the same time , he petitioned Nero to appoint a separate legate for Cappadocia , with the responsibility for conducting the war in Armenia . 
 = = = Parthian siege of Tigranocerta = = = 
 Monaeses meanwhile entered Armenia and approached Tigranocerta . Tigranes had taken care to gather supplies , and the city was well @-@ fortified and garrisoned with Romans and Armenians alike . The siege was largely undertaken by the <unk> contingent , since the Parthians , being cavalrymen , were unskilled and unwilling to engage in siegework . The Parthian assault failed , and was driven back with loss by a successful Roman sally . At this point , Corbulo sent an envoy to Vologases , who had encamped with his court at Nisibis , near Tigranocerta and the Roman – Parthian border . The failed siege and a shortage of fodder for his cavalry forced Vologases to agree to withdraw Monaeses from Armenia . At the same time however , the Romans too left Armenia , something that , according to Tacitus , raised suspicions of Corbulo 's motives : some whispered that he had reached an agreement of mutual withdrawal with the Parthians , and that he was unwilling to risk his reputation by renewing hostilities against them . At any rate , a truce was arranged and a Parthian embassy was dispatched to Rome . The negotiations failed to reach an agreement , and war was resumed in the spring of 62 . 
 In the meantime , the asked @-@ for legate for Cappadocia had arrived , in the person of Lucius Caesennius Paetus , the consul of the previous year ( 61 AD ) . The army was divided between him and Corbulo , with IV Scythica , XII Fulminata , the newly arrived V Macedonica and the auxiliaries from Pontus , Galatia and Cappadocia going to Paetus , while Corbulo retained III Gallica , VI Ferrata and X Fretensis . Because of their antagonism for glory , the relations between the two Roman commanders were strained from the beginning . It is notable that Corbulo kept the legions he had spent the past few years campaigning with , and gave his colleague , who after all was expected to conduct the main campaign , the more inexperienced units . The total Roman force arrayed against the Parthians was nevertheless considerable : the six legions alone totaled some 30 @,@ 000 men . The exact number and disposition of auxiliary units is unclear , but there were seven cavalry alae and seven infantry cohorts in Syria alone , comprising a force of 7 @-@ 9 @,@ 000 troops . 
 = = = Battle of Rhandeia = = = 
 Paetus nonetheless appeared confident of victory , and followed the Parthian declaration of war and capture of Tigranocerta with his own invasion of Armenia , while Corbulo remained at Syria , further strengthening the fortifications in the Euphrates frontier . Paetus had only two legions with him , IV Scythica and XII Fulminata , and advanced towards Tigranocerta . A few minor forts were taken , but a lack of supplies forced him to withdraw westwards for the winter . 
 The Parthians had originally intended to invade Syria , but Corbulo put on a convincing display of military might , building a strong flotilla of ships equipped with catapults and a bridge over the Euphrates , which allowed him to establish a foothold on the Parthian shore . Therefore , the Parthians abandoned their plans for Syria , and turned their attention towards Armenia . There , Paetus had dispersed his forces and granted extended leaves to his officers , so that he was taken unawares at the Parthian advance . Upon learning of it , he initially advanced to meet Vologases , but after a reconnaissance detachment was defeated , he panicked and withdrew hastily . Paetus sent his wife and son to safety in the fortress of Arsamosata , and tried to block the Parthian advance by occupying the passes of the Taurus mountains with detachments from his army . In so doing , however , he further dispersed his forces , which were then defeated in detail by the Parthians . Roman morale plunged and panic set in among the army , which was now besieged in a series of hastily erected camps near Rhandeia . Paetus , who appears to have fallen into desperate inactivity , sent urgent messages to Corbulo to come to his rescue . 
 Corbulo in the meantime had been aware of the danger faced by his colleague , and put part of his forces on readiness ; but he did not march to join Paetus , and some accused him of delaying in order to reap more glory from rescuing him . Nevertheless , when the calls for assistance arrived , he responded quickly and marched forth with half of the Syrian army , carrying many provisions laden on camels . He soon met dispersed men of Paetus ' army , and managed to rally them around his force . But before he could arrive to the rescue , Paetus had capitulated : the Parthians , aware that relief was nearing , increasingly harassed the Romans , until Paetus was forced to send a letter to Vologases to seek terms . The subsequent treaty was humiliating : not only would the Romans leave Armenia and surrender all forts they held , but they also agreed to build a bridge over the nearby <unk> river over which Vologases could pass in triumph , sitting atop an elephant . In addition , the Roman army was liberally plundered by the Armenians , who took even the Romans ' weapons and clothes without facing any resistance . Still worse , according to rumors reported by Tacitus , the Romans were made to pass under the yoke , a gesture of ultimate humiliation in Roman eyes . 
 The two Roman forces met on the banks of the Euphrates near Melitene , amidst scenes of mutual grief ; while Corbulo lamented the undoing of his achievements , Paetus tried to convince him to attempt to reverse the situation by invading Armenia . Corbulo however refused , claiming that he did not have the authority to do so , and that either way the army was too worn out to be able to campaign effectively . In the end , Paetus retired to Cappadocia and Corbulo to Syria , where he received envoys from Vologases , who demanded that he evacuate his bridgehead over the Euphrates . In turn , Corbulo demanded the Parthian evacuation of Armenia . Vologases agreed to this , and both sides withdrew their forces , leaving Armenia once again masterless but de facto under Parthian control , until a Parthian delegation could travel to Rome . 
 = = Corbulo 's return and peace settlement = = 
 Rome , meanwhile , appears to have been largely unaware of the real situation in Armenia . Tacitus <unk> records that " trophies for the Parthian war and arches were erected in the center of the Capitoline hill " by decree of the Senate , even while the war was not yet decided . Whatever illusions the Roman leadership had , they were shattered by the arrival of the Parthian delegation to Rome in the spring of 63 . Their demands , and the subsequent interrogation of the centurion who accompanied them , revealed to Nero and the Senate the true extent of the disaster , which Paetus had concealed in his dispatches . Nevertheless , in the words of Tacitus , the Romans decided to " accept a dangerous war over a disgraceful peace " ; Paetus was recalled , and Corbulo placed again in charge of the campaign into Armenia , with extraordinary imperium which placed him above all other governors and client rulers in the East . Corbulo 's post as governor of Syria was entrusted to Gaius Cestius Gallus . 
 Corbulo reordered his forces , withdrawing the defeated and demoralized IV Scythica and XII Fulminata legions to Syria , leaving X Fretensis to guard Cappadocia , and leading his veteran III Gallica and VI Ferrata to Melitene , where the invasion army was to be assembled . To these he also added V Macedonica , which had remained in Pontus throughout the previous year and not been tainted by the defeat , the newly arrived XV Apollinaris , and large numbers of auxiliaries and contingents of the client kings . 
 After his army crossed the Euphrates , following a route opened up by Lucullus over a hundred years before , he received envoys from Tiridates and Vologases . At the approach of such a large force , and aware of Corbulo 's ability as a general , the two Arsacids were anxious to negotiate . Indeed , Corbulo , no doubt on instructions from Nero , reiterated the old Roman position : if Tiridates would accept his crown from Rome , then renewed war could be averted . Tiridates readily agreed to negotiations , and Rhandeia , the scene of last year 's Roman defeat , was agreed upon as a meeting place . To the Armenians , this place was intended as a reminder of their strength , while Corbulo agreed to it because there he hoped to expunge the earlier disgrace , by peace or war . Once there , Corbulo put Paetus ' son , who served under him as a legate , in charge of a party that was to gather the remains of the Roman soldiers and ensure them a proper burial . On the agreed day , both Tiridates and Corbulo , each accompanied by 20 horsemen , met between the two camps . Tiridates agreed to travel to Rome and seek confirmation of his crown from Nero . In sign of this agreement , a few days later , both armies put on a display , arrayed in full parade gear . Tiridates approached the Roman camp , where a statue of the Emperor Nero had been erected upon a raised platform , and placed his royal diadem at its feet in submission . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In 66 , Tiridates visited Rome to receive his crown and was lavishly received by Nero , who used the occasion to boost his own popularity . He ordered the gates of the Temple of Janus to be shut , thus declaring that peace reigned throughout the Roman Empire . 
 Nero celebrated this peace as a major achievement : he was hailed as imperator and held a triumph , although no new territory had been won , and the peace reflected a compromise rather than a true victory . For although Rome could prevail militarily in Armenia , politically , she had no genuine alternatives to the Arsacid candidacy on offer for the Armenian throne . Armenia would henceforth be ruled by an Iranian dynasty , and despite its nominal allegiance to Rome , it would come under increasing Parthian influence . In the judgment of later generations , " Nero had lost Armenia " , and although the Peace of Rhandeia ushered in a period of relatively peaceful relations that would last for 50 years , Armenia would continue to be a constant bone of contention between the Romans , the Parthians , and their Sassanid successors . For the short term however , the peace that Nero secured was kept by both sides , even while the bulk of Rome 's eastern forces was involved in the suppression of the Jewish Revolt . 
 As for Corbulo , he was honoured by Nero as the man who had brought this " triumph " to be , but his popularity and influence with the army made him a potential rival . Together with the involvement of his son @-@ in @-@ law Lucius Annius <unk> in a foiled plot against Nero in 66 , Corbulo became suspect in the eyes of the emperor . In 67 , while journeying in Greece , Nero ordered him to be executed ; upon hearing of this , Corbulo committed suicide . 
 The war had also demonstrated to the Romans that the defensive system in the East , as put in place by Augustus , was no longer adequate . Thus the following years saw a major reorganization of the Roman East : the client kingdoms of Pontus and Colchis ( in 64 AD ) , Cilicia , Commagene and Lesser Armenia ( in 72 AD ) were made into Roman provinces , the number of legions in the area increased , and Roman presence in the Caucasian client states of Iberia and Albania strengthened , with the aim of strategically encircling Armenia . Direct Roman control was extended to the entire line of the Euphrates , marking the beginning of the Eastern limes that would survive until the Muslim conquests of the 7th century . 
 = Ikata , Ehime = 
 Ikata ( <unk> , Ikata @-@ chō ) is a small town located in Nishiuwa District , Ehime Prefecture , Japan . Following a recent merger with the neighboring towns of Misaki and Seto , the town now spans the mountainous Sadamisaki Peninsula , the narrowest peninsula in Japan and the westernmost point on the island of Shikoku . 
 This unique geography has greatly influenced Ikata 's growth . On the one hand , it has presented significant challenges to urban development that were not overcome until recently in the town 's long history . On the other , the peninsula is what gives the town its beautiful mountain and ocean scenery which , bolstered by significant investments in infrastructure and tourist facilities , has formed the basis for a burgeoning tourism industry . 
 In addition to the beauty of its rugged , natural landscape , Ikata has long been known for fishing and mikan orange farming . In recent years Ikata has also become a hotspot of modern energy production — the Ikata Nuclear Power Plant until 2012 produced much of Shikoku 's electricity , and the town 's windy mountains are dotted by dozens of windmills . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Prehistory = = = 
 The Sadamisaki Peninsula area has been inhabited since at least the Jōmon Period ( 10 @,@ 000 – 300 BC ) , as evidenced by the discovery of stone tools and earthenware pots in the Misaki and Kushi neighborhoods . 
 In 1963 a local man discovered a stone ax dating back to the mid @-@ Yayoi Period ( 300 BC – 250 AD ) in his farm plot in the Kawachi neighborhood . Upon further investigation by the Japan Archaeological Society in 1986 , the area was recognized as containing the remains of a highland settlement ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) . This is a type of settlement usually located several tens of meters above the surrounding area on mountainsides , and is peculiar to the Yayoi period . 
 = = = Classical era = = = 
 After the Taika Reform of 646 , Ikata and the greater surrounding area became known as the Uwa District in 701 . The Uwa District covered the entire Nanyo region ( map ) until it was split in two in 866 . Since districts were defined by population , one can infer that the area was underdeveloped and sparsely populated at the time . 
 = = = Feudal era = = = 
 Towards the end of the Heian Period , the Yawatahama and Ikata area became known as Yano ( <unk> , Yano @-@ gō , later <unk> Yano @-@ shō ) . As ownership of farmlands became increasingly concentrated in the hands of local ruling families , control of the Yano area was given to Taira no <unk> , a member of the Heike clan . 
 Some members of the Heike family secretly settled in the Seto area in 1185 after being defeated in the Genpei Wars . 
 Entering the Edo Period and the Tokugawa shogunate , the Uwa District came under control of the Uwajima Domain ( <unk> , Uwajima @-@ han ) . From 1610 to 1612 , the first Uwajima feudal lord , Tomita Nobutaka , gathered farmers from the local area to dig a canal through the thinnest part of the Sadamisaki Peninsula , Seto 's Mitsukue neighborhood . The project was soon canceled due to insufficient funds . By this time , the name Ikata ( <unk> , Ikata @-@ ura ) can be seen in records of taxes paid to the feudal lords . 
 The Mitsukue neighborhood prospered as a port town during the feudal period , as it was used as a port of rest for <unk> on their way to and from the capital as part of the <unk> <unk> system . This traffic was likely the source of the demand for Nobutaka 's abortive attempt to create a shortcut through the peninsula . 
 = = = Modern era = = = 
 A decade after the Meiji Restoration , in March 1878 the Uwa District was divided into the current <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and Nishiuwa districts ( <unk> , South- , <unk> , and West @-@ Uwa , respectively ) . Ikata was designated a village ( <unk> , <unk> ) in 1889 , and other neighborhoods along the peninsula soon followed suit , many merging to reduce the number of independent settlements from 26 to 6 . 
 More recently , Seto 's Mitsukue Bay was used for submarine training operations by the Japanese navy leading up to World War II , as the bay 's shape is similar to that of Pearl Harbor . A monument named The Nine War Heroes ( <unk> , Kyū <unk> ) stands in Suka Park in Mitsukue as a memorial dedicated to the nine young men ( ages 21 – 28 ) who were stationed in the Mitsukue area for these exercises . According to the plaque on the monument , the men were quite friendly with the locals , and stories are still told about them in the neighborhood to this day . The men died on December 8 , 1941 , during one of the initial attacks on Pearl Harbor . 
 In 1955 another round of mergers corresponding to the Great Shōwa Merger reduced the number of municipal entities to 3 . 
 In 1977 the Ikata Nuclear Power Plant began operation as the first nuclear power plant on the island of Shikoku . 
 On April 1 , 2005 , Ikata merged with the nearby towns of Misaki and Seto to create the new town of Ikata , which spans the Sadamisaki Peninsula . 
 = = = Current events = = = 
 March , 2014 . National attention turns to Ikata as the towns elections near . Many wonder if Ikata will approve the restart of its nuclear power generators . 
 The installation of many new windmills in 2006 and 2007 solicited a significant amount of noise complaints from nearby residents . 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 March 1878 — Meiji reforms create the Nishiuwa District 
 1889 — Ikata is designated a village . 
 March 31 , 1955 — The villages of Ikata and <unk> merge , forming the old town of Ikata 
 September 30 , 1977 — Reactor No. 1 of the Ikata Nuclear Power Plant begins operation 
 April 1 , 2005 — The towns of Misaki and Seto were merged into Ikata to form the new and expanded town of Ikata 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 Ikata is on the Sadamisaki peninsula , Japan 's narrowest peninsula and the westernmost point on the island of Shikoku . The peninsula is extremely mountainous , with steep cliffs and precious little usable flat land . To combat this , the town 's bays and ponds have seen vigorous coastal reclamation efforts dating back to the early Meiji period ( late 1800s ) . Ikata 's mountainsides are covered with terraced mikan fields , and natural forest in the undeveloped areas . 
 The various neighborhoods of Ikata are found nestled among the foothills of the mountains , connected only by winding coastal roads and a single highway , Route 197 . The biggest of the neighborhoods and the administrative center of Ikata is <unk> , near the eastern edge of the town . 
 Ikata is surrounded on three sides by ocean — the Iyo Sea ( part of the Inland Sea ) to the north , the Uwa Sea ( Pacific Ocean ) to the south , and the Hōyo Strait ( separating Shikoku from Kyūshū ) to the west . 
 The climate in Ikata is warm , with an average year @-@ round temperature of 16 – 17 ° C ( 61 – 63 ° F ) and 1 @,@ 500 ml of yearly rain . The coldest parts of winter remain above freezing ( 5 ° C or 41 ° F on average ) , with snowfall seen only once or twice per year . Rain is concentrated in the rainy season in June and July , and also in September . 
 The length of the peninsula makes accurate weather prediction difficult for the town ; when driving down Melody Line , it is not uncommon to find it sunny between one set of tunnels , rainy between another , and foggy between yet another . Ikata 's position , stretching out into the ocean , also makes it a frequent target for typhoons . 
 = = = Nearby cities and towns = = = 
 Yawatahama to the East 
 Ōita , Ōita Prefecture to the West , across the Hōyo Strait 
 = = Demographics = = 
 Ikata is a small town , with a population of 10 @,@ 637 as of March 31 , 2014 . The total land area of the town is 94 @.@ 37 km2 , making the population density 113 persons per km2 . However , much of the land on the peninsula is quite mountainous and not suited for development ; the population density of the individual settlements , which are squeezed into the small bay areas in the foothills of the mountains , is much higher . Extrapolating from data based on the most recent land survey , only 3 @.@ 21 % of the town 's land is inhabited ; this puts the population density at a much higher 3 @,@ 510 persons / kilometer @-@ squared . 
 Like much of rural Japan , Ikata faces a rapidly declining and aging population . According to the Ikata website , roughly 40 % of the town 's population is 65 or older . Furthermore , many elementary and middle schools have closed since the 1970s . Those that remain have very small student populations . For example , Ikata Elementary School is Ikata 's largest elementary school ; there were 303 students in 1987 , 162 in 2006 , and 128 in 2014 ; <unk> Elementary was Old Ikata 's smallest school ; it had 51 students in 1987 , and only 14 in 2007 @.@ before it closed in 2010 . Currently , Futami Elementary is Ikata 's smallest Elementary school with 21 students . However , plans are in effect to close the school at the end of the current fiscal year ( April , 2015 ) . 
 This population issue was a significant part of the impetus for the recent merger of Old Ikata with Seto and Misaki . While Old Ikata is geographically more accessible , and has enjoyed the economic benefits of the Ikata Nuclear Power Plant , Seto and Misaki have experienced even more severe aging and decline of their populations . In 2000 , Seto 's working @-@ age population dipped below 50 % of its total . 
 Ethnically Ikata is extremely homogeneous with only a handful of non @-@ Japanese residents , most of whom are either temporary farm laborers from China , or English educators on the JET Programme . 
 = = Transportation and sightseeing = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 Due to Ikata 's length and mountainous terrain , regular bus service did not reach the tip of the peninsula until the 1960s . Until then , the only public transportation available was local ferries that connected the bays of each neighborhood . In 1963 , the original Route 197 was completed . It follows the coastline , and is thus extremely winding and narrow , with very little room for cars to pass . Traversing the peninsula by this route takes hours and can be quite nerve @-@ wracking ; this earned it the ire of the locals , who came up with a disparaging nickname that is a pun on the actual name : " the Don 't @-@ go @-@ there Terrible Road " ( <unk> , i @-@ ku @-@ na <unk> , where i @-@ ku @-@ na is an alternate pronunciation of " 197 " , literally meaning " don 't go " ) . 
 = = = Modern day = = = 
 The Ikata leg of the new Route 197 was completed in 1987 and is the heart of transportation in modern Ikata , affectionately nicknamed " Melody Line " . Unlike the old roads , Melody Line boasts two full lanes and runs relatively straight down the peninsula . Seated high in the mountains , drivers can enjoy views of both the Pacific Ocean and Inland Sea . The route terminates at Misaki and continues over to Kyūshū by ferries that connect Misaki Port with <unk> ( Ōita , Ōita ) and Beppu , Ōita . 
 Melody Line is such an improvement over the old roads that it has become a significant Ehime sightseeing attraction in itself , with many tourists coming to see cherry blossoms in the spring . Together with the city of Iyo 's seaside Route 378 , Melody Line makes one of the prefecture 's recommended sightseeing routes , and one of <unk> 's " 100 Hidden Treasures of Japan " ( <unk> , nihon no <unk> <unk> @-@ sen ) . 
