 = = = Amenities = = = 
 The ballpark features several eateries from which spectators can watch the game . A glass @-@ enclosed multilevel restaurant named the " Terrace Club " is located along the left field foul line on the suite level . Spectators need a valid game ticket and a pass to enter to the Terrace Club . On non @-@ game days it is used for private and corporate events , such as business meetings , parties and weddings . The " Budweiser Patio " is a buffet eatery used mostly for corporate or private parties , located just behind the right field foul pole between the visitors ' bullpen and section 117 . A new children 's play area named " Kids Clubhouse " , located on the mezzanine level , opened in May 2012 . It includes arts and craft areas , a climbing wall , a mini field where children can practice sliding and fielding , and a batting cage . There are large windows where adults can watch the game from the Kids Clubhouse . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 2008 - named Best MLB Stadium by Sports Illustrated 
 = = Ballpark firsts = = 
 All firsts are by the Cleveland Indians unless otherwise stated 
 = Roar ( song ) = 
 " Roar " is a song by American singer Katy Perry for her fourth studio album , Prism ( 2013 ) . It was released as the lead single from the record on August 10 , 2013 . The song was written by Perry , Bonnie McKee , Dr. Luke , Max Martin , and Cirkut , and produced by the latter three . It is a power pop song , containing elements of glam rock and arena rock , with lyrics centering on standing up for oneself and self @-@ empowerment . 
 " Roar " received generally mixed reviews from music critics ; many appreciated its overall production , while others felt that its lyrical content contained " clichés " . The song was a commercial success , becoming Perry 's eighth non @-@ consecutive number one song on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 , and also topping charts in Australia , Canada , Ireland , New Zealand , and the United Kingdom . Additionally , it also reached the top five in most international charts , including France , Germany , Italy , Japan and Switzerland . 
 To promote the song , Perry performed under the Brooklyn Bridge at the closing ceremony of the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards , on The X Factor Australia , at the Sydney Opera House in late October 2013 , and on the German TV show Schlag den Raab . Grady Hall and Mark Kudsi directed the song 's music video , which features Perry trying to adapt to the jungle where she survived a plane crash , and taming a tiger . It garnered generally mixed reviews from music critics . " Roar " was nominated for Song of the Year and Best Pop Solo Performance at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards . The song topped the charts in 14 countries and sold 12 million units . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 The song was mixed by Serban Ghenea at MixStar Studios . " Roar " was recorded in four other studios : Luke 's in the Boo , Playback Recording Studio and Secret Garden Studios , all located in the state of California , as well as MXM Studios in Stockholm , Sweden . All its development took place in March 2013 . McKee told MTV that " Roar " is " kind of a ' pick yourself up and dust yourself off and keep going ' , female @-@ empowerment song " and " kind of an epiphany song . " Perry said she wrote the song after undergoing therapy , saying she was " sick of keeping all these feelings inside and not speaking up for myself " . 
 Musically , " Roar " is styled in power pop , and features elements of glam rock and arena rock . Throughout the song , Perry " flexes diva @-@ like vocals " , singing the lyric " Hey ! " several times in a way resemblant of The Lumineers . The song 's instrumentation is composed of " pounding " pianos and " booming " bass drums . According to the sheet music published by Alfred Publishing Co . , Inc. on Musicnotes.com , " Roar " is composed in the key of B ♭ major and set in a 44 time signature at a moderate tempo of 90 beats per minute . Perry 's vocal range spawns from the low note B ♭ 3 to the high note E ♭ 5 , while the music follows the chord progression of B ♭ – Cm – Gm – E ♭ . The song shares the theme of empowerment with Perry 's single " Firework " . Perry described the track as a song speaking about standing up for oneself . 
 = = Release = = 
 The song 's release was announced with the release of a video teaser , entitled " Burning Baby Blue " , that saw Perry burning a blue wig . More video teasers were released onto YouTube , that showed Perry at a funeral with a coffin decorated with the singer 's famous pink and white pinwheels dress , and entering a recording booth while dressed with a " throwback " jacket featured in the single 's cover art , which was revealed on August 8 , 2013 . It features a tiger print border around Perry , who wears a blue Japanese silk <unk> jacket , with the image of a tiger printed on its back . On the same day of the song 's digital release , a lyric video for it , produced by Joe <unk> , Aya Tanimura , Tim Zimmer , and Tuan Le , was released onto YouTube . It primarily shows Perry doing daily activities such as eating breakfast , going to the bathroom , and taking a bath , while texting the lyrics of " Roar " to friends . Some words are substituted with various <unk> characters . It was target of plagiarism accusations by music producer Dillon Francis , who felt it copied the concept of instant messaging from his video entitled " Messages " . 
 The first video teaser for " Roar " was released on August 2 , 2013 along with an announcement that the American release was scheduled for August 12 with a subsequent release to mainstream radio on August 13 . However , the song debuted two days earlier than expected by ' leaking ' on August 10 . The UK release was originally scheduled for September 8 , but on August 30 Perry announced the release date would be moved up to September 1 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Miriam Coleman from Rolling Stone appreciated the songs 's " easy poppy beat " and its " repeated refrains " , factors she believed contributed to make the song a " determined note for the new album " . James Montgomery of MTV described it as " one of the more perfect pop songs to come down the pipeline in quite a while " . Gerrick D. Kennedy from Los Angeles Times also gave a positive review , classifying " Roar " as a " sweet , poppy confection with a bit of bite " . Melinda Newman from HitFix saw the song as a " change of pace " for Perry , whilst Andrew Hampp from Billboard believed it to be a return to the style of her album One of the Boys , but criticized its tempo and its lyrics that " rarely rise above easy clichés and rhymes " . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine described the song as " more of a yelp than a roar " . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 Upon the release of " Roar " , many accused Perry of copying Sara Bareilles ' " Brave " . When Bareilles herself was asked about the controversy between the two songs , she responded : " Katy 's a friend of mine and we 've known each other a really long time " , and was upset that there was a " negative spin on two artists that are choosing to share positive messages . " She also mentioned she had known about " Roar " before its release and stated " If I 'm not mad I don 't know why anybody else is upset " . In response to the accusations , Dr. Luke tweeted on August 14 , 2013 : " Roar was written and recorded before Brave came out . " In direct response to the attention " Brave " received as a result of the plagiarism accusations , Bareilles ' record label , Epic Records , decided to promote " Brave " to the mainstream pop radio format . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 = = = North America = = = 
 On the Billboard Hot 100 , the song debuted at number 85 on the week @-@ ending August 14 , 2013 due to radio airplay . The following week , during its first week on sale , " Roar " sold 557 @,@ 000 digital copies , earning Perry the highest first @-@ week sales numbers of 2013 and also her biggest digital song sales week ever , breaking her previous record held by " Firework " , which sold 509 @,@ 000 digital copies for the week ending January 8 , 2011 . The song soared eighty @-@ three positions to number two in its second week , kept from the top spot by only Robin Thicke 's " Blurred Lines " , while becoming Perry 's twelfth top @-@ ten hit single in the United States , and her ninth consecutive single to peak within the top three on the Hot 100 . After another week at number two , " Roar " reached number one for the chart dated September 4 , 2013 , becoming Perry 's eighth number one on the Hot 100 and her ninth digital number @-@ one single , after selling 448 @,@ 000 copies . " Roar " spent a total two weeks at number one before it was surpassed by Miley Cyrus ' " Wrecking Ball " . On its seventh frame , the song moved 2 @-@ 1 ( peak audience impressions of 159 million ) and became Perry 's sixth number one on the Billboard Hot 100 Airplay , as well as becoming her fastest climb to the top position . 
 " Roar " also reached number one on both the US Mainstream Top 40 and Adult Pop Songs . The number @-@ one position on the Pop Songs chart gave Perry her tenth number one , tying her with Rihanna for the most number ones on the airplay @-@ based chart . The number @-@ one position on the Adult Pop Songs chart also gave Perry multiple milestones ; it became her eighth chart topper , tying her with Maroon 5 and P ! nk as the act with the most number @-@ ones there . It also made the fastest ascension to the top spot ; a record previously held by Perry 's own single " California Gurls " ( 2010 ) . It also set airplay records in both of the charts , by becoming the most weekly @-@ played song in history , with 16 @,@ 065 and 5 @,@ 309 plays per week , respectively . 
 The song has also reached the top spot on both the Adult contemporary chart and Hot Dance Club Songs . In addition to this , the track also reached number one on both the On Demand and Streaming charts , with a weekly peak of 2 @.@ 1 million and 12 million , respectively . " Roar " surpassed digital sales of four million in its seventeenth week , faster than any other song in digital history . Its sales reached 4 @.@ 41 million by the end of 2013 , becoming the sixth best @-@ seller of the year . Perry has seven of her songs with sales more than four million , the most for any artist . By February 2014 , " Roar " had surpassed five million sales , and was Perry 's fifth song to reach that level . Perry is the only artist to have six songs go 5x Platinum . As of October 2015 , the single has sold 6 @,@ 110 @,@ 000 copies in the US . 
 On August 31 , 2013 , " Roar " debuted at number one on the Canadian Hot 100 on the strength of digital downloads . In doing so , it became only the eleventh song to debut at number one on the chart , and it also became Perry 's third number @-@ one debut , making her the artist with most number @-@ one debuts at the time . It also became Perry 's ninth Canadian Hot 100 number one , breaking the tie she shared with Rihanna for the most chart toppers . It has so far spent five non @-@ consecutive weeks atop the chart . " Roar " was also in the top of the Canadian Digital Chart for three non @-@ consecutive weeks ; there , it was Perry 's sixth number @-@ one single . In Mexico , it reached number one on the Monitor Latino English @-@ language airplay chart . 
 = = = Europe and Oceania = = = 
 In the United Kingdom , " Roar " entered at number one on the UK Singles Chart on September 8 , 2013 , selling 179 @,@ 500 copies in its first week and ending the prolonged number @-@ one run of Ellie Goulding 's " Burn " . The song became Perry 's fourth UK number @-@ one single . The single spent two weeks atop the chart before being succeeded by " Talk Dirty " by Jason Derulo ft . 2 Chainz . The song also debuted atop the adjacent UK chart of Scotland and the Irish Singles Chart . It has been certified Platinum by the British Phonographic Industry , denoting sales of over 600 @,@ 000 copies in the UK . " Roar " was the 6th best @-@ selling song of 2013 in the United Kingdom and has sold a total of 1 @.@ 02 million copies as of January 2015 , thus making Katy Perry one of only 18 artists ever to achieve more than one million sales in the UK , where it became her second single after " Firework " to sell over a million copies . 
 The song reached number four on the Italian Singles Chart , where it was eventually certified Platinum by the Federation of the Italian Music Industry , for sales of over 15 @,@ 000 digital copies . In Spain , the single peaked at number five on the sales chart , according to PROMUSICAE . In Austria , it became a number @-@ one on the Ö3 Austria Top 40 , while in Germany and Switzerland it reached numbers two and three , respectively . In the Belgian Ultratop 50 , " Roar " peaked at number five in Flanders and number seven in Wallonia . In France the song peaked at number six . The single also reached the top five in Norway . " Roar " found placings among the top @-@ ten of the airplay charts in Croatia , Czech Republic , Hungary , and Slovakia . Within the unofficial digital charts of Greece , Luxembourg and Portugal , compiled outside of the respective countries by Billboard , " Roar " peaked at number two in both the Greece and Luxembourg charts and at number eight in the Portuguese chart . 
 " Roar " entered at the top of the New Zealand Singles Chart after just four days on sale , becoming Perry 's ninth number @-@ one single , second top debut and her eleventh top ten . After less than five weeks , the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand certified the single quadruple @-@ platinum , denoting sales exceeding 60 @,@ 000 units . The song is listed as the 48th best @-@ selling single of all time in New Zealand , making Perry the only singer to have the most entries , which including " California Gurls " , " Firework " and " E.T .. In Australia , the song debuted at number three on the ARIA Singles Chart , before climbing to number one the following week ; thus becoming Perry 's third number one single in Australia . In less than a month , Australian Recording Industry Association certified the single two @-@ times platinum , and as of October 2013 , the song received a quadruple @-@ platinum certification , denoting sales of 280 @,@ 000 copies . " Roar " has been certified 11 × Platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association and has sold 630 @,@ 000 copies in Australia alone . " Roar " peaked at number two in the Venezuelan Pop Rock Chart . On the Gaon Chart of South Korea , it reached number one on the international chart . In Japan , the song entered the Japan Hot 100 at number seven . The reached number one in both the Media Forest airplay chart in Israel , and the Lebanese Singles Chart . Similarly , in South Africa , the song peaked at number two on the EMA airplay chart . 
 In Russia , on the <unk> Weekly General Airplay chart the song debuted at number 395 on August 25 , 2013 and it has climbed the chart , peaking so far at number five on November 17 , 2013 . On the Top Hit Weekly Audience Choice chart , it peaked at number three on the issue dated October 27 , 2013 . According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) , " Roar " sold 9 @.@ 9 million units ( combined sales and track @-@ equivalent streams ) globally throughout 2013 and was the fifth best @-@ selling single of the year . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Filming of the official music video for " Roar " began on August 7 , 2013 and ended on August 9 , 2013 . The video was released on September 5 , 2013 , directed by Grady Hall and Mark Kudsi , and filmed at the Los Angeles County Arboretum and Botanic Garden . A 21 @-@ second teaser of the video had previously been uploaded on August 25 , 2013 . Nokia posted a two @-@ minute behind the scenes video on September 4 , 2013 . On November 14 , 2013 , an extended 17 @-@ minute behind @-@ the @-@ scenes video was uploaded to Perry 's official VEVO account . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 At the beginning of the video , Katy and her boyfriend ( played by actor and model Brian Nagel ) have crashed their plane in the middle of the jungle . Katy shows signs of worry , while her boyfriend takes pictures of himself and dumps his bags on her to explore . As it turns to night , they wander through the jungle as he throws things back at her . Suddenly , he is attacked by a tiger and Katy dumps her bags and runs off screaming . She approaches a lake and is almost bitten by a crocodile when she puts her hand in the water . She sits on a rock and ends up covered in tarantulas . As she looks into the lake while singing the chorus , she sees a reflection of a tiger instead of herself . Behind her in the darkness there are dozens of pairs of blinking eyes , but they are revealed to be fireflies which fly around her before forming an image of a roaring tiger in the sky . 
 Presumably a few days later , Katy has since made friends with a monkey and uses her stiletto heel to form a spear . She uses it to shoot a banana , which she gives to the monkey . In another scene , she bathes in the lake , with the help of an elephant who sprays her with water from the lake using its trunk . Katy helps a crocodile by brushing its teeth using a toothbrush she has salvaged , and tries to reach her clothes which have been taken by the elephant . At night , she holds a torch and explores a cave . Inside , she watches an animated drawing on the wall in which humans try to kill a tiger with fire ; attempting to burn it as it grows stronger and shooting spears which it sends firing back towards them . The next morning , Katy emerges from the cave , wearing a leopard @-@ print bikini top , a grass skirt , laced up legs and bare feet , displaying a boost of confidence and holding the spear she made earlier . She stands on top of a waterfall , overlooking the jungle , and then swings across the sky on a vine . 
 With the help of the monkey , Katy builds a cat toy which she uses to distract the tiger who ate her boyfriend earlier in the video . She lures it into an area of the jungle , and traps it inside . She comes face @-@ to @-@ face with the tiger and the two of them roar at each other , until her roar tames the tiger as it sits in front of her submissively . Afterwards , she is shown sitting on a giant grass throne , wearing a flower crown as the rest of the jungle animals sit around her , including the tiger , monkey and elephant . The tiger is shown wearing a collar that says " Kitty <unk> " , a reference to her real @-@ life cat of the same name . Katy takes selfies with the monkey on her boyfriend 's phone , applies lipstick made from berry juice , and gives the elephant a <unk> . She then awakens from sleeping in the plane , leading the viewer to think all the previous events have just been a dream , but walks out of the plane still in the jungle , stretching her arms and yawning with the animals sitting around her . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Upon its release , the music video received mixed reviews from critics . Idolator contributors Robbie Daw , Sam Lansky , and Carl <unk> gave it mostly lackluster reviews . Daw considered that the release of such a " safe " video was a disappointment for Perry and expressed eagerness to her next single ; while Lansky likened its " <unk> [ <unk> ] " to that of a " woman 's <unk> commercial " ; and the latter divided the video in what he considered to be of " good cheesy " and " bad cheesy " : he highlighted the fake set , Perry 's acting and the ending , but criticized the CGI , which he deemed " dopey " , the product placement and Perry 's " overly literal roar @-@ off with a tiger " . The only writer for the website that gave the visual a favorable review was Mike Wass , who appreciated the " campy element [ s ] " in it , while noting that it drew inspiration from the music video for " Doctor Jones " by the dance @-@ pop group Aqua . In total , the reviews had an average score of approximately 6 out of 10 . 
 James Montgomery from MTV believed that the video drew inspiration from Sheena , Queen of the Jungle and stated the video did not take itself too seriously , describing it as " camp " . Slant Magazine writer Sal Cinquemani was neutral about the video , noting that although Prism was being billed as a departure for Perry , both " Roar " and its video were not . Perry was criticized by PETA for using exotic animals in the video for " Roar " . <unk> Burke from PETA stated : " Animals used for entertainment endure horrific cruelty and suffer from extreme confinement and violent training methods . " Burke also declared that the animals involved in the music video were allegedly provided by a company who was criticized by US officials . Perry responded by obtaining a letter from the American Humane Association , which had representatives present at the three @-@ day shoot . It stated that " After reviewing the reports , we believe that the Guidelines for the Safe Use of Animals in Filmed Media were followed and that no animal was harmed in the making of this music video " . 
 On July 7 , 2015 , the music video for " Roar " became the fourth video to reach 1 billion views on Vevo , making Perry the first artist in history to have two music videos with 1 billion views . The music video for " Roar " is the thirteenth most viewed YouTube video of all time , receiving over 1 @.@ 46 billion views as of July 2016 . 
 = = Promotion and live performances = = 
 On September 16 , 2013 , the song was unexpectedly used during player introductions by the Cincinnati Bengals in their home opener against the rival Pittsburgh Steelers on Monday Night Football , to tie in the song 's jungle theme with the team 's nickname . Throughout the game , the song was also played sporadically during game breaks . Although the Bengals won the game 20 @-@ 10 , the song drew much criticism by Bengals fans and even some of the team 's players . One Bengals fan even told the Wall Street Journal that Steeler fans sitting near him were laughing at the Bengals fans throughout the game ; the Steelers themselves have used the Styx song " Renegade " frequently at Heinz Field since 2001 . Four days after the game , the team publicly apologized , announcing that while the song would not be nixed from Paul Brown Stadium 's playlist completely , the team would use a hard rock or classic rock song for player introductions moving forward . 
 " Roar " was also used as the theme song of world number 1 tennis player Serena Williams during the 2014 US Open Championships . Williams , dressed in a matching leopard @-@ themed dress , won the championship . 
 Perry first performed " Roar " at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards , under the Brooklyn Bridge , during the ceremony 's closing . She performed the song on Saturday Night Live on October 12 , 2013 . While hosting We Can Survive : Music for Life on October 23 , 2013 , she performed the song with Sara Bareilles , Bonnie McKee , Ellie Goulding , Kacey Musgraves , and duo Tegan and Sara . She also performed the song on the Australian version of The X Factor on October 28 , 2013 . Perry then performed the song the following day at the Sydney Opera House . She performed the song on German TV show Schlag den Raab on November 16 , 2013 . On December 14 , 2013 , Perry performed " Roar " at the NRJ Music Awards , but suffered technical difficulties which resulted in her performance being stopped by the host halfway through who asked for it to be restarted . This led many to believe that Perry had initially been lip @-@ syncing the performance . NRJ later released an apology to Perry , stating that she had been singing live but that the wrong mix of the song was played over her live vocals , which resulted in her being visually out of sync with the backing track . 
 On February 1 , 2015 , Perry performed the song during the Super Bowl XLIX halftime show . 
 = = Cover versions and usage in media = = 
 In 2013 , the song was covered on the episode " A Katy or a Gaga " of the TV series Glee . The song is also featured in the film Horrible Bosses 2 . It has become the new entrance music for Amanda Nunes . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 Since May 2013 RIAA certifications for digital singles include on @-@ demand audio and / or video song streams in addition to downloads . 
 = Pomeroy State Park = 
 Pomeroy State Park is an undeveloped and unmarked Connecticut state park located in the town of Lebanon just south of Willimantic . Established around 1955 on the estate of Charles Pomeroy , the park has grown to be 200 acres in total , but lacks an entrance or parking . Activities in the park include hiking and hunting with bows . The park is accessed by parking off the roadside of Connecticut Route 289 . 
 = = History = = 
 Located on the top of Bush Hill , south of Hosmer Mountain , Pomeroy State Park that is named for Charles Pomeroy , a textile manufacturer . The park preserves a forested area that shares a boundary with preserved farmland . The natural setting of the park is undisturbed by development of even an entrance to the park . The park consists of 200 acres of land , of which 90 acres were previously part of the Pomeroy estate before the establishment of the state park . Established circa 1955 , the park was listed as containing 99 acres in the Connecticut State Register and Manual . The park limits expanded to 104 acres by 1963 . 
 = = Activities = = 
 Pomeroy State Park is an undeveloped and unmarked park that has hunting and hiking activities for visitors . According to the Oh , Ranger ! website , the park does not have any listed or established trails for hiking and hunting is restricted to bow hunting . A 2005 property designation map from the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection uses a portion of the Willimantic Quadrangle map to show the hilly terrain on the northeast portion of the park and the top of Bush Hill to the northwest . The southern limits of the part are also hilly with a steeper elevation change at the edge of the southwest boundary . 
 Joseph Leary , author of A Shared Landscape , noted that it is unlikely that this park could be developed because parking is limited to the roadside of Connecticut Route 289 . The Town of Lebanon 's website confirms that the park has no entrance and parking is restricted to the roadside of the highway . 
 = Florence Violet McKenzie = 
 Florence Violet McKenzie OBE ( née Granville ; 1890 – 1982 ) , affectionately known as " Mrs Mac " , was Australia 's first female electrical engineer , founder of the Women 's Emergency Signalling Corps ( WESC ) and lifelong promoter for technical education for women . She campaigned successfully to have some of her female trainees accepted into the all @-@ male Navy , thereby originating the Women 's Royal Australian Naval Service ( WRANS ) . Some 12 @,@ 000 servicemen passed through her signal instruction school in Sydney , acquiring skill in Morse code and visual signalling ( flag semaphore and International Code of Signals ) . 
 She set up her own electrical contracting business in 1918 , and apprenticed herself to it , in order to meet the requirements of the Diploma in Electrical Engineering at Sydney Technical College and in 1922 she was the first Australian woman to take out an amateur radio operator 's license . Through the 1920s and 1930s , her " Wireless Shop " in Sydney 's Royal Arcade was renowned amongst Sydney radio experimenters and hobbyists . She founded The Wireless Weekly in 1922 , established the Electrical Association for Women in 1934 , and wrote the first " all @-@ electric cookbook " in 1936 . She also corresponded with Albert Einstein in the postwar years . 
 = = Family and education = = 
 Florence Violet McKenzie was born Florence Violet Granville on 28 September 1890 in Melbourne , although before her marriage to Cecil McKenzie at the age of 34 , she was known as Violet Wallace . Other sources cite 1892 as her birth year . Wallace was her stepfather George 's surname ; he was a commercial traveller . When Violet was an infant , the family moved to <unk> , south of Sydney . 
 From a young age , Violet had an independent interest in electricity and invention . As she recalled in an oral history interview in 1979 : 
 I used to play about with bells and buzzers and things around the house . My mother would sometimes say " Oh , come and help me find something , it 's so dark in this cupboard " – she didn 't have very good eyesight … So I 'd get a battery and I 'd hook a switch , and when she opened that cupboard door a light would come on … I started sort of playing with those things . 
 From <unk> school , McKenzie won a bursary to study at Sydney Girls ' High School . In 1915 she passed Chemistry I and Geology I at the University of Sydney , then approached the Sydney Technical College in Ultimo to enrol in the Diploma of Electrical Engineering . By March 1922 , she had won the diploma . In December 1923 , McKenzie graduated from the Sydney Technical College . She later gave her Diploma – the first of its kind awarded in Australia to a woman – to the collection of the Powerhouse Museum , also in Ultimo . 
 Cecil Roland McKenzie was a young electrical engineer employed by the Sydney County Council 's Electricity Undertaking . He too was a radio enthusiast , and one of Violet 's customers at the shop . They were married at the Church of St Philip in Auburn on New Years Eve 1924 . They built a house at 26 George Street , Greenwich Point complete with a wireless room in the attic . The house remains , but has been extensively renovated since the McKenzies lived there . 
 The McKenzies had a daughter , stillborn , in 1926 . They sometimes took in the two sons of Violet 's only sibling , Walter Reginald Wallace , from Melbourne . According to the Sands Directory these boys , Merton Reginald Wallace and Lindsay Gordon Wallace , later operated their own radio shop in Prahran , Melbourne . 
 = = Early employment and interests = = 
 Violet taught mathematics at Armadale , before deciding to take a course in electrical engineering . Throughout her studies , Miss Wallace worked as an electrical contractor , installing electricity in private houses , such as that of politician <unk> Parkhill in Mosman , and in factories and commercial premises , including the Standard Steam Laundry on Dowling Street , Woolloomooloo . " Self made success " . Sunday Guardian . 20 October 1929 . She was an enthusiastic ham radio operator , being the first licensed woman in the country and with the call sign " <unk> " ( later changed to " <unk> " ) . In 1922 Miss Wallace opened " The Wireless Shop " , after purchasing the entire stock of the wireless vendor who preceded her – billing itself as " the oldest radio shop in town " – in the Royal Arcade ( which ran from George Street through to Pitt Street – replaced in the 1970s by the Hilton hotel ) . McKenzie later said it was schoolboys visiting her shop who first introduced her to Morse code . Australia 's first weekly radio magazine was conceived at the shop , by Miss Wallace and three co @-@ founders . " The Wireless Weekly " became the monthly magazine " Radio & Hobbies " , then " Radio , Television & Hobbies " , and finally Electronics Australia , and remained in circulation until 2001 . 
 In 1924 McKenzie became the only female member of the Wireless Institute of Australia . That same year she travelled to the United States for business reasons , and in San Francisco was welcomed at radio <unk> : ' Miss Wallace , an electrical engineer from Australia , will now talk from the studio . ' She reportedly used her time on air to comment on the difference between the tram systems in San Francisco and those in Sydney . In 1931 she also notes that that she experimented with improving the science of television through the use of chemistry : 
 " [ I ] have a pronounced kink for television work and devote most of my spare time in experimenting that branch of the science . Have a deep @-@ rooted conviction that chemistry is going to provide the solution and am working along those lines . " 
 The McKenzies had a mutual interest in tropical fish and had an enormous fish pond in the front yard . She spoke of heating water electrically to house tropical fish at home in the early 1920s , and of having given talks on radio <unk> about tropical fish in the days when she was doing electrical contracting work . In January 1933 the American journal <unk> published an article written by McKenzie concerning ' Some interesting inhabitants of Sydney seashores ' , in which she recommended keeping sea horses in a salt @-@ water tank . 
 = = Women 's technical education = = 
 In the 1930s , McKenzie turned her attention increasingly to teaching other women about electricity and radio . She had observed the need over years of working in the field herself . In 1925 , she told the Australian Woman 's Mirror : " [ T ] here are such a lot of women experimenters [ amongst my customers ] that I would like to form a Women 's Wireless Club . ' In 1931 she told a Sunday Sun reporter that she wanted to see a course of lectures on domestic radio and electricity established in girls ' schools and technical colleges . The following year she took matters into her own hands , opening a Women 's Radio College on Phillip Street in 1932 . She persuaded employers to take on some of her trainees , as one of them later recalled : 
 During the Depression I joined Mrs Mac 's electrical school in Phillip Street . It was the first time girls were involved with electrical circuits , Morse and making radio sets . Later Mrs Mac decided it was time to use our skills in industry , so she persuaded <unk> Ltd to take one of us ( me ) on trial in their radio section . Soon the others followed from the school , and we started the component parts section , and we were absorbed into many other sections . 
 McKenzie believed that electricity could save women from domestic drudgery , writing that ... " To see every woman emancipated from the " heavy " work of the household by the aid of electricity is in itself a worthy object . " To this end in 1934 she founded an educational initiative , the Electrical Association for Women ( EAW ) at 170 King Street in the centre of Sydney , later moving a few blocks away to 9 Clarence Street . 
 Concerned with safety when using electrical appliances , and no doubt drawing on her own experience in receiving an accidental electric shock that knocked her out for an hour , McKenzie delivered at least one talk on resuscitation , advising that conventional resuscitation should proceed for up to thee @-@ quarters of an hour following electrocution . She knew of one case where recovery took 4 hours . 
 By 1936 , McKenzie had sold the Wireless Shop , and was busy at the Electrical Association for Women . She gave electric cooking demonstrations in the EAW kitchen , which was fitted out with show electrical appliances by the Sydney County Council . She compiled the EAW Cookery Book , Australia 's first " all @-@ electric " cookery book , which ran into seven editions and remained in print until 1954 . She wrote an illustrated book for children about electrical safety called The Electric Imps in 1938 . 
 In July 1938 , McKenzie was one of 80 women in attendance at the inaugural meeting of the Australian Women 's Flying Corps ( later known as the Australian Women 's Flying Club ) held at the Feminist Club of New South Wales at 77 King Street . McKenzie was appointed treasurer and instructor in Morse code to the organisation . 
 = = Women 's Emergency Signalling Corps = = 
 In 1939 McKenzie established the Women 's Emergency Signalling Corps ( WESC ) in her Clarence Street rooms – known affectionately as " Sigs " . Her original idea was to train women in telegraphy so that they could replace men working in civilian communications , thereby freeing those skilled men up to serve in the war . By the time war broke out , 120 women had been trained to instructional standard . 
 = = Women 's Royal Australian Naval Service = = 
 McKenzie campaigned energetically to have some of her female trainees accepted into the Air Force and Navy as telegraphists . She encountered a great deal of official resistance . In 1940 she wrote to the Minister of the Navy , former Prime Minister WM ( Billy ) Hughes , saying " I would like to offer the services of our Signalling Corps , if not acceptable as telegraphists then at least as instructors . " Despite her suggestion being dismissed , some time later McKenzie and six trainees were provided third @-@ class train tickets to Melbourne to meet with the Naval Board for testing . 
 In early January 1941 , Commander Newman , the Navy 's Director of Signals and Communications , visited the WESC headquarters on Clarence Street to test McKenzie 's trainees . Finding they were highly proficient , he recommended the Navy admit them . Hughes still took some convincing . After McKenzie threatened to take her offer to the Air Force instead , the urgent need for trained telegraphists prevailed , and on 21 April a Navy Office letter authorised the entry of women into the Navy . This was the beginning of the Women 's Royal Australian Naval Service – the WRANS . The minister 's condition was that " no publicity ... be accorded this break with tradition ' . 
 On 28 April 1941 , McKenzie accompanied 14 of her WESC trainees ( twelve telegraphists and two domestic helpers ) . They had their medical test on 25 April and arrived at HMAS Harman in Canberra on 28 April 1941 . The women were dressed in their green WESC uniform which had been designed by McKenzie herself – it was several months before a female Navy uniform was ready . Francis Proven became WRANS number 1 . From this initial intake of 14 , the WRANS ranks expanded to some 2 @,@ 600 by the end of the war , representing about 10 per cent of the entire Royal Australian Naval force at the time . All told , McKenzie trained about 3 @,@ 000 women , one @-@ third of whom went into the services . Many others remained at the Clarence Street school as instructors . 
 In May 1941 , the Air Force appointed McKenzie as an honorary flight officer of the Women 's Auxiliary Australian Air Force , so she could legitimately instruct Air Force personnel . This was the only official recognition McKenzie received during the war for her efforts . 
 = = Postwar wireless training = = 
 Violet McKenzie helped with rehabilitation after the war , keeping her school open for as long as there was a need for instruction in wireless signalling . In the postwar years , she trained men from the merchant navy , pilots in commercial aviation , and others needing the trade qualification known as a " signaller 's ticket " . In 1948 , a reporter from Sky Script visit to the school and described the scene , and the diversity of students : 
 At a table in a corner recently there were six elementary trainees : One was a Chinese quartermaster , another a half @-@ Burmese . Two were Americans … One … an aircraft skipper down from New Guinea to get his wireless ticket ; and the other chap a ship 's officer with the same objective . In another corner there 's an ANA commander preparing for his 20 @-@ word @-@ a @-@ minute exam : an English ship 's wireless officer ... an ex @-@ RAF Wing @-@ Commander ... an Indian Navy man ... [ and ] groups of airline ' types ' also on the job . 
 McKenzie told a journalist that , after the war , " All the airmen came back and wanted to join Qantas , but they needed to build up their Morse speed and learn to use the modern equipment . " The Department of Civil Aviation fitted out a room at the school with transmitters , receivers and radio compass so that pilots could train for their wireless ticket at the school . From 1948 , McKenzie held a First Class Flight Radio Telephony Operator License . 
 One of the ex @-@ RAAF airmen who retrained for a civilian career with McKenzie wrote : 
 Being unemployed , we spent almost all of each weekday at the school , so if a tuition fee had been applicable , Mrs Mac would have earned a tidy sum of money . That , of course , was not her way of doing things . She required no payment for the training she provided , and I suspect that she was quite out of pocket over the whole affair ... It would be true to say that a great number of the pilots whose futures were finally fulfilled in airlines in Australia owe a deal to Mrs Mac ... There was no other school operating in Sydney at the time , providing Morse training to potential airline pilots , and no other school then or thereafter giving such training completely free of charge . 
 Famous aviators who trained for their wireless ticket at McKenzie 's school include Patrick Gordon Taylor and Cecil Arthur Butler . McKenzie also trained Mervyn Wood , later Commissioner of Police in New South Wales , and the principals of the Navigation Schools at both the Melbourne and Sydney Technical Colleges . 
 According to a People magazine profile of McKenzie written in January 1953 , McKenzie received an unceremonious notice from the owners of 10 Clarence Street to quit the premises . The Sands Directory indicates that she moved her operation briefly to No 6 Wharf at Circular Quay in 1953 , before retiring to her home at Greenwich Point in 1954 . McKenzie wrote that she closed the school when the airlines established their own school and the government added a signals training section to the Navigation School at the Technical College . She continued to help the occasional pupil with special difficulties at her home . 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = Correspondence with Einstein = = = 
 In early 1949 McKenzie started writing to Albert Einstein . Her first letter to him wished him a speedy recovery from recent illness . Two of her letters are held in the Einstein archives in Jerusalem . It is clear from the second letter that he wrote back to her at least once . Some accounts claim that McKenzie corresponded regularly with Einstein for as long as 15 years before his death in 1955 , but the documentary record suggests such reports exaggerate the extent of the correspondence . She also sent him several gifts over the years including shells ( for his daughter ) that airmen would collect across the Pacific on her request and a boomerang which had been brought to her from Central Australia by an airline pilot . She wrote that , " Some of your mathematical friends might like to plot its flight ! " There are other reports that she sent him a didgeridoo , and a recording of didgeridoo music when he replied that he couldn 't work out how to play the instrument . 
 = = = Awards and honours = = = 
 On 8 June 1950 , McKenzie was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) for her work with the WESC . In 1957 she was elected a Fellow of the Australian Institute of Navigation . In 1964 she became Patron of the Ex @-@ WRANS Association . In 1979 she was made a Member of the Royal Naval Amateur Radio Society . In 1980 a plaque celebrating her " skills , character and generosity " was unveiled at the Missions to Seamen Mariners ' Church , Flying Angel House . The Church has since relocated to 320 Sussex St , where the plaque can be seen in the garden . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 Violet McKenzie was nine years older than her husband Cecil , but she outlived him by 23 years . After his death in 1958 , she shared her house for a time with Cecil 's sister Jean , a primary school teacher . In May 1977 , after a stroke paralysed her right side and confined her to a wheelchair , McKenzie moved to the nearby Glenwood Nursing Home . She died peacefully in her sleep on 23 May 1982 . At her funeral service , held at the Church of St Giles in Greenwich , 24 serving WRANS formed a Guard of Honour . McKenzie was cremated at the Northern Suburbs Crematorium . The June 1982 edition of the newsletter of the Ex @-@ WRANS Association was devoted to their former teacher and patron . Amongst the memories recorded therein is a statement McKenzie made two days before she died : " ... it is finished , and I have proved to them all that women can be as good as , or better than men . " 
 = Brabham = 
 Motor Racing Developments Ltd . , commonly known as Brabham / ˈbræbəm / , was a British racing car manufacturer and Formula One racing team . Founded in 1960 by two Australians , driver Jack Brabham and designer Ron Tauranac , the team won four Drivers ' and two Constructors ' World Championships in its 30 @-@ year Formula One history . Jack Brabham 's 1966 Drivers ' Championship remains the only such achievement using a car bearing the driver 's own name . 
 In the 1960s , Brabham was the world 's largest manufacturer of open wheel racing cars for sale to customer teams , and had built more than 500 cars by 1970 . During this period , teams using Brabham cars won championships in Formula Two and Formula Three . Brabham cars also competed in the Indianapolis 500 and in Formula 5000 racing . In the 1970s and 1980s , Brabham introduced innovations such as the Gordon Murray designed " fan car " — which won its only race before being withdrawn — in @-@ race refuelling , carbon brakes , and hydropneumatic suspension . 
 The team won two more Formula One Drivers ' Championships in the 1980s with Brazilian Nelson Piquet . He won his first championship in 1981 in the Ground effects BT49 @-@ Ford , and became the first to win a Drivers ' Championship with a turbocharged car in 1983 . In 1983 the Brabham BT52 , driven by Piquet and Italian Riccardo Patrese , was powered by the BMW M12 Straight @-@ 4 engine , and powered Brabham to four of the team 's 35 Grand Prix victories . 
 British businessman Bernie Ecclestone owned Brabham during most of the 1970s and 1980s , and later became responsible for administering the commercial aspects of Formula One . Ecclestone sold the team in 1988 . Its last owner was the Middlebridge Group , a Japanese engineering firm . Midway through the 1992 season , the team collapsed financially as Middlebridge was unable to make repayments against loans provided by Landhurst Leasing . The case was investigated by the United Kingdom Serious Fraud Office . In 2009 , an unsuccessful attempt was made by a German organisation to enter the 2010 Formula One season using the Brabham name . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The Brabham team was founded by Jack Brabham and Ron Tauranac , who met in 1951 while both were successfully building and racing cars in their native Australia . Brabham was the more successful driver and went to the United Kingdom in 1955 to further his racing career . There he started driving for the Cooper Car Company works team and by 1958 had progressed with them to Formula One , the highest category of open wheel racing defined by the Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) , motor sport 's world governing body . In 1959 and 1960 , Brabham won the Formula One World Drivers ' Championship in Cooper 's revolutionary mid @-@ engined cars . 
 Despite their innovation of putting the engine behind the driver , the Coopers and their Chief Designer Owen Maddock were generally resistant to developing their cars . Brabham pushed for further advances , and played a significant role in developing Cooper 's highly successful 1960 T53 " <unk> " car , with input from his friend Tauranac . Brabham was confident he could do better than Cooper , and in late 1959 he asked Tauranac to come to the UK and work with him , initially producing upgrade kits for Sunbeam Rapier and Triumph Herald road cars at his car dealership , Jack Brabham Motors , but with the long @-@ term aim of designing racing cars . Brabham describes Tauranac as " absolutely the only bloke I 'd have gone into partnership with " . Later , Brabham offered a Coventry @-@ Climax FWE @-@ engined version of the Herald , with 83 hp ( 62 kW ) and uprated suspension to match the extra power . 
 To meet that aim , Brabham and Tauranac set up Motor Racing Developments Ltd . ( MRD ) , deliberately avoiding the use of either man 's name . The new company would compete with Cooper in the market for customer racing cars ; as Brabham was still employed by Cooper , Tauranac produced the first MRD car , for the entry level Formula Junior class , in secrecy . Unveiled in the summer of 1961 , the " MRD " was soon renamed . Motoring journalist <unk> <unk> pointed out that " [ the ] way a Frenchman pronounces those initials — written phonetically , ' em air day ' — sounded perilously like the French word ... merde . " Gavin <unk> achieved a second @-@ place finish at Goodwood and another at Mallory Park in the MRD @-@ Ford . The cars were subsequently known as Brabhams , with type numbers starting with BT for " Brabham Tauranac " . 
 By the 1961 Formula One season , the Lotus and Ferrari teams had developed the mid @-@ engined approach further than Cooper . Brabham had a poor season , scoring only four points , and — having run his own private Coopers in non @-@ championship events during 1961 — left the company in 1962 to drive for his own team : the Brabham Racing Organisation , using cars built by Motor Racing Developments . 
 = = Racing history — Formula One = = 
 = = = Jack Brabham and Ron Tauranac ( 1961 – 1970 ) = = = 
 Motor Racing Developments initially concentrated on making money by building cars for sale to customers in lower formulae , so the new car for the Formula One team was not ready until partway through the 1962 Formula One season . The Brabham Racing Organisation ( BRO ) started the year fielding a customer Lotus chassis , which was delivered at 3 am in order to keep it a secret . Brabham took two points finishes in <unk> , before the turquoise @-@ liveried Brabham <unk> car made its debut at the 1962 German Grand Prix . It retired with a throttle problem after 9 of the 15 laps , but went on to take a pair of fourth places at the end of the season . 
 From the 1963 season , Brabham was partnered by American driver Dan Gurney , the pair now running in Australia 's racing colours of green and gold . Jack Brabham took the team 's first win at the non @-@ championship Solitude Grand Prix in 1963 . Gurney took the marque 's first two wins in the world championship , at the 1964 French and Mexican Grands Prix . Brabham works and customer cars took another three non @-@ championship wins during the 1964 season . The 1965 season was less successful , with no championship wins . Brabham finished third or fourth in the Constructors ' Championship for three years running , but poor reliability marred promising performances on several occasions . Motor sport authors Mike Lawrence and David Hodges have said that a lack of resources may have cost the team results , a view echoed by Ron Tauranac . 
 The FIA doubled the Formula One engine capacity limit to 3 litres for the 1966 season and suitable engines were scarce . Brabham used engines from Australian engineering firm Repco , which had never produced a Formula One engine before , based on aluminium V8 engine blocks from the defunct American Oldsmobile <unk> road car project , and other off the shelf parts . Consulting and design engineer Phil Irving ( of Vincent Motorcycle fame ) was the project engineer responsible for producing the initial version of the engine . Few expected the Brabham @-@ <unk> to be competitive , but the light and reliable cars ran at the front from the start of the season . At the French Grand Prix at Reims @-@ <unk> , Jack Brabham became the first man to win a Formula One world championship race in a car bearing his own name . Only his former team mate , Bruce McLaren , has since matched the achievement . It was the first in a run of four straight wins for the Australian veteran . Jack Brabham won his third title in 1966 , becoming the only driver to win the Formula One World Championship in a car carrying his own name ( cf Surtees , Hill and Fittipaldi Automotive ) . In 1967 , the title went to Brabham 's team mate , New Zealander Denny Hulme . Hulme had better reliability through the year , possibly due to Jack Brabham 's desire to try new parts first . The Brabham team took the Constructors ' World Championship in both years . 
 For 1968 Austrian Jochen Rindt replaced Hulme , who had left to join McLaren . Repco produced a more powerful version of their V8 to maintain competitiveness against Ford 's new Cosworth DFV , but it proved very unreliable . Slow communications between the UK and Australia had always made identifying and correcting problems very difficult . The car was fast — Rindt set pole position twice during the season — but Brabham and Rindt finished only three races between them , and ended the year with only ten points . 
 Although Brabham bought Cosworth DFV engines for the 1969 season , Rindt left to join Lotus . His replacement , Jacky Ickx , had a strong second half to the season , winning in Germany and Canada , after Jack Brabham was sidelined by a testing accident . Ickx finished second in the Drivers ' Championship , with 37 points to Jackie Stewart 's 63 . Brabham himself took a couple of pole positions and two top three finishes , but did not finish half the races . The team were second in the Constructors ' Championship , aided by second places at Monaco and Watkins Glen scored by Piers Courage , driving a Brabham for the Frank Williams Racing Cars privateer squad . 
 Jack Brabham intended to retire at the end of the 1969 season and sold his share in the team to Tauranac . However , Rindt 's late decision to remain with Lotus meant that Brabham drove for another year . He took his last win in the opening race of the 1970 season and was competitive throughout the year , although mechanical failures blunted his challenge . Aided by number two driver Rolf <unk> , the team came fourth in the Constructors ' Championship . 
 = = = Ron Tauranac ( 1971 ) = = = 
 Tauranac signed double world champion Graham Hill and young Australian Tim <unk> to drive for the 1971 season . Tauranac designed the unusual ' lobster claw ' <unk> , featuring twin radiators mounted ahead of the front wheels , a single example of which was built for Hill . Although Hill , no longer a front @-@ runner since his 1969 accident , took his final Formula One win in the non @-@ championship BRDC International Trophy at Silverstone , the team scored only seven championship points . 
 Tauranac , an engineer at heart , started to feel his Formula One budget of around £ 100 @,@ 000 was a gamble he could not afford to take on his own and began to look around for an experienced business partner . He sold the company for £ 100 @,@ 000 at the end of 1971 to British businessman Bernie Ecclestone , Jochen Rindt 's former manager and erstwhile owner of the Connaught team . Tauranac stayed on to design the cars and run the factory . 
 = = = Bernie Ecclestone ( 1972 – 1987 ) = = = 
 Tauranac left Brabham early in the 1972 season after Ecclestone changed the way the company was organised without consulting him . Ecclestone has since said " In retrospect , the relationship was never going to work " , noting that " [ Tauranac and I ] both take the view : ' Please be reasonable , do it my way ' " . The highlights of an aimless year , during which the team ran three different models , were pole position for Argentinian driver Carlos Reutemann at his home race at Buenos Aires and a victory in the non @-@ championship Interlagos Grand Prix . For the 1973 season , Ecclestone promoted the young South African engineer Gordon Murray to chief designer and moved Herbie Blash from the Formula Two programme to become the Formula One team manager . Both would remain with the team for the next 15 years . For 1973 , Murray produced the triangular cross @-@ section <unk> , with which Reutemann scored two podium finishes and finished seventh in the Drivers ' Championship . 
 In the 1974 season , Reutemann took the first three victories of his Formula One career , and Brabham 's first since 1970 . The team finished a close fifth in the Constructors ' Championship , fielding the much more competitive <unk> . After a strong finish to the 1974 season , many observers felt the team were favourites to win the 1975 title . The year started well , with a first win for Brazilian driver Carlos Pace at the Interlagos circuit in his native São Paulo . However , as the season progressed , tyre wear frequently slowed the cars in races . Pace took another two podiums and finished sixth in the championship ; while Carlos Reutemann had five podium finishes , including a dominant win in the 1975 German Grand Prix , and finished third in the Drivers ' Championship . The team likewise ranked third in the Constructors ' Championship at the end of the year . 
 While rival teams Lotus and McLaren relied on the Cosworth DFV engine from the late 1960s to the early 1980s , Ecclestone sought a competitive advantage by investigating other options . Despite the success of Murray 's Cosworth @-@ powered cars , Ecclestone signed a deal with Italian motor manufacturer Alfa Romeo to use their large and powerful flat @-@ 12 engine from the 1976 season . The engines were free , but they rendered the new <unk> , now in red Martini Racing livery , unreliable and overweight . The 1976 and 1977 seasons saw Brabham fall toward the back of the field again . Reutemann negotiated a release from his contract before the end of the 1976 season and signed with Ferrari . Ulsterman John Watson replaced him at Brabham for 1977 . Watson lost near certain victory in the French Grand Prix ( Dijon ) of that year when his car ran low on fuel on the last lap and was passed by Mario Andretti 's Lotus , with Watson 's second place being the team 's best result of the season . The car often showed at the head of races , but the unreliability of the Alfa Romeo engine was a major problem . The team lost Carlos Pace early in the 1977 season when he died in a light aircraft accident . 
 For the 1978 season , Murray 's BT46 featured several new technologies to overcome the weight and packaging difficulties caused by the Alfa engines . Ecclestone signed then two @-@ time Formula One world champion Niki Lauda from Ferrari through a deal with Italian dairy products company Parmalat which met the cost of Lauda ending his Ferrari contract and made up his salary to the £ 200 @,@ 000 Ferrari was offering . 1978 was the year of the dominant Lotus 79 " wing car " , which used aerodynamic ground effect to stick to the track when cornering , but Lauda won two races in the BT46 , one with the controversial " B " or " fan car " version . 
 The partnership with Alfa Romeo ended during the 1979 season , the team 's first with young Brazilian driver Nelson Piquet . Murray designed the full @-@ ground effect BT48 around a rapidly developed new Alfa Romeo V12 engine and incorporated an effective " carbon @-@ carbon braking " system — a technology Brabham pioneered in 1976 . However , unexpected movement of the car 's aerodynamic centre of pressure made its handling unpredictable and the new engine was unreliable . The team dropped to eighth in the Constructors ' Championship by the end of the season . Alfa Romeo started testing their own Formula One car during the season , prompting Ecclestone to revert to Cosworth DFV engines , a move Murray described as being " like having a holiday " . The new , lighter , Cosworth @-@ powered BT49 was introduced before the end of the year at the Canadian Grand Prix ; where after practice Lauda announced his immediate retirement from driving , later saying that he " was no longer getting any pleasure from driving round and round in circles " . 
 The team used the BT49 over four seasons . In the 1980 season Piquet scored three wins and the team took 3rd in the Constructors ' Championship with Piquet second in the Drivers ' Championship . This season saw the introduction of the blue and white livery that the cars would wear through several changes of sponsor , until the team 's demise in 1992 . With a better understanding of ground effect , the team further developed the BT49C for the 1981 season , incorporating a hydropneumatic suspension system to avoid ride height limitations intended to reduce downforce . Piquet , who had developed a close working relationship with Murray , took the drivers ' title with three wins , albeit amid accusations of cheating . The team finished second in the Constructors ' Championship , behind the Williams team . 
 Renault had introduced turbocharged engines to Formula One in 1977 . Brabham had tested a BMW 4 @-@ cylinder M12 turbocharged engine in the summer of 1981 . For the 1982 season the team designed a new car , the BT50 , around the BMW engine which , like the Repco engine 16 years before , was based on a road car engine block , the BMW M10 . Brabham continued to run the Cosworth @-@ powered BT49D in the early part of the season while reliability and driveability issues with the BMW units were resolved . The relationship came close to ending , with the German manufacturer insisting that Brabham use their engine . The turbo car took its first win at the Canadian Grand Prix . In the Constructors ' Championship , the team finished fifth , the drivers Riccardo Patrese , who scored the last win of the Brabham @-@ Ford combination in the Monaco Grand Prix , 10th and World Champion Piquet a mere 11th in the Drivers ' Championship . In the 1983 season , Piquet took the championship lead from Renault 's Alain Prost at the last race of the year , the South African Grand Prix to become the first driver to win the Formula One Drivers ' World Championship with a turbo @-@ powered car . The team did not win the Constructors ' Championship in either 1981 or 1983 , despite Piquet 's success . Riccardo Patrese was the only driver other than Piquet to win a race for Brabham in this period — the drivers in the second car contributed only a fraction of the team 's points in each of these championship seasons . Patrese finished 9th in the Drivers ' Championship with 13 points , dropping the team behind Ferrari and Renault to third in the Constructors ' Championship . 
 Piquet took the team 's last wins : two in 1984 by winning the 7th and 8th race of that season , the Canadian Grand Prix and the Detroit Grand Prix , and one in 1985 by winning the French Grand Prix , before reluctantly leaving for the Williams team at the end of the season . After seven years and two world championships , he felt he was worth more than Ecclestone 's salary offer for 1986 . Piquet finished 5th in 1984 and a mere 8th in 1985 in the respective Drivers ' Championships . The 1986 season was a disaster . Murray 's radical long and low <unk> , with its BMW M12 engine tilted over to improve its aerodynamics and lower its centre of gravity , scored only two points . Driver Elio de Angelis became the Formula One team 's only fatality when he died in a testing accident at the Paul Ricard circuit . Derek Warwick , who replaced de Angelis , was close to scoring two points for fifth in the British Grand Prix , but a problem on the last lap dropped him out of the points . In August , BMW after considering running their own in @-@ house team , announced their departure from Formula One at the end of the season . Murray , who had largely taken over the running of the team as Ecclestone became more involved with his role at the Formula One Constructors Association , felt that " the way the team had operated for 15 years broke down " . He left Brabham in November to join McLaren . 
 Ecclestone held BMW to their contract for the 1987 season , but the German company would only supply the <unk> engine . The upright units , around which Brabham had designed their new car , were sold for use by the Arrows team . Senior figures at Brabham , including Murray , have admitted that by this stage Ecclestone had lost interest in running the team . The 1987 season was only slightly more successful than the previous year — Patrese and de Cesaris scoring 10 points between them , including two third places at the Belgian Grand Prix and the Mexican Grand Prix . Unable to locate a suitable engine supplier , the team missed the FIA deadline for entry into the 1988 world championship and Ecclestone finally announced the team 's withdrawal from Formula One at the Brazilian Grand Prix in April 1988 . During the season ending Australian Grand Prix , Ecclestone announced he had sold MRD to <unk> team owner Walter Brun for an unknown price . 
 = = = Joachim Luhti ( 1989 ) = = = 
 Brun soon sold the team on , this time to Swiss financier Joachim Luhti , who brought it back into Formula One for the 1989 season . The new Brabham <unk> , powered by a Judd V8 engine ( originally another of Jack Brabham 's companies ) , was produced for the 1989 season . Italian driver Stefano Modena , who had driven for the team in the 1987 Australian Grand Prix in a one off drive for the team , drove alongside the more experienced Martin Brundle who was returning to Formula One after spending 1988 winning the World Sportscar Championship for Jaguar . Modena took the team 's last podium : a third place at the Monaco Grand Prix ( Brundle , who had only just scraped through pre @-@ qualifying by 0 @.@ 021 seconds before qualifying a brilliant 4th , had been running third but was forced to stop to replace a flat battery , finally finishing sixth ) . The team also failed to make the grid sometimes : Brundle failed to <unk> at the Canadian Grand Prix and the French Grand Prix . The team finished 9th in the Constructors ' Championship at the end of the season . 
 = = = Middlebridge Racing ( 1989 – 1992 ) = = = 
 After Luhti 's arrest on tax fraud charges in mid @-@ 1989 , several parties disputed the ownership of the team . Middlebridge Group Limited , a Japanese engineering firm owned by billionaire Koji Nakauchi , was already involved with established Formula 3000 team Middlebridge Racing and gained control of Brabham for the 1990 season . Herbie Blash had returned to run the team in 1989 and continued to do so in 1990 . Middlebridge paid for its purchase using £ 1 million loaned to them by finance company Landhurst Leasing , but the team remained underfunded and would only score a few more points finishes in its last three seasons . Jack Brabham 's youngest son , David , raced for the Formula One team for a short time in 1990 including the season ending Australian Grand Prix ( the first time a Brabham had driven a Brabham car in an Australian Grand Prix since 1968 ) . 1990 was a disastrous year , with Modena 's fifth place in the season opening United States Grand Prix being the only top six finish . The team finished ninth in the Constructors ' Championship . Brundle and fellow Briton Mark Blundell , scored only three points during the 1991 season . Due to poor results in the first half of 1991 , they had to <unk> in the second half of the season , Blundell failed to do so in Japan , as did Brundle in Australia . The team finished 10th in the Constructors ' Championship , behind another struggling British team , Lotus . In 1992 , Damon Hill , the son of another former Brabham driver and World Champion , debuted in the team after Giovanna Amati was dropped when her sponsorship failed to materialise . Amati was the fifth woman to attempt a Formula One race , but her three attempts were unsuccessful . 
 Argentine Sergio Rinland designed the team 's final cars around Judd engines , except for 1991 when Yamaha powered the cars . In the 1992 season the cars ( which were updated versions of the 1991 car ) rarely qualified for races . Hill gave the team its final finish , at the Hungarian Grand Prix , where he crossed the finish line 11th and last , four laps behind the winner , Ayrton Senna . After the end of that race the team ran out of funds and collapsed . Middlebridge Group Limited had been unable to continue making repayments against the £ 6 million ultimately provided by Landhurst Leasing , which went into administration . The Serious Fraud Office investigated the case . Landhurst 's managing directors were found guilty of corruption and imprisoned , having accepted bribes for further loans to Middlebridge . It was one of four teams to leave Formula One that year . ( cf March Engineering , Fondmetal and Andrea Moda Formula ) . Although there was talk of reviving the team for the following year , its assets passed to Landhurst Leasing and were auctioned by the company 's receivers in 1993 . Among these was the team 's old factory in Chessington , which was acquired by Yamaha Motor Sports and used to house <unk> Technology Limited , a company manufacturing composite components for race and road cars run by Herbie Blash . The factory was bought by the Carlin DPR GP2 motor racing team in 2006 . 
 = = = Potential F1 revival ( 2010 ) = = = 
 On 4 June 2009 , Franz Hilmer confirmed that he had used the name to lodge an entry for the 2010 Formula One season as a cost capped team under the new budget cap regulations . The Brabham family was not involved and announced that it was seeking legal advice over the use of the name . The team 's entry was not accepted , and the Brabham family later obtained legal recognition of their exclusive rights to the Brabham brand . 
 = = = Brabham Racing ( 2014 – ) = = = 
 In September 2014 , David Brabham — the son of Brabham founder Sir Jack Brabham — announced the reformation of the Brabham Racing team under the name Project Brabham , with plans to enter the 2015 FIA World Endurance Championship and 2015 24 Hours of Le Mans in the LMP2 category using a crowdsourcing business model . The team is also aiming to enter the FIA Formula E Championship and return to Formula One in the future . 
 = = Motor Racing Developments = = 
 Brabham cars were also widely used by other teams , and not just in Formula One . Jack Brabham and Ron Tauranac called the company they set up in 1961 to design and build formula racing cars to customer teams Motor Racing Developments ( MRD ) , and this company had a large portfolio of other activities . Initially , Brabham and Tauranac each held 50 percent of the shares . Tauranac was responsible for design and running the business , while Brabham was the test driver and arranged corporate deals like the Repco engine supply and the use of the <unk> wind tunnel . He also contributed ideas to the design process and often machined parts and helped build the cars . 
 From 1963 to 1965 , MRD was not directly involved in Formula One , and often ran works cars in other formulae . A separate company , Jack Brabham 's Brabham Racing Organisation , ran the Formula One works entry . Like other customers , BRO bought its cars from MRD , initially at £ 3 @,@ 000 per car , although it did not pay for development parts . Tauranac was unhappy with his distance from the Formula One operation and before the 1966 season suggested that he was no longer interested in producing cars for Formula One under this arrangement . Brabham investigated other chassis suppliers for BRO , however the two reached an agreement and from 1966 MRD was much more closely involved in this category . After Jack Brabham sold his shares in MRD to Ron Tauranac at the end of 1969 , the works Formula One team was MRD . 
 Despite only building its first car in 1961 , by the mid @-@ 1960s MRD had overtaken established constructors like Cooper to become the largest manufacturer of single @-@ seat racing cars in the world , and by 1970 had built over 500 cars . Of the other Formula One teams which used Brabhams , Frank Williams Racing Cars and the Rob Walker Racing Team were the most successful . The 1965 British Grand Prix saw seven Brabhams compete , only two of them from the works team , and there were usually four or five at championship Grands Prix throughout that season . The firm built scores of cars for the lower formulae each year , peaking with 89 cars in 1966 . Brabham had the reputation of providing customers with cars of a standard equal to those used by the works team , which worked " out of the box " . The company provided a high degree of support to its customers — including Jack Brabham helping customers set up their cars . During this period the cars were usually known as " Repco Brabhams " , not because of the Repco engines used in Formula One between 1966 and 1968 , but because of a smaller @-@ scale sponsorship deal through which the Australian company had been providing parts to Jack Brabham since his Cooper days . 
 At the end of 1971 Bernie Ecclestone bought MRD . He retained the Brabham brand , as did subsequent owners . Although the production of customer cars continued briefly under Ecclestone 's ownership , he believed the company needed to focus on Formula One to succeed . The last production customer Brabhams were the Formula Two <unk> and the Formula Three <unk> of 1973 , although Ecclestone sold ex @-@ works Formula One <unk> to RAM Racing as late as 1976 . 
 In 1988 Ecclestone sold Motor Racing Developments to Alfa Romeo . The Formula One team did not compete that year , but Alfa Romeo put the company to use designing and building a prototype " Procar " — a racing car with the silhouette of a large saloon ( the Alfa Romeo 164 ) covering a composite racing car chassis and mid mounted race engine . This was intended for a racing series for major manufacturers to support Formula One Grands Prix , and was designated the Brabham <unk> . 
 = = Racing history — other categories = = 
 = = = Indycar = = = 
 Brabham cars competed at the Indianapolis 500 from the mid @-@ 1960s to the early 1970s . After an abortive project in 1962 , MRD was commissioned in 1964 to build an Indycar chassis powered by an American Offenhauser engine . The resultant <unk> chassis was raced by Jack Brabham as the " Zink @-@ Urschel <unk> " at the 1964 event and retired with a fuel tank problem . The car was entered again in 1966 , taking a third place for Jim <unk> . From 1968 to 1970 , Brabham returned to Indianapolis , at first with a 4 @.@ 2 litre version of the Repco V8 the team used in Formula One — with which Peter Revson finished fifth in 1969 — before reverting to the Offenhauser engine for 1970 . The Brabham @-@ Offenhauser combination was entered again in 1971 by J.C. Agajanian , finishing fifth in the hands of Bill Vukovich II . Although a Brabham car never won at Indianapolis , <unk> won four United States Automobile Club ( USAC ) races over 1965 and 1966 in the <unk> . The " Dean Van Lines Special " in which Mario Andretti won the 1965 USAC national championship was a direct copy of this car , made with permission from Brabham by Andretti 's crew chief Clint Brawner . Revson took Brabham 's final USAC race win in a <unk> in 1969 , using the Repco engine . 
 = = = Formula Two = = = 
 In the 1960s and early 1970s , drivers who had reached Formula One often continued to compete in Formula Two . In 1966 MRD produced the <unk> for the lower category , with a Honda engine acting as a stressed component . The car was extremely successful , winning 11 consecutive Formula Two races in the hands of the Formula One pairing of Brabham and Hulme . Cars were entered by MRD and not by the Brabham Racing Organisation , avoiding a direct conflict with Repco , their Formula One engine supplier . 
 = = = Formula Three = = = 
 The first Formula Three Brabham , the <unk> , won only four major races in 1964 . The <unk> which followed in 1965 was a highly successful design . 58 cars were sold , which won 42 major races . Further developments of the same concept , including wings by the end of the decade , were highly competitive up until 1971 . The <unk> of 1972 was Brabham 's first production monocoque and the first not designed by Tauranac . Although 40 were ordered , it was less successful than its predecessors . The angular <unk> was the final Formula Three Brabham . 
 = = = Formula 5000 = = = 
 Brabham made one car for Formula 5000 racing , the Brabham <unk> . Rolled out in late 1973 it was tested in early 1974 by John Watson at Silverstone before making its debut at the Rothmans <unk> Championship Round at Monza on June 30 , 1974 driven by Martin <unk> . Former Australian Drivers ' Champion Kevin Bartlett used the Chevrolet powered Brabham <unk> to finish 3rd in the 1978 Australian Drivers ' Championship including finishing 5th in the 1978 Australian Grand Prix . 
 = = = Sports cars = = = 
 Tauranac did not enjoy designing sports cars and could only spare a small amount of his time from MRD 's very successful single @-@ seater business . Only 14 sports car models were built between 1961 and 1972 , out of a total production of almost 600 chassis . The <unk> was the only one built in any numbers , and was quite successful in national level racing in the UK in 1964 and 1965 . The design was " stretched " in 1966 to become the one @-@ off <unk> , originally fitted with the 4 @.@ 3 litre version of the Repco engine for Can @-@ Am racing . It was quickly abandoned by MRD after engine reliability problems became evident . 
 = = Technical innovation = = 
 Brabham was considered a technically conservative team in the 1960s , chiefly because it persevered with traditional " spaceframe " cars long after Lotus introduced lighter , stiffer " monocoque " chassis to Formula One in 1962 . Chief designer Tauranac reasoned that monocoques of the time were not usefully stiffer than well designed spaceframe chassis , and were harder to repair and less suitable for MRD 's customers . His " old fashioned " cars won the Brabham team the 1966 and 1967 championships , and were competitive in Formula One until rule changes forced a move to monocoques in 1970 . 
 Despite the perceived conservatism , in 1963 Brabham was the first Formula One team to use a wind tunnel to hone their designs to reduce drag and stop the cars lifting off the ground at speed . The practice only became the norm in the early 1980s , and is possibly the most important factor in the design of modern cars . Towards the end of the 1960s , teams began to exploit aerodynamic downforce to push the cars ' tyres down harder on the track and enable them to maintain faster speeds through high @-@ speed corners . At the 1968 Belgian Grand Prix , Brabham were the first , alongside Ferrari , to introduce full width rear wings to this effect . 
 The team 's most fertile period of technical innovation came in the 1970s and 1980s when Gordon Murray became technical director . During 1976 , the team introduced " carbon @-@ carbon brakes " to Formula One , which promised reduced " unsprung weight " and better stopping performance due to carbon 's greater coefficient of friction . The initial versions used carbon @-@ carbon composite brake pads and a steel disc faced with carbon " pucks " . The technology was not reliable at first ; in 1976 , Carlos Pace crashed at 180 mph ( 290 km / h ) at the <unk> circuit after heat build @-@ up in the brakes boiled the brake fluid , leaving him with no way of stopping the car . By 1979 , Brabham had developed an effective carbon @-@ carbon braking system , combining structural carbon discs with carbon brake pads . By the late 1980s , carbon brakes were used by all competitors in almost all top level motor sports . 
 Although Brabham experimented with <unk> and underbody skirts in the mid @-@ 1970s , the team , like the rest of the field , did not immediately understand Lotus 's development of a ground effect car in 1977 . The Brabham BT46B " Fan car " of 1978 , generated enormous downforce with a fan , which sucked air from beneath the car , although its claimed use was for engine cooling . The car only raced once in the Formula One World Championship — Niki Lauda winning the 1978 Swedish Grand Prix — before a loophole in the regulations was closed by the FIA . 
 Although in 1979 Murray was the first to use lightweight " carbon fibre composite " panels to stiffen Brabham 's aluminium alloy monocoques , he echoed his predecessor Tauranac in being the last to switch to the new fully composite monocoques . Murray was reluctant to build the entire chassis from composite materials until he understood their behaviour in a crash , an understanding achieved in part through an instrumented crash test of a BT49 chassis . The team did not follow McLaren 's 1981 MP4 / 1 with their own fully composite chassis until the " <unk> " <unk> in 1986 , the last team to do so . This technology is now used in all top level single seater racing cars . 
 For the 1981 season the FIA introduced a 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) minimum ride height for the cars , intended to slow them in corners by limiting the downforce created by aerodynamic ground effect . Gordon Murray devised a " hydropneumatic suspension " system for the BT49C , which allowed the car to settle to a much lower ride height at speed . Brabham were accused of cheating by other teams , although Murray believes that the system met the letter of the regulations . No action was taken against the team and others soon produced systems with similar effects . 
 At the 1982 British Grand Prix , Brabham reintroduced the idea of re @-@ fuelling and changing the car 's tyres during the race , unseen since the 1957 Formula One season , to allow their drivers to sprint away at the start of races on a light fuel load and soft tyres . After studying techniques used at the Indianapolis 500 and in NASCAR racing in the United States , the team were able to refuel and re @-@ tyre the car in 14 seconds in tests ahead of the race . In 1982 Murray felt the tactic did little more than " get our sponsors noticed at races we had no chance of winning " , but in 1983 the team made good use of the tactic . Refuelling was banned for 1984 , and did not reappear until the 1994 season ( until it was banned again in 2010 as a part of cost cutting measures ) , but tyre changes have remained part of Formula One . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 The fan car and hydropneumatic suspension exploited loopholes in the sporting regulations . In the early 1980s , Brabham was accused of going further and breaking the regulations . During 1981 , Piquet 's first championship year , rumours circulated of illegal underweight Brabham chassis . Driver Jacques Laffite was among those to claim that the cars were fitted with heavily ballasted bodywork before being weighed at scrutineering . The accusation was denied by Brabham 's management . No formal protest was made against the team and no action was taken against them by the sporting authorities . 
 From 1978 , Ecclestone was president of the Formula One Constructors Association ( FOCA ) , a body formed by the teams to represent their interests . This left his team open to accusations of having advance warning of rule changes . Ecclestone denies that the team benefited from this and Murray has noted that , contrary to this view , at the end of 1982 the team had to abandon their new <unk> car , built on the basis that ground effect would be permitted in 1983 . Brabham had to design and build a replacement , the BT52 , in only three months . At the end of the 1983 season , Renault and Ferrari , both beaten to the Drivers ' Championship by Piquet , protested that the Research Octane Number ( RON ) of the team 's fuel was above the legal limit of 102 . The FIA declared that a figure of up to 102 @.@ 9 was permitted under the rules , and that Brabham had not exceeded this limit . 
 = = Championship results = = 
 Results achieved by the " works " Brabham team . Bold results indicate a championship win . 
 = Hurricane Epsilon = 
 Hurricane Epsilon was the final of fifteen hurricanes within the record @-@ breaking 2005 Atlantic hurricane season . Originating from a cold front beneath an upper @-@ level low , Epsilon formed on November 29 about 915 mi ( 1470 km ) east of Bermuda . Initially , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) forecast the storm to transition into an extratropical cyclone within five days , due to conditions unfavorable for significant intensification . Epsilon continually defied forecasts , at first due to an unexpected loop to the southwest , and later due to retaining its strength despite cold waters and strong wind shear . 
 On December 1 , Epsilon began a northeast motion due to an approaching trough , and the next day it attained hurricane status . After turning to the east , it developed characteristics of an annular hurricane , meaning it had a circular eye , a ring of convection , and had few fluctuations in its intensity . On December 5 Epsilon attained peak winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) , and the next day it turned to the south and southwest . Late on December 7 , the winds dropped below hurricane status for the first time in five days , making Epsilon the longest @-@ lasting December hurricane on record . Stronger wind shear caused rapid weakening , and the storm could no longer be classified as a tropical cyclone late on December 8 . The next day the remnant circulation of Epsilon dissipated . 
 = = Formation and naming = = 
 On November 27 , a surface storm with gale @-@ force winds developed beneath an upper @-@ level low pressure area , about 1150 mi ( 1850 km ) east of Bermuda . At the time , a cold front extended eastward from the surface storm toward the eastern Atlantic Ocean , north of Tropical Storm Delta . By that time , tropical cyclone forecast models anticipated the possible development of a subtropical cyclone , and although they were inconsistent , National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) specialist Eric Blake stated , " blocking at high latitudes seems to favor another subtropical cyclone effort . " The blocking referred to a ridge stretching across the northern Atlantic . The surface storm gradually separated from the frontal zone , but initially its convection , or thunderstorm activity , was sparse and poorly organized . 
 The NHC introduced the system in its tropical weather outlook on November 28 , with the possibility of subtropical or tropical development noted . It moved slowly westward , becoming better organized , and by late that day resembled a subtropical cyclone ; however , as it was still connected to the cold front , it could not have been classified as such . Early on November 29 , an area of deep convection developed and organized over the surface center when it was about 915 mi ( 1470 km ) east of Bermuda . The NHC accordingly assessed the system as developing into a tropical storm , designating it with the Greek letter Epsilon . 
 = = Tropical storm intensity = = 
 Operationally , the NHC did not initiate advisories until 1500 UTC on November 29 , about nine hours after it actually developed . By that time , the convection had wrapped into a ring 45 mi ( 72 km ) in diameter . In the first advisory on Epsilon , the NHC forecast steady strengthening to near hurricane status due to marginally favorable conditions , followed by extratropical transition within five days ; an alternate possibility was Epsilon being absorbed by a larger extratropical storm . The storm moved westward after its development with a persistent ridge to its north . Initially , Epsilon was embedded beneath an upper @-@ level low that provided an area of low wind shear and instability . An eye @-@ like feature briefly developed in the center of the convection , although the thunderstorms waned late on November 28 due to restricted inflow . However , banding features and outflow improved at the same time . 
 By November 30 , the NHC anticipated extratropical transition to occur within two days , although some strengthening was still expected . That day , there was an increase in convection over the center and the development of a ragged eye @-@ feature . The winds briefly increased to 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) , although the intensity of the thunderstorms diminished . Initially Epsilon was predicted to continue westward and eventually turn to the north and northeast . Instead , it turned toward the southwest and executed a cyclonic loop ; the unexpected motion caused larger than normal errors in the extended track forecast . As it moved to the south , the storm crossed over an area of warmer water temperatures , and the NHC remarked that " just a modest increase in convection [ would be ] needed to make Epsilon a hurricane . " At the time , forecasters assessed the winds in Epsilon to be around 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) , although in a post @-@ season re @-@ analysis it was found to have been 10 mph ( 15 km / h ) weaker . Late on November 30 , Epsilon made its closest approach to Bermuda , passing about 645 miles ( 1045 km ) east @-@ southeast of the island . 
 Tropical Storm Epsilon began its motion to the east and northeast on December 1 , due to an approaching trough . Its structure became that of a " shallow hybrid @-@ type tropical cyclone " , and an eye @-@ feature again developed within the convection . At the time , the NHC and several computer models anticipated extratropical transition within 36 hours as it accelerated northeastward near the Azores . However , four computer models predicted an alternate scenario , and forecaster Stacy Stewart stated such transition would only occur " barring any southward motion over warmer water that would prolong both the lifetime of Epsilon and the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season . " As it continued northeastward , the storm separated from upper @-@ level low it was previously beneath . After a decrease in convection , the thunderstorm activity again increased over the center , and there were more banding features . Despite moving over slightly cooler water temperatures , Epsilon attained hurricane status late on December 2 , following the development of a well @-@ defined eye 29 miles ( 46 km ) in diameter . 
 = = Peak strength and hurricane status = = 
 A few hours after reaching hurricane status , the NHC thought Epsilon reached peak winds , as the storm was about to move over cooler water temperatures . Additionally , the hurricane was expected to stall near the Azores , in contrast to the original forecast of continued acceleration to the northeast . On December 3 it turned due eastward , still maintaining an eye , modest amounts of convection , and outflow . Despite moving into an area of cooler waters and generally unfavorable atmospheric conditions , Epsilon retained its hurricane status ; the only entity supporting its intensity was its warm upper @-@ level temperature . By late on December 3 , its presentation was described as " remarkably well @-@ organized for a hurricane at high latitude in December ... embedded in a strong upper @-@ level westerly wind environment and moving over [ 70 – 72 ° F ( 21 – 22 ° C ) ] water . " 
 As it continued eastward , Epsilon developed characteristics of an annular hurricane ; such cyclones , more often found in the deep tropics with greater intensity , have circular eyes , surrounded by a nearly uniform ring of convection and a general lack of thunderstorms outside the ring . For several days , the intensity fluctuated in a narrow range , and although Epsilon was briefly downgraded to tropical storm status on December 4 , the NHC assessed it as remaining a hurricane . After it was thought to have weakened , the eye became more symmetric as the ring of convection became stronger . The hurricane remained difficult to forecast , as NHC forecaster Lixion Avila remarked , " There are no clear reasons ... and I am not going to make one up ... to explain the recent strengthening of Epsilon . " 
 By late on December 4 , the NHC was no longer anticipating extratropical transition , after a front passed north of the storm and there was no interaction . At 0600 UTC on December 5 , the hurricane 's appearance generated 4 @.@ 7 on the Dvorak technique , a system used to estimate intensity from satellite imagery . This was the highest rating during Epsilon 's duration , and suggested winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) , which was its peak intensity . Around that time , the hurricane began a turn to the east @-@ southeast , as the ridge to its north built behind the passage of a cold front . Despite the cold water temperatures and unfavorable strong upper @-@ level winds , Epsilon maintained its intensity , and the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory ( GFDL ) model predicted it would remain a hurricane for nearly three days . 
 = = Weakening and dissipation = = 
 On December 6 the hurricane turned to the south and southwest . As it did so , Epsilon passed beneath a mid @-@ level trough that sheltered it from the wind shear . After weakening during the evening , the convection redeveloped around the large and distinct eye in the daytime , a process Epsilon had done repeatedly in its duration . However , late on December 7 , an approaching trough began increasing wind shear over the system , displacing the convection from the center and causing the eye to dissipate . After maintaining hurricane status for five days , Epsilon weakened to tropical storm status about 920 mi ( 1480 km ) southwest of the Azores . 
 Once weakened to a tropical storm , Epsilon began rapidly deteriorating . On December 8 , it was downgraded to a tropical depression as the convection had totally dissipated . The NHC issued their final advisory on Epsilon at 1500 UTC that day , after the cyclone consisted of a tight swirl of low clouds with no convection . On issuing the last advisory , Lixion Avila remarked , " I hope this is the end of the long lasting 2005 hurricane season . " There was ultimately one more tropical storm – Zeta . 
 Late on December 8 , Epsilon transitioned into a remnant low pressure area . The remnant circulation elongated in advance of a frontal zone , and it dissipated late on December 9 . The front absorbed the remnants the next day . 
 = = Naming and records = = 
 After completing the list of 21 tropical cyclone names for the first time ever , the NHC began naming storms with the Greek alphabet . Epsilon was the fifth name of the list , and ultimately there was one additional storm , making the 2005 season the most active on record with 27 named storms . Since Epsilon stayed well out to sea and never approached land , no warnings or watches were issued . No ships reported tropical storm force winds from Epsilon and there were no damages or fatalities . 
 When Tropical Storm Epsilon persisted until December 1 , it extended the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season beyond the normal boundaries of June 1 to November 30 . Although such off @-@ season Atlantic storms are unusual , a similar event occurred just one year prior with Tropical Storm Otto . 
 Epsilon is just one of four tropical cyclones to ever attain hurricane status in December , along with a hurricane in 1887 , Alice in 1954 , and Lili in 1984 . The cyclone maintained hurricane status for five days , longer than any other Atlantic hurricane in December . 
 = Oriental Film = 
 Oriental Film was a film production company in Batavia , Dutch East Indies ( now Jakarta , Indonesia ) . Established by ethnic Chinese businessman Tjo Seng Han in 1940 , it completed four black @-@ and @-@ white films before it was closed in 1941 . All the company 's films were screened into the 1950s but may now be lost . They were directed by two men , Njoo Cheong Seng and Sutan Usman Karim , and launched the careers of actors such as Dhalia and Soerip . 
 Established during the revival of the Indies film industry , Oriental released its first film , Kris Mataram , in July 1940 . It starred Njoo 's wife Fifi Young , and relied on her fame as a stage actress to draw audiences . This was followed by a further three films , which were targeted at low @-@ income audiences and extensively used kroncong music . Their final production was Panggilan Darah in 1941 , which was completed after Njoo and Young had migrated to Majestic Film . Oriental was unable to recoup its expenses of renting a Dutch @-@ owned studio , and the company was shut down . 
 = = Establishment = = 
 Following the commercial successes of Terang Boelan ( Full Moon ; 1937 ) , Fatima ( 1938 ) , and Alang @-@ Alang ( Grass ; 1939 ) , the Dutch East Indies film industry – which had been severely weakened by the Great Depression – was revived . Film production increased and , in 1940 , four new production houses were opened , including Oriental Film . Funded entirely by the ethnic Chinese businessman Tjo Seng Han , the company 's first headquarters were at 42 <unk> Street , in eastern Batavia ( now Jakarta ) ; according to the weekly Sin Po , this studio had simple facilities . Another ethnic Chinese businessman , Tjan Hock Siong , was brought on to manage the day @-@ to @-@ day activities of the studio . 
 Tjo and Tjan hired Njoo Cheong Seng , a dramatist who had previously worked with the Orion Opera before establishing his own troupe , and his wife Fifi Young . The two had gained wide recognition through their stage work , and it was hoped that name recognition would bring in audiences . The hiring of Njoo and Young was part of a trend of bringing theatrically trained actors and crew into the film industry . Terang Boelan had used stage starlet Roekiah and her husband Kartolo to great effect , and the actors had brought similar financial success to Tan 's Film after they were hired . 
 = = Productions = = 
 Oriental 's first production , Kris Mataram ( Kris of Mataram ) , was directed by Njoo and starred Young and Omar <unk> . It followed a young noblewoman ( played by Young ) who marries a nobleman despite her parents ' disapproval . For this film , Njoo drew Joshua Wong from Tan 's as cinematographer , then used the Wong name as part of his advertising : " [ Kris Mataram has ] the J. Wong guarantee " . Released in July 1940 , the film was targeted at low @-@ income audiences – particularly theatre @-@ goers who would recognise Young . A review in the Soerabaijasch Handelsblad praised it , calling Kris Mataram " captivating to the last metre " . 
 Before its studio 's second production , Oriental began renting the studios of Algemeen Nederlandsch Indisch Filmsyndicaat ( ANIF ) in <unk> , Batavia , for 1 @,@ 500 gulden a month . This rent also included access to the studio 's equipment and cameraman <unk> <unk> , as well as facilities such as air conditioning and telephones in each office , and lighting equipment for night @-@ time shots . A large adjacent plot of land was also included . By renting the ANIF complex , Oriental became the largest and most modern studio in the Indies . 
 Njoo soon showed a proclivity for sensation , which was manifested in the December 1940 release Zoebaida . For the film , a love story set in Timor starring Young as the title character , Oriental used bright , extravagant costumes ; Njoo gave the characters whimsical names which would not be found in the setting . Rather than shoot on location – which would have been prohibitively expensive – Oriental constructed sets behind the ANIF Studio . Reviewers of the film noted with disdain that Zoebaida was exaggerated and clearly reflected its stage influences . 
 Oriental released its third production , Pantjawarna ( Five Colours ) , in March 1941 . Again starring Young , the film – in which a young woman must raise two daughters despite her husband 's imprisonment – featured two new hires , Dhalia and Soerip . Both women , teenagers at the time , had established stage careers and were known for their singing voices , which were put to use in several of Pantjawarna 's twelve kroncong songs . This film was well received by critics , and Young 's acting was praised in both the Bataviaasch Nieuwsblad and Soerabaijasch Handelsblad ; the latter characterised Pantjawarna as " a success for <unk> [ Oriental Film Company ] and proof of the progress made in the cinema of the Indies " . 
 After Pantjawarna , Fred Young drew Njoo and his wife to the newly established Majestic Film . Deprived of their director and main star , Oriental hired the journalist Sutan Usman Karim to direct their fourth production , Panggilan Darah ( Call of Blood ) . This film , written by Karim and starring Dhalia and Soerip , told of two young orphans as they tried to eke a living in Batavia . This film , which debuted in June 1941 , prominently featured the cigarette factory Nitisemito , leading the Indonesian film historian Misbach Yusa Biran to suggest that it may have paid for the advertisement . He records it as a modest success , although he notes that reviews were mixed . 
 = = Closure and legacy = = 
 Following Panggilan Darah , Oriental – which had been losing money steadily – released its contract for the ANIF studio , which was taken over by the Dutch @-@ run Multi Film . Despite hopes that they would continue producing narrative films , perhaps with less modern equipment , the company was dissolved . Oriental 's actors and crew members migrated to different studios . Suska was signed to Java Industrial Film and directed a single film for them , Ratna Moetoe Manikam . Dhalia went to Populair 's Film and acted in one production , Moestika dari Djemar ( The Jewel of Djemar ; 1942 ) , before the Japanese occupation in March 1942 closed that studio . Soerip , meanwhile , joined Njoo and Young at Majestic Film , acting in two productions before that studio was closed . 
 Although Oriental was short @-@ lived , several of the actors and crew it hired went on to lengthy careers . Njoo , after handling two films for Majestic in 1941 , spent much of the decade in theatre before returning to directing in the mid @-@ 1950s . Fifi Young , who continued acting for Njoo until their divorce in 1945 , appeared in more than eighty films before her death in 1975 . Dhalia and Soerip likewise had lengthy careers : both acted until the 1990s , Dhalia in 52 productions and Soerip in 25 . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 In a period of two years , Oriental released four films ; all were feature length , made in black @-@ and @-@ white , and received wide releases in the Dutch East Indies . Some , such as Panggilan Darah , enjoyed international release ; the film was screened in Singapore ( then part of the Straits Settlements ) by September 1941 . The company 's productions were targeted at low @-@ income audiences and extensively used kroncong music , for the recording of which the company established the Oriental Novelty Five . Though its films were screened at least into the 1950s , Oriental 's output may be lost . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = The Stones in the Park = 
 The Stones in the Park generally refers to a free outdoor festival held in Hyde Park on 5 July 1969 , headlined by The Rolling Stones and featuring Third Ear Band , King Crimson , Screw , Alexis Korner 's New Church , Family and The Battered Ornaments , in front of a crowd estimated at between 250 @,@ 000 and 500 @,@ 000 fans . 
 It was the Stones ' first public concert in over two years , and was planned as an introduction of new guitarist , Mick Taylor , though circumstances inevitably changed following the death of former member Brian Jones two days earlier . The band rehearsed at the Beatles ' studio in the basement of 3 Savile Row , and Jagger and Richards came up with a 14 @-@ song set ; the Hyde Park concert would be the first time many of the songs had been played before a public audience . The PA system was supplied by Watkins Electric Music , who had already handled amplification at previous Hyde Park shows . 
 Fans started to arrive at the park with candles on 4 July in tribute to Jones , and by the morning of 5 July , 7 @,@ 000 people had already gathered . Mick Jagger read a short eulogy on stage before the Stones ' set began , reading two stanzas of Percy Bysshe Shelley 's poem on John Keats 's death , Adonaïs , from a calf @-@ bound book . After this recital , several hundred cabbage white butterflies were released . The setlist for their performance was " I 'm Yours & I 'm Hers , " " Jumpin ' Jack Flash , " " Mercy Mercy " , " Down Home Girl " , " Stray Cat Blues " , " No Expectations " , " I 'm Free " , " Loving Cup " , " Love in Vain " , " ( I Can 't Get No ) Satisfaction " , " Honky Tonk Women " , " Midnight Rambler " , " Street Fighting Man " , and " Sympathy for the Devil " . During the 18 @-@ minute @-@ long rendition of " Sympathy for the Devil " , a number of African tribal drummers joined the band . 
 While the event is considered a memorable one by several critics , they also agree that it was not one of the Stones ' best performances , and the guitars played during the concert were out of tune . In a 1971 interview with Rolling Stone magazine , Keith Richards evaluated their performance , " We played pretty bad until near the end , because we hadn 't played for years ... Nobody minded , because they just wanted to hear us play again . " The Stones ' portion of concert was filmed by Granada Television and broadcast that September . It has since been released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray . In April 2013 , the band announced their intention to play two return concerts on 6 and 13 July , although the performances were not free . 
 = = Background = = 
 The festival was an important one for the Stones . They had not performed a public concert since their 1967 European Tour , and in 1968 had only performed at the NME Poll Winners Concert and at their television project The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus . In interviews , Mick Jagger stated that he felt the band 's forte was performing live , rather than in the studio , and was keen to return to the stage . Blackhill Enterprises , which had already managed several successful concerts in Hyde Park , including a festival headlined by Blind Faith in June 1969 attended by 150 @,@ 000 people , were contacted to organise one at the next convenient date after the organiser @-@ compère of that concert , Sam Cutler , had met Jagger in the VIP area at the concert and later at the Royal Albert Hall . When asked why the festival would be free , Jagger noted that they had not made much money from previous concert tours anyway , and that he felt the audience would have a better time if they did not have to pay although he ensured that the cost of the concert would be covered by selling exclusive television rights to Granada Television . 
 However , the gradual estrangement of Brian Jones and his decreasing musical contributions – he had only appeared on two tracks on the then in @-@ progress Let It Bleed — made a return to touring problematic . They had shelved The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus after having been upstaged by The Who . By June 1969 , matters had finally come to a head and it was decided that Jones should be replaced for the gig . 
 Mick Taylor , who had by this time obtained a reputation for himself by playing with John Mayall & the Bluesbreakers , was invited to work on Let It Bleed . The band enjoyed his contributions and decided to make him an offer to join full @-@ time . After considering this for a few days , he accepted , and his position was officially announced at a press conference in the park 's bandstand on 13 June . The single " Honky Tonk Women , " recorded on 1 June with Taylor , was rush @-@ released to tie in with the festival date . The Hyde Park concert would be Taylor 's first gig with the band , and as they had barely had any time to rehearse with him he was understandably nervous , though he later stated that he felt the others , who were far closer to Jones than him , would feel more emotionally drained . Jagger , too , was nervous , unsure whether Jones 's fans would take to Taylor and indeed whether they would boycott the concert ; he did not expect the crowd to match the 150 @,@ 000 who had come to the Blind Faith gig . In addition , the hot summer had sent the pollen levels soaring and Jagger suffered from hay @-@ fever and laryngitis in the days leading up to the concert . 
 Jones died on 3 July , two days before the festival . The Stones were in Olympic Studios when they were told of his death by Ian Stewart , and , although grief @-@ stricken , decided they would go ahead with the gig and dedicate their performance to him . Keith Richards later wrote : 
 The all @-@ important thing for us was it was our first appearance for a long time , and with a change of personnel . It was Mick Taylor 's first gig . We were going to do it anyway . Obviously a statement had to be made of one kind or another , so we turned it into a memorial for Brian . We wanted to see him off in grand style . The ups and downs with the guy are one thing , but when his time 's over , release the doves , or in this case the <unk> of white butterflies . 
 The band rehearsed at the Beatles ' studio in the basement of 3 Savile Row , and Jagger and Richards came up with a 14 @-@ song set ; the Hyde Park concert would be the first time many of the songs had been played before a public audience . 
 = = Performance = = 
 The performers at the festival included Third Ear Band , Screw , King Crimson , Alexis Korner 's New Church , Roy Harper , Battered Ornaments , Family , and The Rolling Stones . 
 Fans started to arrive at the park with candles on 4 July in tribute to Jones , and the police allowed the park to be opened late so they could stay . By the following morning , there were already 7 @,@ 000 people . As with the Stones ' performance at the infamous Altamont Free Concert later that year , the Hells Angels were hired as stewards to protect the stage and equipment , something suggested by the Grateful Dead 's manager Rock Scully , who was used to the Angels performing this service at free festivals in California . According to Cutler , Jagger said that he was keen on doing a similar free concert in California at some time in the future . At Hyde Park , fifty Angels patrolled the vicinity of the stage , though there was little resemblance other than a superficial one to their American counterparts . They performed their duties in exchange for a cup of tea . In the event , there were only twelve arrests on the day and a subsequent police report claimed that the Angels were " totally ineffective " . 
 King Crimson at this point still consisted of the original line @-@ up of Robert Fripp , Greg Lake , Ian McDonald , Michael Giles and lyricist Peter Sinfield . They had not yet released an album , and were invited to play on the strength of word of mouth after their live performances in venues such as the Marquee Club . Sam Cutler introduced them on stage , stating the " new band is gonna go a long way . " The band 's setlist was " 21st Century Schizoid Man , " " The Court of the Crimson King , " " Get Thy Bearings " , " Epitaph , " " Mantra , " " Travel Weary Capricorn , " and " Mars . " 
 Three of the tracks appeared in studio form on the band 's debut album , In the Court of the Crimson King , albeit with different lyrics to the performance here . The band 's set has since been released on CD , with some bonus material . Recalling the event , Fripp remembers the sense of community at the event and the good weather , particularly noting a sense of goodwill backstage . 
 Alexis Korner 's involvement with Blues Incorporated had been a key ingredient in the Stones forming in 1962 , and he had played onstage with several group members during this time . New Church had been formed with guitarist Peter Thorup after the demise of Blues Incorporated . 
 Roy Harper had been regularly appearing at a number of Hyde Park festivals since 1968 and saw his popularity increase as a result of these . This eventually resulted in Blackhill 's Peter Jenner managing him , leading to a contract with Harvest Records . For the 5 July gig , he contributed a one @-@ song set between equipment changes . 
 The Battered Ornaments had been the backing band for Cream collaborator Pete Brown . They performed without Brown for the festival , who had been fired from the band the previous day . Guitarist Chris Spedding took over lead vocals . The band supplied the armoured personnel carrier that carried the Stones from their hotel to the park . 
 = = = The Rolling Stones = = = 
 The band met at the Londonderry Hotel on Park Lane , overlooking the park , where they had booked a tenth @-@ floor suite , and proceeded to the park in the armoured personnel carrier , together with their two official photographers , Michael Cooper and Spanish Tony Sanchez . They alighted from the carrier into a caravan @-@ trailer behind the stage . Jagger , his face heavily made up and with a studded leather collar around his neck , was clad in a white dress . He had borrowed the dress , which had been made for Sammy Davis , Jr. at the Mr Fish boutique , and wore it to Prince Rupert Lowenstein 's white ball , where he had shown it to Princess Margaret . Jagger was only to wear it for half @-@ an @-@ hour at the Hyde Park concert , after which he tore it off to reveal a violet T @-@ shirt and white loon pants . 
 Before the Stones kicked off their set , Jagger addressed the crowd , asking them to be quiet so he could read something as a tribute to Jones . He then read two stanzas of Percy Bysshe Shelley 's poem on John Keats 's death , Adonaïs , from a calf @-@ bound book . After this recital , several hundred cabbage white butterflies were released , despite the Royal Parks authority having stipulated before the concert that any butterflies released by the Stones should be sterilised and should certainly not be of the voracious cabbage white genus ( Pieris spp . ) . 2 @,@ 500 butterflies were due to be released , but due to the hot weather , many of them died from lack of air in storage . Watts later said that the butterflies " were a bit sad , there were casualties . It was like the Somme . " 
 The Stones then launched into " I 'm Yours and I 'm Hers " , which , according to Philip Norman , was an ironic choice given that Marianne Faithfull and Marsha Hunt , both of whom Jagger was alleged to be having relationships with at that time , were in the audience . 
 The setlist for their performance was " I 'm Yours & I 'm Hers " , " Jumpin ' Jack Flash " , " No Expectations " , " Mercy Mercy " , " Stray Cat Blues " , " I 'm Free " , " Down Home Girl " , " Love in Vain " , " Give Me A Little Drink " , " Midnight Rambler " , " ( I Can 't Get No ) Satisfaction " , " Honky Tonk Women " , " Street Fighting Man " , and " Sympathy for the Devil " . 
 During the 18 @-@ minute @-@ long rendition of " Sympathy for the Devil " , a number of Ginger Johnson 's African tribal drummers joined the band . After the concert ended , the volunteers who cleared up the 5 @,@ 000 tonnes of rubbish were each given a copy of " Honky Tonk Women " . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 Blackhill Enterprises provided a 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) high stage , with the speakers being housed in a thirty @-@ foot @-@ high tower so that people at the far end of the park would be able to hear the music . The stage was flanked by palm trees in pots and behind the performers there was a blowup of the cover of the Beggars Banquet album . Richards had started experimenting with open tunings by this point in the band 's career , particularly after hearing Ry Cooder , and the Hyde Park gig was the first chance audiences got to hear them . He played a Gibson ES @-@ 330 tuned to open E tuning with a capo on the fourth fret , and a Gibson Flying V. Taylor , meanwhile , played a Gibson Les Paul for the opening number , followed by an SG for the majority of the set . The PA system was supplied by Watkins Electric Music , who already handled amplification at previous Hyde Park shows . Company founder Charlie Watkins recalls it was the largest PA he had assembled to that point and , unable to provide enough gear himself , he was forced to borrow extras from other groups , later saying , " I didn 't have many columns , but I wanted to put <unk> up . I borrowed some from T @-@ Rex . They all chipped in — that 's what we used to do . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 1971 , in an interview with Rolling Stone magazine , Richards said , " We played pretty bad until near the end , because we hadn 't played for years ... Nobody minded , because they just wanted to hear us play again . " 
 The Guardian 's Richard Gott stated that the show was " a great and epoch @-@ making event in British social history " , although he added that " most of the music ... was indifferent " . According to Norman , " the band 's <unk> was painfully obvious . Keith and Mick Taylor 's guitars , so harmonious at first meeting , turned into a pair of pneumatic drills fighting a grudge match to the death . Charlie 's drumming and Bill 's bass each seemed to have melted into jelly . " The Daily Telegraph 's Iain Martin stated that the Stones were " under @-@ rehearsed and quite possibly nervous , not having performed live in front of an audience in more than two years . The guitars were badly out of tune and half the songs were approached at the wrong tempo " , adding that Jagger appeared to be " trying to cover up for the shortcomings of his bandmates " . Retrospectively reviewing the DVD release of the Stones ' set , Film 4 commented : " It isn 't the greatest film about the band and it isn 't their greatest performance , but for fans it captures the band at a significant moment . " 
 = = DVD release = = 
 The DVD , released on 25 September 2006 , includes the same concert footage as the TV broadcast of 25 September 1969 . The DVD includes three previously unseen songs which were filmed at the concert – " Mercy , Mercy " , " Stray Cat Blues " and " No Expectations " . The latter two are incomplete but are included here due to their uniqueness ( HD ) . Also included is news footage of their early fame from 1964 , footage of Mick Jagger discussing his arrest for drugs possession in July 1967 and his subsequent press conference on his release from prison , and a 1971 interview with Bill Wyman and Charlie Watts about their tour of France . 
 Eagle Rock Entertainment later issued reissued the special on DVD and Blu @-@ Ray as From The Vault - Hyde Park - Live in 1969 in 2015 . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 " Midnight Rambler " ( 4 : 30 ) 
 " ( I Can 't Get No ) Satisfaction " ( 4 : 00 ) 
 " I 'm Free " ( 2 : 50 ) 
 Eulogy ( for Brian Jones ) ( 2 : 00 ) 
 " I 'm Yours & I 'm Hers " ( Johnny Winter ) ( 2 : 10 ) 
 " Jumpin ' Jack Flash " ( 3 : 20 ) 
 " Honky Tonk Women " ( 3 : 05 ) 
 " Love in Vain " ( Robert Johnson ) ( 4 : 30 ) 
 " Sympathy for the Devil " ( 10 : 30 ) 
 Bonus tracks 
 " Mercy Mercy " 
 " Stray Cat Blues " 
 " No Expectations " 
 = = 2013 concert = = 
 On Richard Bacon 's BBC Radio 5 Live show on 3 April 2013 it was announced that the Rolling Stones would hold a concert in Hyde Park as part of their 50th anniversary celebrations on 6 July . Mick Jagger quipped , " I 'll try and keep the poetry to a minimum " , and remarked , in respect of the white dress that he wore for the 1969 concert , " I can still just about get into the zippers . " On 9 April it was announced that they would hold a second concert , on 13 July . Several celebrities , including David Walliams , Gemma Arterton , Chris O 'Dowd , Noel Fielding , Simon Fuller and Bobby Gillespie attended the 6 July gig . 
 = USS Congress ( 1799 ) = 
 USS Congress was a nominally rated 38 @-@ gun wooden @-@ hulled , three @-@ masted heavy frigate of the United States Navy . She was named by George Washington to reflect a principal of the United States Constitution . James Hackett built her in Portsmouth New Hampshire and she was launched on 15 August 1799 . She was one of the original six frigates whose construction the Naval Act of 1794 had authorized . Joshua Humphreys designed these frigates to be the young Navy 's capital ships , and so Congress and her sisters were larger and more heavily armed and built than the standard frigates of the period . 
 Her first duties with the newly formed United States Navy were to provide protection for American merchant shipping during the Quasi War with France and to defeat the Barbary pirates in the First Barbary War . During the War of 1812 she made several extended length cruises in company with her sister ship President and captured , or assisted in the capture of twenty British merchant ships . At the end of 1813 , due to a lack of materials to repair her , she was placed in ordinary for the remainder of the war . In 1815 she returned to service for the Second Barbary War and made patrols through 1816 . In the 1820s she helped suppress piracy in the West Indies , made several voyages to South America , and was the first U.S. warship to visit China . Congress spent her last ten years of service as a receiving ship until ordered broken up in 1834 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 In 1785 Barbary pirates , most notably from Algiers , began to seize American merchant vessels in the Mediterranean . In 1793 alone , eleven American ships were captured and their crews and stores held for ransom . To combat this problem , proposals were made for warships to protect American shipping , resulting in the Naval Act of 1794 . The act provided funds to construct six frigates , but included a clause that if peace terms were agreed to with Algiers , the construction of the ships would be halted . 
 Joshua Humphreys ' design was unusual for the time , being long on keel and narrow of beam ( width ) and mounting very heavy guns . The design called for a diagonal scantling ( rib ) scheme intended to restrict hogging while giving the ships extremely heavy planking . This design gave the hull a greater strength than a more lightly built frigate . Humphreys ' design was based on his realization that the fledgling United States of the period could not match the European states in the size of their navies . This being so , the frigates were designed to overpower other frigates with the ability to escape from a ship of the line . 
 Congress was given her name by President George Washington after a principle of the United States Constitution . Her keel was reportedly laid down late in 1795 at a shipyard in Portsmouth , New Hampshire . James Hackett was charged with her construction and Captain James Sever served as a superintendent . Her construction proceeded slowly and was completely suspended when in March 1796 , a peace treaty was signed with Algiers . Congress remained at the shipyard , incomplete , until relations with France deteriorated in 1798 with the start of the Quasi @-@ War . At the request of then President John Adams , funds were approved on 16 July to complete her construction . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The Naval Act of 1794 had specified 36 @-@ gun frigates . However , Congress and her sister @-@ ship Constellation were re @-@ rated to 38s because of their large dimensions , being 164 ft ( 50 m ) in length and 41 ft ( 12 m ) in width . 
 The " ratings " by number of guns were meant only as an approximation , and Congress often carried up to 48 guns . Ships of this era had no permanent battery of guns such as modern Navy ships carry . The guns and cannons were designed to be completely portable and often were exchanged between ships as situations warranted . Each commanding officer outfitted armaments to their liking , taking into consideration factors such as the overall tonnage of cargo , complement of personnel aboard , and planned routes to be sailed . Consequently , the armaments on ships would change often during their careers , and records of the changes were not generally kept . 
 During her first cruise in the Quasi @-@ War against France , Congress was noted to be armed with a battery of forty guns consisting of twenty @-@ eight 18 pounders ( 8 kg ) and twelve 9 pounders ( 4 kg ) . For her patrols during the War of 1812 , she was armed with a battery of forty @-@ four guns consisting of twenty @-@ four 18 pounders and twenty 32 pounders ( 15 kg ) . 
 = = Quasi @-@ War = = 
 Congress launched on 15 August 1799 under the command of Captain Sever . After fitting @-@ out in Rhode Island , she set off on her maiden voyage 6 January 1800 sailing in company with Essex to escort merchant ships to the East Indies . Six days later she lost all of her masts during a gale . Because her rigging had been set and tightened in a cold climate , it had slackened once she reached warmer temperatures . Without the full support of the rigging , all the masts fell during a four @-@ hour period , killing one crew member trying to repair the main mast . 
 The crew rigged an emergency sail and limped back to the Gosport Navy Yard for repairs . While there , some of Sever 's junior officers announced that they had no confidence in his ability as a commanding officer . A hearing was held , and Captain Sever was cleared of any wrongdoing and remained in command of Congress , though many of his crew soon transferred out to Chesapeake . 
 Remaining in port for six months while her masts and rigging were repaired , she finally sailed again on 26 July for the West Indies . Congress made routine patrols escorting American merchant ships and seeking out French ships to capture . On two occasions she almost ran aground ; first while pursuing a French privateer , she ran into shallow water where large rocks were seen near the surface . Although their exact depth was not determined , Sever immediately abandoned pursuit of the privateer and changed course towards deeper waters . Her second close call occurred off the coast of the Caicos Islands , when during the night she drifted close to the reefs . At daybreak her predicament was discovered by the lookouts . 
 A peace treaty with France was ratified on 3 February 1801 and Congress returned to Boston in April . In accordance with an act of Congress passed on 3 March and signed by President John Adams , thirteen frigates then currently in service were to be retained . Seven of those frigates , including Congress , were to be placed in ordinary . En route to the Washington Navy Yard , she passed Mount Vernon on her way up the Potomac and Captain Sever ordered her sails lowered , flag at half mast , and a 13 @-@ gun salute fired to honor the recently deceased George Washington . Congress decommissioned at Washington along with United States and New York . 
 = = First Barbary War = = 
 During the United States ' preoccupation with France during the Quasi @-@ War , troubles with the Barbary States were suppressed by the payment of tribute to ensure that American merchant ships were not harassed and seized . In 1801 Yusuf Karamanli of Tripoli , dissatisfied with the amount of tribute he was receiving in comparison to Algiers , demanded an immediate payment of $ 250 @,@ 000 . In response , Thomas Jefferson sent a squadron of frigates to protect American merchant ships in the Mediterranean and pursue peace with the Barbary States . 
 The first squadron , under the command of Richard Dale in President , was instructed to escort merchant ships through the Mediterranean and negotiate with leaders of the Barbary States . A second squadron was assembled under the command of Richard Valentine Morris in Chesapeake however , the performance of Morris 's squadron was so poor that he was recalled and subsequently dismissed from the Navy in 1803 . A third squadron was assembled under the command of Edward Preble in Constitution and by mid @-@ 1804 they had successfully fought the Battle of Tripoli Harbor . 
 President Jefferson reinforced Preble 's squadron in April and ordered four frigates to sail as soon as possible . President , Congress , Constellation and Essex were placed under the direction of Commodore Samuel Barron . Congress was captained by John Rodgers and two months were spent preparing the squadron for the voyage . They departed in late June and arrived at Gibraltar on 12 August . Congress and Essex were immediately sent to patrol off the coast of Tangier and when they returned to Gibraltar two weeks later , Congress continued on to Tripoli . 
 Congress , accompanied by Constellation , assumed blockade duties of Tripoli and captured one xebec before sailing for Malta on 25 October for repairs . On 6 November Rodgers assumed command of Constitution and in his place , Stephen Decatur assumed command of Congress . The next recorded activity of Congress is in early July 1805 when she was sent in company with Vixen to blockade Tunisia . They were joined on the 23rd by additional U.S. Navy vessels . In early September , Congress carried the Tunisian ambassador back to Washington DC . Afterward , placed in ordinary at the Washington Navy Yard , she served as a classroom for midshipmen training through 1807 . 
 = = War of 1812 = = 
 In 1811 Congress required extensive repairs before recommissioning with Captain John Rogers in command . She performed routine patrols early in 1812 before war was declared on 18 June . Upon the declaration she was assigned to the squadron of Commodore Rodgers sailing in company with Argus , Hornet , President and United States . 
 Almost immediately Rogers was informed by a passing American merchant ship of a fleet of British merchantmen en route to Britain from Jamaica . Congress sailed along in pursuit , but was interrupted when President began pursuing HMS Belvidera on 23 June . Congress trailed behind President during the chase and fired her <unk> at the escaping Belvidera . Unable to capture Belvidera , the squadron returned to the pursuit of the Jamaican fleet . On 1 July they began to follow a trail of coconut shells and orange peels the Jamaican fleet had left behind them . Sailing to within one day 's journey of the English Channel , the squadron never sighted the convoy and Rodgers called off the pursuit on the 13th . During their return trip to Boston , Congress assisted in the capture of seven merchant ships , including the recapture of an American vessel . 
 Making her second cruise against the British with President , Congress sailed from Boston on 8 October . On the 31st of that month , both ships began to pursue HMS Galatea , which was escorting two merchant ships . Galatea and her charges were chased for about three hours , during which Congress captured the merchant ship Argo . In the meantime , President kept after Galatea but lost sight of her as darkness fell . Congress and President remained together during November but they did not find a single ship to capture . On their return to the United States they passed north of Bermuda , proceeded towards the Virginia capes , and arrived back in Boston on 31 December . During their entire time at sea , the two frigates captured nine prizes . 
 Congress and President were blockaded in Boston by the Royal Navy until they slipped through the blockade on 30 April 1813 and put to sea for their third cruise of the war . On 2 May they pursued HMS Curlew but she outran them both and escaped . Congress parted company with President on the 8th and patrolled off the Cape Verde Islands and the coast of Brazil . She only captured four small British merchant ships during this period and returned to the Portsmouth Navy Yard for repairs in late 1813 . By this time of the war , materials and personnel were being diverted to the Great Lakes , which created a shortage of resources necessary to repair her . Due to the amount of repairs she needed , it was decided instead to place her in ordinary , where she stayed for the remainder of the war . 
 = = Second Barbary War = = 
 Soon after the United States declared war against Britain in 1812 , Algiers took advantage of the United States ' preoccupation with Britain and began intercepting American merchant ships in the Mediterranean . On 2 March 1815 , at the request of President James Madison , Congress declared war on Algiers . Work preparing two American squadrons promptly began — one at Boston under Commodore William Bainbridge , and one at New York under Commodore Steven Decatur . 
 Captain Charles Morris assumed command of Congress and assigned to the squadron under Bainbridge . After repairs and refitting , she transported the Minister to Holland William Eustis to his new post . Congress departed in June and after a few weeks at Holland , sailed for the Mediterranean and arrived at Cartagena , Spain in early August joining Bainbridge 's squadron . By the time of Congress 's arrival , however , Commodore Decatur had already secured a peace treaty with Algiers . 
 Congress , Erie , Chippewa and Spark sailed in company with Bainbridge 's flagship Independence — the first commissioned ship of the line of the U.S. Navy — as a show of force off Algiers . The squadron subsequently made appearances off Tripoli and Tunis and arrived at Gibraltar in early October . From there , Congress and many other ships were ordered back to the United States . She arrived at Newport , Rhode Island , remained there shortly , and proceeded to Boston where she decommissioned in December and assigned to ordinary . 
 = = Later career = = 
 In June 1816 Charles Morris again commanded Congress and began preparations for a cruise to the Pacific Coast of the United States . His objective was taking possession of Fort Astoria from the British and conducting inquiries at various ports along the coast to further improve commercial trade . These plans were canceled , however , when a U.S. Navy ship collided with a Spanish Navy vessel in the Gulf of Mexico . Consequently , Morris commanded a squadron of ships in the Gulf to ensure that American merchant commerce in the area would continue unmolested . 
 Congress arrived in the Gulf of Mexico in December 1816 and made patrols through July 1817 performing duties that Morris described as " tedious and uninteresting " . From there she sailed for Haiti where Morris and an agent of the United States negotiated a settlement with Henri Christophe over the case of a captured vessel . Afterward , Congress sailed for Venezuela to observe and gather information regarding the ongoing Venezuelan War of Independence . She arrived about 21 August and visited the Venezuelan city of Barcelona soon after . 
 Upon return to the Norfolk Navy Yard later the same year , Morris requested relief as commander due to failing health and Arthur Sinclair assumed command . Sinclair began preparing for a return voyage to South America carrying a diplomatic contingent to assure various South American countries of the United States ' intention to remain neutral in their conflicts with Spain for independence . The diplomats included Caesar A. Rodney , John Graham , Theodorick Bland , Henry Brackenridge , William Reed , and Thomas Rodney . Congress departed on 4 December and returned to Norfolk in July 1818 . 
 Early in 1819 Congress made a voyage under the command of Captain John D. Henley to China , becoming the first U.S. warship to visit that country . She returned to the United States in May 1821 . Shortly afterward , pirates in the West Indies began seizing American merchant ships and in early 1822 , she served as the flagship of Commodore James Biddle . She is recorded as collecting prisoners from the captured pirate ship Bandara D <unk> on 24 July of that year . Her next recorded activity is returning to Norfolk in April 1823 where Biddle immediately prepared for a voyage to Spain and Argentina to deliver the newly appointed Ministers , Hugh Nelson and Caesar A. Rodney respectively . 
 Extensive modifications were required to the berth deck of Congress in order to accommodate Rodney 's wife and eleven children . Additionally , Rodney 's household goods and furniture , described by Biddle as " enough to fill a large merchant ship , " were loaded into her hold that required much of the ships stores to be relocated . She departed from Wilmington , Delaware on 8 June and arrived at Gibraltar where Hugh Nelson disembarked for Spain . On 18 September Congress arrived at Rio de Janeiro , Brazil , where Rodney hired his own merchant ship to carry his family the rest of the distance to Buenos Aires . Congress subsequently returned to Norfolk on 17 December . 
 After her return , Congress served as a receiving ship ; being moved between the Norfolk and Washington Navy Yards under tow as needed . She remained on this duty for the next ten years until a survey of her condition was performed in 1834 , and found unfit for repair , she was broken up the same year . 
 = Century 21 Exposition = 
 The Century 21 Exposition ( also known as the Seattle World 's Fair ) was a world 's fair held April 21 , 1962 , to October 21 , 1962 , in Seattle , Washington . Nearly 10 million people attended the fair . Unlike some other world 's fairs of its era , Century 21 made a profit . 
 As planned , the exposition left behind a fairground and numerous public buildings and public works ; some credit it with revitalizing Seattle 's economic and cultural life ( see History of Seattle since 1940 ) . The fair saw the construction of the Space Needle and <unk> monorail , as well as several sports venues ( Washington State Coliseum , now KeyArena ) and performing arts buildings ( the Playhouse , now the Cornish Playhouse ) , most of which have since been replaced or heavily remodeled . 
 The site , slightly expanded since the fair , is now called Seattle Center ; the United States Science Pavilion is now the Pacific Science Center . Another notable Seattle Center building , the Experience Music Project , was built nearly 40 years later and designed to fit in with the fairground atmosphere . 
 = = Cold War and Space Race context = = 
 The fair was originally conceived in 1955 to mark the 50th anniversary of the 1909 Alaska – Yukon – Pacific Exposition , but it soon became clear that that date was too ambitious . With the Space Race underway and Boeing having " put Seattle on the map " as " an aerospace city " , a major theme of the fair was to show that " the United States was not really ' behind ' the Soviet Union in the realms of science and space " . As a result , the themes of space , science , and the future completely trumped the earlier conception of a " Festival of the [ American ] West " . 
 In June 1960 , the International Bureau of Expositions certified Century 21 as a world 's fair . Project manager Ewen Dingwall went to Moscow to request Soviet participation , but was turned down . The Baltic states ( then occupied by the Soviet Union ) were not invited , nor was the mainland People 's Republic of China , Vietnam , nor North Korea . 
 As it happened , the Cold War had an additional effect on the fair . President John F. Kennedy was supposed to attend the closing ceremony of the fair on October 21 , 1962 . He bowed out , pleading a " heavy cold " ; it later became public that he was dealing with the Cuban Missile Crisis . 
 The fair 's vision of the future displayed a technologically based optimism that did not anticipate any dramatic social change , one rooted in the 1950s rather than in the cultural tides that would emerge in the 1960s . Affluence , automation , consumerism , and American power would grow ; social equity would simply take care of itself on a rising tide of abundance ; the human race would master nature through technology rather than view it in terms of ecology . In contrast , 12 years later — even in far more conservative Spokane , Washington — Expo ' 74 took environmentalism as its central theme . 
 = = Buildings and grounds = = 
 Once the fair idea was conceived , several sites were considered . Among the sites considered within Seattle were Duwamish Head in West Seattle ; Fort Lawton ( now Discovery Park ) in the Magnolia neighborhood ; and First Hill — even closer to Downtown than the site finally selected , but far more densely developed . Two sites south of the city proper were considered — Midway , near Des Moines , and the Army Depot in Auburn — as was a site east of the city on the south shore of Lake Sammamish . 
 The site finally selected for the Century 21 Exposition had originally been contemplated for a civic center . The idea of using it for the world 's fair came later and brought in federal money for the United States Science Pavilion ( now Pacific Science Center ) and state money for the Washington State Coliseum ( later Seattle Center Coliseum , rebuilt 1993 as KeyArena ) . Some of the land had been donated to the city by James Osborne in 1881 and by David and Louisa Denny in 1889 . Two lots at Third Avenue N. and John Street were purchased from St. Demetrios Greek Orthodox Church , who had been planning to build a new church building there ; the church used the proceeds to purchase land in the Montlake neighborhood . The Warren Avenue School , a public elementary school with several programs for physically handicapped students , was torn down , its programs dispersed , and provided most of the site of the Coliseum ( now KeyArena ) . Near the school , some of the city 's oldest houses , apartments , and commercial buildings were torn down ; they had been run down to the point of being known as the " Warren Avenue slum " . The old Fire Station No. 4 was also sacrificed . 
 As early as the 1909 Bogue plan , this part of Lower Queen Anne had been considered for a civic center . The Civic Auditorium ( later the Opera House , now McCaw Hall ) , the ice arena ( later Mercer Arena ) , and the Civic Field ( rebuilt in 1946 as the High School Memorial Stadium ) , all built in 1927 had been placed there based on that plan , as was an armory ( the Food Circus during the fair , later Center House ) . 
 The fair planners also sought two other properties near the southwest corner of the grounds . They failed completely to make any inroads with the Seattle Archdiocese of the Roman Catholic Church , who had recently built Sacred Heart Church there ; they did a bit better with the Freemasons ' Nile Temple , which they were able to use for the duration of the fair and which then returned to its previous use . It served as the site of the Century 21 Club . This membership organization , formed especially for the fair , charged $ 250 for membership and offered lounge , dining room , and other club facilities , as well as a gate pass for the duration of the fair . The city ended up leasing the property after the fair and in 1977 bought it from the Masons . The building was eventually incorporated into a theater complex including the Seattle Children 's Theatre . 
 Paul <unk> was the fair 's chief architect ; he also designed the Coliseum building . Among the other architects of the fair , Seattle @-@ born Minoru Yamasaki received one of his first major commissions to build the United States Science Pavilion . Yamasaki would later design New York 's World Trade Center . Victor <unk> and John Graham , Jr. designed the Space Needle . Hideki Shimizu and Kazuyuki Matsushita designed the original International Fountain . Despite the plan to build a permanent civic center , more than half the structures built for the fair were torn down more or less immediately after it ended . 
 The grounds of the fair were divided into : 
 World of Science 
 World of Century 21 ( also known as World of Tomorrow ) 
 World of Commerce and Industry 
 World of Art 
 World of Entertainment 
 Show Street 
 Gayway 
 Boulevards of the World 
 Exhibit Fair 
 Food and Favors 
 Food Circus 
 Source : 
 Besides the monorail , which survives as of 2016 , the fair also featured a Skyride that ran 1 @,@ 400 feet ( 430 m ) across the grounds from the Gayway to the International Mall . The bucket @-@ like three @-@ person cars were suspended from cables that rose as high as 60 feet ( 18 m ) off the ground . The Skyride was moved to the Puyallup Fairgrounds in 1980 . 
 = = = World of Science = = = 
 The World of Science centered on the United States Science Exhibit . It also included a NASA Exhibit that included models and mockups of various satellites , as well as the Project Mercury capsule that had carried Alan Shepard into space . These exhibits were the federal government 's major contribution to the fair . 
 The United States Science Exhibit began with Charles Eames ' 10 @-@ minute short film The House of Science , followed by an exhibit on the development of science , ranging from mathematics and astronomy to atomic science and genetics . The <unk> held up to 750 people at a time for a simulated voyage first through the Solar System and then through the Milky Way Galaxy and beyond . Further exhibits presented the scientific method and the " horizons of science " . This last looked at " Science and the individual " , " Control of man 's physical surroundings " , " Science and the problem of world population " , and " Man 's concept of his place in an increasingly technological world " . 
 = = = World of Century 21 = = = 
 The Washington State Coliseum , financed by the state of Washington , was one of <unk> 's own architectural contributions to the fairgrounds . His original conception had been staging the entire fair under a single giant air @-@ conditioned tent @-@ like structure , " a city of its own " , but there were neither the budgets nor the tight agreements on concept to realize that vision . In the end , he got exactly enough of a budget to design and build a 160 @,@ 000 sq. ft. building suitable to hold a variety of exhibition spaces and equally suitable for later conversion to a sports arena and convention facility . 
 During the festival , the building hosted several exhibits . Nearly half of its surface area was occupied by the state 's own circular exhibit " Century 21 — The Threshold and the Threat " , also known as the " World of Tomorrow " exhibit , billed as a " 21 @-@ minute tour of the future " . The building also housed exhibits by France , Pan American World Airways ( Pan Am ) , General Motors ( GM ) , the American Library Association ( ALA ) , and RCA , as well as a Washington state tourist center . 
 In " The Threshold and the Threat " , visitors rode a " <unk> " into the " world of tomorrow " . Music " from another world " and a shifting pattern of lights accompanied them on a 40 @-@ second upward journey to a starry space bathed in golden light . Then they were faced briefly with an image of a desperate family in a fallout shelter , which vanished and was replaced by a series of images reflecting the sweep of history , starting with the Acropolis and ending with an image of Marilyn Monroe . 
 Next , visitors were beckoned into a cluster of cubes containing a model of a " city of the future " ( which a few landmarks clearly indicated as Seattle ) and its suburban and rural surroundings , seen first by day and later by night . The next cluster of cubes zoomed in on a vision of a high @-@ tech , future home in a sylvan setting ( and a commuter gyrocopter ) ; a series of projections contrasted this " best of the future " to " the worst of the present " ( over @-@ uniform suburbs , a dreary urban housing project ) . 
 The exhibit continued with a vision of future transportation ( centered on a monorail and high @-@ speed " air cars " on an electrically controlled highway ) . There was also an " office of the future " , a climate @-@ controlled " farm factory " , an automated offshore kelp and plankton harvesting farm , a vision of the schools of the future with " electronic storehouses of knowledge " , and a vision of the many recreations that technology would free humans to pursue . 
 Finally , the tour ended with a symbolic sculptural tree and the reappearance of the family in the fallout shelter and the sound of a ticking clock , a brief silence , an extract from President Kennedy 's Inaugural Address , followed by a further " symphony of music and color " . 
 Under the same roof , the ALA exhibited a " library of the future " ( centered on a <unk> computer ) . GM exhibited its vision for highways and vehicles of the future ( the latter including the Firebird III . Pan Am exhibited a giant globe that emphasized the notion that we had come to be able to think of distances between major world cities in hours and minutes rather than in terms of chancy voyages over great distances . RCA ( which produced " The Threshold and the Threat " ) exhibited television , radio , and stereo technology , as well as its involvement in space . The French government had an exhibit with its own take on technological progress . Finally , a Washington state tourist center provided information for fair @-@ goers wishing to tour the state . 
 = = = World of Commerce and Industry = = = 
 The World of Commerce and Industry was divided into domestic and foreign areas . The former was sited mainly south of American Way ( the continuation of Thomas Street through the grounds ) , an area it shared with the World of Science . It included the Space Needle and what is now the Broad Street Green and Mural Amphitheater . The Hall of Industry and some smaller buildings were immediately north of American Way . The latter included 15 governmental exhibitors and surrounded the World of Tomorrow and extended to the north edge of the fair . 
 Among the features of Domestic Commerce and Industry , the massive Interiors , Fashion , and Commerce Building spread for 500 feet ( 150 m ) — nearly the entire Broad Street side of the grounds — with exhibits ranging from 32 separate furniture companies to the Encyclopædia Britannica . Vogue produced four fashion shows daily alongside a perfumed pool . The Ford Motor Company , in its pavilion , presented a simulated space flight and its vision for the car of the future , the Ford Seattle @-@ ite XXI . The Electric Power Pavilion included a 40 feet ( 12 m ) -high fountain made to look like a hydroelectric dam , with the entrance to the pavilion through a tunnel in said " dam " . The Forest Products Pavilion was surrounded by a grove of trees of various species , and included an all @-@ wood theater . Standard Oil of California celebrated , among other things , the fact that the world 's first service station opened in Seattle in 1907 . The fair 's Bell Telephone ( now AT & T Inc . ) exhibit was featured in a short film called " Century 21 Calling ... " , which was later shown on Mystery Science Theater 3000 . There were also several religious pavilions . Near the center of all this was Seattle artist Paul Horiuchi 's massive mosaic mural , the region 's largest work of art at the time , which now forms the backdrop of Seattle Center 's Mural Amphitheater . 
 Foreign exhibits included a science and technology exhibit by Great Britain , while Mexico and Peru focused on handicrafts , and Japan and India attempted to show both of these sides of their national cultures . The Taiwan and South Korea pavilions showed their rapid industrialization to the world and the benefits of capitalism over communism during the time of cold war era . Other pavilions included one featuring Brazilian tea and coffee ; a European Communities Pavilion from the then six countries of the European Economic Community ; and a joint pavilion by those countries of Africa that had by then achieved independence . Sweden 's exhibit included the story of the salvaging of a 17th @-@ century man @-@ of @-@ war from Stockholm harbor , and San Marino 's exhibit featured its postage stamps and pottery . Near the center of this was the <unk> Fountain featuring three sculptures by Seattle artist Everett <unk> . 
 = = = World of Art = = = 
 The Fine Arts Pavilion ( later the Exhibition Hall ) brought together an art exhibition unprecedented for the West Coast of the United States . Among the 50 contemporary American painters whose works shown were Josef Albers , Willem de Kooning , Helen <unk> , Philip <unk> , Jasper Johns , Joan Mitchell , Robert Motherwell , Georgia O 'Keeffe , Jackson Pollock , Robert Rauschenberg , Ad Reinhardt , Ben Shahn , and Frank Stella , as well as Northwest painters Kenneth Callahan , Morris Graves , Paul Horiuchi , and Mark Tobey . American sculptors included Leonard Baskin , Alexander Calder , Joseph Cornell , Louise Nevelson , Isamu Noguchi , and 19 others . The 50 international contemporary artists represented included the likes of painters Fritz Hundertwasser , Joan Miró , Antoni <unk> , and Francis Bacon , and sculptors Henry Moore and Jean Arp . In addition , there were exhibitions of Mark Tobey 's paintings and of Asian art , drawn from the collections of the Seattle Art Museum ; and an additional exhibition of 72 " masterpieces " ranging from Titian , El Greco , Caravaggio , Rembrandt , and Rubens through Toulouse @-@ Lautrec , Monet , and Turner to Klee , Braque , and Picasso , with no shortage of other comparably famous artists represented . 
 A separate gallery presented Northwest Coast Indian art , and featured a series of large paintings by Bill Holm introducing Northwest Native motifs . 
 = = = World of Entertainment = = = 
 A US $ 15 million performing @-@ arts program at the fair ranged from a boxing championship to an international twirling competition but with no shortage of nationally and internationally famous performers , especially at the new Opera House and Playhouse . After the fair , the Playhouse became the Seattle Repertory Theatre ; in the mid @-@ 1980s it became the <unk> Playhouse . When the <unk> Theatre closed , Cornish College of the Arts took over the lease from the city of Seattle , and now operates it as the Cornish Playhouse at Seattle Center . 
 = = = = Opera House performances = = = = 
 Scheduled groups performing at the Opera House included : Source : 
 = = = = Other performances = = = = 
 Events and performances at the Playhouse included Sweden 's Royal Dramatic Theatre ; a chamber music performance by Isaac Stern , Milton Katims , Leonard Rose , Eugene Istomin , and the Juilliard String Quartet ; two appearances by newsman Edward R. Murrow ; Bunraku theater ; Richard Dyer @-@ Bennet ; Hal Holbrook 's solo show as Mark Twain ; the Count Basie and Benny Goodman jazz orchestras ; Lawrence Welk ; Nat King Cole ; and Ella Fitzgerald . Also during the fair , Memorial Stadium hosted the Ringling Brothers Circus , Tommy Bartlett 's Water Ski Sky and Stage Show , Roy Rogers and Dale Evans ' Western Show , and an appearance by evangelist Billy Graham . 
 The fair and the city were the setting of the Elvis Presley movie It Happened at the World 's Fair ( 1963 ) , with a young Kurt Russell making his first screen appearance . Location shooting began on September 4 and concluded nearly two weeks later . The film would be released the following spring , long after the fair had ended . 
 = = = Show Street = = = 
 At the northeast corner of the grounds ( now the <unk> @-@ TV studios ) , Show Street was the " adult entertainment " portion of the fair . Attractions included Gracie Hansen 's Paradise International ( a Vegas @-@ style floor show ( rivalled next door by LeRoy Prinz 's " Backstage USA " ) , Sid and Marty <unk> 's adults @-@ only puppet show , Les <unk> de Paris , and ( briefly , until it was shut down , ) a show featuring naked " Girls of the Galaxy " . Tamer entertainment came in forms such as the Paris Spectacular wax museum , an elaborate Japanese Village , and the Hawaiian Pavilion . 
 = = = Other sections of the fair = = = 
 Gayway 
 The Gayway was a small amusement park ; after the fair it became the Fun Forest . In 2011 , the Fun Forest was shut down and the Chihuly Garden and Glass opened in its place . 
 Boulevards of the World 
 Boulevards of the World was " the shopping center of the fair " . It also included the Plaza of the States and the original version of the International Fountain . 
 Exhibit Fair 
 The Exhibit Fair provided another shopping district under the north stands of Memorial Stadium . 
 Food and Favors 
 " Food and Favors " , officially one of the " areas " of the fair , simply encompassed the various restaurants , food stands , etc . , scattered throughout the grounds . These ranged from vending machines and food stands to the Eye of the Needle ( atop the Space Needle ) and the private Century 21 Club . 
 Food Circus 
 The Food Circus was a food court in the former armory , later named the Center House , and recently renamed The Armory ( 2012 ) as a remodel of the building continues . Unlike the current arrangement with a stage and a large open space for dancing , events , and temporary booths , many food booths were in the middle of the room as well as at the edges . There were 52 concessionaires in all , nine of them with exhibits in addition to their food for sale . Beginning in 1963 , the Food Circus also housed a variety of museums , including Jones ' Fantastic Show , the Jules <unk> World of Miniatures , and the Pullen Klondike Museum . 
 = = Promotional video = = 
 = Walter Loving = 
 Walter Howard Loving ( December 17 , 1872 – 1945 ) was an African American soldier and musician most noted for his leadership of the Philippine Constabulary Band . The son of a former slave , Loving led the band during the 1909 U.S. presidential inaugural parade , where it formed the official musical escort to the President of the United States , the first time a band other than the U.S. Marine Band had been assigned that duty . 
 Loving is believed to have been the first African American to conduct a musical performance in the White House . 
 In addition to his long career in military music , Loving also worked with the U.S. Army 's intelligence division during World War I , and , in private life , as a real estate investor in the San Francisco Bay area . Toward the end of his life he returned to the Philippines . Loving was killed in 1945 during the Battle of Manila in dramatic , though unclear , circumstances . He posthumously received the Philippines ' Presidential Merit Award . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Born outside <unk> , Virginia in 1872 , Loving was the son of a former slave . He spent his early childhood living with his parents and an extended family of fourteen relatives . At age ten , Loving moved to Minnesota and into the home of Charles Eugene Flandrau , who employed Loving 's sister Julia as a maid . He and Julia later relocated with the Flandrau family to South Dakota . Family legend claims Loving was tutored in mathematics by Theodore Roosevelt when the future president stayed at the Flandrau home in 1886 . According to Loving 's biographer Robert Yoder , Loving may have viewed Flandrau as a sort @-@ of father figure . It is known the he attended elementary school with Flandrau 's son , Charles Macomb Flandrau , and believed that Flandrau financed Loving 's later education at the Preparatory High School for Negro Youth in Washington , DC and , subsequently , the New England Conservatory of Music . 
 Loving 's early adulthood involved several stints in the U.S. Army as a musician , and later regimental bandleader . A later period of study at the New England Conservatory of Music ended when Loving decided to rejoin the Army over the protests of his professors , who believed his talent as a cornetist would be wasted . After withdrawing from the conservatory , Loving was given command of the band of the 45th United States Volunteer Infantry Regiment . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Philippine Constabulary Band = = = 
 In 1902 Loving was tapped to organize the Philippine Constabulary Band on the recommendation of Governor @-@ General of the Philippines William Howard Taft , who had earlier heard Loving 's 45th regimental band perform . Loving , who had learned both Spanish and Tagalog during his brief time in the Philippines , developed an instant rapport with his bandsmen . During the period in which Loving led the Philippine Constabulary Band it established a reputation for excellence both in the Philippines and the United States . The U.S. military periodical Army and Navy Life described the band as " one of the finest of all military bands in the world , " while the Pacific Coast Musical Review , opined that " the Philippine Constabulary Band is in a class by itself . " During a 1915 performance in San Francisco , California , John Philip Sousa was invited to guest conduct the group , afterwards commenting that , " when I closed my eyes , I thought it was the United States Marine Band . " 
 The Philippine Constabulary Band was the lead unit in the United States presidential inaugural parade of 1909 , which saw its former patron William Howard Taft inaugurated as President of the United States . It was the first time a band other than the United States Marine Band served as the musical escort to the President of the United States . 
 The day after the inauguration the band was invited to perform for the president and Mrs. Taft at the White House , becoming the first band in history from outside the continental United States to perform at a White House reception . It is also believed this may have been the first time an African American conducted a musical performance at the White House . 
 Loving continued as the band 's director until being forced to take a medical leave in 1915 due to tuberculosis . 
 = = = Military Intelligence Division = = = 
 During World War I Loving served stateside in the U.S. Army as an officer in the Military Intelligence Division . Holding the rank of major throughout the war , Loving was initially charged with investigating subversive activities by African American leaders , attending meetings and rallies in plainclothes and developing a network of informants . In one of his reports he would assert that African American socialists were " the most radical of all radicals " as well as allege " vicious and well @-@ financed propaganda " campaigns run in black newspapers as being the impetus for the Chicago race riot of 1919 . David Levering Lewis has called Loving " one of the Army 's most effective wartime undercover Negro agents . " 
 Later , Loving would be tasked with touring the United States to inspect the conditions of race relations at U.S. Army camps . His final report observed that African American soldiers were best treated and most effectively integrated into military units when white officers from the western United States and northeastern United States held command and he recommended to the Army that white officers from the southern United States not be permitted to lead units with black soldiers . Loving also attacked the Army 's racial policies pertaining to non @-@ commissioned officers , noting that , 
 " The assignment of white noncommissioned officers to colored units is a new departure in the history of the American army . Even in Civil War days colored units carried colored noncommissioned officers ... that most of these white noncommissioned officers view themselves in the light of the overseer of antebellum days is shown by their practice of carrying revolvers when they take details of men out to work . " 
 = = = Return to Manila and second retirement = = = 
 Following the end of hostilities , Loving returned to the Philippines and resumed command of the Philippine Constabulary Band for three years before retiring a second time , moving with his wife , Edith , to Oakland , California . In Oakland , Loving found success in real estate speculation . Because attitudes in Oakland at the time made African American ownership of property in some portions of the city problematic , Loving would dress in a chauffeur 's uniform and drive Edith , who had a light complexion and could be mistaken for Caucasian , to view property . 
 = = = Later career and third retirement = = = 
 From 1937 through 1940 , Loving again took command of the Philippine Constabulary Band , by then renamed the Philippine Army Orchestra . Returning to the Philippines at the personal invitation of Manuel Quezon , he was commissioned at the rank of lieutenant @-@ colonel in the Philippine Commonwealth Army and also made " Special Advisor to the President of the Philippines . " He retired in 1940 but continued to live in Manila . According to an obituary in the Chicago Tribune penned by Loving 's longtime friend Roscoe Simmons , " Col. Loving and Gen. MacArthur had an affectionate relationship known in all military circles " and MacArthur would later recall Loving 's death as " a sacrifice he would never forget . " 
 = = Death = = 
 Walter and Edith Loving were detained in 1941 by Japanese forces following the surrender of Manila . During his captivity , Loving composed a resistance song Beloved Philippines . He was released due to his declining health and advancing age in 1943 . In 1945 , during the Battle of Manila , Loving was again arrested and detained , along with other Americans and Filipinos , at the Manila Hotel . 
 The exact circumstances surrounding Loving 's death are unclear . According to Yoder , with Manila 's defenses on the verge of collapse to the advancing American and Filipino armies , the hotel prisoners were ordered to run to the beach while Japanese soldiers shot at them . The then 73 @-@ year @-@ old Loving refused to run , declaring " I am an American . If I must die , I 'll die like an American , " whereupon he was beheaded . In a 2010 article , a Philippine newspaper columnist contends , however , the Manila Hotel prisoners attempted escape and Loving used his body to barricade a staircase to prevent Japanese troops from pursuit ; he was bayoneted to death in the process . A third account relayed in a 1945 Associated Negro Press story says that Loving was shot in the back by retreating Japanese troops . Mortally wounded , he crawled from the Manila Hotel to the battered bandstand at Luneta Park , the site of many of the Philippine Constabulary Band 's performances , and died . 
 In 1952 , Loving was posthumously awarded the Presidential Merit Medal by the Government of the Philippines during a ceremony at Luneta during which his final composition , Beloved Philippines , was performed . Loving was also the recipient of the Distinguished Conduct Star , the second @-@ highest military honor of the Philippines , and the United States ' Philippine Campaign Medal , the latter given for his service during the Philippine @-@ American War . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Loving married his wife , Edith , in 1916 and had one son , Walter . Walter Loving , Jr . ' s , godfather was Roscoe Simmons . 
 During the course of his life , Loving took an interest in politics , supporting both Republican and Democratic candidates . During the United States presidential election , 1916 , Loving requested his former patron , Taft , introduce him to Republican presidential candidate Charles Evans Hughes , with whose campaign he sought to volunteer . Taft , however , declined in a letter , explaining he did not feel it was appropriate for him to offer such an introduction to a political candidate ( in that letter , Taft also expressed to Loving his regret that " you are no longer at the head of the Constabulary Band which was largely your creation . " ) Loving also campaigned for Isabella <unk> Greenway , the granddaughter of Charles Flandrau , during her 1932 congressional race in Arizona . 
 = Maryland Route 24 = 
 Maryland Route 24 ( MD 24 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . The state highway runs 25 @.@ 17 miles ( 40 @.@ 51 km ) from an entrance to Aberdeen Proving Ground in Edgewood north to the Pennsylvania state line near Fawn Grove , Pennsylvania . MD 24 is the main north – south highway of Harford County . The southern half of the state highway connects U.S. Route 1 ( US 1 ) and the county seat of Bel Air with Aberdeen Proving Ground , US 40 , and Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) through a suburban corridor . The northern half of MD 24 is a rural highway that passes through Rocks State Park . 
 The original section of MD 24 , which began at MD 23 in Forest Hill and included MD 165 through Pylesville , was constructed in the late 1910s and early 1920s . MD 24 was moved to the highway to Fawn Grove after that road was built in the late 1920s and early 1930s . The highway between US 1 in Bel Air and US 40 in Edgewood was also constructed in the late 1920s and early 1930s . The state highway from US 40 south to Aberdeen Proving Ground was constructed as MD 408 around 1930 . After the road from Bel Air to Forest Hill was completed in the mid @-@ 1930s , MD 24 was extended south to Edgewood . 
 MD 24 received its first relocation in Edgewood in the mid @-@ 1950s after assuming all of MD 408 . After another relocation due to the construction of I @-@ 95 in the early 1960s , the state highway was placed on a new alignment through Edgewood in the late 1960s and early 1970s ; the old alignment became MD 755 . MD 24 was relocated to a divided highway from I @-@ 95 to US 1 in the late 1980s ; the old highway through Bel Air became MD 924 . Much of the highway through Edgewood was expanded to a divided highway in the mid @-@ 1990s . MD 24 's interchange with MD 924 was constructed between 2008 and 2011 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 24 carries five names throughout its length . The highway is named Emmorton Road between Aberdeen Proving Ground and US 40 and Vietnam Veterans Memorial Highway from US 40 to US 1 . After its short concurrency with US 1 on the Bel Air Bypass , MD 24 is known as Rock Springs Avenue from US 1 to Forest Hill , where the highway becomes Rocks Road for the remainder of its length to the Pennsylvania state line . The state highway is a part of the main National Highway System between I @-@ 95 and the northern end of its concurrency with US 1 in Bel Air . MD 24 is also classified as an intermodal connector from MD 755 to I @-@ 95 and as a National Highway System principal arterial from Aberdeen Proving Ground to MD 755 and from its northern junction with US 1 to MD 23 . 
 = = = Edgewood to Bel Air = = = 
 MD 24 begins at an entrance to the Edgewood Area of Aberdeen Proving Ground ; the highway continues south into the military installation as Hoadley Road . The state highway crosses over the Amtrak Northeast Corridor and MARC 's Penn Line and heads north as Emmorton Road , a two @-@ lane controlled access highway that passes between residential subdivisions in Edgewood , where the highway intersects Trimble Road . MD 24 expands to a four @-@ lane divided highway just south of MD 755 ( Edgewood Road ) . The state highway heads northeast , crossing in quick succession Otter Point Creek , US 40 ( Pulaski Highway ) , and Winters Run . Access to and from US 40 is provided via a two @-@ way ramp between the two highways . MD 24 continues north as the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Highway , which curves back to the north and crosses over CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision before intersecting MD 7 ( Philadelphia Road ) in the hamlet of Van Bibber . 
 After an intersection with Edgewood Road , which is MD 24 's old alignment , the state highway meets I @-@ 95 ( John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway ) at a partial cloverleaf interchange . Immediately to the north of that interchange is a diamond interchange with the southern ends of MD 924 ( Emmorton Road ) and Tollgate Road . MD 924 , which is the old alignment of MD 24 , and Tollgate Road parallel MD 24 to the east and west , respectively . The two highways serve residential subdivisions bypassed by MD 24 between Edgewood and Bel Air ; MD 924 serves the village of Emmorton . MD 24 also passes close to the historic home Woodside , accessed via Singer Road ; <unk> , found at the west end of Plumtree Road ; and Whitaker 's Mill Historic District on Ring Factory Road . The state highway parallels Plumtree Run as it approaches Bel Air . MD 24 passes by Upper Chesapeake Medical Center before meeting US 1 Business ( Belair Road ) at an intersection surrounded by shopping centers , including the Harford Mall . The state highway crosses over the Ma and Pa Trail , a rail trail that follows the abandoned right @-@ of @-@ way of the Maryland and Pennsylvania Railroad , and Heavenly Waters , a tributary of Winters Run , before reaching its junction with US 1 ( Bel Air Bypass ) . The three @-@ way junction features long , sweeping ramps to and from the northbound direction of US 1 and an intersection with the U.S. highway to access the southbound direction . 
 = = = Bel Air to Fawn Grove = = = 
 MD 24 and US 1 head northeast together as a four @-@ lane undivided highway . The two highways pass under Vale Road before reaching the northern end of the concurrency , which is a partial cloverleaf interchange with Rock Spring Road . This road heads south toward downtown Bel Air as MD 924 ; MD 24 leaves US 1 and heads north on this road . The state highway heads north through a commercial area as a five @-@ lane road with center turn lane . The highway reduces to two lanes and passes through another commercial area before its intersection with MD 23 ( East – West Highway ) in Forest Hill . At Jarrettsville Road , which is the old alignment of MD 23 , MD 24 's name changes to Rocks Road and enters a mix of farmland and forest . The state highway crosses Stirrup Run before beginning to closely parallel Deer Creek . MD 24 passes through several sharp curves as the highway enters Rocks State Park , where the state highway passes through the gorge that Deer Creek has cut through Rock Ridge . The state highway crosses Deer Creek and passes the access road to the Gladden Farm before leaving the state park . 
 MD 24 continues north through farmland , crossing several branches of Deer Creek and intersecting Holy Cross Road , which leads west to the Col. John Streett House and east to the village of Street . At Bush 's Corner , the highway meets MD 165 ( Federal Hill Road / Pylesville Road ) at a roundabout . MD 24 passes close to Kilgore Falls , the second highest waterfall in Maryland ; the falls on the Falling Branch of Deer Creek are accessed via St. Marys Road . Just to the north at Five Forks , the state highway intersects Clermont Mill Road and MD 136 , which heads west as Harkins Road and east as Whiteford Road . MD 24 continues northwest to its terminus at the Pennsylvania state line . Rocks Road continues north as SR 2055 to PA 851 , the Main Street of Fawn Grove . 
 = = History = = 
 MD 24 was originally constructed between 1917 and 1938 . While the portion of the state highway north of Bel Air has seen limited improvements since the 1930s , the highway south of Bel Air has been fully relocated , in some places multiple times , and expanded to a divided highway for much of its length . 
 = = = Original construction and early improvements = = = 
 MD 24 was one of the original state @-@ numbered highways designated in 1927 . The state highway originally began at MD 23 in Forest Hill and followed its current course along Rocks Road north to Bush 's Corner , then followed Pylesville Road ( which later became MD 165 ) through Pylesville to the Pennsylvania state line at Cardiff . The portion of Pylesville Road between <unk> Road ( now MD 624 ) and the village of Pylesville was paved with macadam by 1910 . MD 24 from just north of Forest Hill to <unk> Road was built with a 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) wide concrete surface in four sections , with construction underway by 1917 and completed by 1921 . The state highway just north of Forest Hill and the highway from Pylesville northeast to the state line were completed with a macadam surface by 1923 . 
 MD 24 from Bush 's Corner toward Fawn Grove began construction in 1926 . The concrete highway was completed to St. Marys Road by 1927 and to Five Forks in 1928 . The third section , from Five Forks to about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south of the state line , was started in 1929 and completed in 1930 . The final section to the state line at Fawn Grove was started in 1930 and completed by 1933 . Around the time the highway was completed , MD 24 was switched from Pylesville Road to Rocks Road north of Bush 's Corner ; MD 165 was extended from Bush 's Corner to Cardiff in MD 24 's stead . MD 24 received a new bridge over Deer Creek within Rocks State Park in 1934 . Since the 1930s , the only notable improvement to the original length of MD 24 was the construction of the roundabout at the MD 24 – MD 165 intersection in 2000 . 
 Construction on what became MD 24 between Van Bibber and Bel Air got underway with the construction of a 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) section of macadam road from Ring Factory Road south to Plumtree Road near Emmorton between 1925 and 1927 . Another macadam segment was completed from Emmorton south to Singer Road at Norris Corner in 1928 . A concrete highway from Norris Corner toward US 40 at Van Bibber was started in 1929 . The first section was completed to approximately the location of I @-@ 95 in 1930 and to Van Bibber by 1933 . Two county highway gaps in the state highway from Van Bibber to Bel Air were resurfaced with macadam and brought into the state system in 1933 . 
 The two remaining portions of the MD 24 corridor to be built were completed through Edgewood and north of Bel Air in the 1930s . In 1930 , Edgewood Road was built as a concrete road from US 40 just west of Van Bibber south to its entrance to Aberdeen Proving Ground at its Pennsylvania Railroad crossing ( now Amtrak ) . Edgewood Road , which was originally designated MD 408 , was constructed with a width of 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) but was proposed for widening to 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) as early as 1934 since it was the main entrance to the Edgewood Arsenal . MD 408 received an underpass of the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad ( now CSX ) and approaches to the grade separation in 1939 . 
 Rock Spring Avenue north of Bel Air was improved as a macadam road starting in 1929 . The improved road extended from the county seat north to the location of the Bel Air Bypass in the community of Frogtown in 1930 and was extended to about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south of Forest Hill by 1933 . The gap south of Forest Hill remained under county control until the highway was resurfaced with macadam around 1938 . MD 24 was extended south from Forest Hill through Bel Air to MD 7 at Van Bibber in 1938 . Through Bel Air , MD 24 followed Main Street , which was widened to 40 feet ( 12 m ) in width around 1940 . 
 = = = <unk> and expansions = = = 
 The first post @-@ war project on MD 24 was the reconstruction of the highway from Norris Corner to Van Bibber starting in 1950 . By the time the project to resurface the highway in bituminous concrete ended in 1952 , MD 24 was extended south through Edgewood , replacing MD 408 from MD 7 to Aberdeen Proving Ground . MD 24 was widened and resurfaced with bituminous concrete from Norris Corner to Bel Air starting in 1954 and from Bel Air to Forest Hill beginning in 1956 . The Norris Corner – Bel Air project included the highway 's first relocation at Emmorton , leaving behind Old Emmorton Road . 
 Another relocation occurred in 1956 to remove MD 24 's staggered intersections at MD 7 in Van Bibber . Edgewood Road was extended north to tie into Emmorton Road just south of the interchange with I @-@ 95 ; this project bypassed Van Bibber Road . MD 24 was relocated again near Van Bibber when the highway 's interchange with I @-@ 95 was constructed in 1963 . This relocation left behind the roadways now marked as Walton Road and Woodside Road in the southeast and northeast quadrants , respectively , of the original diamond interchange . 
 The next relocation in the Edgewood area occurred in two sections starting in 1967 . MD 24 was moved to its present alignment from just south of the I @-@ 95 interchange to Edgewood Road south of US 40 in 1970 . The bypass included a bridge over US 40 ; access between the two highways was provided by Edgewood Road , which was designated MD 755 . The new alignment of MD 24 was extended south to a new entrance to Aberdeen Proving Ground in 1974 ; MD 755 was extended south along MD 24 's old alignment to the pre @-@ existing entrance next to the Edgewood MARC station . MD 24 from I @-@ 95 to MD 755 was expanded to a divided highway around 1997 ; this project included the construction of a two @-@ way ramp between MD 24 and US 40 to add the direct access that had not been provided in 1970 . 
 MD 24 's interchange with US 1 north of Bel Air was constructed in 1964 along with the rest of the Bel Air Bypass . The interchange was originally a diamond interchange ; a loop ramp was added from northbound US 1 to northbound MD 24 in 1983 . Construction of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Highway from I @-@ 95 to US 1 in Bel Air began in 1986 . The four @-@ lane divided highway was completed in 1987 . MD 24 was also expanded to a divided highway through the I @-@ 95 interchange , which was transformed into its modern partial cloverleaf . The original alignment of MD 24 between I @-@ 95 and Bel Air was planned to become another section of MD 755 in 1986 but was designated MD 924 in 1987 . 
 In December 2008 , the Maryland Transportation Authority began a project to replace MD 24 's intersection with MD 924 and Tollgate Road just north of the MD 24 – I @-@ 95 interchange . The intersection was replaced with a diamond interchange in October 2011 . As part of the project , the MD 24 – I @-@ 95 interchange had several ramps altered to separate I @-@ 95 traffic heading for MD 24 and MD 924 . The Maryland State Highway Administration has long @-@ term plans to expand the Bel Air Bypass to a divided highway from Winters Run to US 1 Business south of Hickory . The Bel Air Bypass is already a four @-@ lane divided highway between MD 147 and Winters Run and around Hickory , but is a three- to four @-@ lane undivided highway from Winters Run to US 1 Business south of Hickory . The Bel Air Bypass would be expanded to a four @-@ lane divided highway from Winters Run to MD 24 and a six @-@ lane divided highway along the US 1 – MD 24 concurrency . The US 1 – MD 24 intersection would be reconstructed as a trumpet interchange . The planning phase of the project was completed in 2001 , but engineering , right @-@ of @-@ way acquisition , and actual construction are on hold until funding becomes available . 
 The Maryland State Highway Administration plans to rebuild the portion of MD 24 that passes through Rocks State Park , which has been undermined by the adjacent Deer Creek . The project was originally proposed in late 2009 and initially called for the route to be relocated further from the creek . The project was put on hold due to opposition from area residents and environmentalists . The Maryland State Highway Administration later proposed reconstructing the road along its current alignment while stabilizing the creek . Work on this project , which is projected to cost $ 13 @.@ 3 million , is expected to start as soon as May 2014 and will require closing the road . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 The entire route is in Harford County . 
 = = Auxiliary routes = = 
 MD 24 has three existing auxiliary routes . 
 MD <unk> is the designation for the Otter Creek Ramp , a 0 @.@ 23 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 37 km ) long four @-@ lane divided ramp that connects MD 24 with US 40 . MD <unk> was built in 1997 . 
 MD 24E is the designation for the unnamed 0 @.@ 85 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 37 km ) ramp from northbound MD 24 to northbound US 1 . This ramp was built in 1987 as part of the construction of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Highway and designated MD 24E in 2001 . 
 MD <unk> is the designation for the unnamed 0 @.@ 52 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 84 km ) ramp from northbound US 1 to southbound MD 24 . Like MD 24E , MD <unk> was built in 1987 and received its designation in 2001 . 
 = The Wiggles Pty Ltd = 
 The Wiggles Pty Ltd is the business created by the founders of the Australian children 's music group The Wiggles . The group was protective of their brand , and adopted many of the same business practices as The Cockroaches , the former band of Anthony Field and Jeff Fatt , two of their founding members . They remained as independent as possible , and retained full creative control and ownership of every aspect of their business . As Field stated , The Wiggles Pty Ltd was " not your regular ' corporate culture ' . " The group made decisions by consensus and made business decisions based upon their experience as performers and their knowledge of early childhood education . They did not tour with a large troupe of dancers , cast , and crew until the late 1990s , and had high expectations regarding the behaviour and attitude of everyone associated with the group . They made careful decisions regarding their endorsements of toys and other products , and avoided over @-@ extending their brand by only licensing products that correlated with their image . 
 The Wiggles formally consolidated their business in 2005 , and consistently appeared in Business Review Weekly 's yearly list of Australia 's richest entertainers . They faced difficulty in producing a television show with the Australian Broadcasting Corporation , so they created thirteen episodes of a self @-@ produced television series . By 2002 , they began airing their TV programs exclusively with the ABC and became " the most successful property that the ABC has represented in the pre @-@ school genre " . In 2009 , they partnered with the digital cable channel Sprout to broadcast their TV shows . In 2012 , due to the effects of the worldwide recession , they cut back on much of their international expansions . 
 Other ventures of The Wiggles Pty Ltd included franchising their concept to South America , Taiwan , and other countries , opening " Wiggles World " sections in theme parks , and online offerings . 
 = = Business philosophy = = 
 Despite Anthony Field 's expressed dislike of the term " branding " , preferring to refer to it as " preserving the good name of The Wiggles " , the group has stressed the importance of , and were protective of , their brand . Field , along with bandmate Jeff Fatt and Field 's brothers Paul and John , were in the pop band The Cockroaches in the 1980s ; as Field reported , The Wiggles adopted many of The Cockroaches ' business practices . They chose to remain as independent and self @-@ contained as possible . The four original members retained ownership and creative control over every aspect of their business , and used outside companies to assist them as their business and popularity grew . As Field reported , " ... Our venture developed organically . We weren 't put together in some sort of Hollywood studio executive 's office " . They used Field 's family members and friends in the early years : former Cockroaches such as Field 's brothers and Cockroach drummer Tony Henry ( Wiggles character Henry the Octopus was named after him ) for musical support ; Field 's nieces and nephews to perform in their inexpensive videos ; their girlfriends to perform as their costumed characters . The wife of founding member Murray Cook made their first costumes . As Fatt reported , " it was very much a cottage industry " . They served as their own roadies and travelled in Fatt 's van , which he drove , towing a trailer with borrowed equipment . Fatt did their bookkeeping on an old computer the first five to six years of the group 's existence . They did their own merchandising , which consisted of selling albums , toys , and t @-@ shirts out of a suitcase set up on the back of a trailer . 
 Trust your creative and business instincts and maintain control of your destiny " . 
 Anthony Field 's stated business philosophy , 2012 
 As Field reported , The Wiggles Pty Ltd was " not your regular ' corporate culture ' . " The four original members made decisions by consensus and would spend more time on creative decisions than on business ones . Field reported that many of their key products were launched " during a brief pause in an Xbox game on our tour bus " . They answered to no one but themselves , with no executive board or shareholders . As Field stated , they made business decisions based upon their experience as performers and their knowledge of early childhood education , " rather than elaborate , long @-@ term business and strategic plans " . When they ventured into international markets , first to the U.S. and the UK in 1998 , they chose to follow the same practices that were successful in Australia by keeping their stage show simple : inexpensive props and effects , and the four original members , along with their characters , singing and dancing for their audiences . Financing every business venture themselves , they had to bear the consequences when their ventures did not succeed . 
 The Wiggles became formally consolidated in 2005 . The group 's board of directors consisted of the original three members , Paul Field , who has been general manager of operations since the group was formed and their manager since the mid @-@ 1990s , and Mike Conway , who had worked for Ernst & Young in England and was their general manager responsible for their expansion into international markets from 2001 to 2012 . 
 In 2012 , The Wiggles cut back much of their international expansion after , like many businesses , experiencing a decrease in their profits after the worldwide recession a few years earlier . Paul Field reported that they would " refocus on what we do best " , which included their live shows , CDs , DVDs , and television productions . 
 The group has always had a strict code of conduct based on zero tolerance of drug use , drinking , smoking , or bad language by any employee of their organisation . They did not tour with a large troupe of dancers and cast members until the late 1990s , but as Field reported , " We 've been lucky with our cast , our turnover is pretty minimal — we 've always had great loyalty from , and talent among , the professionals " . By 2005 , they travelled using two 16 @-@ metre ( 52 ft ) trucks , three tour buses , a cast of 13 dancers ( called " the Wiggly dancers " ) , and 10 permanent crew members . According to Field , they required that the cast and crew of all their productions have a positive and respectful relationship with their audience , both on stage and off . 
 = = Merchandising = = 
 The Wiggles recognised that toys were a necessary part of a child 's normal development , especially his or her motor and language skills , so they trod the " fine line between maintaining and promoting early childhood values and operating in the commercial arena " , and as Field put it , " proceeded cautiously " . At first , Cook reviewed every merchandising proposal they received , but turned it over to other companies such as the Toronto @-@ based toy company Spin Master in later years , although Field reported that they continued to " sign off on things " . The group avoided over @-@ extending their brand by only licensing products that correlated with their image , like endorsing healthy foods , and by remaining within the preschool and family markets . 
 The group was named Australia 's richest entertainers by Business Review Weekly ( BRW ) for four years in a row ( 2004 – 2008 ) They earned A $ 45 million in 2009 , when they were third on BRW 's annual list . In 2011 , the worldwide recession hit The Wiggles , as it had many Australian entertainers ; they earned $ 28 million and had a 28 % decrease in profits , but they still appeared second on the BRW 's list that year . According to BRW , the group restructured The Wiggles Pty Ltd in 2011 when they downsized staff and re @-@ focused on the more profitable aspects of the business , including their music , TV , and DVD ventures . Conway reported that 2011 was " the toughest year I have experienced economically , at [ The ] Wiggles or anywhere " . They showed negative equity by the end of the year , and in their first loss of profits in over ten years , resulted in a 28 percent decrease in income from the previous year . Conway blamed the poor economy , the group 's decrease in their U.S. tour from twelve weeks to five , difficulties in stocking DVDs at Walmart , and the cost of changing to a new digital format . 
 By 2012 , founding members Anthony Field , Cook , and Fatt retained 30 % ownership of their brand , and Paul Field and Conway each owned 5 % . Page received a payout of about $ 20 million when he left the group and the business in 2006 . Also in 2012 , The Wiggles appeared second on BRW 's list , earning $ 17 @.@ 167 million , despite negative press they received after Page returned and replaced Moran . In early 2013 , Fatt , Cook , and Page retired from the group for medical and personal reasons . They were replaced by former back @-@ up singers Lachlan Gillespie , Simon Pryce , and Emma Watkins , so that the group could continue to develop and preserve their brand . Although they insisted that they chose Watkins , the group 's first female member , because she was the most qualified for the job , they admitted that it was " a strategy for marketing the Wiggles into the next generation " . 
 = = Television and DVD production = = 
 In the early years of the group 's existence , it seemed " logical " to develop a television program that both entertained and conveyed sound and developmentally appropriate values . At the time , according to Field , Australian children 's TV " was an extremely staid and cautious genre " , so it was difficult for them to break into it . They filmed a television pilot for the Australian Broadcasting Corporation ( ABC ) because they felt a program on the network would receive the most exposure to the pre @-@ school market , but as The Sydney Morning Herald ( SMH ) reported in 2002 , " the project never got off the ground due to irreconcilable artistic differences " . Also according to the SMH , the ABC told them that they could not communicate with children , and that the members of the group should " not speak , just sing " . The ABC insisted that instead of what the SMH called their " trademark colourful <unk> and black trousers " , they wear shorts and caps . The Wiggles responded to this criticism by creating thirteen episodes of a self @-@ produced television series , The Wiggles , which they funded from their tours and video sales . In this series , and in most of their early series , they cut costs by using two cameras and visually checked the performance of each song ; that way , according to Paul Field , it took them less time to complete a forty @-@ minute video than it took other production companies to complete a three @-@ minute music video . 
 They sold the program to Australia 's Channel Seven , and then moved it to the ABC in 1998 and to the Disney Channel in 1999 . Paul Field reported that in the early 2000s , a meeting at a New York licensing fair with Grahame <unk> , the ABC 's acting director of enterprises , led to the ABC 's " enthusiastic " agreement to produce The Wiggles ' TV shows . Beginning in 2002 , The Wiggles filmed four seasons worth of shows exclusively with the ABC : Lights , Camera , Action , Wiggles aired on the ABC in 2003 , The Wiggles Show in 2004 and 2005 , and Wiggle and Learn in 2008 . The network called them " the most successful property that the ABC has represented in the pre @-@ school genre " . In 2007 , The Wiggles opened their own recording and film studios in Sydney , called " Hot Potato Studios " . They were the first pre @-@ school production company in Australia to shoot their videos and TV programs in high @-@ definition . 
 In 2009 , as Cook put it , " to try somewhere else , and to freshen up our brand a bit " , The Wiggles ended their long relationship with the Disney Channel in the U.S. when they entered into a five @-@ year @-@ long partnership with the digital cable channel Sprout . They also aired previous episodes of their show on the channel , created and hosted a three @-@ hour block of programming that aired in the mornings , and created online and on @-@ demand content . Sprout called the partnership " Our biggest acquisition ... that Sprout has ever done " . Cook stated that the move was not " acrimonious " , and although the group owed much of their early success to Disney , that it " was just business " . The first decade of the 21st century ended with The Wiggles expanding their brand by creating new shows , including The Dorothy the Dinosaur Show and Baby Antonio 's Circus in 2009 , a three @-@ minute show that featured Field 's oldest son and acrobatics . 
 = = Other ventures = = 
 In 2005 , as a " relatively short @-@ lived " experiment , the group franchised its concept to other countries . They started in Taiwan , because as Cook stated , they thought the country " was a small enough place , in case it didn 't work out " . The Taiwanese group was successful , so they branched out to Latin America , casting Spanish @-@ speaking Australians . The Wiggles ceased to pursue additional franchising when they learned that viewers in other countries preferred the original versions of their songs and programs because they helped children learn English , and according to Cook , when it became too hard for them to control , and when it " did not prove lucrative " . By 2012 , they found that it was easier to simply dub their programs into other languages . 
 Also in 2005 , Australia 's largest theme park , Dreamworld in Queensland , opened a " Wiggles World " section , which included a Big Red Car ride and a full set for production purposes . The band received licensing rights and sign @-@ off rights for every aspect of the section 's operation . Staff at Dreamworld had to take a " Wiggles boot camp " , to ensure they followed The Wiggles ' code of conduct when dealing with children and their families . Driven by the Dreamworld success , Six Flags opened its first " Wiggles World " section at their largest theme park at Jackson , New Jersey in April 2007 , and planned to open 20 more at its parks across the U.S. in the next decade . The sections emphasised family involvement ; they offered joint rides on which parents and children could equally participate . In 2008 , Six Flags announced their intentions to open parks with Wiggles World sections in Dubai and across the Arab world . In 2010 , after emerging from bankruptcy protection , Six Flags ended their licensing agreements with The Wiggles and other organizations , and changed the themes of their rides and park areas . 
 In 2005 , The Wiggles opened their first play centre in Sydney , and by 2006 had built other play centres throughout Sydney and in the U.S. For a small price , parents were able to take their children to the centres for unlimited educational and play time , as well as themed party rooms for private birthday parties . The play centres also held a gift shop with Wiggles merchandise and a cafe that served food featured in many of their songs . Three centres in Texas and Sydney were closed as part of their financial restructuring in 2012 . 
 In 2008 , the group began to sell downloads of Wiggles ringtones and songs , and streaming video on an on @-@ demand website . On 24 April 2009 , the group launched <unk> , a virtual world website for toddlers and their parents with online games and content , much of which required a pay subscription for premium content . As part of the launch , the company moved the previously free fan club and message board into the subscribed content , but after fan complaints , the free board was reinstated . In 2012 , as part of their cost @-@ cutting measures , The Wiggles closed the subscription portion of their site . 
 = Garry Williams ( gridiron football ) = 
 Garry Williams ( born August 20 , 1986 ) is a gridiron football offensive tackle who is currently a free agent . He previously played for the Carolina Panthers of the National Football League ( NFL ) , who signed him as an undrafted free agent in 2009 . He attended the University of Kentucky , where he played college football for the Wildcats while studying community communications and leadership development . 
 Williams dealt with repeated injuries while playing for the Carolina Panthers . His injuries prevented him from being a consistent starter despite multiple opportunities . In 2012 , Williams played a complete season and contributed to a team record 29 first downs in a single game . 
 = = High school career = = 
 Williams played high school football at Seneca High School MCA for the Red Hawks , where he started at the defensive tackle position as a freshman before switching to offensive tackle . The Red Hawks competed in the playoffs each year that Williams played . In his senior year , he was named a 2003 first @-@ team all @-@ state player by the Associated Press and the Courier @-@ Journal after leading his team to a 10 – 2 record and the second round of state playoffs . The Red Hawks were also ranked first in the state for the first time in school history that season . Williams also played track and field at Seneca , and he was ranked second in the state at shot put in 2003 . 
 = = College career = = 
 In early 2004 , Williams committed to play football at the University of Kentucky , but he did not join the team that season . He later recommitted to Kentucky in 2005 and enrolled that year . In the 2005 season , Williams played in five games before starting in the final three matches of the season at left tackle . He started 12 games in his sophomore year and was named the Most Outstanding Offensive Lineman by the team . In early 2007 , Williams was indefinitely suspended from the Wildcats for academic reasons , but his suspension was later lifted prior to the start of the season . 
 In 2007 , Williams started in all 13 games and was named a second @-@ team All @-@ SEC player . The Wildcat 's offense also broke the team record for most points scored in a season with 475 points in Williams ' junior year . Williams was named the SEC 's offensive lineman of the week for his play against the Florida Atlantic Owls on September 29 . As a senior , Williams was again named to the All @-@ SEC second @-@ team after starting in 11 games . He was also named the team 's most outstanding offensive lineman after allowing only a single sack the entire season . A knee injury caused Williams to miss two games as a senior . He finished his career at Kentucky with 45 games played and 39 starts . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Carolina Panthers = = = 
 Williams was eligible for the 2009 NFL Draft but went undrafted . He was later signed by the Carolina Panthers as a free agent , and was the only undrafted rookie to make the active roster of the Panthers following training camp . Williams made his NFL debut in Week 11 of his rookie season against the Miami Dolphins . He went on to play in seven games in 2009 , where he was utilized mostly on special teams . In 2010 , Williams played in all 16 regular season games , while starting in 11 . He started for the first time against the San Francisco 49ers in Week 7 , and remained a starter for the rest of the season . In Carolina 's final preseason game of 2011 , Williams suffered a broken ankle , causing him to miss the entire season . Head coach Ron Rivera later said the Panthers had planned on Williams taking on the role of a starter prior to his injury . 
 In 2012 , Williams played in all 16 games and started in nine . In Week 15 against the San Diego Chargers , Williams started and contributed to the Panthers breaking a team record with 29 first downs . Williams also started on the offensive line that helped reach 273 rushing yards and 530 total offensive yards in Week 17 against the New Orleans Saints , both the second highest values in team history . Prior to the 2013 season , the Panthers released right guard Geoff <unk> and announced Williams as the likely starter . He started against the Seattle Seahawks in the regular season opener , but was injured and left the game . He was later diagnosed with a torn ACL and MCL in his left knee , ending his season . Williams played in the 2014 season opener against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers , but left practice later that week with coaches citing a sore hip . He was later placed on injured reserve with a back injury , ending his season . Williams became a free agent in 2015 and the Panthers did not resign him . 
 = = = Calgary Stampeders = = = 
 The Calgary Stampeders signed Williams as an international free agent on May 28 , 2015 . Williams made the Stampeders ' active roster following preseason and made his CFL debut on July 18 against the Winnipeg Blue Bombers . He started three games at left tackle before being forced to leave the August 1st game against the Montreal Alouettes with an arm injury . After Williams reportedly had X @-@ rays of his elbow taken , he was diagnosed with a hyperextended right elbow . He suffered multiple injuries during the rest of the regular season , causing him to sit out several games . He returned in time to play in both playoff games for Calgary . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Williams was born in Atlanta , Georgia to Garry Williams Sr. and Angela Williams . While playing college football and studying public service and leadership at the University of Kentucky , he was involved in community service . He helped with a " Breakfast with Santa " event at the University of Kentucky Children 's Hospital and rang bells to collect donations for the Salvation Army . 
 = Clinton Street Theater = 
 The Clinton Street Theater is a theater located in southeast Portland , Oregon . It is believed to be the second oldest operating movie house in the city and one of the oldest continually operating cinemas in the United States . The theater was designed by Charles A. Duke in 1913 , built in 1914 , and opened as The Clinton in 1915 . It became known as the 26th Avenue Theatre in 1945 and the Encore in 1969 , before reverting to a resemblance of its original name in 1976 . The Clinton often screens grindhouse , cult and experimental films , and has become known for hosting regular screenings of The Rocky Horror Picture Show ( since 1978 , marking one of the film 's longest @-@ running showings ) and Repo ! The Genetic Opera . The venue also hosts the annual Filmed by Bike festival , the Faux Film Festival and the Portland Queer Documentary Film Festival . 
 = = History = = 
 A photograph of the building that was to house the theater appeared in The Morning Oregonian newspaper in 1913 . Known as the Kleist Building after its owner , Edward Kleist , it had a pressed brick front and walls with hollow tiles . The second floor was intended for residential rooms and apartments , and the ground floor was designed for business storerooms and a movie theater . According to a February 1915 newspaper advertisement , The Exploits of Elaine , the first in a continuing series of Craig Kennedy detective stories , was to show at The Clinton on March 1 . 
 The 300 @-@ seat theater was designed by Charles A. Duke in 1913 and opened in 1915 as The Clinton . Its main entrance faced 26th Avenue until 1922 . The venue became known as the 26th Avenue Theatre in 1945 and the Encore in 1969 , before reverting to a variation of its original name on May 30 , 1975 . At that time , a five @-@ person collective bought the theater . The movie house had been showing X @-@ rated films , which the collective replaced with a wide variety of movies including foreign films , The Rocky Horror Picture Show , and older films like The African Queen . 
 In September 1999 , Anne Rozier and Dennis Nyback took over operation of the theater . Nyback had previously shown films at the Clinton beginning in 1997 . He was told about the availability of the theater when he was showing films in June 1999 . During his time operating the theater with Rozier , Clinton showed a mix of new films , revival films , and creations by Nyback using his archive . His shows included : " Defining the 1970 's Through Classic Commercials " , " Bad Bugs Bunny " , " Strange and Surreal Industrial Films " , " F & # k Mickey Mouse " , " <unk> A Go Go " , " Jazz on Film " , " The Dark Side of Dr. Seuss " , " Forty Years of Classic Commercials " , and " The Genius of Bob Clampett " . 
 Seth and Nicola <unk> purchased the business from Anne Rozier in September 2003 . The couple " fell in love with both the city and the theater " after visiting in July 2002 as coordinators of San Francisco 's Sick Puppy short film festival . The <unk> added heating and air conditioning , both firsts for the theater , and refurbished the bathrooms , lobby and walls , among other upgrades . Screening independent films and supporting local filmmakers remain the couple 's primary goals . 
 In March 2012 the business , including fixtures and projection and concession equipment , but not the building itself , were listed for sale . In April 2012 ownership of the business transferred from the <unk> to Roger and Lani Jo Leigh . After the sale , Seth <unk> said in a press release : " For the last eight @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years I have had the opportunity to run the coolest movie theater , in the coolest neighborhood , in the coolest city in America . My eternal gratitude goes out to the citizens of Portland . I can never say thank you enough times for all of the support you have given to the Clinton . " Events to mark the change included an open house " meet @-@ and @-@ greet " , which included screenings of two documentary films by Lani Jo , and an evening of rare trailers and video clips from the Prelinger Archives . Lani Jo confirmed the theater will continue to offer screenings of The Rocky Horror Picture Show and focus on documentary and independent films . 
 = = Events = = 
 Clinton Street Theater offers : " a mixture of grindhouse , music films , political documentaries and experimental films " . The theater has become known for its weekly screenings of Rocky Horror and Repo ! The Genetic Opera , and for its annual Filmed by Bike festival , which began in 2003 and features : " bike @-@ themed independent short movies from around the world . " Rocky Horror screenings began in 1978 , marking one of the longest @-@ running showings of the film . The theater also hosts the Faux Film Festival , offering cult and independent film showings , and the Portland Queer Documentary Film Festival . 
 To celebrate the 40th anniversary of the Portland Trail Blazers , in 2009 the theater screened the 1978 rare and out of circulation documentary Fast Break about the team 's 1976 – 77 championship season . In 2010 the Clinton hosted the Three @-@ Minute Picture Show , which featured screenings of three @-@ minute films by first @-@ time filmmakers . The venue has also hosted benefit events , such as " Can 't Stop the Serenity " ( presented by PDX Browncoats ) , which included showings of the film Serenity among other features to benefit Equality Now and the Oregon Food Bank . Other hosted events have included the Portland Underground Film Festival , comedy shows , commemorations for holidays such as Martin Luther King , Jr . Day , and lectures on film making . 
 Many celebrities have appeared at the theater to promote films , including Crispin Glover in 2008 , and Bill Plympton and Tom Shadyac in 2011 . Chuck Palahniuk , Tom Potter and Gus Van Sant have also appeared at the theater . 
 = Jordanhill railway station = 
 Jordanhill railway station is a side <unk> suburban railway station in the Jordanhill area in the West End of Glasgow , Scotland . The station , which is governed by Transport Scotland and managed by Abellio ScotRail , lies on the Argyle Line and the North Clyde Line . 
 It is located near the Jordanhill Campus of the University of Strathclyde and sits atop Crow Road , an important western thoroughfare in Glasgow and the main route to the Clyde Tunnel . The station is five stops and eleven minutes ' journey time from Glasgow Central on the Argyle Line . Trains on the North Clyde Line pass through without stopping at the station . 
 In operation since 1887 , the station stemmed losses for an area that was in decline . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The station opened on 1 August 1887 as part of the Glasgow , Yoker and Clydebank Railway . Construction of the station structure was not completed until 1895 , with modular @-@ design wooden buildings , commonly seen on the new suburban railway lines , being built on both platforms . The station is located on part of the former site of brick and tile works , Jordanhill being an area of artisans and miners until the close of the nineteenth century . The railway station arrived just as much of the local industry was declining , giving residents , who previously had to walk to <unk> or Partick to find transport into Glasgow , proper access to the city centre . 
 The station 's opening effectively filled a gap in provision , as lines in the area had already been constructed ; the Whiteinch and Stobcross Railways both opened in 1874 , but no station was constructed on these lines at Jordanhill . A new link allowed services to Whiteinch Victoria Park to begin in 1897 , but they ceased in 1951 and the link was closed to freight in 1967 . The route of the link has been converted into a nature walk from Victoria Park to Jordanhill station , running alongside the existing line for approximately half its length . 
 On 15 January 1898 , J. Johnstone , a member of the Whiteinch Harriers running club , was killed while attempting to run across the line west of the station . A small lead memorial stood on the spot for many years . The freight line saw near @-@ disaster on 28 December 1932 , when seventeen wagons laden with coal ran away on a slight incline on the sidings operated by the Great Western Steam Laundry ; they ran into other wagons , derailing nine and spilling coal over the line , seriously disrupting passenger traffic . 
 A serious accident occurred on 28 April 1980 , when a three @-@ coach train carrying 80 passengers from Dalmuir to Motherwell derailed at <unk> West Junction , just after leaving Jordanhill . All the bogies on the leading coach left the rails , causing fifteen people ( nine women and six men ) to be injured seriously enough for them to be taken to the Western Infirmary . 
 = = = Plans for rebuilding = = = 
 In 1998 , Strathclyde Passenger Transport ( SPT ) undertook a study into the possible relocation of the station west to <unk> Drive . A December 2002 report from the Scottish Executive included this station as part of their High Resource Scenario , estimating the project cost at approximately £ 2 million ( US $ 4 million ) . By 2004 , SPT had identified this station as one of their top three priorities , and Glasgow City Council had identified it as a " main priority " . 
 An alternative proposal would keep the existing station open but with many services calling only at a new <unk> Drive station . This proposal was backed in August 2001 by Charlie Gordon , then leader of Glasgow City Council , who said that having a second station in Jordanhill would assist students at the nearby Jordanhill campus of the University of Strathclyde . The proposed new station would have been only roughly 500 yd ( 460 m ) away . 
 The station at Jordanhill is to be rebuilt , one of six new stations in the west of Scotland , according to an announcement made on 19 May 2006 by SPT chief executive Ron Culley . 
 Jordanhill Station will be rebuilt for the 2014 Commonwealth Games , one of a number of stations that will be rebuilt for the Commonwealth Games through a £ 300 million transport legacy plan . 
 = = Services = = 
 As part of the Argyle Line , the station is used — along with Glasgow Central and Anderston — by those commuting to and from Central Glasgow , near the heart of its business and financial district . The typical hourly service from the station is four trains per hour to Dalmuir via Yoker ( two extended to Dumbarton Central ) , two trains to Whifflet via Glasgow Central and two trains to Cumbernauld via Glasgow Queen Street . 
 In SRA 's 2002 / 3 financial year , 85 @,@ 861 people boarded trains at Jordanhill station , and 94 @,@ 613 disembarked , making it the <unk> busiest station in the United Kingdom , and twenty @-@ fifth busiest on the Argyle Line in 2003 . 
 In 2016 the Queen Street High Level tunnel closure will see restricted services for part of the year , with frequencies dropping to half @-@ hourly from here . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The station has a very small car park ( eleven spaces ) and is not permanently staffed , but it contains a ticket machine , one of an initial batch of ten installed by SPT in late 2003 and early 2004 as part of a drive to curb fare dodging , which was estimated to be costing the company £ 2 million a year . Both platforms are elevated and each has a wheelchair ramp . There is a connecting footbridge between the two platforms . 
 = = In the area = = 
 The Jordanhill Campus of the University of Strathclyde , which hosts the Faculty of Education , is located nearby . Several schools are also in the area , including Jordanhill School , Broomhill Primary , St Thomas Aquinas ; as well as a Territorial Army centre . For the later part of the 1980s and the early part of the 1990s , a huge Jolly Giant toy centre lay just across Crow Road , and was a major local attraction . It closed in the 1990s and after housing a discount clothing store for a few years it is now an Arnold Clark Volkswagen car dealership . 
 Backing onto platform 2 is a Scout hall , home to the 72nd Scout Troop . 
 There are two sports facilities accessible from the station : 
 New Anniesland , a rugby union and cricket playing field is home to the Glasgow <unk> Sports Club , and The Glasgow Academy . 
 Old Anniesland , home to The High School of Glasgow and the <unk> Sports club . 
 Rugby union team Glasgow Hawks RFC predominantly play at Old Anniesland , but occasionally play at New Anniesland . 
 = SMS Württemberg ( 1878 ) = 
 SMS Württemberg was one of four Sachsen @-@ class armored frigates of the German Imperial Navy . Her sister ships were Sachsen , Bayern , and Baden . Württemberg was built in the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin from 1876 to 1881 . The ship was commissioned into the Imperial Navy in August 1881 . She was armed with a main battery of six 26 cm ( 10 in ) guns in two open barbettes . 
 After her commissioning , Württemberg served with the fleet on numerous training exercises and cruises . She participated in several cruises escorting Kaiser Wilhelm II on state visits to Great Britain and to various cities in the Baltic Sea in the late 1880s and early 1890s . During 1898 – 1899 , the ship was modernized at the Imperial Dockyard in Kiel ; she served for another seven years with the fleet before being withdrawn from active service in 1906 . She was subsequently used in a variety of secondary roles , until she was sold in 1920 and broken up for scrap . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Württemberg was ordered by the Imperial Navy under the contract name " D , " which denoted that the vessel was a new addition to the fleet . She was built at the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin ; her keel was laid in 1876 under construction number 78 . The ship was launched on 9 November 1878 and commissioned into the German fleet on 9 May 1881 . Along with her three sisters , Württemberg was the first large , armored warship built for the German navy that relied entirely on engines for propulsion . 
 The ship was 98 @.@ 20 meters ( 322 @.@ 2 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 18 @.@ 40 m ( 60 @.@ 4 ft ) and a draft of 6 @.@ 32 m ( 20 @.@ 7 ft ) forward . Württemberg was powered by two 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines , which were supplied with steam by eight coal @-@ fired Dürr boilers . The ship 's top speed was 13 knots ( 24 km / h ; 15 mph ) , at 5 @,@ 600 indicated horsepower ( 4 @,@ 200 kW ) Her standard complement consisted of 32 officers and 285 enlisted men , though while serving as a squadron flagship this was augmented by another 7 officers and 34 men . 
 She was armed with six 26 cm ( 10 in ) guns , two of which were single @-@ mounted in an open barbette forward of the conning tower and the remaining four mounted amidships , also on single mounts in an open barbette . As built , the ship was also equipped with six 8 @.@ 7 cm ( 3 @.@ 4 in ) L / 24 guns and eight 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss revolver cannons . Württemberg 's armor was made of wrought iron , and was concentrated in an armored citadel amidships . The armor ranged from 203 to 254 mm ( 8 @.@ 0 to 10 @.@ 0 in ) on the armored citadel , and between 50 – 75 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 0 in ) on the deck . The barbette armor was 254 mm of wrought iron backed by 250 mm of teak . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning in May 1881 , Württemberg was placed in reserve . She was not activated for service with the fleet until 1884 ; this in part had to do with the poor performance of her sister Sachsen in the fleet maneuvers of 1880 . Among the problems associated with the Sachsen @-@ class ships was a tendency to roll dangerously due to their flat bottoms , which greatly reduced the accuracy of their guns . The ships were also poorly armored , compared to their contemporaries . In addition , they were slow and suffered from poor maneuverability . Nevertheless , Württemberg and her three sisters served as the I Division in the 1884 fleet maneuvers , under the command of Rear Admiral Alexander von Monts . The ship was again placed in reserve in 1885 , but returned to fleet service in 1886 alongside Sachsen , Baden , and the new ironclad Oldenburg . During the annual fleet maneuvers , Württemberg 's engines proved troublesome . 
 Following the 1886 maneuvers , Württemberg and her three sisters were removed from active duty to serve as the Baltic reserve division . In June 1887 , Germany dedicated the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal ; Württemberg was among the ships present during the celebrations . The ship returned to active service with the fleet in 1890 when she joined the I Division during the annual maneuvers . Württemberg was commanded by Captain Alfred von Tirpitz during the exercises . The eight ships of the I and II Divisions simulated a Russian fleet blockading Kiel , which was defended by torpedo boat flotillas . Württemberg was in reserve during the 1891 maneuvers , but returned to the I Division in 1892 , 1893 , and 1894 . By the winter of 1894 – 1895 , the last of the four Brandenburg @-@ class battleships had been commissioned ; these ships were assigned to the I Division , which displaced Württemberg and her three sisters to the II Division . The eight ships conducted training cruises over the winter and spring before conducting the annual autumn fleet exercises . 
 On 21 June 1895 , the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal was opened for traffic , eight years after work had begun . Württemberg and her three sisters , along with dozens of other warships , attended the ceremonies . The major naval powers sent fleets to join the fleet review . The Autumn 1895 maneuvers simulated a high @-@ seas battle between the I and II Divisions in the North Sea , followed by combined maneuvers with the rest of the fleet in the Baltic . Württemberg again served during the 1896 and 1897 maneuvers , though Sachsen was her only sister to join the exercises . Baden and Bayern were out of service for extensive modernization . 
 After the conclusion of the 1897 maneuvers , Württemberg was taken into drydock at the Imperial Dockyard in Kiel for reconstruction . The ship 's old wrought iron and teak armor was replaced with new Krupp nickel @-@ steel armor . The four funnels were trunked into a single large funnel and new engines were also installed , which increased the ship 's speed to 15 @.@ 4 knots ( 28 @.@ 5 km / h ; 17 @.@ 7 mph ) . The ship 's 8 @.@ 7 cm guns were replaced with quick @-@ firing 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 30 guns and four 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) autocannons . Work was completed in 1898 . Württemberg remained with the fleet until 1906 ; her replacement in the fleet organization plan , the new dreadnought battleship Rheinland , was ordered that year . Württemberg was then used as a torpedo training and test ship until February 1919 , when she was reduced to an escort for F @-@ type minesweepers . The ship was stricken from the naval register on 20 October 1920 and sold to <unk> Co . Württemberg was ultimately broken up for scrap in Wilhelmshaven . 
 = Paradox ( horse ) = 
 Paradox ( 1882 – 1890 ) was a British Thoroughbred racehorse and sire . In a career that lasted from October 1884 until October 1885 he ran eight times and won six races . Despite running only twice in 1884 , he proved himself to be one of the best two @-@ year @-@ olds of his generation by winning the Dewhurst Plate . In the following year he won five of his six races including the 2 @,@ 000 Guineas , the Grand Prix de Paris , the Sussex Stakes and the Champion Stakes . His only defeat came when he was narrowly beaten by Melton in the Epsom Derby . 
 The final phase of the colt 's racing career was marked by controversy and recrimination following his withdrawal from the Cambridgeshire Handicap in the autumn of 1885 and he was retired from racing in 1886 . Paradox had little opportunity to establish himself at stud , dying in 1890 at the age of eight . 
 = = Background = = 
 Paradox was a strongly @-@ built bay horse bred by the Graham brothers at the Yardley Stud near Birmingham . He was sired by the 2 @,@ 000 Guineas runner @-@ up Sterling out of Casuistry , an undistinguished racehorse who had been sold cheaply at the end of her racing career by Lord Rosebery . Casuistry became an important broodmare , being the direct female ancestor of notable thoroughbreds such as Humorist , Royal Palace and Spend a Buck . As a yearling Paradox was bought for 700 guineas by the trainer John Porter on behalf of his associate , Captain Bowling . Porter trained the colt at his stable at Kingsclere . 
 = = Racing career = = 
 = = = 1884 : two @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Until 1946 there was no requirement for British racehorses to be named and , in 1884 , the horse who would become known as Paradox raced as " bay colt by <unk> Casuistry " or , simply , " the Casuistry colt " . He was slow to mature but , by late 1884 , he had begun to show signs of promise . After watching him run in a trial gallop , the Duke of Westminster paid £ 6 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 564 @,@ 049 today ) for the colt . By way of comparison , the 1884 Epsom Derby carried prize money of £ 4 @,@ 600 . By the time he appeared on a racecourse his performances in training and purchase price meant that he had acquired a considerable reputation and , despite making his debut in the Middle Park Plate , the season 's most important races for two @-@ year @-@ olds , he was made joint @-@ favourite at odds of 9 / 4 . The inexperienced Casuistry colt showed " a little temper " at the start and , after racing with the leaders in the early stages , he became unbalanced and lost his position on the downhill section of the course . He finished strongly to dead @-@ heat for third place behind Melton and the French colt <unk> , but the Duke was highly displeased by the performance and offered the colt for sale . He was bought by William Broderick Cloete , a South African @-@ born businessman who had made his fortune in Mexican coal @-@ mining . At the next Newmarket meeting , on his first start for his new owner , the Casuistry colt ran in the Dewhurst Plate and started the 2 / 1 second favourite behind Xaintrailles . He took an early lead and pulled away in " grand style " to record a three length win from the filly Cora . The Dewhurst was regarded as the year 's most important two @-@ year @-@ old race after the Middle Park Plate , and the colt 's win established him as one of the best horses of his generation , with bookmakers making him one of the favourites for the following year 's Derby . Shortly afterwards it was reported that an offer of £ 10 @,@ 000 for the colt had been turned down . 
 = = = 1885 : three @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 = = = = Spring = = = = 
 Over the winter the Casuistry colt was given the name " Paradox " ( misreported as " Paragon " in some sources ) and , by early 1885 , was clear favourite for both the 2 @,@ 000 Guineas and the Epsom Derby . When he reappeared in the 2 @,@ 000 Guineas over one mile at Newmarket on 6 May he was considered virtually unbeatable and , with only six other colts turning out to oppose him , he started at odds of 1 / 3 . Ridden by Fred Archer , Paradox started well and moved into the lead with three furlongs to travel . Most of his opponents were soon struggling , but an unnamed " bay colt by <unk> out of <unk> " ( later named Crafton ) emerged as a serious challenger . Archer had to use his spurs on Paradox and the favourite drifted across the course under pressure before prevailing by a head after a " brilliant and exciting " race . It was only after some animated discussion that Crafton 's connections decided not to lodge an objection against the winner for causing interference in the closing stages . 
 = = = = Summer = = = = 
 Despite his win in the Guineas , Paradox was passed over by Archer , who chose to ride Melton in the Derby . At Epsom on 3 June Paradox , ridden by Fred Webb , was made the 4 / 1 second favourite in a field of twelve runners , with Melton starting the 15 / 8 favourite . Webb was given the ride despite " scurrilous " rumours concerning his honesty . The race took place in fine weather before a reportedly " enormous " crowd that included the Prince and Princess of Wales . Paradox took the lead two furlongs from the finish and was immediately challenged by Archer on Melton ; from that point on the two had the race between them . Melton made gradual but relentless progress to catch Paradox " in the last stride " and win by a head in a " desperate finish " , with Archer riding one of his strongest races . After the race Cloete expressed his satisfaction with Webb 's performance and rewarded the jockey with a gift of £ 100 . Irish writer Oscar Wilde was reported to have observed " I understand that Milton 's Paradise Lost is being revived and will appear in Derby Week and will be published under the title Paradox Lost by Melton . " 
 Paradox was never beaten again . Eleven days after his defeat at Epsom he was sent to Longchamp to contest the Grand Prix de Paris , the most important and valuable race in France . The start of the race was delayed for half an hour as the authorities struggled to clear spectators from the course . Ridden once again by Archer , Paradox was restrained in the early stages before making steady progress and turning into the straight in second place . Paradox overtook the leader <unk> halfway down the straight and won " [ w ] ith the greatest ease " at odds of 1 / 3 . His success was greeted enthusiastically by the travelling British supporters but there were hisses and hoots from the French contingent and the raising of the Union Jack after the race led to what was described as an " unfavourable demonstration " . Paradox returned to England and ran the one mile Sussex Stakes at Goodwood on 29 July . The winners of major races were assigned additional weight in the race and Paradox carried twelve pounds extra as a result of his success in France . Archer sent him to the front two furlongs from the finish and he won comfortably by three quarters of a length from Royal Hampton . 
 = = = = Autumn = = = = 
 Later in the year Paradox was campaigned at Newmarket and entered in three races ; his main target was expected to be the Cambridgeshire Handicap at the end of October . He was assigned a weight of 124 pounds and was strongly supported in the betting . Some time before the race , however , Cloete arrived in England from Mexico and had a disagreement with Porter that resulted in the withdrawal of Paradox from the Cambridgeshire , causing a " terrible rumpus " among the betting public . It was rumoured that Cloete was furious that he had not been kept informed of the trainer 's plans and had missed the chance to bet on Paradox at long odds . It was also suggested that he was upset by accusations that Paradox had never been an intended runner and had been left in the race in an attempt to manipulate the betting market . An exacerbating factor in the affair was that there had been a delay between Cloete privately announcing that the horse would not run and the official withdrawal , during which period heavy gambling continued , with some individuals apparently profiting from inside knowledge . Cloete removed Paradox , and all of his other horses , from Porter 's stable and sent them to be trained by Richard Marsh at Lordship Farm . 
 At the first October meeting Paradox ran the Champion Stakes over ten furlongs , with Archer riding at his lowest weight of 120 pounds . Running in wet , difficult conditions , Paradox took the lead in the closing stages and won from Duke of Richmond and the filly Aveline . His victory was received in silence by the spectators , although there were none of the open displays of hostility towards Cloete that been feared following the controversy arising from the colt 's withdrawal from the Cambridgeshire . At the next Newmarket meeting , when the Cambridgeshire was run , Cloete rerouted his colt to the Free Handicap . Paradox won , despite conceding thirty @-@ four pounds to Aveline , but his " brilliant " success was again met with silence from the crowd and Cloete was greeted " without a word of congratulation or the semblance of a note of enthusiasm " . Paradox remained in training as a four @-@ year @-@ old with his entries including the Ascot Gold Cup , but he did not run again and was retired to stud . 
 = = Stud career = = 
 Paradox began his stud career , during which he became increasingly bad @-@ tempered and difficult to manage , at a fee of 30 guineas . He showed some promise as a stallion , siring several winners including Red Ensign ( Prince of Wales 's Stakes ) , <unk> ( Stewards ' Cup ) and <unk> ( Hansa Preis ) , and his stud fee had risen to 100 guineas by 1890 when he died of a twisted intestine at the age of eight . His daughter Thankful Blossom was the ancestor of Bull Lea , an American stallion referred to as " one of the great sires in American Thoroughbred history " , . 
 = = Pedigree = = 
 Paradox was inbred <unk> to <unk> , meaning that this stallion appears in both the third and the fourth generations of his pedigree . He was also inbred 4x4 to Touchstone . 
 = The Light of the Sun = 
 The Light of the Sun is the fourth studio album by American R & B singer Jill Scott . It was recorded after Scott 's four @-@ year break from her music career and departure from her former label , Hidden Beach Recordings . The Light of the Sun was recorded at several studios and produced primarily by Scott and JR Hutson , a songwriter and producer who had previously worked on her 2007 record The Real Thing : Words and Sounds Vol . 3 . Music journalists noted The Light of the Sun for its neo soul sound , element of improvisation , and Scott 's feminine themes . 
 The Light of the Sun was released on June 21 , 2011 , by Scott 's imprint label , Blue Babe Records . It received positive reviews from most critics and debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 in the United States , where it sold 135 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The album became Scott 's first American number @-@ one record , and as of March 2015 , it had sold 478 @,@ 000 copies in the US . It was promoted with three singles , including the Billboard R & B hits " So in Love " and " Blessed " . Scott also promoted the album with her Summer Block Party concert tour . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following her 2007 album , The Real Thing : Words and Sounds Vol . 3 , Scott took a break from recording music . She undertook acting roles in the movies Tyler Perry 's Why Did I Get Married ? and <unk> , and she had a starring role in the television series The No. 1 Ladies ' Detective Agency . During her break , she divorced her husband of six years <unk> Williams in 2007 , became engaged to the former drummer Lil ' John Roberts in 2008 , gave birth to their son Jett Hamilton in 2009 , and broke up with Roberts . Scott subsequently began sessions for The Light of the Sun . 
 In 2009 , Scott left her former record label Hidden Beach Recordings . During the album 's recording , she was sued by Hidden Beach , which claimed she had left without fulfilling a six @-@ album contract . The lawsuit was settled in 2011 , with Hidden Beach planning to release in August a compilation album The Original Jill Scott from the Vault , Vol . 1 , the first in a planned album series of Scott 's previously unreleased recordings . In 2010 , Warner Bros. Records signed Scott to a deal that gave her direct control over her marketing and promotion . In a strategy to re @-@ establish Scott 's presence with fans , she signed a multi @-@ tour deal with Live Nation / <unk> Ventures to expand her concert touring . Scott co @-@ headlined a national , 20 @-@ date arena tour with the recording artist Maxwell , called Maxwell & Jill Scott : The Tour , in 2010 . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The album was recorded at several recording studios , including Fever Recording Studios in North Hollywood , 9th Street Studios and Threshold Sound & Vision in Santa Monica , Studio 609 and The Studio in Philadelphia , The Boom Boom Room in Burbank and The Village Studios in West Los Angeles . Scott worked with the producers Terry Lewis , JR Hutson and Justice League for the album . Scott had first worked with Hutson on her previous album The Real Thing . 
 In an interview for HitQuarters , Hutson said of Scott 's approach to The Light of the Sun , " She ’ s now in charge of a lot of different things and with it comes a lot of trials and tribulations , and I think her goal is to just give people a very realistic glimpse of where she is in her life right now . " Scott has noted songs such as " Hear My Call " and " Quick " as reflective of the " darkest moments " in her life and has said that much of the album 's music developed from studio jams and freestyle sessions . In an interview for Metro , she said of the " largely improvised " recording process : 
 I went into a studio with no lyrics , nothing written out . I got together a great group – featuring Adam Blackstone on bass and Randy Bowland on guitar – and just put them in a studio and got them to play while I improvised lyrics . From the first note , you could hear little tunes emerging , and that would inspire me to freestyle lyrics . We call it ' going in ' . You go inside yourself , inside your spirit , and you explore . It ’ s exhausting . When we were done , there was a lot of whooping and hugging and high @-@ <unk> . It ’ s that kind of record . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The album was released in the United States on June 21 , 2011 , on Scott 's own imprint label , Blues Babe Records , distributed by Warner Bros. Records , her first release by the label . It is the first release under the distribution deal between Blues Babe and Warner Bros. It was released on June 27 in the United Kingdom . On July 28 , Scott embarked on her Summer Block Party concert tour , which concluded on August 28 . The tour had Anthony Hamilton and Mint Condition as opening acts , Doug E. Fresh as host , and DJ Jazzy Jeff on turntables . Scott also promoted the album with performances on the television shows The Tonight Show with Jay Leno , Jimmy Kimmel Live ! and Live with Regis and Kelly . She headlined the Essence Music Festival on July 1 . 
 On April 11 , Scott released the promotional single " Shame " on her Soundcloud account . It features the rapper Eve and the vocal group The A Group . Its music video was filmed at the Cecil B. Moore Recreational Center in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , where Eve and the rapper Black Thought were in attendance . Scott said in an interview for CNN that she spent several summers at the recreation center and that it was at risk of being demolished . The video was premiered on April 13 on <unk> It was later released as the album 's second single in the United Kingdom . The album 's first single , " So in Love " featuring Anthony Hamilton , was released on June 26 . It spent nine weeks on the US Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , peaking at number 10 on the chart , one week on the Billboard Hot 100 , peaking at number 97 , and three weeks on Billboard 's Radio Songs , peaking at number 71 on the chart . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The album debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 chart , with first @-@ week sales of 135 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . It was her first number @-@ one album in the US . It sold 55 @,@ 000 copies in its second week on the Billboard 200 . As of May 2015 , The Light of the Sun had sold 479 @,@ 000 copies in the US . 
 The album debuted at number 83 on the Canadian Albums Chart . In the Netherlands , the album peaked at number 51 and spent two weeks on the Mega Album Top 100 chart . In France , it reached number 103 and spent one week on the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique 's albums chart . In Belgian Wallonia , the album reached number 99 and spent one week on the Ultratop 50 Albums chart . In the United Kingdom , it debuted at number 69 on the UK Albums Chart and at number 14 on the R & B Albums Chart . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The Light of the Sun received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 73 , based on 15 reviews . Mikael Wood from Entertainment Weekly complimented its " earnest introspection and earthy textures " , and observed " a distinctly early @-@ <unk> vibe " . In The New York Times , Jon Pareles praised Scott 's " proudly and forthrightly feminine " themes and said the songs are " springy with a sense of improvisation , both in the rhythms and in their elaborate vocal overlays " . The Washington Post 's Bill Friskics @-@ Warren noted its " sumptuous orchestration , jazzy flourishes and neo @-@ soul beats " , and wrote , " The full range of human emotion , from defiance to hurt and hope , is expressed over the course of the album . " AllMusic 's Thom Jurek said that " Scott sounds more in control than ever ; her spoken and sung phrasing ( now a trademark ) , songwriting , and production instincts are all solid " . In the Chicago Tribune , Greg Kot wrote , " She ’ s perfected a style that toggles between singing and conversing , and balances more conventional pop structure with spontaneity . " Caroline Sullivan in The Guardian noted its " uplifting sung @-@ spoken pieces " and wrote , " It 's Scott 's warm <unk> over the whole album that makes it a must @-@ hear . " 
 In a mixed review , Andy Gill from The Independent criticized Scott 's lyrics as " a sticky puddle of self @-@ regard " and found its songs " [ un ] developed much beyond a languid soul @-@ jazz vamp " . Rolling Stone writer Jon Dolan gave the album three out of five stars and called her " trademark " musical style " warm and inviting , if rarely thrilling , neo @-@ soul " . Daryl Easlea of BBC Online wrote that it " at times [ ... ] veers towards self @-@ indulgence , and some of its ideas are not fully followed through " , but complimented its " freewheeling vibe " and called it " a lovely , bittersweet album that celebrates the joy of life " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = <unk> = 
 The cytosol or cytoplasmic matrix is the liquid found inside cells . It constitutes most of the intracellular fluid ( ICF ) . It is separated into compartments by membranes . For example , the mitochondrial matrix separates the mitochondrion into many compartments . 
 In the eukaryotic cell , the cytosol is within the cell membrane and is part of the cytoplasm , which also comprises the mitochondria , plastids , and other organelles ( but not their internal fluids and structures ) ; the cell nucleus is separate . The cytosol is thus a liquid matrix around the organelles . In prokaryotes , most of the chemical reactions of metabolism take place in the cytosol , while a few take place in membranes or in the periplasmic space . In eukaryotes , while many metabolic pathways still occur in the cytosol , others are contained within organelles . 
 The cytosol is a complex mixture of substances dissolved in water . Although water forms the large majority of the cytosol , its structure and properties within cells is not well understood . The concentrations of ions such as sodium and potassium are different in the cytosol than in the extracellular fluid ; these differences in ion levels are important in processes such as osmoregulation , cell signaling , and the generation of action potentials in excitable cells such as endocrine , nerve and muscle cells . The cytosol also contains large amounts of macromolecules , which can alter how molecules behave , through macromolecular crowding . 
 Although it was once thought to be a simple solution of molecules , the cytosol has multiple levels of organization . These include concentration gradients of small molecules such as calcium , large complexes of enzymes that act together to carry out metabolic pathways , and protein complexes such as proteasomes and <unk> that enclose and separate parts of the cytosol . 
 = = Definition = = 
 The term cytosol was first introduced in 1965 by H.A. <unk> , and initially referred to the liquid that was produced by breaking cells apart and <unk> all the insoluble components by ultracentrifugation . Such a soluble cell extract is not identical to the soluble part of the cell cytoplasm and is usually called a cytoplasmic fraction . The term cytosol is now used to refer to the liquid phase of the cytoplasm in an intact cell . This excludes any part of the cytoplasm that is contained within organelles . Due to the possibility of confusion between the use of the word " cytosol " to refer to both extracts of cells and the soluble part of the cytoplasm in intact cells , the phrase " aqueous cytoplasm " has been used to describe the liquid contents of the cytoplasm of living cells . 
 = = Properties and composition = = 
 The proportion of cell volume that is cytosol varies : for example while this compartment forms the bulk of cell structure in bacteria , in plant cells the main compartment is the large central vacuole . The cytosol consists mostly of water , dissolved ions , small molecules , and large water @-@ soluble molecules ( such as proteins ) . The majority of these non @-@ protein molecules have a molecular mass of less than 300 Da . This mixture of small molecules is extraordinarily complex , as the variety of molecules that are involved in metabolism ( the metabolites ) is immense . For example , up to 200 @,@ 000 different small molecules might be made in plants , although not all these will be present in the same species , or in a single cell . Estimates of the number of metabolites in single cells such as E. coli and baker 's yeast predict that under 1 @,@ 000 are made . 
 = = = Water = = = 
 Most of the cytosol is water , which makes up about 70 % of the total volume of a typical cell . The pH of the intracellular fluid is 7 @.@ 4 @.@ while human cytosolic pH ranges between 7 @.@ 0 - 7 @.@ 4 , and is usually higher if a cell is growing . The viscosity of cytoplasm is roughly the same as pure water , although diffusion of small molecules through this liquid is about fourfold slower than in pure water , due mostly to collisions with the large numbers of macromolecules in the cytosol . Studies in the brine shrimp have examined how water affects cell functions ; these saw that a 20 % reduction in the amount of water in a cell inhibits metabolism , with metabolism decreasing progressively as the cell dries out and all metabolic activity halting when the water level reaches 70 % below normal . 
 Although water is vital for life , the structure of this water in the cytosol is not well understood , mostly because methods such as nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy only give information on the average structure of water , and cannot measure local variations at the microscopic scale . Even the structure of pure water is poorly understood , due to the ability of water to form structures such as water clusters through hydrogen bonds . 
 The classic view of water in cells is that about 5 % of this water is strongly bound in by solutes or macromolecules as water of solvation , while the majority has the same structure as pure water . This water of solvation is not active in osmosis and may have different solvent properties , so that some dissolved molecules are excluded , while others become concentrated . However , others argue that the effects of the high concentrations of macromolecules in cells extend throughout the cytosol and that water in cells behaves very differently from the water in dilute solutions . These ideas include the proposal that cells contain zones of low and high @-@ density water , which could have widespread effects on the structures and functions of the other parts of the cell . However , the use of advanced nuclear magnetic resonance methods to directly measure the mobility of water in living cells contradicts this idea , as it suggests that 85 % of cell water acts like that pure water , while the remainder is less mobile and probably bound to macromolecules . 
 = = = Ions = = = 
 The concentrations of the other ions in cytosol are quite different from those in extracellular fluid and the cytosol also contains much higher amounts of charged macromolecules such as proteins and nucleic acids than the outside of the cell structure . 
 In contrast to extracellular fluid , cytosol has a high concentration of potassium ions and a low concentration of sodium ions . This difference in ion concentrations is critical for osmoregulation , since if the ion levels were the same inside a cell as outside , water would enter constantly by osmosis - since the levels of macromolecules inside cells are higher than their levels outside . Instead , sodium ions are expelled and potassium ions taken up by the Na ⁺ / K ⁺ -ATPase , potassium ions then flow down their concentration gradient through potassium @-@ selection ion channels , this loss of positive charge creates a negative membrane potential . To balance this potential difference , negative chloride ions also exit the cell , through selective chloride channels . The loss of sodium and chloride ions compensates for the osmotic effect of the higher concentration of organic molecules inside the cell . 
 Cells can deal with even larger osmotic changes by accumulating <unk> such as <unk> or trehalose in their cytosol . Some of these molecules can allow cells to survive being completely dried out and allow an organism to enter a state of suspended animation called <unk> . In this state the cytosol and <unk> become a glass @-@ like solid that helps stabilize proteins and cell membranes from the damaging effects of desiccation . 
 The low concentration of calcium in the cytosol allows calcium ions to function as a second messenger in calcium signaling . Here , a signal such as a hormone or an action potential opens calcium channels so that calcium floods into the cytosol . This sudden increase in cytosolic calcium activates other signalling molecules , such as calmodulin and protein kinase C. Other ions such as chloride and potassium may also have signaling functions in the cytosol , but these are not well understood . 
 = = = Macromolecules = = = 
 Protein molecules that do not bind to cell membranes or the cytoskeleton are dissolved in the cytosol . The amount of protein in cells is extremely high , and approaches 200 mg / ml , occupying about 20 @-@ 30 % of the volume of the cytosol . However , measuring precisely how much protein is dissolved in cytosol in intact cells is difficult , since some proteins appear to be weakly associated with membranes or organelles in whole cells and are released into solution upon cell lysis . Indeed , in experiments where the plasma membrane of cells were carefully disrupted using <unk> , without damaging the other cell membranes , only about one quarter of cell protein was released . These cells were also able to synthesize proteins if given ATP and amino acids , implying that many of the enzymes in cytosol are bound to the cytoskeleton . However , the idea that the majority of the proteins in cells are tightly bound in a network called the <unk> lattice is now seen as unlikely . 
 In prokaryotes the cytosol contains the cell 's genome , within a structure known as a nucleoid . This is an irregular mass of DNA and associated proteins that control the transcription and replication of the bacterial chromosome and plasmids . In eukaryotes the genome is held within the cell nucleus , which is separated from the cytosol by nuclear pores that block the free diffusion of any molecule larger than about 10 nanometres in diameter . 
 This high concentration of macromolecules in cytosol causes an effect called macromolecular crowding , which is when the effective concentration of other macromolecules is increased , since they have less volume to move in . This crowding effect can produce large changes in both the rates and the position of chemical equilibrium of reactions in the cytosol . It is particularly important in its ability to alter dissociation constants by favoring the association of macromolecules , such as when multiple proteins come together to form protein complexes , or when DNA @-@ binding proteins bind to their targets in the genome . 
 = = Organization = = 
 Although the components of the cytosol are not separated into regions by cell membranes , these components do not always mix randomly and several levels of organization can localize specific molecules to defined sites within the cytosol . 
 = = = Concentration gradients = = = 
 Although small molecules diffuse rapidly in the cytosol , concentration gradients can still be produced within this compartment . A well @-@ studied example of these are the " calcium sparks " that are produced for a short period in the region around an open calcium channel . These are about 2 micrometres in diameter and last for only a few milliseconds , although several sparks can merge to form larger gradients , called " calcium waves " . Concentration gradients of other small molecules , such as oxygen and adenosine triphosphate may be produced in cells around clusters of mitochondria , although these are less well understood . 
 = = = Protein complexes = = = 
 Proteins can associate to form protein complexes , these often contain a set of proteins with similar functions , such as enzymes that carry out several steps in the same metabolic pathway . This organization can allow substrate channeling , which is when the product of one enzyme is passed directly to the next enzyme in a pathway without being released into solution . <unk> can make a pathway more rapid and efficient than it would be if the enzymes were randomly distributed in the cytosol , and can also prevent the release of unstable reaction intermediates . Although a wide variety of metabolic pathways involve enzymes that are tightly bound to each other , others may involve more loosely associated complexes that are very difficult to study outside the cell . Consequently , the importance of these complexes for metabolism in general remains unclear . 
 = = = Protein compartments = = = 
 Some protein complexes contain a large central cavity that is isolated from the remainder of the cytosol . One example of such an enclosed compartment is the proteasome . Here , a set of subunits form a hollow barrel containing proteases that degrade cytosolic proteins . Since these would be damaging if they mixed freely with the remainder of the cytosol , the barrel is capped by a set of regulatory proteins that recognize proteins with a signal directing them for degradation ( a ubiquitin tag ) and feed them into the proteolytic cavity . 
 Another large class of protein compartments are bacterial microcompartments , which are made of a protein shell that encapsulates various enzymes . These compartments are typically about 100 @-@ 200 nanometres across and made of interlocking proteins . A well @-@ understood example is the <unk> , which contains enzymes involved in carbon fixation such as <unk> . 
 = = = <unk> sieving = = = 
 Although the cytoskeleton is not part of the cytosol , the presence of this network of filaments restricts the diffusion of large particles in the cell . For example , in several studies tracer particles larger than about 25 nanometres ( about the size of a ribosome ) were excluded from parts of the cytosol around the edges of the cell and next to the nucleus . These " excluding compartments " may contain a much denser meshwork of actin fibres than the remainder of the cytosol . These <unk> could influence the distribution of large structures such as ribosomes and organelles within the cytosol by excluding them from some areas and concentrating them in others . 
 = = Function = = 
 The cytosol has no single function and is instead the site of multiple cell processes . Examples of these processes include signal transduction from the cell membrane to sites within the cell , such as the cell nucleus , or organelles . This compartment is also the site of many of the processes of cytokinesis , after the breakdown of the nuclear membrane in mitosis . Another major function of cytosol is to transport metabolites from their site of production to where they are used . This is relatively simple for water @-@ soluble molecules , such as amino acids , which can diffuse rapidly through the cytosol . However , hydrophobic molecules , such as fatty acids or sterols , can be transported through the cytosol by specific binding proteins , which shuttle these molecules between cell membranes . Molecules taken into the cell by endocytosis or on their way to be secreted can also be transported through the cytosol inside vesicles , which are small spheres of lipids that are moved along the cytoskeleton by motor proteins . 
 The cytosol is the site of most metabolism in prokaryotes , and a large proportion of the metabolism of eukaryotes . For instance , in mammals about half of the proteins in the cell are localized to the cytosol . The most complete data are available in yeast , where metabolic reconstructions indicate that the majority of both metabolic processes and metabolites occur in the cytosol . Major metabolic pathways that occur in the cytosol in animals are protein biosynthesis , the pentose phosphate pathway , glycolysis and gluconeogenesis . The localization of pathways can be different in other organisms , for instance fatty acid synthesis occurs in chloroplasts in plants and in apicoplasts in <unk> . 
 = Flat Bastion Road = 
 Flat Bastion Road is a road in Gibraltar , the British Overseas Territory at the southern end of the Iberian Peninsula . The road runs north @-@ south , providing views of the city and Bay of Gibraltar . Previously known in Spanish as Senda del Moro ( English : Path of the Moor ) , the traditional Llanito name for the road is Cuesta de Mr. Bourne . 
 The road angles along the west side of the Rock of Gibraltar to the Flat Bastion , a fortification . Married quarters were built along the road . In the nineteenth century there were outbreaks of yellow fever in the 1820s and of diphtheria in the 1880s among the residents , apparently due to faulty sewers . Developments included , in the 1830s a school for poor children which remained in use as a school into the early twentieth century and a club where masked balls were held . In modern times the bastion 's magazine has been refurbished for civilian use , the barracks have been converted into affordable housing , and parking has become an issue . 
 = = Background = = 
 Flat Bastion Road begins to the southeast of the Garrison Library , at the intersection of Prince Edward 's Road and Castle Road , north of its junction with Devil 's Gap Road . Proceeding in a southerly direction , it becomes Gardiner 's Road as it passes through Charles V Wall , just before it reaches Europa Road . 
 The road runs along the west side of the Rock of Gibraltar , leading to the Flat Bastion fortification . The original Flat Bastion , then called Baluarte de Santiago ( Santiago 's Bastion ) , was built by the Spanish some time between 1565 and 1627 . It may have been designed by Daniel Specklin . It was one of the fortifications along the Charles V Wall that protected the new Africa Gate . The Flat Bastion Magazine within the Bastion was once a point where immense quantities of gunpowder were stored . It was threatened by a fire in 1874 that swept through the long grass and other vegetation of the south districts of the colony and reached Charles V 's wall before burning out . 
 = = History = = 
 Conditions were unsanitary in the 19th century . The road is mentioned in 1828 when there was an outbreak of yellow fever in Gibraltar . A French medical commission visited the colony and documented their findings on the spread of the epidemic . Many of the reported cases were in houses on Flat Bastion Road . By September most of the houses on the road were infected . A sanitary sewer that ran parallel to the road was suspected . One source said it did not emit any excessive odours that seemed out of the normal . However , the French commission said that the sewer outside at least one of the houses in the road emitted a very bad smell ( " une très <unk> <unk> " ) . A report of 1 September 1828 described Wilson 's Buildings , two wooden sheds on the road to Flat Bastion , as " decidedly inimical to the health of any persons who may inhabit them . " 
 Families living on the road in 1828 included those of Josepha <unk> , Jose Nuñez , the financier Grellet , the family of Thomas Gum , and the family of Michaela Medina . In 1832 the Gibraltar Public School , a free English @-@ language establishment for poor children , was set up in a government @-@ owned building on Flat Bastion Road . Funded by the contributions of wealthy people in the colony , it was open to children of all faiths . By 1833 , there were 181 boys and 99 girls at the school . After boys were excluded in 1897 , it continued as a school for girls into the early 20th century . 
 An 1883 Sanitary Order in Council aimed at reducing health risks defined Flat Bastion Road as one of the boundaries of the " streets , ramps , roads , lanes , passages , alleys , stairs and public places " within which the new regulations would apply . The Army Medical Department reported in 1889 that several cases of diphtheria had occurred in the married quarters on Flat Bastion Road . It turned out that the rainwater pipes from the roof were cracked . The pipes were connected directly to the sewer , and sewer gas was escaping into the rooms . 
 The road was depicted in an article on the colony that appeared in 1885 in Frank Leslie 's Popular Monthly , a New York @-@ based magazine , in a pastiche of ink drawings that also depict " <unk> Bay " ( Catalan Bay ) , Waterport Gate , the signal station and the rock from the Spanish lines . A donkey is depicted in the foreground . Jeanie Conan depicted the picturesque road in a watercolour titled " Flat Bastion Rd . Gibraltar " in 1888 . A visitor noted that the " Ladysmith club " on the Flat Bastion Road was holding masquerades in its salons , while elsewhere the Salvation Army was preaching and parading signs with advice from the gospels . 
 = = Modern times = = 
 During the 1970 census , residents on the road were counted as part of the <unk> Ramp enumeration area . 
 The magazine is now a geological research facility and exhibition centre involved with the lithology of Gibraltar . The barracks , north of the bastion on Flat Bastion Road , have been renovated and converted into affordable residential housing . The Flat Bastion barracks redevelopment project started by 2007 , and was completed about 2010 . The development has been renamed Flat Bastion Mews . Communal gardens for the new housing were established at that time . The two bedroom apartments also included allocated parking . 
 The government 's Traffic , Parking and Transport Plan issued in 2009 , mentions a parking project for Flat Bastion Road under which 104 parking spots were to be added . In 2010 there was public criticism about the lack of parking on the road as the government had removed existing parking before constructing the new parking spaces . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Animal testing = 
 Animal testing , also known as animal experimentation , animal research , and in vivo testing , is the use of non @-@ human animals in experiments that seek to control the variables that affect the behavior or biological system under study . This approach can be contrasted with field studies in which animals are observed in their natural environments . Experimental research with animals is usually conducted in universities , medical schools , pharmaceutical companies , defense establishments , and commercial facilities that provide animal @-@ testing services to industry . The focus of animal testing varies on a continuum from pure research , done with little regard to the uses to which understanding may be put , to applied research , which may focus on answering some question of great practical importance , such as finding a cure for a disease . Examples of applied research include testing , breeding , defense research , and toxicology , including cosmetics testing . In education , animal testing is sometimes a component of biology or psychology courses . The practice is regulated to varying degrees in different countries . 
 Worldwide it is estimated that the number of vertebrate animals — from zebrafish to non @-@ human primates — ranges from the tens of millions to more than 100 million used annually . In the US in 2014 , official statistics indicate that 834 @,@ 453 vertebrates were used in research . However , it is important to realise that mice , rats , birds , fish , frogs , invertebrates and animals not yet weaned are not included in this figure as they are not protected by the relevant US legislation . In the EU , these species represent 93 % of animals used in research . If the same was true in the US then the total number of animals used in research is estimated to be between 12 and 25 million . One estimate of mice and rats used in the US alone in 2001 was 80 million . In the EU in 2011 , 11 @.@ 5 million animals were used in research . Mice , rats , fish , amphibians and reptiles together account for over 85 % of research animals . 
 Most animals are euthanized after being used in an experiment . Sources of laboratory animals vary between countries and species ; most animals are purpose @-@ bred , while a minority are caught in the wild or supplied by dealers who obtain them from auctions and pounds . 
 Supporters of the use of animals in experiments , such as the British Royal Society , argue that virtually every medical achievement in the 20th century relied on the use of animals in some way . The Institute for Laboratory Animal Research of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences has argued that animal research cannot be replaced by even sophisticated computer models , which are unable to deal with the extremely complex interactions between molecules , cells , tissues , organs , organisms , and the environment . Animal rights , and some animal welfare , organizations — such as PETA and BUAV — question the need for and legitimacy of animal testing , arguing that it is cruel and poorly regulated , that medical progress is actually held back by misleading animal models that cannot reliably predict effects in humans , that some of the tests are outdated , that the costs outweigh the benefits , or that animals have the intrinsic right not to be used or harmed in experimentation . 
