 " The Target " received positive reviews from critics , with many commenting on Nunez and Kinsey 's performances . The episode was viewed by 3 @.@ 88 million viewers and received 1 @.@ 9 / 5 rating among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 , ranking fourth in its timeslot . The episode , however , ultimately ranked as the highest @-@ rated NBC series of the night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) believes that Angela Lipton ( Angela Kinsey ) does not know about his affair with her husband , but in fact she is playing dumb in order to keep Oscar off his guard while she makes arrangements to have him killed . She goes to Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) for help , without telling him the details , and he calls a fellow former volunteer sheriff 's deputy named Trevor ( Chris Gethard ) for assistance . After Trevor shows his credentials , Angela says she wants the target murdered , which Dwight protests is too extreme , so they compromise to breaking the target 's kneecaps . Dwight realizes the target is Oscar when Angela angrily crushes a cookie given to her by Oscar . Dwight tries to get Angela to reconsider , but Trevor has already arrived to carry out the job . Dwight rushes to get Oscar out . They run into Trevor outside . A struggle between the three men ensues , with Oscar ultimately managing to take away Trevor 's lead pipe . When Trevor runs away , Oscar and Dwight are confronted by Angela , who blames Oscar for turning her husband gay . Oscar says that he was always gay , and refuses to hand the lead pipe over to Angela . She kicks him in the shin instead . Upset that they don 't understand homosexuality , Dwight and Angela go to Toby Flenderson ( Paul Lieberstein ) , who is confounded by their outlandish questions over homosexual activity . 
 Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) asks Dunder Mifflin CEO David Wallace ( Andy Buckley ) if he can work part @-@ time so he can go to Philadelphia to help with his sports marketing job . David Wallace says that he might be needed in the office if there 's a crisis with one of his clients , to which he responds that Stanley Hudson ( Leslie David Baker ) and Phyllis Vance ( Phyllis Smith ) have agreed to cover for him , though he in fact hasn 't asked them yet . Stanley and Phyllis respond with their usual disinterest in helping others , so Jim offers to treat them to lunch . Stanley and Phyllis order extra side dishes and help themselves to an excess of wine , annoying Jim with drunken behavior and silencing him whenever he brings up the subject of their covering for him . When they arrive back at the office , a drunk Stanley and Phyllis are seemingly passed out in Jim 's backseat . When Jim puts his coat on them to keep them warm , Phyllis and Stanley say they will cover for him as they care for Jim and his family , laughing as they reveal they were only pranking him . Jim gives both of them a hug . 
 Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) decides to start painting her mural in the warehouse , but has a hard time getting started as she is afraid of it not being perfect . Meanwhile , bored with having to fill out customer complaint cards ( which he finds redundant because the complaints are already in the computer ) , Pete ( Jake Lacy ) uses them to build a card tower in the annex with other employees . The card tower takes on a deeper meaning for the employees when Pete points out that it is composed of failures made by every one of them ( excepting only Pam ) , and thus proves that they should not be ashamed of their failures . They decide to try to make it go all the way to the ceiling , but end up one complaint card short . Not wanting to use a blank card as it would defy the point of the tower , Pam offers to complete the tower by getting her first customer complaint . She calls one of their smaller clients , delivers a yo mama joke , and hangs up . The client , whose mother was actually obese and is now deceased , drops Dunder Mifflin as their paper supplier , leaving them simultaneously excited over getting that last complaint and disappointed over losing a client . After celebrating the completion of the card tower , Pam finally starts painting the mural , saying artists should not care too much in what others think , further asserting this by telling off Hide ( Hidetoshi <unk> ) when he insults her artwork . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Target " was written by producer Graham Wagner , marking his debut writing credit for the series after joining the writing staff in the ninth season . It was directed by executive producer Brent Forrester , his fourth directing credit for the series and first since the eighth season episode , " Test the Store " . Ed Helms and Clark Duke did not appear in the episode . This is due to the fact that they were both written out of several episodes of the season in order to film The Hangover Part III and Kick @-@ Ass 2 , respectively . 
 The official website of The Office included several cut scenes from " The Target " within a week of the episode 's release . In the first 58 @-@ second clip , Pam feels further pressure over her mural and reveals that several of the warehouse workers think her name is Pat . In the second 60 @-@ second clip , The Senator comes by the office , Jim pretends to beg to Stanley and Phyllis while they are sleeping , and Pam talks more about her mural . In the third 66 @-@ second clip , Angela checks out Trevor 's qualifications . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Dwight assures Angela that she is not stupid , rather " Jazz is stupid . " Angela concurs , saying : " Just play the right notes ! " " The Target " features several meta @-@ references and references to previous episodes . Dwight tells Angela and Trevor that " this documentary crew has been following our every move for the past nine years but I don 't see them so I think we 're good " , when they are in Trevor 's van . Angela and Dwight question Toby about the tendencies of homosexuals in a way similar to how Dwight questions Toby about the appearance of female genitalia in the second season episode " Sexual Harassment " . While working on her mural , Pam is seen wearing a Pratt Institute hoodie , which she attended for three months during the fifth season . Angela tells Dwight to meet up in the " usual place " , which Dwight shows up to nude , referencing their previous secretive relationship . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " The Target " originally aired on NBC on November 29 , 2012 . In its original American broadcast , the episode was viewed by 3 @.@ 88 million viewers and received a 1 @.@ 9 rating / 5 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 1 @.@ 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 5 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This made " The Target " the lowest rated episode of the series , tying with " Here Comes Treble " . The episode also ranks as the least @-@ viewed episode of the series and the first one to fall below the 4 @-@ million viewer mark . Despite this , The Office was the highest @-@ rated NBC television program . When DVR ratings were taken into account , the episode was viewed by 6 @.@ 047 million viewers , a 56 percent increase . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " The Target " received mostly positive reviews from critics , with many praising the performances of Oscar Nunez and Angela Kinsey . The A.V. Club reviewer Erik Adams wrote that the episode was a perfect mix , between the more subtle , realistic style of the early seasons , and the more @-@ farcical style of the most recent seasons . He named the Oscar @-@ Angela plotline a " season highlight " , and complimented Angela Kinsey 's commitment to Angela throughout the plotline . He also praised the other storylines of the episode for showing the family @-@ like bond between the whole ensemble . He ultimately gave the episode an " A – " . Cindy White of IGN commented that the episode proved the series did not need a character in the role of the boss . She complimented the confrontation between Oscar and Angela and the Pam subplot for marking some " development " in her character , but criticized the Jim @-@ Stanley @-@ Phyllis subplot for being " over the top " . She ultimately gave the episode an 8 @.@ 0 / 10 . Paste writer Bonnie Stiernberg called the episode " strong " , and compared it to the older episodes . She praised the Oscar @-@ Angela plotline , calling it Oscar Nunez and Kinsey 's best performance of the year . She also complimented the Jim @-@ Stanley @-@ Phyllis subplot , calling the ending to it sweet , and the Pam @-@ Pete @-@ Erin subplot , calling it " more complex @-@ but no less enjoyable " and praised the development of Pam 's character , considering it to be " touching " . Stiernberg ultimately gave the episode an 8 @.@ 6 / 10 . 
 Michael Tedder of New York praised the writers work and for giving " nice character moments " to the cast , particularly Kinsey . He also praised them for giving Kinsey " more to work with " , comparing her role in previous episodes which featured her character being " exaggerated to cartoon levels for the sake of a laugh " . ScreenCrush reviewer Damon Houx was slightly more critical with his review , writing that while the cast was quite good , the episode was too struggled with " find [ ing ] stuff for everyone to do " , and that the Pete @-@ Erin @-@ Pam and Jim @-@ Stanley @-@ Phyllis subplots " ultimately have nowhere interesting to go " . Multiple critics noted similarities between the style of this episode with the early seasons of the series , particularly for its use of callbacks . 
 = Royal Question = 
 The Royal Question ( French : Question royale , Dutch : <unk> ) was a major political crisis in Belgium that lasted from 1945 to 1951 , coming to a head between March and August 1950 . The " Question " at stake surrounded whether King Leopold III could resume his royal powers and duties as King of the Belgians amid allegations that his actions during World War II had gone contrary to the provisions of the Belgian Constitution . It was eventually resolved by the abdication of Leopold in favour of his son , Baudouin , in 1951 . 
 The crisis emerged from the division between Leopold and his government , led by Hubert Pierlot , during the German invasion of 1940 . Leopold , who was suspected of authoritarian sympathies , had taken over command of the Belgian Army at the outbreak of war . Considering his constitutional position as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief to take precedence over his civil role as head of state , he refused to leave his army and join the Belgian government in exile in France . Leopold 's refusal to obey the Government marked a constitutional crisis and , after having negotiated the surrender to the Germans on 28 May , Leopold was widely condemned . During the subsequent German occupation , Leopold was held under house arrest in his palace where he was praised for stoically sharing the suffering of ordinary Belgians . Shortly before the Allies liberated the country in 1944 , he was deported to Germany by the Nazis . 
 With Belgium liberated but the King still in captivity , a regency was proclaimed and Leopold 's brother , Prince Charles , Count of Flanders , was elected as prince regent . The King was declared officially " unable to rule " in accordance with the Constitution . With the country divided along political lines over whether the King could ever return to his functions , and with the left wing dominant politically , Leopold went into exile in Switzerland . In 1950 , a national referendum was organised by a new centre @-@ right government to decide on whether Leopold could return . Although the result was a victory for the Leopoldists , it produced a strong regional split between Flanders , which was broadly in favour of the King 's return , and Brussels and Wallonia which generally opposed it . Leopold 's return to Belgium in July 1950 was greeted with widespread protests in Wallonia and a general strike . The unrest culminated in the killing of four workers by police on 31 July . With the situation fast deteriorating , on 1 August 1950 Leopold announced his intention to resign . After a transition period , he formally abdicated in favour of Baudouin in July 1951 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Monarchy and the Constitution = = = 
 Belgium gained its independence from the United Netherlands in 1830 and was established as a popular and constitutional monarchy under a bicameral parliamentary democracy . A liberal Constitution was written in 1831 which codified the responsibilities and restrictions imposed on the monarch . Although the King , as head of state , was prevented from acting without the approval of a government minister , he was allowed full control of military matters in his capacity as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief . Which responsibility would take precedence if they became incompatible was left ambiguous and this uncertainty would lie at the heart of the Royal Question . The first king , King Leopold I , accepted the terms of the Constitution but attempted to use its ambiguities to subtly increase his own powers . This was continued by his successors , although with little real success . 
 = = = King Leopold III = = = 
 King Leopold III came to the throne in 1934 after his father , Albert I , died in a mountaineering accident . Albert , known as the " Knight King " ( roi @-@ chevalier or <unk> @-@ <unk> ) , had been hugely popular in Belgium after commanding the Belgian army during World War I ( 1914 – 18 ) while much of the country was under German occupation . Leopold 's reign was marked by economic crisis in the wake of the Great Depression , and political agitation by both far @-@ left and far @-@ right parties . Amid this period of crisis , Leopold attempted to expand the powers of the monarch . He was widely suspected of holding authoritarian and right @-@ wing political views . From 1936 , Leopold was a strong supporter of Belgium 's " independence policy " of political neutrality in the face of Nazi Germany 's increasingly aggressive territorial expansion . 
 = = German invasion and occupation , 1940 – 44 = = 
 On 10 May 1940 , German forces invaded neutral Belgium without a formal declaration of war . Leopold headed immediately to Fort Breendonk , the headquarters of the Belgian army near Mechelen , to take control of the army . He refused to address the Belgian parliament beforehand , as Albert I had famously done at the outbreak of World War I. The speed of the German advance , using the new Blitzkrieg approach , soon pushed the Belgian army westwards despite British and French support . On 16 May , the Belgian government left Brussels . 
 = = = Break between King and Government = = = 
 Soon after the outbreak of war , the King and Government began to disagree . While the Government argued that the German invasion had violated Belgian neutrality and made Belgium one of the Allies , Leopold argued that Belgium was still a neutral country and had no obligations beyond defending its borders . Leopold opposed allowing British and French forces into Belgian territory to fight alongside Belgian troops , as a breach of its neutrality . 
 On 25 May 1940 , Leopold met senior representatives of his Government for a final time at the <unk> van <unk> in West Flanders . The meeting is frequently cited as the start of the Royal Question and the moment of the decisive break between King and Government . Four ministers of the Government were present : Hubert Pierlot , Paul @-@ Henri Spaak , Henri Denis and Arthur <unk> . By the time of the meeting , against the backdrop of the bloody Battle of the Lys , the Belgian government was preparing to continue the fight against Germany from exile in France . They urged the King to join them , following the examples of Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands and Charlotte , Grand Duchess of Luxembourg . The King rejected their arguments and hardened his own position . He refused to leave Belgian territory and his army in Flanders at any cost . The ministers suspected that Leopold 's aides were already negotiating with the Germans . The meeting broke up with no agreement and the Belgian Government left for France . 
 Leopold negotiated a cease @-@ fire with the Germans on 27 May 1940 , and the Belgian armed forces officially surrendered the following day . Leopold became a prisoner of war and was placed under house arrest at the Royal Palace of Laeken , near Brussels . Furious that the King had both ignored the government and negotiated a surrender without consulting them , Pierlot gave an angry speech on Radio Paris , condemning the King and announcing the Government 's intention to continue fighting alongside the Allies . French politicians , notably Paul Reynaud , blamed Leopold for the growing disaster of the Battle of France and angrily condemned him as a " criminal king " ( roi @-@ <unk> ) . 
 = = = Leopold during the German occupation = = = 
 With the Belgian surrender on 28 May 1940 , Belgium was placed under German occupation and a military administration was established under General Alexander von Falkenhausen to govern the country . Belgian civil servants were ordered to remain at their posts in order to ensure the continued functioning of the state and to attempt to protect the population from the demands of the German authorities . 
 With France 's defeat and the installation of the pro @-@ German Vichy regime , it was widely believed that Germany was about to win the war . Leopold was hailed as a " martyr " or a symbol of national resilience , in contrast to a Government that appeared to place its ideology above the interests of the Belgian people . On 31 May 1940 , the senior representative of the Catholic Church in Belgium , Cardinal Jozef @-@ Ernest van Roey , circulated a pastoral letter calling for all Belgians to unite around the King . Other figures in the King 's entourage , particularly the authoritarian socialist Henri De Man , believed that democracy had failed and that the end of the war would see the King as the ruler of an authoritarian Belgian state . 
 Imprisoned , the King continued to follow his own political programme . He believed that after the German victory a " New Order " would be established in Europe and that , as the senior Belgian figure in occupied Europe , he could negotiate with the German authorities . Leopold corresponded with Adolf Hitler and tried to organise a meeting with him . Hitler remained uninterested and distrustful of the King , but on 19 November 1940 Leopold succeeded in gaining an unproductive audience with him at Berchtesgaden . 
 Popular support for Leopold in Belgium declined sharply in December 1941 when news of Leopold 's remarriage to Lilian Baels was made public . The marriage was deeply unpopular with the Belgian public . The image of the " prisoner @-@ king " ( roi <unk> ) , sharing the suffering of the Belgian prisoners of war , was undermined and his popularity fell sharply , especially in Wallonia , the home of the majority of the Belgian prisoners still detained . Popular opinion also turned on the king for his perceived unwillingness to speak out against German occupation policies . 
 Amid German defeats against the Russians on the Eastern Front after 1942 , the King prepared for the end of the war . He ordered the preparation of a document , known as the Political Testament ( Testament Politique ) , which would justify his behaviour under the occupation and detail his interventions on behalf of Belgian prisoners of war and deported workers . Leopold however continued to condemn the action of the Belgian government in exile ( based in London after October 1940 ) . On 7 June 1944 , following D @-@ Day , he was deported to Germany . He was finally liberated by American forces on 7 May 1945 . 
 = = Regency and the early crisis , 1944 – 49 = = 
 = = = Leopold declared " unable to reign " , 1944 = = = 
 After D @-@ Day , Allied troops crossed the Belgian frontier on 1 September 1944 . German forces did little to oppose the liberating forces , which by 4 September were in control of Brussels , although the last occupied parts of Belgian territory were only liberated in February 1945 . On 8 September 1944 , the government in exile returned to Brussels and was greeted with general indifference . Although the King was no longer in the country , his Political Testament was presented to the returned Government as he had wished , and was soon circulated publicly . At the same time , a copy was presented to the British king , George VI , and was seen by the Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden . The text reignited the divisions within the Government which had been largely hidden since earlier in the war . 
 Since the King was still in German custody , there was no opposition to the creation of a regent in his absence . On 20 September 1944 , a meeting of both Chambers of Parliament was called . Article 82 of the Constitution was invoked , declaring the King " unable to reign " ( dans l <unk> de <unk> ) . Leopold 's reclusive brother , Prince Charles , Count of Flanders , was elected prince regent and took the oath the following day . Further action on the Royal Question was pushed aside by more pressing economic and political issues that occupied most of the Government 's time . 
 = = = Political recovery and revival of the Royal Question = = = 
 Soon after the liberation , Belgium began a period of rapid economic recovery and the process of political reconstruction began . The traditional party system had been torn apart by the war and occupation . The two major ideological blocks proceeded to create their own parties : socialists created the Belgian Socialist Party ( PSB @-@ BSP ) , while Catholics and conservatives created the Christian Social Party ( PSC @-@ CVP ) . The biggest change in early post @-@ liberation politics was the surge of support for the Communist Party of Belgium , which become the third party in Belgian politics until 1949 , temporarily displacing the Liberal Party . The Walloon Movement also re @-@ emerged after the war , promoting the culture and economic interests of the French @-@ speaking areas in the south . The period saw major reform of trade unions following the creation of the first large unified union , the General Federation of Belgian Labour ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) , in April 1945 with 248 @,@ 000 members nationwide . By 1947 , however , the political structure of the Belgian state had stabilised . 
 Under the early regency , both the Pierlot and subsequent Achille Van Acker governments attempted to avoid confronting the issue of Leopold 's return despite calls from Communists , some Socialists and trade unionists for the King 's resignation in April and May 1945 . Soon after the King 's liberation , Van Acker and a government delegation headed to <unk> , Austria to negotiate with Leopold . At a series of meetings between 9 and 11 May 1945 , Van Acker insisted that the King publicly announce his support for the Allied cause and his commitment to parliamentary democracy . No agreement was reached . In the meantime , Leopold took up residence in <unk> ( near Geneva ) in Switzerland under the pretext that heart palpitations made further negotiations or thoughts of return to political life impossible . 
 In Belgium , political debate about the Royal Question continued and grew after the war , and remained a polemical topic in the popular press , notably in the Francophone newspaper Le Soir . In the general election of 1949 , the PSC @-@ CVP campaigned on a pro @-@ Leopold royalist platform . The results reshaped the political landscape ; the Communists were routed and the PSB @-@ BSP lost seats to both the Liberals and Catholics . The Catholics gained a new majority in the Senate and a plurality in the Chamber of Representatives , their best results since the war . Gaston Eyskens took over as Prime Minister at the head of a Liberal @-@ Catholic coalition . Both parties in the government ( and Leopold himself ) supported a referendum on the King 's return , which became the focus of political attention . 
 = = Culmination of the crisis , 1950 = = 
 = = = Referendum of March 1950 = = = 
 The Eyskens government agreed to a national referendum , known as the " popular consultation " ( consultation populaire or <unk> ) , which was scheduled for 12 March 1950 . Although campaigning was vigorous on both sides , there was little disruption to the polls . 
 The results of the referendum were indecisive . Leopold 's return won a clear 57 @.@ 68 per cent majority in the national vote , with majorities in seven of the nine provinces . However , the vote was heavily divided by region . In Flanders , 72 per cent voted in favour of Leopold 's return , but in Brussels the Leopoldists won only a minority of 48 per cent . In Wallonia a mere 42 per cent voted for the restitution of the King . The final results , in percentages by province , were : 
 * The majority in the arrondissement of Verviers voted in favour of the King 's return . ‡ The arrondissement of Namur voted against the return . 
 The result confirmed the worries of some , including Spaak , that the vote would not be sufficiently decisive in either direction and could divide the country along regional and linguistic lines . On 13 March , Eyskens traveled to <unk> to attempt to encourage Leopold to abdicate . Paul Van Zeeland and Spaak attempted to broker a new agreement by which Leopold would resign in favour of his son . On 15 April 1950 , Leopold announced that he was willing to temporarily delegate his authority . Many within the PSC @-@ CVP realised that , despite the referendum 's result , their party 's lack of a parliamentary majority would undermine their ability to build a national reconciliation around the King as long as their Liberal coalition partners and Socialist opponents were unwilling to accept the King 's return . 
 = = = Leopold 's return to Belgium = = = 
 On 29 April 1950 , Charles dissolved parliament pending fresh elections . His intention was probably to prevent the formation of a PSC @-@ CVP government under Van Zeeland , a staunch <unk> , which would lead to the return of the King without further discussion . The following election produced an absolute PSC @-@ CVP majority in both Chamber and Senate , and a new single @-@ party government under Jean <unk> was formed . 
 One of the first acts of the <unk> government was to introduce a bill bringing the " impossibility to reign " to an end . On 22 July 1950 , Leopold returned to Belgium for the first time since June 1944 and resumed his functions . 
 = = = General strike and abdication = = = 
 In 1949 , the <unk> @-@ <unk> voted a special budget of ten million Belgian francs to establish a Committee of Common Action ( Comité d <unk> commune ) aimed at supporting strike action taken in event of the King 's return . The union took the lead in the opposition which emerged in the summer of 1950 . André Renard , a Walloon trade union leader , called for " insurrection " and " revolution " in the newspaper La Wallonie shortly after the King 's return in July 1950 . Modern historians have noted that " the smell of revolution was on the air " as Walloon nationalists called for the immediate secession of Wallonia and the creation of a republic . 
 The general strike of 1950 began in the coal mining centres of Hainaut and quickly spread . Workers were soon on strike across Wallonia , Brussels , and , to a lesser extent , Flanders . The port of Antwerp was one of the key sites affected and the country was virtually paralysed . On 30 July , four workers were shot dead by the Gendarmerie at Grâce @-@ <unk> , near Liège and the violence intensified . Staunch Leopoldists in the Government called for a stronger stance but found themselves in a minority , even in the PSC @-@ CVP . Frustrated at the lack of progress , the Government threatened to resign en masse . 
 As the situation escalated , the National Confederation of Political Prisoners and their Dependents ( Confédération nationale des <unk> politiques et des <unk> droit , Nationale <unk> van <unk> <unk> en <unk> , or <unk> @-@ <unk> ) , the organisation representing political prisoners detained during the German occupation , offered to act as intermediaries between the different parties because of their respected status . The <unk> @-@ <unk> succeeded in persuading both parties to reopen negotiations . A tense meeting between the King and Government took place during the night of 31 July to 1 August at Laeken . In the afternoon on 1 August , Leopold publicly announced his intention to resign in favour of his eldest son , Baudouin , to avoid further bloodshed . Baudouin , at the age of 19 , formally became prince royal on 11 August 1950 . 
 = = Accession of Baudouin , 1951 = = 
 Leopold 's abdication message of 1 August 1950 was premised on a reconciliation in the person of his eldest son over the course of a year . Baudouin was seen by most parties as an acceptable alternative candidate . According to a law approved on 11 August , executive powers were transferred to Baudouin in advance of the official abdication . Leopold formally abdicated on 16 July 1951 . His son succeeded him the following day . 
 = = = Assassination of Julien Lahaut = = = 
 On 17 July 1951 , as Baudouin was taking the oath of allegiance to the Constitution in front of the Parliament , an unidentified individual in the Communist benches shouted " vive la république ! " ( " Long Live the Republic ! " ) . The interruption caused outrage . It was widely suspected that the culprit was Julien Lahaut , the noted Communist leader , who had been one of the leading opponents of Leopold 's return . On 18 August , Lahaut was shot dead by an unidentified assassin outside his house in Seraing , near Liège . The murder shocked the Belgian public and an estimated 200 @,@ 000 people attended Lahaut 's funeral . Although no @-@ one was ever prosecuted for the murder , it was widely attributed to clandestine <unk> militia like the Ligue <unk> or the Bloc <unk> belge who operated with the knowledge of the security services . 
 = = Aftermath and significance = = 
 In the aftermath of the Royal Question , national priorities shifted to other political questions . On 17 September 1950 , the government of Joseph <unk> announced its intention of dispatching Belgian volunteers to fight in the Korean War . Negotiations about the European Defence Community followed and , by the mid @-@ 1950s , Belgium was immersed in a new political crisis , known as the Second School War , surrounding the secularisation of education . 
 Modern historians describe the Royal Question as an important moment in Belgian recovery after World War II . The opposition between Leopoldists and anti @-@ Leopoldists led to the re @-@ establishment of Socialist and Catholic political parties from before the war . The Question was also an important moment in the Belgian linguistic conflict . It also put an end to the federalisation of Belgian institutions which might exacerbate the regional tensions exposed by the Royal Question . In addition , the perceived failure of the PSC @-@ CVP to realise Flemish demands for the return of Leopold helped to strengthen support for the Flemish nationalist <unk> party after 1954 . In Wallonia , the legacy of trade union and socialist political mobilisation during the general strike paved the way for a left @-@ wing revival of the Walloon Movement . 
 The Lahaut assassination was not solved , and it remains contentious as the only political murder in Belgian history apart from the death of the socialist politician André Cools in 1991 . Leopoldists were suspected , but no individual was prosecuted in the aftermath . An enquiry by historians Rudy Van <unk> and Etienne <unk> named an alleged culprit . A final report , commissioned by the Belgian government , was submitted in 2015 . 
 = The Indian Princess ( play ) = 
 The Indian Princess ; or , La Belle Sauvage , is a musical play with a libretto by James Nelson Barker and music by John Bray , based on the Pocahontas story as originally recorded in John Smith 's The Generall Historie of Virginia ( 1624 ) . The piece is structured in the style of a Ballad @-@ opera , with songs and choruses , and also has music underlying dialogue , like a melodrama . Pocahontas persuades her father , King Powhatan , to free Smith and becomes attracted to John Rolfe , breaking off her arranged marriage with a neighboring tribal prince , an action that leads to war . Her tribe wins the war , but her father loses trust in the white settlers ; Pocahontas warns the settlers who reconcile with Powhatan . Several comic romances end happily , and Smith predicts a great future for the new country . 
 The play deals with relations between Native Americans and the first European settlers in America . Scholars have debated whether the piece is progressive in its depiction of the natives and have commented that the work reflects an emerging American dramatic and musical sensibility . It served to popularize and romanticize the Pocahontas story as an important American myth . 
 The comedy was first performed in 1808 at The Chestnut Street Theatre in Philadelphia . It has been cited as the first play about American Indians by an American playwright known to be produced on a professional stage , and possibly the first play produced in America to be then performed in England , although the validity of both statements has been questioned . Its portrayal of Native Americans has been criticized as racially insensitive , but the piece is credited with inspiring a whole new genre of plays about Pocahontas specifically and Native Americans in general , that was prevalent throughout the 19th and early 20th Century . The play was subsequently produced throughout the country . 
 = = Background = = 
 Barker was motivated to create a truly " American " style of drama to counteract what he saw as " mental colonialism " and the American tendency to feel culturally inferior to Europe . For this reason , he looked to native subject matter for the play , as opposed to other American dramatists like John Howard Payne who neglected American subject matter and locations . 
 Although in his preface , Barker cites his primary source of inspiration as John Smith 's The Generall Historie of Virginia ( 1624 ) , he was likely more influenced by a series of popular books by John Davis , including , Travels of Four Years and a Half in the United States of America ( 1803 ) , Captain Smith and Princess Pocahontas ( 1805 ) , and The First Settlers of Virginia ( 1806 ) which featured a more sexualized and romanticized characterization of Pocahontas . 
 Much of the known background about the piece comes from a letter Barker wrote to William Dunlop , dated June 10 , 1832 . In it , he indicates that he had been working on The Indian Princess for a number of years before it was first produced in 1808 . In fact in 1805 , he wrote a Masque entitled " America " ( which has not survived ) that he intended to serve as a conclusion to the play , in which characters called " America , " " Science , " and " Liberty " sing and engage in political debate . Barker originally intended the piece as a play without music , but John Bray , an actor / translator / composer employed by The New Theatre in Philadelphia , convinced him to add a musical score . 
 = = Character list = = 
 The published dramatis personæ divides the character list into “ Europeans ” ( the settlers ) and “ Virginians ” ( the natives ) , listing the men first , by rank , followed by the women and the supernumeraries . 
 = = Plot synopsis = = 
 = = = Act I = = = 
 At the Powhatan River , Smith , Rolfe , Percy , Walter , Larry , Robin , and Alice disembark from a barge as the chorus of soldiers and adventurers sing about the joy of reaching the shore . Larry , Walter , Alice ( Walter ’ s wife ) , and Robin reminisce about love , and Robin admits to Larry his lustful feelings about Alice . Meanwhile , Nima is preparing a bridal gown for Pocahontas in the royal village of <unk> , but Pocahontas expresses displeasure about the arrangement her father made for her to marry Miami , a rival Indian prince . Smith is then attacked by a party of Indians , including Nantaquas , Pocahontas ’ s brother . Due to his fighting prowess , Nantaquas thinks he is a god , but Smith explains he is only a trained warrior from across the sea . The Indians capture Smith to bring him to their chief . Back at the Powhatan River , Robin attempts to seduce Alice , but is foiled by Walter and Larry . When Walter tells the group about Smith ’ s capture , they depart to go after him . Before they leave , Rolfe tries to convince Percy to move on after his lover , Geraldine , apparently was unfaithful . 
 = = = Act II = = = 
 When King Powhatan is presented with the captured Smith , he decides , at the urging of the tribe ’ s priest Grimosco , to execute him . Pocahontas , having been moved by Smith ’ s nobility , says she will not allow Smith to be killed unless she herself dies with him . This persuades Powhatan to free Smith . Soon , Percy and Rolfe encounter Smith and his Indian allies on the way back to the settlement , and Rolfe is immediately struck by Pocahontas , whose manner suggests the attraction is mutual . They speak of love , but Rolfe must soon depart with Smith . Pocahontas confesses her love for Rolfe to Miami , who receives the news with anger , jealousy and rage . Pocahontas convinces her father to dissolve her arranged engagement with Miami , which will mean war between their two tribes . 
 = = = Act III = = = 
 Jamestown has now been built and Walter tells his wife Alice about Powhatan ’ s victory over Miami . They then discuss a banquet hosted by Powhatan that Smith , Rolfe and Percy will attend . Meanwhile , Pocahontas and Nima witness Grimosco and Miami plotting to kill the European settlers . When Grimosco coerces Powhatan into believing he should kill all the White men , by casting doubt about their intentions , creating fear about how they will act in the future , and invoking religious imagery , Pocahontas runs to warn the settlers about the danger . Back in Jamestown , a comic bit ensues in which Larry ’ s wife Kate has arrived disguised as a male page , and teases him before revealing herself . She says she has come with Percy ’ s lover , Geraldine , also disguised as a page , who has come to convince Percy he was wrong about her infidelity . Pocahontas arrives and convinces the settlers to go to Powhatan ’ s palace to rescue their colleagues from Grimosco ’ s plot . They arrive just in time to prevent the disaster . Grimosco is taken away , and Miami stabs himself in shame . Everyone else has a happy ending : Pocahontas is with Rolfe , Walter is with Alice , Larry is with Kate , Percy is with Geraldine , and even Robin is with Nima . Smith forgives Powhatan , and gives the play 's final speech , predicting a great future for the new country that will form in this land . 
 = = Score = = 
 The surviving published version of the musical score appears in the format of a simplified keyboard transcription using a two @-@ staff system ( treble and bass ) . It includes only occasional notations about the instruments used in the original full orchestral score , which has not survived . Therefore , musical elements from the original production such as inner harmonic parts , countermelodies , and accompaniment figurations are no longer known . Based on records of payments made to musicians at The Chestnut Street Theatre at the time of the premiere , it was likely that the production employed approximately 25 pieces , which may have consisted of pairs of woodwinds ( flutes , oboes , clarinets , and bassoons ) and brasses ( horns and trumpets ) as well as some timpani and strings . Typically , however , the entire orchestra was used only for the overture and selected large chorus numbers , while solo numbers were accompanied by strings and one or two pairs of woodwinds . The brasses and timpani may have been used to invoke a sense of the military in numbers like Walter ’ s “ Captain Smith . ” 
 = = Performances = = 
 The play first premiered at The Chestnut Street Theatre in Philadelphia on April 6 , 1808 . In Barker 's letter to Dunlop , he writes the performance was done as a benefit for Mr. Bray ( who also played the role of Walter ) . However , other sources suggest it was a benefit for a Mrs. Woodham . In any case , it is clear that the performance was interrupted by an offstage commotion which may have cut the performance short . Mr. Webster , a tenor who played the role of Larry , was an object of public scorn at the time because of his effeminate manner and dress , and audience members rioted in outrage at his participation , causing Barker himself to order the curtain to be dropped . The play was subsequently performed again in Philadelphia on February 1 , 1809 , although it was advertised for January 25 . 
 There is some discrepancy about the date of the New York premiere , which took place at The Park Theatre , either on June 14 , 1808 , or on January 14 , 1809 , as a benefit for English actress Mrs. Lipman . It was performed again in New York as a benefit for Dunlop on June 23 , 1809 , There was a performance benefiting Bray and an actor named Mr. Cone advertised for August 25 , 1808 , at The Alexandria Theatre in Virginia . There was also a gala premiere on an unspecified date in Baltimore . Barker wrote in his letter to Dunlop that the play was subsequently and frequently performed in all the theatres across the country . It was the standard practice in all these productions for the Native American roles to be played by white actors wearing dark makeup . 
 The The Indian Princess has been cited as the first well @-@ documented case of a play that was originally performed in America being subsequently staged in England . Although records indicate there was a play called Pocahontas ; or the Indian Princess , credited as being adapted by T.A. Cooper , that played The Theatre Royal at Drury Lane in London on December 15 , 1820 , and subsequently on December 16 and December 19 , the piece differed drastically from Barker 's original and featured a completely different cast of characters . Barker himself wrote that the production was done without his permission or even his knowledge , and based on a critical response he read of the London performance , he deduced that there was very little in the play that was his own . Other evidence suggests that the script used in England was not only a completely different play , but that it was likely not even originated by an American . This assertion is based primarily on three factors : the kinder and <unk> portrayal of the Natives , which reduces the grandeur of the play 's American heroes , the more vague listing of the setting as " North America " rather than specifically " Virginia , " and the lack of implications about America 's great destiny that was evident in Barker 's version . The distinction between the London and American versions is also supported by a review of the London production , in which the reviewer cites a lack of comic characters ( Barker ’ s version included several ) , and the presence of a character named “ <unk> , ” who is nowhere to be found in Barker ’ s play . 
 = = Style and structure = = 
 Structurally , the play resembles a typical English Ballad @-@ opera . The plot of the play can be seen as a blending of a comedy of racial and cultural stereotypes with a love story and an historical drama . Barker borrows heavily from Shakespearean comedy , as can be seen most blatantly in the gender disguises employed by the characters of Kate and Geraldine . The use of verse writing for higher class characters and prose for those of lesser status also borrows from the Shakespearean tradition . It is of note that Pocahontas switches from prose to verse after falling in love with Rolfe . 
 The Indian Princess is also one of the first American plays to call itself a “ melo @-@ drame ” ( or melodrama ) which literally is French for “ play with music . ” Like the French and German melodramas typical of the period , the score contained open @-@ ended snippets of background mood music that can be repeated as much as necessary to heighten the sentimentality of the drama , although some have argued that it bears no other resemblance to the typical French melodrama of the period . Still others have said that the categorization of the piece as a melodrama is accurate , considering the play ’ s portrayal of the genre ’ s typical persecuted heroine ( Pocahontas ) , villainous antagonists ( Miami and Grimosco ) , virtuous hero ( Smith ) , and comic relief ( Robin and others ) . 
 The play can also be seen as a predecessor to the exaggerated emotionalism of later American drama , and as an early example of how background music would be used in more modern American drama and films . 
 = = Analysis and criticism = = 
 The Indian Princess is one example of an attempt by an artist of the early 19th Century to define an American national identity . Pocahontas , representing the spirit of America , literally shields Smith from injury and serves as foster mother , protecting colonists from famine and attack , achieving mythic status as a heroic mother , and preserving , nurturing and legitimizing America as a country . The play allows for an acknowledgement of the troubling aspects of the nation ’ s history of conquest , violence , and greed , by couching the negative implications in a romantic plot . In other words , the romantic conquest helps to soften the harshness and brutality of the colonial conquest . The success of the play reflects a larger cultural desire to express its sense of self through the Pocahontas myth . 
 Barker also had commercial interests , and was motivated by a drive for artistic and financial success . In this vein , the play was an attempt to please the anglophile public , but create something truly American in setting and theme . The portrayals of the Indians in the play , from a perspective of racial sensitivity , have been met with mixed reviews by modern critics . Some write positively about the portrayals , saying that , other than Grimosco and Miami , the natives are noble , though primitive , and have a more “ American ” value system than the savages traditionally portrayed in British media of the period . Others , however , see the characters portrayed stereotypically as lusty , childlike , weak and corruptible beings , with the exceptions of Pocahontas and Nantaquas , who are portrayed positively only because they accept English values . Still others take a middle ground , noting the range of representations . In any case , the play can be seen as a justification of White assimilation of the natives , especially when examining Pocahontas ’ s choice to be with Rolfe as a microcosm of their societies . 
 Critics have pointed out several inherent flaws in the script , including the early placement of the play ’ s climax ( Smith at the chopping block ) at the beginning of Act II , loose construction , song lyrics that trivialize characters , and a main character in Pocahontas that is somewhat stilted and overly poetic . In contrast , however others have argued that Pocahontas ’ s love scene in Act III is where the truest poetry of the piece emerges . 
 There has been less critique of Bray ’ s musical work , but Victor Fell Yellin tried to recreate what he felt was the score 's melodic expressiveness and sonorous grandeur in his 1978 recording of it . In the liner notes , he points out that the music does not critically compare with the great musical masters of its time , but its success is derived from its charm . While it lacks modulation , it contains well @-@ turned melodic and rhythmic phrases , and syncopations that add to its American style . 
 The Indian Princess certainly began a long American tradition of romanticizing and sexualizing Pocahontas , who was only a child in Smith ’ s original accounts . Therefore , it deserves recognition for inaugurating a genre , but it can be criticized for diminishing the potential richness of the subject matter . 
 = = Historical significance = = 
 Barker 's The Indian Princess has been cited as the first American play featuring Native American characters to ever be staged , although Barker 's play is predated by at least two offerings by Europeans featuring Native Americans , including Tammany in 1794 by British playwright Ann Kemble Hatton , and German writer Johann Wilhelm Rose 's Pocahontas : <unk> mit Gesang , in <unk> <unk> ( A Play with Songs , in five Acts ) in 1784 . At least one American play was also written before Barker 's : <unk> , published by Robert Rogers in 1766 , though the piece was apparently never produced . However , more recently uncovered evidence shows a record of an anonymous melodrama entitled Captain Smith and the Princess Pocahontas produced at The Chestnut Street Theatre in 1806 , calling into question whether Barker ’ s play was really the first of its kind ( though no further information is known about the earlier piece ) . Barker 's play has also been cited as the earliest surviving dramatized account of Smith and Pocahontas , although this idea is debunked by the availability of the aforementioned Johann Wilhelm Rose work . 
 In any case , The Indian Princess is credited as being primarily responsible for elevating the Pocahontas story to one of the nation 's most celebrated myths , and is thought to mark the beginning of the popular American genre of Indian Drama . The piece is also of note as one of very few of its time to have the entire musical score published and available today , as opposed to only individual popular songs . 
 Barker ’ s play directly or indirectly inspired many other stage adaptations of the Pocahontas story , including : 
 Pocahontas , or the Settlers of Virginia by George Washington Parke Custis ( 1830 ) 
 Pocahontas by Robert Dale Owen ( 1837 ) 
 The Forest Princess by Charlotte B. Conner ( 1848 ) 
 Po @-@ ca @-@ hon @-@ <unk> , or The Gentle Savage by John Brougham ( 1855 ) 
 Pocahontas by Welland Hendrick ( 1886 ) 
 Pocahontas by Edwin O. Ropp ( 1906 ) 
 Royalty in Old Virginia by Effie <unk> ( 1908 ) 
 Pokey ; Or , The Beautiful Legend on the Amorous Indian by Phillip Moeller ( 1918 ) 
 Pocahontas and the Elders by Virgil Geddes ( 1933 ) 
 The Founders by Paul Green ( 1957 ) 
 Additionally , there were approximately 40 plays with Indian themes recorded from 1825 to 1860 that likely were directly influenced by The Indian Princess . Edward Henry Corbould ’ s engraving ( c . 1850 ) , “ Smith Rescued by Pocahontas ” was possibly also directly inspired by The Indian Princess . Disney ’ s animated Pocahontas ( 1995 ) is one of the more recent of several films also in the same tradition as Barker ’ s play . 
 = 1996 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1996 Atlantic hurricane season had the most major hurricanes since 1964 , which are Category 3 or higher on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale . Featuring a total of thirteen named storms , nine hurricanes , and six major hurricanes , the season officially began on June 1 , 1996 , and ended on November 30 , 1996 , dates which conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . The season 's first tropical cyclone , Tropical Storm Arthur , developed on June 17 , while the final cyclone , Hurricane Marco dissipated on November 26 . The most intense hurricane , Edouard , was a powerful Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane that affected portions of the Mid @-@ Atlantic states and New England . The season featured nine tropical cyclone landfalls , including six hurricanes , one of which was a major hurricane . In total , six major hurricanes formed during the 1996 Atlantic hurricane season — the highest number produced in a single season since 1964 . 
 The four most notable tropical cyclones of the season were hurricanes Bertha , Cesar , Fran , and Hortense . Bertha made landfall as a Category 2 hurricane on the coast of North Carolina , causing a total of 12 deaths and $ 335 million ( 1996 USD ) in damage . Hurricane Fran made landfall in the same general area a little over a month later as a Category 3 hurricane , causing 37 deaths and $ 6 @.@ 9 billion in damage . Hurricane Cesar developed in the east Caribbean during late @-@ July and crossed Nicaragua into the east Pacific as a strong tropical storm several days later , at which time it earned the name Douglas . The system produced strong winds and flooding , leading to 113 deaths and $ 202 @.@ 96 million in damage . Finally , Hurricane Hortense formed in the east Atlantic during the month of September and crossed Hispaniola and Puerto Rico , causing 39 direct deaths and $ 158 million in damage . Collectively , the tropical cyclones of the 1996 Atlantic hurricane season caused $ 8 @.@ 41 billion in damage and 256 deaths . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ season forecasts = = = 
 Forecasts of hurricane activity are issued before each hurricane season by noted hurricane experts such as Dr. William M. Gray and his associates at Colorado State University ( CSU ) and the Weather Research Center ( WRC ) . A normal season , as defined by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) , has 12 @.@ 1 named storms , of these 6 @.@ 4 reach hurricane strength , and 2 @.@ 7 major hurricanes , which are Category 3 or higher on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Additional , the 1950 @-@ 2000 CSU average for a normal season is 9 @.@ 6 named storms , of these 5 @.@ 9 reach hurricane strength , and 2 @.@ 3 become major hurricanes . In December 1995 , CSU predicted that only 8 named storms would form and 5 of those would become hurricanes ; no specific number of major hurricanes was given . However , in April 1996 , CSU revised their forecast , stating that 11 named storms would develop , with seven of those intensifying into a hurricane , and three reaching major hurricane intensity . In June , CSU predicted 10 named storms , 6 hurricanes , and 2 major hurricanes . The forecast by the WRC in early 1996 was 10 named storms and 6 hurricanes , though there was no prediction on the number of major hurricanes . 
 = = = Seasonal activity = = = 
 The 1996 Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 1 , but the first named storm did not form until seventeen days later . It was an above average season in which 13 tropical cyclones formed , with all cyclones attaining tropical storm status . Nine of these sixteen attained hurricane status and six of those reached major hurricane status , which was well above the 1980 – 2010 average of 2 @.@ 7 per season . Although there was neither an El Niño or a La Niña , the above average activity in the season was likely due to abnormally warm sea surface temperatures . Six hurricanes and three tropical storms made landfall during the season , causing 256 deaths and more than $ 8 @.@ 41 billion in damage . Hurricane Edouard and Hurricane Marco also caused damage and fatalities , but neither storm made an official landfall . 
 Tropical cyclogenesis in the 1996 Atlantic hurricane season began with the development of Tropical Storm Arthur on June 17 . In the month of July , two tropical cyclones formed , both of which later attained hurricane status . August was the most active month of the season , with a total of four storms developing in that period of time . The month of August also featured the strongest and costliest tropical cyclones of the season , Hurricane Edouard and Hurricane Fran , respectively . Although September is the climatological peak of hurricane season , only two tropical cyclones developed in that month . Despite this , both reached major hurricane status . Three tropical cyclones formed in October , with one attaining hurricane status . Finally , one tropical cyclone developed in November , Hurricane Marco . The storm lasted 10 days before dissipating on November 26 , only four days before the official end of the season on November 30 . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an Accumulated Cyclone Energy ( ACE ) index of 166 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . It is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm Arthur = = = 
 An area of increasing convection , possibly associated with a tropical wave , developed into Tropical Depression One on June 17 at 1800 UTC , while located near Grand Bahama . Initially , the depression moved north @-@ northwestward and then northward around the western periphery of a Atlantic subtropical ridge . Despite moderately strong wind shear , the depression strengthened and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Arthur while re @-@ curving northeastward at 0000 UTC on June 19 . About 24 hours later , Arthur made landfall near Cape Lookout , North Carolina with winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . The storm weakened to a tropical depression early on June 20 , before becoming extratropical the next day . 
 As the center of Arthur passed east of Cape Romain , South Carolina , minor increases in surf were reported . Rainfall peaked at 5 @.@ 85 inches ( 149 mm ) in Georgetown , South Carolina , though because it fell gradually , no significant flooding was reported , other than minor ponding of water on roads . In addition , Arthur also brought precipitation to Georgia and Virginia , though amounts rarely exceeded 3 inches ( 76 mm ) . In North Carolina , swells ranged as high as 7 ft ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) . A C @-@ Man station located about 34 @.@ 5 miles ( 55 @.@ 5 km ) southeast of Cape Fear reported sustained winds of 39 mph ( 64 km / h ) and gusts up to 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . Overall , damage caused by Arthur was minimal , totaling only $ 1 million . 
 = = = Hurricane Bertha = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression Two at 0000 UTC on July 5 , while located about 575 miles ( 925 km ) east of Cape Verde . Twelve hours later , it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Bertha . Over the next few days , it continued to strengthen , becoming a hurricane on July 7 , prior to moving through the northern Leeward Islands . A period of rapid intensification began late on July 8 , with Bertha peaking as a Category 3 hurricane with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) on the following day . Moving around the western periphery of a subtropical ridge , Bertha passed north of the Bahamas as a weakening hurricane before turning towards the north @-@ northeast and re @-@ strengthened . Late on July 12 , Bertha made landfall between Wrightsville Beach and Topsail Beach , North Carolina with winds of 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) . Gradual weakening ensued the following day as Bertha moved up the Mid @-@ Atlantic states and into New England before becoming extratropical on July 14 . 
 In the United States Virgin Islands , heavy rainfall and hurricane @-@ force winds damaged about 2 @,@ 500 homes , of which 43 lost their roofs . Many boats were destroyed . Total damage was estimated near $ 7 @.@ 5 million . The storm caused 3 deaths in Puerto Rico . Additionally , damage in Puerto Rico totaled $ 7 @.@ 5 million . Two deaths were confirmed in Saint Martin . The storm caused numerous power outages and damaged 10 homes in Antigua and Barbuda . Four deaths occurred in Florida , three of which due to rip currents . North Carolina bore the brunt of the hurricane in the United States . Storm surge destroyed several fishing piers , marinas , and boats . A combination of storm surge and strong winds damaged over 5 @,@ 000 homes and buildings , with at least 4 destroyed . There were 2 deaths in the state . The remnants brought local flooding and minor wind damage to the Mid @-@ Atlantic , New England , and Atlantic Canada . One surfer died in New Jersey . Overall , the storm caused 12 deaths and about $ 285 million in damage , primarily in eastern North Carolina . 
 = = = Hurricane Cesar = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa on July 17 . It developed into Tropical Depression Three near Isla Margarita of Venezuela on July 24 . The depression headed westward , steered by a strong high pressure area over the Bahamas . On July 25 , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Cesar . Around that time , it struck Curaçao . Cesar caused minor damage in the ABC islands to roofs and trees ; one person drowned in heavy surf on <unk> . An additional three people drowned offshore Venezuela . In Colombia , heavy rainfall caused 3 deaths , 2 of which were from a mudslide in Pueblo Bello . Strong winds and significant amounts of precipitation lashed the Archipelago of San Andrés , Providencia and Santa Catalina , unroofing 60 homes , and resulting in 11 fatalities , and resulting in 800 million COP ( $ 440 @,@ 00 USD ) in damage . The storm continued westward and intensified into a hurricane on July 27 . 
 At 0400 UTC on July 28 , Cesar made landfall near Bluefields , Nicaragua , with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . After weakening to a tropical storm later that day , Cesar moved into the Pacific and was reclassified as Tropical Storm Douglas on July 29 . In Nicaragua , the storm wrought about $ 50 @.@ 5 million in losses . More than 2 @,@ 500 homes , 39 bridges and 25 miles ( 40 km ) of roads were destroyed . The storm killed 42 people and left an estimated 100 @,@ 000 homeless in Nicaragua . In Costa Rica , river flooding damaged or destroyed 3 @,@ 874 homes ; 150 bridges were also destroyed . The road network was significantly damaged . Across the country , at least 39 people were killed and damage amounted to $ 151 million . Additionally , 12 people died in El Salvador . Overall , Cesar caused 113 deaths and $ 202 @.@ 96 million in damage . 
 = = = Hurricane Dolly = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression Four at 0600 UTC on August 19 , while located west @-@ southwest of Jamaica . The system strengthened into Tropical Storm Dolly about twelve hours later . Dolly headed westward and intensified into a Category 1 hurricane late on August 20 . It then made landfall near Chetumal , Quintana Roo with winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . The system weakened to a tropical depression on August 21 . Later that day or early on August 22 , Dolly emerged into the Bay of Campeche and quickly re @-@ strengthened into a tropical storm . The storm deepened further and was upgraded to a hurricane again at 1200 UTC on August 23 ; Dolly simultaneously peaked with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Around that time , it struck between Tuxpan , Veracruz and Tampico , Tamaulipas . Dolly quickly weakened to a tropical depression early on August 24 , but remained intact while crossing Mexico and dissipated over the eastern Pacific Ocean on August 25 . 
 The storm brought heavy rainfall to much of Mexico , peaking at 37 @.@ 41 inches ( 950 mm ) . In Quintana Roo , flooding destroyed a large amount of farmlands . Widespread flooding occurred after a river in the Pueblo Viejo area overflowed its banks . Hundreds of homes were destroyed , displacing about 35 @,@ 000 people . Large scale evacuations occurred in San Luis Potosí , while about 6 @,@ 500 fled their homes in the Tampico area . Communications and power outages were reported as far west as Mazatlán , Sinaloa . Throughout Mexico , there were fourteen fatalities reported , six in Veracruz , three in Nuevo León , one in Monterrey , and one in . Additionally , two people were left missing in Nuevo León . The outer bands of Dolly brought rainfall to southern Texas , which caused minor flooding , but was mostly beneficial due to drought conditions in the state . 
 = = = Hurricane Edouard = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression Five on August 19 , while located about 345 miles ( 555 km ) southeast of Cape Verde . The depression moved westward and strengthened into Tropical Storm Edouard on August 22 . Further intensification occurred , with the storm being upgraded to a hurricane on the following day . Early on August 24 , the storm re @-@ curved west @-@ northwestward and began to undergo rapid deepening . At 0600 UTC on August 25 , Edouard attained its maximum sustained winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 933 mbar ( 27 @.@ 6 inHg ) ; it was the most intense tropical cyclone of the season . The storm remained a major hurricane for nearly eight days . Edouard passed well north of the Lesser Antilles and then began re @-@ curving northward on August 29 . Later , the storm passed midway between Cape Hatteras and Bermuda on September 1 . 
 Edouard approached Nantucket , Massachusetts , but turned to the east before reaching land . On September 3 , the storm weakened and became extratropical . It was absorbed by a larger system on the September 7 . Edouard brought rough seas and gusty winds along the East Coast of the United States from South Carolina northward . Strong waves in New Jersey drowned 2 people . Minor erosion and coastal flooding also occurred in several states , especially in New York and Massachusetts . In the latter , wind gusts up to 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) left two @-@ thirds of Nantucket , most of Cape Cod , and all of Martha 's Vineyard without electricity . Gusty winds in Maine left about 1 @,@ 900 without power in Portland . Damage in the United States totaled about $ 20 million . In Canada , the storm brought rainfall up to 5 @.@ 35 inches ( 136 mm ) and gusts to 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) . Rough seas disrupted ferry service and caused the closure of several beaches . 
 = = = Hurricane Fran = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression Six on August 23 , while located southeast of Cape Verde . The depression moved westward for several days and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Fran on August 27 while 1 @,@ 035 miles ( 1 @,@ 665 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles . Fran tracked west @-@ northwestward and intensified into a hurricane on August 29 . However , Fran became less organized after a disruption to inflow due to Hurricane Edouard and weakened back to a tropical storm . Fran quickly re @-@ intensified into a hurricane by August 31 . While moving west @-@ northwestward and then north @-@ northwestward , the storm slowly strengthened . At 0000 UTC on September 5 , Fran peaked as a Category 3 hurricane with maximum sustained winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 946 mbar ( 27 @.@ 9 inHg ) . Early on the following day , the storm made landfall near Cape Fear , North Carolina at the same intensity . Fran weakened and moved inland , becoming extratropical over Ontario on September 8 . Its remnants moved over the Great Lakes and were absorbed by a front on September 10 . 
 In South Carolina , the outer bands of Fran produced high winds and light to moderate rainfall , downing numerous trees and power lines . As a result , a number of cars were damaged and over 63 @,@ 000 people were left without electricity . Damage in South Carolina reached about $ 40 million . The state of North Carolina bore the brunt of the storm . Wind gusts as strong as 137 mph ( 220 km / h ) were reported . Additionally , storm tide heights ranging from 8 to 12 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 to 3 @.@ 7 m ) lashed the coast . Damage was most severe in the Raleigh area , exceeding $ 2 billion . Several hundred thousand falling trees damaged at least 10 @,@ 000 homes . Throughout the state , approximately 1 @.@ 7 million people were left without electricity . Damage in North Carolina reached about $ 5 @.@ 1 billion , with about $ 2 @.@ 3 billion to homes and businesses , $ 1 @.@ 1 billion to public property , $ 1 billion to forestry and timber , and $ 700 million to agriculture . Elsewhere , Fran brought flooding to several states , including Virginia , West Virginia , Maryland , Ohio , and Pennsylvania , as well as Washington , D.C. Outside North Carolina , effects were worst in Virginia , where flooding and winds left 400 @,@ 000 people without electricity and caused about $ 350 million in damage . Hurricane Fran was responsible for 37 deaths , with 24 of them in North Carolina . Property damage in the United States was estimated at $ 6 @.@ 9 billion . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Gustav = = = 
 An area of disturbed weather , accompanied with a low @-@ level circulation , emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa on August 24 . It organized further over the next few days , becoming Tropical Depression Seven on August 26 , while located about 150 miles ( 240 km ) south of Cape Verde . With a ridge to its north , the system moved west @-@ southwestward . Conditions were initially unfavorable for development due to outflow from Hurricane Fran . On August 28 , the depression began moving northwestward due to an approaching trough . Around the same time , the influence from Fran decreased , allowing it to intensify into Tropical Storm Gustav on August 28 . 
 At 0000 UTC on August 29 , Gustav reached its peak intensity as a 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 005 mbar ( 29 @.@ 7 inHg ) . Thereafter , the trough previously causing the storm 's northwestward motion transitioned into an upper @-@ level low , increasing shear across the region . As a result , the storm slowly weakened and was downgraded to a tropical depression late on September 1 . Gustav dissipated at 0600 UTC on the following day , while situated about 1 @,@ 015 miles ( 1 @,@ 633 km ) east @-@ northeast of the northernmost Lesser Antilles . 
 = = = Hurricane Hortense = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression Eight on September 3 , while located about halfway between the Lesser Antilles and Cape Verde . The depression headed westward and barely strengthened until becoming Tropical Storm Hortense early on September 7 . Hortense passed over Guadeloupe on the following day and entered the Caribbean Sea . It strengthened into a hurricane on September 9 and then curved northwestward . The storm intensified slightly further , before making landfall near Guánica , Puerto Rico with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) at 0600 UTC on September 10 . It soon moved back offshore and brushed Dominican Republic while crossing the Mona Passage . After re @-@ entering the Atlantic , Hortense substantially strengthened and peaked as a 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) Category 4 hurricane early on September 13 . Thereafter , the storm weakened as it tracked rapidly north @-@ northeastward . Early on September 15 , Hortense made landfall in Nova Scotia as a minimal Category 1 hurricane . It quickly weakened further to a tropical storm before re @-@ entering the Atlantic and became extratropical later that day . 
 The storm produced heavy rainfall and gusty winds as it passed through the Lesser Antilles . On Guadeloupe , damage was most significant to crops , with over 50 % of banana plantains destroyed . Localized flooding was reported on Martinique . Impact was most significant in Puerto Rico . Across the island , 11 @,@ 463 houses were severely damaged . About 1 @.@ 4 million people on Puerto Rico were left without electricity – equivalent to about 40 % of the island 's population . Damage in Puerto Rico was estimated at $ 153 @.@ 4 million . There were also 19 deaths , most of which due to drowning during flash floods . In the Dominican Republic , strong winds damaged a number of buildings and houses , and downed several power lines . Flooding also forced the closure of several roads and impacted 80 % of crops in Samaná Province . At least 3 fatalities were confirmed in that country . The storm brought strong winds to the Bahamas and Turks and Caicos Islands , and lesser winds to Bermuda . Later in its duration , Hortense struck Nova Scotia , bringing heavy rainfall and hurricane force winds to isolated locations . There were many power outages , trees blown down , roofs torn away , and roads damaged in the state . New Brunswick , Newfoundland , and Prince Edward Island were also impacted , though not as severely as in Nova Scotia . Damage in Atlantic Canada reached approximately $ 3 @.@ 64 million . 
 = = = Hurricane Isidore = = = 
 A tropical wave with a well @-@ defined circulation developed into Tropical Depression Nine at 1200 UTC on September 24 , while located south of Cape Verde . Due to an anticyclone to its north , the depression initially moved west @-@ northwestward . After convection wrapped around the circulation and banding features increased , the National Hurricane Center upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Isidore on September 25 . Isidore deepened further and began developing an eye feature . Early on September 26 , the storm was upgraded to a hurricane . About 24 hours later , it reached Category 2 intensity . At 0000 UTC on September 28 , Isidore attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 960 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 35 inHg ) . 
 After reaching peak intensity on September 28 , steering current from a quasi @-@ stationary mid- to upper @-@ level low pressure area turned Isidore northward . Later that day , the eye feature disappeared and the storm began weakening due to strong upper @-@ level winds . On September 28 , Isidore weakened to a Category 2 hurricane . By the following day , it was downgraded to a Category 1 hurricane . Early on September 30 , Isidore weakened to a tropical storm . The storm deteriorated further and was downgraded to a tropical depression at 1200 UTC on the following day . Because much of the deep convection diminished , Isidore was declared extratropical at 0000 UTC on October 1 , while located about 490 miles ( 790 km ) west @-@ southwest of Flores Island in the Azores . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Josephine = = = 
 Tropical Depression Ten developed from the remnants of a cold front in the southwestern Gulf of Mexico on October 6 . Moving generally eastward , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Josephine on October 6 . The next day , it peaked with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Josephine made landfall in Taylor County , Florida near peak intensity early on October 8 . Shortly after moving inland , the storm became extratropical . Early in its duration , the system interacted with a ridge , resulting in strong winds and high tides in Texas . The outer bands caused flooding rainfall in southern Texas , and in Louisiana , high tides flooded roads and stranded residents on Grand Isle . In Florida , the storm produced a storm surge reaching 9 @.@ 3 feet ( 2 @.@ 8 m ) in Suwannee . High tides flooded about 3 @,@ 600 houses along the west coast . Strong winds left about 400 @,@ 000 people without power . The storm also spawned at least 16 tornadoes , one of which damaged 130 homes . 
 The extratropical remnants of Josephine moved along the eastern coast of the United States , producing wind gusts as strong as 77 mph ( 124 km / h ) in St. Mary 's County and in Ocean City , Maryland . The winds caused widespread power outages , including 26 @,@ 000 in Virginia and 31 @,@ 000 in New Jersey . Heavy rainfall flooded low @-@ lying areas and rivers along the storm 's path , including in North Carolina which had previously been affected by hurricanes Bertha and Fran earlier in the year . In the Southeastern United States , the storm contributed to dozens of traffic accidents , which killed a person each in Georgia , North Carolina , and Virginia . Damage throughout the United States totaled about $ 130 million . Josephine later moved offshore , and after passing southeast of Cape Cod , moved through Atlantic Canada with moderate rainfall and gusty winds . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Kyle = = = 
 A tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa on September 27 and crossed the Atlantic and Caribbean before eventually developing into Tropical Depression Eleven on October 11 . The depression drifted slowly southwestward and strengthened into Tropical Storm Kyle later that day . Slightly further intensification occurred and Kyle peaked as a 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) tropical storm early on October 12 . However , upper @-@ level southwesterly shear caused Kyle to quickly weaken back to a tropical depression later that day . At 1800 UTC on October 12 , Kyle made landfall in eastern Guatemala with winds of 30 mph ( 45 km / h ) . By early on October 13 , the storm had completely dissipated inland . 
 Portions of the coasts of Belize , Guatemala , Honduras , and Mexico were under a tropical storm warning or hurricane watch as Kyle was approaching ; however they were cancelled after Kyle weakened back to a tropical depression . Impact from Kyle was minimal and limited to light rainfall in the countries of Belize , Guatemala , Honduras , and the Yucatán Peninsula of Mexico . In Belize , rainfall peaked at 2 @.@ 32 inches ( 59 mm ) . Rainfall to the northwest of the center of Kyle was heavier , with some areas of Mexico 's Yucatán Peninsula receiving over 3 inches ( 76 mm ) ; precipitation peaked at 5 @.@ 71 inches ( 145 mm ) in Tulum . 
 = = = Hurricane Lili = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression Twelve on October 14 . After the storm formed , further strengthening of Lili was gradual , first to tropical storm status on October 16 and then to hurricane status on October 17 . The next day , Lili made landfall in Matanzas Province , Cuba with winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) and moved across the central portion of the island ; it was first hurricane to hit the country since Kate in 1985 . After emerging into the Atlantic Ocean , the hurricane accelerated northeastward , briefly peaking as a Category 3 hurricane with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) near the Bahamas on October 19 . For almost an entire week , Hurricane Lili oscillated in intensity while fluctuating several times in forward speed . About two weeks passed before Lili transitioned into an extratropical storm north of the Azores on October 27 , which subsequently moved across Ireland and Great Britain . 
 Early in its duration , Lili caused flooding in Central America that left thousands homeless and killed 14 people . In Cuba , 269 @,@ 995 people were evacuated in advance of Lili , resulting in no deaths in the country . Damage was heaviest in Cuba , mostly due to the hurricane 's heavy rainfall peaking at 29 @.@ 41 inches ( 747 mm ) . The hurricane affected 11 Cuban provinces , damaging 92 @,@ 542 houses and destroying another 6 @,@ 369 . The rains heavily damaged the sugar cane and banana crops . Overall , damage in the country was estimated at $ 362 million . In nearby Florida , one person died after being swept into a drain during the storm 's heavy rains . Moisture from Lili also fueled a storm that struck the northeastern United States , which contributed indirectly to a death when a man in Maine tried to drive across a flooded roadway . Damage in the Bahamas was not severe and was limited to some damaged roofs and downed trees . When the remnants of Lili struck Ireland and the United Kingdom , it produced strong winds and high seas that damaged hundreds of houses , causing $ 300 million in damage and six deaths . 
 = = = Hurricane Marco = = = 
 A cold front interacted with several tropical waves , eventually spawning Tropical Depression Thirteen late on November 16 , while southwest of Jamaica . Initially a tropical depression , it remained weak while tracking southwestward and eventually southward . On November 19 , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Marco . It re @-@ curved eastward and continued to strengthen , briefly becoming a hurricane on November 20 . Marco weakened back to a tropical storm later that day . The storm turned northeastward toward Hispanola , but later became stationary before curing eastward . Afterwards Marco doubled @-@ back to the west . After weakening to a tropical depression on November 23 , Marco became a tropical storm again on the following day . Thereafter , it tracked northwestward while fluctuating in intensity , before dissipating on November 26 . 
 Although it did not make landfall , Marco produced heavy rainfall in the Greater Antilles and Central America , which caused significant flooding in some areas . In Honduras , 4 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed , 40 bridges washed away , and nearly 50 @,@ 000 acres of fruit plantations were flooded . Nine deaths were also reported . Flood damage in other Central American countries was also reported , though affects were less severe . Heavy rainfall was also reported in Cuba . Marco also contributed to an ongoing flood in Jamaica and caused three additional fatalities in Dominican Republic . Overall , Marco caused 15 fatalities and approximately $ 8 @.@ 2 million in damage . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the north Atlantic in 1996 . The World Meteorological Organization retired three names in the spring of 1997 : Cesar , Fran , and Hortense . They were replaced in the 2002 season by Cristobal , Fay , and Hanna . The names not retired from this list were used again in the 2002 season . This is the same list used for the 1990 season except for Dolly and Kyle , which replaced Diana and Klaus , respectively . A storm was named Kyle for the first time in 1996 . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 This is a table of all of the storms that formed in the 1996 Atlantic hurricane season . It includes their duration , names , landfall ( s ) – denoted by bold location names – damages , and death totals . Deaths in parentheses are additional and indirect ( an example of an indirect death would be a traffic accident ) , but are still related to that storm . Damage and death include totals while a tropical cyclone was in its pre @-@ formative or post @-@ formative stages . 
 = Riot Act ( album ) = 
 Riot Act is the seventh studio album by American rock band Pearl Jam , released on November 12 , 2002 through Epic Records . Following a full @-@ scale tour in support of its previous album , Binaural ( 2000 ) , Pearl Jam took a year @-@ long break . The band then reconvened in the beginning of 2002 and commenced work on a new album . The music on the record featured a diverse sound , including songs influenced by folk , art rock , and experimental rock . The lyrics deal with mortality and existentialism , with much influence from both the political climate after the September 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks and the accidental death of nine fans during Pearl Jam 's performance at the 2000 Roskilde Festival . 
 The band supported the album with a politically charged concert tour in 2003 . Riot Act was the band 's last album of all @-@ new material for Epic . The album received mostly positive reviews , and has been certified gold by the RIAA in the United States . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Producer Adam Kasper was brought in to work with the band on its seventh album . Kasper had engineered other Pearl Jam albums , and was brought to produce following a suggestion by drummer Matt Cameron , who worked with Kasper on his previous groups Wellwater Conspiracy and Soundgarden . Riot Act was recorded in two sessions in February 2002 and April 2002 at Studio X in Seattle , Washington . The album was mixed by Brendan O 'Brien at Studio X. 
 Similar to the process for Yield and Binaural , band members worked on material individually before starting the recording sessions together . According to Cameron , everyone in the band had " four or five " ideas coming into the sessions , and there was " a lot to just kind of weed through and work on . " The band often recorded material intended to be demo recordings , but lead vocalist Eddie Vedder would come along and record his vocals afterwards , stating , " I just sang it , that 's the take . " Regarding the creative process , guitarist Stone Gossard said that while playing alone " the anal @-@ retentive side of you goes , ' I think I could play better . ' " , but when reuniting " the entire band goes ' No , it 's great as it is , ' then you just get in the mood and embrace it . " Gossard stated that " the process of letting go is constant in this band " , adding that bandmembers would arrive with " a clear idea of what a song is going to be " but eschew for other musical ideas while discussing the song with the group . Riot Act was the first Pearl Jam album to feature Kenneth " Boom " Gaspar on Keyboards , most notably on the song " Love Boat Captain " . According to Gaspar , the song initially developed out of a jam session he had with Vedder in Hawaii shortly after the two first met . When they were done , Vedder asked Gaspar if he was " ready to go to Seattle . " According to Gossard , bringing in Gaspar was about being " open to new things , " while Vedder stated Gaspar " was able to find his place " and fit in easily with the band dynamics . Guitarist Mike McCready said that he had always wanted the band to feature keyboards . 
 McCready described the recording environment as " a pretty positive one " and " very intense and spiritual . " Cameron said that producer Adam Kasper created a " really relaxed " atmosphere and that the band was able to complete lot of material in a short amount of time . Vedder set up his typewriter in a corner of the studio and would write lyrics as the band members played their material . Most of the album was recorded live , with Cameron describing the album as " our anti @-@ Pro Tools record . " Gossard said that the band fed off Cameron 's playing as well as Vedder 's excitement about the recording process . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Riot Act features a diverse sound , including folk @-@ based and experimental songs . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic said " Riot Act is the album that Pearl Jam has been wanting to make since Vitalogy — a muscular art rock record , one that still hits hard but that 's filled with ragged edges and odd detours . " Gossard said " Riot Act really seems to showcase all of our thing . There 's the simple rock songs we could have written in the earlier era , but it covers all the different times and dynamics we 've had and still holds together . " The musical experiments also lead several songs on the album to use alternate tunings , including " You Are " , " All or None " and " Bu $ hleaguer " . 
 The lyrics on Riot Act were more direct than on preceding records , in response to the political climate after the September 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks . Bassist Jeff Ament commented that he felt that love was a major theme of the album , and Vedder tried to convey themes such as love , loss and struggle to make a difference because of the difficulty in leading with events such as the September 11 attacks and the accidental death of nine fans during Pearl Jam 's performance at the 2000 Roskilde Festival - " You start feeling like , ' What do I have to say ? What is my opinion ? ' Then I realized I did have an opinion . Not only did I have one , but I felt like it was formed by processing a lot of information and having good influences . Ament also told that " I think the time 's right to turn our voice up a bit [ . . . ] And Ed did it in a great way , with humour and a mystical , magical approach . It isn 't just , ' We 're pissed off , and fuck you ! Riot ! Anarchy ! ' Cos I don 't think that 's the method . At least at this point . " Vedder , however , said , " I have to admit this record came out a bit one @-@ sided . But I think we as a country need to understand why we 're involved in the Middle East . This hollow patriotism frightens me . " The singer added that the Riot Act lyrics " represent [ ed ] my state of mind these days . I 'm optimistic yet disillusioned , hopeful yet frustrated . " Several songs on the album were inspired by Roskilde tragedy , with the album 's first single , " I Am Mine " , being written by Vedder in 2000 in a hotel room before the band 's first show after Roskilde , and " Love Boat Captain " including a brief lyrical reference ( " Lost nine friends we 'll never know ... two years ago today " ) . Regarding the time period when the lyrics were being written , Vedder said , " There 's been a lot of mortality ... It 's a weird time to be writing . Roskilde changed the shape of us as people , and our filter for seeing the world changed . " 
 A few songs feature lyrical collaborations between Vedder and other members of the group , including one with Ament ( " Ghost " ) , one with Cameron ( " You Are " ) , and two with Gossard ( " Bu $ hleaguer " and " All or None " ) . Sole lyrical contributions from band members other than Vedder include Cameron with " Get Right " and Ament with " Help Help " . The album 's lyrics tackle existential matters ( " Love Boat Captain " , " <unk> " , and " I Am Mine " ) , as well as social and political concerns ( " Green Disease " , " Bu $ hleaguer " , and " 1 / 2 Full " ) . The lyrics of " Save You " represent the anger felt by anyone who watches a close friend waste away his or her life . Regarding " Love Boat Captain " , Vedder said , " Love is one resource that the corporations aren 't going to be able to monopolize . " Vedder said that " <unk> " is " about man 's giant ego , that he 's the most important thing on the planet . " Regarding " Green Disease " , Vedder stated he was " mystified " at CEO and corporate @-@ management salaries and " how someone can justify taking that much at the cost of other people 's livelihoods . " " Bu $ hleaguer " is a satirical commentary on President George W. Bush . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 The album 's cover art , photographed by Ament , features two skeletons wearing crowns , suggesting the possibility that the two represent a king and a queen . The forged metal figurines were created by blacksmith Kelly Gilliam . According to Ament , the band had trouble coming up with a name for the album . After the artwork had been finalized and the tracks were sequenced , the band spent weeks trying to come up with a title . Vedder suggested Riot Act , and the band members went with it as they were tired with trying to come up with a title . McCready stated that the title has no real significance . He said , " I guess we were trying to come up with a title that reflected some of the music on the record , which we thought was urgent @-@ sounding and kind of loud ... It just seemed to fit . " Ament implied that the title has to do with " getting your act together . " 
 = = Tour = = 
 Pearl Jam promoted the album with tours in Australia , Japan , and North America in 2003 . The tours were the band 's first with keyboardist Boom Gaspar . The two legs of the North American tour focused on the Midwestern United States , the East Coast , and the West Coast , and had more concerts in arenas . The trauma of Roskilde lead the tour to lack performances on festivals and open floor venues . 
 The band received much publicity for its energetic politically charged performances during the tour . At many shows during the 2003 North American tour , Vedder performed " Bu $ hleaguer " with a rubber mask of George W. Bush , wearing it at the beginning of the song and then hanging it on a mic stand to allow him to sing . The band made news when it was reported that several fans left after Vedder had " impaled " the Bush mask on his mic stand at the band 's April 1 , 2003 show in Denver , Colorado show at the Pepsi Center . Following a performance of the song at Pearl Jam 's April 30 , 2003 show in Uniondale , New York at the Nassau Coliseum , the band was met with boos from the crowd and chants of " U @-@ S @-@ A. " Vedder responded by defending his right to free speech and the band followed with a performance of The Clash 's " Know Your Rights " . The song " Arc " was performed by Vedder at nine shows during the second North American leg of the tour as a tribute to the victims of the Roskilde disaster . The concerts were documented by a long series of official bootlegs , all of which were available through the band 's official website , and six of which were released in record stores : Perth , Tokyo , State College , Pennsylvania , two shows from Madison Square Garden , and Mansfield , Massachusetts . Two concerts became DVDs , the Seattle one being issued as Live at the Showbox , and the first of two shows at Madison Square Garden was released as the Live at the Garden DVD . Pearl Jam also supported the album 's material at a series of political rallies and benefit concerts while preparing for its eighth studio album . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Riot Act reached number five in the U.S. on the Billboard 200 album chart , with 166 @,@ 000 copies sold in its first week of release . The album would end up selling only 508 @,@ 000 copies in the United States according to Nielsen SoundScan , short of the 718 @,@ 000 sold by predecessor Binaural . Riot Act has been certified gold by the RIAA . The international response to Riot Act was more positive . The album topped the charts in Australia , where it went platinum and ended among the best @-@ selling records of the year in both 2002 and 2003 . Riot Act also went to number two in both Italy , and New Zealand , three in Norway , and number four in Canada . 
 Three singles were released from Riot Act . Lead single " I Am Mine " entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 43 , and reached number six on the Modern Rock charts . While " Save You " was released as the second single for North America , " Love Boat Captain " was the second single for international markets . " Save You " did not chart on the Hot 100 , but it did place on the Mainstream Rock and Modern Rock charts . Music videos for several songs from the album , including " I Am Mine " , " Save You " , " Love Boat Captain " , " <unk> My Way " , and " 1 / 2 Full " , were filmed at Seattle 's Chop Suey club in September 2002 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Riot Act received mixed to favorable reviews from music critics according to Metacritic , where it holds a 73 after 20 reviews . NME gave Riot Act an eight out of ten . Reviewer Louis Pattison stated that " Riot Act is the sound of a band entering a powerful middle @-@ age . They still deserve your attention . " AllMusic staff writer Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave the album four out of five stars , saying " given several plays , this does indeed seem like the richest record Pearl Jam has made in a long time . " Spin gave the album seven out of ten stars . The review said , " Pearl Jam 's seventh studio album balances emotive bombast with a taut @-@ sweaty hard @-@ rock attack . " Critic Robert Christgau described Pearl Jam on the album as " masters of their own audio , with soft spots where their emotions can go . " Rolling Stone staff writer Keith Harris gave the album three out of five stars , saying that " like Neil Young at his most deliberately despondent , Pearl Jam sound purposefully tired . " Chris Willman of Entertainment Weekly gave the album a B , saying that Vedder ’ s lyrics " rarely cohere , " and that " too few of the tense rhythmic setups build to the kind of ... catharsis that would be something to Riot home about . " Q gave the album three out of five stars . The review called the album " An adult rock record in which nuance succeeds over bombast . " 
 Hugo Lindgren of The New York Times stated that the " record sounds as if it were made to slip quietly into the marketplace , connect with the faithful and leave everyone else alone , " and that " there 's no catchy single , and not even the slightest echo of anything else happening in pop music now . " He added that the " band 's grooves still sound taut , emotive and world @-@ class . " Adam Sweeting of The Guardian gave the album two out of five stars . In the review he stated that " Riot Act isn 't one thing or the other : tracks such as " Ghost " or " Get Right " gesture towards hard rock without really putting the hammer down , while a more reflective piece like " All or None " doesn 't exploit its own possibilities . " Sweeting observed , " On full , Pearl Jam sound like Stillwater , Cameron Crowe 's fictional 1970s second @-@ raters from his film Almost Famous . " Kyle Reiter of Pitchfork Media said that the album " meanders from one song to the next with an overwhelming <unk> , " and stated that it " [ brings ] them ever closer to homogenous bar @-@ band territory . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Eddie Vedder , except where noted . 
 = = = Outtakes = = = 
 The album 's singles featured three B @-@ sides from the Riot Act recording sessions that weren 't included on the album : " Down , " " Undone " and " Other Side . " " Down " and " Undone " were B @-@ sides on the " I Am Mine " single , and " Other Side " was featured on the " Save You " and " Love Boat Captain " singles . All three songs were included on the 2003 Lost Dogs collection of rarities , although " Undone " appeared in a slightly different form . McCready said that " Down " came out lighter than intended , and was ultimately left off Riot Act because it did not fit with the other songs on the album . Also recorded during the sessions was " 4 / 20 / 02 , " a song honoring Alice in Chains frontman Layne Staley which Vedder wrote the same day that he heard the news of Staley 's death . According to Vedder , " 4 / 20 / 02 " was not included on Riot Act because the band already had too many songs . It was included on Lost Dogs as well , albeit in the form of a hidden track . A recording of " Severed Hand , " a song that later appeared on the band 's next studio album Pearl Jam , was attempted during the recording sessions ; however the band only spent a few hours on the song before it was shelved . " Last Soldier , " which appeared on the band 's 2001 fan club Christmas single as a live version recorded at the 2001 Bridge School Benefit , was written by McCready following September 11 , 2001 . McCready said the band played around with the song , but never seriously considered recording it for Riot Act . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Oasis ( band ) = 
 Oasis were an English rock band formed in Manchester in 1991 . Developed from an earlier group , the Rain , the band originally consisted of Liam Gallagher ( vocals and tambourine ) , Paul " Bonehead " Arthurs ( guitar ) , Paul " Guigsy " McGuigan ( bass guitar ) , and Tony McCarroll ( drums , percussion ) . They were later joined by Liam 's older brother Noel Gallagher ( lead guitar and vocals ) as a fifth member , becoming the band 's settled line @-@ up until April 1995 . 
 Oasis signed to independent record label Creation Records in 1993 and released their record @-@ setting debut album Definitely Maybe ( 1994 ) . The following year the band recorded ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? ( 1995 ) with their new drummer Alan White , formerly of <unk> , in the midst of a chart rivalry with Britpop peers Blur . Along with Suede , Pulp and the aforementioned Blur , Oasis came to be regarded as a component of the Britpop " big four " , and the Gallagher brothers were featured regularly in tabloid newspapers for their sibling disputes and wild lifestyles . In 1997 Oasis released their third album , Be Here Now ( 1997 ) , and although it became the fastest @-@ selling album in UK chart history , the album 's popularity tapered off quickly , not before selling 8 million copies . McGuigan and Arthurs left Oasis in 1999 as the band went on to record and release Standing on the Shoulder of Giants ( 2000 ) . After their departures , they were replaced by former Heavy Stereo guitarist / frontman Gem Archer and former Hurricane No. 1 guitarist / frontman Andy Bell who joined the group for the tour in support of Standing on the Shoulder of Giants , which had moderate success . Their fifth studio album Heathen Chemistry ( 2002 ) saw Noel Gallagher 's releasing strict creative control in the band 's output with all members contributing songs , which led to more relaxed recording sessions . In 2004 the band were joined by The Who 's drummer Zak Starkey , replacing Alan White , and found renewed success and popularity with Don 't Believe the Truth ( 2005 ) . 
 Following the recording of the band 's seventh album Dig Out Your Soul ( 2008 ) , Starkey left and was replaced by Chris Sharrock on Oasis ' last tour as a collective band . During the tour the brothers ' increasingly deteriorating relationship ultimately led to Noel Gallagher announcing in August 2009 that he would be leaving the band after a backstage altercation with Liam before a festival appearance . The band , comprising the remaining members of Oasis and led by Liam Gallagher , decided to continue working together under the name Beady Eye until breaking up in 2014 , while Noel went on to form his solo project Noel Gallagher 's High Flying Birds . 
 Oasis have had eight UK number @-@ one singles and eight UK number @-@ one albums , and won fifteen NME Awards , nine Q Awards , four MTV Europe Music Awards and six Brit Awards , including one in 2007 for Outstanding Contribution to Music and one for the Best Album of the Last 30 Years as voted by BBC Radio 2 listeners ; they have been nominated for three Grammy Awards . By 2009 , the band had sold over 70 million records worldwide . The band were listed in the Guinness World Records book in 2010 for " Longest Top 10 UK Chart Run by a Group " after an unprecedented run of 22 top 10 hits in the UK . The band also holds the Guinness World Record for being the most successful act in the UK between the years 1995 and 2005 , spending 765 weeks in the Top 75 singles and albums charts . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and early years : 1991 – 92 = = = 
 Oasis evolved from an earlier band called the Rain , composed of Paul McGuigan ( bass guitar ) , Paul Arthurs ( guitar ) , Tony McCarroll ( drums ) and Chris Hutton ( vocals ) . Unsatisfied with Hutton , Arthurs invited and auditioned acquaintance Liam Gallagher as a replacement . Liam suggested that the band name be changed to Oasis . This change was inspired by an Inspiral Carpets tour poster that hung in the Gallagher brothers ' bedroom . One of the venues the poster listed was the Oasis Leisure Centre in Swindon , Wiltshire . 
 Oasis played their first ever live gig on 18 August 1991 at the Boardwalk club in Manchester . Liam 's brother Noel Gallagher , who was a roadie for Inspiral Carpets , went with the band to watch his younger brother 's band play . Whilst Noel and his friends did not think Oasis sounded particularly spectacular , he did begin to consider the possibility of using his brother 's group as a possible outlet for a series of songs he had been writing for several years . Noel approached the group about joining with the proviso that he would become the band 's sole songwriter and leader , and that they would commit to an earnest pursuit of commercial success . " He had loads of stuff written , " Arthurs recalled . " When he walked in , we were a band making a racket with four tunes . All of a sudden , there were loads of ideas . " Oasis under Noel Gallagher crafted a musical approach that relied on simplicity , with Arthurs and McGuigan restricted to playing barre chords and root bass notes ; McCarroll playing basic rhythms , and the band 's amplifiers turned up to create distortion , Oasis created a sound " so devoid of finesse and complexity that it came out sounding pretty much unstoppable . " 
 = = = Definitely Maybe : 1993 – 94 = = = 
 After over a year of live shows , rehearsals and a recording of a proper demo ( known as the Live Demonstration tape ) , the band 's big break came in May 1993 when they were spotted by Creation Records co @-@ owner Alan McGee . Oasis were invited to play a gig at King Tut 's Wah Wah Hut club in Glasgow , Scotland , by a band called Sister Lovers , who shared their rehearsal rooms . Oasis , along with a group of friends , found the money to hire a van and make the journey to Glasgow . When they arrived , they were refused entry to the club as they were not on that night 's set list , which reportedly caused the band to bully their way in ( although both the band and McGee have given contradicting statements about how they actually managed to get into the club on that night ) . They were given the opening slot and impressed McGee , who was there to see 18 Wheeler , one of his own bands , that night . McGee was so impressed by what he saw he offered them a recording contract then and there ; they however did not sign until several months later . Due to problems securing an American contract , Oasis ended up signing a worldwide contract with Sony , which in turn licensed Oasis to Creation in the UK . Following a limited white label release of the demo of their song " Columbia " , their first single , " Supersonic " , was released in April 1994 , reaching number 31 in the charts . The release was followed by " Shakermaker " . This song would become the subject of a plagiarism suit , with Oasis paying $ 500 @,@ 000 in damages . Their third single , " Live Forever " , was their first to enter the top ten of the UK charts . After troubled recording and mixing sessions , their debut album , Definitely Maybe , was released on 29 August 1994 , entering the charts at number one within a week of its release , and at the time becoming the fastest selling debut album in the UK . 
 The best part of a year of constant live performances and recordings , along with a hedonistic lifestyle , were taking their toll on the band . This behaviour culminated during a gig in Los Angeles in September 1994 , leading to inept performance by Liam during which he made offensive remarks about American audiences and hit Noel with a tambourine . The incident upset Noel to such an extent that he temporarily quit the band immediately after and flew to San Francisco ( it was from this incident that the song " Talk Tonight " was written ) . He was tracked down by Creation 's Tim Abbot and they made a trip to Las Vegas . Once there , the elder Gallagher was persuaded to continue with the band . He reconciled with his brother and the tour resumed in Minneapolis . The group followed up the fourth single from Definitely Maybe , " Cigarettes & Alcohol " , with the Christmas single " Whatever " , which entered the British charts at number three . This song would later carry a co @-@ writer 's credit for Neil Innes , who sued and also won damages . 
 = = = ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? : 1995 = = = 
 Oasis had their first UK number one single in April 1995 with " Some Might Say " . At the same time , drummer Tony McCarroll was ousted from the band . McCarroll said , on leaving Oasis , that he was " unlawfully expelled from the partnership " for what he called a " personality clash " with the brothers . The Gallaghers , on the other hand , doubted McCarroll 's musical ability , with Noel saying : " I like Tony as a geezer but he wouldn 't have been able to drum the new songs " . McCarroll was replaced by Alan White , formerly of <unk> and younger brother of renowned studio percussionist Steve White , whom Paul Weller recommended to Noel . White made his debut for the band at a Top of the Pops performance of " Some Might Say " . Oasis began recording material for their second album in May of that year in Rockfield Studios near Monmouth . The band , by this point , had recorded the concert that would see release in August as Live by the Sea . 
 During this period , the British press seized upon a supposed rivalry between Oasis and Britpop band Blur . Previously , Oasis did not associate themselves with the Britpop movement and were not invited to perform on the BBC 's " Britpop Now " programme introduced by Blur singer Damon Albarn . On 14 August 1995 , Blur and Oasis released new singles on the same day , setting up " The Battle of Britpop " that dominated the national news . Blur 's " Country House " outsold Oasis ' " Roll with It " 274 @,@ 000 copies to 216 @,@ 000 during the week . Oasis ' management came up with several reasons for this , claiming " Country House " sold more because it was less expensive ( £ 1 @.@ 99 vs £ 3 @.@ 99 ) and because there were two different versions of " Country House " with different B @-@ sides forcing serious fans to buy two copies . An alternative explanation given at the time by Creation was that there were problems associated with the barcode on the " Roll with It " single case , which did not record all sales . Noel Gallagher told The Observer in September that he hoped Damon Albarn and Alex James of Blur would " catch AIDS and die " , which caused a media furore . He subsequently apologised for this in a formal letter to various publications . 
 Bassist Paul McGuigan briefly left the band in September 1995 , citing nervous exhaustion . He was replaced by Scott McLeod , formerly of The Ya Ya 's , who was featured on some of the tour dates as well as in the " Wonderwall " video before leaving abruptly while on tour in the US . McLeod later contacted Noel Gallagher claiming he felt he had made the wrong decision . Gallagher curtly replied " I think you have too . Good luck signing on . " To complete the tour , McGuigan was successfully convinced to return to the band . 
 Although a softer sound led to mixed reviews , Oasis ' second album , ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? was a commercial success , becoming the fourth best @-@ selling album in UK Chart history with over four million copies sold . The album spawned two further hit singles , " Wonderwall " and " Don 't Look Back in Anger " , which reached numbers two and one respectively . It also contained the non @-@ UK single " Champagne Supernova " — featuring guitar and backing vocals by Paul Weller — that received widespread critical acclaim and peaked at number one on the US modern rock chart . 
 = = = Be Here Now : 1996 – 98 = = = 
 The group played their first headline outdoor concerts at Maine Road football stadium , home of Manchester City F.C. whom the Gallagher brothers have been fans of since childhood , on 27 and 28 April 1996 . Highlights from the second night featured on the video ... There and Then , released later the same year . As their career reached its zenith , Oasis performed back @-@ to @-@ back concerts at Knebworth on 10 and 11 August . The band sold out both shows within minutes . The audience of 125 @,@ 000 people each night for two nights ( 2 @.@ 5 million people applied for tickets , and 250 @,@ 000 were actually sold , meaning the possibility of 20 sold out nights ) , was at the time a record @-@ breaking number for an outdoor concert held in the UK , and to this day the largest demand for a show in British history . 
 The rest of the month proved to be difficult for the group . Oasis were due to record an episode of MTV Unplugged at the Royal Festival Hall but Liam pulled out , citing a sore throat . He watched the performance from a balcony with cold beer and cigarettes , heckling Noel 's singing between songs . Four days later the group left for a tour of American arenas but Liam refused to go ; the band decided to continue the tour with Noel on vocals . Liam rejoined the tour on 30 August , and on 4 September 1996 , Oasis performed " Champagne Supernova " at the 1996 MTV Video Music Awards at Radio City Music Hall in New York City . Liam made gestures at Noel during his guitar solo , then spat beer all over the stage before storming off . A few weeks later Noel flew home without the band , who followed on another flight . This event prompted media speculation that the group were splitting up . The brothers soon reconciled and decided to complete the tour . 
 Oasis spent the end of 1996 and the first quarter of 1997 at Abbey Road Studios in London and Ridge Farm Studios in Surrey recording their third album . Quarrels between the Gallagher brothers plagued the recording sessions . Be Here Now was released in August 1997 . Preceded by the UK number one single " D 'You Know What I Mean ? " , the album was their most anticipated effort , and as such became the subject of considerable media attention . By the end of the first day of release , Be Here Now sold 424 @,@ 000 units and by the end of business on Saturday of that week sales had reached 696 @,@ 000 , making it the fastest @-@ selling album in British history . The album debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 in the US , but its first week sales of 152 @,@ 000 — below expected sales of 400 @,@ 000 copies — were considered a disappointment . Although early media reviews were positive , once the hype had died down , the album was criticised for being bloated and derivative with most of the critics focused on the extensive length of several songs , the heavier sound , and overproduction . 
 By this time the Britpop movement was in decline , and the band had failed to meet expectations with their third album . After the conclusion of the Be Here Now Tour in early 1998 , amidst much media criticism the group kept a low profile . Later in the year , Oasis released a compilation album of fourteen B @-@ sides , entitled The Masterplan . " The really interesting stuff from around that period is the B @-@ sides . There 's a lot more inspired music on the B @-@ sides than there is on Be Here Now itself , I think " , related Noel in an interview in 2008 . 
 = = = Standing on the Shoulder of Giants : 1999 – 2000 = = = 
 In early 1999 , the band began work on their fourth studio album . First details were announced in February with Mark " Spike " Stent revealed to be taking a co @-@ producing role . Things were not going well and the shock departure of founding member Paul " Bonehead " Arthurs was announced in August . This departure was reported at the time as amicable , with Noel stating that Arthurs wanted to spend more time with his family . Arthurs ' statement clarified his leaving as " to concentrate on other things " . However , Noel has since offered a contradicting version : that a series of violations of Noel 's " no drink or drugs " policy ( imposed by Noel so that Liam could sing properly ) for the album 's sessions resulted in a confrontation between the two . Two weeks later the departure of bassist Paul McGuigan was announced . The Gallagher brothers held a press conference shortly thereafter where they assured reporters that " the future of Oasis is secure . The story and the glory will go on . " 
 The now three @-@ piece Oasis chose to continue recording the album , with Noel Gallagher re @-@ recording most of Arthurs ' guitar and McGuigan 's bass parts . After the completion of the recording sessions , the band began searching for replacement members . The first new member to be announced was new lead / rhythm guitarist Colin " Gem " Archer , formerly of Heavy Stereo , who later claimed to have been approached by Noel Gallagher only a couple of days after Arthurs ' departure was publicly announced . Finding a replacement bassist took more time and effort . The band were rehearsing with David Potts , but he quickly resigned , and they brought in Andy Bell , former guitarist / songwriter of Ride and Hurricane No. 1 as their new bassist . Bell had never played bass before and had to learn to play it ( with Noel since saying that Liam said , " If he can play the guitar , he can play the <unk> ' bass " ) , along with a handful of songs from Oasis ' back catalogue , in preparation for a scheduled tour of America in December 1999 . 
 With the folding of Creation Records , Oasis formed their own label , Big Brother , which released all of Oasis ' subsequent records in the UK and Ireland . Oasis ' fourth album , Standing on the Shoulder of Giants , was released in February 2000 to good first @-@ week sales . It peaked at number one on the British charts and number 24 on the Billboard charts . Three singles were released from the album : " Go Let It Out " , " Who Feels Love ? " and " Sunday Morning Call " , all of which were top five UK singles . The " Go Let It Out " video was shot before Bell joined the group and therefore featured the unusual line @-@ up of Liam on rhythm guitar , Archer on lead guitar and Noel on bass . With the departure of the founding members , the band made several small changes to their image and sound . The cover featured a new " Oasis " logo , designed by Gem Archer , and the album was also the first Oasis release to include a song written by Liam Gallagher , entitled " Little James " . The songs also had more experimental , psychedelic influences . Standing on the Shoulder of Giants received only lukewarm reviews and is the band 's lowest selling studio album . 
 To support the record the band staged an eventful world tour . While touring in Barcelona in 2000 , Oasis were forced to cancel a gig when an attack of tendinitis caused Alan White 's arm to seize up , and the band spent the night drinking instead . After a row between the two brothers , Noel declared he was quitting touring overseas altogether , and Oasis were supposed to finish the tour without him . Noel eventually returned for the Irish and British legs of the tour , which included two major shows at Wembley Stadium . A live album of the first show , called Familiar to Millions , was released in late 2000 to mixed reviews . 
 = = = Heathen Chemistry : 2001 – 03 = = = 
 Throughout 2001 , Oasis split time between sessions for their fifth studio album and live shows around the world . Some gigs included the month @-@ long Tour of Brotherly Love with The Black Crowes and Spacehog and a show in Paris supporting Neil Young . The album , Heathen Chemistry , Oasis ' first album with new members Andy Bell and Gem Archer , was released in July 2002 . The album reached number 1 in the UK and number 23 in the US , although critics gave it mixed reviews . There were four singles released from the album : " The Hindu Times " , " Stop Crying Your Heart Out " , " Little by Little / She Is Love " , and " Songbird " , written by Liam – Oasis ' first single not written by Noel . The record blended the band 's sonic experiments from their last albums , but also went for a more basic rock sound . The recording of Heathen Chemistry was much more balanced for the band , with all of the members , apart from White , writing songs . Johnny Marr provided additional guitar as well as backup vocals on a couple of songs . 
 After the album 's release , the band embarked on a successful world tour that was once again filled with incidents . In late summer 2002 , whilst the band were on tour in the US , Noel , Bell and touring keyboardist Jay Darlington were involved in a car accident in Indianapolis . While none of the band members sustained any major injuries , some shows were cancelled as a result . In December 2002 , the latter half of the German leg of the band 's European tour had to be postponed after Liam Gallagher , Alan White and three other members of the band 's entourage were arrested after a violent brawl at a Munich nightclub . The band had been drinking heavily and tests showed that Liam had used cocaine . Liam lost two front teeth and kicked a police officer in the ribs , while Alan suffered minor head injuries after getting hit with an ashtray . Two years later Liam was fined around £ 40 @,@ 000 . The band finished their tour in March 2003 after returning to those postponed dates . 
 = = = Don 't Believe the Truth : 2004 – 06 = = = 
 Liam Gallagher said Oasis began recording a sixth album in late December 2003 with producers Death in Vegas at Sawmills Studios in Cornwall . The album was originally planned for a September 2004 release to coincide with the 10th anniversary of the release of Definitely Maybe . However , long @-@ time drummer Alan White , who at this time had played on nearly all of the band 's material , left the band in early January 2004 . At the time , his brother Steve White stated on his own website that " the spirit of being in a band was kicked out of him " and he wanted to be with his current girlfriend . White was replaced by Zak Starkey , drummer of The Who and the son of The Beatles ' Ringo Starr . Though Starkey performed on studio recordings and toured with the band , he was not officially a member and the band were a four @-@ piece for the first time in their career . Starkey played publicly for the first time at Poole Lighthouse . 
 A few days later , Oasis , with Starkey , headlined the Glastonbury Festival for the second time in their career and performed a largely greatest hits set , which included two new songs — Gem Archer 's " A Bell Will Ring " and Liam Gallagher 's " The Meaning of Soul " . The performance received negative reviews , with NME calling it a " disaster . " The BBC 's Tom Bishop called Oasis ' set " lacklustre and uneventful ... prompting a mixed reception from fans " , mainly because of Liam 's uninspired singing and Starkey 's lack of experience with the band 's material . 
 After much turbulence , the band 's sixth album was finally recorded in Los Angeles @-@ based Capitol Studios from October to December the same year . Producer Dave Sardy took over the lead producing role from Noel , who decided to step back from these duties after a decade of producing leadership over the band . In May 2005 , after three years and as many scrapped recording sessions , the band released their sixth studio album , Don 't Believe the Truth , fulfilling their contract with Sony BMG . It followed the path of Heathen Chemistry as being a collaborative project again , rather than a Noel @-@ written album . The album was the first in a decade not to feature drumming by Alan White , marking the recording debut of Starkey . The record was generally hailed as the band 's best effort since Morning Glory by fans and critics alike , spawning two UK number one singles : " Lyla " and " The Importance of Being Idle " , whilst " Let There Be Love " entered at number 2 . Oasis picked up two awards at the Q Awards : one People 's Choice Award and the second for Don 't Believe the Truth as Best Album . Following in the footsteps of Oasis ' previous five albums , Don 't Believe the Truth also entered the UK album charts at number one . To date the album has sold more than 7 million copies worldwide . 
 In May 2005 , the band 's new line @-@ up embarked on a large scale world tour . Beginning on 10 May 2005 at the London Astoria , and finishing on 31 March 2006 in front of a sold out gig in Mexico City , Oasis played more live shows than at any time since the Definitely Maybe tour , visiting 26 countries and headlining 113 shows for over 3 @.@ 2 million people . The tour passed without any major incidents and was the band 's most successful in more than a decade . The tour included sold out shows at New York 's Madison Square Garden and LA 's Hollywood Bowl . A rockumentary film made during the tour , entitled Lord Don 't Slow Me Down directed by Dick Carruthers was released in October 2007 . A second DVD included live footage from an Oasis gig in Manchester from 2 July 2005 . 
 Oasis released a compilation double album entitled Stop the Clocks in 2006 , featuring what the band considers to be their " definitive " songs . The band received the Brit Award for outstanding contribution to music in February 2007 , playing several of their most famous songs afterwards . Oasis released their first ever digital @-@ only release , " Lord Don 't Slow Me Down " , in October 2007 . The song debuted at number ten in the UK singles chart . 
 = = = Dig Out Your Soul : 2007 – 09 = = = 
 The band 's resurgence in popularity since the success of Don 't Believe The Truth was highlighted in February 2008 when , in a poll to find the fifty greatest British albums of the last fifty years conducted by Q magazine and HMV , two Oasis albums were voted first and second ( Definitely Maybe and ( What 's The Story ) Morning Glory ? respectively ) . Two other albums by the band appeared in the list – Don 't Believe The Truth came in at number fourteen , and the album that has previously been heavily criticised by some of the media , Be Here Now , made the list at <unk> 
 Oasis recorded for a couple of months in 2007 – between July and September — completing work on two new songs and demoing the rest . They took a two @-@ month break , because of the birth of Noel 's son . The band re @-@ entered the studio on 5 November 2007 and finished recording around March 2008 with producer Dave Sardy . In May 2008 , Zak Starkey left the band after recording Dig Out Your Soul , the band 's seventh studio album . He was replaced by former Icicle Works drummer Chris Sharrock on their tour and , like Zak , Chris was not an official member of the band and Oasis remained as a four @-@ piece . The first single from the record was " The Shock of the Lightning " written by Noel Gallagher , and was pre @-@ released on 29 September 2008 . Dig Out Your Soul , the band 's seventh studio album , was released on 6 October and went to number one in the UK and number five on the Billboard 200 . The band started touring for a projected 18 @-@ month @-@ long tour expected to last till September 2009 , with support from Kasabian , The Enemy and Twisted Wheel . On 7 September 2008 , while performing at Virgin Festival in Toronto , a member of the audience ran on stage and physically assaulted Noel . Noel suffered three broken and dislodged ribs as a result from the attack , and the group had to cancel several shows while he recovered . In June 2008 , the band re @-@ signed with Sony BMG for a three @-@ album deal . 
 On 25 February 2009 , Oasis received the NME Award for Best British Band of 2009 as well as best blog for Noel 's ' Tales from the Middle of Nowhere ' . 
 On 4 June 2009 , Oasis played the first of three concerts at Manchester 's Heaton Park and after having to leave the stage twice due to a generator failure , came on the third time to declare the gig was now a free concert ; it delighted the 70 @,@ 000 ticket holders , 20 @,@ 000 of whom claimed the refund . The band 's two following gigs at the venue , on 6 and 7 June , proved a great success , with fans turning out in their thousands despite the changeable weather and first night 's sound issues . 
 = = = Split and aftermath : 2009 – present = = = 
 As a result of Liam suffering laryngitis , Oasis cancelled a planned gig at V Festival in Chelmsford on 23 August 2009 . Noel Gallagher later made a statement saying the gig was cancelled due to Liam having ' a hangover ' . Tension between the brothers rose and a fight between them in a backstage area on 28 August 2009 reportedly resulted in Liam throwing a plum and wielding Noel 's guitar like an axe . The group 's manager announced the cancellation of their concert at the Rock en Seine festival near Paris just minutes before it was about to begin , along with the cancellation of the last date at I @-@ Day Festival and a statement that the group " does not exist anymore " . Two hours later , a statement from Noel appeared on the band 's website : 
 " It is with some sadness and great relief ... I quit Oasis tonight . People will write and say what they like , but I simply could not go on working with Liam a day longer . " 
 On the 6th of July 2011 Absolute Radio uploaded a video to YouTube where Noel Gallagher speaks about the night Oasis ended . Noel states within this video . ' If i had my time again i would have gone back and done the gig . I 'd have done that gig and i 'd have done the next gig and we 'd have all gone away and we could have probably discussed it . We may never have split <unk> 
 On 16 February 2010 , Oasis won the award for Best Brit Album of the Last 30 Years at the 2010 Brit Awards . Liam Gallagher collected the award alone before presenting his speech , which thanked Bonehead , McGuigan and Alan White but not his brother , Noel . Liam threw his microphone and the band 's award into the crowd . On 15 March 2010 , Liam defended his actions at the awards ceremony , saying " I 'm sick of it all being about me and Noel , the last couple of months has pretty much been all about me and him so I thought it was only right to mention the other lads who played on the album and the best fans in the world , " and " I thought it was a nice gesture to give this to the fans , obviously it was misinterpreted as per usual . " about throwing the award . 
 Time Flies ... 1994 – 2009 , a compilation album containing singles by the group , was released on 14 June 2010 . The decision to make the compilation a singles collection , and the track order , was decided by Noel Gallagher , who released a number of videos to the Oasis YouTube account relating to the collection . 
 On 26 February 2014 , Noel via the band 's official website announced that the first three studio albums would be reissued , remastered and re @-@ released throughout the remainder of 2014 to commemorate the 20th anniversary of Definitely Maybe . A remastered 3 @-@ disc version of Definitely Maybe was released on 19 May 2014 . 
 A documentary titled Supersonic is set to be released in October 2016 , and will tell the story of Oasis from their beginnings to the height of their fame during the summer of 1996 . Produced by the same team behind the Academy Award @-@ winning biopic Amy , Supersonic is said to feature up close and personal footage , as well as never before seen archive material and interviews with the band . 
 = = Influences = = 
 Oasis were most heavily influenced by the Beatles , an influence that was frequently labelled as an " obsession " by the British media . In addition , members of Oasis have cited the Stone Roses , U2 , Bee Gees , T. Rex , Sex Pistols , Slade , Small Faces , the Who , Nirvana , the Rolling Stones , the Stooges , the La 's , the Doors , Jimi Hendrix , Bob Dylan , Neil Young , Humble Pie , Happy Mondays , the Hollies , Inspiral Carpets , Peter Green @-@ era Fleetwood Mac , the Kinks , the Jam , Pink Floyd , the Verve , Led Zeppelin , David Bowie , the Velvet Underground , Talking Heads , and the Smiths as an influence or inspiration . 
 = = Legal battles over songwriter credits = = 
 Legal action has been taken against Noel Gallagher and Oasis for plagiarism on three separate occasions during the course of Oasis ' career . The first was the case of Neil Innes ( formerly of the Bonzo Dog Doo @-@ Dah Band and the Rutles ) suing to prove the Oasis song " Whatever " borrowed from his song " How Sweet to Be an Idiot " . Innes was eventually awarded royalties and a co @-@ writer credit . Noel Gallagher claimed in 2010 that the plagiarism was unintentional and he was unaware of the similarities until informed of Innes 's legal case . In the second incident , Oasis were also sued by Coca @-@ Cola and forced to pay $ 500 @,@ 000 in damages to the New Seekers after it was alleged that the Oasis song " Shakermaker " had lifted words and melody from " I 'd Like to Teach the World to Sing " . When asked about the incident , Noel Gallagher joked " Now we all drink Pepsi . " On the third and final occasion , when promotional copies of ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? were originally distributed , they contained a previously unreleased bonus song called " Step Out " . This promotional CD was quickly withdrawn and replaced with a version that omitted the controversial song , which was allegedly similar to the Stevie Wonder song " Uptight ( Everything 's Alright ) " . " Step Out " later reappeared as the B @-@ side to " Don 't Look Back in Anger " , albeit now listing " Wonder , et. al " as co @-@ writers . 
 On the flip side , the 2003 song " Life Got Cold " by UK girl band Girls Aloud received attention due to similarities between the guitar riff and melody of " Life Got Cold " and that of the song " Wonderwall " . A BBC review stated " part of the chorus sounds like it is going to turn into Wonderwall by Oasis . " A source told The Sun that Girls Aloud " are all big Oasis fans so I 'm sure they won 't mind comparisons with their classic love song . " Warner / Chappell Music has since credited Oasis songwriter Noel Gallagher . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 Many bands and artists have cited Oasis as an influence or inspiration , including the Killers , Arctic Monkeys , the Enemy , Elliott Smith , Lily Allen , the View , Drake Bell , Hurts , Coldplay , Maroon 5 , the Coral , Ryan Adams , the Kooks , the Rifles , the Pigeon Detectives , Keane and Kasabian . 
 = = Band members = = 
 Liam Gallagher – lead vocals , tambourine , acoustic guitar ( 1991 – 2009 ) 
 Noel Gallagher – lead guitar , acoustic guitar , rhythm guitar , vocals , bass , keyboard ( 1991 – 2009 ) 
 Gem Archer – rhythm guitar , lead guitar , acoustic guitar , harmonica ( 1999 – 2009 ) 
 Andy Bell – bass , acoustic guitar ( 1999 – 2009 ) 
 Alan White – drums , percussion ( 1995 – 2004 ) 
 Paul " Guigsy " McGuigan – bass ( 1991 – 1999 ) 
 Paul " Bonehead " Arthurs – rhythm guitar , acoustic guitar , piano ( 1991 – 1999 ) 
 Tony McCarroll – drums ( 1991 – 1995 ) 
 Touring musicians 
 Jay Darlington – keyboard ( 2004 – 2009 ) 
 Zak Starkey – drums , percussion ( 2004 – 2008 ) 
 Chris Sharrock – drums ( 2008 – 2009 ) 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Definitely Maybe ( 1994 ) 
 ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? ( 1995 ) 
 Be Here Now ( 1997 ) 
 Standing on the Shoulder of Giants ( 2000 ) 
 Heathen Chemistry ( 2002 ) 
 Don 't Believe the Truth ( 2005 ) 
 Dig Out Your Soul ( 2008 ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows = 
 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows is the seventh and final novel of the Harry Potter series , written by British author J. K. Rowling . The book was released on 21 July 2007 by Bloomsbury Publishing in the United Kingdom , in the United States by Scholastic , and in Canada by Raincoast Books , ending the series that began in 1997 with the publication of Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone . The novel chronicles the events directly following Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince ( 2005 ) , and the final confrontation between the wizards Harry Potter and Lord Voldemort , as well as revealing the previously concealed back story of several main characters . The title of the book refers to three mythical objects featured in the story , collectively known as the " Deathly Hallows " — an unbeatable wand , a stone to bring the dead to life , and a cloak of invisibility . 
 Rowling finished writing Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows in January 2007 . Before its release , Bloomsbury reportedly spent £ 10 million to keep the book 's contents safe before its release date . American publisher Arthur Levine refused any copies of the novel to be released in advance for press review , although two reviews were submitted early . Shortly before release , photos of all 759 pages of the U.S. edition were leaked and transcribed , leading Scholastic to look for the source that had leaked it . 
 Released globally in 93 countries , Deathly Hallows broke sales records as the fastest @-@ selling book ever , a record it still held in 2012 . It sold 15 million copies in the first 24 hours following its release , including more than 11 million in the U.S. and UK alone . The previous record , 9 million in its first day , had been held by Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince . The novel has also been translated into over 120 languages . The title proved difficult to translate and was often rendered closer to " Harry Potter and the Relics of Death " in other languages . 
 Major themes in the novel are death and living in a corrupted society , and critics have compared them to Christian allegories . Generally well @-@ received , the book won the 2008 Colorado Blue Spruce Book Award , and the American Library Association named it a " Best Book for Young Adults " . A two @-@ part film adaptation began showing in November 2010 when Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 was released ; Part 2 was released on 15 July 2011 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Throughout the six previous novels in the series , the titular character Harry Potter has struggled with the difficulties of adolescence along with being famous as the only wizard to survive the Killing Curse . The curse was cast by the evil Tom Riddle , better known as Lord Voldemort , a powerful evil wizard , who had murdered Harry 's parents and attempted to kill Harry as a baby , in the belief this would frustrate a prophecy that Harry would become his equal . As an orphan , Harry was placed in the care of his Muggle ( non @-@ magical ) relatives Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon . 
 In Philosopher 's Stone , Harry re @-@ enters the wizarding world at age 11 and enrols in Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry . He makes friends with fellow students Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger , and is mentored by the school 's headmaster , Albus Dumbledore . He also meets Professor Severus Snape , who intensely dislikes and bullies him . Harry fights Voldemort several times while at school , as the wizard tries to regain a physical form . In Goblet of Fire , Harry is mysteriously entered in a dangerous magical competition called the Triwizard Tournament , which he discovers is a trap designed to allow the return of Lord Voldemort to full strength . During Order of the Phoenix , Harry and several of his friends face off against Voldemort 's Death Eaters , a group of Dark witches and wizards , and narrowly defeat them . In Half @-@ Blood Prince , Harry learns that Voldemort has divided his soul into several parts , creating " horcruxes " from various unknown objects to contain them ; in this way he has ensured his immortality as long as at least one of the horcruxes still exists . Two of these had already been destroyed , one a diary destroyed by Harry in the events of Chamber of Secrets and one a ring destroyed by Dumbledore shortly before the events of Half @-@ Blood Prince . Dumbledore takes Harry along in the attempt to destroy a third horcrux contained in a locket . However the horcrux has been taken by an unknown wizard , and upon their return Dumbledore is ambushed and disarmed by Draco Malfoy who cannot bring himself to kill him , then killed by Snape . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Following Dumbledore 's death , Voldemort consolidates his support and power , including covert control of the Ministry of Magic , while Harry is about to turn seventeen , losing the protection of his home . The Order of the Phoenix move Harry to a new location before his birthday , but are attacked upon departure . Mad @-@ Eye is killed , and George Weasley wounded , the rest arrive safely . 
 Abandoning school , Ron and Hermione accompany Harry to finish Dumbledore 's quest : to hunt and destroy Voldemort 's four remaining Horcruxes . Initially they have very few clues — one is a locket once owned by Hogwarts ' co @-@ founder Salazar Slytherin which was stolen by the mysterious " R.A.B. " , one is possibly a cup originally belonging to co @-@ founder Helga Hufflepuff , a third might be connected to co @-@ founder Rowena Ravenclaw , and the fourth might be Nagini , Voldemort 's snake familiar . They also receive apparently meaningless bequests from Dumbledore 's possessions — a Golden Snitch for Harry , a <unk> for Ron , and a book of fairy tales for Hermione . 
 Before leaving , they attend Ron 's brother Bill 's wedding , but the Ministry of Magic finally falls to Voldemort and the wedding is attacked . They flee to 12 Grimmauld Place in London , the family home of Sirius Black and headquarters of the Order of the Phoenix , where they identify R.A.B. as Sirius ' brother Regulus Black , and learn from the house @-@ elf Kreacher that Slytherin 's locket was stolen from the house and then seized by Dolores Umbridge of the Ministry of Magic . They infiltrate the Ministry of Magic and take back the locket , but have no way to destroy it . Under the object 's evil influence and the strain of constant vigilance , they argue and Ron leaves . 
 Harry and Hermione continue the quest , discovering more about Dumbledore 's past , including the death of Dumbledore 's younger sister and his connection to the dark wizard Gellert Grindelwald . They travel to Godric 's Hollow , Harry 's birthplace and the place where his parents died , and meet the elderly magical historian <unk> Bagshot , but she turns out to be Nagini in disguise , awaiting their arrival ; the snake attacks Harry and again they barely escape , this time to the Forest of Dean , where their luck appears to turn . A mysterious silver doe , similar to a Patronus , appears and silently guides Harry to an icy pond containing the Sword of Hogwarts co @-@ founder Godric Gryffindor , a Goblin @-@ made weapon and one of the few objects able to destroy Horcruxes . During Harry 's attempt to recover the sword , the Horcrux attempts to kill him . He is saved by Ron , who was guided back by the <unk> , and they realise Dumbledore 's gifts may be meaningful . Ron obtains the sword , and uses it to destroy the locket . 
 Harry continues to have visions of Voldemort torturing and killing wizards , apparently in pursuit of some object . Hermione identifies in her book , a strange symbol also worn at the wedding by Xenophilius Lovegood . They visit him and are told the symbol represents the mythical Deathly Hallows , three objects from an old fairy tale titled The Tale of the Three Brothers : the Elder Wand , an unbeatable wand ; the Resurrection Stone , able to summon the dead ; and an infallible Invisibility Cloak . Harry realises that Voldemort is seeking ( and shortly afterwards , successfully obtains ) the Elder Wand , won by Dumbledore after Grindelwald 's defeat , recognises the Resurrection Stone as that found by Dumbledore which had become the second Horcrux , and his own inherited Invisibility Cloak as the third Hallow . 
 The trio are captured and taken to Malfoy Manor , where Bellatrix Lestrange tortures Hermione to learn how the three acquired the sword , which she had believed was in her vault at Gringotts bank . They escape , along with Luna Lovegood , Ollivander , Dean Thomas , and the goblin Griphook , aided by the elf Dobby . During the escape Harry disarms Draco Malfoy and Dobby dies . Bellatrix ' terror in interrogating Hermione suggests to Harry that some exceptional object is in her vault , and when questioned , Griphook confirms that a gold cup is indeed in her vault . They break into the vault , retrieve the cup , and escape on a dragon , although they lose the sword . Harry has a vision of Voldemort and sees that he now understands their plan , and intends to make his remaining horcruxes even safer . The vision also confirms that the unidentified horcrux is at Hogwarts . 
 They enter the school through an undiscovered secret entrance . The teachers drive out Snape , and defend the school to win time for Harry to locate the penultimate horcrux . Voldemort had set a guard in the Ravenclaw tower , corroborating Harry 's belief that the horcrux is Rowena Ravenclaw 's diadem , lost centuries ago . The Ravenclaw ghost 's story further confirms this belief , and Harry remembers an old diadem in the Room of Requirement . Ron and Hermione destroy the cup with basilisk fangs from the Chamber of Secrets as Voldemort and his army besiege the castle . They find the diadem but are ambushed by Draco Malfoy and his friends Crabbe and Goyle . Crabbe tries to kill them using <unk> , a cursed fire , but is unable to control it ; the fire destroys the diadem and himself . Harry and his friends save Malfoy and Goyle , and several major characters are killed in the battle , including Remus Lupin , Nymphadora Tonks , and Fred Weasley . 
 In his encampment , Voldemort feels that the Elder Wand is not performing as he expected . According to legend , its allegiance must be won by killing the previous owner , and Voldemort concludes — incorrectly — that as Snape killed Dumbledore , he will not be able to fully wield the wand 's power until he kills Snape , which he does . Harry arrives as Snape is dying , and Snape passes him memories to view in a <unk> . They reveal finally , that Snape had a lifelong love for Harry 's mother , and felt haunted by causing her death , that despite hating Harry 's father he agreed at Dumbledore 's request to watch over their son Harry and act as a double agent against Voldemort , that Dumbledore 's death was planned with Snape in advance , that Snape cast the doe Patronus to lead Harry to the sword , and that — apparently — he himself must die if Voldemort is to be killed . He accepts his death and Dumbledore 's scheming that has guided his life , and goes to seek out and be killed by Voldemort . On the way he tells Neville Longbottom that Voldemort 's snake Nagini — the last known horcrux — must be killed to make Voldemort vulnerable . He uses the Resurrection Stone to seek comfort and courage from his dead loved ones — his parents , Sirius and Lupin — dropping the stone in the forest before reaching Voldemort 's camp . Voldemort uses the Killing Curse and Harry does not defend himself . 
 Harry awakens in a dreamlike location somewhat like Kings Cross Station , and is greeted by Dumbledore who explains that Voldemort 's original Killing Curse left a fragment of Voldemort 's soul in Harry which caused the connection they had felt , that when Voldemort used Harry 's blood to regain his full strength , this further protected Harry from Voldemort , that this fragment of Voldemort 's soul has now been killed by Voldemort 's own spell , and that Harry is free to return or " go on " . Harry chooses to return and feigns death . Voldemort displays Harry 's body and offers a truce if the defenders surrender , but Neville kills Nagini with the sword , leaving Voldemort unprotected , and Harry escapes under his cloak as the battle resumes . 
 In a final onslaught , Bellatrix is killed and Harry reveals to Voldemort that he is alive . He explains to Voldemort that the Elder Wand 's loyalty transfers upon the defeat , not necessarily the killing , of its previous master . Although Voldemort believed he has won the wand 's allegiance by killing Snape , who killed Dumbledore , in fact he ( Harry ) had defeated Draco Malfoy who had previously disarmed Dumbledore . Therefore , the outcome of their duel will depend upon whether the Elder Wand knows its previous master was disarmed , which will have left Harry as its true master , even though neither Draco nor Harry ever physically held it . He also explains that his attempted self @-@ sacrifice has protected the remaining defendants , who can now no longer be hurt by Voldemort . Harry urges Voldemort to feel remorse , in order to save his soul . Enraged , Voldemort attempts one final Killing Curse , but the Elder Wand refuses to act against Harry and the spell rebounds , killing him finally . 
 After Voldemort 's death , Harry uses the Elder Wand to repair his original broken wand , saying that he will return it to Dumbledore 's tomb , where its power may vanish if Harry dies undefeated and where it may drop out of history , and the wizarding world returns to peace once more . 
 Epilogue 
 In an epilogue set in King 's Cross station 19 years later , Harry and Ginny Weasley are a couple with three children : James Sirius , Albus Severus , and Lily Luna . Ron and Hermione also have two children , Rose and Hugo ; Harry 's godson Teddy Lupin , is found kissing Bill and Fleur Weasley 's daughter Victoire ; Neville Longbottom is now a Hogwarts professor ; and Draco Malfoy and his wife are also at the station to send off their son , Scorpius . Albus is departing for his first year at Hogwarts , and is worried he will be placed into Slytherin House . Harry reassures him , telling his son that he is named for two Hogwarts headmasters , and one of them ( Snape ) was a Slytherin and " the bravest man he had ever met " , but that the Sorting Hat could take account of personal preferences , as it did for Harry . The book ends with the words : " The scar had not pained Harry for nineteen years . All was well . " 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Franchise = = = 
 Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone was published by Bloomsbury , the publisher of all Harry Potter books in the United Kingdom , on 30 June 1997 . It was released in the United States on 1 September 1998 by Scholastic — the American publisher of the books — as Harry Potter and the Sorcerer 's Stone , after Rowling had received US $ 105 @,@ 000 for the American rights — an unprecedented amount for a children 's book by a then @-@ unknown author . 
 The second book , Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets was originally published in the UK on 2 July 1998 , and in the US on 2 June 1999 . Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban was then published a year later in the UK on 8 July 1999 , and in the US on 8 September 1999 . Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire was published on 8 July 2000 at the same time by Bloomsbury and Scholastic . Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix is the longest book in the series at 766 pages in the UK version and 870 pages in the US version . It was published worldwide in English on 21 June 2003 . Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince was published on 16 July 2005 , and it sold 9 million copies in the first 24 hours of its worldwide release . 
 = = = Choice of title = = = 
 Shortly before releasing the title , J. K. Rowling announced that she had considered three titles for the book . The final title , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , named after the mythical Deathly Hallows in the novel , was released to the public on 21 December 2006 , via a special Christmas @-@ themed hangman puzzle on Rowling 's website , confirmed shortly afterwards by the book 's publishers . When asked during a live chat about the other titles she had been considering , Rowling mentioned Harry Potter and the Elder Wand and Harry Potter and the Peverell Quest . 
 = = = Rowling on finishing the book = = = 
 Rowling completed the book while staying at the Balmoral Hotel in Edinburgh in January 2007 , and left a signed statement on a marble bust of Hermes in her room which read : " J. K. Rowling finished writing Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows in this room ( 552 ) on 11 January 2007 " . In a statement on her website , she said , " I 've never felt such a mixture of extreme emotions in my life , never dreamed I could feel simultaneously heartbroken and euphoric . " She compared her mixed feelings to those expressed by Charles Dickens in the preface of the 1850 edition of David Copperfield , " a two @-@ years ' imaginative task " . " To which , " she added , " I can only sigh , try seventeen years , Charles " . She ended her message by saying " Deathly Hallows is my favourite , and that is the most wonderful way to finish the series " . 
 When asked before publication about the forthcoming book , Rowling stated that she could not change the ending even if she wanted . " These books have been plotted for such a long time , and for six books now , that they 're all leading a certain direction . So , I really can 't " . She also commented that the final volume related closely to the previous book in the series , Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince , " almost as though they are two @-@ halves of the same novel " . She has said that the last chapter of the book was written " in something like 1990 " , as part of her earliest work on the series . Rowling also revealed she originally wrote the last words to be " something like : ' Only those who he loved could see his lightning scar ' " . Rowling changed this because she did not want people to think Voldemort would rise again and to say that Harry 's mission was over . 
 = = Major themes = = 
 = = = Death = = = 
 In a 2006 interview , J. K. Rowling said that the main theme of the series is Harry dealing with death , which was influenced by her mother 's death in 1990 , from multiple sclerosis . Lev Grossman of Time stated that the main theme of the series was the overwhelming importance of continuing to love in the face of death . 
 = = = Living in a corrupted society = = = 
 Academics and journalists have developed many other interpretations of themes in the books , some more complex than others , and some including political subtexts . Themes such as normality , oppression , survival , and overcoming imposing odds have all been considered as prevalent throughout the series . Similarly , the theme of making one 's way through adolescence and " going over one 's most harrowing ordeals — and thus coming to terms with them " has also been considered . Rowling has stated that the books comprise " a prolonged argument for tolerance , a prolonged plea for an end to bigotry " and that also pass on a message to " question authority and ... not assume that the establishment or the press tells you all of the truth " . 
 Some political commentators have seen J. K. Rowling 's portrayal of the <unk> Ministry of Magic and the oppressive measures taken by the Ministry in the later books ( like making attendance at Hogwarts School compulsory and the " registration of <unk> " with the Ministry ) as an allegory of criticising the state . 
 = = = Christian allegories = = = 
 The Harry Potter series has been criticised for supposedly supporting witchcraft and the occult . Before publication of Deathly Hallows , Rowling refused to speak out about her religion , stating , " If I talk too freely , every reader , whether 10 or 60 , will be able to guess what 's coming in the books " . However , many have noted Christian allegories apparent in Deathly Hallows . For example , Harry dies and then comes back to life to save mankind , like Christ . The location where this occurs is King 's Cross . Harry also urges Voldemort to show remorse , to restore his shattered soul . Rowling also stated that " my belief and my struggling with religious belief ... I think is quite apparent in this book " , which is shown as Harry struggles with his faith in Dumbledore . 
 Deathly Hallows begins with a pair of epigraphs , one by Quaker leader William Penn and one from Aeschylus ' The Libation Bearers . Of this , Rowling said " I really enjoyed choosing those two quotations because one is pagan , of course , and one is from a Christian tradition . I 'd known it was going to be those two passages since Chamber was published . I always knew [ that ] if I could use them at the beginning of book seven then I 'd cued up the ending perfectly . If they were relevant , then I went where I needed to go . They just say it all to me , they really do " . 
 When Harry visits his parents ' grave , the biblical reference " The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death " ( 1 Corinthians 15 : 26 ) is inscribed on the grave . The <unk> ' family tomb also holds a biblical quote : " Where your treasure is , there your heart will be also " , which is from Matthew 6 : 21 . Rowling states , " They 're very British books , so on a very practical note Harry was going to find biblical quotations on tombstones ... [ but ] I think those two particular quotations he finds on the tombstones at Godric 's Hollow , they sum up – they almost epitomise the whole series " . 
 Harry Potter pundit John Granger additionally noted that one of the reasons the Harry Potter books were so popular is their use of literary alchemy ( similar to Romeo and Juliet , C. S. Lewis 's <unk> and Charles Dickens 's A Tale of Two Cities ) and vision symbolism . In this model , authors weave allegorical tales along the alchemical magnum opus . Since the medieval period , alchemical allegory has mirrored the passion , death and resurrection of Christ . While the entire series utilises symbols common in alchemy , the Deathly Hallows completes this cycle , tying themes of death , rebirth , and the Resurrection Stone to the principal motif of alchemical allegory , and topics presented in the first book of the series . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Marketing and promotion = = = 
 The launch was celebrated by an all @-@ night book signing and reading at the Natural History Museum in London , which Rowling attended along with 1 @,@ 700 guests chosen by ballot . Rowling toured the US in October 2007 , where another event was held at Carnegie Hall in New York City with tickets allocated by sweepstake . 
 Scholastic , the American publisher of the Harry Potter series , launched a multimillion @-@ dollar " There will soon be 7 " marketing campaign with a " Knight Bus " travelling to 40 libraries across the United States , online fan discussions and competitions , collectible bookmarks , tattoos , and the staged release of seven Deathly Hallows questions most debated by fans . In the build @-@ up to the book 's release , Scholastic released seven questions that fans would find answered in the final book : 
 Who will live ? Who will die ? 
 Is Snape good or evil ? 
 Will Hogwarts reopen ? 
 Who ends up with whom ? 
 Where are the Horcruxes ? 
 Will Voldemort be defeated ? 
 What are the Deathly Hallows ? 
 J. K. Rowling arranged with her publishers for a poster bearing the face of the missing British child Madeleine McCann to be made available to book sellers when Deathly Hallows was launched on 21 July 2007 , and said that she hoped that the posters would be displayed prominently in shops all over the world . 
 After it was told that the novel would be released on 21 July 2007 , Warner Bros. shortly thereafter said that the film adaptation of Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix would be released shortly before the novel would be released , on 13 July 2007 , making many people proclaim that July 2007 , was the month of Harry Potter . 
 = = = Spoiler embargo = = = 
 Bloomsbury invested £ 10 million in an attempt to keep the book 's contents secure until 21 July , the release date . Arthur Levine , U.S. editor of the Harry Potter series , denied distributing any copies of Deathly Hallows in advance for press review , but two U.S. papers published early reviews anyway . There was speculation that some shops would break the embargo and distribute copies of the book early , as the penalty imposed for previous instalments — that the distributor would not be supplied with any further copies of the series — would no longer be a deterrent . 
 = = = Online leaks and early delivery = = = 
 In the week before its release , a number of texts purporting to be genuine leaks appeared in various forms . On 16 July , a set of photographs representing all 759 pages of the U.S. edition was leaked and was fully transcribed prior to the official release date . The photographs later appeared on websites and peer @-@ to @-@ peer networks , leading Scholastic to seek a subpoena in order to identify one source . This represented the most serious security breach in the Harry Potter series ' history . Rowling and her lawyer confirmed that there were genuine online leaks . Reviews published in both The Baltimore Sun and The New York Times on 18 July 2007 , corroborated many of the plot elements from this leak , and about one day prior to release , The New York Times confirmed that the main circulating leak was real . 
 Scholastic announced that approximately one @-@ ten @-@ thousandth ( 0 @.@ 0001 ) of the U.S. supply had been shipped early — interpreted to mean about 1 @,@ 200 copies . One reader in Maryland received a copy of the book in the mail from DeepDiscount.com four days before it was launched , which evoked incredulous responses from both Scholastic and <unk> . Scholastic initially reported that they were satisfied it had been a " human error " and would not discuss possible penalties ; however , the following day Scholastic announced that it would be launching legal action against DeepDiscount.com and its distributor , Levy Home Entertainment . Scholastic filed for damages in Chicago 's Circuit Court of Cook County , claiming that <unk> engaged in a " complete and flagrant violation of the agreements that they knew were part of the carefully constructed release of this eagerly awaited book . " Some of the early release books soon appeared on eBay , in one case being sold to Publishers Weekly for US $ 250 from an initial price of US $ 18 . 
 = = = Price wars and other controversies = = = 
 Asda , along with several other UK supermarkets , having already taken pre @-@ orders for the book at a heavily discounted price , sparked a price war two days before the book 's launch by announcing they would sell it for just £ 5 a copy . Other retail chains then also offered the book at discounted prices . At these prices the book became a loss leader . This caused uproar from traditional UK booksellers who argued they had no hope of competing in those conditions . Independent shops protested loudest , but even Waterstone 's , the UK 's largest dedicated chain bookstore , could not compete with the supermarket price . Some small bookstores hit back by buying their stock from the supermarkets rather than their wholesalers . Asda attempted to counter this by imposing a limit of two copies per customer to prevent bulk purchases . Philip Wicks , a spokesman for the UK Booksellers Association , said , " It is a war we can 't even participate in . We think it 's a crying shame that the supermarkets have decided to treat it as a loss @-@ leader , like a can of baked beans . " Michael Norris , an analyst at Simba Information , said : " You are not only lowering the price of the book . At this point , you are lowering the value of reading . " 
 In Malaysia , a similar price war caused controversy regarding sales of the book . Four of the biggest bookstore chains in Malaysia , MPH Bookstores , Popular Bookstores , Times and Harris , decided to pull Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows off their shelves as a protest against Tesco and Carrefour hypermarkets . The retail price of the book in Malaysia is MYR 109 @.@ 90 , while the hypermarkets Tesco and Carrefour sold the book at MYR 69 @.@ 90 . The move by the bookstores was seen as an attempt to pressure the distributor Penguin Books to remove the books from the hypermarkets . However , as of 24 July 2007 , the price war has ended , with the four bookstores involved resuming selling the books in their stores with discount . Penguin Books has also confirmed that Tesco and Carrefour are selling the book at a loss , urging them to practice good business sense and fair trade . 
 The book 's early Saturday morning release in Israel was criticised for violating Shabbat . Trade and Industry Minister Eli Yishai commented " It is forbidden , according to Jewish values and Jewish culture , that a thing like this should take place at 2 am on Saturday . Let them do it on another day . " Yishai indicated that he would issue indictments and fines based on the Hours of Work and Rest Law . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The Baltimore Sun 's critic , Mary Carole McCauley , noted that the book was more serious than the previous novels in the series and had more straightforward prose . Furthermore , reviewer Alice Fordham from The Times wrote that " Rowling 's genius is not just her total realisation of a fantasy world , but the quieter skill of creating characters that bounce off the page , real and flawed and brave and lovable " . Fordham concluded , " We have been a long way together , and neither Rowling nor Harry let us down in the end " . The New York Times writer Michiko Kakutani agreed , praising Rowling 's ability to make Harry both a hero and a character that can be related to . 
 Time magazine 's Lev Grossman named it one of the Top 10 Fiction Books of 2007 , ranking it at No. 8 , and praised Rowling for proving that books can still be a global mass medium . Novelist Elizabeth Hand criticised that " ... the spectacularly complex interplay of narrative and character often reads as though an entire trilogy 's worth of summing @-@ up has been crammed into one volume . " In a starred review from Kirkus Reviews , the reviewer said , " Rowling has shown uncommon skill in playing them with and against each other , and also woven them into a darn good bildungsroman , populated by memorable characters and infused with a saving , irrepressible sense of fun " . They also praised the second half of the novel , but criticised the epilogue , calling it " provocatively sketchy " . In another review from The Times , reviewer Amanda Craig said that while Rowling was " not an original , high @-@ concept author " , she was " right up there with other greats of children 's fiction " . Craig went on to say that the novel was " beautifully judged , and a triumphant return to form " , and that Rowling 's imagination changed the perception of an entire generation , which " is more than all but a handful of living authors , in any genre , have achieved in the past half @-@ century " . 
 In contrast , Jenny Sawyer of The Christian Science Monitor said that , " There is much to love about the Harry Potter series , from its brilliantly realised magical world to its multilayered narrative " , however , " A story is about someone who changes . And , puberty aside , Harry doesn 't change much . As envisioned by Rowling , he walks the path of good so unwaveringly that his final victory over Voldemort feels , not just inevitable , but hollow " . In The New York Times , Christopher Hitchens compared the series to World War Two @-@ era English boarding school stories , and while he wrote that " Rowling has won imperishable renown " for the series as a whole , he also stated that he disliked Rowling 's use of deus ex machina , that the mid @-@ book camping chapters are " abysmally long " , and Voldemort " becomes more tiresome than an Ian Fleming villain " . Catherine Bennett of The Guardian praised Rowling for putting small details from the previous books and making them large in Deathly Hallows , such as Grindelwald being mentioned on a Chocolate Frog Card in the first book . While she points out " as her critics say , Rowling is no Dickens " , she says that Rowling " has willed into a fictional being , in every book , legions of new characters , places , spells , rules and scores of unimagined twists and subplots " . 
 Stephen King criticised the reactions of some reviewers to the books , including McCauley , for jumping too quickly to surface conclusions of the work . He felt this was inevitable , because of the extreme secrecy before launch which did not allow reviewers time to read and consider the book , but meant that many early reviews lacked depth . Rather than finding the writing style disappointing , he felt it had matured and improved . He acknowledged that the subject matter of the books had become more adult , and that Rowling had clearly been writing with the adult audience firmly in mind since the middle of the series . He compared the works in this respect to Huckleberry Finn and Alice in Wonderland which achieved success and have become established classics , in part by appealing to the adult audience as well as children . 
 = = = Sales , awards and honours = = = 
 Sales for Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows were record setting . The initial U.S. print run for Deathly Hallows was 12 million copies , and more than a million were pre @-@ ordered through Amazon.com and Barnes & Noble , 500 percent higher than pre @-@ sales had been for Half @-@ Blood Prince . On 12 April 2007 , Barnes & Noble declared that Deathly Hallows had broken its pre @-@ order record , with more than 500 @,@ 000 copies pre @-@ ordered through its site . On opening day , a record 8 @.@ 3 million copies were sold in the United States ( over 96 per second ) , and 2 @.@ 65 million copies in the United Kingdom . It holds the Guinness World record for fastest selling book of fiction in 24 hours for U.S. sales . At WH Smith , sales reportedly reached a rate of 15 books sold per second . By June 2008 , nearly a year after it was published , worldwide sales were reportedly around 44 million . 
 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows has won several awards . In 2007 , the book was named one of The New York Times 100 Notable Books , and one of its Notable Children 's Books . The novel was named the best book of 2007 , by Newsweek 's critic Malcolm Jones . Publishers Weekly also listed Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows among their Best Books of 2007 . In 2008 , the American Library Association named the novel one of its Best Books for Young Adults , and also listed it as a Notable Children 's Book . Furthermore , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows received the 2008 Colorado Blue Spruce Book Award . 
 = = Translations = = 
 Due to its worldwide fame , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows has been translated into many languages . The first translation to be released was the Ukrainian translation , on 25 September 2007 ( as <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> – Harry Potter i <unk> 'ni <unk> ) . The Swedish title of the book was revealed by Rowling as Harry Potter and the Relics of Death ( Harry Potter och <unk> ) , following a pre @-@ release question from the Swedish publisher about the difficulty of translating the two words " Deathly Hallows " without having read the book . This is also the title used for the French translation ( Harry Potter et les <unk> de la mort ) , the Spanish translation ( Harry Potter y las Reliquias de la Muerte ) , the Dutch translation ( Harry Potter en de <unk> van de Dood ) and the Brazilian Portuguese translation ( Harry Potter e as <unk> da Morte ) . The first Polish translation was released with a new title : Harry Potter i <unk> <unk> – Harry Potter and the Insignia of Death . The Hindi translation Harry Potter aur <unk> ke <unk> ( <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , which means " Harry Potter and the Gifts of Death " , was released by <unk> Publication in India on 27 June 2008 . The Romanian version was released on the 1st of December 2007 using the title ( Harry Potter și <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = Editions = = 
 Deathly Hallows was released in hardcover on 21 July 2007 and in paperback in the United Kingdom on 10 July 2008 and the United States on 7 July 2009 . In SoHo , New York , there was a release party for the American paperback edition , with many games and activities . An " Adult Edition " with a different cover illustration was released by Bloomsbury on 21 July 2007 . To be released simultaneously with the original U.S. hardcover on 21 July with only 100 @,@ 000 copies was a Scholastic deluxe edition , highlighting a new cover illustration by Mary <unk> . In October 2010 , Bloomsbury released a " Celebratory " paperback edition , which featured a foiled and starred cover . Lastly , on 1 November 2010 , a " Signature " edition of the novel was released in paperback by Bloomsbury . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 A two @-@ part film adaptation of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows is directed by David Yates , written by Steve Kloves and produced by David Heyman , David Barron and J. K. Rowling . Part 1 was released on 19 November 2010 , and Part 2 on 15 July 2011 . Filming began in February 2009 , and ended on 12 June 2010 . However , the cast confirmed they would reshoot the epilogue scene as they only had two days to shoot the original . Reshoots officially ended around December 2010 . Part 1 ended at Chapter 24 of the book , when Voldemort regained the Elder Wand . However , there were a few omissions , such as the appearances of Dean Thomas and Viktor Krum , and Peter Pettigrew 's death . James <unk> of Reelviews said that the script stuck closest to the text since Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets , yet this was met with negativity from some audiences as the film inherited " the book 's own problems " . 
 = = = Audiobooks = = = 
 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows was released simultaneously on 21 July 2007 , in both the UK and the United States . The UK edition features the voice of Stephen Fry and runs about 24 hours while the U.S. edition features the voice of Jim Dale and runs about 21 hours . Both Fry and Dale recorded 146 different and distinguishable character voices , and was the most recorded by an individual on an audiobook at the time . 
 For his work on Deathly Hallows , Dale won the 2008 Grammy Award for the Best Spoken Word Album for Children . He also was awarded an <unk> Award by AudioFile , who claimed , " Dale has raised the bar on audiobook interpretation so high it 's hard to imagine any narrator vaulting over it . " 
 = = The Tales of Beedle the Bard = = 
 On 4 December 2008 , Rowling released The Tales of Beedle the Bard both in the UK and US . The Tales of Beedle the Bard is a spin @-@ off of Deathly Hallows and contains fairy tales that are told to children in the " Wizarding World " . The book includes five short stories , including " The Tale of the Three Brothers " which is the story of the Deathly Hallows . 
 Amazon.com released an exclusive collector 's edition of the book which is a replica of the book that Amazon.com purchased at auction in December 2007 . Seven copies were auctioned off in London by Sotheby 's . Each was illustrated and handwritten by Rowling and is 157 pages . It was bound in brown Moroccan leather and embellished with five hand @-@ chased <unk> sterling silver ornaments and mounted <unk> . 
 = Apollo Global Management = 
 Apollo Global Management , LLC is an American private equity firm , founded in 1990 by former Drexel Burnham Lambert banker Leon Black . The firm specializes in leveraged buyout transactions and purchases of distressed securities involving corporate restructuring , special situations , and industry consolidations . Apollo is headquartered in New York City , and also has offices in Purchase , New York , Los Angeles , Houston , London , Frankfurt , Luxembourg , Singapore , Hong Kong and Mumbai . 
 As of August 2015 , Apollo managed over US $ 162 billion of investor commitments across its private equity , credit and real estate funds and other investment vehicles making it one of the largest alternative investment management firms globally . Among the most notable companies currently owned by Apollo are Claire 's , Caesars Entertainment Corporation , Norwegian Cruise Line , <unk> Enterprise Solutions , and CORE Media Group ( American Idol ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Apollo , originally referred to as Apollo Advisors , was founded in 1990 , on the heels of the collapse of Drexel Burnham Lambert in February 1990 . It was founded by Leon Black , the former head of Drexel 's mergers and acquisitions department , along with other Drexel alumni . Among the most notable founders are John Hannan , Drexel 's former co @-@ director of international finance ; Craig <unk> , a lawyer who worked with Drexel 's high @-@ yield division in Los Angeles ; and Arthur <unk> , the former head of the corporate finance department . Other founding partners included Marc Rowan , Josh Harris and Michael Gross , who both worked under Black in the mergers and acquisitions department , and Antony Ressler , who worked as a senior vice president in Drexel 's high yield department with responsibility for the new issue / syndicate desk . 
 Less than six months after the collapse of Drexel , the founders of Apollo had already begun a series of ventures . Apollo Investment Fund L.P. , the first of their private equity investment funds , was formed to make investments in distressed companies . Apollo 's first fund raised approximately $ 400 million of investor commitments on the strength of Black 's reputation as a prominent lieutenant of Michael Milken and key player in the buyout boom of the 1980s . Lion Advisors was set up to provide investment services to Credit Lyonnais , which was seeking to profit from depressed prices in the high yield market . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 At the time of Apollo 's founding , financing for new leveraged buyouts was minimal and Apollo turned instead to a strategy of distressed @-@ to @-@ control takeovers . Apollo would purchase distressed securities which could be converted into a controlling interest in the equity of the company through a bankruptcy reorganization or other restructuring . Apollo used distressed debt as an entry point , enabling the firm to invest in such firms as Vail Resorts , Walter Industries , Culligan and Samsonite . 
 Early on , Apollo made a name for itself by acquiring interests in companies that Drexel had helped finance by purchasing high @-@ yield bonds from failed savings and loans and insurance companies . Apollo acquired several large portfolios of assets from the U.S. government 's Resolution Trust Corporation . One of Apollo 's earliest and most successful deals involved the acquisition of Executive Life Insurance Company 's bond portfolio . Using this vehicle , Apollo would purchase the Executive Life portfolio , generating tremendous profits when the value of high yield bonds recovered , but also resulting in a variety of state regulatory issues for Apollo and Credit Lyonnais over the purchase . More than a decade after the purchase , in 2002 , California Attorney General Bill Lockyer accused Apollo , Leon Black , and an investor group led by French bank Credit Lyonnais , of illegally acquiring the assets and bond portfolio of Executive Life Insurance Co. in 1991 . According to the State of California , Lion allegedly violated a California law that prohibited foreign government @-@ owned banks from owning California insurance companies . 
 In 1993 , Apollo Real Estate Advisers was founded in collaboration with William Mack to seek opportunities in the U.S. property markets . Apollo Real Estate Investment Fund , L.P. , the first in a family of real estate " opportunity funds " was closed in April 1993 with $ 500 million of investor commitments . In 2000 , Apollo exited the partnership , which continued to operate as Apollo Real Estate Advisers until changing its name to AREA Property Partners , effective January 15 , 2009 . That firm is owned and controlled by its remaining principals , who include William Mack , Lee <unk> , William Benjamin , John Jacobsson , Stuart Koenig and Richard Mack . Apollo Real Estate Investment Fund , L.P. , the first in a family of real estate " opportunity funds " was closed in April 1993 with $ 500 million of investor commitments . As of 2008 , the firm was investing out of three funds : Apollo Real Estate Investment Fund V , Apollo European Real Estate Fund II and Apollo Value Enhancement Fund VII . In 2004 , Apollo Real Estate acquired the Value Enhancement Funds family of investment vehicles to broaden its offerings in the " value @-@ added " segment of the real estate investment spectrum . Apollo also operates a real estate mezzanine lending program and real estate securities hedge fund called <unk> Real Estate Securities Fund , L.P. 
 In 1995 , Apollo raised its third private equity fund , Apollo Investment Fund III with $ 1 @.@ 5 billion of investor commitments from investors that included CalPERS and the General Motors pension fund . Unlike its first two funds and later funds , Fund III would ultimately prove only an average performer for private equity funds of its vintage . Among the investments made in Fund III ( invested through 1998 ) were : Alliance Imaging , Allied Waste Industries , <unk> Home Furnishings , Levitz Furniture , Communications Corporation of America , Dominick 's , Ralphs ( acquired Apollo 's Food @-@ 4 @-@ Less ) , <unk> , NRT Incorporated , <unk> Corporation , Telemundo and WMC Mortgage Corporation . 
 Also in 1995 , Apollo founding partner Craig <unk> left the firm to found a smaller competitor Pegasus Capital Advisors . Since inception Pegasus has raised $ 1 @.@ 8 billion in four private equity funds focused on investments in middle @-@ market companies in financial distress . In 1997 , Apollo co @-@ founder Tony Ressler founded Ares Management as the successor to its Lion Advisors business which would manage collateralized debt obligation vehicles . 
 In 1998 , Apollo raised its fourth private equity fund , Apollo Investment Fund IV , with $ 3 @.@ 6 billion of investor commitments . Among the investments made in Fund IV ( invested through 2001 ) were : Allied Waste Industries , AMC Entertainment , Berlitz International , Clark Retail Enterprises , Corporate Express ( <unk> ) , <unk> Services Corporation , National Financial Partners , Pacer International , Rent @-@ A @-@ Center , Resolution Performance Products , Resolution Specialty Materials , Sirius Satellite Radio , <unk> Communications , United Rentals and Wyndham Worldwide . 
 = = = 2000 @-@ 2005 = = = 
 Apollo deployed its fourth fund during the booming markets of the late 1990s , only to experience difficulties with the collapse of the Internet bubble and the onset of the recession . Amid the turmoil of collapsing markets , Apollo was able to raise its fifth private equity fund in 2001 , Apollo Investment Fund V , with $ 3 @.@ 7 billion of investor commitments , roughly the same amount raised as for its previous fund . Among the investments made in Fund V ( invested through 2006 ) were <unk> Group , AMC Entertainment , Berry Plastics , <unk> , Compass Minerals , General Nutrition Centers ( GNC ) , Goodman Global , Hexion Specialty Chemicals ( Borden ) , <unk> , Linens ‘ n Things , Metals USA , <unk> Investment Holdings , <unk> , <unk> Communications , and Unity Media . 
 Meanwhile , Ares continued to grow through the late 1990s , and profited significantly from investments made after the collapse of the high yield market in 2000 and 2001 . Although technically , the founders of Ares had completed a spin out with the formation of the firm in 1997 , they had maintained a close relationship with Apollo over its first five years and operated as the West Coast affiliate of Apollo . By 2002 , when Ares raised its first corporate opportunities fund , the firm announced that it was more formally separating itself from its former parent company . The timing of this separation also coincided with Apollo 's legal difficulties with the State of California over its purchase of Executive Life Insurance Company in 1991 . 
 Following the spin @-@ off of Ares in 2002 , Apollo developed two new affiliates to continue its investment activities in the capital markets . The first of these new affiliates , founded in 2003 , was Apollo Distressed Investment Fund ( <unk> ) Management a credit opportunity investment vehicle . The following year , in April 2004 , Apollo raised $ 930 million through an initial public offering ( IPO ) for a listed business development company , Apollo Investment Corporation ( NASDAQ : <unk> ) ) . Apollo Investment Corporation was formed to invest primarily in middle @-@ market companies in the form of mezzanine debt and senior secured loans , as well as by making certain direct equity investments in companies . The Company also invests in the securities of public companies . 
 = = = 2005 @-@ 2010 = = = 
 The 2005 - 2007 period marked a boom period in private equity with new " largest buyout " records set and surpassed several times in an 18 @-@ month window from the beginning of 2006 through the middle of 2007 . Apollo was among the most active investors in leveraged buyout transactions during this period . Although Apollo was involved in a number of notable and large buyouts , the firm largely avoided the very largest transactions of this period . Among Apollo 's most notable investments during this period included Harrah 's Entertainment , a leading US gaming and casino company ; Norwegian Cruise Line , the cruise line operator ; Claire 's Stores , the retailer of costume jewelry ; and Realogy , the real estate franchisor that owns Coldwell Banker , Century 21 and Sotheby 's International Realty . 
 In August 2006 , Apollo launched a $ 2 billion publicly traded private equity vehicle in Europe , AP Alternative Assets ( <unk> : AAA ) . The IPO of this new vehicle followed in the footsteps of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts , which raised $ 5 billion for its KKR Private Equity Investors vehicle in May 2006 . Apollo initially attempted to raise $ 2 @.@ 5 billion for the public vehicle , but fell short when it offered the shares in June , raising only $ 1 @.@ 5 billion . Apollo raised an additional $ 500 million via private placements in the weeks following that sale . 
 As the private equity industry expanded through 2006 and 2007 , several of the largest private equity firms , most notably The Blackstone Group and Kohlberg Kravis Roberts , announced plans to realize value from their firms through the sale of shares in the public equity markets . Apollo Management chose a slightly different path , by completing a private placement of shares in its management company in July 2007 . By pursuing a private placement rather than a public offering , Apollo would be able to avoid much of the public scrutiny applied to Blackstone and KKR . In November 2007 , Apollo was able to realize additional value from the sale of a 9 % ownership interest in its management company to the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority ( <unk> ) . Ultimately , in April 2008 , Apollo would file with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) to permit some holders of its privately traded stock to sell their shares on the New York Stock Exchange and in March 2011 , Apollo completed its initial public offering ( NYSE : APO ) . In 2008 , the firm opened an office in India , marking their first push into Asia . 
 As the deterioration of the financial markets worsened into 2008 , Apollo saw several of its investments come under pressure . Apollo 's 2005 investment in the struggling US retailer , Linens ' n Things suffered from a significant debt burden and softening consumer demand . In May 2008 , Linens was forced to file for bankruptcy protection , one of several high profile retail bankruptcies in 2008 , costing Apollo all of its $ 365 million investment in the company . At the same time , Apollo 's investment in Claire 's , Realogy and Harrah 's Entertainment came under pressure . Apollo would respond actively to its investment difficulties seeking to exchange a portion of the existing debt at Harrah 's and Realogy to more favorable securities . At Claire 's , Apollo exercised its " PIK toggle " option to shut off cash interest payments to its bondholders and issue more debt instead , in order to provide the company with additional financial flexibility . 
 In December 2008 , Apollo completed fundraising for its latest fund , Apollo Investment Fund VII with approximately $ 14 @.@ 7 billion of investor commitments . Apollo had been targeting $ 15 billion , but had been in fundraising for more than 16 months , with the bulk of the capital raised in 2007 . 
 In December 2009 , it was announced that Apollo would acquire Cedar Fair Entertainment Company shares and the company would be become private underneath the management group . The deal includes a cash payment of $ 635 million and assumed debt which gives the transaction a value of $ 2 @.@ 4 billion . It was later announced in April 2010 that the deal was pulled due to poor shareholder response . 
 = = = 2010 @-@ 2015 = = = 
 In March 2012 it made a second attempt to acquire an amusement park operator with a $ 225 @.@ 7 million offer for Great Wolf Resorts . 
 In November 2012 , The McGraw @-@ Hill Companies sold their education division ( " McGraw @-@ Hill Education " ) to Apollo Global Management , in a deal totaling $ 2 @.@ 5 billion . 
 On 11 March 2013 , Apollo Global Management made the only bid for the snacks business of Hostess Brands , including Twinkies , for $ 410 million . 
 In December 2013 , Apollo bought a portfolio of Irish home loans from Lloyds Bank for € <unk> , less than half their nominal £ <unk> ( € <unk> ) value . The shares were bought by an Apollo Global Management subsidiary , Tanager Limited . The portfolio made a £ <unk> loss last year . 
 On 16 January 2014 , The Financial Times reported Apollo will buy CEC Entertainment , the parent of Chuck E. Cheese 's , for about $ 1 billion . 
 In June 2015 , Apollo Global Management made a successful offer of around $ 1 @.@ 03 billion in cash to privatise OM Group . Also that month , Apollo won the bidding during an auction for Saint @-@ <unk> ’ s <unk> glass bottle manufacturing unit for a rumoured fee of around 2 @.@ 95 billion . 
 In June 2016 , Apollo Global Management made a successful offer to purchase Diamond Resorts International . 
 = = Operations = = 
 Apollo is operated by its managing partners , Leon Black , Joshua Harris and Marc Rowan and a team of more than 250 investment professionals , as of March 31 , 2013 . The firm 's headquarters are located in the Solow Building at 9 West 57th Street in New York City , and the firm operates additional offices in Purchase , New York , Los Angeles , Houston , London , Frankfurt , Luxembourg , Singapore , Hong Kong and Mumbai 
 Apollo ’ s executive committee includes : Leon Black , chairman and chief executive officer ; Josh Harris , senior managing director ; Marc Rowan , senior managing director ; and Marc <unk> who was hired as President in November 2010 . 
 Apollo operates three business lines in an integrated manner : 
 Private equity — The private equity business is the cornerstone of Apollo 's investment activities . Apollo invests through a variety of private equity strategies , most notably leveraged buyouts and distressed buyouts and debt investments . This business operates primarily through the firm 's family of private equity investment funds ( See : Investment funds ) 
 Credit — Apollo invests through a variety of credit strategies to complement its core private equity business . Apollo invests through a variety of investment vehicles including mezzanine funds , hedge funds , European non @-@ performing loan funds and senior credit opportunity funds . 
 Real Estate — Apollo Global Real Estate ( <unk> ) was established in 2008 to build upon Apollo 's history of investing in real estate @-@ related sectors such as hotels and lodging , leisure and logistics . <unk> manages a number of debt and equity @-@ oriented real estate investment funds . 
 = = Investment vehicles = = 
 = = = Private equity funds = = = 
 Apollo has historically relied primarily on private equity funds , pools of committed capital from pension funds , insurance companies , endowments , fund of funds , high @-@ net @-@ worth individuals , family offices , sovereign wealth funds and other institutional investors . Since 2014 , Apollo has begun investing its eighth private equity fund , Apollo Investment Fund VIII , which raised approximately $ 18 billion of investor commitments , making it the largest private equity fund raised since the financial crisis . Since inception in 1990 , Apollo has raised a total of eight private equity funds , including : 
 = = = Apollo Investment Corporation = = = 
 Apollo Investment Corporation is a US @-@ domiciled publicly traded private equity closed @-@ end fund and an affiliate of Apollo . AIC was formed to invest primarily in middle @-@ market companies in the form of mezzanine debt and senior secured loans , as well as by making certain direct equity investments in companies . The Company also invests in the securities of public companies . 
 AIC is structured as a business development company , a type of publicly traded private equity vehicle that is designed to generate interest income and long term capital appreciation . AIC historically has not invested in companies controlled by Apollo 's private equity funds . 
 = = = AP Alternative Assets = = = 
 AP Alternative Assets ( Euronext : AAA ) is a Guernsey @-@ domiciled publicly traded private equity closed @-@ end limited partnership , managed by Apollo Alternative Assets , an affiliate of Apollo Management . AAA was formed to invest alongside Apollo 's main private equity funds and hedge funds . 
 AAA was launched in August 2006 , shortly after Kohlberg Kravis Roberts completed an initial public offering for its $ 5 billion for its KKR Private Equity Investors vehicle in May 2006 . Apollo raised a total of $ 2 billion for AAA including the vehicle 's $ 1 @.@ 5 billion IPO and a subsequent private placement . 
 AAA 's investment portfolio is made up of a mix of private equity and capital markets investments : 
 = = Portfolio investments = = 
 Apollo has been an active private equity investor through the mid @-@ 2000s buyout boom . The following is a list of Apollo 's most recent and currently active private equity investments . The bulk of these investments are held in Apollo Investment Fund V , VI and VII . 
 Other investments include Connections Academy and Unity Media <unk> . 
 = = Affiliated businesses = = 
 From its inception , Apollo built as part of a network of affiliated businesses focusing on private equity and a variety of distressed investment strategies . 
 = = = Lion Advisors = = = 
 Lion Advisors ( or Lion Capital ) , which was founded at the same time as Apollo in 1990 , focused on investment management and consulting services to foreign institutional accounts targeting investments in public and private high yield debt securities in the US . In 1992 , Lion entered into a more formal arrangement to manage the $ 3 billion high @-@ yield portfolio for Credit Lyonnais which together with a consortium of other international investors provided the capital for Lion 's investment activities . The Lion business would ultimately be replaced by Ares Management . 
 = = = Ares Management = = = 
 Ares Management , founded in 1997 , was initially established to manage a $ 1 @.@ 2 billion market value collateralized debt obligation vehicle . Ares would grow to manage a family of collateralized loan obligation ( <unk> ) vehicles that would invest in capital markets @-@ based securities including senior bank loans and high @-@ yield and mezzanine debt . Ares was founded by Antony Ressler and John H. <unk> , both partners at Apollo as well as Bennett Rosenthal , who joined the group from the global leveraged finance group at Merrill Lynch . 
 Ares I and II which were raised were structured as market value <unk> . Ares III though Ares X were structured as cash flow <unk> . In 2002 , Ares completed a spinout from Apollo management . Although technically , the founders of Ares had completed a spinout with the formation of the firm in 1997 , they had maintained a close relationship with Apollo over its first five years and operated as the West Coast affiliate of Apollo . Shortly thereafter , Ares completed fundraising for Ares Corporate Opportunities Fund , a special situations investment fund with $ 750 million of capital under management . 
 In 2004 , Ares debuted a publicly traded business development company , Ares Capital Corporation ( NASDAQ : ARCC ) . In 2006 , Ares raised a $ 2 @.@ 1 billion successor special situations fund ( Ares Corporate Opportunities Fund II ) . 
 = Bankers ' Toadies incident = 
 The Bankers ' Toadies incident occurred in 1937 in Alberta , Canada when a pamphlet was discovered advocating the " extermination " of nine men identified as " Bankers ' Toadies " . The men were opponents of the Social Credit government of Premier William Aberhart , which had been elected on a platform of giving all Albertans monthly dividends ; Aberhart blamed the banking system for his failure to follow through on this pledge . 
 After David Duggan , leader of the Conservative Party and one of the men named , raised his concern over the pamphlet in the Legislative Assembly of Alberta , police raided the Social Credit League 's Edmonton headquarters . Social Credit whip Joe Unwin and Social Credit Board advisor George Frederick Powell were arrested and charged with criminal libel and counselling to murder . Both were convicted of the libel charge , and Justice William Carlos Ives sentenced them to hard labour . 
 = = Background = = 
 William Aberhart 's Social Credit League won a substantial victory in the 1935 Alberta provincial election on the strength of its promise to implement social credit , an economic theory proposed by British engineer C. H. Douglas . Social credit held that the poverty of the Great Depression was in part the fault of bankers , who kept the cost of credit , and by extension of production , high . Aberhart 's solution involved , among other things , monthly " credit dividends " to Albertans in the amount of C $ 25 . 
 By 1937 , Aberhart 's failure to implement these dividends or make other progress towards implementing social credit made many of his backbenchers suspect that he was either unwilling or unable to do so . This belief , combined with a suspicion that he did not properly understand Douglas 's theories , led to the 1937 Social Credit backbenchers ' revolt . One outcome of the revolt was Aberhart 's ceding a number of the government 's powers to the Social Credit Board , made up of five Social Credit backbenchers . Glenville MacLachlan , its chair , travelled to the United Kingdom , where he asked Douglas to come to Alberta and serve as its advisor . Douglas declined , but in his stead sent two of his lieutenants , L. D. Byrne and George Frederick Powell . Part of the Board 's mandate was to educate the public about social credit ; to this end , Powell and Social Credit whip Joseph Unwin were assigned to write educational materials . 
 In response to what they saw as the radically anti @-@ business views of the Aberhart government and the Social Credit Board , Alberta 's mainstream opposition parties — chiefly the Liberals and the Conservatives — began to cooperate under the auspices of the newly formed People 's League . 
 = = Leaflet = = 
 In October 1937 , Conservative leader David Duggan rose in the Legislative Assembly of Alberta to draw its attention to a pamphlet distributed in and around the legislature building that called for his " extermination " . The front of the leaflet read as follows : 
 My child , you should NEVER say hard or unkind things about Bankers ' Toadies . God made snakes , slugs , snails and other creepy @-@ crawly , treacherous , and poisonous things . NEVER , therefore , abuse them — just exterminate them ! And to prevent all evasion demand the <unk> you want — $ 25 @.@ 00 a month and a lower cost to live . 
 The back of the pamphlet listed nine men identified as " toadies " . Besides Duggan , they were 
 S. W. Field , lawyer and president of the People 's League 
 H. H. Parlee , lawyer and president of the Liberals ' Edmonton constituency association 
 John Lymburn , lawyer , member of the People 's League , and former Attorney @-@ General of Alberta 
 H. R. Milner , lawyer and president of the Conservatives ' Edmonton constituency association 
 G. D. Hunt , investment broker 
 L. Y. Cairns , lawyer , member of the Conservatives ' provincial executive 
 G. W. Auxier , lawyer and secretary of the People 's League 
 William Antrobus Griesbach , lawyer , member of the Canadian Senate , and former member of the Canadian House of Commons and mayor of Edmonton 
 Below this list of names were the words " Exterminate Them . And to prevent all Evasion , Demand the Result You Want — $ 25 @.@ 00 a <unk> and a lower cost to live . " 
 On October 3 , the police raided the Social Credit League 's Edmonton office and seized 4 @,@ 000 copies of the pamphlet . Griesbach pressed charges against Powell and Unwin for criminal libel and counselling to murder . 
 = = Trial = = 
 Aberhart , who besides being Premier was Attorney @-@ General , tried to prevent the trial from proceeding by withdrawing the Crown prosecutor assigned to it . Either trial judge William Carlos Ives or a justice of the peace countered by appointing a private prosecutor so the case could go ahead . Both defendants were held on $ 20 @,@ 000 bail . Both hired lawyers : Powell was represented by Hugh Calais Macdonald , while Unwin retained one R. Jackson . George Steer acted for the prosecution . 
 On October 27 , both men appeared before police magistrate A. H. Gibson for their preliminary hearings on the criminal libel charge ( the counselling to murder charge had been dropped ) . Unwin opted for a jury trial , while Powell elected to be tried by a judge alone . Unwin 's trial proceeded first , on November 12 . He testified that he had ordered the pamphlets , which were paid for by the government , and then circulated them as a publication of the " United Democrats " , a fictitious organization that listed its address as that of Unwin 's home . According to Unwin , the leaflet 's text , minus the named individuals , had been provided to him by Powell , he had sent it to the printer 's in exactly that form , and he was surprised to see the list of names in the final version . Though his testimony was vague and apparently evasive , he admitted to destroying 4 @,@ 000 copies of the leaflet on the day of the police raid . He was convicted and Ives , dismissing his role in the affair as that of an " errand boy " , sentenced him to three months hard labour . 
 Powell 's trial proceeded immediately after Unwin 's , and his testimony contradicted much of what Unwin had said . Powell claimed that Unwin had put the list of names on the pamphlet , and that Powell had expected that it would list organizations rather than individuals . Ives found Unwin 's testimony more credible , convicted Powell on November 15 , and sentenced him to six months hard labour . He also recommended that he be deported to his native United Kingdom following his sentence . Appeals by both men against conviction and sentence were unsuccessful . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The case attracted considerable media attention and mixed reactions . A Toronto spokesman for the Communist Party of Canada protested the arrests and called for a " united front " against the People 's League . Aberhart maintained that the men had been jailed on the basis of some harmless political humour , and encouraged the federal government to grant them clemency ; Prime Minister of Canada William Lyon Mackenzie King responded that to do so would be to engage in " direct interference by the federal executive with the free and proper functioning of our courts " . Every night , some Social Crediters drove to the Fort Saskatchewan Penitentiary , where the men were being held , to show their support . On February 11 , 1938 , the legislature passed a resolution calling for the men 's release . 
 Douglas reacted to his deputy 's arrest with anger , telling reporters that " whoever is instigating the proceedings is asking for a great deal of trouble , and is likely to get it . " On December 10 , 1937 , he wrote King to tell him that he had been invited to come to Alberta to provide advice , and asked if he would be risking arrest and deportation if he did so . King responded that as long as Douglas , unlike Powell , refrained from running afoul of the Criminal Code , he had nothing to fear . 
 At the end of Unwin 's sentence , the Social Credit members of the legislature celebrated with a snake dance . Powell was released early , on March 21 , 1938 , in an attempt by King to bolster his Liberals ' chances in a by @-@ election in Edmonton East the same day ; the by @-@ election was won by Social Crediter Orvis A. Kennedy , and a jubilant celebration followed . Once again , the Communists expressed solidarity with the Social Crediters , with Jan Lakeman thanking the voters for giving " an overwhelming defeat to the forces of reaction " . Powell left Canada immediately upon his release , but not before being paid $ 4 @,@ 000 by the Alberta government as thanks for his services . 
 On August 18 , 1938 , police magistrate A. H. Gibson , who had presided over the prosecution of Unwin and Powell , was dismissed without cause by provincial Order in Council . Gibson believed that his dismissal was due to " the government 's resentment over my action in the Powell @-@ Unwin case and the fact that they hold me more or less to blame for the fact that the accused men were sent to jail . " Aberhart 's Social Crediters were re @-@ elected with a reduced majority in the 1940 provincial election ; Aberhart remained premier until his 1943 death . Unwin was defeated in 1940 by Labour candidate Angus James Morrison . Though he lived until January 4 , 1987 , Unwin remains most remembered for his involvement in the Bankers ' Toadies incident . 
 = Hôtel d 'Alluye = 
 The Hôtel d 'Alluye is a hôtel particulier in Blois , Loir @-@ et @-@ Cher , France . Built for <unk> Robertet when he was secretary and notary to Louis XII , the residence bears the name of his barony of Alluyes . On Rue Saint @-@ Honoré near Blois Cathedral and the Château de Blois , it is now significantly smaller than it was originally as the north and west wings were destroyed between the seventeenth and nineteenth centuries . 
 Built between 1498 ( or 1500 ) and 1508 , the hôtel particulier is one of the first examples of Renaissance architecture in Blois . Its façades consist of Gothic , French Renaissance and Italian Renaissance architecture . The Hôtel d 'Alluye was owned by the Robertet family from 1508 until 1606 before undergoing frequent changes in ownership ; since 2007 , it has been divided into ten apartments and a large office . 
 As a result of its ownership changes the building has been considerably altered , with only the east and south wings retaining their original appearance . Destruction of the west wing began during the seventeenth century , and the north wing was destroyed in 1812 . The Hôtel d 'Alluye was classified as a monument historique on 6 November 1929 , and its courtyard has been open to the public on European Heritage Days since 2011 . 
 = = Location = = 
 Built near Blois Cathedral and the Royal Château de Blois , the Hôtel d 'Alluye is located on Rue Saint @-@ Honoré . Its south side originally extended along Rue Saint @-@ Honoré between the current No. 4 and No. 10 , and its west side extended along Rue Porte @-@ <unk> . Records indicate that the north side was extended to Rue Beauvoir in 1643 , enlarging the hôtel particulier over a large quadrangle 30 m ( 98 ft ) wide . 
 How Robertet obtained such a large plot in the centre of Blois is unknown ; he may have acquired the land gradually for the building 's future construction , or could have been granted a fief by the Crown for his services . Although , it is known that Robertet sought to acquire an adjoining building ( the Hôtel Denis @-@ Dupont ) to extend his property . Lawyer Denis Dupont ( the building 's owner ) strongly opposed the idea , and over half of the former Hôtel Denis @-@ Dupont remains . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Under Louis XII the courtesans of France settled in Blois from 1498 to 1515 , and the city became the capital of the Kingdom of France . As a result , many people purchased residences in Blois and the Loire Valley . Named after Robertet 's barony of Alluyes , construction of the Hôtel d 'Alluye began in 1498 or 1500 and was completed in 1508 . It was built during his tenure as secretary and notary to Louis XII , and a diplomatic document from the Republic of Florence described the hôtel as new in September 1508 . The hôtel particulier is an example of French Renaissance architecture ; this , coupled with its ornamentation , were intended to reflect the tastes of Robertet , who was well known for his artistic collections . One of the first examples of Renaissance architecture in Blois , the hôtel indicates the influence of the Quattrocento on him . 
 The Hôtel d 'Alluye was owned by the descendants of Robertet and Michelle Gaillard de Longjumeau until the early sixteenth century . In 1588 , it hosted Louis II , Cardinal of Guise , the brother of Henry I , Duke of Guise ( " Scarface " ) , who was on the Estates General of Blois until his assassination was ordered by Henry III . Robertet 's grandson , Baron François Robertet of Alluyes , died in 1603 with no male offspring ; three years later , the residence and its surrounding property were seized by the Crown . 
 = = = Seventeenth and eighteenth centuries = = = 
 The 1620s saw the fragmentation of the west wing of the original residence . Sold to a number of owners , this part of the building was gradually distorted until only a few remnants were left . The other three wings of the building were acquired by the <unk> of Saint @-@ Denis in 1621 , and on 5 July 1637 the residence was acquired by the <unk> family . In 1644 , major restoration work was done on the north wing under Charles <unk> . The Hôtel d 'Alluye was sold by Michel <unk> de la <unk> to the <unk> family on 5 August 1718 for 9 @,@ 000 livres . 
 = = = Modern era = = = 
 Around 1812 Lambert Rosey , a member of the <unk> family , demolished the building 's north wing . In 1832 , Rosey sold the building to Amédée Naudin for 12 @,@ 000 francs . Work began in the east wing , with its depth reduced and its layout becoming more irregular . Naudin died on 21 November 1864 , and his two daughters sold the residence on 5 June 1866 for 40 @,@ 000 francs . From 1868 to 1869 , it was restored under the direction of Félix <unk> ; in 1877 , further restoration work was planned but not done . 
 From 1890 to 1895 major changes were made to the Rue Saint @-@ Honoré section , with many attics and roofs transformed . In 2007 , the residence was purchased by a developer , who divided it into ten apartments three years later . This helped save the rear of the residence , which had a badly @-@ damaged roof . Currently , the building comprises ten apartments and a large office . 
 = = Buildings = = 
 Destroyed in 1812 , the original layout of the north wing is unknown but it is described in a 1644 document . <unk> than the other wings , the wing and its gallery were no more than 8 m ( 26 ft ) wide and contained two bedrooms . A staircase at the northeast corner linked it to the other wings . 
 Although the east wing is well @-@ preserved , it has undergone many changes and its initial appearance is unknown . The wing has two levels overlooking the courtyard retaining their arcades ( now glassed @-@ in ) , which are the same shape as those in the south wing . The southeast end of the wing contained a kitchen ( with a well ) and a large pantry . 
 Opening onto Rue Saint @-@ Honoré with a large portal , the south wing was the hotel 's main building ; like the east wing , it is well @-@ preserved . To the left of the portal is an area which previously served as a stable . The ground floor has a large room opening onto the courtyard and another , smaller room . The first floor consists of three rooms : two small rooms and a garderobe . During the eighteenth century , it was recorded that the top floor had two chambres de bonne . 
 The west wing 's design is known only from archival records , since it was almost totally destroyed between the seventeenth and nineteenth centuries . The first part of the wing consisted of stables , a spiral staircase leading to the exterior façade , a corridor linking the courtyard to the street and a large pantry . During the seventeenth century , the second part held an indoor jeu de paume court and a chapel ; its first floor had three large bedrooms . 
 = = Façades , entrances and courtyard = = 
 The hotel 's exterior façade was inspired by the Louis XII wing of the Château de Blois . Since its construction , dormers have been added and the window design has changed . The original façade can be seen in the decoration of some ground @-@ floor windows and the portal , and the walls , windows and corbels of this hôtel particulier are in the Gothic style . 
 More modern than the exterior façades and contrary to French architectural tradition , the interior façades embrace the Italian Renaissance style . The hotel 's galleries had two levels of " basket @-@ handle " arches , columns on the first floor and rectangular pillars . Italian influence on the buildings appears in the moldings and carvings on its doors and pillars — for example , facing birds . 
 Thirteen antique terracotta medallions adorn the balustrade of the gallery 's first floor , representing Roman emperors and influenced by Italian architecture . Surrounded by a thick garland of fruits and flowers , these medallions were originally painted green to suggest bronze and distinguish the façade . The building 's perforated railings are inspired by the François I wing of the Château de Blois . The windows were probably added during the late @-@ nineteenth @-@ century restoration . Dismantled in 1812 , the northern galleries were originally supported by two sets of six white marble columns ( rarely found in sixteenth @-@ century buildings ) . 
 The hôtel d 'Alluye originally had three entrances linking it to shopping areas . The original main entrance , on the south side of the hotel , has been preserved . The hotel was accessible from the west by a path from Rue Porte @-@ <unk> ; that entrance was bricked up in 1606 . A third , seventeenth @-@ century entrance linked the north side of the hotel to Rue Beauvoir . 
 The inner courtyard was originally decorated with a bronze copy of Donatello 's David , which was inspired by Michelangelo . Placed in 1509 , the statue was given to Robertet by the Florentine Republic . As early as 1513 , it was moved to his Château de Bury . 
 = = Interior decoration = = 
 Much of the hôtel d 'Alluye 's original interior decoration remains . A notable exception is the fireplace in the largest room of the south wing , which was repainted and redecorated by Martin <unk> during the nineteenth century . On the sides of the fireplace , two maxims ( maxima <unk> ) are engraved in ancient Greek . The first reads , " Remember the common fate " ( " <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> " ) and the second " Above all , respect the divine " ( " <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> " ) . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 The hôtel d 'Alluye , classified as a monument historique on 6 November 1929 , is privately owned . Since 2011 , its courtyard has been open to the public on European Heritage Days . 
 = The Last Temptation of Homer = 
 " The Last Temptation of Homer " is the ninth episode of The Simpsons ' fifth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 9 , 1993 . In the episode , a female employee named Mindy is hired at the nuclear power plant . Homer and Mindy find themselves attracted to each other , but even though Homer is very tempted by her , he stays faithful to his wife Marge . Meanwhile , Bart becomes an outcast and makes friends with a group of nerds after he is prescribed glasses , special shoes , and throat spray which changes his voice . 
 The episode was written by Frank Mula and directed by Carlos Baeza . It did not get the usual amount of laughs at the test screenings , which made the staff worry the show was not as funny as they expected . Michelle Pfeiffer guest starred in the episode as Mindy and received praise for her performance , including a spot on Entertainment Weekly 's list of the 16 best guest appearances on The Simpsons . The episode features cultural references to films such as The Wizard of Oz , It 's A Wonderful Life , and A Christmas Carol . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 7 , and was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After Homer and his coworkers barely escape from a gas leak at the nuclear power plant , Homer 's coworker is fired when he asks Mr. Burns to put in a real emergency exit . After breaking numerous labor laws in hiring a replacement , such as hiring illegal aliens and ducks , the United States Department of Labor demands that Burns make changes in the power plant 's policies , including hiring at least one female worker . A beautiful woman named Mindy Simmons is brought in and Homer finds he is falling in love with her . Barney advises Homer to talk to Mindy because they will most likely have nothing in common . Homer does so , and to his horror , he finds they have exactly the same personality and interests . Meanwhile , Marge is sick with a bad cold , which makes her very unattractive to Homer . 
 Meanwhile , Bart is sent to an eye specialist after it is discovered he has poor vision . The optometrist decides he has lazy eye and fits him with special , thick glasses he has to wear for two weeks . Bart also finds out he has a dry scalp that can only be treated by matting his hair down with a medicated salve , therefore parting his hair to both sides . He also receives a pair of oversized shoes to help his posture , and a spray in his throat to cure the redness , which temporarily gives him a squeaky voice . These adjustments give Bart the appearance of , and gradually turn him into , a nerd . He is picked on and beaten up regularly by bullies for the duration of the two weeks . Eventually , Bart comes back to school in his normal appearance , explaining he is no longer a nerd , but the bullies still decide to beat him up anyway . 
 Homer does his best to avoid Mindy , who is falling in love with Homer , but despite his best efforts , they keep ending up together . Eventually , Homer decides to talk to Mindy , and say that due to their attraction , they should completely avoid each other . However , things get worse when Homer and Mindy are sent to represent the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant at the National Energy Convention in Capital City . After a romantic dinner as an award for winning the Convention , Homer and Mindy go back to their hotel room , and Homer expresses his worries . Mindy tells Homer how she feels about him , but assures him that nothing has to happen between them , and that it is up to him to decide how far their relationship will go . Even though he is very tempted by her , Homer declares his faithfulness to Marge . Mindy accepts his decision and leaves after they share a kiss . Later , Marge shows up with Homer to share a romantic evening together . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Frank Mula and directed by Carlos Baeza . The idea was conceived by the then @-@ show runner David Mirkin . When he was hired to work on The Simpsons , one of his goals was to study the aspect of Homer 's character if he was " really tempted away " from Marge . Mirkin wanted to find out what would happen in a situation where Homer finds himself attracted to another woman . The Simpsons creator Matt Groening had previously written an episode for the show 's third season , called " Colonel Homer " , where Homer finds himself attracted to a country singer named Lurleen Lumpkin . In that episode , Lurleen immediately had a " crush " on Homer , but Homer was not aware of it until later on . With this episode , Mirkin wanted Homer to immediately know he was attracted to Mindy . Mirkin thought it was a " great exploration " to see what happened to Homer in this particular case . The episode did not get the usual amount of laughs at the animatic test screening , which made the staff worry it was not as funny as they expected . Mirkin said it had to do with the fact that because there were very " subtle " performances in the episode , the animation had to be " exactly right " for it to be funny . Baeza and David Silverman , another animation director on the show , worked " hard " on the episode . Mirkin said from the very beginning it was a " huge group effort " from both the writing and the animation staff . 
 Many scenes in the animatic portrayed Mindy as flirty . Mirkin did not like this because the secret of the episode was Homer and Mindy are two good people who are thrown into the situation and " can 't help that their <unk> are going crazy upon seeing each other " . He added that the two characters have " so much in common " that it is " not just a physical relationship , but a mental connection as well " , and that Mindy is not a seductress but rather a woman just as nervous as Homer . Mirkin also pointed out that while Homer is being tempted by a " seemingly perfect " woman at work , his wife could not be more " imperfect " since she has got a cold and looks sick . " He 's trying to connect with his family , but with Marge looking sick and Bart looking like a nerd , everything is just not working , " Mirkin said . 
 American actress Michelle Pfeiffer provided the voice of Mindy Simmons in the episode . All the writers showed up at the recording studio in West Los Angeles to see her record her lines . When Pfeiffer entered the room with her daughter , Pfeiffer was " mobbed " by the energy of the writers and directors , who were excited to see her . Mirkin , who directed Pfeiffer in the studio , was nervous because he thought she was a beautiful woman who was on a " completely different level " than the other actors and actresses he had directed on the show . Pfeiffer was also nervous because she had never voiced an animated character . Mirkin told her : " You 're gonna love this more than anything you have ever done because it 's calm and pleasant , and we have so much time to play and experiment . " This helped her calm down and by the end of the session , she was " really relaxed " and they had a " fantastic " time . Silverman told Pfeiffer to not sound too flirty , and that she should just act herself . In one scene in the episode , Mindy <unk> as she eats doughnuts , much like Homer does . To get the right drool sound , Pfeiffer put broccoli and water in her mouth . Mirkin said he did not have to give much direction during the recording of Homer and Mindy 's final scene together , in which Mindy tells Homer how she feels about him . Pfeiffer " hit it really well " and they did it several times to get it " more and more real " . Mirkin also thought that Pfeiffer completely understood the part and played it perfectly . He described her as " one of those actresses that you don 't even have to see to know they 're great , instead you can hear from her voice what a brilliant actress she is . " Dan Castellaneta was also praised by Mirkin for his performance as Homer . Castellaneta struggled to be " sweet " and " moving " in his performance . 
 When Homer calls a marriage counseling hotline in the episode , he accidentally knocks himself unconscious in the phone booth . In a dream , he is approached by his guardian angel . The angel , in the form of Colonel Klink , shows Homer what his life would be like without Marge . Colonel Klink is a character on the American television series Hogan 's Heroes . Klink 's actor in Hogan 's Heroes , Werner Klemperer , provided the voice of Klink in this episode . Mirkin said Klemperer was a " fantastic sport " to do the character . Since Hogan 's Heroes had gone off the air in 1971 , he had forgotten how to play Klink . Mirkin therefore had to do an impression of Klink that Klemperer could imitate to get it right . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When Bart receives new glasses , scalp treatment , orthopedic shoes , and throat spray , he does an impersonation of Jerry Lewis ' nerdy character in The Nutty Professor . When Homer first meets Mindy , he imagines her as Venus in Sandro Botticelli 's painting The Birth of Venus . To deal with Homer and Mindy charging room service to the company , Mr. Burns unleashes flying monkeys in the manner of the Wicked Witch of the West , as seen in the 1939 film The Wizard of Oz . However , the attempt fails as the monkeys all fall to their deaths . The scene between Homer and Colonel Klink from Hogan 's Heroes , wondering what his life would have been like if he married Mindy and not Marge , draws from the films It 's A Wonderful Life and A Christmas Carol . When Homer meets Mindy in the elevator , he thinks " unsexy thoughts " to avoid being seduced by her . He imagines Barney in a bikini and humming the theme tune to the American sitcom I Dream of Jeannie . Homer attempts to read the notes for Mindy that he wrote on his hand , but they have smeared out because of sweat . In his attempt , Homer unknowingly babbles the Nam Myoho Renge Kyo , a Buddhist chant in Nichiren Buddhism and SGI . This is a reference to an Akbar and Jeff cartoon , written by Matt Groening , in which the same mantra is used . When Homer notices the sweat , he says he is " sweating like [ film critic ] Roger Ebert " . In the bathroom , Homer sings a rough version of the song " Mandy " by Barry Manilow , replacing " Mandy " with " Mindy " . Homer refers to comic strip Ziggy when he wonders if Mindy agrees the title character has become " too preachy " . Barry White 's song " Can 't Get Enough of Your Love , Babe " is played in the episode 's final scene where Homer and Marge make out at the hotel room . When Bart is being fitted for correctional glasses the optician reveals former Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin had a pair just like Bart 's . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " The Last Temptation of Homer " finished 24th ( tied with The Fresh Prince of Bel Air ) in the ratings for the week of December 6 – 12 , 1993 . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 7 . The episode was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . In 2003 , it was placed tenth on Entertainment Weekly 's top 25 The Simpsons episode list , and The Daily Telegraph characterized the episode as one of " The 10 Best Simpsons Television Episodes " . Nancy Basile of About.com named it one of her top twenty favorite episodes of the show , and said Michelle Pfeiffer " is so elegant and beautiful , that the irony of her playing a burping love interest for Homer Simpson is funny enough . " She added " the thorny issue of adultery is tackled in a way only The Simpsons could , " and " though Homer is contemplating cheating , he 's a sympathetic and almost innocent character . " Robert Canning of IGN called the episode " smart , touching and funny " , and said " it did a great job showing Homer 's struggle to deal with the flirtations of a co @-@ worker . " 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , called it a " wonderfully scripted episode " . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson said , " Given Homer ’ s utter devotion to Marge , it may seem off @-@ character for him to fall for Mindy , but the show makes it fit , as his obsession doesn ’ t come across as inconsistent . " He added the plot with Bart becoming a nerd is the " funnier one " of the two . Bill Gibron of DVD Talk called it a " jest fest loaded with insight into the human heart and hilarious over @-@ the @-@ top goofiness . " TV DVD Reviews 's Kay Daly called it the season 's finest episode with the " greatest foray into emotional resonance " . Matt Groening thought it was an amazing episode with " a lot of fun " in it . David Mirkin said Frank Mula 's script was great . 
 In a 2008 article , Entertainment Weekly named Pfeiffer 's role as Mindy one of the 16 best guest appearances on The Simpsons . She also appeared on AOL 's list of their top favorite guest stars on the show . Brett Buckalew of Metromix Indianapolis wrote that Pfeiffer " gives arguably the best celebrity guest @-@ vocal performance in series history . " Total Film 's Nathan Ditum ranked her performance as the 15th best guest appearance in the show 's history . 
 = European storm petrel = 
 The European storm petrel , British storm petrel or just storm petrel ( Hydrobates pelagicus ) is a seabird in the storm petrel family , Hydrobatidae . It is the only member of the genus Hydrobates . The small , square @-@ tailed bird is entirely black except for a broad white rump and a white band on the underwings , and it has a fluttering , bat @-@ like flight . The large majority of the population breeds on islands off the coasts of Europe , with the greatest numbers in the Faroe Islands , United Kingdom , Ireland and Iceland . The Mediterranean population is a separate subspecies , but is inseparable at sea from its Atlantic relatives ; its strongholds are Filfla Island ( Malta ) , Sicily and the Balearic Islands . 
 The storm petrel nests in crevices and burrows , sometimes shared with other seabirds or rabbits , and lays a single white egg , usually on bare soil . The adults share the lengthy incubation and both feed the chick , which is not normally brooded after the first week . This bird is strongly migratory , spending the northern hemisphere winter mainly off the coasts of South Africa and Namibia , with some birds stopping in the seas adjoining West Africa , and a few remaining near their Mediterranean breeding islands . This petrel is strictly oceanic outside the breeding season . It feeds on small fish , squid and zooplankton while pattering on the sea 's surface , and can find oily edible items by smell . The food is converted in the bird 's stomach to an oily orange liquid which is regurgitated when the chick is fed . Although usually silent at sea , the storm petrel has a chattering call given by both members of a pair in their courtship flight , and the male has a purring song given from the breeding chamber . 
 The storm petrel cannot survive on islands where land mammals such as rats and cats have been introduced , and it suffers natural predation from gulls , skuas , owls and falcons . Although the population may be declining slightly , this petrel is classified by the International Union for Conservation of Nature as being of Least Concern due to its high total numbers . Its presence in rough weather at sea has led to various mariners ' superstitions , and , by analogy , to its use as a symbol by revolutionary and anarchist groups . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The storm petrels , Hydrobatidae , are one of the four major families of the Procellariiformes or " tubenoses " , an order of seabirds that also includes the albatrosses , the Procellariidae , and the diving petrels . The family is an ancient group of small species which is thought to have diverged early from the rest of the tubenoses ; the supporting fossil record is poor , with specimens from California dating back only to the Late Miocene ( 11 @.@ 6 – 5 @.@ 3 million years ago ) . The Hydrobatidae are often divided into two subfamilies , the mainly southern hemisphere Oceanitinae and the northern Hydrobatinae ; cytochrome b DNA sequence analysis suggests that these might be full families . The European storm petrel is the only member of the genus Hydrobates , the remainder of the Hydrobatinae being placed in Oceanodroma , although the least storm petrel is sometimes separated as the sole member of <unk> . The relationships within the Hydrobatinae are complex and uncertain , and it has been suggested that all the members of the subfamily could be subsumed into an enlarged Hydrobates . 
 The storm petrel was first described from by Linnaeus in his Systema naturae in 1758 as Procellaria <unk> . It was moved to the genus Hydrobates by Friedrich <unk> in 1822 . Petrel , first recorded in 1602 , is a corruption of <unk> , referring to the bird 's <unk> @-@ pattering across the water . The suggestion that the word refers to St Peter walking on the waves is a later invention . Storm arises from seamen 's association of this bird with bad weather . In English , the name of the species was written as " stormy petrel " by some 19th @-@ century authors . 
 The scientific name derives from Greek ; Hydrobates is from <unk> , water , and <unk> , walker , and pelagicus is from <unk> , of the sea . There are two recognised subspecies , the North Atlantic nominate subspecies , H. p. pelagicus ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) , and the Mediterranean H. p. melitensis ( Schembri , 1843 ) . Although there is some genetic support for classifying the southern form as a separate species , the morphology is not considered sufficiently different from that of the nominate subspecies to justify a split . 
 = = Description = = 
 The storm petrel is a small bird , 14 – 18 cm ( 5 @.@ 5 – 7 @.@ 1 in ) in length with a 36 – 39 cm ( 14 – 15 in ) wingspan . It weighs 20 – 38 g ( 0 @.@ 71 – 1 @.@ 34 oz ) , with an average of 28 g ( 0 @.@ 99 oz ) . It is square @-@ tailed and has all @-@ black plumage except for a snow @-@ white rump that extends to the sides of the tail base and a broad white band on the underwings . Juveniles in fresh plumage can also show a narrow white bar on the upperwing . The plumage becomes dark brown rather than black as it becomes worn . There are no obvious differences between the sexes , although in the Mediterranean subspecies , at least , most captured birds can be sexed using a formula which involves multiplying the wing length by the length of the white rump band ; females are slightly larger and have a longer white rump than males . The Mediterranean subspecies has longer wings and a heavier bill on average than the nominate form , but neither sex nor subspecies can be determined by observation at sea . 
 Moult is prolonged in all tubenoses , since they must maintain an ability to fly . Northern populations start replacing their plumage after those further south , reflecting the later start to their breeding season . Birds in a Welsh colony commenced moulting in early August , while populations in northern Spain and the Balearics started in early July and mid @-@ June respectively . Breeding birds moult later than non @-@ breeders . 
 The storm petrel 's large nasal olfactory bulbs facilitate a keen sense of smell , and the birds themselves have a distinctive musty aroma which can help researchers to locate breeding colonies . Individual petrels recognise their own body scent and can use it to locate their nest in the dark . 
 The flight is weak @-@ looking and resembles that of a bat , with fluttering interspersed with short glides . When feeding , the birds hang with raised wings and patter on the surface with their feet , but , unlike the Wilson 's storm petrel , do not look as if they are walking on the water . Birds will sometimes settle on the sea . Like other petrels , the European storm petrel cannot walk properly on land , but shuffles on its tarsi ; once there is enough room , the bird flaps its wings to support itself on its toes . 
 The European storm petrel can be distinguished from related Western Palaearctic species by the white bar on its underwing and its distinctive fluttering flight . Compared to Leach 's storm petrel , band @-@ rumped storm petrel , and the recently described Monteiro 's storm petrel , it is also smaller , darker , shorter @-@ winged and has a square tail . Wilson 's storm petrel lacks an underwing bar , and has long legs with the feet visible beyond the tail . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 In its display flight , the storm petrel gives a call consisting of eight or more repetitions of a fast ter @-@ <unk> sounds ending in a trill ( rapid alternation of notes ) . This chattering , staccato call is highly variable in pitch , stress and length . Both sexes make the call , which is used as an advertisement for a mate , for pair recognition , and in the nuptial flight . The details of the vocalisation vary geographically , including between the Atlantic and Mediterranean populations , and birds recognise calls from their own breeding area . The chatter @-@ call of the Mediterranean subspecies is distinctive . It has the first two notes running into each other , and the final element is sometimes doubled . The storm petrel is usually silent at sea , but sometimes gives the chattering call . A purring song arrr @-@ r @-@ r @-@ r @-@ r @-@ r @-@ r … ending with a sharp <unk> is given in the burrow by the male only ; it was described by Charles Oldham as " like a fairy being sick " . Other vocalisations include a fast wick @-@ wick @-@ wick , sometimes given in flight , and an up @-@ <unk> alarm which resembles the chatter @-@ call . Chicks give a whistling pee @-@ pee @-@ pee call when being fed , and a faster version of this vocalisation is used by adults and young to signal distress . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Storm petrels breed only in the Western Palaearctic on islands off the Atlantic and Mediterranean coasts of Europe . The largest colonies are in the Faroe Islands ( 150 @,@ 000 @-@ 400 @,@ 000 pairs ) , United Kingdom ( 20 @,@ 000 @-@ 150 @,@ 000 ) , Ireland ( 50 @,@ 000 @-@ 100 @,@ 000 ) and Iceland ( 50 @,@ 000 @-@ 100 @,@ 000 ) , with smaller breeding areas off Norway , Malta , Spain , the Canary Islands , Italy , France and Greece . The strongholds of the melitensis subspecies are the island of Filfla ( Malta ) , Sicily and the Balearic Islands , with smaller sites elsewhere in the Mediterranean . This latter form also breeds in North Africa ; definitely in Tunisia , probably in Algeria and possibly in Morocco . Because of its nocturnal habits and the problems of accessing some of the small islands on which it breeds , the distribution is poorly known . A colony was discovered as recently as 2009 , on Lampedusa . The storm petrel has been recorded as a vagrant in several European countries as far east as the Ukraine , in the Guinea region of West Africa , and in Turkey , Israel , Lebanon , and the US . Although there were no North American records for more than 30 years after the first in 1970 , this bird has been more or less annual in small numbers since 2003 . 
 The storm petrel breeds on exposed and usually uninhabited islands which it visits only at night . It otherwise frequents mid @-@ depth waters away from the coastal zone , but not over the ocean deeps . In the breeding season , it is mainly found between the 10 – 25 ° C July isotherms . In Europe , it is rarely seen from land except in autumn storms . 
 The storm petrel is migratory , spending the northern hemisphere winter mainly in cool waters off the coasts of South Africa and Namibia , south to latitude 38 ° S and east to KwaZulu @-@ Natal . Some birds stay north of the equator in the seas adjoining Mauritania and Rio de Oro , and a few remain near the breeding islands , especially in the Mediterranean . It is strictly oceanic outside the breeding season , although it is described as regularly seen from land in West Africa . Young birds do not return to the breeding colonies until their second or third year . Birds mostly head south from the breeding islands between September and November , reaching West Africa by mid @-@ November and the south Atlantic by the end of the year . The return passage starts in April , with late records from the tropics and further south probably representing sub @-@ adult birds that will not breed that year . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The storm petrel is sexually mature at age 4 – 5 years , with the Mediterranean subspecies typically breeding a year earlier than the Atlantic form . Breeding happens in colonies and normally begins in late May or June . Pairs have a repeated nocturnal display flight in which the male chases the female , the chase being accompanied by flight calls . Some near @-@ adult birds may pair up and occupy a hole at the same time , prior to breeding in the following year . 
 Storm petrels normally nest in crevices between or under rocks , or burrow in the soil . When they make their own tunnels , they loosen the earth with their bills and kick out the debris with their feet . The birds less commonly nest in walls , under buildings or down rabbit burrows . Disused or occupied burrows of Atlantic puffins and Manx shearwaters are sometimes used , and the petrel pair may share a common entrance with those seabirds , rabbits or other pairs of its own species . Where other occupants are present , the petrels dig a side burrow or use an existing low @-@ roofed tunnel which the larger birds or rabbits cannot easily enter . Even so , puffins and shearwaters will sometimes access and destroy nests , and adult petrels may be killed by their larger neighbours . Human @-@ made plastic nesting tubes are readily used , and may provide protection against predators . Birds usually mate for life and use the same hole every year . 
 The nest tunnel is 10 – 300 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 – 118 @.@ 1 in ) long and 5 – 8 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) across , with a slightly narrower entrance . The nest chamber is typically unlined , although pairs may bring in some grass , bracken or seaweed . Although the storm petrel is generally non @-@ territorial when breeding , a pair will defend the nest chamber itself after the eggs have been laid . 
 The clutch is a single egg , usually pure white , sometimes with some reddish brown spots that soon disappear . The average size of the egg is 28 mm × 21 mm ( 1 @.@ 10 in × 0 @.@ 83 in ) , and it weighs 6 @.@ 8 g ( 0 @.@ 24 oz ) , of which 6 % is shell . If an egg is lost early enough , on rare occasions a replacement may be laid . This is very unusual for tubenoses . The eggs are incubated by both parents for 38 – 50 days , the longer periods arising when the eggs have become chilled through adult absence . One adult typically spends three days at a time on the egg while its partner feeds at sea . The chicks are altricial and covered with silver @-@ grey down , and are fed by both parents with their regurgitated oily stomach contents . The adults do not normally stay with the chick after first week , visiting only to bring food . After about 50 days , the chicks are fed less regularly , sometimes with gaps of several days , and the parents may stop visiting completely shortly before the chick leaves the nest . The chicks fledge about 56 – 86 days after hatching , and receive no parental support after leaving the nest hole . 
 Tubenoses have smaller egg clutches and much longer and more variable incubation and fledging times than passerines with similarly sized eggs , resembling swifts in these developmental factors . Tubenoses and swifts have generally secure nest sites , but their food sources are unreliable , whereas passerines are vulnerable in the nest but food is usually plentiful . In the particular case of the storm petrel , it has a body temperature perhaps 3 ° C lower than other small birds , and this may also contribute to the lengthy incubation . 
 The adult petrel 's annual death rate is 12 – 13 % , and the typical life span is 11 years . Longevity records established from bird ringing recoveries include a bird aged 31 years 11 months 9 days , and another aged more than 33 years . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The storm petrel normally flies within 10 m ( 33 ft ) of the water surface and typically feeds by picking items off the sea as it patters over the surface . Birds have been observed diving for food to a depth of not more than 0 @.@ 5 m ( 20 in ) . and it is claimed , using indirect measurements , that the Mediterranean subspecies reaches depths of up to 5 m ( 16 ft ) ) . A bird may range up to 200 km ( 120 mi ) over the course of two or three days in search of food . Although the bird usually feeds during the day , in the breeding season petrels will often feed at night close to the shore . 
 The typical prey consists of surface organisms such as small fish , squid , crustaceans and jellyfish . The storm petrel will also eat offal and oily food , often located by smell , and will follow ships . In the Atlantic , more than half the food items are zooplankton and the fish caught include small herring and <unk> ; whale carcasses are scavenged where available . During digestion , the plankton is quickly converted to an oily orange liquid that owes its colour to carotenoids . Larger prey items take longer to digest . The oil , rich in vitamin A , is produced by a large gland in the stomach . The Mediterranean subspecies ' diet is mainly fish , particularly Mediterranean sand eels . Petrels also catch opossum shrimps from waters close to the colony . Bluefin tuna farms are exploited on the Maltese island of Filfla ; birds from the large local colony feed on the unwashed food fed to the farmed tuna , a mixture of fish , squid and prawns which produces a sizeable oily slick . Small numbers of insects are caught near breeding colonies , and some plant material , including angiosperm seeds and sorrel , has been found in the stomach contents . A study on Leach 's storm petrel , which consumes similar items , showed that the petrels were snipping pieces off plant leaves in flight , but it could not be confirmed that this was in the course of catching insects . Nasal glands remove excess salt from seawater consumed by the petrel as a concentrated solution excreted through the nostrils . 
 Petrels can be attracted to boats with " chum " , a malodorous mixture typically containing fish heads , bones and offal , with added fish oil and popcorn to aid flotation . An apparently empty ocean will soon fill with hundreds of birds attracted by the smell . The attraction of the fishy odour is sometimes enhanced by the addition of <unk> ( DMS ) a chemical also naturally produced by some planktonic organisms , although there are doubts about the safety of this possible carcinogen . 
 = = Predators and parasites = = 
 Adults and young are vulnerable to predation at the breeding colonies , their only defence being to spit oil . Petrels cannot breed on islands where rats have been introduced , and feral cats frequently kill these birds on Foula in the Shetland Islands . The American mink , a non @-@ native species in Europe , is a strong swimmer , and can colonise islands up to 2 km ( 2 @,@ 200 yd ) from the mainland . Natural predators of petrels and other seabirds include skuas and large gulls . The yellow @-@ legged gull is a particular problem in the Mediterranean , and great skuas were estimated to kill 7 @,@ 500 petrels a year on St Kilda , an unsustainable number . Some great black @-@ backed gulls on the Atlantic islands specialise in taking seabird chicks at night , and peregrine falcons hunt adults at sea . Localised predators include Eleonora 's falcon on the <unk> Islands and the nocturnal barn owl on the Balearics ; a few owls can wipe out a colony . The little owl is also a predator of both adults and young where it occurs . 
 Feather mites of at least two species have been found on the storm petrel , with <unk> pelagicus occurring at much higher densities than <unk> <unk> . The flea <unk> <unk> and <unk> mites are commonly found , with lower numbers of ticks . These blood @-@ sucking parasites slow the growth rate of nestlings and may affect their survival rate . 
 Storm petrels seem to be largely free of blood parasites , even when in close proximity to carrier species such as the yellow @-@ legged gull . It has been suggested that seabird species with long incubation periods and long lives have well @-@ developed immune systems that prevent serious blood parasitism . 
 = = Status = = 
 The European population of the storm petrel has been estimated at 430 @,@ 000 – 510 @,@ 000 breeding pairs or 1 @,@ 290 @,@ 000 – 1 @,@ 530 @,@ 000 individual birds and makes up 95 % of the world total numbers . The population estimate includes about 11 @,@ 000 to 16 @,@ 000 breeding pairs of the Mediterranean subspecies . 
 Although this species ' population now appears to be declining , the decrease is not rapid or large enough to trigger conservation vulnerability criteria . Given its high numbers , this petrel is therefore classified by the International Union for Conservation of Nature as being of Least Concern . The perceived decline may be due increased predation from gulls , skuas and introduced mammals . Eradication of rats protects seabird colonies and may enable recolonisation of islands cleared of rodents . Predation of cave @-@ nesting petrels in the Balearics by yellow @-@ legged gulls is restricted to relatively few individual gulls specialising in this prey item ; this means that the problems can be controlled by selective culling and the provision of plastic nest boxes . 
 Because it feeds in flight , the storm petrel is less affected by oil pollution than other seabirds , and may be able to use its good sense of smell to avoid slicks , although a large spill near a breeding colony could have serious consequences . 
 = = In culture = = 
 Its association with storms makes the storm petrel a bird of bad omen to mariners ; they are said to either foretell or cause bad weather . A more prosaic explanation of their appearance in rough weather is that , like most oceanic seabirds , they rely on the winds to support them in flight and just sit on the water surface when becalmed . The birds were sometimes thought to be the souls of perished sailors , and killing a petrel was believed to bring bad luck . The petrel 's reputation led to the old name of witch , although the commonest of the folk names is Mother Carey 's Chicken , a name also used for storm petrels in general in the UK and USA from at least 1767 . This is believed to be a corruption of mater cara ( dear mother , the Virgin Mary ) , a reference to the supernatural Mother Carey , or a superstitious modification of an earlier Mother Mary 's Chicken to reduce the potency of the religious name . The Mother Carey character appears a number of times in literature . In the Cicely Fox Smith poem " Mother Carey " , she calls old sailors to return to the sea , but in John Masefield 's poem of the same name she is seen as a wrecker of ships . She appears as a fairy in Charles Kingsley 's The Water Babies and is depicted in one of Jessie Willcox Smith 's illustrations for the book . 
 The association of the storm petrel with turbulent weather has led to its use as a metaphor for revolutionary views , the epithet " stormy petrel " being applied by various authors to characters as disparate as Roman tribune Publius Clodius Pulcher , a Presbyterian minister in the early Carolinas , an Afghan governor , or an Arkansas politician . 
 A 1901 poem by Russian writer Maxim Gorky is invariably titled in English as " The Song of the Stormy Petrel " , although that may not be a perfectly accurate translation of the Russian title " <unk> о <unk> " , because " <unk> " ( the name of the bird in Russian ) translates to the English general term " storm bird " . The poem was called " the battle anthem of the revolution " , and earned Gorky the nickname " The Storm Petrel of the Revolution " . 
 Various revolutionary anarchist groups adopted the bird 's name , either as a group identifier , as in the Spanish Civil War , or for their publications . The Stormy Petrel ( Burevestnik ) was the title of the magazine of the Anarchist Communist Federation in Russia around the time of the 1905 revolution , and is still an imprint of the London group of the Anarchist Federation ( Britain and Ireland ) . To honor Gorky and his work , the name Burevestnik was bestowed on a variety of institutions , locations , and products in the USSR . 
 = <unk> ribbontail ray = 
 Not to be confused with the bluespotted stingray , Neotrygon kuhlii . 
 The bluespotted ribbontail ray ( <unk> lymma ) is a species of stingray in the family Dasyatidae . Found from the intertidal zone to a depth of 30 m ( 100 ft ) , this species is common throughout the tropical Indian and western Pacific Oceans in nearshore , coral reef @-@ associated habitats . It is a fairly small ray , not exceeding 35 cm ( 14 in ) in width , with a mostly smooth , oval pectoral fin disc , large protruding eyes , and a relatively short and thick tail with a deep fin fold underneath . It can be easily identified by its striking color pattern of many electric blue spots on a yellowish background , with a pair of blue stripes on the tail . 
 At night , small groups of bluespotted ribbontail rays follow the rising tide onto sandy flats to root for small benthic invertebrates and bony fishes in the sediment . When the tide recedes , the rays separate and withdraw to shelters on the reef . Reproduction is aplacental viviparous , with females giving birth to litters of up to seven young . This ray is capable of injuring humans with its venomous tail spines , though it prefers to flee if threatened . Because of its beauty and size , the bluespotted ribbontail ray is popular with private aquarists despite being poorly suited to captivity . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed this species as Near Threatened , as it faces widespread habitat degradation and intensive fishing pressure throughout its range . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The bluespotted ribbontail ray was originally described as Raja lymma by Swedish naturalist Peter Forsskål , in his 1775 <unk> Animalium quae in <unk> ad maris australis <unk> per <unk> 1772 , 1773 , et 1774 <unk> <unk> , <unk> , et <unk> Joannes <unk> Forster , etc . , <unk> Henrico Lichtenstein . The specific epithet lymma means " dirt " . Forsskål did not designate a type specimen . In 1837 , German biologists Johannes Peter Müller and Friedrich Gustav Jakob Henle created the genus <unk> for Trygon ornatus , now known to be a junior synonym of this species . 
 Other common names used for this species include bluespotted ray , bluespotted fantail ray , bluespotted lagoon ray , bluespotted stingray , fantail ray , lesser fantail ray , lagoon ray , reef ray , ribbon @-@ tailed stingray , and ribbontail stingray . Morphological examination has suggested that the bluespotted ribbontail ray is more closely related to the <unk> @-@ American Himantura ( H. pacifica and H. <unk> ) and the river stingrays ( <unk> ) than to the congeneric blotched fantail ray ( T. <unk> ) , which is closer to Dasyatis and Indo @-@ Pacific Himantura . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Widespread in the nearshore waters of the tropical Indo @-@ Pacific region , the bluespotted ribbontail ray has a range that extends around the periphery of the Indian Ocean from South Africa to the Arabian Peninsula to Southeast Asia , including Madagascar , Mauritius , Zanzibar , the Seychelles , Sri Lanka , and the Maldives . It is rare in the Persian Gulf and Gulf of Oman . In the Pacific Ocean , this species is found from the Philippines to northern Australia , as well as around numerous Melanesian and Polynesian islands as far east as the Solomon Islands . Rarely found deeper than 30 m ( 100 ft ) , the bluespotted ribbontail ray is a bottom @-@ dwelling species that frequents coral reefs and adjacent sandy flats . It is also commonly encountered in the intertidal zone and tidal pools , and has been sighted near seagrass beds . Every summer , considerable numbers of bluespotted ribbontail rays arrive off South Africa . 
 = = Description = = 
 The pectoral fin disc of the bluespotted ribbontail ray is oval in shape , around four @-@ fifths as wide as long , with a rounded to broadly angular snout . The large , protruding eyes are immediately followed by the broad spiracles . There is a narrow flap of skin between the nares with a fringed posterior margin , reaching past the mouth . The lower jaw dips at the middle and deep furrows are present at the mouth corners . There are 15 – 24 tooth rows in either jaw , arranged into pavement @-@ like plates , and two large papillae on the floor of the mouth . The pelvic fins are narrow and angular . The thick , depressed tail measures about 1 @.@ 5 times the disc length and bears one or two ( usually two ) serrated spines well behind the tail base ; there is a deep fin fold on the ventral surface , reaching the tip of the tail , and a low midline ridge on the upper surface . 
 The skin is generally smooth , save for perhaps a scattering of small thorns on the middle of the back . The dorsal coloration is striking , consisting of numerous circular , neon blue spots on a yellowish brown or green background ; the spots vary in size , becoming smaller and denser towards the disc margin . The tail has two stripes of the same blue running along each side as far as the spines . The eyes are bright yellow and the belly is white . Individuals found off southern Africa may lack the blue tail stripes . The bluespotted ribbontail ray grows to 35 cm ( 14 in ) across , 80 cm ( 31 in ) long , and 5 kg ( 11 lb ) . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 One of the most abundant stingrays inhabiting Indo @-@ Pacific reefs , the bluespotted ribbontail ray generally spends the day hidden alone inside caves or under coral ledges or other debris ( including from shipwrecks ) , often with only its tail showing . At night , small groups assemble and swim onto shallow sandy flats with the rising tide to feed . Unlike many other stingrays , this species seldom buries itself in sand . The bluespotted ribbontail ray excavates sand pits in search of molluscs , polychaete worms , shrimps , crabs , and small benthic bony fishes ; when prey is located , it is trapped by the body of the ray and maneuvered into the mouth with the disc . Other fishes , such as goatfish , frequently follow foraging rays , seeking food missed by the ray . 
 Breeding in the bluespotted ribbontail ray occurs from late spring to summer ; the male follows the female and nips at her disc , eventually biting and holding onto her for copulation . There is also a documented instance of a male holding onto the disc of a smaller male bluespotted stingray ( Dasyatis kuhlii ) , in a possible case of mistaken identity . Adult males have been observed gathering in shallow water , which may relate to reproduction . Like other stingrays , this species is aplacental viviparous : the embryos are initially sustained by yolk , which later in development is supplemented by histotroph ( " uterine milk " , containing mucus , fat , and proteins ) produced by the mother . The gestation period is uncertain , but is thought to be between four and twelve months long . Females bear litters of up to seven young , each a miniature version of the adult measuring around 13 – 14 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 – 5 @.@ 5 in ) across . Males attain sexual maturity at a disc width of 20 – 21 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 – 8 @.@ 3 in ) ; the maturation size of females is unknown . 
 Known predators of the bluespotted ribbontail ray include hammerhead sharks ( Sphyrna ) and bottlenose dolphins ( Tursiops ) ; it is also potentially preyed upon by other large fishes and marine mammals . When threatened , this ray tends to flee at high speed in a zigzag pattern , to throw off pursuers . Numerous parasites have been identified from this species : the tapeworms <unk> <unk> , Anthobothrium <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> elegans and E. <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and Rhinebothrium <unk> and R. <unk> , the monogeneans Decacotyle <unk> , Empruthotrema <unk> , Entobdella australis , and <unk> <unk> , the flatworms <unk> <unk> and Anaporrhutum albidum , the nematode <unk> australis , the copepod <unk> <unk> , and the protozoan Trypanosoma <unk> . This ray has been observed soliciting cleanings from the bluestreak cleaner wrasse ( Labroides dimidiatus ) by raising the margins of its disc and pelvic fins . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 While timid and innocuous towards humans , the bluespotted ribbontail ray is capable of inflicting an excruciating wound with its venomous tail spines . Its attractive appearance and relatively small size has resulted in its being the most common stingray found in the home aquarium trade . However , it seldom fares well in captivity and very few hobbyists are able to maintain one for long . Many specimens refuse to feed in the aquarium , and even seemingly healthy individuals often inexplicably die or stop feeding . A higher degree of success has been achieved by public aquariums and a breeding project is maintained by the European Association of Zoos and Aquaria ( for example , a total of 15 pubs were born at Lisbon Oceanarium from 2011 to 2013 ) . The bluespotted ribbontail ray is utilized as food in East Africa , Southeast Asia , and Australia ; it is captured intentionally or incidentally using gillnets , longlines , spears , and fence traps . 
 The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed the bluespotted ribbontail ray as Near Threatened . Although still relatively common and widely distributed , this species faces continuing degradation of its coral reef habitat throughout its range , from development and destructive fishing practices using cyanide or dynamite . In addition , its populations are under heavy pressure by artisanal and commercial fisheries , and by local collecting for the aquarium trade . 
 = Douglas Jardine = 
 Douglas Robert Jardine ( 23 October 1900 – 18 June 1958 ) was a cricketer who played 22 Test matches for England , captaining the side in 15 of those matches between 1931 and 1934 . A right @-@ handed batsman , he is best known for captaining the English team during the 1932 – 33 Ashes tour of Australia . During that series , England employed " Bodyline " tactics against the Australian batsmen , wherein bowlers pitched the ball short on the line of leg stump to rise towards the bodies of the batsmen in a manner that most contemporary players and critics viewed as intimidatory and physically dangerous . Jardine is generally believed to be the person responsible for the implementation of Bodyline . A controversial figure among cricketers , he was well known for his dislike of Australian players and crowds and was unpopular in Australia , particularly for his manner and especially after the Bodyline tour . Many who played under his leadership regarded him as an excellent captain ; not all regarded him as good at managing people . He was also famous in cricket circles for wearing a multi @-@ coloured Harlequin cap . 
 After establishing an early reputation as a prolific schoolboy batsman , Jardine played cricket for Winchester College , attended the University of Oxford , playing for its cricket team , and played for Surrey County Cricket Club as an amateur . He developed a defensive method of batting which was unusual for an amateur , receiving occasional criticism for negative batting . Despite this , Jardine was selected in Test matches for the first time in 1928 , and went on to play with some success in the Test series in Australia in 1928 – 29 . Following this tour , his business commitments prevented him from playing as much cricket . However , in 1931 , he was asked to captain England in a Test against New Zealand . Although there were some initial misgivings about his captaincy , Jardine led England in the next three cricket seasons and on two overseas tours , one of which was the Australian tour of 1932 – 33 . Of his 15 Tests as captain , he won nine , lost one and drew five . He retired from all first @-@ class cricket in 1934 following a tour to India . 
 Although Jardine was a qualified solicitor he did not work much in law , choosing instead to devote most of his working life to banking and , later on , journalism . He joined the Territorial Army in the Second World War and spent most of it posted in India . After the war , he worked as company secretary at a paper manufacturer and also returned to journalism . While on a business trip in 1957 , he became ill with what proved to be lung cancer and died , aged 57 , in 1958 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Douglas Jardine was born on 23 October 1900 in Bombay , British India , to Scottish parents . His parents were Malcolm Jardine , also a former first @-@ class cricketer but later a barrister , and Alison Moir . At the age of nine , Douglas was sent to stay with his mother 's sister in St Andrews , Scotland . She lived in a large mansion where he spent most of his school holidays while going to <unk> Hill School near Newbury , Berkshire , from May 1910 . The school had high standards and Jardine was moderately successful academically . From 1912 , he played cricket for the school first eleven , enjoying success as a bowler and as a batsman . He captained the team in his final term , when the team were unbeaten . Jardine was influenced by the writing of former England captain C. B. Fry on batting technique , which contradicted the advice of his coach at <unk> Hill . The coach disapproved of Jardine 's batting methods , but Jardine did not back down and quoted a book by Fry to support his viewpoint . 
 In 1914 , Jardine entered Winchester College . At the time , life at Winchester was arduous and austere ; discipline was harsh . Sport and exercise were vital parts of the school day . In Jardine 's time , preparing the pupils for war was also important . According to Jardine 's biographer , Christopher Douglas , the pupils were " taught to be honest , impervious to physical pain , uncomplaining and civilised . " All pupils were required to be academically competent and Jardine was able to get along without exhibiting brilliance ; successful sportsmen , on the other hand , were revered . Jardine enjoyed a slightly better position than some other pupils , already possessing when he arrived a reputation as a cricketer and soon excelling at other sports , representing the school at football as a goalkeeper and rackets , and playing Winchester College football , a sport which has resemblances to rugby union . However , his main sporting reputation came from cricket . He was in the first eleven for three years from 1917 and received coaching from Harry Altham , Rockley Wilson and Schofield Haigh , the latter two of whom were distinguished cricketers . Jardine later said that Wilson helped to develop his batting . In 1919 , his final year , Jardine came top of the school batting averages with 997 runs at an average of 66 @.@ 46 . He also became captain although there were doubts within the school about his ability to unify the team . Despite these doubts , Winchester won their annual match against Eton College in 1919 , a fixture in which Eton usually held the upper hand . Jardine 's batting ( 35 and 89 in the match ) and captaincy were believed by critics to be the key factors in his side 's first victory over Eton for 12 years . After his retirement from cricket , he named his 89 in that match as his favourite innings . Jardine went on to score 135 not out against Harrow School . 
 Jardine 's achievements in the season were widely reported in the local and national press . He went on to play in two representative schools matches at Lord 's Cricket Ground , where he scored 44 , 91 , 57 and 55 in two matches and won favourable reviews in the press . Wisden , in 1928 , described Jardine at this time as being obviously of a much higher standard than his contemporaries , particularly in defence and on side batting . However , at this stage in his batting , he was sometimes criticised for being too cautious and not using all the batting strokes of which he was capable . His good batting technique gave the impression that he could easily score more quickly . 
 = = First @-@ class career = = 
 = = = Oxford University = = = 
 Jardine entered New College , Oxford , in September 1919 at a time when the university was more crowded than usual due to the arrival of men whose entrance had been delayed due to the war . He still took part in several sports , representing New College as goalkeeper in matches between the colleges , and being given a trial for the University football team , although he was not chosen . He continued to play rackets and began to play real tennis , making such progress and showing such promise that he went on to represent the University successfully and won his Blue . In cricket , Jardine came under the coaching of Tom Hayward who influenced his footwork and defence . Wisden commented in 1928 that Jardine had come with an excellent reputation , but did not quite achieve the success which was expected . However , his batting ability , particularly defensively , remained unquestionable . 
 In the 1920 season , Jardine made his first @-@ class debut , played eight first @-@ class matches and scored two fifties . Playing mainly as an opening batsman , he won his Blue , appearing in the University Match against Cambridge but fell short of expectations , according to Wisden . Although his batting technique was excellent , he received criticism from those who saw him bat as they believed him to be too cautious . At this stage in his career , Jardine did limit his strokes , not feeling confident enough to play them all safely enough . In all , he scored 217 runs at an average of 22 @.@ 64 . In the match for Oxford against Essex , he took six wickets for six runs in a bowling spell of 45 balls , bowling leg breaks , to have bowling figures of six for 28 . It was the only occasion in his career where he took five or more wickets in an innings . 
 Playing more confidently and fluently in 1921 , Jardine began the season well , scoring three fifties in his first three first @-@ class matches . Then Oxford played against the Australian touring side which dominated the season . In the second innings , Jardine scored 96 not out to save the game but was unable to complete his century before the game ended . Even so , the innings was praised by those who saw it . The tourists were criticised in the press for not allowing Jardine to reach his hundred , particularly as the match was reduced from three days to two days at the request of the Australians , who wished to have a rest day in between matches . The Australians had tried to help him with some easy bowling but the situation was confused by the batsmen 's scores not being displayed on a scoreboard at the cricket ground . There has been speculation that this incident led to Jardine 's later hatred of Australians , although Christopher Douglas denies this was the case . Cricket historian David Frith believed it is possible that Australian captain Warwick Armstrong could have addressed sarcastic comments to Jardine but Wisden believed his slow approach cost him his century . The Australian manager expressed regret that he missed out . This innings was the highest that had been played to that point in the season against the Australians , and only one higher score was made before the first Test . It could have led to Jardine playing for England in 1921 as Plum Warner , an influential figure who had recently captained Middlesex , suggested in The Cricketer magazine that Jardine should play in the first Test , which followed the Oxford match . He had been impressed by Jardine on the other occasions he had seen him bat . He remained in Test contention for a short time , but was not selected . In the meantime , he scored his first first @-@ class hundred in a match against The Army and another followed against Sussex . Both innings were cautious , with defence his main priority for much of the innings , but he failed in the match against Cambridge . Jardine then went on to play for Surrey , for whom he was qualified , replacing the injured Jack Hobbs as an opening batsman before dropping down to number five in the batting order . Jardine played in a vital match against reigning County Champions Middlesex which would determine the champions for the season . In a situation of great pressure , Jardine scored a vital 55 to hold the innings together after the loss of early wickets , although Surrey went on to lose the match . Jardine finished the season with 1 @,@ 015 runs at an average of 39 @.@ 03 , although critics still did not believe his potential had been fulfilled . 
 Jardine missed most of the 1922 season due to a serious knee injury , playing only four matches at a time when he was expected to make a big impression . There was speculation in the newspapers about whether he would be fit for the match against Cambridge , but he missed it and was also unable to play for Surrey that season . Even so , in 1922 he was selected by The Isis as one of its men of the year . After some early problems with his troublesome knee , Jardine returned to cricket by May of the 1923 season . He was not given the Oxford captaincy in his final year , which has led to speculation that his manner and unfriendliness prevented him from being made captain . However , his injury and the availability of other deserving candidates may have provided at least part of the explanation . After a cautious start on his return , Jardine gradually found his batting form , and contributed to Oxford 's only win over Cambridge in the decade . During one innings of another match , he received criticism for using his pads to stop the ball from hitting the wickets : this was within the laws of the game but was controversial and seen by critics to be against the spirit of the game . Christopher Douglas traces Jardine 's hostility towards the press and critics to this incident . He also received criticism for his slow batting for Oxford , again being singled out due to his known ability to play attacking shots . Partly this was because Jardine held a responsible position , the team often reliant on his success . The complaints were a manifestation of wider criticism of young amateur batting at the time for its lack of enterprise , as commentators began to hark back to the " golden age " before the war . Jardine left Oxford in 1923 having scored a total of 1 @,@ 381 runs and a fourth class degree in modern history . 
 When Jardine went on to play for Surrey that season , a strong batting side , he played with more freedom and in a varied style . Batting at number five , he had to play different types of innings , either attacking or defensive , depending on the match situation . He made a success of it , playing long defensive innings or sacrificing his innings in an attempt to hit quick runs . His captain Percy Fender seemed satisfied with his role , keeping him in it all season despite his reputation for caution . He scored his first century for Surrey against Yorkshire and was awarded his County Cap , making 916 runs at an average of 38 @.@ 16 in the whole season . 
 = = = County cricketer = = = 
 Once Jardine left Oxford , he began to qualify as a solicitor while still playing for Surrey . He made steady progress over the next three seasons but was overshadowed by other amateur batsmen . His contemporaries at Oxford and Cambridge attracted much attention in the press , as did the next generation of amateur batsmen . He was appointed vice @-@ captain to Fender for the 1924 season , due in large part to the stigma attached to professional cricketers being appointed as captain . There were professionals such as Jack Hobbs playing for Surrey who could have been made captain , but Jardine was preferred as an amateur . In that season , Jardine was selected for the Gentlemen v Players match for the first time and came third in the Surrey averages . In all first @-@ class matches , he scored 1 @,@ 249 runs at an average of 40 @.@ 29 . The following season , Jardine was less successful , scoring fewer runs at a lower average and with a highest score of 87 ( 1 @,@ 020 runs at 30 @.@ 90 ) . It had also been suggested in the press that Jardine should captain the Gentlemen , with a view towards the future of the England Test team , but this did not happen . In fact , owing to an injury sustained playing village cricket at Ashtead for a team called C.E. McIver 's XI , he was unable to appear in the Gentlemen v Players match at Lord 's . In 1926 , Jardine had his most successful season to date , with 1 @,@ 473 runs ( average 46 @.@ 03 ) , although he was again overshadowed by other players and by the attention given to the Ashes series being played . Towards the end of the season , his batting became more attractive and his rate of scoring increased as he began to play more shots . His assurance and judgement against all bowling , even international bowlers , became noticed and he scored 538 runs in his final ten innings . 
 In 1927 , Jardine achieved his highest average in a season , scoring 1 @,@ 002 runs and averaging 91 @.@ 09 in a very wet summer which led to difficult wickets to bat on . Wisden named him as one of its Cricketers of the Year , commenting that he had improved his style and footwork . That season , he could only play 11 matches due to work commitments as a clerk with <unk> Bank , for whom he had worked since qualifying as a solicitor . Despite his lack of practice , he scored hundreds in his first three matches and came top of the Surrey batting averages . He scored a century in the Gentlemen v Players match , which impressed influential people at Lord 's , and represented England in a trial match against The Rest . In this latter match , when Percy Chapman withdrew at the last minute , Jardine took over the captaincy , earning praise in the press for his performance . By this stage , he was considered a certainty to tour Australia the following winter . 
 = = = Test cricketer = = = 
 Jardine 's batting performance in 1928 was similar to that from the previous season . He played 14 matches , but scored 1 @,@ 133 runs at an average of 87 @.@ 15 . He also enjoyed success in high profile matches , scoring 193 for Gentlemen at the Oval , where the crowd had booed his slow start ( at one stage , he took half an hour to score two runs ) but later cheered him as his last fifty runs were scored in half an hour . For the same team at Lord 's , he scored 86 and 40 . He captained The Rest against England in a Test trial and made the highest score in each innings , scoring 74 not out in the fourth innings to help his team to draw the game on a difficult pitch , against international bowlers Maurice Tate and Harold Larwood . 
 Immediately after this match , Jardine made his Test debut against the West Indies who were touring England that season . This was West Indies ' first ever Test match . The team possessed several fast bowlers who bowled with hostility and enjoyed some success on the tour of England . Many batsmen only played them with difficulty , particularly on the occasional fast @-@ paced pitch , but Jardine played them confidently in the Test series . Jardine played in the first two Tests , both of which were won by England by an innings , but missed the third for unknown reasons . He scored 22 on his debut , but was more successful in the second Test . He scored an eventful 83 : when he had scored 26 , he hit his wicket when setting off for a run , but was given not out . At the time , a batsman was not out if he had completed his shot and was setting off for a run . West Indian cricketer Learie Constantine later recalled that Jardine would have been given out except that the batsman informed the umpire that he had already finished his shot . Jardine was later run out by Tate , a player with whom he did not enjoy a good relationship , when they were batting together in the England innings : Tate refused to go for a run causing Jardine to be run out . 
 = = = First tour to Australia = = = 
 Jardine was selected to tour Australia with the M.C.C. team in 1928 – 29 as part of a very strong batting side , playing in all five Test matches and scoring 341 runs at an average of 42 @.@ 62 . In all first @-@ class matches , he scored 1 @,@ 168 runs ( average 64 @.@ 88 ) . He was also on the five @-@ man selection committee for the tour , which chose teams to play in specific games but had not chosen the touring party . Wisden judged that he had been as great a success as had been expected and impressed everyone with the strength of his defensive shots and his play on the back foot . It said that he played some delightful innings . Percy Fender , covering the tour as a journalist , believed that Jardine never had the chance to play a normal innings in the Test , having to provide the stability to the batting , and often seeming to come out to bat in a crisis . 
 Jardine was the centre of attention at the start of the tour . He began the tour with three consecutive hundreds and was seen as one of the main English threats . In his first hundred , the crowd engaged in some good @-@ natured joking at Jardine 's expense , but he was jeered by the crowd in his second hundred for batting too slowly . His third hundred was described by Bradman as one of the finest exhibitions of strokeplay that he had seen ; Jardine accelerated after another slow start , during which he was again barracked , to play some excellent shots . The crowds took an increasing dislike to him , partially for his success with the bat , but mainly for his superior attitude and bearing , his awkward fielding , and particularly his choice of headwear . His first public action in South Australia was to take out the members of the South Australian team who had been to Oxford or Cambridge Universities . Then , he wore a Harlequin cap , given to people who played good cricket at Oxford . It was not unusual for Oxford and Cambridge cricketers to wear similar caps while batting , as both Jardine and M.C.C. captain Percy Chapman did so on this tour , although it was slightly unorthodox to wear them while fielding . However , this was neither understood nor acceptable to the Australian crowds . They quickly took exception to the importance he seemed to place on class distinction . Although Jardine may simply have worn the cap out of superstition , it conveyed a negative impression to the spectators , with his general demeanour drawing one comment of " Where 's the butler to carry the bat for you ? " Jardine 's cap became a focus for criticism and mockery from the crowds throughout the tour . Nevertheless , Jack Fingleton later claimed that Jardine could still have brought the crowds onto his side by exchanging jokes or pleasantries with them . It is certain that Jardine by this stage had developed an intense dislike for Australian crowds . During his third century at the start of the tour , during a period of abuse from the spectators , he observed to a sympathetic Hunter Hendry that " All Australians are uneducated , and an unruly mob " . After the innings , when Patsy Hendren said that the Australian crowds did not like Jardine , he replied " It 's fucking mutual " . Due to the large number of good close fielders in the side , Jardine did not field in the slips , his usual position for Surrey , but next to the crowd on the boundary . There , he was roundly abused and mocked , particularly when chasing the ball : he was not a good fielder on the boundary . In one of the Test matches , he spat towards the crowd while fielding on the boundary as he changed position for the final time . 
 In the first Test , Jardine scored 35 and 65 not out . His first innings began with England in an uncertain position , having lost three wickets for 108 on a very good batting wicket . His innings led England to a stronger position . He played very cautiously , being troubled by Clarrie Grimmett and Bert Ironmonger , the Australian spinners . Jardine believed that Ironmonger threw the ball , and this bowler gave him considerable trouble throughout his career . Thanks to the bowling of Harold Larwood , England took a huge first innings lead . In his second innings , although he played well in his 65 , Jardine was not under much pressure . He scored a large number of singles , giving his partners most of the bowling and building up the lead to the point where England achieved a massive victory by 675 runs . This victory surprised and troubled the Australian cricketing public . Jardine played a similar role in the second Test , batting with Wally Hammond to retrieve a poor start for England in his only innings as they won by eight wickets . Jardine scored 62 in the third Test , supporting Hammond who made a double century . However , when Australia batted a second time , they built up a big lead and left England needing 332 to win on an exceptionally bad wicket which had been damaged by rain . Jack Hobbs and Herbert Sutcliffe , in one of their most famous partnerships , put on 105 . Hobbs sent a message to the team that Jardine should be the next batsmen to come in , even though he usually batted later on , as he was the batsman most likely to survive in the conditions . When Hobbs was dismissed , Jardine came in to bat . He survived , although finding batting exceptionally difficult , until the day 's play ended . Percy Fender believed that Jardine was the only batsman in the side who could have coped with the difficult conditions . He went on to make 33 next day , and England won by three wickets . 
 During the team 's brief visit to Tasmania , Jardine made his highest first @-@ class score of 214 . In the fourth Test , Jardine only scored one run in the first innings , before he was given out leg before wicket ( lbw ) despite obviously hitting the ball . In the second innings , coming out to bat with the score 21 for two , Jardine scored 98 in a partnership of 262 with Hammond which was then the highest partnership for the third wicket in all Test matches . The scoring was very slow , and the crowd protested throughout Jardine 's innings , even though he scored faster than Hammond . He was out when Wisden believed he looked certain to reach a century . England went on to win the match by 12 runs . 
 Jardine was not successful in the final Test , won by Australia . He was used as an opener , due to an injury to Sutcliffe , and made just 19 and a first ball duck . Once both of his innings were completed , on the fifth day of a match which lasted eight days , he left the match and set off across Australia to catch a boat to India for a holiday . It is not clear if this was planned or if he had simply had enough . Jardine never provided an explanation , to the Australian press nor afterwards . Later , Jardine wrote about the Australian crowds , complaining over their involvement , but praising their knowledge and judgement of the game and describing them as more informed than English crowds . He also expressed later reservations to Bob Wyatt about Percy Chapman , saying that he would have shot him if a gun was available . Jardine did not appear in first @-@ class cricket in the 1929 season due to business commitments . 
 = = England captain = = 
 = = = Appointment as captain = = = 
 At the beginning of the 1930 season , Jardine was offered the vice @-@ captaincy of Surrey . He was unable to accept owing to business commitments and played just nine matches for the season , scoring 402 runs at an average of 36 @.@ 54 and managing one century and one fifty . He was never in the running for Test selection that season , although his presence may have been missed as the English batting was unreliable in the Tests . Christopher Douglas argues that had Jardine been playing regularly , he would have been made captain for the final Test , when Chapman was dropped in favour of the sounder batsman Bob Wyatt . The sensation of the Test series was Donald Bradman , who dominated the English bowling to score 974 runs with unprecedented speed and certainty , making the English selectors realise that something must be done to address his skill . With Bradman at the fore , Australia regained the Ashes 2 – 1 . 
 Jardine played a full season of cricket in 1931 . In June , he was appointed as captain for the Test against New Zealand ( two more Tests were later added ) . The English selectors were searching for possible captains for the 1932 – 33 tour of Australia , with Bradman and Australia 's strong batting line up foremost in their minds . Christopher Douglas believes that , as Jardine was not a regular county captain , the selectors wanted to assess his leadership ability but had probably not settled on him as a final choice . He was also chosen as a dependable , proven batsman . While Percy Fender approved of his appointment , The Times ' correspondent believed that he was unproven and others were more deserving of the leadership . Ian Peebles , writing 40 years later , claimed that Jardine 's appointment was popular but cricket administrators had misgivings . Alan Gibson believed that Jardine was chosen because the other candidates were either not worth their place in the side , too old or had controversy attached to them . Furthermore , Jardine impressed the chairman of selectors , Pelham Warner , who stated that he was very effective in selection meetings through his knowledge of cricket history and went into great detail to choose the correct players ; it seems that Warner was the driving force behind Jardine 's appointment . 
 In his first Test as captain , Jardine clashed with several players . Frank Woolley was unhappy with his captain 's manner , feeling humiliated at his treatment in the field at one point . He also rebuked Ian Peebles and Walter Robins , two young amateur bowlers , for their amusement over an incident in the match . The home team 's fortunes were mixed , as New Zealand put up a very good fight in their first Test in England , and both sides could have won . The New Zealanders were so successful that a further two Tests were arranged . Jardine was criticised in the press for not instructing his batsmen to score quickly enough to win in the fourth innings , although this strategy was unlikely to succeed , and the match was drawn . England won the second Test by an innings and the third Test was drawn , sealing the series 1 – 0 . Jardine had a top score of just 38 in the series , but only batted four times and was not out in three of the innings . At the beginning of the following season , Wisden 's editor believed that , as Jardine had failed to impress ( unspecified ) people with his captaincy , he was no longer a certainty to lead the side to Australia , and only Percy Chapman 's lack of form prevented his reinstatement at Jardine 's expense . As a batsman , Jardine was more impressive in Wisden 's opinion , showing himself to be good in defence despite his lack of cricket in the past two seasons . A notable innings was his 104 for The Rest to prevent defeat against champion county Yorkshire . The opposition bowling , particularly from Bill Bowes , was short and hostile , but Jardine survived for over four hours . He scored 1 @,@ 104 first @-@ class runs for the season at an average of 64 @.@ 94 . 
 At the beginning of the 1932 season , Jardine became captain of Surrey . There was much speculation that Fender had been replaced due to disputes with the Surrey committee but it was some time before this , and Jardine 's appointment , was confirmed . Fender was supportive of Jardine and happy to play under him . Jardine overcame a cautious beginning to develop a more aggressive captaincy style , and Surrey finished in their highest position in the championship for six years . England played one international match that season , India 's first ever Test match , and Jardine was selected as captain . India possessed a very effective bowling attack on this tour , which surprised many teams , and England 's batsmen struggled against them . Jardine , who had played a long innings against the tourists for M.C.C. earlier in the season , was the only English batsman to pass 30 in both innings . He scored 79 and 85 not out , and was praised for two excellent defensive innings in a difficult situation by Wisden and The Cricketer . During the match , Jardine again clashed with his team . He gave Bill Bowes and Bill Voce the very unusual instruction to bowl one full toss each over to take advantage of the batsmen 's trouble seeing the ball against the crowd . The bowlers did not do so , and were later reprimanded by Jardine who told them to obey orders . Jardine himself went on to score 1 @,@ 464 runs in the season at an average of 52 @.@ 28 . 
 = = = Planning for the 1932 – 33 tour = = = 
 A week after the Test , it was announced that Jardine would captain the M.C.C. team to Australia that winter , although he seemed to have had last minute doubts about accepting . Others were also concerned about whether he was the best choice . For example , Rockley Wilson is reputed to have said that with Jardine as captain , " We shall win the Ashes ... but we may well lose a Dominion " . However , the selectors thought that a determined leader was needed to defeat the Australians and a more disciplined approach than that of Percy Chapman on the previous tour was needed . Jardine began to plan tactics from this point , discussing ideas with various people . He was aware that Bradman , Australia 's star batsman and the main worry of the selectors , had occasionally shown vulnerability to pace bowling . During the final Test of the 1930 Ashes at the Oval , during Bradman 's innings of 232 , the wicket became difficult for a time following rain . Bradman was briefly seen to be uncomfortable facing deliveries that bounced higher than usual at a faster pace . Percy Fender was one of many cricketers who noticed , and he discussed this with Jardine in 1932 . When Jardine later saw film footage of the Oval incident and noticed Bradman 's discomfort , he shouted , " I 've got it ! He 's yellow ! " Further details that developed his plans came from letters Fender received from Australia in 1932 describing how Australian batsmen were increasingly moving across the stumps towards the off @-@ side to play the ball on the on @-@ side . Fender showed these letters to Jardine . It was also known in England that Bradman had shown some discomfort during the 1931 – 32 Australian season against pace bowling . 
 Following Jardine 's appointment , a meeting was arranged with Nottinghamshire captain Arthur Carr and his two fast bowlers Larwood and Voce at London 's Piccadilly Hotel . Jardine explained his belief that Bradman was weak against bowling directed at leg stump and that if this line of attack could be maintained , it would restrict Bradman 's scoring to one side of the field , giving the bowlers greater control of his scoring . Jardine asked Larwood and Voce if they could bowl accurately on leg stump and make the ball rise up into the body of the batsman . The bowlers agreed that they could , and that it might prove effective , but Jardine stressed that bowling accurately was vitally important , or Bradman would dominate the bowling . Larwood believed that Jardine saw Bradman as his main target and wished to attack him psychologically as well as in a cricketing sense . At the same time , other Australian batsmen were also discussed . Larwood and Voce practised the plan over the remainder of the 1932 season with mixed success . Jardine also visited Frank Foster who had toured Australia in 1911 – 12 to discuss field placings appropriate to Australian conditions . Foster had bowled leg theory on that tour with his fielders placed close in on the leg @-@ side , as had George Hirst in 1903 – 04 . During the second half of the season , the team to tour Australia was announced . The selection of four fast bowlers and a few medium pacers was very unusual at the time , and it was commented on by the hosts ' media , including Bradman . The selection of Eddie Paynter , who did not have a strong record , to replace the ill Kumar Shri <unk> was very likely a choice of Jardine . He had a history of good performances against Yorkshire , and Jardine considered that a player 's record against northern counties was a good indication of his potential at international level . 
 = = Bodyline tour = = 
 = = = Beginning of the tour = = = 
 In Jardine 's obituary , Wisden described this tour as " probably the most controversial tour in history . England won four of the five Tests , but it was the methods they employed rather than the results which caused so much discussion and acrimony . " On the journey to Australia , by the boat Orontes , Jardine kept away from his team . He issued some instructions on their conduct , such as giving autographs or keeping out of the sun . He also began to have disagreements with Plum Warner , who was one of the two team managers along with Richard Palairet . He discussed tactics with Harold Larwood and other bowlers , spoke to Hedley Verity about his role in the team , and he may have met batsmen Wally Hammond and Herbert Sutcliffe . Some players reported that Jardine told them to hate the Australians in order to defeat them , while instructing them to refer to Bradman as " the little bastard . " At this stage , he seems to have settled on leg theory , if not full Bodyline , as his main tactic . 
 Once the team arrived in Australia , Jardine quickly alienated the press by refusing to give team details before a match and being uncooperative when interviewed by journalists . The press printed some negative stories as a result and the crowds barracked as they had done on his previous tour , which made him angry . Jardine still wore his Harlequin cap and began the tour well with 98 and 127 before the first Test . Once again , he clashed with paceman Bill Bowes , refusing to give his bowler the requested field placings in an early match . As a result , Bowes deliberately gave away easy runs in an attempt to get his way , but following a discussion , Bowes was converted to Jardine 's tactics and ultimately to his ability as a captain . In a tour match , Jardine also instructed Hammond to attack the bowling of Chuck Fleetwood @-@ Smith , whom he considered dangerous and thus did not want him to play in the Tests . Up until this point , there had been little unusual about the English bowling except the number of fast bowlers . Larwood and Voce were given a light workload in the early matches by Jardine . This changed in the match against an Australian XI , from which Jardine rested himself , where the bowlers first used the tactics that came to be known as Bodyline . Under the captaincy of Wyatt , the bowlers bowled short and around leg stump , with fielders positioned close by on the leg side to catch any deflections . Wyatt later claimed that this was not planned beforehand and he simply passed on to Jardine what happened after the match . These tactics continued in the next match ; several players were hit . Many commentators criticised this style of bowling ; although bowlers had previously used leg theory bowling , where bowlers bowled outside leg stump with a concentration of fielders on the leg side , using these tactics with fast bowlers dropping the ball short was almost unprecedented . It was seen as dangerous and against the spirit of the game . In a letter , Jardine told Fender that his information about the Australian batting technique was correct and that it meant he was having to move more and more fielders onto the leg side . He said that " if this goes on I shall have to move the whole bloody lot to the leg side . " Jardine increasingly came into disagreement with Warner over Bodyline as the tour progressed , but his tactics were successful in one respect : in six innings against the tourists ahead of the Tests , Bradman had scored only 103 runs , causing concern among the Australian public who expected much more from him . 
 = = = Test matches = = = 
 When the first Test began , Jardine persisted with Bodyline tactics , even though Bradman , the main target , did not play in the match . David Frith has pointed out that Bradman would have been watching and seeing the tactics that England were using . However , when Stan McCabe was scoring 187 not out , Jardine was briefly seen to be unsettled as runs came quickly , and he may not have been fully convinced that the tactics would be successful . England eventually won the match comfortably . In the second Test , Jardine completely misjudged the pitch and left out a specialist spinner when conditions later in the match favoured one . The match seemed to be going well when Bill Bowes unexpectedly bowled the returning Bradman first ball in the first innings ; Jardine was seen to be so delighted that he had clasped his hands above his head and performed a " war dance " . This was an extremely unusual reaction in the 1930s , particularly from Jardine who rarely showed any emotion while playing cricket . In the second innings , Bradman scored an unbeaten century which helped Australia to win the match and level the series at one match each . This made it seem to critics that Bodyline was not quite the threat that had been perceived and Bradman 's reputation , which had suffered slightly with his earlier failures , was restored . On the other hand , the pitch was slightly slower than was customary throughout the series , and Larwood was suffering from problems with his boots which reduced his effectiveness . 
 Jardine had clashed with more of his team by this stage : he had argued with Gubby Allen at least twice about his refusal to bowl Bodyline ( although he did bowl bouncers and fielded in the " leg trap " , the fielders who waited for catches close in on the leg side ) ; and the Nawab of Pataudi had refused to field in the " leg trap " , to which Jardine responded , " I see his highness is a conscientious objector " , and subsequently allowed Pataudi to play little part in the tour . 
 The teams went into the third Test with the series level ; England won that match but the controversy nearly ended the tour . Jardine , concerned by his poor run of batting form , had promoted himself to open the batting but was part of a drastic England collapse to 30 for four in the first innings . However , the trouble began when Bill Woodfull was struck on the chest by a Larwood delivery , drawing the comment from Jardine of " Well bowled , Harold " , aimed mainly at Bradman who was also batting at the time . For the next ball faced by Woodfull , at the start of Larwood 's next over , the fielders moved into the Bodyline fielding positions for the next ball he faced . Jardine wrote that Larwood had asked for the field to be moved , while Larwood said that it was Jardine 's decision . The crowd became noisily angry as the ill feeling caused by the English bowling tactics spilled out , and Jardine later expressed regret that he had moved the fielders when he did . There was further anger later in the innings when Bert Oldfield suffered a fractured skull . At this point , several of the players feared that there may be a riot and that the crowd would jump onto the field to attack them ; mounted police were deployed as a precaution , but the spectators remained behind the fences . Jardine then batted very slowly in an innings of 56 , during which he was continuously barracked by the crowd . Despite England 's win , Wisden believed that it was probably the most unpleasant match ever played . However , it commended Jardine 's courage , claimed that praise of his leadership was unanimous , and said that " above all he captained his team in this particular match like a genius " . In the immediate aftermath , journalists in England and Australia took up viewpoints both for and against Jardine . The M.C.C. sent a telegram congratulating him on winning the match . 
 Following the third Test , strongly worded cables passed between the Australian Board of Control and the M.C.C. at Lord 's . The Australian Board accused the English team of unsportsmanlike tactics , stating that " Bodyline bowling has assumed such proportions as to menace the best interests of the game , making protection of the body the main consideration . " The M.C.C. responded angrily to the accusations of unsporting conduct , played down the Australian claims about the danger of Bodyline and threatened to call off the tour . The series was becoming a major diplomatic incident by this stage , and many people saw Bodyline as damaging to an international relationship that needed to remain strong . Public reaction in both England and Australia was outrage directed at the other nation . The Governor of South Australia , Alexander Hore @-@ Ruthven , who was in England at the time , expressed his concern to British Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs James Henry Thomas that this would cause a significant impact on trade between the nations . The standoff was settled only when Australian Prime Minister Joseph Lyons met members of the Australian Board and outlined to them the severe economic hardships that could be caused in Australia if the British public boycotted Australian trade . Given this understanding , the Board withdrew the allegation of unsportsmanlike behaviour two days before the fourth Test , thus saving the tour . However , correspondence continued for almost a year . Jardine was shaken by the events and by the hostile reactions that his team were receiving . Stories appeared in the press , possibly leaked by the disenchanted Nawab of Pataudi , about fights and arguments between the England players . Jardine offered to stop using Bodyline if the team did not support him , but after a private meeting ( not attended by Jardine or either of the team managers ) the players released a statement fully supporting Jardine and the Bodyline tactics . It was subsequently revealed that several of the players had private reservations , but they did not express them publicly at the time . Even so , Jardine would not have played in the fourth Test without the withdrawal of the unsportsmanlike accusation . 
 Once the fourth Test got underway , England won the match to take the series . Partly prompted by Jardine , Eddie Paynter scored 83 having released himself from hospital . Jardine went on to make a painstaking 24 , at one point facing 82 balls without scoring a single run . He was not proud of his batting performance , being <unk> to Australian Test opener Jack Fingleton , and describing his batting to Bill O 'Reilly as being " like an old maid defending her virginity . " England also won the final Test ending on 28 February , with a final clash taking place between Jardine and Larwood . After a long bowling spell , Larwood was furious when Jardine sent him in to bat as nightwatchman but went on to score 98 runs . Later , Larwood broke his foot while bowling in the second innings , but Jardine was not convinced that he was seriously injured . He made him stay on the field until Bradman was out . Larwood , partly through this injury and partly through political repercussions from this series , never played another Test . Also in this match , Jardine enraged Harry Alexander by asking him not to run on the pitch as he was damaging it and giving his side an advantage . He proceeded to bowl hostile bouncers at Jardine , who was struck painfully to the delight of the crowd . 
 While Jardine won the series as captain , he contributed just 199 runs at an average of 22 @.@ 11 in the Tests , and 628 runs ( average 36 @.@ 94 ) in all first @-@ class cricket in Australia . Jardine only played in the first Test of the short series which followed in New Zealand , due to rheumatism . All the players enjoyed the short tour although rain ruined the cricket , and Jardine was observed to show signs of paranoia towards all things Australian . Pelham Warner , although he later stated that he disapproved of Bodyline bowling , praised Jardine 's captaincy on the tour and believed that he was cruelly treated by the Australian crowds . He further believed that Jardine was convinced that the tactics were legitimate . 
 = = = Aftermath and 1933 season = = = 
 Controversy over Bodyline continued throughout the following summer . Jardine himself contributed his opinion in a book , In Quest for the Ashes , a first @-@ hand account of the Bodyline tour . He defended his tactics and heavily criticised the Australian <unk> , to the extent of suggesting that fixtures between England and Australia should be halted until this problem was solved . While arguments continued to rage in print and discussion , even at government level , Jardine received a hero 's welcome on his return to England , making several public appearances . Despite his fears that the M.C.C. might sack him in the face of criticism , he was appointed as England captain for the series against the West Indies in 1933 . He continued to captain Surrey during his infrequent first @-@ class appearances that summer , although business commitments prevented him from playing a full season . He was cheered by the crowd or given a standing ovation when he came out to bat as M.C.C. captain against the West Indians in May , at Sheffield for Surrey against Yorkshire , and in the first and second Test matches . In all first @-@ class cricket that season , Jardine scored 779 runs at an average of 51 @.@ 93 , including three hundreds . One of these centuries came in the second Test ( Jardine missed the third with an injury that ended his season ) . 
 Some bowlers had experimented with Bodyline in the season , and the West Indian team , 1 – 0 down in the series and frustrated by the lack of pace in the pitches , decided to experiment with the tactic . Facing a good West Indies total , England suffered a batting collapse , at one point falling to 134 for four . With Les Ames in difficulty against the short @-@ pitched bowling , Jardine said , " You get yourself down this end , Les . I 'll take care of this bloody nonsense . " He went right back to the bouncers , standing on tiptoe , and stopped them with a dead bat , sometimes playing the ball one handed for more control . Wisden described how he never flinched despite facing the greatest amount of Bodyline . It also believed that he played it " probably better than any other man in the world was capable of doing . " He batted for nearly five hours , scoring 127 , his only Test century . England then retaliated by bowling Bodyline in the West Indies ' second innings , but the slow pitch meant that the match was drawn . However , this performance played a large part in turning English opinion against Bodyline . The Times used the word " Bodyline " , without using inverted commas or using the qualification " so @-@ called " , for the first time . Wisden said that " most of those watching it for the first time must have come to the conclusion that , while strictly within the law , it was not nice . " 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 During the 1933 season , Jardine was appointed as captain for the M.C.C. tour of India that winter which would feature the hosts ' first Tests at home . This continued support for Jardine in the face of growing unhappiness towards Bodyline bowling came with some reservations , as the President and Secretary of the M.C.C. met Jardine for discussions prior to his appointment . This was probably about the need for diplomacy and tact on what may have proved to be a sensitive tour . With only two players from the Bodyline tour , Jardine and Verity , taking part , it was not a full @-@ strength side but won the Test series 2 – 0 . India were weaker than expected , and lacked a large group of quality players . Jardine nevertheless won praise from Wisden for his captaincy and his batting . He approached the matches with a very competitive spirit , seeking to gain every advantage with his tactics and research . At the same time , he was far more willing to take up speaking engagements than on the Bodyline tour , showed an appreciation and regard for Indian crowds which he had never extended to Australia , and played the diplomatic role that was usually expected of a captain of the M.C.C. at the time . He often spoke of his affection for India , describing it as the land of his birth and seemed to be relaxed and happy on this tour . 
 England won the Test series 2 – 0 . Jardine contributed three fifties in four innings in the series , scoring 221 runs at an average of 73 @.@ 66 . He scored 60 , 61 and 65 before his final Test innings ended at 35 not out . Jardine scored 831 first @-@ class runs on the Indian leg of the tour — he played one match in Ceylon ( now Sri Lanka ) — averaging 55 @.@ 40 . Although Jardine enjoyed the tour , there were still clashes evident . There was an argument with the Viceroy over Jardine selecting the Maharaja of Patiala to play for the M.C.C. in one match ; in a subsequent match , Jardine complained that the pitch was rolled for too long . He also clashed , later on , with the umpire Frank Tarrant , initially due to suspicion over the number of lbw decisions given against the M.C.C. , but also because Tarrant had warned him against using Bodyline and was employed by Indian princes . Jardine threatened to stop him umpiring and sent a telegram to Lord 's , with the result that Tarrant , having officiated the first two Tests , was not used in the third . For much of the time , Jardine used different tactics to those employed in Australia . Slow bowling , particularly that of Hedley Verity , played a key part in the bowling attack . At times , the faster bowlers Nobby Clark and Stan Nichols bowled Bodyline , resulting in several injuries . In this case , the Indian bowlers Mohammad <unk> and Amar Singh retaliated with Bodyline bowling of their own . 
 As the tour went on , there was discussion at a high level over Jardine 's future . The M.C.C. authorities had realised that Bodyline was dangerous and should not be continued , but some figures such as Lord Hawke did not want to let Jardine down . Australians saw him as more of a problem ; the likes of Alexander Hore @-@ Ruthven wanted guarantees that Jardine would not use Bodyline and even that he not play . Plum Warner also believed that Jardine should no longer captain . Jardine himself saved the English selectors from any possible dilemma . In March 1934 , he first told Surrey that he would be unable to play regularly any more and he resigned as captain . Then in an announcement in the Evening Standard , he stated that " I have neither the intention nor the desire to play cricket against Australia this summer . " It is unclear whether this was due to the pressure over Bodyline , over assurances that the M.C.C. may have asked him to give or simply due to financial worries . This decision effectively ended his first @-@ class career . He never played another Test and played only two more first @-@ class matches in England , in 1937 and 1948 , and one in India in 1943 – 44 . 
 Jardine played in 22 Test matches for England , scoring 1 @,@ 296 runs at an average of 48 @.@ 00 . In his first @-@ class cricket career , he played 262 matches , scoring 14 @,@ 848 runs at an average of 46 @.@ 83 . His occasional bowling brought him 48 wickets at an average of 31 @.@ 10 . 
 = = Style and personality = = 
 = = = Batting = = = 
 Jardine was seen as having a classical technique . While batting , he stood very straight and side on to the bowler . His off @-@ driving was powerful , his defence was excellent , and he was superb at judging the line of the ball and letting it pass by if it was going to miss his wickets . His on @-@ side play was also excellent , being able to place the ball between fielders for easy runs . Christopher Douglas described Jardine as " the epitome of the old @-@ fashioned amateur " . However , he also comments that his approach to batting was like that of a professional and that his back @-@ foot batting was of a quality that few amateurs could manage . In 1928 , Wisden 's correspondent described Jardine as the most secure amateur batsman of the time , and identified his greatest strength as his defence and his " mental gifts . " He played very straight and hit the ball hard in defence , but could not play all the strokes , particularly on the off side . R. C. Robertson @-@ Glasgow believed that Jardine had modelled himself on C. B. Fry . He also noted that Jardine displayed good concentration , a strong desire to improve his batting and a fighting spirit that brought out his best in a crisis . He also said that Jardine could play every recognised cricket shot , but would not do so in a match and Robertson @-@ Glasgow believed it was Jardine 's one weakness as a batsman . The more important the occasion , the more defensive and restricted Jardine 's batting became : " In general , as the task grew greater , the strokes grew fewer . " 
 Christopher Douglas argues that Jardine liked to make his runs when his side was in difficulty and enjoyed being tested ; his approach would often lead his team to recovery from an unfavourable situation . Douglas comments that Jardine held his place in the England side despite strong competition from other batsmen . His defensive technique rescued England from weak positions in around a dozen innings and only played in two losses with England ( which were his two least successful games with the bat ) . He also excelled in the main Gentlemen v Players fixture at Lord 's , making a good score in each of his appearances in this match . Jack Hobbs classed him as a great batsman and believed that he was under @-@ rated by his contemporaries . 
 Wisden believed that Jardine 's effective batting technique meant that fast bowlers troubled him less than other batsmen . He did have difficulties with a few bowlers . Alec Kennedy , a medium paced inswing bowler , took Jardine 's wicket eleven times , eight of these occasions before the batsman had scored 20 runs . Kennedy found that Jardine had slightly slow footwork , often bowling him or trapping him lbw . Bert Ironmonger also troubled Jardine , taking his wicket in five of the eleven Test innings in which they faced each other . Jardine displayed a slight weakness against Australian slow bowlers , not moving his feet well enough against them . In 16 Test innings in Australia , he was out to slow bowlers ten times , but he rarely experienced similar difficulties against English spinners . One other bowler to cause Jardine problems was the Australian paceman Tim Wall , who took his wicket five times on the nine occasions he bowled to him . 
 = = = Captaincy = = = 
