 = = Definitions = = 
 The terms animal testing , animal experimentation , animal research , in vivo testing , and vivisection have similar <unk> but different connotations . Literally , " vivisection " means the " cutting up " of a living animal , and historically referred only to experiments that involved the dissection of live animals . The term is occasionally used to refer pejoratively to any experiment using living animals ; for example , the Encyclopædia Britannica defines " vivisection " as : " Operation on a living animal for experimental rather than healing purposes ; more broadly , all experimentation on live animals " , although dictionaries point out that the broader definition is " used only by people who are opposed to such work " . The word has a negative connotation , implying torture , suffering , and death . The word " vivisection " is preferred by those opposed to this research , whereas scientists typically use the term " animal experimentation " . 
 = = History = = 
 The earliest references to animal testing are found in the writings of the Greeks in the 2nd and 4th centuries BCE . Aristotle and Erasistratus were among the first to perform experiments on living animals . Galen , a physician in 2nd @-@ century Rome , dissected pigs and goats , and is known as the " father of vivisection " . <unk> , an Arabic physician in 12th @-@ century Moorish Spain who also practiced dissection , introduced animal testing as an experimental method of testing surgical procedures before applying them to human patients . 
 Animals have been used repeatedly through the history of biomedical research . The founders , in 1831 , of the Dublin Zoo were members of the medical profession , interested in studying the animals both while they were alive and when they were dead . In the 1880s , Louis Pasteur convincingly demonstrated the germ theory of medicine by inducing anthrax in sheep . In the 1880s , Robert Koch infected mice and guinea pigs with anthrax and tuberculosis . In the 1890s , Ivan Pavlov famously used dogs to describe classical conditioning . In World War I , German agents infected sheep bound for Russia with anthrax , and inoculated mules and horses of the French cavalry with the equine glanders disease . Between 1917 and 1918 , the Germans infected mules in Argentina bound for American forces , resulting in the death of 200 mules . Insulin was first isolated from dogs in 1922 , and revolutionized the treatment of diabetes . On November 3 , 1957 , a Soviet dog , Laika , became the first of many animals to orbit the earth . In the 1970s , antibiotic treatments and vaccines for leprosy were developed using armadillos , then given to humans . The ability of humans to change the genetics of animals took a large step forwards in 1974 when Rudolf Jaenisch was able to produce the first transgenic mammal , by integrating DNA from the SV40 virus into the genome of mice . This genetic research progressed rapidly and , in 1996 , Dolly the sheep was born , the first mammal to be cloned from an adult cell . 
 Toxicology testing became important in the 20th century . In the 19th century , laws regulating drugs were more relaxed . For example , in the U.S. , the government could only ban a drug after a company had been prosecuted for selling products that harmed customers . However , in response to the Elixir <unk> disaster of 1937 in which the eponymous drug killed more than 100 users , the U.S. congress passed laws that required safety testing of drugs on animals before they could be marketed . Other countries enacted similar legislation . In the 1960s , in reaction to the Thalidomide tragedy , further laws were passed requiring safety testing on pregnant animals before a drug can be sold . 
 = = = Historical debate = = = 
 As the experimentation on animals increased , especially the practice of vivisection , so did criticism and controversy . In 1655 , the advocate of Galenic physiology Edmund O 'Meara said that " the miserable torture of vivisection places the body in an unnatural state . " O 'Meara and others argued that animal physiology could be affected by pain during vivisection , rendering results unreliable . There were also objections on an ethical basis , contending that the benefit to humans did not justify the harm to animals . Early objections to animal testing also came from another angle — many people believed that animals were inferior to humans and so different that results from animals could not be applied to humans . 
 On the other side of the debate , those in favor of animal testing held that experiments on animals were necessary to advance medical and biological knowledge . Claude Bernard — who is sometimes known as the " prince of <unk> " and the father of physiology , and whose wife , Marie Françoise Martin , founded the first anti @-@ vivisection society in France in 1883 — famously wrote in 1865 that " the science of life is a superb and dazzlingly lighted hall which may be reached only by passing through a long and ghastly kitchen " . Arguing that " experiments on animals ... are entirely conclusive for the toxicology and hygiene of man ... the effects of these substances are the same on man as on animals , save for differences in degree " , Bernard established animal experimentation as part of the standard scientific method . 
 In 1896 , the physiologist and physician Dr. Walter B. Cannon said " The <unk> are the second of the two types Theodore Roosevelt described when he said , ' Common sense without conscience may lead to crime , but conscience without common sense may lead to folly , which is the handmaiden of crime . ' " These divisions between pro- and anti- animal testing groups first came to public attention during the brown dog affair in the early 1900s , when hundreds of medical students clashed with anti @-@ vivisectionists and police over a memorial to a vivisected dog . 
 In 1822 , the first animal protection law was enacted in the British parliament , followed by the Cruelty to Animals Act ( 1876 ) , the first law specifically aimed at regulating animal testing . The legislation was promoted by Charles Darwin , who wrote to Ray Lankester in March 1871 : " You ask about my opinion on vivisection . I quite agree that it is justifiable for real investigations on physiology ; but not for mere damnable and detestable curiosity . It is a subject which makes me sick with horror , so I will not say another word about it , else I shall not sleep to @-@ night . " In response to the lobbying by anti @-@ vivisectionists , several organizations were set up in Britain to defend animal research : The Physiological Society was formed in 1876 to give physiologists " mutual benefit and protection " , the Association for the Advancement of Medicine by Research was formed in 1882 and focused on policy @-@ making , and the Research Defence Society ( now Understanding Animal Research ) was formed in 1908 " to make known the facts as to experiments on animals in this country ; the immense importance to the welfare of mankind of such experiments and the great saving of human life and health directly attributable to them . " 
 Opposition to the use of animals in medical research first arose in the United States during the 1860s , when Henry Bergh founded the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals ( <unk> ) , with America 's first specifically anti @-@ vivisection organization being the American <unk> Society ( AAVS ) , founded in 1883 . <unk> of the era generally believed the spread of mercy was the great cause of civilization , and vivisection was cruel . However , in the USA the <unk> ' efforts were defeated in every legislature , overwhelmed by the superior organization and influence of the medical community . Overall , this movement had little legislative success until the passing of the Laboratory Animal Welfare Act , in 1966 . 
 = = Care and use of animals = = 
 = = = The Three Rs = = = 
 The Three Rs ( 3Rs ) are guiding principles for more ethical use of animals in testing . These were first described by <unk> Russell and R.L. Burch in 1959 . The 3Rs are : 
 Replacement which refers to the preferred use of non @-@ animal methods over animal methods whenever it is possible to achieve the same scientific aims . These methods include computer modeling . 
 Reduction which refers to methods that enable researchers to obtain comparable levels of information from fewer animals , or to obtain more information from the same number of animals . 
 Refinement which refers to methods that alleviate or minimize potential pain , suffering or distress , and enhance animal welfare for the animals used . These methods include non @-@ invasive techniques . 
 The 3Rs have a broader scope than simply encouraging alternatives to animal testing , but aim to improve animal welfare and scientific quality where the use of animals can not be avoided . These 3Rs are now implemented in many testing establishments worldwide and have been adopted by various pieces of legislation and regulations . 
 Despite the widespread acceptance of the 3Rs , many countries — including Canada , Australia , Israel , the United Kingdom , and Germany — have reported rising experimental use of animals in recent years with increased use of mice and , in some cases , fish while reporting declines in the use of cats , dogs , primates , rabbits , guinea pigs , and hamsters . Along with other countries , China has also escalated its use of GM animals , resulting in an increase in overall animal use . 
 Four R 's 
 = = = Regulations = = = 
 The regulations that apply to animals in laboratories vary across species . In the U.S. , under the provisions of the Animal Welfare Act and the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals ( the Guide ) , published by the National Academy of Sciences , any procedure can be performed on an animal if it can be successfully argued that it is scientifically justified . In general , researchers are required to consult with the institution 's veterinarian and its Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee ( IACUC ) , which every research facility is obliged to maintain . The IACUC must ensure that alternatives , including non @-@ animal alternatives , have been considered , that the experiments are not unnecessarily duplicative , and that pain relief is given unless it would interfere with the study . The IACUCs regulate all vertebrates in testing at institutions receiving federal funds in the USA . Although the provisions of the Animal Welfare Act do not include purpose @-@ bred rodents and birds , these species are equally regulated under Public Health Service policies that govern the IACUCs . Animal Welfare Act ( AWA ) regulations are enforced by the USDA , whereas Public Health Service regulations are enforced by <unk> and in many cases by <unk> . 
 According to the 2014 U.S. Department of Agriculture Office of the Inspector General ( OIG ) report — which looked at the oversight of animal use during a three @-@ year period — “ some Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees … did not adequately approve , monitor , or report on experimental procedures on animals . ” The OIG found that “ as a result , animals are not always receiving basic humane care and treatment and , in some cases , pain and distress are not minimized during and after experimental procedures . ” According to the report , within a three @-@ year period , nearly half of all American laboratories with regulated species were cited for AWA violations relating to improper IACUC oversight . The USDA OIG made similar findings in a 2005 report . Others have criticized the composition of IACUCs , asserting that the committees are predominantly made up of animal researchers and university representatives who may be biased against animal welfare concerns . 
 Larry Carbone , a laboratory animal veterinarian , writes that , in his experience , IACUCs take their work very seriously regardless of the species involved , though the use of non @-@ human primates always raises what he calls a " red flag of special concern . " A study published in Science magazine in July 2001 confirmed the low reliability of IACUC reviews of animal experiments . Funded by the National Science Foundation , the three @-@ year study found that animal @-@ use committees that do not know the specifics of the university and personnel do not make the same approval decisions as those made by animal @-@ use committees that do know the university and personnel . Specifically , blinded committees more often ask for more information rather than approving studies . 
 Scientists in India are protesting a recent guideline issued by the University Grants Commission to ban the use of live animals in universities and laboratories . 
 = = = Numbers = = = 
 Accurate global figures for animal testing are difficult to obtain ; it has been estimated that 100 million vertebrates are experimented on around the world every year , 10 – 11 million of them in the EU . The Nuffield Council on Bioethics reports that global annual estimates range from 50 to 100 million animals . None of the figures include invertebrates such as shrimp and fruit flies . 
 According to the US Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) , the total number of animals used in the US during 2014 was 834 @,@ 453 , down from almost 1 @.@ 2 million in 2005 , however , this number does not include rats and mice , which make up around 90 % of research animals . By comparing with EU data , where all vertebrate species are counted , Speaking of Research estimated that around 12 million vertebrates were used in research in the US in 2014 . A 2015 article published in the Journal of Medical Ethics , argued that the use of animals in the US has dramatically increased in recent years . Researchers found this increase is largely the result of an increased reliance on genetically modified mice in animal studies . 
 In 1995 , researchers at Tufts University Center for Animals and Public Policy estimated that 14 – 21 million animals were used in American laboratories in 1992 , a reduction from a high of 50 million used in 1970 . In 1986 , the U.S. Congress Office of Technology Assessment reported that estimates of the animals used in the U.S. range from 10 million to upwards of 100 million each year , and that their own best estimate was at least 17 million to 22 million . 
 In GB , Home Office figures show that 3 @.@ 87 million procedures were carried out in 2014 . 3 @,@ 246 procedures used non @-@ human primates , down over 50 % since 1988 . A " procedure " refers here to an experiment that might last minutes , several months , or years . Most animals are used in only one procedure : animals are frequently euthanized after the experiment ; however death is the endpoint of some procedures . The procedures conducted on animals in GB in 2014 were categorised as - 
 9 % ( 180 thousand ) were assessed as sub @-@ threshold 
 7 % ( 133 thousand ) were assessed as non @-@ recovery 
 51 % ( 980 thousand ) were assessed as mild 
 25 % ( 483 thousand ) were assessed as moderate 
 8 % ( 150 thousand ) were assessed as severe 
 A ‘ severe ’ procedure would be , for instance , any test where death is the end @-@ point or fatalities are expected , whereas a ‘ mild ’ procedure would be something like a blood test or an MRI scan . 
 = = = Invertebrates = = = 
 Although many more invertebrates than vertebrates are used in animal testing , these studies are largely unregulated by law . The most frequently used invertebrate species are Drosophila melanogaster , a fruit fly , and Caenorhabditis elegans , a nematode worm . In the case of C. elegans , the worm 's body is completely transparent and the precise lineage of all the organism 's cells is known , while studies in the fly D. melanogaster can use an amazing array of genetic tools . These invertebrates offer some advantages over vertebrates in animal testing , including their short life cycle and the ease with which large numbers may be housed and studied . However , the lack of an adaptive immune system and their simple organs prevent worms from being used in several aspects of medical research such as vaccine development . Similarly , the fruit fly immune system differs greatly from that of humans , and diseases in insects can be different from diseases in vertebrates ; however , fruit flies and <unk> can be useful in studies to identify novel virulence factors or pharmacologically active compounds . 
 Several invertebrate systems are considered acceptable alternatives to vertebrates in early @-@ stage discovery screens . Because of similarities between the innate immune system of insects and mammals , insects can replace mammals in some types of studies . Drosophila melanogaster and the Galleria <unk> <unk> have been particularly important for analysis of virulence traits of mammalian pathogens . <unk> and other insects have also proven valuable for the identification of pharmaceutical compounds with favorable bioavailability . The decision to adopt such models generally involves accepting a lower degree of biological similarity with mammals for significant gains in experimental throughput . 
 = = = Vertebrates = = = 
 In the U.S. , the numbers of rats and mice used is estimated to be between 20 and 100 million a year . Other rodents commonly used are guinea pigs , hamsters , and gerbils . Mice are the most commonly used vertebrate species because of their size , low cost , ease of handling , and fast reproduction rate . Mice are widely considered to be the best model of inherited human disease and share 99 % of their genes with humans . With the advent of genetic engineering technology , genetically modified mice can be generated to order and can provide models for a range of human diseases . Rats are also widely used for physiology , toxicology and cancer research , but genetic manipulation is much harder in rats than in mice , which limits the use of these rodents in basic science . Nearly 200 @,@ 000 fish and 20 @,@ 000 amphibians were used in the UK in 2004 . The main species used is the zebrafish , Danio rerio , which are translucent during their embryonic stage , and the African clawed frog , Xenopus laevis . Over 20 @,@ 000 rabbits were used for animal testing in the UK in 2004 . Albino rabbits are used in eye irritancy tests ( Draize test ) because rabbits have less tear flow than other animals , and the lack of eye pigment in albinos make the effects easier to visualize . Rabbits are also frequently used for the production of polyclonal antibodies . 
 = = = = Cats = = = = 
 Cats are most commonly used in neurological research . 24 @,@ 221 cats were used in the U.S. in 2013 , around half of whom were used in experiments which have the potential to cause " pain and / or distress " though only 0 @.@ 3 % of cat experiments involved potential pain which was not relieved by anesthetics / analgesics . 
 = = = = Dogs = = = = 
 Dogs are widely used in biomedical research , testing , and education — particularly beagles , because they are gentle and easy to handle , and to allow for comparisons with historical data from beagles ( a Reduction technique ) . They are used as models for human and veterinary diseases in cardiology , endocrinology , and bone and joint studies , research that tends to be highly invasive , according to the Humane Society of the United States . The most common use of dogs is in the safety assessment of new medicines for human or veterinary use as a second species following testing in rodents , in accordance with the regulations set out in the International Conference on <unk> of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use . The U.S. Department of Agriculture 's Animal Welfare Report shows that 67 @,@ 772 dogs were used in USDA @-@ registered facilities in 2013 . 
 = = = = Non @-@ human primates = = = = 
 Non @-@ human primates ( NHPs ) are used in toxicology tests , studies of AIDS and hepatitis , studies of neurology , behavior and cognition , reproduction , genetics , and xenotransplantation . They are caught in the wild or purpose @-@ bred . In the United States and China , most primates are domestically purpose @-@ bred , whereas in Europe the majority are imported purpose @-@ bred . The European Commission reported that in 2011 , 6 @,@ 012 monkeys were experimented on in European laboratories . According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture , there were 105 @,@ 665 monkeys in U.S. laboratories in 2014 . 23 @,@ 465 monkeys were imported into the U.S. in 2014 including 929 who were caught in the wild . Most of the NHPs used in experiments are macaques ; but marmosets , spider monkeys , and squirrel monkeys are also used , and baboons and chimpanzees are used in the US . As of 2015 , there are approximately 730 chimpanzees in U.S. laboratories . 
 In one survey , it was found that 89 % of singly @-@ housed primates exhibited self @-@ injurious or abnormal <unk> behaviors including pacing , rocking , hair pulling , and biting among others . 
 The first transgenic primate was produced in 2001 , with the development of a method that could introduce new genes into a rhesus macaque . This transgenic technology is now being applied in the search for a treatment for the genetic disorder Huntington 's disease . Notable studies on non @-@ human primates have been part of the polio vaccine development , and development of Deep Brain Stimulation , and their current heaviest non @-@ toxicological use occurs in the monkey AIDS model , SIV . In 2008 a proposal to ban all primates experiments in the EU has sparked a vigorous debate . 
 = = = Pain and suffering = = = 
 The extent to which animal testing causes pain and suffering , and the capacity of animals to experience and comprehend them , is the subject of much debate . 
 According to the USDA , in 2006 about 670 @,@ 000 animals ( 57 % ) ( not including rats , mice , birds , or invertebrates ) were used in procedures that did not include more than momentary pain or distress . About 420 @,@ 000 ( 36 % ) were used in procedures in which pain or distress was relieved by anesthesia , while 84 @,@ 000 ( 7 % ) were used in studies that would cause pain or distress that would not be relieved . 
 In the UK , research projects are classified as mild , moderate , and substantial in terms of the suffering the researchers conducting the study say they may cause ; a fourth category of " unclassified " means the animal was anesthetized and killed without recovering consciousness , according to the researchers . In December 2001 , 1 @,@ 296 ( 39 % ) of project licenses in force were classified as mild , 1 @,@ 811 ( 55 % ) as moderate , 63 ( 2 % ) as substantial , and 139 ( 4 % ) as unclassified . There have , however , been suggestions of systemic underestimation of procedure severity . 
 The idea that animals might not feel pain as human beings feel it traces back to the 17th @-@ century French philosopher , René Descartes , who argued that animals do not experience pain and suffering because they lack consciousness . Bernard Rollin of Colorado State University , the principal author of two U.S. federal laws regulating pain relief for animals , writes that researchers remained unsure into the 1980s as to whether animals experience pain , and that veterinarians trained in the U.S. before 1989 were simply taught to ignore animal pain . In his interactions with scientists and other veterinarians , he was regularly asked to " prove " that animals are conscious , and to provide " scientifically acceptable " grounds for claiming that they feel pain . Carbone writes that the view that animals feel pain differently is now a minority view . Academic reviews of the topic are more equivocal , noting that although the argument that animals have at least simple conscious thoughts and feelings has strong support , some critics continue to question how reliably animal mental states can be determined . The ability of invertebrates to experience pain and suffering is less clear , however , legislation in several countries ( e.g. U.K. , New Zealand , Norway ) protects some invertebrate species if they are being used in animal testing . 
 In the U.S. , the defining text on animal welfare regulation in animal testing is the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals . This defines the parameters that govern animal testing in the U.S. It states " The ability to experience and respond to pain is widespread in the animal kingdom ... Pain is a stressor and , if not relieved , can lead to unacceptable levels of stress and distress in animals . " The Guide states that the ability to recognize the symptoms of pain in different species is vital in efficiently applying pain relief and that it is essential for the people caring for and using animals to be entirely familiar with these symptoms . On the subject of analgesics used to relieve pain , the Guide states " The selection of the most appropriate analgesic or anesthetic should reflect professional judgment as to which best meets clinical and humane requirements without compromising the scientific aspects of the research protocol " . Accordingly , all issues of animal pain and distress , and their potential treatment with analgesia and anesthesia , are required regulatory issues in receiving animal protocol approval . 
 = = = Euthanasia = = = 
 Regulations require that scientists use as few animals as possible , especially for terminal experiments . However , while policy makers consider suffering to be the central issue and see animal euthanasia as a way to reduce suffering , others , such as the RSPCA , argue that the lives of laboratory animals have intrinsic value . Regulations focus on whether particular methods cause pain and suffering , not whether their death is undesirable in itself . The animals are euthanized at the end of studies for sample collection or post @-@ mortem examination ; during studies if their pain or suffering falls into certain categories regarded as unacceptable , such as depression , infection that is unresponsive to treatment , or the failure of large animals to eat for five days ; or when they are unsuitable for breeding or unwanted for some other reason . 
 Methods of euthanizing laboratory animals are chosen to induce rapid unconsciousness and death without pain or distress . The methods that are preferred are those published by councils of veterinarians . The animal can be made to inhale a gas , such as carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide , by being placed in a chamber , or by use of a face mask , with or without prior sedation or anesthesia . <unk> or anesthetics such as barbiturates can be given intravenously , or inhalant anesthetics may be used . Amphibians and fish may be immersed in water containing an anesthetic such as <unk> . Physical methods are also used , with or without sedation or anesthesia depending on the method . Recommended methods include decapitation ( beheading ) for small rodents or rabbits . Cervical dislocation ( breaking the neck or spine ) may be used for birds , mice , and immature rats and rabbits . <unk> ( grinding into small pieces ) is used on 1 day old chicks . High @-@ intensity microwave irradiation of the brain can preserve brain tissue and induce death in less than 1 second , but this is currently only used on rodents . Captive bolts may be used , typically on dogs , ruminants , horses , pigs and rabbits . It causes death by a concussion to the brain . Gunshot may be used , but only in cases where a penetrating captive bolt may not be used . Some physical methods are only acceptable after the animal is unconscious . Electrocution may be used for cattle , sheep , swine , foxes , and mink after the animals are unconscious , often by a prior electrical stun . <unk> ( inserting a tool into the base of the brain ) is usable on animals already unconscious . Slow or rapid freezing , or inducing air embolism are acceptable only with prior anesthesia to induce unconsciousness . 
 = = Research classification = = 
 = = = Pure research = = = 
 Basic or pure research investigates how organisms behave , develop , and function . Those opposed to animal testing object that pure research may have little or no practical purpose , but researchers argue that it forms the necessary basis for the development of applied research , rendering the distinction between pure and applied research — research that has a specific practical aim — unclear . Pure research uses larger numbers and a greater variety of animals than applied research . Fruit flies , nematode worms , mice and rats together account for the vast majority , though small numbers of other species are used , ranging from sea slugs through to armadillos . Examples of the types of animals and experiments used in basic research include : 
 Studies on embryogenesis and developmental biology . Mutants are created by adding transposons into their genomes , or specific genes are deleted by gene targeting . By studying the changes in development these changes produce , scientists aim to understand both how organisms normally develop , and what can go wrong in this process . These studies are particularly powerful since the basic controls of development , such as the homeobox genes , have similar functions in organisms as diverse as fruit flies and man . 
 Experiments into behavior , to understand how organisms detect and interact with each other and their environment , in which fruit flies , worms , mice , and rats are all widely used . Studies of brain function , such as memory and social behavior , often use rats and birds . For some species , behavioral research is combined with enrichment strategies for animals in captivity because it allows them to engage in a wider range of activities . 
 Breeding experiments to study evolution and genetics . Laboratory mice , flies , fish , and worms are inbred through many generations to create strains with defined characteristics . These provide animals of a known genetic background , an important tool for genetic analyses . Larger mammals are rarely bred specifically for such studies due to their slow rate of reproduction , though some scientists take advantage of inbred domesticated animals , such as dog or cattle breeds , for comparative purposes . Scientists studying how animals evolve use many animal species to see how variations in where and how an organism lives ( their niche ) produce adaptations in their physiology and morphology . As an example , sticklebacks are now being used to study how many and which types of mutations are selected to produce adaptations in animals ' morphology during the evolution of new species . 
 = = = Applied research = = = 
 Applied research aims to solve specific and practical problems . Compared to pure research , which is largely academic in origin , applied research is usually carried out in the pharmaceutical industry , or by universities in commercial partnerships . These may involve the use of animal models of diseases or conditions , which are often discovered or generated by pure research programmes . In turn , such applied studies may be an early stage in the drug discovery process . Examples include : 
 Genetic modification of animals to study disease . Transgenic animals have specific genes inserted , modified or removed , to mimic specific conditions such as single gene disorders , such as Huntington 's disease . Other models mimic complex , multifactorial diseases with genetic components , such as diabetes , or even transgenic mice that carry the same mutations that occur during the development of cancer . These models allow investigations on how and why the disease develops , as well as providing ways to develop and test new treatments . The vast majority of these transgenic models of human disease are lines of mice , the mammalian species in which genetic modification is most efficient . Smaller numbers of other animals are also used , including rats , pigs , sheep , fish , birds , and amphibians . 
 Studies on models of naturally occurring disease and condition . Certain domestic and wild animals have a natural propensity or predisposition for certain conditions that are also found in humans . Cats are used as a model to develop immunodeficiency virus vaccines and to study leukemia because their natural predisposition to FIV and Feline leukemia virus . Certain breeds of dog suffer from narcolepsy making them the major model used to study the human condition . Armadillos and humans are among only a few animal species that naturally suffer from leprosy ; as the bacteria responsible for this disease cannot yet be grown in culture , armadillos are the primary source of bacilli used in leprosy vaccines . 
 Studies on induced animal models of human diseases . Here , an animal is treated so that it develops pathology and symptoms that resemble a human disease . Examples include restricting blood flow to the brain to induce stroke , or giving neurotoxins that cause damage similar to that seen in Parkinson 's disease . Such studies can be difficult to interpret , and it is argued that they are not always comparable to human diseases . For example , although such models are now widely used to study Parkinson 's disease , the British anti @-@ vivisection interest group BUAV argues that these models only superficially resemble the disease symptoms , without the same time course or cellular pathology . In contrast , scientists assessing the usefulness of animal models of Parkinson 's disease , as well as the medical research charity The Parkinson 's Appeal , state that these models were invaluable and that they led to improved surgical treatments such as <unk> , new drug treatments such as levodopa , and later deep brain stimulation . 
 Animal testing has also included the use of placebo testing . In these cases animals are treated with a substance that produces no pharmacological effect , but is administered in order to determine any biological alterations due to the experience of a substance being administered , and the results are compared with those obtained with an active compound . 
 = = = = Xenotransplantation = = = = 
 Xenotransplantation research involves transplanting tissues or organs from one species to another , as a way to overcome the shortage of human organs for use in organ transplants . Current research involves using primates as the recipients of organs from pigs that have been genetically modified to reduce the primates ' immune response against the pig tissue . Although transplant rejection remains a problem , recent clinical trials that involved implanting pig insulin @-@ secreting cells into diabetics did reduce these people 's need for insulin . 
 Documents released to the news media by the animal rights organization Uncaged Campaigns showed that , between 1994 and 2000 , wild baboons imported to the UK from Africa by <unk> Ltd , a subsidiary of Novartis Pharma AG , in conjunction with Cambridge University and Huntingdon Life Sciences , to be used in experiments that involved grafting pig tissues , suffered serious and sometimes fatal injuries . A scandal occurred when it was revealed that the company had communicated with the British government in an attempt to avoid regulation . 
 = = = Toxicology testing = = = 
 Toxicology testing , also known as safety testing , is conducted by pharmaceutical companies testing drugs , or by contract animal testing facilities , such as Huntingdon Life Sciences , on behalf of a wide variety of customers . According to 2005 EU figures , around one million animals are used every year in Europe in toxicology tests ; which are about 10 % of all procedures . According to Nature , 5 @,@ 000 animals are used for each chemical being tested , with 12 @,@ 000 needed to test pesticides . The tests are conducted without anesthesia , because interactions between drugs can affect how animals detoxify chemicals , and may interfere with the results . 
 Toxicology tests are used to examine finished products such as pesticides , medications , food additives , packing materials , and air <unk> , or their chemical ingredients . Most tests involve testing ingredients rather than finished products , but according to BUAV , manufacturers believe these tests overestimate the toxic effects of substances ; they therefore repeat the tests using their finished products to obtain a less toxic label . 
 The substances are applied to the skin or dripped into the eyes ; injected intravenously , intramuscularly , or subcutaneously ; inhaled either by placing a mask over the animals and restraining them , or by placing them in an inhalation chamber ; or administered orally , through a tube into the stomach , or simply in the animal 's food . Doses may be given once , repeated regularly for many months , or for the lifespan of the animal . 
 There are several different types of acute toxicity tests . The LD50 ( " Lethal Dose 50 % " ) test is used to evaluate the toxicity of a substance by determining the dose required to kill 50 % of the test animal population . This test was removed from OECD international guidelines in 2002 , replaced by methods such as the fixed dose procedure , which use fewer animals and cause less suffering . Abbott writes that , as of 2005 , " the LD50 acute toxicity test ... still accounts for one @-@ third of all animal [ toxicity ] tests worldwide . " 
 <unk> can be measured using the Draize test , where a test substance is applied to an animal 's eyes or skin , usually an albino rabbit . For Draize eye testing , the test involves observing the effects of the substance at intervals and grading any damage or irritation , but the test should be halted and the animal killed if it shows " continuing signs of severe pain or distress " . The Humane Society of the United States writes that the procedure can cause redness , ulceration , hemorrhaging , cloudiness , or even blindness . This test has also been criticized by scientists for being cruel and inaccurate , subjective , over @-@ sensitive , and failing to reflect human exposures in the real world . Although no accepted in vitro alternatives exist , a modified form of the Draize test called the low volume eye test may reduce suffering and provide more realistic results and this was adopted as the new standard in September 2009 . However , the Draize test will still be used for substances that are not severe irritants . 
 The most stringent tests are reserved for drugs and foodstuffs . For these , a number of tests are performed , lasting less than a month ( acute ) , one to three months ( <unk> ) , and more than three months ( chronic ) to test general toxicity ( damage to organs ) , eye and skin irritancy , <unk> , carcinogenicity , <unk> , and reproductive problems . The cost of the full complement of tests is several million dollars per substance and it may take three or four years to complete . 
 These toxicity tests provide , in the words of a 2006 United States National Academy of Sciences report , " critical information for assessing hazard and risk potential " . Animal tests may overestimate risk , with false positive results being a particular problem , but false positives appear not to be prohibitively common . Variability in results arises from using the effects of high doses of chemicals in small numbers of laboratory animals to try to predict the effects of low doses in large numbers of humans . Although relationships do exist , opinion is divided on how to use data on one species to predict the exact level of risk in another . 
 = = = = Cosmetics testing = = = = 
 Cosmetics testing on animals is particularly controversial . Such tests , which are still conducted in the U.S. , involve general toxicity , eye and skin irritancy , <unk> ( toxicity triggered by ultraviolet light ) and <unk> . 
 Cosmetics testing on animals is banned in India , the European Union , Israel and Norway while legislation in the U.S. and Brazil is currently considering similar bans . In 2002 , after 13 years of discussion , the European Union agreed to phase in a near @-@ total ban on the sale of animal @-@ tested cosmetics by 2009 , and to ban all cosmetics @-@ related animal testing . France , which is home to the world 's largest cosmetics company , L 'Oreal , has protested the proposed ban by lodging a case at the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg , asking that the ban be quashed . The ban is also opposed by the European Federation for Cosmetics Ingredients , which represents 70 companies in Switzerland , Belgium , France , Germany , and Italy . In October 2014 , India passed stricter laws that also ban the importation of any cosmetic products that are tested on animals . 
 = = = Drug testing = = = 
 Before the early 20th century , laws regulating drugs were lax . Currently , all new pharmaceuticals undergo rigorous animal testing before being licensed for human use . Tests on pharmaceutical products involve : 
 metabolic tests , investigating pharmacokinetics — how drugs are absorbed , metabolized and excreted by the body when introduced orally , intravenously , intraperitoneally , intramuscularly , or <unk> . 
 toxicology tests , which gauge acute , sub @-@ acute , and chronic toxicity . Acute toxicity is studied by using a rising dose until signs of toxicity become apparent . Current European legislation demands that " acute toxicity tests must be carried out in two or more mammalian species " covering " at least two different routes of administration " . Sub @-@ acute toxicity is where the drug is given to the animals for four to six weeks in doses below the level at which it causes rapid poisoning , in order to discover if any toxic drug metabolites build up over time . Testing for chronic toxicity can last up to two years and , in the European Union , is required to involve two species of mammals , one of which must be non @-@ rodent . 
 efficacy studies , which test whether experimental drugs work by inducing the appropriate illness in animals . The drug is then administered in a double @-@ blind controlled trial , which allows researchers to determine the effect of the drug and the dose @-@ response curve . 
 Specific tests on reproductive function , embryonic toxicity , or carcinogenic potential can all be required by law , depending on the result of other studies and the type of drug being tested . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 It is estimated that 20 million animals are used annually for educational purposes in the United States including , classroom observational exercises , dissections and live @-@ animal surgeries . Frogs , fetal pigs , perch , cats , earthworms , grasshoppers , crayfish and starfish are commonly used in classroom dissections . Alternatives to the use of animals in classroom dissections are widely used , with many U.S. States and school districts mandating students be offered the choice to not dissect . Citing the wide availability of alternatives and the decimation of local frog species , India banned dissections in 2014 . 
 The Sonoran Arthropod Institute hosts an annual Invertebrates in Education and Conservation Conference to discuss the use of invertebrates in education . There also are efforts in many countries to find alternatives to using animals in education . The <unk> database , maintained by <unk> , lists products that may be used as alternatives or supplements to animal use in education , and in the training of personnel who work with animals . These include alternatives to dissection in schools . <unk> has a similar database and a loans system . 
 In November 2013 , the US @-@ based company Backyard Brains released for sale to the public what they call the " <unk> " , an " electronic backpack " that can be attached to cockroaches . The operator is required to amputate a cockroach 's antennae , use sandpaper to wear down the shell , insert a wire into the thorax , and then glue the electrodes and circuit board onto the insect 's back . A mobile phone app can then be used to control it via Bluetooth . It has been suggested that the use of such a device may be a teaching aid that can promote interest in science . The makers of the " <unk> " have been funded by the National Institute of Mental Health and state that the device is intended to encourage children to become interested in neuroscience . 
 = = = Defense = = = 
 Animals are used by the military to develop weapons , vaccines , battlefield surgical techniques , and defensive clothing . For example , in 2008 the United States Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency used live pigs to study the effects of improvised explosive device explosions on internal organs , especially the brain . 
 In the US military , goats are commonly used to train combat medics . ( Goats have become the main animal species used for this purpose after the Pentagon phased out using dogs for medical training in the 1980s . ) While modern mannequins used in medical training are quite efficient in simulating the behavior of a human body , some trainees feel that " the goat exercise provide [ s ] a sense of urgency that only real life trauma can provide " . Nevertheless , in 2014 , the U.S. Coast Guard announced that it would reduce the number of animals it uses in its training exercises by half after PETA released video showing Guard members cutting off the limbs of unconscious goats with tree trimmers and inflicting other injuries with a shotgun , pistol , ax and a scalpel . That same year , citing the availability of human simulators and other alternatives , the Department of Defense announced it would begin reducing the amount of animals it uses in various training programs . In 2013 , several Navy medical centers stopped using ferrets in intubation exercises after complaints from PETA . 
 Besides the US , six out of 28 NATO countries , including Poland and Denmark , use live animals for combat medic training . 
 = = Ethics = = 
 = = = Viewpoints = = = 
 The moral and ethical questions raised by performing experiments on animals are subject to debate , and viewpoints have shifted significantly over the 20th century . There remain disagreements about which procedures are useful for which purposes , as well as disagreements over which ethical principles apply to which species . 
 A 2015 Gallup poll found that 67 % of Americans were “ very concerned ” or “ somewhat concerned ” about animals used in research . A Pew poll taken the same year found 50 % of American adults opposed the use of animals in research . 
 Still , a wide range of viewpoints exist . The view that animals have moral rights ( animal rights ) is a philosophical position proposed by Tom Regan , among others , who argues that animals are beings with beliefs and desires , and as such are the " subjects of a life " with moral value and therefore moral rights . Regan still sees ethical differences between killing human and non @-@ human animals , and argues that to save the former it is permissible to kill the latter . Likewise , a " moral dilemma " view suggests that avoiding potential benefit to humans is unacceptable on similar grounds , and holds the issue to be a dilemma in balancing such harm to humans to the harm done to animals in research . In contrast , an abolitionist view in animal rights holds that there is no moral justification for any harmful research on animals that is not to the benefit of the individual animal . Bernard Rollin argues that benefits to human beings cannot outweigh animal suffering , and that human beings have no moral right to use an animal in ways that do not benefit that individual . Another prominent position is that of philosopher Peter Singer , who argues that there are no grounds to include a being 's species in considerations of whether their suffering is important in utilitarian moral considerations . Malcolm Macleod and collaborators argue that most controlled animal studies do not employ randomization , allocation concealment , and blinding outcome assessment , and that failure to employ these features exaggerates the apparent benefit of drugs tested in animals , leading to a failure to translate much animal research for human benefit . 
 Governments such as the Netherlands and New Zealand have responded to the public 's concerns by outlawing invasive experiments on certain classes of non @-@ human primates , particularly the great apes . In 2015 , captive chimpanzees in the U.S. were added to the Endangered Species Act adding new road blocks to those wishing to experiment on them . Similarly , citing ethical considerations and the availability of alternative research methods , the U.S. NIH announced in 2013 that it would dramatically reduce and eventually phase out experiments on chimpanzees . 
 The British government has required that the cost to animals in an experiment be weighed against the gain in knowledge . Some medical schools and agencies in China , Japan , and South Korea have built cenotaphs for killed animals . In Japan there are also annual memorial services ( <unk> <unk> ) for animals sacrificed at medical school . 
 Various specific cases of animal testing have drawn attention , including both instances of beneficial scientific research , and instances of alleged ethical violations by those performing the tests . The fundamental properties of muscle physiology were determined with work done using frog muscles ( including the force generating mechanism of all muscle , the length @-@ tension relationship , and the force @-@ velocity curve ) , and frogs are still the preferred model organism due to the long survival of muscles in vitro and the possibility of isolating intact single @-@ fiber preparations ( not possible in other organisms ) . Modern physical therapy and the understanding and treatment of muscular disorders is based on this work and subsequent work in mice ( often engineered to express disease states such as muscular dystrophy ) . In February 1997 a team at the Roslin Institute in Scotland announced the birth of Dolly the sheep , the first mammal to be cloned from an adult somatic cell . 
 Concerns have been raised over the mistreatment of primates undergoing testing . In 1985 the case of Britches , a macaque monkey at the University of California , Riverside , gained public attention . He had his eyelids sewn shut and a sonar sensor on his head as part of an experiment to test sensory substitution devices for blind people . The laboratory was raided by Animal Liberation Front in 1985 , removing Britches and 466 other animals . The National Institutes of Health conducted an eight @-@ month investigation and concluded , however , that no corrective action was necessary . During the 2000s other cases have made headlines , including experiments at the University of Cambridge and Columbia University in 2002 . In 2004 and 2005 , undercover footage of staff of <unk> 's , a contract research organization that provides animal testing services , Virginia lab was shot by People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) . Following release of the footage , the U.S. Department of Agriculture fined <unk> $ 8 @,@ 720 for 16 citations , three of which involved lab monkeys ; the other citations involved administrative issues and equipment . In 1997 PETA filmed staff from Huntingdon Life Sciences , showing dogs being mistreated . The employees responsible were dismissed , with two given community service orders and ordered to pay £ 250 costs , the first lab technicians to have been prosecuted for animal cruelty in the UK . 
 = = = Threats to researchers = = = 
 In 2006 , a primate researcher at the University of California , Los Angeles ( UCLA ) shut down the experiments in his lab after threats from animal rights activists . The researcher had received a grant to use 30 macaque monkeys for vision experiments ; each monkey was anesthetized for a single physiological experiment lasting up to 120 hours , and then euthanized . The researcher 's name , phone number , and address were posted on the website of the Primate Freedom Project . Demonstrations were held in front of his home . A Molotov cocktail was placed on the porch of what was believed to be the home of another UCLA primate researcher ; instead , it was accidentally left on the porch of an elderly woman unrelated to the university . The Animal Liberation Front claimed responsibility for the attack . As a result of the campaign , the researcher sent an email to the Primate Freedom Project stating " you win , " and " please don 't bother my family anymore . " In another incident at UCLA in June 2007 , the Animal Liberation Brigade placed a bomb under the car of a UCLA children 's ophthalmologist who experiments on cats and rhesus monkeys ; the bomb had a faulty fuse and did not detonate . UCLA is now refusing Freedom of Information Act requests for animal medical records . 
 These attacks — as well as similar incidents that caused the Southern Poverty Law Center to declare in 2002 that the animal rights movement had " clearly taken a turn toward the more extreme " — prompted the US government to pass the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act and the UK government to add the offense of " Intimidation of persons connected with animal research organisation " to the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 . Such legislation and the arrest and imprisonment of extremists may have decreased the incidence of attacks . 
 = = Alternatives to animal testing = = 
 Many scientists and governments state that animal testing should cause as little suffering to animals as possible , and that animal tests should only be performed where necessary . The " Three Rs " are guiding principles for the use of animals in research in most countries . Whilst replacement of animals , i.e. alternatives to animal testing , is one of the principles , their scope is much broader . Although such principles have been welcomed as a step forwards by some animal welfare groups , they have also been criticized as both outdated by current research , and of little practical effect in improving animal welfare . 
 The scientists and engineers at Harvard 's Wyss Institute have created " organs @-@ on @-@ a @-@ chip " , including the " lung @-@ on @-@ a @-@ chip " and " gut @-@ on @-@ a @-@ chip " . These tiny devices contain human cells in a 3 @-@ dimensional system that mimics human organs . The chips can be used instead of animals in in vitro disease research , drug testing , and toxicity testing . Researchers have also begun using 3 @-@ D <unk> to create human cells for in vitro testing . 
 Another non @-@ animal research method is in silico or computer simulation and mathematical modeling which seeks to investigate and ultimately predict toxicity and drug affects in humans without using animals . This is done by investigating test compounds on a molecular level using recent advances in technological capabilities with the ultimate goal of creating treatments unique to each patient . 
 <unk> a form of in vitro is on the uprising of alternatives . 
 Microdosing is another alternative to the use of animals in experimentation . Microdosing is a process whereby volunteers are administered a small dose of a test compound allowing researchers to investigate its pharmacological affects without harming the volunteers . Microdosing can replace the use of animals in pre @-@ clinical drug screening and can reduce the number of animals used in safety and toxicity testing . 
 Additional alternative methods include positron emission tomography ( PET ) , which allows scanning of the human brain in vivo , and comparative epidemiological studies of disease risk factors among human populations . 
 <unk> and computer programs have also replaced the use of animals in dissection , teaching and training exercises . 
 Official bodies such as the European Centre for the Validation of Alternative Test Methods of the European Commission , the Interagency Coordinating Committee for the Validation of Alternative Methods in the US , <unk> in Germany , and the Japanese Center for the Validation of Alternative Methods ( among others ) also promote and disseminate the 3Rs . These bodies are mainly driven by responding to regulatory requirements , such as supporting the cosmetics testing ban in the EU by validating alternative methods . 
 The European Partnership for Alternative Approaches to Animal Testing serves as a liaison between the European Commission and industries . The European Consensus Platform for Alternatives coordinates efforts amongst EU member states . 
 Academic centers also investigate alternatives , including the Center for Alternatives to Animal Testing at the Johns Hopkins University and the <unk> in the UK . 
 = New York State Route 398 = 
 New York State Route 398 ( NY 398 ) was an east – west state highway located within the town of Stuyvesant in Columbia County , New York , in the United States . It served as a short connector between NY 9J in the hamlet of Stuyvesant and U.S. Route 9 ( US 9 ) in the hamlet of Sunnyside southwest of the village of Kinderhook . NY 398 was assigned in the early 1930s and remained unchanged until 1980 , when ownership and maintenance of the highway was transferred to Columbia County . The route was redesignated as County Route 26A at that time . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 398 began at an intersection with NY 9J in downtown Stuyvesant . The route progressed eastward , passing a small park and intersecting with local roads . NY 398 passed Firwood Barn as it climbed in elevation . The route turned to the southeast and passed some small parks . After that , the route became more rural , climbing even higher in elevation and intersecting with another local road . 
 After the local road however , the highway began to patch its way through several hills and mountains , but this did not last long . The highway then became rural again , emerging from the mountains behind it . There were a few short hills the rest of the way along NY 398 , until it entered the small hamlet of Sunnyside . There , it became a little more <unk> , and the highway terminated at an intersection with US 9 . 
 = = History = = 
 NY 398 was assigned c . 1932 to the highway connecting the hamlets of Stuyvesant and Sunnyside . It remained unchanged until January 28 , 1980 , when the NY 398 designation was officially removed from the highway . Ownership and maintenance of NY 398 's former routing was transferred from the state of New York to Columbia County on April 1 , 1980 , as part of a highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . The highway became part of County Route 26A ( CR 26A ) , a designation that continues west of NY 9J to a junction with River View Street near the Hudson River . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route was in Stuyvesant , Columbia County . 
 = Mary Dyer = 
 Mary Dyer , born Marie Barrett ( c . 1611 – 1 June 1660 ) , was an English and colonial American Puritan turned Quaker who was hanged in Boston , Massachusetts Bay Colony , for repeatedly defying a Puritan law banning Quakers from the colony . She is one of the four executed Quakers known as the Boston martyrs . 
 While the place of her birth is not known , she was married in London in 1633 to the milliner William Dyer . Mary and William were Puritans who were interested in reforming the Anglican Church from within , without separating from it . As the English king increased pressure on the Puritans , they left England by the thousands to go to New England in the early 1630s . Mary and William arrived in Boston by 1635 , joining the Boston Church in December of that year . Like most members of Boston 's church , they soon became involved in the Antinomian Controversy , a theological crisis lasting from 1636 to 1638 . Mary and William were strong advocates of Anne Hutchinson and John Wheelwright in the controversy , and as a result Mary 's husband was disenfranchised and disarmed for supporting these " heretics " and also for harboring his own heretical views . Subsequently , they left Massachusetts with many others to establish a new colony on Aquidneck Island ( later Rhode Island ) in Narraganset Bay . 
 Before leaving Boston , Mary had given birth to a severely deformed infant that was stillborn . Because of the theological implications of such a birth , the baby was buried secretly . When the Massachusetts authorities learned of this birth , the ordeal became public , and in the minds of the colony 's ministers and magistrates , the monstrous birth was clearly a result of Mary 's " monstrous " religious opinions . More than a decade later , in late 1651 , Mary Dyer boarded a ship for England , and stayed there for over five years , becoming an avid follower of the Quaker religion that had been established by George Fox several years earlier . Because Quakers were considered among the most heinous of heretics by the Puritans , Massachusetts enacted several laws against them . When Dyer returned to Boston from England , she was immediately imprisoned , and then banished . Defying her order of banishment , she was again banished , this time upon pain of death . Deciding that she would die as a martyr if the anti @-@ Quaker laws were not repealed , Dyer once again returned to Boston and was sent to the gallows in 1659 , having the rope around her neck when a reprieve was announced . Not accepting the reprieve , she again returned to Boston the following year , and was then hanged to become the third of four Quaker martyrs . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Details of the life of Mary Dyer in England are scarce ; only her marriage record and a short probate record for her brother have been found . In both of these English records her name is given as Marie Barret . A tradition that Dyer was the daughter of Lady Arbella Stuart and Sir William Seymour , was debunked by genealogist G. Andrews Moriarty in 1950 . However , Moriarty correctly predicted that despite his work the legend would persist , and in 1994 the tradition was included as being plausible in a published biography of Dyer . 
 While the parents of Mary Dyer have not been identified , family researcher Johan Winsser made a significant discovery concerning a brother of Dyer , which he published in 2004 . On 18 January 1633 / 4 a probate administration was recorded in the Prerogative Court of Canterbury for a William Barret . The instrument granted administration of Barret 's estate " jointly to William Dyer of St Martin @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Fields , fishmonger , and his wife Marie Dyer , otherwise Barret . " The fact that the estate of a brother of Mary Dyer would be left in the hands of Mary and her husband strongly suggests that William ( and therefore Mary ) had no living parents and no living brothers at the time , and also suggests that Mary was either William Barrett 's only living sister , or his oldest living sister . The other facts that could be drawn from the instrument are that William Barrett was unmarried and that he died somewhere " beyond the seas " from England . 
 That Mary was well educated is apparent from letters that she wrote . The Quaker chronicler , George Bishop described her as a " Comely Grave Woman , and of a goodly Personage , and one of a good Report , having a husband of an Estate , fearing the Lord , and a Mother of Children . " Dutch writer , Gerard <unk> wrote that she was reputed to be a " person of no mean extract and parentage , of an estate pretty plentiful , of a comely stature and countenance , of a piercing knowledge in many things , of a wonderful sweet and pleasant discourse , so fit for great affairs ... " Massachusetts Governor John Winthrop described her as being " a very proper and fair woman ... of a very proud spirit , and much addicted to revelations " . 
 Mary was married to William Dyer , a fishmonger and milliner , on 27 October 1633 at the parish of St Martin @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Fields , which at the time was in Westminster , Middlesex , but is now a part of London . Mary 's husband was baptized in Lincolnshire , England . Settlers from Lincolnshire contributed a disproportionately large percentage of members of the Boston Church in New England , and a disproportionately large part of the leadership during the founding of Rhode Island . 
 Mary and William Dyer were Puritans , as evidenced by their acceptance into the membership of the Boston church in New England . The Puritans wanted to complete the separation of the Anglican church from Catholicism that had begun under the rule of the English monarch Henry VIII . The conformists in England accepted the English monarch as the head of the church , and the form of worship that greatly resembled that in the Catholic church . The Puritans , as non @-@ conformists , wanted to do away with the vestments , bowing and making the sign of the cross that were prevalent in Anglican worship , and observe a much simpler and Biblical form of worship . Some of the non @-@ conformists , such as the Pilgrims , wanted to separate completely from the Anglican church , while the Puritans wished to reform the church from within . As the ranks of Puritans began swelling in England , so too did the severity of government intervention , including exile or death for ministers not adhering to the state religious practices . In the 1620s England 's King Charles I , with little understanding of religion , was adamant that English subjects conform to the same uniform religion , which included the vestments and procedures found in the Catholic church . As exploration of the North American continent was then leading to settlement , the Puritans found a way to practice their form of religion by emigrating from England . 
 = = Massachusetts = = 
 In 1635 , Mary and William Dyer sailed from England to New England . Mary was likely pregnant , or gave birth during the voyage , because on 20 December 1635 their son Samuel was baptized at the Boston church , exactly one week after the Dyers joined the church . William Dyer became a freeman of Boston on 3 March the following year . 
 = = = Antinomian Controversy = = = 
 During the earliest days of the Boston Church , before the arrival of Mary and William Dyer , there was a single minister , the Reverend John Wilson . In 1633 , one of England 's most noted Puritan clergymen , John Cotton , arrived in Boston , and quickly became the second minister ( called " teacher " ) in Boston 's church . In time , the Boston parishioners could sense a theological difference between Wilson and Cotton . Anne Hutchinson , a theologically astute midwife who had the ear of many of the colony 's women , became outspoken in support of Cotton , and condemned the theology of Wilson and most of the other ministers in the colony during gatherings , or conventicles , held at her house . 
 Differing religious opinions within the colony eventually became public debates and erupted into what has traditionally been called the Antinomian Controversy . Many members of Boston 's church found Wilson 's emphasis on morality , and his doctrine of " evidencing justification by sanctification " ( a covenant of works ) to be disagreeable . Hutchinson told her followers that Wilson lacked " the seal of the Spirit . " Wilson 's theological views conformed with those of all of the other ministers in the colony except for Cotton , who instead stressed " the inevitability of God 's will " ( a covenant of grace ) . The Boston parishioners had become accustomed to Cotton 's doctrines , and some of them began disrupting Wilson 's sermons , even finding excuses to leave when Wilson got up to preach or pray . 
 Both William and Mary Dyer sided strongly with Hutchinson and the free @-@ grace advocates , and it is highly likely that Mary attended the periodic theological gatherings at the Hutchinson 's home . In May 1636 , the Bostonians received a new ally when the Reverend John Wheelwright arrived from England , and immediately aligned himself with Cotton , Hutchinson and the other free @-@ grace supporters . Yet another boost for those advocating the free @-@ grace theology came during the same month , when the young aristocrat Henry Vane was elected as the governor of the colony . Vane was a strong supporter of Hutchinson , but also had his own unorthodox ideas about theology that were considered radical . 
 By late 1636 , the theological schism had become great enough that the General Court called for a day of fasting to help ease the colony 's difficulties . The appointed fasting day , in January , included church services , and Cotton preached during the morning , but with Wilson away in England , John Wheelwright was invited to preach during the afternoon . Though his sermon may have seemed benign to the average listener in the congregation , most of the colony 's ministers found Wheelwright 's words to be objectionable . Instead of bringing peace , the sermon fanned the flames of controversy , and in Winthrop 's words , Wheelwright " inveighed against all that walked in a covenant of works , ... and called them <unk> , and stirred up the people against them with much bitterness and <unk> . " In contrast , the followers of Hutchinson were encouraged by the sermon , and intensified their crusade against the " legalists " among the clergy . During church services and lectures , they publicly questioned the ministers about their doctrines which disagreed with their own beliefs . 
 When the General Court next met on 9 March , Wheelwright was called upon to answer for his sermon . He was judged guilty of " contempt & sedition " for having " purposely set himself to kindle and increase " bitterness within the colony . The vote did not pass without a fight , however , and Wheelwright 's friends protested formally . Most members of the Boston church , favoring Wheelwright in the conflict , drafted a petition justifying Wheelwright 's sermon , and 60 people signed this remonstrance protesting the conviction . William Dyer was among those who signed the petition which accused the General Court of condemning the truth of Christ . Dyer 's signature in support of Wheelwright soon proved to be fateful to the Dyer family . 
 Anne Hutchinson faced trial in early November 1637 for " traducing " ( slandering ) the ministers , and was sentenced to banishment on her second day in court . Within a week of her sentencing , many supporters of hers , including William Dyer , were called into court and were disenfranchised . Fearing an armed insurrection , the constables were then sent from door to door throughout the colony 's towns to disarm those who signed the Wheelwright petition . Within ten days these individuals were ordered to deliver " all such guns , pistols , swords , powder , shot , & match as they shall be owners of , or have in their custody , upon <unk> of ten pound [ s ] for every default " . A great number of those who signed the petition , faced with losing their protection and in some cases livelihood , recanted under the pressure , and " acknowledged their error " in signing the petition . Those who refused to recant suffered hardships and many decided to leave the colony . Being both disenfranchised and disarmed , William Dyer was among those who could no longer justify remaining in Massachusetts . 
 = = = Monstrous birth = = = 
 While William Dyer appeared in the Boston records on several occasions , Mary Dyer had not caught the attention of the Massachusetts authorities until March 1638 as the Antinomian Controversy came to an end . Following Hutchinson 's civil trial , she was kept as a prisoner in the home of a brother of one of the colony 's ministers . Though she had been banished from the colony , this did not mean she was removed as a member of the Boston church . In March 1638 she was forced to face a church trial to get at the root of her heresies , and determine if her relationship with the Puritan church would continue . While William Dyer was likely with other men finding a new home away from Massachusetts , Mary Dyer was still in Boston and in attendance at this church trial . At the conclusion of the trial , Hutchinson was excommunicated , and as she was leaving the Boston Church , Mary stood and walked hand in hand with her out of the building . As the two women were leaving the church , a member of the congregation asked another person about the identity of the woman leaving the church with Hutchinson . A reply was made that it was the woman who had had the monstrous birth . Governor Winthrop soon became aware of this verbal exchange and began conducting an investigation . 
 Dyer had given birth five months earlier , on 11 October 1637 , to a deformed stillborn baby . Winthrop wrote that while many women had gathered for the occasion , that " none were left at the time of the birth but the midwife and two others , whereof one fell asleep . " Actually , two women present were midwives — Anne Hutchinson and Jane Hawkins , but the third woman was never identified . Hutchinson fully understood the serious theological implications of such a birth , and immediately sought the counsel of Reverend John Cotton . Thinking about how he would react if this were his child , Cotton instructed Hutchinson to conceal the circumstances of the birth . The infant was then buried secretly . 
 Once Winthrop had learned of the monstrous birth , he confronted Jane Hawkins , and armed with new information then confronted Reverend Cotton . As the news spread among the colony 's leaders , it was determined that the infant would be exhumed and examined . According to Winthrop , a group of " above a hundred persons " including Winthrop , Cotton , Reverend Wilson , and Reverend Thomas Weld " went to the place of <unk> & commanded to digg it up to [ behold ] it , & they <unk> it , a most hideous creature , a woman , a fish , a bird , & a beast all woven together ... " In his journal , Winthrop provided a more complete description as follows : 
 it was of ordinary bigness ; it had a face , but no head , and the ears stood upon the shoulders and were like an ape 's ; it had no forehead , but over the eyes four horns , hard and sharp ; two of them were above one inch long , the other two shorter ; the eyes standing out , and the mouth also ; the nose hooked upward ; all over the breast and back full of sharp pricks and scales , like a thornback [ i.e. , a skate or ray ] , the navel and all the belly , with the distinction of the sex , were where the back should be , and the back and hips before , where the belly should have been ; behind , between the shoulders , it had two mouths , and in each of them a piece of red flesh sticking out ; it had arms and legs as other children ; but , instead of toes , it had on each foot three claws , like a young fowl , with sharp talons . 
 While some of the description may have been accurate , many puritanical embellishments were added to better fit the moral story being portrayed by the authorities . The modern medical condition that best fits the description of the infant is <unk> , meaning partial or complete absence of a brain . This episode was just the beginning of the attention emanating from Dyer 's personal tragedy . The religion of the Puritans demanded a close look at all aspects of one 's life for signs of God 's approval or disapproval . Even becoming a member of the Puritan church in New England required a public confession of faith , and any behavior that was viewed by the clergy as being unorthodox required a theological examination by the church , followed by a public confession and repentance by the offender . Such microscopic inspection caused even private matters to become looked at publicly for the purpose of instruction , and Dyer 's tragedy was widely examined for signs of God 's judgment . This led to a highly subjective form of justice , an example of which was the 1656 hanging of Ann Hibbins whose offense was simply being resented by her neighbor . In Winthrop 's eyes Dyer 's case was unequivocal , and he was convinced that her monstrous birth was a clear signal of God 's displeasure with the antinomian heretics . Winthrop felt that it was quite providential that the discovery of the monstrous birth occurred exactly when Anne Hutchinson was excommunicated from the local body of believers , and exactly one week before Dyer 's husband was questioned in the Boston church for his heretic opinions . 
 To further fuel Winthrop 's beliefs , Anne Hutchinson suffered from a miscarriage later in the same year when she aborted a strange mass of tissue that appeared like a handful of transparent grapes ( a rare condition , mostly in woman over 45 , called a hydatidiform mole ) . Winthrop was convinced of divine influence in these events , and made sure that every leader in New England received his own account of the " monster " birth , and he even sent a deposition to England . Soon , the story took on a life of its own , and in 1642 it was printed in London under the title Newes from New @-@ England of a Most Strange and Prodigious Birth , brought to Boston in New @-@ England ... Though the author of this work was not named , it may have been the New England minister Thomas Weld who was in England at the time to support New England 's ecclesiastical independence . In 1644 Weld , who was still in England , took Winthrop 's account of the Antinomian Controversy , and published it under one title , and then added a preface of his own and republished it under the title A Short story of the Rise , reign and ruine of the Antinomians , Familists & Libertines ... usually just called Short Story . In 1648 Samuel Rutherford , a Scottish <unk> , included Winthrop 's account of the monster in his anti @-@ sectarian treatise A Survey of the <unk> Antichrist , Opening the Secrets of <unk> and <unk> . Even the English writer , Samuel Danforth , included the birth in his 1648 Almanack as a " memorable occurrence " from 1637 . The only minister who wrote without sensationalism about Dyer 's deformed infant was the Reverend John Wheelwright , Anne Hutchinson 's ally during the Antinomian Controversy . In his 1645 response to Winthrop 's Short Story , entitled Mercurius Americanus , he wrote that Dyer 's and Hutchinson 's monsters described by Winthrop were nothing but " a monstrous conception of his [ Winthrop 's ] brain , a spurious issue of his intellect . " 
 Twenty years after the tragic birth , when Mary Dyer returned to the public spotlight for her Quaker evangelism , she continued to be remembered for the birth of her deformed child , this time in the diary of John Hull . Also , in 1660 , an exchange of letters took place between England and New England when the two eminent English clergymen , Richard Baxter and Thomas Brooks , sought information about the monstrous birth from 1637 . A New Englander , whose identity was not included , sent back information about the event to the English divines . The New Englander , who used Winthrop 's original description of the " monster " almost verbatim , has subsequently been identified as yet another well @-@ known clergyman , John Eliot who preached at the church in Roxbury , not far from Boston . 
 The most outrageous accounting of Dyer 's infant occurred in 1667 when a memorandum of the Englishman Sir Joseph Williamson quoted a Major Scott about the event . Scott was a country lawyer with a notorious reputation , and his detractors included the famous diarist Samuel Pepys . Scott 's outlandish assertion was that the young Massachusetts governor , Henry Vane , fathered the monstrous births of both Mary Dyer and Anne Hutchinson ; that he " debauched both , and both were delivered of monsters . " After this , the accounts became less frequent , and the last historical account of Dyer 's monstrous birth was in 1702 when the New England minister Cotton Mather mentioned it in passing in his <unk> Christi <unk> . 
 = = Rhode Island = = 
 Several of those affected by the events of the Antinomian Controversy went north with John Wheelwright in November 1637 to found the town of Exeter in what would become New Hampshire . A larger group , uncertain where to go , contacted Roger Williams , who suggested they purchase land from the natives along the Narraganset Bay , near his settlement in Providence . On 7 March 1638 , just as Anne Hutchinson 's church trial was getting underway , a group of men gathered at the home of William Coddington and drafted a compact for a new government . This group included several of the strongest supporters of Hutchinson who had either been disenfranchised , disarmed , excommunicated , or banished , including William Dyer . Altogether , 23 individuals signed the instrument which was intended to form a " Bodie Politick " based on Christian principles , and Coddington was chosen as the leader of the group . Following through with Roger Williams ' proposed land purchase , these exiles established their colony on Aquidneck Island ( later named Rhode Island ) , naming the settlement Pocasset . 
 William and Mary Dyer joined William and Anne Hutchinson and many others in building the new settlement on Aquidneck Island . Within a year of the founding of this settlement , however , there was dissension among the leaders , and the Dyers joined Coddington , with several other inhabitants , in moving to the south end of the island , establishing the town of Newport . The Hutchinsons remained in Pocasset , whose inhabitants renamed the town Portsmouth , and William Hutchinson became its chief magistrate . William Dyer immediately became the recording secretary of Newport , and he and three others were tasked in June 1639 to proportion the new lands . In 1640 the two towns of Portsmouth and Newport united , and Coddington was elected governor , while Dyer was chosen as Secretary , and held this position from 1640 to 1647 . Roger Williams , who envisioned a union of all four settlements on the Narragansett Bay ( Providence , Warwick , Portsmouth , and Newport ) , wanted royal recognition of these settlements for their protection , and went to England where he obtained a patent bringing the four towns under one government . Coddington was opposed to the Williams patent and managed to resist union with Providence and Warwick until 1647 when representatives of the four towns ultimately met and united under the patent . With all four of the Narragansett settlements now under one government , William Dyer was elected the General Recorder for the entire colony in 1648 . 
 Coddington continued to be unhappy with the consolidated government , and wanted colonial independence for the two island towns . He sailed to England to present his case , and in April 1651 , the Council of State of England gave him the commission he sought , making him governor @-@ for @-@ life of the island . Criticism of Coddington arose as soon as he returned with his commission . Three men were then directed to go to England to get Coddington 's commission revoked : Roger Williams , representing the mainland towns , and John Clarke and William Dyer representing the two island towns . In November 1651 the three men left for England , where Dyer would meet his wife . Mary Dyer had sailed to England before the three men departed , as Coddington wrote in a letter to Winthrop that Mr. Dyer " sent his wife over in the first ship with Mr. <unk> , and is now gone himself for England . " It remains a mystery as to why Mary Dyer would leave six children behind , one an infant , to travel abroad . Biographer Ruth Plimpton hinted that Mary had some royal connection , and suggested that the news of the execution of King Charles compelled her to go . However , no record has been found to satisfactorily explain this mystery . 
 Because of recent hostilities between the English and the Dutch , the three men , once in England , did not meet with the Council of State on New England until April 1652 . After the men explained their case , Coddington 's commission for the island government was revoked in October 1652 . William Dyer was the messenger who returned to Rhode Island the following February , bringing the news of the return of the colony to the Williams Patent of 1643 . Mary , however , would remain in England for the next four years . 
 = = Quaker conversion = = 
 = = = England = = = 
 Mary Dyer 's time in England lasted for over five years , and during her stay she had become deeply taken by the Quaker religion established by George Fox around 1647 . Formally known as the Society of Friends , the Quakers did not believe in baptism , formal prayer and the Lord 's Supper , nor did they believe in an ordained ministry . Each member was a minister in his or her own right , women were essentially treated as men in matters of spirituality , and they relied on an " Inner Light of Christ " as their source of spiritual inspiration . In addition to denouncing the clergy , and refusing to support it with their tithes , they also claimed liberty of conscience as an inalienable right and demanded the separation of church and state . Their worship consisted of silent meditation , though those moved by the Spirit would at times make public exhortations . They minimized the customs of bowing or men removing their hats , they would not take an oath , and they would not fight in wars . The Puritans in Massachusetts viewed Quakers as being among the most reprehensible of heretics , and they enacted several laws against them . 
 While in England , one place that Dyer visited , and likely spent a lot of time , was Swarthmoor Hall , located near Ulverston in Cumbria in northwestern England . Biographer Ruth Plimpton surmises that Dyer had spent time with her old friend Henry Vane at his estate in Lincolnshire , called Belleau , and that Vane had introduced Mary to the judge Thomas Fell who traveled extensively across the kingdom , and who owned the Swarthmoor manor . In 1652 George Fox had visited Swarthmoor while the judge was traveling , but was invited in as a house guest by the judge 's wife , Margaret Fell . Within a few days , Fox had swayed Margaret to his religious beliefs . When the judge returned to Swarthmoor , he too listened to Fox , and though he was not taken by Fox 's religious views , he was nevertheless tolerant and sympathetic with Fox , and allowed him to use Swarthmoor as a Quaker meeting place . 
 Plimpton relates that Dyer made the journey of several days from Lincolnshire to Cumbria , and stayed at Swarthmoor as a guest of the Fells . It is here that Dyer almost certainly met George Fox , and learned about his beliefs and the role of women as preachers in his faith . Though documentary evidence of an actual meeting of Dyer and Fox is lacking , it is certain that Dyer was known to Margaret Fell , based on a letter written to Margaret by two Quakers in Barbadoes . The two men , John Rous and Henry Fell ( no close relation to Thomas and Margaret Fell ) wrote on 24 May 1657 that " We are still waiting here to get a passage for New England . We have not heard anything yet from Anne Burden and Mary Dyer , who went thither ... " 
 Judge Thomas Fell died in 1658 , but Swarthmoor continued to be a center of Quaker activity where George Fox would visit on many occasions . Margaret Fell was imprisoned for her Quaker activism from 1664 to 1668 , and following her release she married George Fox . 
 = = = Quakers in Massachusetts = = = 
 Of all the New England colonies , Massachusetts was the most active in persecuting the Quakers , but the Plymouth , Connecticut and New Haven colonies also shared in their persecution . When the first Quakers arrived in Boston in 1656 there were no laws yet enacted against them , but this quickly changed , and punishments were meted out with or without the law . It was primarily the ministers and the magistrates who opposed the Quakers and their evangelistic efforts . A particularly vehement persecutor , the Reverend John Norton of the Boston church , clamored for the law of banishment upon pain of death . He is the one who later wrote the vindication to England , justifying the execution of the first two Quakers in 1659 . 
 The punishments doled out to the Quakers intensified as their perceived threat to the Puritan religious order increased . These included the stocks and pillory , lashes with a three @-@ corded , knotted whip , fines , imprisonment , mutilation ( having ears cut off ) , banishment and death . When whipped , women were stripped to the waist , thus being publicly exposed , and whipped until bleeding . Such was the fate of Dyer 's Newport neighbor , Herodias Gardiner who had made a perilous journey through a 60 @-@ mile wilderness to get to Weymouth in the Massachusetts colony . She had made the arduous trek with another woman and with her " Babe sucking at her Breast " to give her Quaker testimony to friends in Weymouth . Similarly , Katharine , the wife of Richard Scott , and a younger sister of Anne Hutchinson , had received ten lashes for coming to visit her future son @-@ in @-@ law , Christopher Holder , in prison . This was the setting into which Mary Dyer stepped , upon her return from England . 
 = = = Dyer 's return to New England = = = 
 In early 1657 Dyer returned to New England with the widow Ann Burden , who came to Boston to settle the estate of her late husband . Dyer was immediately recognized as a Quaker and imprisoned . Dyer 's husband had to come to Boston to get her out of jail , and he was bound and sworn not to allow her to lodge in any Massachusetts town , or to speak to any person while traversing the colony to return home . Dyer nevertheless continued to travel in New England to preach her Quaker message , and in early 1658 was arrested in the New Haven Colony , and then expelled for preaching her " inner light " belief , and the notion that women and men stood on equal ground in church worship and organization . In addition to sharing her Quaker message , she had come to New Haven with two others to visit Humphrey Norton who had been imprisoned for three weeks . Anti @-@ Quaker laws had been enacted there , and after Dyer was arrested , she was " set on a horse " , and forced to leave . 
 Following her New Haven trip , Mary was recovering from a bout of pneumonia when in June 1658 two Quaker activists , Christopher Holder and John Copeland came to Boston . They had already been evicted from other parts of the colony , and were exasperating the magistrates . Being joined by John Rous from Barbadoes , the three men were sentenced to having their right ears cut off , and the sentence was carried out in July . As biographer Plimpton wrote , the men " were so stalwart while their ears were removed " that additional punishment in the form of whippings were carried out for the next nine weeks . Word of this cruelty reached Dyer while she was visiting Richard and Katherine Scott in Providence . Richard Scott was considered to be the first Quaker in Providence . The Scotts had two daughters , Mary , the older , who was engaged to Christopher Holder , and Patience , the younger , aged 11 . Mrs. Scott and her two daughters , along with Mary Dyer and her friend Hope Clifton , were all compelled to go to Boston to visit with Holder and the other men in jail . The four women and child were all imprisoned . Three other people who had also come to visit Holder and were then imprisoned were Nicholas Davis from Plymouth , the London merchant William Robinson and a Yorkshire farmer named Marmaduke Stephenson , the latter two on a Quaker mission from England . 
 The Quaker situation was becoming highly problematical for the magistrates . Their response to the increasing presence of these people was to enact tougher laws , and on 19 October 1658 a new law was passed in the Massachusetts colony that introduced capital punishment . Quakers would be banished from the colony upon pain of death , meaning they would be hanged if they defied the law . Dyer , Davis , Robinson and Stephenson were then brought to court , and then sentenced to " banishment upon pain of death " under the new law . Davis returned to Plymouth , Dyer went home to Newport , but Robinson and Stephenson remained in the Massachusetts Bay Colony , spending time in Salem . 
 In June 1659 Robinson and Stephenson were once again apprehended and brought back to the Boston jail . When Dyer heard of these arrests , she once again left her home in Newport , and returned to Boston to support her Quaker brethren , ignoring her order of banishment , and once again being incarcerated . Her husband had already come to Boston two years earlier to retrieve her from the authorities , signing an oath that she wouldn 't return . He wouldn 't come back to Boston again , but on 30 August 1659 he did sit down to write a long and impassioned letter to the magistrates , questioning the legality of the actions taken by the Massachusetts authorities . 
 On 19 October Dyer , Robinson and Stephenson were brought before Governor Endicott , where they explained their mission for the Lord . The next day , the same group was brought before the governor , who directed the prison keeper to remove the men 's hats . He then addressed the group , " We have made many laws and endeavored in several ways to keep you from among us , but neither whipping nor imprisonment , nor cutting off ears , nor banishment upon pain of death will keep you from among us . We desire not your death . " Having met his obligation to present the position of the colony 's authorities , he then pronounced , " <unk> now to your sentence of death . " William Robinson then wanted to read a prepared statement about being called by the Lord to Boston , but the governor would not allow it to be read , and Robinson was sent back to prison . Marmaduke Stephenson , being less vociferous than Robinson , was allowed to speak , and though initially declining , he ultimately spoke his mind , and then was also sent back to jail . 
 When Dyer was brought forth , the governor pronounced her sentence , " Mary Dyer , you shall go from hence to the place from whence you came , and from thence to the place of execution , and there be hanged till you be dead . " She replied , " The will of the Lord be done . " When Endicott directed the marshall to take her away , she said , " Yea , and joyfully I go . " 
 = = The first Quaker executions = = 
 The date set for the executions of the three Quaker evangelists , William Robinson , Marmaduke Stephenson and Mary Dyer , was 27 October 1659 . Captain James Oliver of the Boston military company was directed to provide a force of armed soldiers to escort the prisoners to the place of execution . Dyer walked hand @-@ in @-@ hand with the two men , and between them . When she was publicly asked about this inappropriate closeness , she responded instead to her sense of the event : " It is an hour of the greatest joy I can enjoy in this world . No eye can see , no ear can hear , no tongue can speak , no heart can understand the sweet incomes and <unk> of the spirit of the Lord which now I enjoy . " The prisoners attempted to speak to the gathered crowd as they proceeded to the gallows , but their voices were drowned out by constant drum beats . 
 The place of execution was not the Boston Common , as expressed by many writers over the years , but instead about a mile south of there on Boston Neck , near the current intersection of West Dedham Street and Washington Street . Boston Neck was at one time a narrow spit of land providing the only land access to the Shawmut Peninsula where Boston is located . Over time , the water on both sides of the isthmus was filled in , so that the narrow neck no longer exists . A possible reason for the confusion may be because the land immediately south of Boston Neck was not privately owned and considered " common lands " , leading some writers to misinterpret this as being the Boston Common . 
 The gallows consisted of nothing more than a large elm tree . Here the prisoners would step up a ladder with one end of a rope about their neck and the other end secured to the tree , and the ladder would then be pulled away . William Robinson was the first of the three to mount the ladder , and when he was positioned he made a statement to the crowd , then died when the ladder was removed . Marmaduke Stephenson was the next to hang , and then it was Dyer 's turn , after she witnessed the execution of her two friends . Dyer 's arms and legs were bound and her face was covered with a handkerchief provided by Reverend John Wilson who had been one of her pastors in the Boston church many years earlier . She stood calmly on the ladder , prepared for her death , but as she waited , an order of a reprieve was announced . A petition from her son , William , had given the authorities an excuse to avoid her execution . It had been a pre @-@ arranged scheme , in an attempt to unnerve and dissuade Dyer from her mission . This was made clear from the wording of the reprieve , though Dyer 's only expectation was to die as a martyr . 
 The day after Dyer was pulled from the gallows she wrote a letter to the General Court , refusing to accept the provision of the reprieve . In this letter she wrote , " My life is not accepted , neither <unk> me , in comparison with the lives and liberty of the Truth and Servants of the living God for which in the <unk> of Love and <unk> I sought you ; yet nevertheless with wicked Hands have you put two of them to Death , which makes me to feel that the Mercies of the Wicked is cruelty ; I rather chuse to Dye than to live , as from you , as Guilty of their Innocent Blood . " 
 The courage of the martyrs led to a popular sentiment against the authorities who now felt it necessary to draft a vindication of their actions . The wording of this petition suggested that the reprieve of Mary Dyer should soften the reality of the martyrdom of the two men . The Massachusetts General Court sent this document to the newly restored king in England , and in answer to it , the Quaker historian , Edward Burrough wrote a short book in 1661 . In this book , Burrough refuted the claims of Massachusetts , point by point , provided a list of the atrocities committed against Quakers , and also provided a narrative of the three Quaker executions that had transpired prior to the book 's publication . 
 After going home to Rhode Island , Dyer spent most of the following winter on Shelter Island , sitting between the north and south forks of Long Island . Though sheltered from storms , the island 's owner , Nathaniel Sylvester , used it as a refuge for Quakers seeking shelter from the Puritans , thus providing its name . Here Dyer was able to commune with her fellow Quakers , including her Newport neighbors , William Coddington and his wife Anne Brinley , who had recently converted . Dyer used her time here to mull over the vindication prepared by the Puritan authorities to send to England , concerning their actions against the Quakers . This document was an affront to Dyer , and she viewed it as merely a means to soften public outrage . She was determined to return to Boston to force the authorities to either change their laws or to hang a woman , and she left Shelter Island in April 1660 focused on this mission . 
 = = Dyer 's martyrdom = = 
 Dyer returned to Boston on 21 May 1660 and ten days later she was once again brought before the governor . The exchange of words between Dyer and Governor Endicott was recorded as follows : 
 Endicott : Are you the same Mary Dyer that was here before ? 
 Dyer : I am the same Mary Dyer that was here the last General Court 
 Endicott : You will own yourself a Quaker , will you not ? 
 Dyer : I own myself to be reproachfully so called . 
 Endicott : Sentence was passed upon you the last General Court ; and now <unk> must return to the prison , and there remain till to @-@ morrow at nine o 'clock ; then thence you must go to the gallows and there be hanged till you are dead . 
 Dyer : This is no more than what thou <unk> before 
 Endicott : But now it is to be executed . Therefore prepare yourself to @-@ morrow at nine o 'clock . 
 Dyer : I came in obedience to the will of God the last General Court , desiring you to repeal your unrighteous laws of banishment on pain of death ; and that same is my work now , and earnest request , although I told you that if you refused to repeal them , the Lord would send others of his servants to witness against them . 
 Following this exchange , the governor asked if she was a prophetess , and she answered that she spoke the words that the Lord spoke to her . When she began to speak again , the governor called , " Away with her ! Away with her ! " She was returned to jail . Though her husband had written a letter to Endicott requesting his wife 's freedom , another reprieve was not granted . 
 = = = Execution = = = 
 On 1 June 1660 , at nine in the morning , Mary Dyer once again departed the jail and was escorted to the gallows . Once she was on the ladder under the elm tree she was given the opportunity to save her life . Her response was , " Nay , I cannot ; for in obedience to the will of the Lord God I came , and in his will I abide faithful to the death . " The military commander , Captain John Webb , recited the charges against her and said she " was guilty of her own blood . " Dyer 's response was : 
 Nay , I came to keep <unk> from you , desiring you to repeal the unrighteous and unjust law of banishment upon pain of death , made against the innocent servants of the Lord , therefore my blood will be required at your hands who willfully do it ; but for those that do is in the simplicity of their hearts , I do desire the Lord to forgive them . I came to do the will of my Father , and in obedience to his will I stand even to the death . 
 Her former pastor , John Wilson , urged her to repent and to not be " so deluded and carried away by the deceit of the devil . " To this she answered , " Nay , man , I am not now to repent . " Asked if she would have the elders pray for her , she replied , " I know never an Elder here . " Another short exchange followed , and then , in the words of her biographer , Horatio Rogers , " she was swung off , and the crown of martyrdom descended upon her head . " 
 = = = Burial = = = 
 The Friends ' records of Portsmouth , Rhode Island contain the following entry : " Mary Dyer the wife of William Dyer of Newport in Rhode Island : she was put to death at the Town of Boston with ye like <unk> hand as the martyrs were in Queen Mary 's time , and there buried upon ye 31 day of ye 3d mo . 1660 . " In the calendar used at the time , May was the third month of the year , but the date in the record is incorrect by a day , as the actual date of death was 1 June . Also , this entry states that Mary was buried there in Boston where she was hanged , and biographer Rogers echoed this , but this is not likely . Family researcher Johan Winsser presents evidence that Mary was buried on the Dyer family farm , located north of Newport where the Navy base is now situated in the current town of Middletown . The strongest evidence found is the 1839 journal entry given by Daniel Wheeler , who wrote , " Before reaching Providence [ coming from Newport ] , the site of the dwelling , and burying place of Mary Dyer was shown me . " Winsser provides other items of evidence lending credence to this notion ; it is unlikely that Dyer 's remains would have been left in Boston since she had a husband , many children , and friends living in Newport , Rhode Island . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 In his History of Boston , Dr. Caleb Snow wrote that one of the officers attending the hanging , Edward Wanton , was so overcome by the execution that he became a Quaker convert . The <unk> later became one of the leading Quaker families in Rhode Island , and two of Wanton 's sons , William and John , and two of his grandsons , Gideon and Joseph Wanton , became governors of the Rhode Island Colony . 
 Humphrey Atherton , a prominent Massachusetts official and one of Dyer 's persecutors , wrote , " Mary Dyer did hang as a flag for others to take example by . " Atherton died on 16 September 1661 following a fall from a horse , and many Quakers viewed this as God 's wrath sent upon him for his harshness towards their sect . 
 Dyer 's biographer Ruth Plimpton wrote that the early New England poet , Anne Bradstreet , who wrote about many contemporary events , was so taken by the hanging of Mary Dyer that " this day her quill was stilled . " Poet John Greenleaf Whittier , in his work Journal of Margaret Smith , called Bradstreet " so wrought up that she was fain to take to her bed , refusing to be comforted , and counting it the heaviest day of her life . " Bradstreet was the daughter of Massachusetts magistrate Thomas Dudley and the wife of another magistrate , Simon Bradstreet , and because the latter was involved in the hanging of Dyer , Whittier wrote of the strain on the once loving relationship between Anne and Simon Bradstreet . Another strong reaction from a contemporary woman and friend of Mary Dyer came from Anne Brinley Coddington , with whom Dyer spent her final winter on Shelter Island . Anne Coddington sent a scathing letter to the Massachusetts magistrates , singling out Governor Endicott 's role in the execution . In addition , her husband , William Coddington sent several letters to the Connecticut governor , John Winthrop , Jr . , condemning the execution . 
 While news of Dyer 's hanging was quick to spread through the American colonies and England , there was no immediate response from London because of the political turbulence , resulting in the restoration of the king to power in 1660 . One more Quaker was martyred at the hands of the Puritans , William Leddra of the Barbadoes , who was hanged in March 1661 . A few months later , however , the English Quaker activist Edward Burrough was able to get an appointment with the king . In a document dated 9 September 1661 and addressed to Endicott and all other governors in New England , the king directed that executions and imprisonments of Quakers cease , and that any offending Quaker be sent to England for trial under the existing English law . 
 While the royal response put an end to executions , the Puritans continued to find ways to harangue the Quakers who came to Massachusetts . In 1661 they passed the " Cart and Tail Law " , having Quakers tied to carts , stripped to the waist , and dragged through various towns behind the cart , being whipped en route , until they were taken out of the colony . At about the time that Endicott died in 1665 , a royal commission directed that all legal actions taken against Quakers would cease . Nevertheless , whippings and imprisonments continued into the 1670s , after which popular sentiment , coupled with the royal directives , finally put an end to the Quaker persecution . 
 = = Modern view = = 
 According to literary scholar Anne Myles , the life of Mary Dyer " functions as a powerful , almost allegorical example of a woman returning , over and over , to the same power @-@ infused site of legal and discursive control . " The only first @-@ hand evidence available as to the thoughts and motives of Dyer lie in the letters that she wrote . But Myles sees her behavior as " a richly legible text of female agency , affiliation , and dissent . " Looking at Burrough 's account of the conversation between Dyer and Governor Endicott , Myles views the two most important dimensions as being agency and affiliation . The first is that Dyer 's actions " can be read as staging a public drama of agency , " a means for women , including female prophets , to act under the power and will of God . While Quaker women were allowed to preach , they were not being assertive when doing so because they were actually " preaching against their own wills and minds . " 
 Dyer possessed a " vigorous intentionality " in engaging with the magistrates and ministers , both in her speech and in her behavior . Even though those who chronicled her actions and life , such as Burroughs and Rogers , looked at her as being submissive to the will of God , she was nevertheless the active participant in her fate , voluntarily choosing to become a martyr . She took full responsibility for her actions , while imploring the Puritan authorities to assume their moral responsibility for her death . This provides a distinguishing feature between Dyer and Anne Hutchinson , the latter of whom may not have fully comprehended the consequences of her behavior . While Dyer 's husband and those unsympathetic to her labelled her as having a " madness " , it is clear from her letters and her spoken words that her purpose and intentions were displayed with the utmost clarity of mind . 
 During her dialogues while walking to the gallows , or standing on the ladder under the hanging tree , Dyer exchanged a series of " <unk> " and " <unk> " with her detractors . With these affirmations and negations she was refusing to allow others to construct her meaning . She refuted the image of her as a sinner in need of repentance , and contested the authority of the elders of the church . Just like Hutchinson 's befuddling of her accusers during her civil trial , Dyer did not allow her interrogators to feel assured in how they framed her meaning . 
 While agency is the first of two dimensions of Dyer 's story , the second is allegiance . Dyer became a known in the public eye on the day when Anne Hutchinson was excommunicated , and Dyer took her hand while they walked out of the meeting house together . Dyer had a strong affiliation and allegiance to this older woman who shared the secret of her unfortunate birth . Likewise , two decades later she framed her acts as a means to stand by her friends and share in their fate . In the first of two letters of Dyer 's that have been preserved , she wrote to the General Court , " if my Life were freely granted by you , it would not avail me , nor could I expect it of you , so long as I should daily hear or see the Sufferings of these People , my dear Brethren and Seed , with whom my Life is bound up , as I have done these two years " . Traditional bonds for females were to spouses and children , yet in the Quaker community there were strong spiritual bonds that transcended gender boundaries . Thus the Puritan public found it very unusual that Dyer walked to the gallows hand @-@ in @-@ hand between two male friends , and she was asked if she was not ashamed of doing so . This spiritual closeness of the Quakers was very threatening to the Puritan mindset where allegiance was controlled by the male church members . The Quakers allowed their personal bonds to transgress not only gender lines , but also the boundaries of age and class . 
 In her first letter to the General Court , Dyer used the themes of agency and allegiance in creating an analogy between her witnessing in Massachusetts with the Old Testament Book of Esther . Esther , a Jew , was called upon to save her people after the evil Haman urged the king to enact a law to have all Jews put to death . It was Esther 's intercession with the king that saved her people , and the parallels are that Dyer is the beautiful Esther , with wicked Haman representing the Massachusetts authorities , and the Jews of the Bible being the Quakers of Dyer 's time . Ultimately , Dyer 's martyrdom did have the desired effect . Unlike the story of Anne Hutchinson , that was narrated for more than a century by only her enemies , the orthodox Puritans , Dyer 's story became the story of the Quakers , and it was quickly shared in England , and eventually made its way before the English King , Charles II . The king ordered an end to the capital punishments , though the severe treatment continued for several more years . 
 According to Myles , Dyer 's life journey during her time in New England transformed her from " a silenced object to a speaking subject ; from an Antinomian monster to a Quaker martyr " . The evidence from a personal standpoint and from the standpoint of all Quakers , suggests that Dyer 's ending was as much a spiritual triumph as it was a tragic injustice . 
 = = Memorials and honors = = 
 A bronze statue of Dyer by Quaker sculptor Sylvia Shaw Judson stands in front of the Massachusetts State House in Boston , and is featured on the Boston Women 's Heritage Trail ; a copy stands in front of the Friends Center in downtown Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , and another in front of Stout Meetinghouse at Earlham College in Richmond , Indiana . 
 In Portsmouth , Rhode Island , Mary Dyer and her friend Anne Hutchinson have been remembered at Founders Brook Park with the Anne Hutchinson / Mary Dyer Memorial Herb Garden , a medicinal botanical garden , set by a scenic waterfall with a historical marker for the early settlement of Portsmouth . The garden was created by artist and herbalist Michael Steven Ford , who is a descendant of both women . The memorial was a grass roots effort by a local Newport organization , the Anne Hutchinson Memorial Committee headed by Newport artist , Valerie <unk> . The organization , called Friends of Anne Hutchinson , meets annually at the memorial in Portsmouth , on the Sunday nearest to 20 July , the date of Anne 's baptism , to celebrate her life and the local colonial history of the women of Aquidneck Island . 
 Dyer was inducted into the Rhode Island Heritage Hall of Fame in 1997 and into the National Women 's Hall of Fame in 2000 . 
 = = Published works = = 
 Two biographies of Mary Dyer have been published , the first being Mary Dyer of Rhode Island , the Quaker Martyr That Was Hanged on Boston Common , June 1 , 1660 by Horatio Rogers ( 1896 ) and the second being Mary Dyer : Biography of a Rebel Quaker by Ruth Plimpton ( 1994 ) . While Dyer published no works herself , she did write two letters which have been preserved , both of them focal to her martyrdom , and both of them published in her biographies . She is the only woman associated with the Antinomian Controversy who produced any published texts . 
 = = Children and descendants = = 
 Mary Dyer had eight known children , six of whom grew to adulthood . Following her martyrdom , her husband remarried and had one more known child , and possibly others . Her oldest child , William , was baptized at St Martin @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Fields ( London ) on 24 October 1634 and was buried there three days later . After sailing to New England , her second child , Samuel , was baptized at the Boston church on 20 December 1635 and married by 1663 Anne Hutchinson , the daughter of Edward Hutchinson and the granddaughter of William and Anne Hutchinson . Her third child was the premature stillborn female , born 17 October 1637 , discussed earlier . Henry , born roughly 1640 , was the fourth child , and he married Elizabeth Sanford , the daughter of John Sanford , Jr . , and the granddaughter of Governor John Sanford . 
 The fifth child was a second William , born about 1642 , who married Mary , possibly a daughter of Richard Walker of Lynn , Massachusetts , but no evidence supports this . Child number six was a male and given the Biblical name <unk> . He was married to Martha Pearce , the daughter of Richard Pearce . Mary was the seventh child , born roughly 1647 , and married by about 1675 Henry Ward ; they were living in Cecil County , Maryland , in January 1679 . Mary Dyer 's youngest child was Charles , born roughly 1650 , whose first wife was named Mary ; there are unsupported claims that she was a daughter of John Lippett . Charles married second after 1690 Martha ( Brownell ) Wait , who survived him . 
 There is no evidence that Mary 's husband , William Dyer , ever became a Quaker . However , her two sons , Samuel and <unk> , were likely Quakers because they were required to appear before the General Court of Trials at Portsmouth , Rhode Island to face charges for not serving in the military . In general , Quakers refused to serve in the military , and the charges were eventually dropped . There was a lot of litigation concerning the estate of William Dyer , Sr ; his widow , Katherine , took both the widow of his son Samuel and later his son Charles to court over the estate , likely feeling that more of his estate belonged to his children with her . 
 Notable descendants of Mary Dyer include Rhode Island Governors Elisha Dyer and Elisha Dyer , Jr . , and U.S. Senator from Rhode Island , Jonathan Chace . 
 = Delaware Route 15 = 
 Delaware Route 15 ( DE 15 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Delaware . The route runs from DE 14 west of Milford in Kent County to U.S. Route 301 ( US 301 ) / DE 71 / DE 896 in Summit Bridge , New Castle County , just south of Summit Bridge over the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal . DE 15 winds a path through many rural sections of Delaware , turning along many different roads . Most of the route , with the exception of the southern part of the route from Canterbury to Milford , runs to the west of US 13 . DE 15 runs through the western outskirts of several cities and towns , including Wyoming , Dover , Clayton , and Middletown . The route intersects DE 12 near Felton , US 13 in Canterbury , DE 10 near Camden , DE 8 in Dover , DE 42 in Seven Hickories , DE 300 and DE 6 in the Clayton area , US 301 / DE 299 in Middletown , and DE 286 near Summit Bridge . 
 What is now DE 15 was paved in several stages from the 1930s to the 1960s . By the 1980s , the route was designated between DE 14 in Milford and US 13 in Canterbury . By 1990 , it was extended north to US 301 / DE 299 near Middletown and then to US 301 / DE 71 / DE 896 near the Summit Bridge by 1994 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Kent County = = = 
 DE 15 begins at an intersection with DE 14 west of the city of Milford in Kent County and proceeds northwest on two @-@ lane undivided Canterbury Road . The road heads through a mix of farmland and woodland with some homes , crossing Browns Branch to the east of McColley Pond and the Murderkill River to the east of Coursey Pond . The route intersects DE 12 and runs to the east of Henderson Aviation Airport . DE 15 reaches the community of Canterbury , where it passes homes and comes to an intersection with US 13 . 
 DE 15 turns north to form a concurrency with US 13 for a short distance on the four @-@ lane divided Dupont Highway before continuing northwest along with US 13 Alt. on two @-@ lane undivided Upper King Road . The road continues through rural land before entering Woodside . Here , US 13 Alt . / DE 15 passes homes and intersects DE 10 Alt . , with DE 15 splitting from US 13 Alt. by heading west along with DE 10 Alt. on Main Street and crossing Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary railroad line . 
 DE 15 splits from DE 10 Alt. by turning north on Dundee Road , leaving Woodside . The road heads through a mix of farmland , woodland , and residential subdivisions , coming to an intersection with DE 10 . Past this intersection , the route becomes Moose Lodge Road and continues north . DE 15 turns east onto Westville Road and enters Wyoming , where it becomes Southern Boulevard and passes homes and some businesses . The route turns northeast onto South Railroad Avenue and runs immediately to the west of the Norfolk Southern railroad line . The road becomes North Railroad Avenue before it leaves Wyoming as it passes to the east of Wyoming Lake . At this point , DE 15 becomes Wyoming Mill Road and heads north through agricultural areas away from the railroad tracks . The road continues through farmland with some woods and residential development before entering Dover and curving to the northwest . 
 Here , DE 15 turns east onto <unk> Road and heads into industrial areas , where it becomes West North Street and widens into a four @-@ lane road . The route turns north onto two @-@ lane Saulsbury Road , continuing through more commercial areas and coming to an intersection with DE 8 . Past this intersection , DE 15 continues north as a three @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane , coming to a junction with Walker Road . Past this intersection , the road name changes to McKee Road and it runs northwest through residential areas with some fields and commercial development . The route loses the center left @-@ turn lane past the College Road intersection . DE 15 turns west to remain on two @-@ lane undivided McKee Road , with Scarborough Road continuing north to US 13 and DE 1 . Past Scarborough Road , the route heads northwest near an industrial park before it leaves Dover . 
 Upon leaving Dover , DE 15 continues through a mix of farmland and woodland with some residential areas , turning southwest onto West <unk> Road and then north onto Kenton Road . The road curves to the north @-@ northwest and reaches an intersection with DE 42 in Moores Corner . At this point , DE 15 turns west to form a concurrency with DE 42 on Seven Hickories Road . In Seven Hickories , DE 15 splits from DE 42 by heading north on Brenford Road . The route splits from Brenford Road and continues northwest on Mount Friendship Road before reaching an intersection with DE 300 . Here , DE 15 turns northeast for a brief concurrency with DE 300 on <unk> Pond Road before turning northwest on Alley Corner Road . The road crosses an abandoned railroad line before it comes to an intersection with DE 6 . At this point , DE 15 turns east to form a concurrency with DE 6 on Millington Road . On the western edge of Clayton , DE 15 splits from DE 6 by heading northeast on Duck Creek Road , passing through residential areas with some industry . The road curves to the north and leaves Clayton . 
 = = = New Castle County = = = 
 DE 15 crosses the Duck Creek into New Castle County and the name becomes Clayton Greenspring Road as it passes through farm fields and woods with some homes . The route turns west onto Vandyke Greenspring Road and skirts the southern edge of the Blackbird State Forest , curving to the west @-@ northwest . DE 15 turns north onto Dexter Corner Road before it continues west onto Blackbird Station Road , curving to the northwest . DE 15 crosses the Maryland and Delaware Railroad 's Northern Line before turning north onto Dogtown Road and heading northwest again . The route runs through agricultural areas and turns north @-@ northeast onto Levels Road . DE 15 passes to the west of a residential neighborhood before turning northwest at a roundabout to remain on Levels Road and reach an intersection with US 301 / DE 299 . 
 At this point , DE 15 turns northeast to join US 301 / DE 299 on four @-@ lane divided Middletown Warwick Road , entering commercial areas in the town of Middletown . At an intersection , the three routes split , with DE 15 heading northwest on Bunker Hill Road , DE 299 turning east onto Main Street , and US 301 continuing north along Middletown Warwick Road . Past US 301 / DE 299 , DE 15 becomes a two @-@ lane undivided road , passing areas of homes and businesses and heading northeast of Appoquinimink High School . At a roundabout , the route turns north onto Choptank Road and leaves Middletown , heading through agricultural areas with some woods and residential development . DE 15 intersects the eastern terminus of DE 286 at a roundabout and continues northeast along Bethel Church Road , ending at an intersection with US 301 / DE 71 / DE 896 in Summit Bridge , just south of the Summit Bridge over the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal . 
 The portion of the route along the DE 6 concurrency west of Clayton and between Alley Mill Road and Caldwell Corner Road in southwestern New Castle County is part of the Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad Byway , a Delaware Byway . DE 15 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 23 @,@ 156 vehicles at the Walker Road intersection in Dover to a low of 504 vehicles along Duck Creek Road in Clayton . The portions of DE 15 concurrent with US 13 , between DE 8 and Scarborough Road , and along the US 301 / DE 299 concurrency are part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1920 , the roads that comprise present @-@ day DE 15 existed as county roads . Bunker Hill Road was paved by 1932 , with Levels Road being constructed as a state highway by this time . Four years later , the segment between DE 12 and US 13 , Brenford Road , a portion north of DE 6 , and Bethel Church Road were paved , while Kenton Road was paved three years later . Paving was completed on the sections between DE 14 and Carpenters Bridge Road and from DE 8 to Kenton Road by 1942 , and the entire segment between Clayton and Middletown excluding a portion of Blackbird Station Road . The remainder of the road between Milford and Canterbury , the portion between Woodside and DE 10 , the portion between Wyoming and Dover , and the segment of Choptank Road between Bohemia Church Road and Bethel Church Road were all paved by 1952 . The remainder of the route between Clayton and Middletown was paved two years later . By 1957 , paving was completed on the remainder of Choptank Road . The section between Woodside and Wyoming was fully paved by 1959 . The Mt . Friendship Road part of the current route was paved by 1964 . Two years later , the paving of present @-@ day DE 15 was completed when Alley Corner Road was paved . 
 DE 15 was designated to run from DE 14 near Milford north to US 13 in Canterbury by 1984 . The route was extended north to US 301 / DE 299 west of Middletown by 1990 . Four years later , DE 15 was extended farther north to US 301 / DE 71 / DE 896 near the Summit Bridge . In 2011 , Wyoming Mill Road was realigned to intersect <unk> Road further to the west at a signalized intersection , reducing congestion . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Magnapop = 
 Magnapop is an alternative rock band based in Atlanta , Georgia . Formed in 1989 , the band has consistently included songwriting duo Linda Hopper as vocalist and Ruthie Morris on guitar . Magnapop first achieved recognition in the Benelux countries of Belgium , the Netherlands and Luxembourg through the festival circuit and have remained popular in Europe throughout their career . After modest success in the United States in the mid @-@ 1990s with the singles " Slowly , Slowly " and " Open the Door " and a series of albums produced by Michael Stipe , Bob Mould , and Geza X , the band went on an extended hiatus due to the dissolution of their record label . They returned with a new rhythm section in 2005 on the Daemon Records release Mouthfeel . The band has continued to perform and record since this reunion and have self @-@ released two more albums . Magnapop 's musical style is noted for blending the pop vocals and melodies of Hopper with the aggressive , punk @-@ influenced guitar @-@ playing of Morris and her back @-@ up vocal harmonies . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and self @-@ titled debut ( 1989 – 1993 ) = = = 
 Linda Hopper — a native of Marietta , Georgia — was a member of the late 1970s / early 1980s music scene in Athens , Georgia , where she befriended fellow University of Georgia student Michael Stipe in an art design class . Stipe went on to form R.E.M. and Hopper joined him in the experimental music group <unk> along with Stipe 's sister Lynda , and other local musicians . After the group folded , Lynda Stipe and Hopper formed Oh @-@ OK , whose line @-@ up later included Matthew Sweet and David McNair . That project ended in 1984 and Hopper briefly belonged to a Washington , D.C. band named Holiday , who released their only EP in 1987 . 
 In 1989 , Ruthie Morris had recently moved to Atlanta from West Palm Beach , Florida — where she played a few shows as the guitarist for The Pockets . She attempted to play with local male musicians , but did not feel comfortable with any of them . Hopper and Morris were introduced by a mutual acquaintance and became fast friends ; they wrote their first song together at Hopper 's apartment the day they met . The duo had a difficult time finding collaborators to form a complete band ( as Hopper described it , " We had to beg people to come and play with us . " ) The duo eventually recruited bassist Tim Lee and McNair on drums in March 1990 . Lee left the band after a brief tenure and was replaced by Shannon Mulvaney , whom Morris met at a record store . The musicians named themselves Homemade Sister after a line from the film Baby Doll and released their first single — " Rip the Wreck " / " Merry " — on Safety Net Records in 1990 . Displeased with their name , the band was briefly renamed Swell , before they found out a San Francisco band had the same name and then billed themselves as Swell <unk> . 
 In 1990 — while named Swell — they made their public debut at a show in Athens that Michael Stipe attended . He approached the band afterward and offered to produce some demos for them in John Keane 's Athens studio in December . Their first high @-@ profile show was at the July 1991 New York New Music Seminar along with three other bands that were introduced by Stipe . At that event , Morris gave out two demo tapes — one to American rock journalist James Sullivan and the other to Tom <unk> and John van <unk> of the Dutch music magazine <unk> OOR . The band proceeded to pass the tape to a promoter in The Netherlands who gave the band some club dates as well as a spot at the side stage of the 1991 Rotterdam Festival . After the positive response they received , they were promoted to the main stage the next day . In The Netherlands , Magnapop was signed to Play It Again Sam Records , who released the Sugarland EP and Magnapop demo album in 1992 . Their self @-@ titled first album included four of the 1990 Stipe demos , and was released on Caroline Records in the United States . A music video for the single " Merry " was shot and aired in Europe . 
 Magnapop was featured on a variety of various artist compilations . Their first commercial recording other than their independent single was their 1992 cover version of " Pleasant Valley Sunday " for Here No Evil – A Tribute to The Monkees . The band was also featured on other various artist tribute albums , including " Ear " ( a different recording from the one on Magnapop ) for <unk> & <unk> – Lyrics by Ernest Noyes Brookings Vol . 3 in 1992 and 1993 's recording of " Every Grain of Sand " for Outlaws Blues Volume Two – A Tribute to Bob Dylan with violinist Mamie <unk> . The band also recorded the Kiss My Mouth EP with Ted <unk> and released it in Europe . Around this time , the band was so fraught from booking recording sessions , that they briefly considered breaking up . 
 Magnapop established their fan base in the early 1990s through touring and the festival circuit — particularly in central Europe , where they first broke through to the mainstream . It was only after they had established a fan base in Europe and received positive press in the United Kingdom that the band first became recognized in the United States , including their native Atlanta . By the end of 1992 , they were getting positive write @-@ ups in American press such as The New York Times and supported Juliana Hatfield on tour . The group made appearances at Rocking Kolonia Festival in Maastricht in 1992 , Pukkelpop in 1992 , <unk> in 1992 , A <unk> to Lowlands Paradise in 1993 , and the Reading Festival in 1993 . They also recorded a John Peel session on September 2 , 1993 and a Black Session on February 25 , 1994 . 
 = = = Mainstream success ( 1994 – 1997 ) = = = 
 Bob Mould of Hüsker Dü had seen the band at a show in New York City 's CBGB as well as in Rotterdam — he called the latter show their " turning point " — and invited the band to tour with his new group Sugar in Europe and the United States in 1992 – 1993 . The band asked Sugar bassist and fellow Athens musician David Barbe produce their major label debut album . When he refused , Mould offered to record with the band , taking them to Pedernales Recording Studio , in Austin , Texas in August 1993 . The sessions would result in the album Hot Boxing , which was released by Play It Again Sam in Europe and Priority Records domestically on July 5 , 1994 . Releasing an album by Magnapop was a radical departure for Priority who had previously focused on rap music . 
 The album produced two singles : " Slowly , Slowly " , which spent seven weeks on the charts , peaking on September 10 , 1994 , at 25 on the U.S. Modern Rock Tracks , and " Lay It Down " , which topped the 1993 De <unk> poll . The band toured the United States supporting The Lemonheads in 1993 and played at the 1994 Phoenix Festival and <unk> to promote the album and created music videos for " Lay It Down " , " Slowly , Slowly " , and " Texas " . The promotional EP Big Bright Cherry was released in 1994 and included three tracks from the Hot Boxing recording sessions as well as three self @-@ produced songs . 
 In 1995 , the McNair and the band parted ways , with neither party giving a definitive rationale . Hopper explained " We had a hard time recording Hot Boxing , because our drummer had a lot of things in the way ... Nobody wants to hurt anyone , or to cut them out , but it was just like four adults getting a divorce , and their child is the band . " She has alternately explained that the split was due to the " alternative lifestyles " of McNair and the rest of the group and that McNair 's musicianship was not as competent as the other members . The remaining trio recruited session drummer Josh Freese and engineers Sandy Solomon and Bernie <unk> to record a cover of Tom Waits ' " Christmas Card from a Hooker in Minneapolis " at Plus Four Recordings Studios , in Sherman Oaks , California in June 1995 for the compilation album Step Right Up : The Songs of Tom Waits . Freese joined the group in November – December of that year in Los Angeles , California to record Rubbing Doesn 't Help . Mould was unavailable , so the band relocated to Los Angeles and worked with producer Geza X at his home studio in attempt to make a more " eclectic " album that would represent the diversity of their songwriting . After hearing some demos , the band decided to hire him to produce the actual album and moved to Los Angeles for recording . The album produced the singles " Open the Door " and " This Family " ( the former also had a music video ) , as well as the EP Fire All Your Guns at Once . The band immediately set out to tour in promotion . 
 Los Angeles musician Mark <unk> auditioned for the band in 1995 and became the group 's permanent drummer . In July of that year , Magnapop supported R.E.M. on their Monster World Tour and continued playing in the United States and Europe , including an appearance at X @-@ Fest in 1996 . They also played their first dates in Australia and Japan in 1996 and hosted 120 Minutes on July 7 of the same year . In late 1996 , Mulvaney left the group , citing problems of distance — Hopper and Morris had relocated permanently to Los Angeles — as well as a desire to focus on his family . He continued playing bass guitar and stand @-@ up bass with Atlanta groups The Hots , The <unk> , and Anna Kramer & The Lost Cause . Boston native and former Queers bassist Greg <unk> replaced him after replying to an ad in The Recycler and the band continued to play live shows through 1997 , including supporting Throwing Muses on their farewell tour . <unk> quit that summer and he was replaced by former <unk> drummer Johnny Rozas and this line @-@ up recorded six demos at a recording studio in Orange County . This version of the band was short @-@ lived as Magnapop was informed while on tour that their record label 's rock division ceased to exist and they did not have any funding for future touring or recording . Compounding matters further , the band members were still under contract to their old record label and were legally disbarred from using the name " Magnapop " until their contract expired seven years later . 
 = = = Hiatus , reformation , and independent releases ( since 1998 ) = = = 
 Hopper and Morris continued to play a few acoustic live shows as a duo into 1999 , occasionally with accompaniment ( such as Philadelphia bassist Billy Warburton and drummer Lance Crow ) and attempted to record an EP for record label Vital Cog with a drum machine as backing , but ended up putting Magnapop on an indefinite hiatus . During this time , Morris also moved to Seattle , where she recorded a 2002 single with drummer Curtis Hall as The New Candidates . Hopper , Morris , Hall , and a group of Seattle musicians also demoed some Hopper / Morris songs during this period . Hall would also drum with Hopper , Morris , and Mulvaney for a few Magnapop shows in 2002 – 2003 . The band officially re @-@ formed in 2003 with bassist Scott Rowe and drummer Brian Fletcher to tour the European festival circuit and record an album . In The Netherlands , Hopper also performed vocals on R.E.M. ' s cover of " Favorite Writer " at two of the group 's concerts on June 21 and 22 . 
 The following May , the band entered Zero Return Studios in Atlanta with drummer Curt Wells as producer for their first album in almost a decade . On January 25 , 2005 , Magnapop released Mouthfeel on Amy Ray 's record label Daemon Records and supported it with a tour through the United States . By 2005 , Fletcher had left the group , and drummer Chad Williams had been recruited to replace him on two weeks prior to the first show on the Mouthfeel tour that included an appearance at South by Southwest . One of these performances was recorded for the band 's first live album — Magnapop Live at Maxwell 's 03 / 09 / 2005 — which they released independently through online music distributors including eMusic , the iTunes Store , and Rhapsody . In May 2006 , the band completed a tour of Belgium and The Netherlands and returned to Atlanta to begin work on the followup to Mouthfeel . They continued touring Europe in 2007 and completed writing and recording for a new album sometime prior to 2008 , with the album initially slated to be released in summer 2009 . These sessions recorded with Brian Paulson were released as Chase Park on September 4 , 2009 , through digital distributors by the band 's own , newly created label , The Kraft Records . 
 The band has continued to intermittently tour since the release of Chase Park and on September 13 , 2011 , Creative Loafing announced that Mulvaney had attempted to re @-@ form the original line @-@ up of Magnapop to perform a benefit concert for local independent music store Criminal Records . The benefit was later scheduled for October 15 , and the band announced that they would be performing their self @-@ titled debut album in its entirety , along with some songs from Hot Boxing . Mulvaney was motivated to support Criminal due to the store carrying their early releases in the Atlanta area . The original line @-@ up has continued to perform on occasion through 2015 . 
 Between touring with Magnapop , bassist Scott Rowe also performed in Luigi from 2003 through 2008 with former Magnapop drummer Brian Fletcher as well as Bad Magic Number with current drummer Williams . The former has released two albums — 2003 's <unk> and Found on the Forest Floor in 2005 . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Magnapop have been defined genre @-@ wise as power pop by multiple rock critics , and their performances have drawn comparisons with punk , new wave , and surf rock . Reviewers have commented on the band 's pop @-@ influenced songwriting , specifically their employment of guitar hooks and simple chord structure . To that end , they have been compared to Mould 's previous work as a member of Sugar and Hüsker Dü , as well as fellow Georgia @-@ based rock acts such as Guadalcanal Diary and Let 's Active and alternative rock pioneers Pixies and The Replacements . The album Rubbing Doesn 't Help represented a stylistic shift for the band away from their more pop @-@ inspired material toward more guitar @-@ oriented rock , but their comeback with Mouthfeel returned to the more pop @-@ inspired sound of Hot Boxing . 
 Morris is known for her particularly aggressive guitar @-@ playing and its interaction with Linda Hopper 's pop @-@ influenced vocals . In addition , the vocal harmony between the two singers has defined the band 's sound , especially on later releases such as Rubbing Doesn 't Help that feature more of Morris ' vocals . Critics have compared Morris 's guitar @-@ playing to punk acts like Johnny Ramone of Ramones as well as alternative rock musicians such as Johnny Marr . 
 = = Covers and tributes = = 
 " Open the Door " has been covered by Eels as the B @-@ side to " Flyswatter " — it would later be collected on Useless <unk> : B @-@ Sides , Soundtracks , Rarities and Unreleased 1996 – 2006 . Eels performed the song several times on their Electro @-@ Shock Blues Show tour in support of the album Electro @-@ Shock Blues . Karaoke versions of the song were released by Stingray Digital through the iTunes Store on January 15 , 2008 . " Favorite Writer " was covered by R.E.M. as a B @-@ side to " Bad Day " in 2003 and was played live during the 2003 tour to promote In Time : The Best of R.E.M. 1988 – 2003 . 
 In 1993 , Juliana Hatfield wrote " Ruthless " in honor of the band 's guitarist after the two had a conversation about Camille Paglia while touring in 1992 ( " We 're all <unk> ' , but I swear we really mean it , man / We 're all sucking up to Ruthie . " ) It appeared as a B @-@ side on the Juliana Hatfield Three singles " Spin the Bottle " and " My Sister " . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Magnapop ( 1992 ) 
 Hot Boxing ( 1994 ) 
 Rubbing Doesn 't Help ( 1996 ) 
 Mouthfeel ( 2005 ) 
 Chase Park ( 2009 ) 
 = = Members = = 
 Linda Hopper – lead vocals 
 Ruthie Morris – backing vocals , guitar 
 Scott Rowe – bass guitar 
 Chad Williams – drums 
 = Star Trek : The Next Generation ( season 1 ) = 
 The first season of the American television science fiction series Star Trek : The Next Generation commenced airing in broadcast syndication in the United States on September 28 , 1987 , and concluded on May 16 , 1988 , after 26 episodes were broadcast . Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Starfleet starship Enterprise @-@ D. It was the first live @-@ action television series in the franchise to be broadcast since Star Trek : The Original Series was cancelled in 1969 , and the first to feature all new characters . Paramount Television eventually sought the advice of the creator of Star Trek , Gene Roddenberry , who set about creating the new show with mostly former The Original Series staff members . An entirely new cast were sought , which concerned some members of The Original Series crew , as Roddenberry did not want to re @-@ tread the same steps as he had in the first series to the extent that well known Star Trek aliens such as Vulcans , Klingons and Romulans were banned at first . 
 The characters in the series gradually changed during preproduction , with adjustments made to the names , genders and ethnicity . When the cast was announced at first , LeVar Burton was the main actor highlighted because of his work on the Roots mini series ; his character , Geordi La Forge was named for a disabled fan . Although the casting was managed by producers Rick Berman and Robert H. Justman , Roddenberry intervened to switch the characters assigned to Marina Sirtis and Denise Crosby . Sirtis took over Crosby 's role as Deanna Troi , and Crosby became Tasha Yar , who had been named Macha Hernandez while Sirtis held the part . Behind the scenes , the writing team became chaotic . Eddie Milkis had quit prior to casting , with Berman taking over from him . Roddenberry 's insistence on re @-@ writing scripts and unusual behaviour alienated some staff . Longtime Star Trek contributor D.C. Fontana quit , filing a claim with the Writer 's Guild of America as she had been acting as story editor but was unpaid in the role . Such were the troubles that the series had a problem recruiting potential writers halfway through the season . By the end of the second season , all the writing staff recruited during season one except for Rick Berman had quit . 
 As the series was being launched directly into syndication , there were concerns that it could affect the ratings . " Encounter at Farpoint " , the pilot , was broadcast to Nielsen ratings of 15 @.@ 7 percent , and after a lull seeing ratings for " The Last Outpost " reach a season low of 8 @.@ 9 percent , they increased again and by the end of the first season , it had become the most popular syndicated series on television . While highly anticipated , initial reviews other than for " Encounter at Farpoint " were poor . The second episode , " The Naked Now " had fans and critics concerned that The Next Generation would re @-@ hash plots of The Original Series , and " Code of Honor " was seen as racist . It was nominated for seven Emmy Awards , winning in makeup , costume design and sound editing . " The Big Goodbye " was awarded a Peabody Award , while cast member Wil Wheaton was nominated for an award at the 9th Youth in Film Awards . The season was first released on DVD on March 26 , 2002 on Region 1 , and was subsequently released in other regions . The region @-@ free Blu @-@ ray releases came in July 2012 @,@ 
 = = Production = = 
 As production was underway on the film Star Trek IV : The Voyage Home , Paramount executives began to work on ideas to bring Star Trek back to television , hiring writer / producer Greg <unk> to develop some proposals . This was not the first time that this had been considered following the success of Star Trek : The Original Series in broadcast syndication , as a series entitled Star Trek : Phase II had been briefly worked on in the late seventies between attempts at creating a film based on The Original Series . The pilot episode of Phase II , entitled " In Thy Image " was changed to become the first Star Trek film , Star Trek : The Motion Picture . Paramount spoke to Leonard Nimoy , who was still portraying Spock in the film franchise , about the new series . They offered him the chance of producing the new series , but he turned them down due to the time commitment . 
 Next , Paramount sought to consult franchise creator Gene Roddenberry , he turned down the idea of running the show based on the time it took him away from his family during the production of The Original Series . When Paramount told him that it would have been impossible to pursue , Roddenberry became interested and began to make plans for a new series with a new cast as he wanted to avoid retreading and recreating the same roles now seen in the film series . Although they had not planned on it originally , Paramount hired Roddenberry to oversea the production and fired <unk> . However , one of his ideas appeared in the premise of The Next Generation , that the Federation and the Klingons had become allies . The first announcement of a new series was made by Roddenberry publicly on October 10 , 1986 . 
 Several stars of The Original Series and the film franchise stated that they did not like the premise of a new series set in the same universe that did not feature them . DeForest Kelley , who would go on to appear in the pilot as Admiral Leonard McCoy , said that while he understood that the studio wanted to keep the franchise going beyond them , he felt that " there 's only one Star Trek , and that 's ours " . James Doohan , who played Montgomery " Scotty " Scott , said that Star Trek was about the characters and with a new cast the studio was " trying to fool the public , and that 's bad business . " William Shatner , who portrayed James T. Kirk , was concerned with the overexposure of the franchise and how a new television series could affect future films . 
 A memo sent on October 24 , showed that Robert H. Justman , an associate producer on The Original Series , was working with Roddenberry on the new plans for a series , which was at that time untitled . They took several influences from the criticism of the previous series in David Gerrold 's The Worlds of Star Trek , and brought the writer of " The Trouble with Tribbles " on as a writer . Gerrold would go on to produce the series bible , although Roddenberry would take the credit for it . Roddenberry also brought together former Star Trek associate producer Eddie Milkis , who had gone on to produce series such as Happy Days . Ideas were suggested such as an android and Klingon marine , which each made it into the final series as well as the great @-@ great @-@ great granddaughter of James T. Kirk , which did not . 
 Ideas proposed for Phase II were included , such as having the second @-@ in @-@ command leading the away team , an idea originally proposed in Gerrold 's The Worlds of Star Trek . Concepts refined from Star Trek : The Animated Series such as the " rec room " were also incorporated , becoming the holodeck . Roddenberry also insisted that technology failures should not be a routinely used plot device . The new version of the Starship Enterprise was at first designated NCC @-@ 1701 @-@ 7 , but following the numbering pattern established in The Voyage Home , became NCC @-@ 1701 @-@ G. Roddenberry also insisted that the new series would avoid reappearances by alien races well known from the The Original Series , specifically banning Romulans , Vulcans and the majority of Klingons . These plans did not last , with Klingons being central to the plot of " Heart of Glory " , a Vulcan appearing in " Coming of Age " and Romulans making their first appearance in the season finale , " The Neutral Zone " . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 They were joined by Robert Lewin as writing producer , based on a recommendation by Justman who had worked with him previously . Lewin was the first person to be involved in the series who did not have a background working on the franchise . D. C. Fontana , who had originally been Roddenberry 's secretary while working on The Original Series and went on to become the story editor for the show , was also brought onto the staff of The Next Generation . She was also the story editor on the new series , but sought a promised associate producer credit . Non @-@ writing staff who were brought from working on the film franchise included Rick Sternbach and Andrew Probert , as well as Michael Okuda who was hired as a scenic artist . Roddenberry hired costume designer William Ware Theiss , who had designed The Original Series costumes , while Milkis and Justman recruited art director Herman Zimmerman . Rick Berman joined the team as the liaison between Roddenberry 's team and Paramount Television . 
 Roddenberry proved a tough negotiator in hiring staff . When he made his first offers to recruit Gerrold and Fontana , they were each under the minimum salaries as designated by the Writer 's Guild of America . After Fontana continued to oppose the rates offered that were lower than dictated by WGA rates , Roddenberry brought his personal lawyer , Leonard Maizlish to argue his case . Gerrold found that Maizlish 's influence changed Roddenberry , and Gerrold started to be called disloyal by Roddenberry when he disagreed with him . Fontana drafted the script for the pilot episode , " Encounter at Farpoint " , while at the same time Gerrold and another The Original Series staffer , John D.F. Black also worked up scripts of their own . 
 Based on the pilot script at that point , and Gerrold and Roddenberry 's bible , the design team began to work up plans for the sets and props that would feature in the series . After viewing the movie series sets , they decided that they needed to build a new bridge for the new Enterprise , to meet Roddenberry 's proclaimed " technology unchained " ideal . Probert , who had worked on the design for Phase II and The Motion Picture based the exterior design for the Enterprise on an abandoned design he had created at the time . Some of the film sets were used , as the film bridge was re @-@ dressed to appear as the battle bridge , and would be further redressed countless times over the course of The Next Generation to represent various bridges . 
 The first staffing change occurred early in 1987 , with Milkis leaving the production . He had signed a one @-@ year contract , but decided to prioritise other commitments . Berman was drafted in to replace him , accepting the new position instead of being the studio liaison . Milkis later said that it was a seamless transition because of the level of knowledge Berman had gained on the production . Fontana and Roddenberry had a falling out over the associate producer position , which she eventually gained . The relationship between the two became so strained that she recorded all meetings with him , and later left after the first couple of episodes . Her work on " The Naked Now " was credited to the pseudonym J Michael Bingham , she put in a claim with the Writers Guild that she had also worked as a story editor on the series but was never paid for it , which was settled amicably with Paramount . Meanwhile , Maizlish started working effectively as a story editor , while production meetings would often result in Roddenberry ranting about various issues . Other writers and producers , including Herbert Wright and Maurice Hurley joined the team . 
 Justman left after half of season one , later explaining that " I 'd accomplished what I wanted to accomplish . Star Trek wasn 't a fluke " . They were not the only departures , as the number of employees departing the increasingly chaotic production started to become legendary in the WGA . By mid @-@ season , the show was having difficulty recruiting writers as there were rumours about how difficult working with Roddenberry had become . He would often re @-@ write scripts , inserting sexual overtones , while blaming the original writers for the problems with the parts that he had inserted . His fellow producers blamed the issues and inconsistencies on his drinking , although his writing had all but stopped by around two thirds of the way through the first season . Gerrold left after the completion of the first season , choosing not to renew his contract due to the issues with his script for an unfilmed episode called " Blood and Fire " and his relationship with Roddenberry and Maizlish . Head writer Lewin also left the team at the end of the season . Out of all the writing staff who worked on the show during the first season , only Rick Berman remained following season two . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 An initial casting call was released to talent agencies on December 10 , 1986 , for eight main cast members . These featured several minor differences in the eventual names , such as Captain Julien Picard , William Ryker and Leslie Crusher ( a 15 @-@ year @-@ old girl ) . It also featured the security chief , Macha Hernandez . The Captain was given the nickname of " Luke " , and both his and Ryker 's name would take on their more familiar forms at some point between the two versions of the writer 's guide in February and March 1987 . Leslie Crusher was considered as a boy named Wesley prior to the casting call ; the gender change was later made permanent . Geordi La Forge was named for a quadriplegic fan named George La Forge who had died in 1975 , while Macha would evolve over time to eventually become Tasha Yar . 
 Preliminary casting began in March 1987 , with Justman and Berman in charge of the process . In May , the actors who were to receive star billing were announced . In the initial press release , only three actors were discussed ; primarily LeVar Burton as La Forge , due to the actor 's appearances in the mini @-@ series Roots . Also included in that release were the announcements of Patrick Stewart , a member of the Royal Shakespeare Company as Captain Picard , and Jonathan Frakes formerly of the North and South miniseries . Marina Sirtis and Denise Crosby were cast as Masha Hernandez and Deanna Troi respectively , but Roddenberry decided to switch the roles , at which point Hernandez became Yar . 
 The rest of the cast included Brent Spiner as the android Data , Gates McFadden as Doctor Beverly Crusher , Wil Wheaton as Beverly 's son , Wesley Crusher . Outside of the main cast , Michael Dorn successfully auditioned to portray Lieutenant ( <unk> ) Worf . It had originally been planned for Dorn to appear in seven out of the first thirteen episodes , but after appearing in the pilot it was decided to expand the role and add him to the main cast . Other guest actors who made their first appearances during season one included John de Lancie as Q and Eric Menyuk as the Traveler . Majel Barrett , who had previously appeared as Nurse Christine Chapel in The Original Series , made her first appearance as Lwaxana Troi during season one and voiced the Enterprise computer throughout . 
 Several future Star Trek : Deep Space Nine alumni also appeared in the first season of The Next Generation , although not in roles they would later feature regularly in . These included Armin Shimerman as a wedding box in " Haven " and as <unk> in " The Last Outpost " ( he would later appear as other Ferengi before gaining the main cast role of Quark in Deep Space Nine ) . Marc Alaimo appeared as an Antican in " Lonely Among Us " , before appearing in different makeup as the Romulan Captain <unk> in the first season finale " The Neutral Zone " ; he would later appear as the Cardassian Gul Macet in The Next Generation fourth season episode " The Wounded " and was later cast as the recurring character of Gul Dukat in Deep Space Nine . Colm Meaney appeared as a conn ensign in two episodes during the season , later established as Chief Miles O 'Brien in season two , and became a main cast member of Deep Space Nine . 
 Crosby decided to leave the series part way through the first season , due to the underdevelopment of her character , Tasha Yar . She later said about the situation in an interview with the official Star Trek website , " I was miserable . I couldn 't wait to get off that show . I was dying " . Roddenberry agreed to her request to leave , which she would return to next in the third season episode " Yesterday 's Enterprise " . Another change to the cast , this time after the end of the first season , was the firing of McFadden , who played Dr. Crusher , from the show . This was later attributed to the actions of Hurley and once he left the crew , she returned to the role at the start of the third season . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Star Trek : The Next Generation was released into broadcast syndication , meaning that it was hosted on multiple television stations without going through a broadcast network . At the time this was relatively unheard of , although The Original Series had become successful following release on syndication after an initial run on NBC . In advance of the first airing of the pilot , " Encounter at Farpoint " , the show had been sold in 171 markets . There were concerns at the time that such a method of broadcasting would negatively impact the ratings received by the series , with Justman suggesting that the payoff would be worth it due to the lack of interference from a potential network . 
 " Encounter at Farpoint " received Nielsen ratings of 15 @.@ 7 percent , and it was granted a commitment for a further 24 one hour episodes following the broadcast . The pilot was the highest rated episode of the first season ; the lowest rated episode of the first season was " The Last Outpost " , the fourth episode broadcast , which received ratings of 8 @.@ 9 percent . Three episodes later , " Justice " was broadcast , which received a rating of 12 @.@ 7 percent , the highest for the season other than the pilot . As of the period between September 6 and January 3 , the show was only outranked in the Nielsen Ratings by Wheel of Fortune and Jeopardy ! for shows released directly into syndication , and it became the highest rated syndicated series by the end of the first season , which prompted several other series to be released directly into syndication . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Although it was highly anticipated , when the series was initially broadcast , the response was lukewarm from fans and reviewers . John J. O 'Connor reviewed the first episode for the New York Times , and simply hoped that the action and pace would increase in the episodes aired after the pilot . Other critics of " Encounter at Farpoint " were more positive ; Don Merrill , writing for TV Guide said that the show was a " worthy successor to the original " . Jill L. Lanford for The Herald Journal said that it was a resurrection of a " legend " and was reminiscent of The Original Series episodes " Arena " and " The Squire of Gothos " . She added that it was the " perfect vehicle to introduce the crew " , and a " perfect start " . There was also some initial criticism of the casting , with Tom Shales of The Washington Post calling Patrick Stewart was a " grim bald crank who would make a better villain " , and Jonathan Frakes " verges on namby @-@ pamby " . Mark Jones and Lance Parkin , in their book Beyond the Final Frontier : An Unauthorised Review of Star Trek , said the first season " often felt like an uneasy politically correct attempt to recreate one of the sixties ' least politically correct shows . " 
 While critics approved of certain elements of the show such as the design of the new Enterprise , the early episodes after the pilot were received negatively . " The Naked Now " , the second episode of the season , was based on the original series episode " The Naked Time " . This resulted in some fans , and former Star Trek writers , becoming concerned that the series would continue to " re @-@ hash " old plots . " Code of Honor " has been seen in hindsight as being racist , with Stewart later saying that the cast and crew were embarrassed by it . Mark A. Altman felt that The Next Generation during the first season was a missed opportunity to address issues relevant to modern life , which he said that The Original Series had done successfully in the sixties . He called some episodes " trite " , and suggested that elements were straight rehashes of previous plots with only some names and scenarios changed . Marina Sirtis remarked while promoting Star Trek : Nemesis that in the beginning " they bloody hated us " . 
 Reviewing the series as part of the DVD release in 2002 , Marc Bernardin for Entertainment Weekly said of season one , that it was " almost hard to believe ... just how bad much of it was " . He thought that the first season was too similar to the end of the " cheesy " original series but said that it " succeeded where it needed to : It introduced viewers to the characters who would carry the torch through six more seasons " , and gave it a score of B + . Tor.com reviewer Keith DeCandido was less positive , feeling that it " earned " its reputation as the poorest of The Next Generation 's seven seasons because " the episodes were uneven , poorly plotted , ineptly scripted , and acted by actors who were still trying to figure their characters out " . He gave it a score of 5 out of 10 . The season has been given an 80 % " fresh " rating by review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Star Trek : The Next Generation received seven nominations at the 40th Primetime Emmy Awards . Chris Haire , Doug Davey , Jerry <unk> and Alan Bernard were nominated for " Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Drama Series " for work on the episode " Where No One Has Gone Before " . Edward R. Brown was nominated for " Outstanding Cinematography for a Series " for " The Big Goodbye " . 
 The makeup teams on the show were nominated for two episodes for " Outstanding Achievement Makeup for a Series " , for the episodes " Coming of Age " and " Conspiracy " , winning the award for the latter episode . William Ware Theiss won the award " Outstanding Costume Design for a Series " for " The Big Goodbye " , while the team working on " 11001001 " won the Emmy for " Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series " . 
 " The Big Goodbye " also won a Peabody Award . The series ' premier episode , " Encounter at Farpoint " was nominated for " Best Dramatic Presentation " at the 1988 Hugo Awards . Wil Wheaton was nominated for " Best Young Actor Starring in a Television Drama Series " at the 9th Youth in Film Awards for his portrayal of Wesley Crusher . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Main cast = = = 
 = = = Recurring cast = = = 
 = = Episodes = = 
 In the following table , episodes are listed by the order in which they aired , and may not necessarily correspond to their production codes . 
 = = Home media release = = 
 The episodes of the first season of The Next Generation had each been released individually and in pairs before being released as a season long box set . This first release came on DVD , but following further work to update the releases into high @-@ definition video and onto Blu @-@ ray disc , " Encounter at Farpoint " was among those episodes included on a preview disc released in January 2012 . A full season release on region @-@ free Blu @-@ ray followed at the end of July . 
 = Typhoon Lupit ( 2003 ) = 
 Typhoon Lupit , known in the Philippines as Typhoon <unk> , destroyed the food supply in several small islands in Yap State in the Federated States of Micronesia ( FSM ) . It formed on November 18 , 2003 , from the monsoon trough to the west of the Marshall Islands . Early in its duration , it moved generally to the west or west @-@ southwest . On November 21 , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Lupit , the 21st storm named by the Japan Meteorological Agency of the 2003 Pacific typhoon season . Two days later , it strengthened into a typhoon and developed an eye . Lupit later began a prolonged movement to the northwest , during which it passed near several islands in Yap State . The typhoon reached peak intensity on November 26 , with peak 10 ‑ minute sustained winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . It later weakened due to increasing wind shear and drier air , and after recurving to the northeast , Lupit became extratropical south of Japan on December 2 . 
 Typhoon Lupit first affected Pohnpei with tropical storm @-@ force winds , and later it damaged or destroyed about 200 homes in Chuuk State . There , high waves flooded roads and homes , while high winds damaged crops . Damage was heaviest in Yap State , mostly in the small Ulithi atoll and Fais Island . On both islands , the typhoon contaminated the water supply and wrecked crops . Rainfall reached 263 mm ( 10 @.@ 35 in ) on Ulithi , and gusts reached 158 km / h ( 98 mph ) . Throughout the FSM , damage totaled about $ 1 @.@ 7 million , although there were no deaths . The damage prompted the FSM government to declare two states as disaster areas , as well as a disaster declaration from the United States federal government . While Lupit was becoming extratropical , it became the first typhoon in December to threaten Japan in 13 years . There , the storm dropped rainfall that resulted in mudslides and flight cancellations . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Typhoon Lupit were from a disturbance that persisted in the monsoon trough on November 14 to the northeast of Kwajalein Atoll . There was a weak circulation with pulsating convection ( thunderstorms ) and weak outflow . The system drifted to the southwest without much organization . On November 17 , the circulation intensified , although convection was initially unable to persist . The next day , outflow increased to the northeast , and the thunderstorms developed over the center . At around 1200 UTC on November 18 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) classified the system as a tropical depression to the west of the Marshall Islands . Due to low wind shear , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a tropical cyclone formation alert , indicating that tropical cyclogenesis was likely . Late on November 19 , the JTWC issued its first advisory on Tropical Depression 26W when the system was about 465 km ( 290 mi ) east @-@ northeast of Pohnpei . 
 With a ridge located to the north , the depression tracked to the west @-@ southwest upon forming . Late on November 20 , the JTWC upgraded the depression to a tropical storm following an increase in deep convection , although the thunderstorms were located south of the center . After it turned more to the west , the JMA upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Lupit to the northwest of Pohnpei on November 21 . Outflow gradually increased , and an eye feature was evident by November 22 . Around that time , Lupit passed about 165 km ( 105 mi ) north of Chuuk . Based on the development of a 30 km ( 18 mi ) eye , the JTWC upgraded Lupit to a typhoon that day , and the JMA followed suit on November 23 when the storm was near the Caroline Islands . While the typhoon was intensifying , it briefly turned to the west @-@ southwest on November 23 , before a strengthening ridge to the southeast turned Lupit to the northwest . The eye gradually became better @-@ defined as the typhoon strengthened , and it passed well to the south of Guam . On November 25 , Lupit passed about 315 km ( 195 mi ) north of Yap in the Federated States of Micronesia ( FSM ) . The next day , the JTWC upgraded the system to a super typhoon , or a storm with maximum 1 ‑ minute sustained winds of 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) . On November 26 , the JMA estimated that Lupit attained peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) in the Philippine Sea , and the next day the JTWC estimated peak 1 ‑ minute winds of 270 km / h ( 165 mph ) . On November 27 , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration classified the system as Super Typhoon " <unk> " after the storm entered the agency 's area of warning responsibility . 
 While around peak intensity , Typhoon Lupit had good outflow channels to the north and south . It had a 26 km ( 14 mi ) eye , and gale @-@ force winds reached a diameter of more than 740 km ( 460 mi ) . After peaking in intensity , Lupit underwent an eyewall replacement cycle , which caused the outflow to decrease and convection around the eye to diminish . Steady weakening began on November 28 , accelerated by increasing wind shear , and late that day it weakened below super typhoon status . Lupit entered a weakness in the subtropical ridge , resulting in a turn to the north and later northeast into an area of cooler waters and drier air . The typhoon accelerated into the westerlies , and dry air entered the circulation while the convection rapidly diminished . While moving northeast off the southeast coast of Japan , Lupit weakened into a tropical storm on December 1 . That day , the JTWC issued its last advisory on the storm , and the JMA declared Lupit as an extratropical cyclone on December 2 . The next day , Lupit dissipated off the east coast of Japan . 
 = = Impact = = 
 While it was first intensifying as a tropical storm , Lupit affected Pohnpei , passing about 120 km ( 75 mi ) north of <unk> . Wind gusts peaked at 69 km / h ( 43 mph ) , and the storm dropped 160 mm ( 6 @.@ 28 in ) of rainfall . Later , the storm affected Chuuk Atoll in the FSM on November 23 . Tropical storm force winds were experienced through the state , and rainfall reached 162 mm ( 6 @.@ 37 in ) on Chuuk and 195 mm ( 7 @.@ 68 in ) on <unk> . The Chuuk state government helped people in low @-@ lying areas to evacuate . High waves flooded homes , and damaged roads and seawalls . About 200 houses were damaged or destroyed , and many homes affected by the typhoon had unsanitary conditions , a contaminated water supply , or lack of food . High winds downed banana and palm trees , and salt water damaged or wrecked all of the food crops in Chuuk . 
 Most of Yap State was affected by the typhoon , and the eye of Typhoon Lupit passed near the small atoll of Ulithi . The typhoon also passed near Fais , producing estimated gusts of over 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . On both islands , Lupit produced waves of 4 @.@ 2 to 5 @.@ 5 m ( 14 to 18 ft ) , causing severe beach erosion , and sea spray and flooding contaminated water supplies . In Fais , there was little flooding because it is an elevated island , although several buildings were damaged , mostly to roofs . On Ulithi , areas along the coast were flooded up to 1 @.@ 5 m ( 5 ft ) deep . Crops were wrecked on both islands , and on Ulithi , it was estimated that the soil would be unfit for growing for at least a year . Stations on Ulithi reported wind gusts of 158 km / h ( 98 mph ) , and 263 mm ( 10 @.@ 35 in ) of rainfall . Lupit affected other islands in Yap State with coastal flooding of around 1 m ( 3 ft ) , severe beach erosion , and wrecked crops . Several islands ' water supply were contaminated . On Woleai , the storm downed trees and power lines , and the runway was closed for a week after being covered with water . Damage in Yap State was least on Yap , where winds gusted to 93 km / h ( 58 mph ) and rainfall totaled 128 mm ( 5 @.@ 02 in ) in a 24 ‑ hour period . There , Lupit downed trees and damaged crops , while high seas flooded areas . There was moderate beach erosion , and some seawalls and coastal roads were damaged . 
 Throughout the FSM , Typhoon Lupit caused about $ 1 @.@ 7 million in damage , although there were no deaths or serious injuries . After the storm , the governor of the FSM declared Chuuk and Yap states as disaster areas . The government sent water to affected areas via a private airline , although damaged runways prevented 60 % of flights from being delivered . A government boat was also used to deliver supplies , but its motor was damaged . After it was repaired , the boat delivered 25 @,@ 312 litres of water and 730 bags of rice . On December 19 , United States President George W. Bush declared Yap State as a federal disaster area , which allocated funds for repairing damaged public buildings and debris removal . FEMA also provided emergency food assistance to nine islands in Yap , including Ulithi and Fais . The United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs provided $ 10 @,@ 000 for purchasing supplies to the most affected areas . As part of Operation Christmas Drop , Japanese and American Air Force units sent four planes to various islands with various supplies and gifts , including to areas affected by the typhoon . 
 While Lupit was becoming extratropical , it produced a gust of 133 km / h ( 83 mph ) on the Japanese island of Chichi @-@ jima , and 130 km / h ( 81 mph ) on Hachijō @-@ jima . The storm dropped heavy rainfall across Japan , peaking at 283 mm ( 11 @.@ 1 in ) in Ōshima <unk> . In the Izu Islands , the high rains caused mudslides and flooding that affected eight buildings . Winds reached 83 km / h ( 51 mph ) in Miyake @-@ jima . In Yakushima , five flights were canceled due to the typhoon . Lupit was the first typhoon in 13 years to threaten Japan in the month of December . 
 = Jenks ' Day Off = 
 Jenks ' Day Off is a 1910 American silent short comedy produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film follows Mr. Jenks ' who drafts a telegram to himself as an excuse to get a reprieve from boredom and his wife 's requests . He walks along the beach and finds a secluded spot to go swimming . A convict in women 's clothing swaps his clothes with Jenks and Jenks has no choice to but to wear the discarded clothes . On his way back , Jenks answers a call for help and is mistaken for the robber . He is captured and has to explain circumstances which lead to awkward situation . Production and casting credits for the film are unknown , but likely Thanhouser staff offer possible identities of the writer and actors . The film was released on August 2 , 1910 and was met with approval by the trade publication . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from August 6 , 1910 . It states : " Mr. Jenks and his family are spending the summer in a fashionable summer hotel , and Mr. Jenks is kept bored and busy performing the many services demanded by his wife . He hits upon the bright idea of sending himself a business telegram which would necessitate his immediate presence in the city , then starts out on a little vacation on his own account . Walking on the beach he discovers a secluded spot , and leaving his clothes on the beach he takes a swim . In the meantime , a convict , who has escaped from a nearby penitentiary , has entered a house nearby in search of a change of clothes , his stripes being too conspicuous . The convict locks a woman of the house up and ransacks the house , but the only garments he can find are women 's clothes , and , deciding that they are better than stripes , he dons them . As the convict in his new disguise is walking along the beach he sees Jenks ' clothes lying there and promptly makes another change . There is nothing for Jenks to do when he comes out except to array himself as a woman . On his way back to the hotel he passes the house that has been robbed and is unlucky enough to hear the woman 's cry for help . When she gets out of the closet , through his aid , she naturally believes that he is the convict , and screams for help . Jenks , frightened , runs away , but is captured after a chase in which the entire village takes part . His wife and daughter witness humiliation , and it 's almost impossible for them to ' square things . ' " 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The comedy of the situation derives from Jenks ' own attempts to manufacture some free time to enjoy himself , only to regret the action because of the resultant circumstances . Advertising for the film confirms this by stating , " Jenk 's day off was a day of woe instead of the day of joy he meant it to be . It taught him to never , never leave his wife 's side - not even for a day ! " Jenks ' swimming in a secluded spot , inferring swimming in the nude through the lack of a swimming suit , sets the stage for the comedy when his clothes are swapped for those of the cross @-@ dressed convict . With no other option , Jenks dons the clothes and responds to the call for help . The lady identifies Jenks as the convict , wearing her clothes , and the film concludes with a chase that leads to the arrest and humiliation of Jenks . This comedy predates the well @-@ known cross @-@ dressing antics of Fatty Arbuckle and Charlie Chaplin by a few years . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil . Film historian Q. David Bowers does not attribute a cameraman for this production , but at least two possible candidates exist . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . The cast is uncredited because their identities are unknown . Bowers states that most of the credits are fragmentary for 1910 Thanhouser productions . Known and more prominent members of the cast to appear in productions include the leading ladies , Anna Rosemond and Violet Heming , and the leading man was Frank H. Crane . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The one reel comedy , approximately 960 feet long , was released on August 2 , 1910 . An alternative title for the production Jenk 's Day Off was included in several known Thanhouser advertisements . This would appear to be in error because the character 's name is Jenks and not Jenk . Theaters advertising the film included those in Missouri , Indiana , Nebraska , and Arizona . The Morning Telegraph gave a positive review to the film , stating that it was a " pretty good story " . The Moving Picture World mirrored this assessment with a bit more detail and referred to the story as being within the realm of reality which makes it funnier . The New York Dramatic Mirror provided the most detailed review of the film and praised the ingenuity of the plot and the acting with the exception of the Jenks ' wife . The reviewer also pointing out that Jenks wrote out the telegram too quickly . 
 = Wrecking Ball ( Miley Cyrus song ) = 
 " Wrecking Ball " is a song recorded by American singer Miley Cyrus for her fourth studio album Bangerz ( 2013 ) . It was released on August 25 , 2013 , by RCA Records as the album 's second single . The song was written by MoZella , Stephan <unk> , Sacha Skarbek , <unk> Kim , Lukasz Gottwald , and Henry Russell Walter ; production was helmed by the last two . " Wrecking Ball " is a pop ballad which lyrically discusses the deterioration of a relationship . 
 " Wrecking Ball " received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who appreciated its lyrical content and overall production . However , some critics questioned if Cyrus ' emotional delivery was genuine , since she had recently generated controversy for her increasingly sexual image . It debuted on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 at number fifty , and later became Cyrus ' first number @-@ one single in the United States after the release of its controversial music video ; it retained the peak position during the following week . Nine weeks later , the track returned to number one , and consequently had the largest gap between number @-@ one sittings in Billboard Hot 100 history . As of January 2014 , " Wrecking Ball " has sold three million copies in the United States . Internationally , the song charted strongly ; it topped the charts in Canada , Spain and the United Kingdom , and charted in the top ten throughout much of Europe and Oceania . 
 An accompanying music video for " Wrecking Ball " was released on September 9 , 2013 . It featured close @-@ up scenes of Cyrus tearfully singing , reminiscent of the clip for " Nothing Compares 2 U " by Sinéad O 'Connor , interspersed with footage of a nude Cyrus swinging on a wrecking ball . Critics were divided in their opinions of the music video , feeling that it was more provocative than the clip for her previous single " We Can 't Stop " . " Wrecking Ball " previously held the Vevo record for the most views in the first 24 hours after its release with 19 @.@ 3 million views . At the 2013 MTV Europe Music Awards , Cyrus took home the award for Best Video and the award for Video of the Year at the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards . Adding to the video 's success , Cyrus won the award for World 's Best Video at the 2014 World Music Awards in Monte Carlo . Cyrus has performed " Wrecking Ball " during several live performances , including the iHeartRadio Music Festival and an episode of Saturday Night Live . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2012 , Cyrus announced plans to focus on her film career , effectively putting her musical endeavors on hiatus . That year , she appeared in the films LOL and So Undercover . She was also confirmed as a primary voice actress in the feature film Hotel Transylvania , but dropped out of the project to coordinate a musical comeback . In January 2013 , Cyrus ended her recording contract with Hollywood Records , under which she released the studio albums Meet Miley Cyrus ( 2007 ) , Breakout ( 2008 ) , Can 't Be Tamed ( 2010 ) , and the extended play ( EP ) The Time of Our Lives ( 2009 ) . Later that month , she signed a recording contract with RCA Records . In March , she confirmed that her fourth studio album would be released by the end of 2013 . 
 Before directly stating that " Wrecking Ball " was originally written with Beyoncé in mind , songwriter Sacha Skarbek tweeted " Beyonce song now becoming a Miley Cyrus song ? ! ! Good / bad ? I don 't know ? ? ! ! ! ! [ sic ] " in December 2012 . His representative commented that " " Originally , the [ songwriting session between Dr. Luke and Sacha ] was booked to write a song for Beyoncé . But as the song [ ' Wrecking Ball ' ] progressed , the songwriters realized the song would not work for her . " 
 The song , and the cover of its parent album Bangerz ( 2013 ) , were unveiled on August 25 , 2013 , before Cyrus ' performance at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards . She released the cover artwork for " Wrecking Ball " on September 6 , which shows Cyrus dressed in a sleeveless white shirt and underwear while swinging on a wrecking ball . The song was serviced to contemporary hit radio stations in the United States on September 17 . It serves as the second single from Bangerz , following the lead single " We Can 't Stop " , which was released in June . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Wrecking Ball " is a pop ballad ; According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Kobalt Music Publishing America , it is set in common time with a tempo of 60 beats per minute . The track is written in the key of D minor and follows the chord progression Dm – F – C – Gm . Miriam Coleman of Rolling Stone noted that it begins with a minimalist keyboard instrumentation , which puts emphasis on Cyrus " anguished vocals " , and also described it as a " heartbroken counterpoint " to " We Can 't Stop " . Its lyrics discuss the deterioration of a relationship , as mentioned in the lines " Don 't you ever say I just walked away / I will always want you / I can 't live a lie / running for my life / I will always want you . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Wrecking Ball " gained mostly positive reviews from contemporary music critics . Writing for The A.V. Club , Marah Eakin provided a favorable review , calling it a " solid ballad " and describing it as " a modern day " My Heart Will Go On " that discussed a deteriorated , shortlived young romance . Kitty Empire from The Observer opined that " the heartbreak section of Bangerz mostly repays your attention " and mentioned " Wrecking Ball " to be a part of it . Although he found the song " predictable , " Evan Sawdey of PopMatters gave it an overall positive review and complimented its production and the build up to its chorus , calling it " the kind of broad mainstream song that shows how you how to properly build up to a chorus before hitting us over the head with it . Jon Dolan of Rolling Stone felt that it " [ rides ] the hunger and confusion that make great coming @-@ of @-@ age pop . " Writing for AllMusic , Heather Phares considered the track to be a standout from Bangerz . 
 Writing for Digital Spy , Robert Copsey questioned Cyrus ' decision to premiere a ballad in the midst of controversies regarding her " salacious exploits " , but enjoyed the song itself and opined that it " proves that there 's method behind the madness . " In a more mixed review , Joseph Atilano from the Philippine Daily Inquirer appreciated the lyrics for seeming heartfelt , but felt that its production was " comparatively weaker " by comparison to her earlier projects . Mikael Wood of Los Angeles Times felt that the track proved that Cyrus " isn 't just a twerk @-@ bot programmed to titillate " , but suggested that her " singing throbs with what feels like an embarrassment of emotion " and found it peculiar that the song discussed the singer 's relationship with Hemsworth when her public behavior seemingly suggested that she " couldn 't care less about " it . 
 After a month of voting , on March 31 , 2014 , Billboard declared the song to be the winner of the 2014 Hot 100 March Madness and their favorite Top 5 single from the past year . It defeated songs like " Holy Grail " by Jay @-@ Z & Justin Timberlake , " Best Song Ever " by One Direction , " Applause " by Lady Gaga , " Timber " by Pitbull & Kesha and finally " Just Give Me a Reason " by Pink and Nate <unk> . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Before officially being serviced as a single , " Wrecking Ball " made a " hot shot debut " at number 50 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 for the week issued on September 7 , 2013 , with 90 @,@ 000 downloads in two days . It reached number 14 the following week with 201 @,@ 000 downloads . After its official premiere as the second single from Bangerz , the track peaked at number one in the United States in its fourth week , heavily assisted by online streaming credits from its recently released music video ; this gave Cyrus her first number @-@ one single in the country . It sold 477 @,@ 000 copies that week , becoming the third @-@ highest single sales week of 2013 , behind the 582 @,@ 000 units moved by " I Knew You Were Trouble " by Taylor Swift and the 557 @,@ 000 units moved by " Roar " by Katy Perry . In December , " Wrecking Ball " returned to the peak position after being stuck at number or two or three the previous nine weeks as Lorde 's " Royals " topped the Hot 100 , with assistance from a viral parody video and consequently became the largest gap between number @-@ one sittings in Billboard history . The next week it tumbled to number 5 as Eminem 's " The Monster " featuring Rihanna topped the chart . As of December 2014 , " Wrecking Ball " has sold 3 @,@ 640 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . The track peaked at number one on the Canadian Hot 100 , and was later certified triple @-@ platinum in the country . It reached the peak position on the Mexico Ingles Airplay . 
 " Wrecking Ball " charted strongly throughout Europe . In the United Kingdom , the song and Bangerz both debuted at number one on their respective charts in the same week , making Cyrus the first artist of 2013 to achieve a " chart double " in the country . It was later certified <unk> by the British Phonographic Industry . Additionally , the song marked Cyrus ' second chart @-@ topping single in the country after " We Can 't Stop " . In Belgium , it respectively reached numbers four and five on the Belgian Ultratop in the Flanders and Wallonia regions , and was eventually awarded a gold certification . The track peaked at number six on the Official German Charts , and was later certified platinum . It charted at number three on the Italian FIMI chart , and earned a double @-@ platinum certification . In Oceania , " Wrecking Ball " charted at number two on both the Australian ARIA Charts and the Official New Zealand Music Chart . It was certified quadruple @-@ platinum in the former country , and was given a platinum certification in the latter . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 An accompanying music video for " Wrecking Ball " was directed by Terry Richardson , and was premiered through Vevo on September 9 , 2013 . The clip features close @-@ up footage of Cyrus emotionally singing to the camera against a white backdrop , having been inspired by the music video for " Nothing Compares 2 U " by Sinéad O 'Connor . Interspersed throughout are scenes of Cyrus licking a sledgehammer and swinging on a wrecking ball . At first , she is shown dressed in a sleeveless shirt , panties and Doc Martens boots ; as the video progresses , she is then shown wearing only the boots . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The music video received generally mixed reviews from critics , who were divided in their opinions regarding Cyrus ' increasingly provocative image . Writing for Billboard , Jason Lipshutz stated that the " nude Cyrus shown straddling a swinging wrecking ball " was the most surprising piece of the clip . Amelia Proud from Daily Mail provided a mixed review , commenting that Cyrus delivered a visual that was more provocative than its " boisterous " predecessor " We Can 't Stop " and questioned if she has " finally gone too far this time " . The staff from Entertainment Weekly joked that viewers would be " scandalized / titillated / disappointed in Billy Ray Cyrus ' parenting skills " after seeing his daughter nude and " fellating a sledgehammer . [ sic ] " Writing for The Guardian , Michael Hann criticized Cyrus ' attempts to distance herself from her innocent Hannah Montana image , a former television series in which Cyrus portrayed the primary character Miley Stewart , a middle school student who led a secret double life as pop star Hannah Montana . He disapproved of the manner in which she transitioned into a career beyond her childhood success , specifically panning her for " exploring the iconography of porn . " As of January 2015 , Billboard named the video as the fourth best music video of the 2010s ( so far ) . 
 James Montgomery from MTV News noted that the controversy surrounding Cyrus ' nude performance in the video was " to be expected " given her recent controversies , and complimented Richardson " for toning down the salacious scenes ( if only for an instant ) , and allowing the softer , more genuine sides to shine through . " Mikael Wood of Los Angeles Times opined that the music video tried to paint Cyrus in a more serious light with its scenes of her emotionally singing and crying . 
 Billboard editor Jason Lipshutz opined " Wrecking Ball " is Cyrus ' " Cry Me a River " , for their controversial music videos and the artists ' music evolution . " A decade ago , Justin Timberlake was in " My music will shut everyone up " mode , too , as he railed against a teenybopper image " . He concluded " Cyrus is breathtaking and talented , and , now that she has our attention with her own version of " Cry Me a River , " can dial down the shock tactics and present her artistic vision in the form of a new full @-@ length . " 
 With 19 @.@ 3 million views in the first twenty @-@ four hours of its release , the clip held the record for having the most views in that time @-@ frame across Vevo platforms . The first @-@ day viewing record was surpassed by the video for " Anaconda " by Nicki Minaj in August 2014 , which received 19 @.@ 6 million views upon its premiere . The video has now received over 840 million views on YouTube . A director 's cut of the music video was released on September 24 , which features only the close @-@ up footage of Cyrus singing against the white backdrop . Vanessa White Wolf from MTV News noted that " the only time Richardson cuts away is at the very end , where , after a quick director 's credit page , we see Terry and Miley laughing and mugging for the camera . " 
 The 2014 Australian art prize the Bald Archy was awarded to Judy Nadin for Wrecking Balls Ashes to Ashes , parodying cricketer Mitchell Johnson as Cyrus . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On September 21 , 2013 , Cyrus performed " Wrecking Ball " for the first time during the iHeartRadio Music Festival in Las Vegas ; she performed twice , first in the afternoon at Festival Village , and later in the evening at the MGM Grand Garden Arena . Despite generating media attention for a provocative wardrobe , the performance was considered to be " fairly tame considering the VMAs " , where she touched recording artist Robin Thicke 's crotch area with a giant foam finger and twerked against his crotch . On October 5 , Cyrus served as the host and musical guest during an episode of Saturday Night Live , which gained favorable reviews from music critics . The following Monday , Cyrus performed the track on Today as part of their Toyota Concert Series . She also performed the song during appearances on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon and The Ellen DeGeneres Show later that month . 
 In November , Cyrus traveled to Europe to sing " Wrecking Ball " at the 2013 MTV Europe Music Awards in Amsterdam on November 10 , 2013 ; she garnered media attention for smoking a joint of marijuana on @-@ stage while accepting the Best Video Award for the track . On November 17 , 2013 , she performed the song on The X Factor in the United Kingdom . After being criticized for delivering a lackluster vocal performance , Cyrus was placed under " vocal rest " by her doctors in preparation of the Bangerz Tour . During her trip , she also performed on Wetten , dass .. ? in Germany ( November 9 ) , BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge in London ( November 12 ) , and the 2013 Bambi Awards in Germany ( November 14 ) . On November 24 , Cyrus performed " Wrecking Ball " at the 2013 American Music Awards ; a digitally animated cat projected on the screen behind her lip @-@ synced the lyrics alongside her . In December , she performed at Jingle Ball concerts in Los Angeles ( KIIS @-@ FM Jingle Ball ) , Saint Paul , Atlanta , New York City , Washington , D.C. , Tampa and Sunrise . Cyrus also performed " Wrecking Ball " on Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve with Ryan Seacrest in Times Square on December 31 . 
 An episode of MTV Unplugged starring Cyrus premiered through MTV on January 29 , 2014 ; she performed an acoustic version of " Wrecking Ball " , among several additional tracks from Bangerz . On May 27 , 2014 Cyrus performed the song during the World Music Awards held in Monte Carlo , Monaco ; where she also won four World Music Awards . She wore a gown with a scenic theme based on flowers during the performance . It received positive reviews for its understated simplicity and strong vocal delivery . Cyrus returned to perform the song during the musical festival on June 21 , 2014 , Summertime Ball at Wembley Stadium of London , in front of 80 @,@ 000 people . Cyrus has performed the song during her ongoing Bangerz Tour . A critic from the Nashville Scene praised the performance , writing , " Wrecking Ball was sung by Miley and earnestly shouted in unison by the arena , some of the audience tearing up . " Blake Hannon praised Cyrus ' vocal delivery , writing , " The crowd kept going when things slowed down for Wrecking Ball . It was the highlight of the night , and not because of anything visual . The costumed characters vanished and the screen was black , with Cyrus belting out one of the best pop power ballads in recent memory with only a smattering of lights . It 's a reminder that beneath it all , Cyrus has a voice — and a pretty big one , at that . " 
 = = Cover versions and media usage = = 
 In September 2013 , British singer @-@ songwriter James Arthur covered " Wrecking Ball " on Radio Hamburg in Germany . Later that month , The Gregory Brothers released a country version , which Laura <unk> from Mashable felt " trades in Miley 's pop @-@ ballad sound for a twangier feel . " American singer @-@ songwriter Alonzo Holt released his own rendition in October , which featured vocals from Arthur ; it peaked at number 97 on the UK Singles Chart and number 71 on the Irish Singles Chart . American group Haim covered " Wrecking Ball " during their performance on BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge , while the trio London Grammar sang it for the same session in December . Rumer Willis later sang the track during a performance which Chiderah Monde from Daily News felt " captured more of the emotion behind the song " than Cyrus ' version . American singer Rebecca Black uploaded an acoustic version to her YouTube channel in November . Canadian singer Sarah Blackwood of Walk Off the Earth also released an acoustic version <unk> Patty Walters broke out to internet acclaim with his pop punk cover , gaining recognition and a contract with Fearless Records for his band As It Is . 
 Danie <unk> , a contestant on the third season of The X Factor USA , performed the track during the first live show on October 29 , while Dami Im from the fifth series of The X Factor Australia sang it in the semi @-@ final round . Marley Rose ( Melissa Benoist ) covered the song and parodied elements of the music video for the Glee episode " The End of <unk> " . Christina <unk> sang the song during the Blind Auditions of sixth season of The Voice USA . Australian artist Kat Jade auditioned with a stripped @-@ back / single @-@ piano version in the third season of The Voice Australia after posting a popular acapella version of the song to her Youtube channel . " Weird Al " Yankovic covered the song as the first in his polka medley " NOW That 's What I Call Polka ! " for his 2014 album Mandatory Fun . Metal band August Burns Red covered the song for the compilation album Punk Goes Pop 6 . Melisa <unk> impersonated Miley Cyrus in Your Face Sounds Familiar ( Philippines season 1 ) and performed this song , which she won the season . 
 50 Cent told NME that the song was the one he would perform at karaoke : " Just a big pop song that no one would suspect , just to fuck with them . Make them go , What ? " The song was featured in the film The Night Before 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Bangerz . 
 Recording 
 Engineered at Conway Recording Studios ( Hollywood , California ) ; Luke 's In the Boo ( Malibu , California ) ; Monster Island Studio ( New York City , New York ) ; Maison de Musique ( Toronto , Canada ) ; <unk> Studios ( West Hollywood , California ) ; Capitol Studios ( Hollywood , California ) 
 Mixed at MixStar Studios ( Virginia Beach , Virginia ) 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Six @-@ banded armadillo = 
 The six @-@ banded armadillo ( Euphractus <unk> ) , also known as the yellow armadillo , is an armadillo found in South America . The sole member of its genus , it was first described by Swedish zoologist Carl Linnaeus in 1758 . The six @-@ banded armadillo is typically between 40 and 50 centimeters ( 16 and 20 in ) in head @-@ and @-@ body length , and weighs 3 @.@ 2 to 6 @.@ 5 kilograms ( 7 @.@ 1 to 14 @.@ 3 lb ) . The carapace ( hard shell on the back ) is pale yellow to reddish brown , marked by scales of equal length , and scantily covered by buff to white bristle @-@ like hairs . The forefeet have five distinct toes , each with moderately developed claws . 
 Six @-@ banded armadillos are efficient diggers and form burrows to live in and search for prey . The armadillo is alert and primarily solitary . An omnivore , it feeds on insects , ants , carrion , and plant material . Due to their poor eyesight , armadillos rely on their sense of smell to detect prey and predators . Births take place throughout the year ; gestation is 60 to 64 days long , after which a litter of one to three is born . Weaning occurs at one month , and juveniles mature by nine months . The six @-@ banded armadillo inhabits savannas , primary and secondary forests , cerrados , shrublands , and deciduous forests . Fairly common , its range spans from Brazil and southern Suriname in the northeast through Bolivia , Paraguay , and Uruguay into northern Argentina in the southeast . The International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) classifies it as least concern , and there are no major threats to its survival . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 The six @-@ banded armadillo is the sole member of the genus Euphractus and is placed in the family <unk> . It was first described by Swedish zoologist Carl Linnaeus as Dasypus <unk> in 1758 . The genera <unk> ( hairy armadillos ) and <unk> ( pichi ) have at times been included in Euphractus , though <unk> , immunological and morphological analyses oppose this . Fossil Euphractus excavated in Buenos Aires ( Argentina ) , Lagoa Santa , Minas Gerais ( Brazil ) and Tarija ( Bolivia ) date back to the Pleistocene . 
 The following five subspecies are recognized : 
 A 2006 morphological study of the phylogeny of armadillos showed that <unk> , <unk> , Euphractus and <unk> form a monophyletic clade . The cladogram below ( based only on the extant species ) is based on this study . 
 However , a mitochondrial DNA investigation has concluded that <unk> ( fairy armadillos ) is the sister group of <unk> ( giant , three @-@ banded and naked @-@ tailed armadillos ) , with Euphractinae ( hairy , six @-@ banded and pichi armadillos ) having diverged earlier . 
 The six @-@ banded armadillo differs from others in the subfamily Euphractinae , which also contains the pichi and hairy armadillos , in having a narrow head and six to seven movable bands on the carapace ( the hard shell on the back ) . Other names for this armadillo are tatu <unk> and tatu <unk> ( in Portuguese ) , and ' yellow armadillo ' . 
 = = Description = = 
 The six @-@ banded armadillo is the largest in Euphractinae , which also contains the pichi and hairy armadillos ; in fact , it is the third largest armadillo after the giant armadillo and the greater long @-@ nosed armadillo . This armadillo is typically between 40 and 50 centimeters ( 16 and 20 in ) in head @-@ and @-@ body length , and weighs 3 @.@ 2 to 6 @.@ 5 kilograms ( 7 @.@ 1 to 14 @.@ 3 lb ) . The carapace is pale yellow to reddish brown ( though not a dark shade of brown or black ) , marked by scales of equal length , and scantily covered by buff to white bristle @-@ like hairs – unlike the hairy armadillos , that are covered by dense hairs . The shell narrows to 70 to 80 percent of its original width towards the top of the head , which is covered by plates arranged in a definite pattern . The forefeet have five distinct toes , each with moderately developed claws , of which the third is the longest . 
 Like the other <unk> and the pink fairy armadillo , the six @-@ banded armadillo has a tympanic bulla ; the ears are 32 to 47 centimeters ( 13 to 19 in ) long . There are 9 pairs of teeth on the upper jaw and 10 pairs on the lower jaw ; the teeth are large and strong and are assisted by strong muscles for chewing . A row of scutes , each 13 – 19 centimeters ( 5 @.@ 1 – 7 @.@ 5 in ) wide , extends along the back of the neck . The tail , 12 – 24 centimeters ( 4 @.@ 7 – 9 @.@ 4 in ) long , is covered by two to four bands of plates on the underside . Some of these plates have holes for scent gland secretions , a feature seen in no other armadillo except a few big hairy armadillos . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 Different studies have recorded different activity patterns for the six @-@ banded armadillo – some consider it to be diurnal ( active mainly during the day ) , while others show it is nocturnal ( active mainly at night ) . It is an alert animal ; unlike other armadillos , it flees on sensing danger and bites if handled . Primarily solitary , six @-@ banded armadillos will congregate only to feed on <unk> . A 1983 study in eastern Brazil calculated the mean home range size as 93 @.@ 3 hectares ( 0 @.@ 360 sq mi ) . An efficient digger , this armadillo can dig U @-@ shaped burrows with a single opening , typically in dry areas ; the burrows may or may not be permanent shelters . These burrows can go deep into the ground and help in foraging . A study of burrows dug by the giant , six @-@ banded , southern naked @-@ tailed and greater naked @-@ tailed armadillos showed that all burrows were similar in the slopes of the burrow and the surrounding soil , and the direction of the entrance ; the location preferred for them and time spent in them , however , differed . Burrows could be easily differentiated by their dimensions ; burrows of six @-@ banded armadillos had a mean height of 19 centimeters ( 7 @.@ 5 in ) and were 21 centimeters ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) wide at the opening , and narrowed down to 10 centimeters ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) with a height of 16 centimeters ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) to 21 centimeters ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) into the burrow . Generally , burrows become wide enough to allow the armadillo to turn around as the depth increases . Unlike the moles , that throw the soil to a side while digging , the six @-@ banded armadillo digs with its forefeet and throws the soil behind with its hindfeet . Armadillos defecate outside their burrows . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The six @-@ banded armadillo is an omnivore that feeds on carrion , small invertebrates , insects , ants , fruits ( typically from bromeliads ) , palm nuts and tubers . A 2004 study classified it as a " carnivore @-@ omnivore " . In a study in a Brazilian ranch , plant material was found to predominate in the diet . Captive individuals have been observed preying upon large rats . Due to their poor eyesight , armadillos rely on their sense of smell to detect prey and predators . To kill the prey , the armadillo stands on it , grabs it using its teeth and tears it into pieces . Six @-@ banded armadillos can store subcutaneous fat to support themselves at times when food is scarce ; this fat can increase the weight to 8 to 11 kilograms ( 18 to 24 lb ) . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Breeding behaviour has been observed in captivity . Births take place throughout the year . After a gestational period of 60 to 64 days , a litter of one to three is born . Each newborn weighs 95 to 110 grams ( 3 @.@ 4 to 3 @.@ 9 oz ) , and has a hairless and soft carapace ; it can give out soft clicks . The pregnant female builds a nest before giving birth ; if disturbed , the mother can react aggressively and shift her offspring . The eyes , closed at birth , open at 22 to 25 days . Weaning occurs at one month and the juveniles mature by nine months . One of the armadillos lived for nearly 18 years . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The six @-@ banded armadillo inhabits savannas , primary and secondary forests , cerrados , shrublands and deciduous forests . It can adapt to a variety of habitats ; it can even occur on agricultural lands and has been recorded at 1 @,@ 600 meters ( 5 @,@ 200 ft ) above the sea level . A study in southeastern Brazil estimated the population density at 0 @.@ 14 individuals per hectare . The same study showed that the six @-@ banded armadillo often displaces and is displaced by the sympatric southern naked @-@ tail armadillo ; this was considered to be helpful in their coexistence . The six @-@ banded armadillo has a wide distribution in South America , from Brazil and southern Suriname in the northeast through Bolivia , Paraguay and Uruguay into northern Argentina in the southeast . Its presence in Peru is doubted . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 The IUCN classifies the six @-@ banded armadillo as least concern , due to its wide distribution , good degree of tolerance and presumably large populations . Moreover , it occurs in several protected areas . Though there are no major threats to its survival , six @-@ banded armadillo populations north of the Amazon River might be declining due to few patches of savannas , human settlement and industrial expansion . Moreover , these armadillos are reportedly hunted for medicinal purposes , though their meat is believed to have an unpalatable taste ; in some areas in its range , people detest its meat due to the belief that the animal feeds on " rotting human corpses " . A 2011 study compared the of six- and nine @-@ banded armadillos in Paraíba ( Brazil ) ; nine @-@ banded armadillo meat tasted better according to the majority of the locals . Consumption of six @-@ banded armadillo meat was not considered safe by the locals for people with certain health problems , such as injuries and hepatitis , a taboo that had stemmed probably from concerns over the armadillo 's diet . Six @-@ banded armadillos often raid <unk> to feed on tender plants ; farmers are known to use traps aided by corn baits for these animals to curb the menace . 
 = On the Run Tour ( Beyoncé and Jay Z ) = 
 The On the Run Tour was a co @-@ headlining stadium tour by American performer Beyoncé and rapper Jay Z. The joint tour came shortly after the two had finished their own solo tours — Beyoncé 's The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour and Jay @-@ Z 's Magna Carter World Tour ( both 2013 – 2014 ) . The tour 's name spins off from the 2013 song " Part II ( On the Run ) " , included on Jay @-@ Z 's album Magna Carta Holy Grail , on which Beyoncé features . An official poster for the tour was released along with the announcement of the venture , showing Beyoncé and Jay @-@ Z embracing whilst dressed in black ski masks , following the criminal " on the lam " narrative found in the couples ' 2002 first single together , " ' 03 Bonnie & Clyde " and " Part II ( On the Run ) " . 
 To promote the tour , a faux movie trailer video was premiered in May 2014 entitled " Run " ( stylized as " RUN " ) . The video , which features eight celebrity cameo appearances , showcases the couple in a variety of Bonnie and Clyde style , action and gun packed situations . The tour itself was noted to follow this same theme throughout , with similar video interludes incorporated into the production of the show . Critics generally lauded the tour , praising the extravagant set list , dynamic and detailed theme and story of the show and both artists ' performance abilities , however some felt the on stage chemistry between the couple was not what it could have been . 
 Due to the large demand and tickets selling out in minutes in multiple locations , extra tour dates were added to the itinerary . The tour became a commercial success , grossing $ 96 million in the first 19 North American shows and $ 109 @.@ 7 million in total as well as attendance totalling at 979 @,@ 781 . It was the fifth highest @-@ grossing tour of 2014 , according to Pollstar 's annual year end tour chart . The show was broadcast in its entirety on September 20 , 2014 , airing on the US television network HBO , following the taping of the two concerts in Paris , France , where the tour concluded . 
 = = Background = = 
 Beyoncé and Jay @-@ Z first collaborated in 2002 on " ' 03 Bonnie & Clyde " , a song from Jay @-@ Z 's seventh studio album , The Blueprint 2 : The Gift & The Curse . Since then , other notable collaborations between the pair include Beyoncé 's 2003 number @-@ one song , " Crazy in Love " featuring Jay @-@ Z , 2013 's " Part II ( On the Run ) " which is widely regarded as the follow up to " ' 03 Bonnie & Clyde " and " Drunk in Love " , the couple 's collaboration from Beyoncé 's self @-@ titled fifth album , which was unexpectedly released in December 2013 . 
 In July 2013 , Jay @-@ Z stated that a joint tour with Beyoncé was " slowly making sense , more sense every day " . Throughout 2013 and 2014 , during Beyoncé 's The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour , Jay @-@ Z made multiple guest appearances , starting in July at The Sound of Change Live charity concert where the couple performed " Crazy in Love " together , shortly followed by another guest appearance at Brooklyn 's Barclays Center in August , where Jay @-@ Z performed " Tom Ford " accompanied by Beyoncé 's backing vocals as found in the song . During Beyoncé 's final leg of the tour in 2014 , Jay @-@ Z appeared a total of seven times to perform their most recent collaboration , " Drunk in Love " , together . Jay @-@ Z accompanied Beyoncé on all six nights of her O2 Arena stint in London and finally , at the last night of the tour in Lisbon . 
 Rumours of a co @-@ headlining stadium tour from Beyoncé and Jay @-@ Z first circulated on April 15 , 2014 , when Page Six reported that a source had revealed the " power couple " would be partaking in a 20 stadium US tour starting in late June and that a performance in New York could take place on July 4 . Confirmation of the rumours started to arise when it was reported that the Pasadena City Council were holding a meeting to decide whether to approve the couples ' proposed concert on August 2 , 2014 at the Rose Bowl . The vote on the matter took place because the Rose Bowl – nestled within an affluent , residential neighbourhood – has a limited number of events permitted per year of twelve , which can only be extended if approved by the city council . The concert was ultimately reported to be the eighteenth approved event of 2014 for the Rose Bowl . 
 = = Development = = 
 The tour was " conceived and launched fast compared to most stadium tours " according to Live Nation , who noted that most tours of this nature take more than a year of planning , compared to the On the Run Tour that took around one month . " It came together quite quickly , around mid @-@ March , " Omar Al @-@ Joulani of Live Nation North America commented . " By April , we had everything together , and once the routing was in place we had about three weeks until the tour was announced . " Following the general sale of tour dates , fans were left concerned as the July 11 , 2014 show in East Rutherford , New Jersey remained pending to go on sale for many weeks , despite all other dates already being available to the public . Some reports stated that the reason for this was that the state of New Jersey had implemented a legislation resulting in 95 % of tickets for an event having to be available to the public . The show was eventually put on sale to the public on June 4 , 2014 . The On the Run Tour was the first tour to be a part of " Official Events " – the collaboration of Facebook and Live Nation in which the size and scale of Ticketmaster 's database is leveraged as events promoted by Live Nation are imported to Artists ' Facebook Pages as " Official Events " , providing fans with direct links to Ticketmaster to purchase verified tickets . 
 The tour was stated to have a running theme throughout the performances of being " on the run " by the Miami New Times , whether it is from " the media , their place in pop music , the haters , the bullshit and sometimes even each other " . When explaining the concept of the tour and its accompanying videos in a telephone conversation to New York @-@ based director <unk> Rimmasch , Jay @-@ Z stated " We ’ re not trying to do this literally , it ’ s not that we ’ re Bonnie and Clyde . We ’ re on the run from everything . On the run from becoming a cliché . On the run from doing the same thing again . " During their individual performances , Beyoncé was often backed by both male and female dancers and Jay @-@ Z was noted to hold the stage for multiple songs without assistance . Beyoncé was backed by an all female band during her solo songs , whilst Jay @-@ Z was accompanied by other male instrumentalists ; however both artist 's musicians collaborated for the majority of the performance . Video interludes filled with " cop chases and other violent outbursts " carried the storytelling between songs . The performances of the joint tour was said to be split up similarly to Jay @-@ Z 's previous joint venture with Kanye West , the Watch the Throne Tour . Beyoncé and Jay @-@ Z would take turn holding down the stage , beginning with several songs by Beyoncé first , followed by duets and afterwards Jay @-@ Z rapping his songs . Both artists sported multiple outfits from a variety of fashion designers throughout the performances of the tour . In Beyoncé 's case , makeup artist Sir John Barnette commented on her quick changes backstage between performances , comparing them to " Daytona 500 " with every member of her team working on a separate part of her look . 
 = = Fashion = = 
 Both Beyoncé and Jay @-@ Z sported multiple outfits throughout the different performances of the tour . One of the more prominent designers for the tour was Versace , in which Beyoncé wore both a fishnet and leather Atelier black bodysuit ( complete with a plunging neckline , a fishnet head mask and high heel combat boots ) , as well as a colourful Atelier bodysuit from the designer . The leather Atelier black bodysuit took approximately 200 hours to craft and was used for the opening number of the tour , " ' 03 Bonnie & Clyde " . The colourful bodysuit was commented on by Versace who stated that the team had their inspiration from the street for the colour and added various crystals and stripes to show a " baseball vibe " while also trying to capture Beyoncé 's energy . Beyoncé 's tour shoes were designed by Stuart Weitzman and Joker 's Closet . Other outfits included a denim jumpsuit and a bedazzled leotard bodysuit that " showed off her derrière " . Beyoncé also sported more thematic and dramatic pieces of clothing , including a full bridal veil and a sweeping train made of a black @-@ and @-@ white American flag . The American flag outfit was designed by Riccardo Tisci of Givenchy and took over 500 hours to create . The American flag train was 16 @.@ 4 feet long but weighed around 500 grams allowing it to fly in the wind . The individual stars on the outfit were hand @-@ embroidered and its inspiration was said to be " American Danger : Bonnie & Clyde with a modern twist . " For the performance of " Ring the Alarm " , Beyoncé returned to designer Vrettos Vrettakos ( with whom she collaborated with notably on her previous solo tour ) . Designed by Dennis <unk> , Vrettakos produced a red , " couture ' crystal spirit ' bodysuit " complete with fringe details on the limbs and " embellished with Swarovski crystals for stage @-@ ready shine " . 
 Alexander Wang designed a " bondage body suit " worn by Beyoncé during the show , as well as multiple pieces by Nicola Formichetti for Diesel . One of these included the previously mentioned denim outfit , which was " made from the company 's patented <unk> Jean material , accented with hand @-@ applied hardware and <unk> , Swarovski crystal elements and black leather accessories " , worn for the performance of " Run the World ( Girls ) " . Formichetti commented on the outfit , saying " Every classic cops and robbers story blurs the lines between the good and bad , we wanted Beyoncé ’ s to be both . Her look is one part police officer and two parts jailbait . " Another piece designed by Diesel was an outfit consisting of jean @-@ shorts and a leather jacket embroiled with the word " Texas " . Biker gangs that developed in the United States after World War II served as an inspiration for the outfit ; Beyoncé 's was meant as a tribute to her hometown and a reminder of her roots . It took 4 – 5 hours to add the word Texas to the leather jacket . The bondage bodysuit was described as " a riff off of an urban bomber hoodie jacket that was cropped to expose a bondage bodysuit underneath that has graphic cutouts . When worn up , the oversized hood covers the face , adding an incognito element reminiscent of the On The Run theme . " It also contained snakeskin <unk> into the sleeves of the outfit . One of the more controversial pieces worn by Beyoncé during the On the Run Tour was a black , thong leotard that " put her bare rear end on display in a kind of cage @-@ like cutout " . Erica <unk> of The Cut blog wrote that the number was a " somewhat disorienting look " . During the performance of " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " , Beyoncé revisited a leotard from the song 's music video in a black and gold lace bodysuit designed by Michael Costello who wanted " Beyoncé to feel beautiful , strong , super sexy and ventilated " with the outfit . Lebanese designer Elie Saab created a bridal @-@ themed , white long @-@ sleeve lace @-@ embellished jumpsuit for Beyoncé for the performances of " Resentment " and " Love On Top " which was part of his Pre @-@ Fall 2014 collection . 
 Jay @-@ Z 's fashion was noted to be Kanye @-@ esque , with pieces worn by him including rotating ensembles of black leather as well as " giant , billowing pant scarves " . For the opening performance , Jay @-@ Z appeared on stage in black sunglasses , gold chains , a black and white star speckled shirt and a black jacket . During the performance of " Big Pimpin ' " Jay @-@ Z wore a fedora . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 The tour was officially announced on April 28 , 2014 , via Jay @-@ Z 's Facebook page . Announcements shortly followed through Beyoncé 's website and an official press release . Pre @-@ sale tickets for fans to secure their seats first before the general sale were sold through Beyoncé 's website and Chase credit and debit card users exclusively . A writer for Billboard noted that Chase was a surprising candidate for the official tour sponsor due to their lack of experience in the concert industry when compared to the live music sponsorship giants such as Citi and American Express . Chase allegedly scored the " 11th @-@ hour " deal due to previous connections with Roc Nation Sports ( owned by Jay Z ) and a $ 4 million bid on the position . A promotional poster for the tour was revealed showing Jay Z and Beyoncé embracing and wearing ski masks , following the criminals @-@ on @-@ the @-@ lam narrative of the couple 's two singles ( " ' 03 Bonnie & Clyde " and " Part II ( On the Run ) " ) . Beyoncé also wore a similar ski mask in her 2013 video " Superpower " featuring Frank Ocean from her self @-@ titled album . A second promotional poster was released on May 30 , 2014 , in an email to fans announcing the on sale times for certain tour dates . The poster features Beyoncé dressed in a white , short @-@ cut wedding dress whilst sitting behind and hugging Jay Z on a motorcycle . 
 Following the tour 's announcement , it was revealed that $ 1 from each ticket sold and a portion of certain VIP ticket proceeds would go to the Shawn Carter Foundation ( named based on Jay Z 's birth name ) , which would help and support existing students of the foundation that represent diverse backgrounds , and face significant barriers to success such as teen pregnancy , homelessness , poverty , former incarceration , sexual and domestic abuse , and gang membership . Fans in Houston , Texas were requested to bring <unk> goods to a selected location by Beyoncé as part of her " # <unk> " campaign , in association with the Houston Food Bank , Miss @-@ A @-@ Meal , The Bread of Life and <unk> 102 @.@ 1 , to help work towards eradicating the nearly 870 @,@ 000 Houston families suffering from hunger . Fans who donated to the campaign resulted in a chance of winning some of the best tickets in the house for the On the Run Tour in Houston , at Minute Maid Park . The campaign " exceeded expectations " , with 2 @,@ 500 people donating over 10 tonnes of food . 
 On May 17 , 2014 , an official video in a faux movie trailer style starring Beyoncé and Jay Z was released entitled " Run " , featuring " Part II ( On the Run ) " serving as background music . The video , which features multiple celebrity cameos including Don Cheadle , Guillermo Díaz , Jake Gyllenhaal , Kidada Jones , Rashida Jones , Blake Lively , Emmy Rossum and Sean Penn , shows Beyoncé and Jay Z out on a Bonnie and Clyde expedition , filled with action , crime , love and guns . Multiple other snippets of tracks from Magna Carta Holy Grail carry the video , alongside " Part II ( On the Run ) " . The video notably ended stating " coming never " , indicating that the trailer was in fact never going to be a full feature film . The video was directed by Melina Matsoukas . One of the many outfits worn by Beyoncé in the video was a Givenchy lace pant suit , and was commented to add an angelic feel to the contrasting , violent run of the narrative . 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 The concert opened with a black @-@ and @-@ white video on the screen accompanied by sirens as Beyoncé and Jay Z appeared onstage surrounded by smoke . The duo started performing the song " ' 03 Bonnie & Clyde " with Beyoncé wearing a fishnet see @-@ through mask and Jay Z wearing black sunglasses , a star @-@ speckled shirt , black jacket and gold chains . The pair went on to perform " Upgrade U " as the second song during the set . The opening run from " ' 03 Bonnie & Clyde to " Upgrade U " set the tone . " Crazy in Love " was performed by the duo among purple lights , smoke , and strobe lights with funky horns in the background . After the performance of the song , " Diamonds from Sierra Leone " began and Beyoncé left the stage as Jay Z continued singing . He performed " Niggas in Paris " alone on stage before being quickly joined by Beyoncé again for the performance of " Tom Ford " . She returned to the stage with a military cap and sang the background vocals for the song . A performance of " Run the World ( Girls ) " followed with Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie 's words from " Flawless " appearing on the screen and the latter song was sung by the singer while dancing with her background dancers . A short snippet of " Yoncé " was performed afterwards . An a cappella performance of " Big Pimpin ' " followed accompanied by vintage videos and party scenes on the screen with Jay @-@ Z wearing a fedora . Beyoncé performed " Naughty Girl " dressed in a bodysuit as she was immediately joined by Jay @-@ Z for " Big Pimpin ' " . 
 Beyoncé appeared on stage seated in a glass chair , wearing a full @-@ length sequined bodysuit and performed dancehall choreography to " Ring the Alarm " before continuing with " On to the Next One " along with Jay @-@ Z. " Clique " followed with Beyoncé dressed in hooded leather as montage of war images and fireballs were shown on the screen . During the song , Beyonce shortly sang a remixed version of her " Diva " and went on singing " Baby Boy " . She reappeared on stage dressed in a black drop @-@ sleeve lace for the performance of " Haunted " . " Drunk in Love " was performed with Beyoncé doing a chair dance and Jay @-@ Z appeared during the end to rap his verse . " Public Service Announcement " and " Why Don 't You Love Me " followed with the latter performance being accompanied by the French dancing duo Les Twins . For " Holy Grail " , Justin Timberlake 's vocals in the studio version were replaced with Beyoncé 's . " Partition " featured a new rap verse sang by Jay @-@ Z and Beyoncé performed it with a pole choreography along with other female dancers . A video with allusions from " Part II ( On the Run ) " showing Beyoncé covered in blood in a lineup and glass shattering preceded " 99 Problems " . " If I Were a Boy " followed with a cover of Lauryn Hill 's " Ex @-@ Factor " afterwards . Beyoncé moved to a stage in the middle of the stadium dressed as a bride in white with a floor @-@ length bridal veil and continued with a performance of " Resentment " seated . She continued with " Love on Top " which was performed as a tribute to Michael Jackson . 
 " Hard Knock Life ( Ghetto Anthem ) " was performed by Jay @-@ Z with black and white shots of Brooklyn . Beyoncé appeared on stage again to perform " Pretty Hurts " in a leather @-@ studded jacket with the word " Texas " emblazoned across the back . The pair moved to the mini @-@ stage for the performances of " Part II ( On the Run ) " and " Young Forever " . Home videos of the couples ' daughter Blue Ivy appeared on the screen and an image of " The Carters " written in the sand followed . One of the short projections on the screen showed footage of the pair 's wedding ceremony in April 2008 along with their " IV " tattoos , as well as a pregnant Beyoncé showing her bare stomach , with Jay @-@ Z behind , putting the surrogacy and fake pregnancy rumors that have appeared since 2011 to rest . " Lift Off " was performed as the last song on the set , serving as an outro . During the performance , Beyoncé changed her costumes numerous times . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The opening night of the tour received generally positive reviews : USA Today 's Erica K. Landau praised the Miami concert , summarizing it as " [ a ] tantalizing spectacle , [ with ] triumphant vocals , palpable sensuality and booty @-@ shaking anthems " . She further described the performance as integrated adding that , " the coordination is not just remarkable , it 's the absolute best way that two of the world 's best performers can deliver a show that proves why they 're on top together " . MTV News editor Rebecca Thomas praised the duo 's united performance , adding that they demonstrated how to share a stage , " egos aside : They toggled , repeatedly , and mostly seamlessly from one megastar catalog to the other and took fan @-@ favorites in surprising new directions — ones that imbued them with pathos that hadn 't been there before . " Miami New Times Kat Bein felt that the chemistry between the couple was not what it could have been , with Beyoncé reportedly shaking off Jay @-@ Z 's kisses or turning away during his " doting playfulness " , however Bein added that this could have been merely a playful act for the stage . She felt that potential " witty banter " between the couple was lost with the use of the video pieces between the songs . Jon Caramanica in a review for The New York Times opined that each entertainer gave the other the opportunity to be the center of attention , while acknowledging their different types of success . He concluded " Jay Z allowed for breezy enjoyment ; Beyoncé demanded full and reverent attention " . 
 The following concerts for the duration of the tour were also met with high praise from critics : <unk> J. Howze of New Pittsburgh Courier praised the " consistent " show in Cincinnati , stating " The duo has proven numerous times that their union , professionally and personally , is unstoppable . " Howze concluded that the show was definitely a " couples concert " meant to be " enjoy [ ed ] " with a love partner . CityBeat 's Jac Kern , who attended the same show praised the duo for performing hard while fully using both of the two stages and interacting with the crowd . However he also felt that intimate moments between the couple on stage were " possibly staged " . The production of the tour was stated to be both large and minimal by The Boston Globe writer James Read who commented that only a few performers could manage to pull off a production of On The Run 's scale . He continued his review , " Nor is there much to behold beyond its stars : no long catwalks , elaborate sets , or even a visible band . With Beyoncé and Jay Z , two natural @-@ born entertainers , you do not need much more . " Mesfin Fekadu of the Associated Press reported that the set list of the show emulated a conversation told through songs ; he noted that despite the concert being a collaborative tour , " it was the performers ' emotional solo material that made their presence as a collaborative duo strong and resilient " . The first Canadian show of the tour was again well received by critics . Graham Slaughter of the Toronto Star concluded in his review , " If there 's anything to be learned from the On the Run tour , it 's that tight timing , a dynamic storyline and legendary talent make a 42 @-@ song concert not just enjoyable , but rather unforgettable . Performers be warned : the bar on dual concerts has forever been raised . " Lorraine Ali of the Los Angeles Times who attended the first of two shows in Pasadena , California , also gave a positive review noting that the concert showcased how a marriage should work with the spouses " balancing out each other 's weaknesses with individual strengths " on stage . Ali went on praising the stage interactions between the pair such as kissing and toggling and concluded , " Whether it was a carefully orchestrated act or not , they are a great team . " 
 The only European shows in Paris , France , were also lauded by critics . Lewis Corner of Digital Spy gave the second Parisian show a five star review . He praised the performance abilities of both artists , explaining " When left to [ Jay @-@ Z 's ] own devices on stage , the rapper is forceful and beguiling . It takes little for him to have thousands waving their hands to ' Tom Ford ' , as he looks dapper in honour of the designer . But when Beyoncé rises up out of the stage in a denim military outfit to the question ' bad bitch ? ' and then storms into ' Run The World ( Girls ) ' , the track 's sentiment couldn 't resound more . Without doubt , she lives up to her hype as one of the world 's best performers . Slick movement , tight choreography , innocent attitude and effortless vocals instantly escalate the atmosphere of the show . " Simon Harper of Clash felt that both performers had immediately apparent different performance approaches and both commanded an " incredible presence and deafening screams from the French crowd " , however concluded that Beyoncé just finished on top as the better of the two , finalising his all positive review with " The music world 's most powerful and influential partnership couldn 't fail to demonstrate the reasons for their rise to dominance ... As the On The Run tour comes to its conclusion , it 's clear to see that Mrs. Carter emerges on top . But damn , it was a good race to watch . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Tickets for the tour were priced at $ 40 to $ 275 , so that wherever fans were on the " ticket chain " , they had an opportunity to attend the show . " We made sure we had affordable tickets as well as the higher @-@ priced tickets that we know the market can bear . Pricing went right across the spectrum , " promoters explained . Jesse Lawrence of Forbes stated that demand for the tour was " through the roof " and that the On the Run Tour was " guaranteed to be one of the biggest tours in recent years . " Shortly after pre @-@ sales for the tour began , tickets had already started to appear on the secondary ticketing market . In the same article , Lawrence explained how with an average ticket price of $ 342 @.@ 67 on the secondary market , the On the Run Tour was " head and shoulders above the rest " , having a higher average ticket price than both Beyoncé and Jay @-@ Z 's previous aforementioned solo tours , Jay @-@ Z 's previous co @-@ headlining tours with Justin Timberlake and Eminem , as well as The Monster Tour ; the then upcoming co @-@ headlining tour from Rihanna and Eminem . 
 Billboard reported that the On the Run Tour was " already one of the summer concert season 's hottest engagements " and noted that tickets had sold out in minutes for multiple dates . Due to the large demand , extra dates were added in East Rutherford , San Francisco and Pasadena following the first shows in each city selling out . The second Rose Bowl stadium date in Pasadena , California , again had to await approval from the Pasadena City Council for the aforementioned reason that the Rose Bowl has a cap of twelve events per year and all other events exceeding this limit require approval from the city council . On June 13 , 2014 , two Paris dates of the tour were announced , set to be performed at the Stade de France . The dates were labelled as the exclusive , only European shows of the On the Run Tour . Within two hours of going on general sale , 90 @,@ 000 tickets were sold between the two Paris shows . Stephanie Smith of Page Six reported that Beyoncé and Jay @-@ Z were paid $ 4 million per show of the tour , " guaranteed and independent of ticket sales " . This totalled to a $ 84 million total payout to the couple throughout the duration of the tour . 
 Live Nation reported to Billboard that the tour had already sold 750 @,@ 000 tickets and was on pace to reach 850 @,@ 000 total tickets sold in North America . It was also noted that the tour was averaging close to $ 5 @.@ 2 million per show in current sales and that the On the Run Tour would finish as " one of the most successful tours of the year " . On the same day , Forbes reported that the summer tour would most likely finish as the second most successful tour of all time by one measure when looking at the average gross per show , which then stood at a predicted $ 5 million . In August 2014 , Omar Al @-@ Joulani of North American touring for Live Nation confirmed that the On the Run Tour had officially passed $ 100 million in ticket sales in the 19 North American shows alone , with attendance topping out at more than the previously predicted 850 @,@ 000 . Al @-@ Joulani also noted the triumph of the tour outside of the " must play " markets such as New York City or Los Angeles , stating the tour routed into some secondary touring markets like Cincinnati , New Orleans and Seattle “ that turned out to be wildly successful " . " We had the greatest time in those markets " said Al @-@ Joulani . 
 In September 2014 , the North American leg of the tour was individually reported to Billboard Boxscore . Beyoncé and Jay @-@ Z landed atop of the Hot Tours chart with 19 sold out shows . The most commercially successful performances of the tour were venues with double bookings , found in East Rutherford , grossing $ 11 @.@ 5 million , Pasadena grossing $ 10 @.@ 9 million and San Francisco , generating $ 8 @.@ 8 million . The tour was announced as the 5th highest grossing tour of 2014 in Pollstar 's annual highest grossing tours chart , with a total revenue of $ 109 @.@ 7 million . The tour also had a total attendance of 979 @,@ 781 and an average attendance of 57 @,@ 634 per city . 
 = = = Records = = = 
 At the July 1 , 2014 concert in Foxborough , Jay @-@ Z became the first rapper to headline Gillette Stadium . Baltimore Ravens senior manager for ticket sales Mike Burke reported that the On the Run Tour was the fastest selling concert ever at the M & T Bank Stadium , stating that unlike other shows there , " this sold out every seat almost instantly . I guess that 's the power of Beyoncé . " 
 = = Broadcasts and recordings = = 
 In July 2014 , it was announced that HBO would exclusively air the On the Run Tour in full at some point in September , following the upcoming filming of the concerts in Paris , France at the scheduled September 12 and 13 , 2014 shows in the city . The shows were shot by music video director Jonas Åkerlund and aired on the channel on September 20 , 2014 . HBO used 20 different cameras to record the two shows . The concert special received a 0 @.@ 5 rating of adults aged 18 – 49 , and aired to 888 @,@ 000 viewers . Following the airing of the special , videos of the performances of " Young Forever " / " Halo " and " Flawless ( remix ) " featuring Nicki Minaj , were uploaded to Beyoncé 's official YouTube and Vevo account . 
 In September 2014 , it was announced that a trilogy of videos entitled " Bang Bang " were to be released as a short film leading up to the broadcast of the tour special . The short film ( in which multiple scenes are found in video interludes and backdrops throughout the tour ) was directed by New York @-@ based filmmaker and photographer <unk> Rimmasch . Together with war photographer William Kaner , Rimmasch put together the filmmaking approach and aesthetic of the series . Inspired by French New Wave cinema , the short film was created using custom camera rigs that Rimmasch had designed , 50 @-@ year @-@ old Russian lenses and lighting effects by Archie <unk> and Scott Spencer and followed an incredibly fast , shoot @-@ from @-@ the @-@ hip recording style . However , following the release of part one of the trilogy , the remaining two videos never came to surface on their scheduled release dates . When asked about this ( and the deletion of part one from its original upload source ) , Rimmasch simply stated " no comment " . In February 2015 , all 3 videos resurfaced online , debuting on <unk> 
 = = Set list = = 
 This set list is representative of the first performance in East Rutherford , New Jersey . It does not represent all concerts for the duration of the tour . 
 = = Shows = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits and personnel are taken from the Official On the Run Tour Program . 
 = Saving Private Brian = 
 " Saving Private Brian " is the fourth episode of season five of Family Guy , an episode produced for Season 4 . The episode originally broadcast on November 5 , 2006 . The episode follows Stewie and Brian after they unintentionally join the United States Army , and end up leaving to serve in Iraq , only to return home when the war ends . Meanwhile , Chris joins a heavy metal band , and develops an anti @-@ social attitude , which requires Marilyn Manson to intervene . 
 The episode was written by Cherry Chevapravatdumrong and directed by Cyndi Tang . It received mostly positive reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 8 @.@ 45 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Gary Cole , Louis Gossett , Jr . , Juanita Jennings , Phil LaMarr , Samm Levine , Rachael MacFarlane , Denis Martel , Enn Reitel , Stacey Scowley , Fred Tatasciore and Wally Wingert , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A U.S. Army recruitment officer comes to the high school to hold an assembly and entices the students with a glamorized , deceptive video presentation , which impresses every one including Chris . Chris returns home and tells the family during dinner that he wants to enlist , but Lois attempts to dissuade him , for the military is not a place for him . The next day , while driving Stewie to <unk> Play & Music for parachute day , Brian decides to take a detour to the recruitment office to scold the recruiting officer for trying to trick Chris through devious means . The two arrive at the office but the wait is long ; when Brian goes to top @-@ up the parking meter Stewie walks into the office . Stewie ends up enlisting in the Army and signs Brian up as well when told there " is a $ 100 bonus for signing up a buddy . " Brian returns and is shocked . Brian and Stewie begin basic training , but Brian becomes stressed from the discipline and decides one night to leave . Stewie wakes up and finds Brian packing his suitcase , but he manages to talk him out of leaving , insisting that he had never finished anything significant in his life and that the Army will provide him the discipline . With this , Brian decides to stay . After they complete their training , Stewie and Brian are deployed to Iraq . Meantime , the two are patrolling the streets of a village , commenting on the " good situation so far " ; however , after the pair get caught up in a terrorist attack , they become dissuaded and decide to find a way to get out of the Army . They first attempt to be discharged by pretending to be homosexual ( only to discover that one of their superiors is gay ) . As a last resort , they attempt to get " Wounded in Action " by shooting each other in the foot ; they do this only to find out that the Army now takes anyone no matter what , going so far as to allow two corpses to guard the ammunition . They are then told that democracy has kicked in and the war is over , thus meaning all the soldiers can return to the United States . 
 Meanwhile , to distract Chris from the Army , Peter takes him to look at extracurricular activities at his school , where he is accepted into a heavy metal band . Chris develops a rebellious and rude attitude after joining the band , and he significantly changes his appearance . Peter and Lois , worried about his behavior , search his room to find the cause of his behavioral change ; Lois becomes convinced it is a result of listening to the violent lyrics from his music . In addition , they find a poster shrine to Marilyn Manson in his closet , and become convinced that his music corrupted their son . They decide to track down Manson and find him at the Grammys Music Awards . When they find Manson , Peter punches him in the face and Lois accuses him for destroying their son with his songs . Manson , played by writer Tom Devanney , laughing at " this old thing again " , offers to help them with Chris . Manson returns to the Griffin house with Peter and Lois , where he tells Chris and his bandmates that it is important to respect and obey their parents , and in addition to mending the tension between them , Manson ends the episode by giving Peter some more parental advice : Peter and Chris should start fishing . 
 = = Production = = 
 The scene in which recruitment officers enter public schools in an attempt to recruit children is based on real life , as the Army has often sent <unk> to high schools for seniors . More recently they have started with the younger grades even though there is a minimum age for enlistment . The show also featured the last ( living ) appearance of Johnny and Vern , the vaudeville performers ; Stewie shoots them because , as MacFarlane comments , " people were getting sick of them " , with David Goodman adding that " the show was relying on them too much " . The duo return in " Back to the Woods " , with Vern as a ghost and Johnny in Hell . 
 Upon the receiving of the news that democracy has come to Iraq , one scene shows a man having a knife held to his throat , which caused some controversy after the episode was broadcast . Stewie also knowingly breaks the fourth wall in the episode , by speaking in a manner as if he were talking to the audience . In one scene , Stewie mentions the time " Peter went after that hockey coach " ( making a veiled reference to " Hockey Dad " Thomas Junta ) , in the expectation of a cutaway gag . However , nothing happens , and Stewie comments , " Oh , no clip ? Thought we had a clip " . This scene was described as being a one off . 
 In addition to the regular cast , actor Gary Cole , actor Louis Gossett , Jr . , actress Juanita Jennings , voice actor Phil LaMarr , actor Samm Levine , voice actress Rachael MacFarlane , actor Denis Martel , voice actor Enn Reitel , actress Stacey Scowley , voice actor Fred Tatasciore and voice actor Wally Wingert guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Alex Breckenridge , Chris Cox , writer Tom Devanney , actor Ralph Garman , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin and writer John Viener made minor appearances . Actor Adam West also has a guest appearance in the episode . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The title is a pun on Steven Spielberg 's hit war film Saving Private Ryan . Several scenes from the Army training contained real @-@ life references ; when the recruits are marching , they begin to sing and dance ; this is a reference to West Side Story . Additionally , the song playing during the recruitment video bears a close resemblance to the Def Leppard song " Pour Some Sugar On Me " . When Peter visits a psychiatrist , the psychiatrist is Dr. Katz ( from Comedy Central ) . The training is similar to that in the film Full Metal Jacket , also spoofing the scene when the Sergeant found contraband food . The Sergeant punishes Brian by informing him that he will have to listen to singles from Chris Gaines ' album : this entire scene was based on a sketch from Saturday Night Live approximately 10 years ago . Peter references actor Gregory Peck and his " kids " with a cutaway gag featuring four Pecks in a car . Brian shown performing numerous different tasks to complete his army training is a reference to An Officer and a Gentleman , with the music playing in the background from Stripes . The lyrics Lois reads from the Wu @-@ Tang Clan album is from the song " Bring Da Ruckus " , the first track from their album Enter the Wu @-@ Tang ( 36 Chambers ) . The scene where Marilyn Manson tells Chris about nutrition is a reference to an episode of Clone High , where Manson leads a musical scene about the importance of the food pyramid . The sign outside of the building where the Grammys are being held says " Welcome to the Grammys ( Not You , Fred Durst ) " , a reference to the lead singer of Limp Bizkit . Stewie misunderstands the location of their deployment to be " Fraggle Ir @-@ Rock " , rather than Iraq , referring to the TV show Fraggle Rock . The scene where Zinedine Zidane headbutts an old lady while delivering her a birthday cake is based on the incident that happened in the 2006 FIFA World Cup final , when Zidane headbutted Marco Materazzi . When Brian is frustrated with the recruits recommending Chris to join the Army , Stewie says that 10 % of his high school class is off to fight another battle . After hearing Stewie , Brian says that he was plagiarizing from The Onion , since Brian read about the war in Iraq in The Onion . During the obstacle course , Brian rides a unicycle , solves a Rubik 's Cube , plays Perfection , finds Waldo , offers a couple eating a salad at a dinner table some fresh pepper , and consoles a woman who was just dumped by her boyfriend . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a significant decrease from the previous week , the episode was viewed in 8 @.@ 45 million homes in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 0 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , slightly being edged out by The Simpsons , while still winning over series creator Seth MacFarlane 's second show American Dad ! . 
 IGN commented that the portrayal of " service in the military is a hilarious satire of the current state of our military in Iraq " . Iverson was also impressed with the episode 's random flashback gags , commenting that " normally they are only groan @-@ worthy " , receiving a final rating of 9 / 10 . Brett Love of TV Squad noted that " The Full Metal Jacket / Stripes angle for Stewie and Brian was great , right down to the Stripes music during the obstacle course . And Louis Gossett , Jr. as Sergeant <unk> is a nice bit of casting " . 
 = Dame Tu Amor ( song ) = 
 " Dame Tu Amor " ( English : " Give Me Your Love " ) is a song recorded by American recording artist Selena for her second LP record , Alpha ( 1986 ) . Lyrically , the narrator addresses her infatuation to give her his love as she is longing for him to do so with a kiss that ensures admiration for her . The themes explored in the song suggest solicit love . " Dame Tu Amor " is a ranchera ballad with cumbia influences . It was composed by Richard Brooks , Ricky Vela , and Selena 's father and manager , Abraham Quintanilla , Jr .. Critics praised the song for its instrumentation and lyrical content and has since been in several compilation albums following Selena 's death in 1995 . " Dame Tu Amor " peaked at number 31 on the US Billboard Hot Ringtones chart in 2006 . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Dame Tu Amor " was written in 1985 by Richard Brooks , keyboardist for Selena y Los Dinos — Ricky Vela — and Selena 's father and manager , Abraham Quintanilla , Jr . Selena was 14 years old during recording sessions for the song , and it was later included on her second LP record , Alpha , in 1986 . The recording was arranged by Brian " Red " Moore , a family friend , and Ray Paz . Rolando Hernandez performed the guitar parts , while Vela used his keyboards to record the piano parts of the song . While additional vocals were provided by former guitarist of the group , Roger Garcia . 
 = = Critical reception and release = = 
 " Dame Tu Amor " was well received by music critics . Josh Kun of Salon noted that the remix version , found on the triple box @-@ set Anthology , has " enough brass and string to make it sound like a Bacharach @-@ penned <unk> . " Mario Tarradell of The Dallas Morning News called the recording an " infectious cumbia [ song ] . " The recording has been released in several compilation albums including , Anthology ( 1998 ) , Y Sus <unk> , Vol . 1 ( 2003 ) , Y Sus <unk> , Vol . 2 ( 2004 ) and Classic Series , Vol . 1 ( 2006 ) . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On the week ending September 23 , 2006 , " Dame Tu Amor " debuted and peaked at number 31 on the US Billboard Hot Ringtones chart . 
 = Type Ia supernova = 
 A type Ia supernova is a type of supernova that occurs in binary systems ( two stars orbiting one another ) in which one of the stars is a white dwarf . The other star can be anything from a giant star to an even smaller white dwarf . However , white dwarfs of the common carbon – oxygen variety are capable of further fusion reactions that release a great deal of energy if their temperatures rise high enough . 
 Physically , carbon – oxygen white dwarfs with a low rate of rotation are limited to below 1 @.@ 38 solar masses ( M ☉ ) . Beyond this , they re @-@ ignite and in some cases trigger a supernova explosion . Somewhat confusingly , this limit is often referred to as the Chandrasekhar mass , despite being marginally different from the absolute Chandrasekhar limit where electron degeneracy pressure is unable to prevent catastrophic collapse . If a white dwarf gradually accretes mass from a binary companion , the general hypothesis is that its core will reach the ignition temperature for carbon fusion as it approaches the limit . If the white dwarf merges with another white dwarf ( a very rare event ) , it will momentarily exceed the limit and begin to collapse , again raising its temperature past the nuclear fusion ignition point . Within a few seconds of initiation of nuclear fusion , a substantial fraction of the matter in the white dwarf undergoes a runaway reaction , releasing enough energy ( 1 – 2 × 1044 J ) to unbind the star in a supernova explosion . 
 This type Ia category of supernovae produces consistent peak luminosity because of the uniform mass of white dwarfs that explode via the accretion mechanism . The stability of this value allows these explosions to be used as standard candles to measure the distance to their host galaxies because the visual magnitude of the supernovae depends primarily on the distance . 
 In May 2015 , NASA reported that the Kepler space observatory observed <unk> 2011b , a Type Ia supernova in the process of exploding . Details of the pre @-@ nova moments may help scientists better understand dark energy . 
 = = Consensus model = = 
 The Type Ia supernova is a sub @-@ category in the Minkowski @-@ Zwicky supernova classification scheme , which was devised by American astronomer Rudolph Minkowski and Swiss astronomer Fritz Zwicky . There are several means by which a supernova of this type can form , but they share a common underlying mechanism . Theoretical astronomers long believed the progenitor star for this type of supernova is a white dwarf and empirical evidence for this was found in 2014 when a Type Ia supernova was observed in the galaxy Messier 82 . When a slowly @-@ rotating carbon @-@ oxygen white dwarf accretes matter from a companion , it can exceed the Chandrasekhar limit of about 1 @.@ 44 M ☉ , beyond which it can no longer support its weight with electron degeneracy pressure . In the absence of a countervailing process , the white dwarf would collapse to form a neutron star , in an accretion induced non @-@ ejective process , as normally occurs in the case of a white dwarf that is primarily composed of magnesium , neon , and oxygen . 
 The current view among astronomers who model Type Ia supernova explosions , however , is that this limit is never actually attained and collapse is never initiated . Instead , the increase in pressure and density due to the increasing weight raises the temperature of the core , and as the white dwarf approaches about 99 % of the limit , a period of convection ensues , lasting approximately 1 @,@ 000 years . At some point in this simmering phase , a deflagration flame front is born , powered by carbon fusion . The details of the ignition are still unknown , including the location and number of points where the flame begins . Oxygen fusion is initiated shortly thereafter , but this fuel is not consumed as completely as carbon . 
 Once fusion has begun , the temperature of the white dwarf starts to rise . A main sequence star supported by thermal pressure would expand and cool which automatically counterbalances an increase in thermal energy . However , degeneracy pressure is independent of temperature ; the white dwarf is unable to regulate the fusion process in the manner of normal stars , so it is vulnerable to a runaway fusion reaction . The flame accelerates dramatically , in part due to the Rayleigh – Taylor instability and interactions with turbulence . It is still a matter of considerable debate whether this flame transforms into a supersonic detonation from a subsonic deflagration . 
 Regardless of the exact details of this nuclear fusion , it is generally accepted that a substantial fraction of the carbon and oxygen in the white dwarf are converted into heavier elements within a period of only a few seconds , raising the internal temperature to billions of degrees . This energy release from thermonuclear fusion ( 1 – 2 × 1044 J ) is more than enough to unbind the star ; that is , the individual particles making up the white dwarf gain enough kinetic energy to fly apart from each other . The star explodes violently and releases a shock wave in which matter is typically ejected at speeds on the order of 5 @,@ 000 – 20000 km / s , roughly 6 % of the speed of light . The energy released in the explosion also causes an extreme increase in luminosity . The typical visual absolute magnitude of Type Ia supernovae is Mv = − 19 @.@ 3 ( about 5 billion times brighter than the Sun ) , with little variation . 
 The theory of this type of supernovae is similar to that of novae , in which a white dwarf accretes matter more slowly and does not approach the Chandrasekhar limit . In the case of a nova , the in @-@ falling matter causes a hydrogen fusion surface explosion that does not disrupt the star . This type of supernova differs from a core @-@ collapse supernova , which is caused by the cataclysmic explosion of the outer layers of a massive star as its core implodes . 
 = = Formation = = 
 = = = Single degenerate progenitors = = = 
 One model for the formation of this category of supernova is a close binary star system . The progenitor binary system consists of main sequence stars , with the primary possessing more mass than the secondary . Being greater in mass , the primary is the first of the pair to evolve onto the asymptotic giant branch , where the star 's envelope expands considerably . If the two stars share a common envelope then the system can lose significant amounts of mass , reducing the angular momentum , orbital radius and period . After the primary has degenerated into a white dwarf , the secondary star later evolves into a red giant and the stage is set for mass accretion onto the primary . During this final shared @-@ envelope phase , the two stars spiral in closer together as angular momentum is lost . The resulting orbit can have a period as brief as a few hours . If the accretion continues long enough , the white dwarf may eventually approach the Chandrasekhar limit . 
 The white dwarf companion could also accrete matter from other types of companions , including a subgiant or ( if the orbit is sufficiently close ) even a main sequence star . The actual evolutionary process during this accretion stage remains uncertain , as it can depend both on the rate of accretion and the transfer of angular momentum to the white dwarf companion . 
 It has been estimated that single degenerate progenitors account for no more than 20 % of all Type Ia supernovae . 
 = = = Double degenerate progenitors = = = 
 A second possible mechanism for triggering a Type Ia supernova is the merger of two white dwarfs whose combined mass exceeds the Chandrasekhar limit . The resulting merger is called a super @-@ Chandrasekhar mass white dwarf . In such a case , the total mass would not be constrained by the Chandrasekhar limit . 
 Collisions of solitary stars within the Milky Way occur only once every 107 @-@ 1013 years ; far less frequently than the appearance of novae . Collisions occur with greater frequency in the dense core regions of globular clusters ( cf. blue stragglers ) . A likely scenario is a collision with a binary star system , or between two binary systems containing white dwarfs . This collision can leave behind a close binary system of two white dwarfs . Their orbit decays and they merge through their shared envelope . However , a study based on SDSS spectra found 15 double systems of the 4 @,@ 000 white dwarfs tested , implying a double white dwarf merger every 100 years in the Milky Way . Conveniently , this rate matches the number of Type Ia supernovae detected in our neighborhood . 
 A double degenerate scenario is one of several explanations proposed for the anomalously massive ( 2 M ☉ ) progenitor of the SN <unk> . It is the only possible explanation for <unk> <unk> @-@ 67 @.@ 5 , as all possible models with only one white dwarf have been ruled out . It has also been strongly suggested for SN 1006 , given that no companion star remnant has been found there . Observations made with NASA 's Swift space telescope ruled out existing supergiant or giant companion stars of every Type Ia supernovae studied . The supergiant companion 's blown out outer shell should emit X @-@ rays , but this glow was not detected by Swift 's <unk> ( X @-@ Ray telescope ) in the 53 closest supernova remnants . For 12 Type Ia supernovae observed within 10 days of the explosion , the satellite 's <unk> ( Ultraviolet / Optical Telescope ) showed no ultraviolet radiation originating from the heated companion star 's surface hit by the supernova shock wave , meaning there were no red giants or larger stars orbiting those supernova progenitors . In the case of SN 2011fe , the companion star must have been smaller than the Sun , if it existed . The Chandra X @-@ ray Observatory revealed that the X @-@ ray radiation of five elliptical galaxies and the bulge of the Andromeda galaxy is 30 @-@ 50 times fainter than expected . X @-@ ray radiation should be emitted by the accretion discs of Type Ia supernova progenitors . The missing radiation indicates that few white dwarfs possess accretion discs , ruling out the common , accretion @-@ based model of Ia supernovae . Inward spiraling white dwarf pairs must be strong sources of gravitational waves , but this cannot be detected as of 2012 . 
 Double degenerate scenarios raise questions about the applicability of Type Ia supernovae as standard candles , since total mass of the two merging white dwarfs varies significantly , meaning luminosity also varies . 
 = = = Type Iax = = = 
 It has been proposed that a group of sub @-@ luminous supernovae that occur when helium accretes onto a white dwarf should be classified as Type Iax . This type of supernova may not always completely destroy the white dwarf progenitor . 
 = = Observation = = 
 Unlike the other types of supernovae , Type Ia supernovae generally occur in all types of galaxies , including ellipticals . They show no preference for regions of current stellar formation . As white dwarf stars form at the end of a star 's main sequence evolutionary period , such a long @-@ lived star system may have wandered far from the region where it originally formed . Thereafter a close binary system may spend another million years in the mass transfer stage ( possibly forming persistent nova outbursts ) before the conditions are ripe for a Type Ia supernova to occur . 
 A long @-@ standing problem in astronomy has been the identification of supernova progenitors . Direct observation of a progenitor would provide useful constraints on supernova models . As of 2006 , the search for such a progenitor had been ongoing for longer than a century . Observation of the supernova SN 2011fe has provided useful constraints . Previous observations with the Hubble Space Telescope did not show a star at the position of the event , thereby excluding a red giant as the source . The expanding plasma from the explosion was found to contain carbon and oxygen , making it likely the progenitor was a white dwarf primarily composed of these elements . Similarly , observations of the nearby SN PTF <unk> , discovered January 16 , 2011 ( UT ) by the Palomar Transient Factory ( PTF ) , lead to the conclusion that this explosion arises from single @-@ degenerate progenitor , with a red giant companion , thus suggesting there is no single progenitor path to SN Ia . Direct observations of the progenitor of <unk> were reported in the August 24 edition of Science and support this conclusion , and also show that the progenitor star experienced periodic nova eruptions before the supernova - another surprising discovery . However , later analysis revealed that the circumstellar material ( CSM ) is too massive for the single @-@ degenerate scenario , and fits better the core @-@ degenerate scenario . 
 = = = Light curve = = = 
 Type Ia supernovae have a characteristic light curve , their graph of luminosity as a function of time after the explosion . Near the time of maximum luminosity , the spectrum contains lines of intermediate @-@ mass elements from oxygen to calcium ; these are the main constituents of the outer layers of the star . Months after the explosion , when the outer layers have expanded to the point of transparency , the spectrum is dominated by light emitted by material near the core of the star , heavy elements synthesized during the explosion ; most prominently isotopes close to the mass of iron ( or iron peak elements ) . The radioactive decay of nickel @-@ 56 through cobalt @-@ 56 to iron @-@ 56 produces high @-@ energy photons which dominate the energy output of the ejecta at intermediate to late times . 
 The use of Type Ia supernovae to measure precise distances was pioneered by a collaboration of Chilean and US astronomers , the <unk> / Tololo Supernova Survey . In a series of papers in the 1990s the survey showed that while Type Ia supernovae do not all reach the same peak luminosity , a single parameter measured from the light curve can be used to correct <unk> Type Ia supernovae to standard candle values . The original correction to standard candle value is known as the Phillips relationship and was shown by this group to be able to measure relative distances to 7 % accuracy . The cause of this uniformity in peak brightness is related to the amount of nickel @-@ 56 produced in white dwarfs presumably exploding near the Chandrasekhar limit . 
 The similarity in the absolute luminosity profiles of nearly all known Type Ia supernovae has led to their use as a secondary standard candle in extragalactic astronomy . Improved calibrations of the Cepheid variable distance scale and direct geometric distance measurements to NGC 4258 from the dynamics of maser emission when combined with the Hubble diagram of the Type Ia supernova distances have led to an improved value of the Hubble constant . 
 In 1998 , observations of distant Type Ia supernovae indicated the unexpected result that the Universe seems to undergo an accelerating expansion . Three members from two teams were subsequently awarded Nobel Prizes for this discovery . 
 = = Two distinct types = = 
 Recently it has been discovered that type Ia supernovae which were considered the same are in fact different , moreover a form of the type Ia supernova which is relatively infrequent today was far more common earlier in the history of the universe . This could have far reaching cosmological significance and could lead to revision of estimation of the rate of expansion of the universe and the prevalence of dark energy . More research is needed . 
 = I Can See the Whole Room ... and There 's Nobody in It ! = 
 I Can See the Whole Room ... and There 's Nobody in It ! ( sometimes I Can See the Whole Room and There 's Nobody in It ! or simply I Can See the Whole Room ! ) is a 1961 painting by Roy Lichtenstein . It is a painting of a man looking through a peephole . It formerly held the record for highest auction price for a Lichtenstein painting . 
 The work is based on a William <unk> @-@ drawn comics panel from a Steve Roper cartoon . Lichtenstein 's derivation augments the presentation of the narrative and expands the use of color in the image . As with the original the image employs the theme of vision , and focuses specifically on mechanized vision as well as monocularity . 
 = = Background = = 
 Based on a 1961 William <unk> drawing for a Steve Roper cartoon story published by the Publishers Syndicate on August 6 , 1961 , Lichtenstein ’ s I Can See the Whole Room ! ... and There 's Nobody in It ! ( 1961 ) measures four @-@ foot by four @-@ foot and is in graphite and oil . The painting depicts a man looking through a hole in a door . His finger is extended to open a circular peephole , while simultaneously allowing the artist to present his face . The painting also uses a speech balloon . 
 It was sold by collector Courtney Sale Ross for $ 43 @.@ 2 million , double its estimate , at Christie 's in New York City in November 2011 ; the seller 's husband , Steve Ross had acquired it at auction in 1988 for $ 2 @.@ 1 million . The painting originally sold for $ 550 in 1961 . It surpassed the $ 42 @.@ 6 million record set the previous November by <unk> ... Alright ... The following May , it was surpassed by Sleeping Girl , which sold for $ 44 @.@ 8 million . 
 = = Description = = 
 The picture teases the viewer who is given the feeling that he is in a dark room being viewed by the main subject of the painting who is a man that peeks through a hole in the door . The narrative element of the image , which included a speech bubble that presents the caption " I Can See the Whole Room and There 's Nobody in It " , clarifies that the man can not see anything in the room although he has a good look at it . The work is a satirical reference to abstraction because it can be imagined as a monochrome canvas that is affected by an actor that has inserted his finger as well as a narrative that also violates this imagining . This finger is also regarded as phallic . 
 The speech bubble makes the entire canvas relevant by broadening the attention to the entire width of the painting and the curves of the bubble unite the narrative with several of the picture 's other graphical elements . Lichtenstein has added color , including all of the primary colors , while transforming the original and making reference to mechanical reproduction via Ben @-@ Day dots . Like Look Mickey , there is reason to describe this image as a self @-@ portrait of sorts . The subject is extending a finger through a circular opening , which is a self @-@ reference because it is representative of Lichtenstein 's technique of stenciling Ben @-@ day dots by pressing the fluid onto the painting surface through a screen with a device not too different in size and shape from a finger . An alternative self @-@ representation is interpreted as a singular peephole that represents the monocular subject matter of Lichtenstein 's training , while the entire canvas represents a doubt in this training 's representation of the physical body , its perception and its actual view . However , the corporeal is depicted quite adequately in the intense <unk> and the dotted coloration of the skin . 
 The work is an example of Lichtenstein 's presentation of the uncertainty of the one @-@ eyed perspective . It is considered to be a work on the subject of " focal vision and blindness " , and it is a prominent example of the theme running through Lichtenstein 's art relating to vision . He uses the narrative to emphasize this theme , while playing on both the circular peephole and the circular eyes . The depicted mechanical device , a peephole in this case , forces the vision into a monocular format . <unk> is funnelled through the primitive peephole apparatus that almost mimics a camera lens . In some senses , monocularity of this work is a strong theme that is directly embodied although only by allusion . In addition , the work is considered to be closely related to his later work , Image <unk> ( 1963 ) , which is regarded as a correction of I Can See the Whole Room ! with its glaring and aggressive <unk> . The monocularity of I Can See the Whole Room ! should be viewed as a concentrated form of monocularity , such as " the common experience of closing one eye in order to fix an object in the gaze " , but a subordinated form of monocularity that is enhanced by technology . 
 = Shaw and Crompton = 
 Shaw and Crompton is a town and civil parish within the Metropolitan Borough of Oldham , in Greater Manchester , England . The population of the civil parish at the 2011 census was 21 @,@ 065 . It lies on the River Beal at the foothills of the South Pennines , 2 @.@ 3 miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) north of Oldham , 3 @.@ 6 miles ( 5 @.@ 8 km ) southeast of Rochdale , and 8 @.@ 7 miles ( 14 km ) to the northeast of the city of Manchester . It is regularly referred to as Shaw . 
 Historically in Lancashire , Crompton ( as it was originally known ) and its surroundings have provided evidence of ancient British and Anglian activity in the area . During the Middle Ages , Crompton formed a small township of scattered woods , farmsteads , moorland , and swamp with a small and close community of families . The local lordship was weak or absent , and so Crompton failed to emerge as a manor with its own lord and court . Farming was the main industry of this broadly independent and self @-@ supporting rural area , with locals supplementing their incomes by hand @-@ loom woollen weaving in the domestic system . 
 The introduction of textile manufacture during the Industrial Revolution initiated a process of rapid and unplanned urbanisation . A building boom began in Crompton during the mid @-@ 19th century , when suitable land for factories in Oldham was becoming scarce . By the late 19th century Crompton had emerged as a densely populated mill town . Forty @-@ eight cotton mills — some of the largest in the United Kingdom — have been recorded as existing in the area . At its spinning zenith , as a result of an interwar economic boom associated with the textile industry , Shaw and Crompton was reported to have had more millionaires per capita than any other town in the world . Imports of foreign cotton goods began the decline in the region 's textile industry during the mid @-@ 20th century ; Shaw and Crompton 's last mill closed in 1989 . 
 Shaw and Crompton , which covers 4 @.@ 5 square miles ( 11 @.@ 7 km2 ) , is a predominantly suburban area of mixed affluence with a population of 21 @,@ 721 in 2001 . Its double name has been said to make it " distinctive , if not unique " . The legacy of its industrial past can be seen in its six surviving cotton mills , all of which are home to large distribution companies , among them Shop Direct Group 's Shaw National Distribution Centre , a major employer in the area . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Toponymy = = = 
 The name Shaw is derived from the Old English word <unk> , meaning " wood " . The name Crompton is also of Old English derivation , from the words <unk> or crumb , meaning " bent " or " crooked " , and ton , for " hamlet or village " . A local historian stated that " this name aptly describes the appearance of the place , with its uneven surface , its numerous mounds and hills , as though it had been crumpled up to form these ridges " . The University of Nottingham 's Institute for Name @-@ Studies has offered the suggestion that the name Crompton means " river @-@ bend settlement " , which may reflect Crompton 's location on a meander of the River Beal . 
 The dual name of both Shaw and Crompton has been said to make the town " distinctive , if not unique " , while preference of Shaw over Crompton and vice versa has been ( and to a limited extent remains ) a minor local controversy and point of confusion . Today , the single name of Shaw seems to have won preference in the locality . 
 Shaw was originally a hamlet and sub @-@ district of Crompton , and appears to have originated as the commercial and ecclesiastic centre of Crompton because of a small chapel sited there dating back to the 16th century . Before then , Whitfield had been the largest village in Crompton . In 1872 , Shaw was noted as one of three villages in Crompton . However , due to Shaw 's urbanisation following the construction of a major road from Werneth to Littleborough , and the establishment of a post office sub @-@ district named and situated in Shaw , it came to dominate Crompton . Additionally , a separate ecclesiastical parish was created for the township in 1835 , which was given the name Shaw because of the church 's location on Shaw Moor , in Crompton . The names merged to form the present day Shaw and Crompton , which boundary markers have used since at least the 1950s . 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 An early type of axe known as a palstave has been discovered on Crompton Moor , providing evidence of Bronze Age human activity . It is believed that the area was inhabited by Ancient Britons , and that the Brigantes gave the River Beal its name . An ancient track , perhaps of Roman origin , crosses the modern Buckstones Road leading to Castleshaw Roman fort in neighbouring Saddleworth . 
 In 616 Æthelfrith of Bernicia , an Anglo @-@ Saxon King , crossed the Pennines with an army and passed through Manchester to defeat the Britons in the Battle of Chester . A wave of Anglian colonists followed this military conquest and their settlements are identified by the Old English suffix ton in local place names . Royton , Middleton , Moston , Clayton , Ashton and Crompton are localities northeast of Manchester which may have been founded during that colonisation , suggesting that Crompton as a settlement could date from the 7th century . 
 During Anglo @-@ Saxon England , it is assumed from toponymic evidence that the township of Crompton formed around a predominantly Anglian community with a few Norse settlers , and within the extensive Hundred of Salfordshire . Following the Norman conquest of England , Crompton was part of a vast estate given to Roger the Poitevin , the maternal nephew of William the Conqueror . It was unmentioned in the Domesday Book of 1086 ; the first recorded use of the name Crompton for the township was discovered in legal documents relating to Cockersand Abbey near Lancaster , dating from the early 13th century . The document outlines that Gilbert de <unk> , a Norman who had acquired the land from Roger de Montbegon , granted his estate to Cockersand Abbey . The Knights Hospitaller and Whalley Abbey held small estates in the township . In 1234 , about 80 acres ( 32 ha ) of land at Whitfield in Crompton were given to the Hospitallers , a religious order that provided care for poor , sick or injured pilgrims to the Holy Land . A medieval cross has been discovered in the ruins of a house at Whitfield . 
 During the High Middle Ages , Crompton was a collection of scattered woods , farmsteads , moorland , swamp and a single corn mill , occupied by a small and close community of families . The area was thinly populated and consisted of several dispersed hamlets , including Whitfield , High Crompton , Cowlishaw , <unk> and <unk> ( above Beal ) . These hamlets were situated above the water @-@ logged valley bottoms and below the exposed high moors . Owing to complicated local arrangements of land tenure , inheritance , and absentee landlords , the local lordship was weak , and Crompton failed to emerge as a manor with its own lord and court . This slowly facilitated comparative freedoms and independence for the early people of Crompton , which encouraged the influx of families from the neighbouring parish of Rochdale , including the <unk> , Cleggs , Greaves and Milnes . 
 During the Late Middle Ages , the Buckley and Crompton families were recorded as the largest landowners in Crompton , owning land and farmsteads at Whitfield and Crompton Fold respectively . The Crompton family has a well @-@ documented history and can be traced back to the time of Magna Carta , appearing in the Assize Roll for 1245 . Crompton is indigenous to the township , and first appears as a family name in the 13th century , when the locality 's principal landowner , Hugh de la Legh , changed his family name to " de Crompton " ( of Crompton ) , to reflect the estate he possessed . The family owned a large historic house by the name of Crompton Hall , on the site of Crompton Fold . Crompton Hall first appears in historical records as early as 1442 , owned by Thomas de Crompton and his family . The original " medieval " Crompton Hall was demolished around 1848 . A second Crompton Hall , set in its own prominent forested grounds , was erected by the family — by then an influential and affluent investor in the local cotton industry — but following the death of the last remaining family members , the site was sold and , in 1950 , the house was demolished to make way for an exclusive development of bungalows . 
 Because of the poor soils and rugged terrain , Samuel Lewis said Crompton 's inhabitants were " a race of hardy and laborious men " . They have also been described as having a reputation for being a " hardy , frugal and somewhat independent breed " , which has been attributed to the tradition of absentee landlords and self @-@ sustenance in earlier times . There had been a chapel of ease at the hamlet of Shaw since at least the early 16th century , but , due to ecclesiastical arrangements for the parish of Prestwich @-@ cum @-@ Oldham , the inhabitants were obliged to contribute money towards Oldham Parish Church , which in turn had obligation to the mother Church of St Mary the Virgin at Prestwich . On several occasions during the 15th and 16th centuries , the Archdeacon of Chester had to intervene because Crompton 's inhabitants refused to contribute towards holy bread and candles used at Prestwich . In 1826 , a poll was taken regarding the re @-@ building of Oldham Church . Not one person in Crompton voted in favour of the rebuilding and when a rate was levied to raise money for the new church at Oldham , the people of Crompton refused to pay . 
 = = = Textiles and the Industrial Revolution = = = 
 The manufacture of textiles in Crompton can be traced back to 1474 , when a lease dated from that year outlines that the occupant of Crompton Park had spinning wheels , cards and looms , all of which suggest that cloth was being produced in large quantities . The upland geography of the area constrained the output of crop growing , and so prior to industrialisation the area was used for grazing sheep , which provided the raw material for a local woollen weaving trade . Wills and inventories from the 15th and 16th centuries suggest most families were involved with small scale pasture , but supplemented their incomes by weaving woollens in the domestic system , and selling cloth , linen and fustians to travelling <unk> for the markets in Manchester and Rochdale . Despite its remoteness by the Pennines , by the Early Modern period the domestic system in Crompton had produced relatively wealthy inhabitants . The most affluent were those involved in cloth and linen , and their wealth was comparable to that of the merchants of Manchester and Salford . 
 Until the mid @-@ 18th century , Crompton 's textile sector had been closely linked with that of Rochdale and Saddleworth in the north and east ; it was a woollen manufacturing district . However , as the demand for cotton goods increased , Crompton mirrored developments in Oldham and Manchester in the south and southwest , importing raw cotton and making cotton cloth . To ensure that the woollen trade was kept buoyant , a law existed from 1675 to 1814 to encourage Shaw and Crompton 's wool production . It required that the deceased were to be buried in woollen garments . 
 In the second half of the 18th century , the technology of cotton @-@ spinning machinery improved , and the need for larger buildings to house bigger , better and more efficient equipment became apparent . The profitability of cotton spinning meant that open land that had been used for farming since antiquity , was utilised for purpose @-@ built weavers ' cottages . Larger buildings were still desired , and construction of two water powered cotton factories ( two or three times the size of a cottage ) can be traced to 1782 . The construction of more mills followed — ten by 1789 — facilitating a process of urbanisation and socioeconomic transformation in the region ; the population moved away from farming , adopting employment in the factory system . The introduction of the factory system led to an increase of the township 's population ; from 872 in 1714 to 3 @,@ 500 in 1801 , mostly as a result of an influx of people from Yorkshire and Lancashire looking for employment in the cotton mills . 
 Power looms introduced in the early 19th century put an end to the last remnants of the domestic system in Crompton , but not without resistance . Weavers and spinners were paid according to the amount of cloth they produced ; independent hand loom weavers saw a drop in their income , and could not compete with the mechanised mass production that was gathering pace in the township . Luddites rioted in the township in 1826 , smashing 24 power looms at Clegg 's mill at High Crompton in protest against their worsening standard of living . 
 Crompton 's damp climate provided the ideal conditions for cotton spinning to be carried out without the cotton drying and breaking , and newly developed 19th @-@ century mechanisation optimised cotton spinning for mass production for the global market . When suitable land in nearby Oldham ( then the largest and most productive mill town in the world ) had become scarce in the 1860s , there was a mill building boom in Shaw and Crompton , giving rise to the area as major mill town . The local townscape became dominated by distinctive rectangular brick @-@ built mills , and its former villages and hamlets agglomerated as a single town around these factories . Shaw and Crompton railway station and a goods yard was opened in 1863 , allowing improved transportation of textile goods and raw materials to and from the township . Neighbouring Royton had begun to encroach upon the township 's southern boundary , forming a continuous urban cotton @-@ spinning district with Oldham , Lees and Chadderton — the Oldham parliamentary constituency — which was responsible for 13 % of the world 's cotton production . 
 The demand for cheap cotton goods from this area prompted the flotation of cotton spinning companies ; the investment was followed by the construction of 12 new cotton mills from 1870 and 1900 . In the post @-@ war economic boom of 1919 – 20 , investors did not have the time to build new mills and so were prepared to pay vastly inflated sums for shares in existing companies . Many mills were refloated at valuations of up to £ 500 @,@ 000 ( £ 20 @,@ 720 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) , or five times what they had cost to build before the war , resulting in the town being nicknamed " The Golden City " as the scramble for shares intensified . Because of this highly profitable share dealing , it was reported in the national press that Shaw and Crompton had more millionaires per capita than any other town in the world . The number of cotton mills in the township peaked at 36 in 1920 . 
 Supplies of raw cotton from the United States were cut during the Lancashire Cotton Famine of 1861 – 1865 , leading to the formation of the Crompton Local Board of Health in 1863 , whose purpose was to ensure social security and maintain hygiene and sanitation in the locality . The Great Depression , and First and Second World Wars each contributed to periods of economic decline in Shaw and Crompton . Although the industry endured , as imports of cheaper foreign yarns increased during the mid @-@ 20th century , Shaw and Crompton 's textile sector declined gradually to a halt ; said to have over @-@ relied upon the textile sector , cotton spinning reduced in the 1960s and 1970s , and by the early 1980s only four mills were operational . In spite of efforts to increase the efficiency and competitiveness of its production , the final cotton was spun in Shaw and Crompton in 1989 , in Lilac and Park mills . Of the 48 cotton mills that have occupied Shaw and Crompton , only six are still standing , all of which are now used as distribution centres . 
 = = = Post @-@ industrial history = = = 
 Since deindustrialisation , Shaw and Crompton 's population has continued to grow as a result of intensive housing expansion and redevelopment which has modernised much of its former Victorian and Edwardian terraced housing districts . The town has 9 @,@ 274 residential dwellings , of which one third are Victorian or Edwardian terraces , built for the cotton mill workers of former times . It is considered a popular residential area of relative prosperity , with a variety of housing types . The Buckstones and Rushcroft areas contain modern housing estates and are amongst the most affluent suburbs of the town . They were built as part of an agreement made in the 1950s between the then Crompton Urban District and the County Borough of Oldham councils , to alleviate Oldham 's chronic shortage of quality housing . The town has subsequently been described as having " good community spirit and relative prosperity , which , in turn , create popular residential areas " . 
 Shaw and Crompton has been used as a filming location for domestic films and television programmes , including The Parole Officer , Common As Muck , Scott & Bailey and The Fred Dibnah Story , the latter of which documented Fred Dibnah 's demolition of the Briar and Cape mill chimneys . The town entered the national media in 2010 , 2011 and 2012 ; for the kidnapping of Sahil Saeed , the mugging and death of Nellie Geraghty ( which featured on Crimewatch ) , and the explosion of a house in Buckley Street respectively . Shaw and Crompton Metrolink station opened as part of Greater Manchester 's light @-@ rail Metrolink network on 16 December 2012 . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Crompton was recorded in 1212 as being one of the five parts of the thegnage estate of <unk> , which was held on behalf of King John by Roger de Montbegon and William de Nevill . The other parts of this estate were Glodwick , <unk> , Oldham , and Werneth , names and places still familiar today . Crompton would later form a township within the ancient ecclesiastical parish of Prestwich @-@ cum @-@ Oldham , in the hundred of Salford . Throughout the Middle Ages , local men acted as jurors and constables for the purposes of upholding law and order in the township . 
 Following the Poor Law Amendment Act 1834 , Crompton formed part of the Oldham Poor Law Union , an inter @-@ parish unit established to provide social security . Crompton 's first local authority was a Local board of health established in 1863 ; Established with reference to the Local Government Act 1858 , Crompton Local Board of Health was a regulatory body responsible for standards of hygiene and sanitation in the township . Following the Local Government Act 1894 , the area of the Local Board became the Crompton Urban District , a local government district within the administrative county of Lancashire . The urban district council was based out of Shaw / Crompton Town Hall , which opened on 28 December 1894 . 
 Under the Local Government Act 1972 , the town 's Urban District status was abolished , and the area has , since 1 April 1974 , formed part of the Metropolitan Borough of Oldham , a local government district of the metropolitan county of Greater Manchester . A civil parish of Crompton was formed in April 1987 and renamed to " Shaw and Crompton " in July 1987 . The civil parish has its own parish council , giving it some limited local government autonomy from that of the wider Metropolitan Borough of Oldham , and including the status as a statutory <unk> on local planning applications . The council comprises 14 locally elected members , Cllr Angie Farrell is the parish chairman 2016 @-@ 2017 and is consulted in planning applications that affect the area through the Shaw and Royton Area Committee of Oldham Metropolitan Borough Council . Shaw and Crompton Community Council , a separate body , meets at least four times per year and is designed to allow local people to put forward their priorities for the area in which they live , suggest improvements and have their say on how services are run on a local basis . Shaw and Crompton does not have a mayor , but does have a town crier , a purely ceremonial role . Shaw and Crompton is one of only a few parishes of England that still observes the ancient custom of Beating the bounds . Originally an annual event , it now takes place every seven years . 
 In terms of parliamentary representation , Shaw and Crompton after the Reform Act 1832 was represented as part of the Oldham parliamentary borough constituency , of which the first Members of Parliaments ( MPs ) were the radicals William Cobbett and John Fielden . Winston Churchill was the MP between 1900 and 1906 . Churchill once stayed at Crompton Hall , and letters written by him describe how peaceful and tranquil he thought the area to be . Constituency boundaries changed during the 20th century ; from 1885 to 1918 Shaw and Crompton lay within Prestwich constituency , from 1918 to 1950 in Royton constituency , from 1950 until 1983 in Heywood and Royton constituency , and from 1983 to 1997 in Littleborough and Saddleworth constituency . Since 1997 , Shaw and Crompton has lain within the parliamentary constituency of Oldham East and Saddleworth , and is represented in the House of Commons by Debbie Abrahams , a member of the Labour Party . 
 = = Geography = = 
 At 53 ° 34 ′ 39 ″ N 2 ° 5 ′ 32 ″ W ( 53 @.@ 5777 ° , <unk> ° ) Shaw and Crompton lies along the eastern edge of the ancient Lancashire border ; Saddleworth and the Pennines are close to the east . The larger towns of Rochdale and Oldham lie to the northwest and south respectively ; Royton is 1 @.@ 2 miles ( 1 @.@ 9 km ) west @-@ southwest . There are no motorways in Shaw and Crompton , though a light rail line bisects the town from north to south . The town has a post office under the Oldham post town . The territory of the civil parish is given as 4 @.@ 5 square miles ( 11 @.@ 7 km2 ) . For purposes of the Office for National Statistics , Shaw and Crompton forms part of the Greater Manchester Urban Area , with Manchester city centre itself 8 @.@ 7 miles ( 14 @.@ 0 km ) southwest of Shaw and Crompton . 
 Described in Samuel Lewis 's A Topographical Dictionary of England ( 1848 ) as located in " a bleak situation " , Shaw and Crompton is in the valley of the River Beal , which runs northward through the town towards the village of Newhey . The land to the east of the town steadily rises , reaching a height of 1 @,@ 283 feet ( 391 m ) at the summit of Crompton Moor . To the west , the land reaches around 699 feet ( 213 m ) at High Crompton and 825 feet ( 251 m ) at Whitfield , and from these highpoints the surface slopes away in all directions . The River Irk rises on Shaw and Crompton 's western boundary with Royton . The geology is represented by carboniferous coal measures . The soils of the town are broadly sterile , the poorest being in the upland moors . Rainfall rises steadily from the Cheshire Plain in a northeasterly direction , and totals are between 51 inches ( 1 @,@ 295 mm ) to 67 inches ( 1 @,@ 702 mm ) a year in Shaw and Crompton , which is well above the UK average of 45 @.@ 4 inches ( 1 @,@ 153 mm ) and compares to about 33 inches ( 838 mm ) a year at Ringway . 
 Shaw and Crompton 's built environment is similar to the urban structure of most towns in England , consisting of residential dwellings centred on a High Street in the town centre , which is the local centre of commerce . There is a mixture of low @-@ density urban areas , suburbs , semi @-@ rural and rural locations in Shaw and Crompton , but overwhelmingly the land use in the town is residential ; industrial areas and terraced houses give way to suburbs and rural greenery as the land rises out of the town . Generally , property in the centre , west , and south of the town is older and smaller in comparison to that found in the east and north . 
 Shaw and Crompton is divided into two political wards , named " Shaw " and " Crompton " ( to the east and west respectively ) , and residential suburbs , including High Crompton , Rushcroft , Buckstones , Clough , Jubilee , Shaw Side , Wrens Nest , Cowlishaw , Low Crompton , Nook , Goats , Wood End and Shore Edge . 
 = = Demography = = 
 According to census data , in 2001 Shaw and Crompton had a total resident population of 21 @,@ 721 , with a population density of around 4 @,@ 692 people per square mile ( 1 @,@ 811 per km ² ) , and an average age of 39 . Around 3 % of Shaw and Crompton 's population is from a black and minority ethnic background ( which includes a small but long established community of Bangladeshi heritage ) , the rest broadly being of white background . 
 Of the residents in the combined electoral wards of Shaw and Crompton ( which are coterminous with the town ) 41 @.@ 7 % were married , 9 @.@ 2 % were cohabiting couples , and 9 @.@ 7 % were lone parent families . Forty percent of households were made up of individuals and 14 % had someone living alone at pensionable age . 
 The ethnicity of the town was given as 96 % white , 0 @.@ 5 % mixed race , 2 @.@ 0 % Asian , 0 @.@ 3 % black and 0 @.@ 2 % Chinese or other . 
 The place of birth of the town 's residents was 96 @.@ 8 % United Kingdom ( including 95 @.@ 13 % from England ) , 0 @.@ 6 % Republic of Ireland , 0 @.@ 5 % from other European Union countries , and 2 @.@ 1 % from elsewhere in the world . Religion was recorded as 84 % Christian , 1 @.@ 7 % Muslim , 0 @.@ 2 % Hindu , 0 @.@ 2 % Buddhist , 0 @.@ 1 % Jewish and < 0 @.@ 1 % Sikh . Some 6 @.@ 8 % were recorded as having no religion , 0 @.@ 1 % had an alternative religion , and 5 @.@ 6 % did not state their religion . 
 The economic activity of residents aged 16 – 74 was 45 % in full @-@ time employment , 12 % in part @-@ time employment , 7 % self @-@ employed , 2 @.@ 4 % unemployed , 2 % students with jobs , 3 % students without jobs , 13 % retired , 4 % looking after home or family , 7 % permanently sick or disabled , and 2 % economically inactive for other reasons . This was roughly in line with the national figures . Of the town 's residents aged 16 – 74 , 15 % had a higher education qualification or the equivalent , compared with 20 % nationwide . 
 Below is a table outlining population growth of the area since 1901 . Earlier records show that the area had a population of 872 in 1714 . 
 = = Economy = = 
 From the 18th century onwards , Shaw and Crompton 's economy was closely tied with that of Britain 's textile manufacture during the Industrial Revolution , particularly the cotton spinning sector . 
 Shaw and Crompton has become a base for distribution companies as a result of the town 's good transport links , its supply of large , disused mill properties , and its situation between Manchester , Oldham , Rochdale , Lancashire , and West Yorkshire . It is home to Shop Direct Group 's Shaw National Distribution Centre , one of the UK 's largest warehouse distribution centres . The company occupies three former cotton mills and state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art purpose @-@ built storage and sorting facilities on a 20 @-@ acre ( 8 @.@ 1 ha ) complex within the town . In 2007 , the site became the retail company 's only packing and distribution centre for non @-@ bulk items . It employs nearly 1 @,@ 000 staff , making it the Metropolitan Borough of Oldham 's largest private employer . The N Brown Group , and children 's toy distributors Toy Options have distribution centres in the town . 
 Until the 1990s , Shaw and Crompton was the home of Osram , the multinational lightbulb manufacturer , which occupied Duke Mill and was a significant employer in the area . Production has since been moved away from the United Kingdom . Warburtons had one of its 11 major bakeries in Shaw and Crompton from 1965 to January 2012 . The " Pennine " bakery produced around 500 @,@ 000 loaves a week and distributed them to major multiples and independent retailers throughout Greater Manchester , Cheshire , and Derbyshire . Located on Glebe Street , it employed around 200 staff and produced a wide range of Warburtons bread products . In August 2012 the building was bought by <unk> who propose to redevelop the building as commercial units for up to 6 businesses . 
 Trent Mill Industrial Estate , on the edge of the town near Rushcroft , takes its name from the mill that was once there . The business park is home to several small industrial companies . It was partially destroyed by a fire that started in a plastics factory in the early hours of 28 April 2007 . 
 On 6 August 2007 , a 35 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 3 @,@ 252 m2 ) Asda supermarket opened on the site of the former Dawn Mill . A derelict row of houses on <unk> was demolished as part of this development . Two houses on Greenfield Lane were also demolished , allowing the existing <unk> store to expand — possibly to help it to compete with the new ASDA store . The original planning application was put to a public vote in 2005 , and included proposals for 316 parking spaces , improved bus facilities , pedestrian routes linked to Market Street , junction improvements to nearby streets , and the relocation of a local tyre @-@ fitting company . The supermarket cost £ 20 million to construct , and is the first ASDA store in the United Kingdom to use environmentally friendly construction techniques , which Wal @-@ Mart intends to use as a blueprint for all its new ASDA supermarkets . It incorporates a sustainable timber frame and an energy @-@ saving ventilation system , which together have eradicated the need for 500 tonnes of steel and 450 tonnes of carbon emissions . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 = = = War memorials = = = 
 The main Crompton War Memorial , located on the High Street , consists of a Scottish granite plinth surmounted by a large bronze statue flanked by two Rolls of Honour containing the 346 names of those from Shaw and Crompton who fought and died in World War I. Panels listing the Roll of Honour from World War II were added and unveiled on 12 November 1950 by Councillor H. M. Turner . Commissioned by the Crompton War Memorial Committee , the statue was conceptualised in 1919 by Richard Reginald Goulden , and unveiled on 29 April 1923 by General Sir Ian Hamilton . The original cost for the memorial alone was £ 4 @,@ 000 , but the total cost , including site and layout , was about £ 6 @,@ 067 . 
 The inscription on the memorial reads : 
 In memory of the men of Crompton who fought and gave their lives to free mankind from the oppression and brutal tyranny of war . 1914 – 1919 . 
 The symbolic memorial depicts a group in which the central figure is a man defending the future generations , represented by young children , against foreign aggression , represented by a beast . The memorial is also a time capsule . Inside it is a lead casket containing coins , a copy of the local newspaper , three cops of spun cotton , and a length of cloth manufactured in the local area . 
 A second , smaller war memorial is located in Jubilee Gardens . It is dedicated to the soldiers who fought in the Second Boer War . It consists of a plaque built into a stone wall that is located between two large bushes . 
 Its inscription reads : 
 In memory of the Crompton men who lost their lives in the South African war 1899 – 1902 
 It then lists eight men : four who were " killed in action " , two who " died of wounds " , and two who " died of disease " . 
 In 1995 , to mark the 50th anniversary of the ending of the Second World War , a landmark known as The Shaw and Crompton Beacon was erected in Jubilee Gardens . 
 The inscription on the plaque below reads : 
 The Shaw and Crompton beacon 
 erected by the Parish Council in 1995 to 
 commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of 
 the ending of World War <unk> plaque was presented by members of the British Legion 
 = = = Crompton Moor = = = 
 Spanning approximately 160 acres ( 0 @.@ 6 km2 ) , and reaching an elevation of 1 @,@ 282 feet ( 391 m ) , Crompton Moor is one of the largest open spaces run by Oldham Countryside Service . It is a registered common of Greater Manchester , and , since 2003 , a designated Site of Biological Importance . Brushes Clough and Pingot are former coal and sandstone quarries on Crompton Moor . During the 1970s , quarrying was halted , the land was reclaimed , and thousands of pine trees were planted . The area has since been used for recreation , including hiking , orienteering , and mountain biking . Brushes Clough Reservoir was constructed in the 19th century by the Oldham County Borough Council , using stone quarried from this site . The area is now managed by United Utilities . 
 Since the 1960s an unnamed waterfall ( provisionally called Crompton Waterfall ) cascades off Crompton Moor into the now unused Pingot Quarry forming the Old Brook , a tributary of the River Beal . 
 = = = Big Lamp = = = 
 The Big Lamp was a six @-@ sided gas @-@ powered public street lamp standing 20 feet ( 6 m ) high at the original cross @-@ road junction of Manchester Road , Oldham Road , High Street , and Church Road . It was pulled down on 17 June 1925 , when electric lighting was introduced . During the 1970s , the junction was redeveloped to accommodate the new Crompton Way bypass . A large roundabout was built , and a scaled @-@ down replica of the original Big Lamp was erected in its centre . The new Big Lamp is electrically powered and stands about 6 feet ( 2 m ) high . On 17 April 2016 , a large sandstone rock welcoming people to Shaw has been sited on the roundabout . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Public transport in Shaw and Crompton is co @-@ ordinated by Transport for Greater Manchester . Shaw and Crompton had a railway line and station between 1863 and 2009 , opened initially for haulage , but later used for passenger and commuter journeys . Shaw and Crompton railway station was used by passenger trains running between Rochdale and Manchester on the Oldham Loop Line . After initially being rejected in the early 2000s , plans to turn the line into part of the light @-@ rail Metrolink system were accepted by the government on 6 July 2006 . Shaw and Crompton railway station closed on 3 October 2009 , so that it can be converted from use with heavy rail to Metrolink . Shaw and Crompton Metrolink station opened on 16 December 2012 . 
 Historically the town was served by two electric tram routes operated by Oldham Corporation . The first ran from <unk> and opened on 15 November 1904 it was almost immediately extended to Chadderton Road , Oldham . The second line from Royton opened on 13 April 1905 . By January 1921 both lines shared a terminus at Wrens Nest and the Royton line had been extended to Hollinwood . In the same year , the routes were assigned numbers ; Hollinwood to Shaw route was No.8 and the route to Chadderton Road was No.9. There were plans to extend the lines to the railway station and High Crompton but these never materialised . Route 9 was closed on 11 June 1935 and route 8 was closed on 2 December 1939 , both were replaced by buses . 
 The bus company First Greater Manchester operates services 58 , 59 , 181 , 182 , 408 and 428 , which provides frequent services to Oldham and Rochdale , with buses also running to Chadderton , Manchester , Middleton , Royton and Stalybridge . Rosso runs the 435 between Buckstones and Rochdale . There is also two Shaw Circular routes 403 and 404 which are run by First , serving the smaller roads of Shaw and Crompton . Shaw and Crompton is located south of junction 21 of the M62 motorway . 
 = = Education = = 
 There had been private cottage schools in the area from a very early time , but Crompton 's first public school was founded in 1791 . In 1838 , the Shaw National School was built . The construction of church schools followed , including Shaw Methodist School in 1842 , St Mary 's , in 1847 and St James ' 1851 . Shaw and Crompton is now served by a variety of schools , including some with religious affiliations . All the schools in the town perform either at or above the national average for test results . Crompton House Church of England School , a secondary school for 11- to 16 @-@ year @-@ olds , also has a sixth form college of further education for 16- to 18 @-@ year @-@ olds on the same site . 
 = = Religion = = 
 The township of Crompton was originally within the parish of Prestwich @-@ cum @-@ Oldham in the Diocese of Lichfield , until 1541 , when , owing to the English Reformation , this diocese was divided and Crompton became part of the Diocese of Chester . This in turn was divided in 1847 , when the present Diocese of Manchester was created . 
 The exact date of the establishment of a place of worship in Crompton is uncertain . Although Shaw Chapel is certain to have been in existence since the early 16th century , it has been put that " Shaw Chapel is even more ancient than Oldham Old Church " , as evidenced by the ancient toponymy of the area . Shaw Chapel was anciently known as St Patrick 's Chapel @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Moor , and during the reign of James I of England , " it was situate in the midst of the common called Shaw Moor , not a single habitation being near it " . It is thought to have been constructed following an increase in wealth produced by the localisation of the woollen trade during a very bleak period , although , in 1552 it was noted that it had no endowment , and its ornaments were in poor condition . It was rebuilt in 1739 and enlarged in 1798 , and rebuilt again in 1870 . It is now known as the Church of Holy Trinity . 
 Shaw and Crompton has three Church of England ecclesiastic parishes : Shaw , High Crompton , and East Crompton . In addition to the established church , a variety of Reformed denominations , particularly Nonconformism and Methodism , have been practiced in Shaw and Crompton . Presbyterian ministers were recorded preaching at Shaw Chapel in as early as the 1650s . The Religious Society of Friends held conventicles in Whitfield in 1660s and 1670s . 
 The following is a table of the churches presently in Shaw and Crompton , as of 2007 . Others have existed , but have been demolished . 
 Most of the above churches participate in Shaw 's annual Whit Walks event , when congregations , choirs , and brass bands parade through the streets from their respective churches before taking part in one large , communal , inter @-@ church service . The town centre is also home to a small mosque . 
 = = Community facilities = = 
 Shaw and Crompton has communal areas and public facilities , including public parks , sporting establishments , and playing fields . Public houses in the centre of the town include The Shay Wake ( a mill town @-@ themed J D Wetherspoon pub , named after the Shaw Wakes week ) , The Blue Bell , Duke of York , Coach and Horses , and The Pineapple . Outlying public houses include the Royal Oak at Cowlishaw , and the Park Inn at Buckstones Road . 
 Crompton Library is a purpose @-@ built library housing over 36 @,@ 000 items including books , CDs , and DVDs that can be borrowed by anyone who lives in the Oldham borough . It has communal Internet facilities . The library was built in the early 1990s after the original 1907 building , which exists now as apartments on Beal Lane , became too small . 
 There are three main public parks in Shaw and Crompton . <unk> Park lies alongside the Oldham and Rochdale Metrolink Line and has a children 's play area , bowling green , and over a mile of wooded pathways along the base of a forested hillside . The land that forms <unk> Park was presented to Crompton Urban District Council by Captain Abram Crompton JP on 22 June 1911 , and opened as a park by him on 14 September 1912 . It was redeveloped with a new park and bowling green for its 2012 centenary after winning a £ 1 million grant from the National Lottery . High Crompton Park is in High Crompton and is home to a tennis court , bowling green , children 's play area , and gardens . Jubilee Gardens are found in the centre of Shaw and Crompton town centre , behind the Crompton War Memorial . Shaw and Crompton has large areas of land reserved for sporting and communal events ; these are located off George Street , Edward Road , and Rushcroft Road respectively . 
 Shaw Market is open retailers and customers every Thursday and is held on Market Street , which is closed to traffic for the event . Westway , the original location of the market , is now used for car parking but has been used occasionally for fun fairs and other events . Shaw and Crompton town has several public sporting establishments . Crompton Pool was a swimming pool built in 1899 on Farrow Street in the town centre and served the community until its closure in July 2014 and subsequent demolition in February 2016 . Crompton Cricket Club , is located on Glebe Street . 
 Playhouse 2 is a 156 @-@ seat theatre in the heart of Shaw and Crompton town centre , which used to be an Odeon cinema . It has been the home of the Crompton Stage Society , an amateur theatre company , since 1966 . A wide variety of entertainment , professional as well as amateur , is produced each year . 
 = = Public services = = 
 Home Office policing in Shaw and Crompton is provided by the Greater Manchester Police . The force 's " ( Q ) Division " have their headquarters for policing the Metropolitan Borough of Oldham at central Oldham , which is now the nearest police station , the former one at Royton being demolished in 2014 to make way for a new leisure centre . Public transport is co @-@ ordinated by Transport for Greater Manchester . Statutory emergency fire and rescue service is provided by the Greater Manchester Fire and Rescue Service . 
 There are no hospitals in Shaw and Crompton — the nearest are in the larger settlements of Oldham and Rochdale — but some local health care is provided by Crompton Health Centre which is Shaw and Crompton 's NHS surgery . It has been subject to a development scheme intended to improve NHS facilities in the town . The North West Ambulance Service provides emergency patient transport in the area . Other forms of health care are provided for locally by several small specialist clinics and surgeries . 
 Waste management is co @-@ ordinated by the local authority via the Greater Manchester Waste Disposal Authority . Locally produced inert waste for disposal is sent to landfill at the Beal Valley . Shaw and Crompton 's Distribution Network Operator for electricity is United Utilities ; there are no power stations in the town . United Utilities also manages Shaw and Crompton 's drinking and waste water ; water supplies are sourced from several local reservoirs , including Dovestones and Chew . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 People from Shaw and Crompton are called <unk> or <unk> . Philip Gilbert Hamerton , an acclaimed etcher , painter , and art critic was born in the area in 1834 . The town is the home of Oldham @-@ born actress Shobna Gulati , former Oldham Athletic player and manager Andy Ritchie , and is the hometown of Kevin O 'Toole , a founding member of dance act N @-@ Trance . Tommy Cannon and Bobby Ball live locally . 
 = Off the Air ( TV series ) = 
 Off the Air is an American anthology television series created by Dave Hughes for Adult Swim . The series is presented without explanation or narration as a showcase of surreal footage arranged around a single loose theme ( expressed in the episode title ) and blended without pause into a single continuous presentation . 
 Hughes , a former employee of MTV Animation , first pitched it to Mike Lazzo at Adult Swim after producing a video mixtape for the network 's 2010 Carnival Tour event . As a result of its 4 a.m. graveyard slot and small selection of episodes , the series remains relatively unknown on the network , but has been received positively and dubbed a cult phenomenon by critics and Adult Swim itself . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The series is presented without explanation or narration as a showcase of surreal footage — animations , short films , music videos , viral videos , film and TV clips , stock footage and morphing psychedelic imagery — arranged around a single loose theme ( expressed in the episode title ) and blended without pause into a single continuous presentation . 
 = = Production = = 
 Series creator Dave Hughes first started working for Adult Swim in 2003 after an eight @-@ year stint with MTV Animation , where he had edited series such as Beavis and Butt @-@ head and Celebrity Deathmatch . Hughes , who saw Adult Swim " slipping away from its more experimental roots " as it got popular , had the concept for Off the Air in mind before , but never thought he would be the one to make it . While living in New York , 120 Minutes , Concrete TV , Liquid Television and Night Flight were among some of the experimental programming that exposed him " to a whole new world of ideas , music and people that I just didn 't see anywhere else on television . " 
 Hughes first pitched the series to the network through Mike Lazzo at Adult Swim sometime after late 2009 , after producing a video mixtape that would be projected behind musical performers for the network 's 2010 Carnival Tour event . He compiled footage for the mixtape using the Prelinger Archives , as well as various online sources , and applied visual effects to them " until you didn 't quite know what you were looking at . " He originally imagined for it to exist as a " bizarre collection " of Internet and archival footage intertwined with clips from Adult Swim shows , " set to good music . " He ultimately had to omit the latter material , however , as the network would still have to acquire licenses for their own series in derivative works . He found that once they were gone , " the show really opened up . " 
 In putting an episode together , Hughes seeks clips " with some kind of truth or integrity to them " , opting for both viral videos in addition to ones with fewer view counts . Tracking down licensees for clips proves to be the most difficult aspect of the process , he stated , with co @-@ producers Cody DeMatteis and Alan Steadman assisting him in pursuit of material hard to obtain . When asked if getting consent for other 's work posed a challenge , Hughes noted it to be helpful working under the " Adult Swim banner " , with only a few artists responding with reluctance . He wrote that each piece of the episode is treated with protection , not " trying to exploit anyone or make fun of anything or anybody . " 
 Each episode is edited using Final Cut Pro , along with Adobe Photoshop and Adobe After Effects for further manipulation ( often employing data @-@ moshing techniques ) . Hughes observed a large portion of producing episodes to stem from " finding the right music to go with the visuals , or vice versa " , and found transitions to " really help keep it moving . " Likewise , Hughes digressed from Liquid Television 's use of longer segments in order to make the series a " larger event rather than a series of smaller events " , and found visual effects and transitions to be " a huge part " of his theory in making an episode . 
 A compilation of videos that were once considered to be featured in the first season had been published on the network 's official blog . These videos , extending into its second season as well as hosting various other supplemental material , have since been published onto Network Awesome . A compilation of material from the first season and additional shorts was given a theatrical release at Cinefamily on August 25 , 2012 , which Hughes attended . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 Its pilot episode , " Animals " , premiered on Adult Swim on New Year 's Day 2011 at 4 a.m. ; it was broadcast twice in a row , back @-@ to @-@ back . Episodes have continued to air in this time slot — considered a graveyard slot in broadcast programming — and as a result of this and its small selection of episodes , the series remains relatively unknown on the network . However , Austin McManus of <unk> noted word of mouth to be " gradually spreading " about it . He and the network also described the show as a cult phenomenon . Two specials have been produced : " Dan Deacon : U.S.A. " , broadcast July 6 , 2013 , consists of surreal footage of American landscapes , with music from the last four tracks of the album America by Dan Deacon . A second special — the second season episode " Nightmares " played in reverse — aired after Halloween night on November 1 , 2014 . 
 It has received positive critical reception , with McManus conducting an eight @-@ page interview and profile of Hughes in appreciation of the series . The magazine had previously published a special issue centered on the network and its shows in July 2012 , but overlooked Off the Air , presenting an " opportunity to shed a little insight and background on an extraordinary unique show . " Speaking from the first time he watched it , McManus praised it for not being " your typical try @-@ too @-@ hard @-@ to @-@ be @-@ weird production . " In Adweek , Sam <unk> ranked it second place out of 18 other programs on the network . He tied it with the network 's parody infomercial specials and wrote that it was " in the same category as King Star King among things that are so cool and strange that they look like they should probably be part of a video installation in an art gallery somewhere . " 
 For Neon Tommy , Jeremy Fuster called it " a dark , unspeakable corner of television where no light can reach and only the sleepless and drug @-@ addled dare to venture . " Amanda <unk> of the Miami New Times joked that , for artists featured on the show , " nothing compares to the prestige of sharing a network with Tim & Eric and Brak , right ? " Ultimately , she saw it as the " already bizarre network 's foray into out @-@ there visual experimentation . " Writing for The Fader , Matthew Trammell regarded it as " when things get really interesting . " PQ <unk> of The <unk> Underground dubbed the series a " modern version " of Liquid Television and called it " really kinda spiffy , and trippy , and cool . " Casper Kelly sought inspiration from the show during the production of his short film for the network , Too Many Cooks . 
 Ratings @-@ wise , several episodes have surpassed one million views according to Nielsen Media Research . Hughes added that he follows the series ' ratings when it occurs to him , but does not receive further analytics . He found it to trend on Twitter during the weeks of its airing , and likes viewing user 's statuses regarding it . In particular , he enjoys reactions from people who wake up to it after falling asleep to the network , and judged from the online response that its audience would be " pretty young , late teens , early 20s " and " strangely positive and engaged . " The network has broadcast praise of the show written by viewers in the form of bumpers , often hinting at further episodes being produced . Episodes have been distributed to sites like YouTube , while a continuous online stream of the show was launched by the network on September 5 , 2014 . On December 19 , 2014 , the show 's Facebook page announced that additional exclusive material will be added to the livestream . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Billy Liddell = 
 William Beveridge " Billy " Liddell ( 10 January 1922 – 3 July 2001 ) was a Scottish footballer , who played his entire professional career with Liverpool . He signed with the club as a teenager in 1938 and retired in 1961 , having scored 228 goals in 534 appearances ( placing Liddell fourth and 12th in the respective club rankings as of August 2010 ) . He was Liverpool 's leading goalscorer in the league in eight out of nine seasons from 1949 – 50 to 1957 – 58 , and surpassed Elisha Scott 's club record for most league appearances in 1957 . 
 With Liverpool , Liddell won a league championship in 1947 and featured in the club 's 1950 FA Cup Final defeat by Arsenal . He represented Scotland at international level on 29 occasions . While serving as a Royal Air Force navigator during the Second World War , Liddell continued his career by appearing in unofficial games for Liverpool and guesting for various teams in the United Kingdom and Canada . After his retirement from football , in 1961 , Liddell occupied himself as a Justice of the Peace ( from 1958 ) , bursar of Liverpool University , and voluntary worker . He died in 2001 . 
 Primarily a left winger , Liddell 's versatility enabled him to play comfortably on the opposite wing and as a striker , at centre and inside forward . Liddell became noted for his strong physique , acceleration , powerful shot , professionalism , and good conduct on the pitch . Such was his influence and popularity that the club acquired the contemporary nickname " <unk> " . Posthumous recognition has included a plaque unveiled in 2004 at Anfield and sixth place in a poll of Liverpool fans , conducted in 2006 under the title " 100 Players Who Shook The Kop " . He was inducted into the Scottish Football Hall of Fame in November 2008 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Townhill , near Dunfermline , Liddell was the eldest of coal miner James and wife Montgomery 's six children . During his childhood , Liddell experienced austerity and poverty , with his family often having to subsist on bread , <unk> , and salt porridge . His parents became determined that he would not become a miner and helped him to decide a future career . He did not originally consider football as a viable profession , eventually choosing accountancy in preference to the civil service and church . His interest in football developed at a young age , which persuaded his parents , despite financial difficulties , to buy him a pair of football boots as a Christmas present when he asked for them aged seven . Liddell 's participation in organised football began at age eight when he joined his school team , which had an average age of ten . 
 As a pupil at Dunfermline High School , Liddell studied chemistry , mathematics , physics , English and two other languages . He became a reluctant rugby player , under the guidance of retired Welsh international Ronnie Boon , while playing football for local teams and Scotland Schoolboys . By the age of 16 , Liddell had progressed sufficiently to earn a contract with Lochgelly Violet football club and be sought after by Liverpool , Hamilton Academical , and Partick Thistle . Liverpool manager George Kay became interested in signing Liddell on the recommendation of the club 's Scottish defender Matt Busby , who learned of the teenager from Manchester City 's Alex Herd while on a golf trip . Herd had forwent one of their rounds to take Willie McAndrew , manager of Hamilton , to watch Liddell play for Lochgelly . When Busby queried him about his absence and Liddell , Herd told him that a contract had not been agreed because limited resources prevented Hamilton from offering Liddell the assurances his parents insisted upon . Instead , Liddell signed for Liverpool as an amateur on 27 July 1938 and became a professional in 1939 on a weekly wage of £ 3 . Negotiations between his parents and the club guaranteed , as a pre @-@ requisite to acceptance , that Liverpool would permit Liddell to continue his accountancy studies , be housed in suitable accommodation , and be employed part @-@ time an accountant at a company in the club 's city . 
 Liddell entered the youth team on his arrival in 1938 . Before he established himself in the side , Liddell had been frustrated at the frequent rotation of players until trainer Albert Shelley advised him to be patient . An injury incurred against Blackburn Rovers threatened to end his career prematurely . He had struck his knee against concrete near the corner flag after being challenged while running with the ball . Doctors informed him of the extent of tissue damage , causing Liddell anxiety about his future . He remained in Blackburn for two weeks , living in the family home of a colleague , before returning to Liverpool to continue his recovery . The Second World War precluded an official debut for Liddell , as the Football Association suspended competitive football from the abandoned 1939 – 1940 season and instituted a regional system in its place . Until the cessation of hostilities in 1945 , Liddell guested for various domestic sides when unavailable for Liverpool and represented select teams , including a Football Association XI and Scottish Services XI . Liddell was capped eight times for Scotland during the war , scoring on his debut in a 5 – 4 win over England in 1942 . 
 With Liverpool , Liddell competed in the various regional leagues that the FA assigned the club to and scored 82 goals in 152 matches between 1940 and 1946 . He debuted on 1 January 1940 against Crewe Alexandra , scoring after two minutes in a 7 – 3 win . In his formative years , Liddell credited Matt Busby and Berry Nieuwenhuys as significant influences . He volunteered for the Royal Air Force and , despite wanting to qualify as a pilot , was trained as a navigator because of his proficiency at mathematics . After being mobilised in December 1942 , Liddell guested with Chelsea and Cambridge Town . He broke his leg in a friendly <unk> while stationed in Bridgnorth , which required admission to the RAF Remedial Centre at Blackpool . 
 Following his recovery , Liddell travelled to Canada to complete a course at the Central Navigation School and became a pilot officer navigator . While on leave , he was used as a substitute by the Toronto Scottish under an assumed name and scored twice in a semi @-@ final play @-@ off . He was recalled to Moncton , New Brunswick , before the final . After some seven months in Canada , Liddell returned to Britain and , when based in Perth in 1944 , accepted an offer to guest for his boyhood favourites Dunfermline Athletic . He subsequently moved to Northern Ireland for further training , where he declined an offer from former Liverpool goalkeeper Elisha Scott to guest for Belfast Celtic because of a prior agreement to play for Linfield . By the end of the war , Liddell had been assigned to 617 Squadron , helping to transport Allied soldiers back to Britain on leave from Italy . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Domestic = = = 
