 = = = = 1946 – 1954 = = = = 
 Liddell 's official debut for Liverpool came in the third round of the FA Cup , the first competitive football tournament to be organised in post @-@ war England . He started in the first leg against Chester City on 5 January 1946 and scored in the 30th minute . The match ended in a 2 – 0 win and featured several additional debutants , including Bob Paisley , who would forge a chemistry with Liddell as a left half . League football completed its first full season under the provisional North and South divisional system , which facilitated the restoration of national football for the 1946 – 47 season . Although he established himself in the North League , scoring 17 goals in 42 matches , Liddell had yet to be discharged from the RAF and did not accompany Liverpool during its post @-@ season tour of North America in May 1946 . His unavailability extended to pre @-@ season training and the first two matches of the 1946 – 47 season . On 7 September , Liddell registered his first official league appearance and scored twice in a 7 – 4 defeat of Chelsea . 
 In his inaugural season of competitive football , Liddell confirmed his status as a regular and contributed to Liverpool 's first championship since 1923 . Positioned on the left wing , he appeared in 34 matches , scored seven goals , and supplied strikers Albert Stubbins and Jack Balmer with numerous assists . Severe conditions in the winter disrupted the league 's schedule and Liverpool did not secure the title until 14 June 1947 . The club won its final game away against Wolves 2 @-@ 1 , with Liddell setting up one of the goals , but the championship was decided by Sheffield United defeating contenders Stoke in the season 's last fixture . The game coincided with the Senior Cup Final between Liverpool and Everton at Anfield , where <unk> announced the result during the match . As a strict teetotaler , Liddell refrained from accepting glasses of champagne to celebrate the success . 
 The club was unable to replicate its form in the 1947 – 48 season , occupying 11th place on its conclusion in May 1948 . Despite that , Liddell reached double figures with a total of 11 goals . He accompanied the club when it embarked on its second exhibition tour of North America . His displays against Sweden 's Djurgården , played at the Brooklyn Dodgers ' Ebbets Field , and North American teams earned him praise from journalists and gained him 13 goals in 11 matches . In the 1948 – 49 season , Liddell occupied left back and four forward positions . During his career , he would fill all ten outfield roles , mostly because of injuries to other players . His brother , Tom , became a teammate in 1949 after Liverpool signed him from Lochore Welfare . He never represented the club as a senior . The club finished in eighth in the 1949 – 50 season , going undefeated for a post @-@ First World War record of 19 consecutive matches . Liddell scored ten goals in seven of those matches , including three braces . 
 Liverpool reached the FA Cup Final , making its first appearance at Wembley Stadium . Liddell had played in all seven matches during the club 's progression , scoring critical goals against Blackpool and Everton . Demand for tickets far exceeded supply , with more than 100 @,@ 000 applications being made for Liverpool 's allocation of only 8 @,@ 000 . Liddell recalled being inundated with requests from friends , family , and Liverpudlians in general . Some 100 @,@ 000 spectators witnessed Arsenal defeat Liverpool 2 – 0 on 29 April . Constant marking by Alex Forbes contained Liddell for much of the 90 minutes , and a tackle executed early in the game caused the winger pain . Journalist Brian Glanville questioned Arsenal 's tactics and recalled being told by Liddell that he had been unable to put his jacket on the next day . Subsequent match reports by the media accused Forbes of acting with malice in his marking , which Liddell and Arsenal 's Wally Barnes refuted . Liddell , who had scored 20 goals in all competitions , returned to Liverpool with his club after a trip to Brighton , to be greeted by thousands of supporters . 
 In 1950 , Liddell became one of many players to be offered a transfer to Colombia by agents representing Independiente Santa Fe and Club Deportivo Los Millonarios . The clubs belonged to the <unk> , unrecognised by FIFA because of a dispute between the league and the domestic governing body . Restrictions in England limited the weekly wage ( £ 12 in the season and £ 10 during the summer ) and impeded a player 's ability to transfer to another club , which caused much discontent in British football until the system was reformed in the 1960s . Liddell chose to reject the contract offer , reportedly estimated at £ 12 @,@ 000 . His wife Phyllis , whom he married in 1946 , later attributed the decision to club loyalty and the recent birth of twins . He later recalled that the proposal had been tempting , acknowledging that the decision would have been more challenging had it not been for the births . Many footballers did agree to contracts , including Alfredo Di Stefano , Neil Franklin , Charlie Mitten , and Hector Rial . 
 Manager George Kay resigned in January 1951 because of declining health and was replaced by former guest player Don Welsh . Before Kay 's resignation , Liverpool failed to record a win in ten matches between September and November . Liddell ended the sequence in December with the deciding goal in a 1 – 0 defeat of Chelsea . The inconsistency continued for the rest of the season and Liverpool lost 3 – 1 to Third Division South Norwich City in the FA Cup third round . The club again underperformed in the 1951 – 52 season , in which Liddell scored a goal against Huddersfield Town described by contemporary media as the " shot of a lifetime " and reported in detail by the Liverpool Echo . When awarded a free kick outside the penalty box , Liverpool opted to have Kevin Baron take it instead of Liddell as was usual . Baron passed it to Liddell , who struck the ball with such force , after a momentary pause , that the shot surprised the Huddersfield defence and goalkeeper Harry Mills , and silenced spectators . Still played as a winger , Liddell finished the season with 19 goals in 40 league appearances . Liverpool only avoided relegation in the 1952 – 53 season by defeating Chelsea in the club 's final fixture , in April 1953 . 
 = = = = 1954 – 1961 = = = = 
 Liverpool 's decline culminated in relegation to the Second Division in the 1953 – 54 season , finishing last with 28 points to end 50 seasons in the top division . The club had conceded 97 goals and failed to record an away win in 24 consecutive matches over a period of 14 months . Liddell , like the rest of his teammates , struggled for form , scoring just seven goals and missing a penalty in a 1 @-@ 0 loss to Cardiff that confirmed relegation . Despite the club 's descent , Liddell elected to stay rather than accept a transfer elsewhere . 
 The prospect of a second relegation , rather than promotion , dominated the club 's thoughts at one stage in the 1954 – 55 season , yet a productive partnership formed . Liddell moved to centre forward , scoring 30 goals in 40 league appearances , one more than teammate John Evans . He scored Liverpool 's solitary goal in its record 9 @-@ 1 loss to Birmingham on 11 December 1954 . To confound the sporting media , Liverpool went on to defeat Everton 4 – 0 in January , in an FA Cup fourth round fixture at Goodison Park before a crowd of 72 @,@ 000 . Goals from Liddell , A 'Court , and Evans overcame the match favourites , with Liddell being characterised by the Liverpool Echo as " inspirational " . The club was eliminated in the next round and finished 11th at the end of the season - its lowest ever finish . 
 Liddell assumed the captaincy in the 1955 – 56 season , in succession to Laurie Hughes . Although the club challenged for promotion , finishing third , the directors decided to dismiss Don Welsh and appoint former player Phil Taylor . Liddell scored 32 goals in the league and cup , including a hat @-@ trick against Nottingham Forest . He could have had one more against Manchester City in an FA Cup fifth round replay at Anfield that Liverpool lost 2 – 1 . Seconds before full @-@ time , Liverpool dispossessed City and Liddell advanced from the halfway line to Bert Trautmann 's goal , striking in the penalty box , reportedly just as the referee signalled to end the match . Along with Trautmann and many other players , Liddell had been unaware of the full @-@ time whistle and Liverpool 's supporters stayed in expectation of extra time until an announcement informed them of the scoreline . 
 In the following season , Liverpool finished a single point behind second @-@ placed Nottingham Forest . While injuries to Louis Bimpson and Brian Jackson meant Liddell played much of the season as a right winger and inside right , he retained his place as the club 's leading scorer , with 21 goals . Promotion again eluded the club in the 1957 – 58 season , while Liddell surpassed Elisha Scott 's record of 430 league appearances ( then erroneously believed to be 429 ) in November 1957 to acclaim . In recalling the match against Notts County , which it transpired only equalled the record , Liddell confessed to having felt self @-@ conscious because of the attention that he received , while appreciative of the respect shown to his achievement , especially from his opponents , managed by friend Tommy Lawton . 
 As he approached the twilight of his career , Liddell slowed as a player and his appearances from the 1958 – 59 season became infrequent . He sought to mitigate his declining pace by adopting a deeper approach , with a " more thoughtful passing game " . His omission from the lineup for the match against Fulham , in which Bimpson replaced him , provoked criticism from supporters , with some opposition being expressed via letters to local newspapers . Bimpson scored and Liddell 's confinement to the reserves attracted the interest of Mersey neighbours New Brighton . The non @-@ leaguers approached Liddell with an offer to become player @-@ manager , which he and the club rejected . After one start in November , Liddell returned to the senior squad in March 1959 for his 466th league appearance , which the footballing community believed would surpass Ted Sagar 's Merseyside record of 465 . Liddell scored two goals in a 3 – 2 win over Barnsley at Anfield , but later learnt that Sagar 's accepted total had been erroneous ( 463 being the correct figure ) . During his absence , Liverpool unexpectedly succumbed to part @-@ time Worcester City in the third round of the FA Cup . Liddell had played in 40 consecutive cup fixtures , but his involvement in the 2 – 1 defeat had been limited to the studding of his colleagues ' boots . 
 Having missed the 1959 – 60 season opener in August , Liddell replaced Bimpson for the match against Bristol City and scored a brace in a 4 – 2 win . He had numerous chances to complete a hat @-@ trick , including two disallowed goals and a penalty taken by Jimmy Melia which the crowd had urged Liddell to take . He retained his place until an injury sustained in September granted Roger Hunt the opportunity to score on his league debut against Scunthorpe . Recurring injury further disrupted Liddell 's season after his return against Middlesbrough and damage to knee ligaments in October rendered him unavailable for four months . Phil Taylor resigned in December due to deteriorating performances and was succeeded by Huddersfield 's Bill Shankly . After Liddell recovered , Shankly selected him to play against Derby County in February , but the match had to be abandoned because of fog . He completed the next match , against Plymouth Argyle , and played in ten successive games , scoring his final goal for the club in a 5 – 1 defeat of Stoke in March . 
 For the match against Bristol Rovers in April , Shankly favoured an 18 @-@ year @-@ old Ian Callaghan , considered by Liddell to be his successor . He received a standing ovation at the end of the match and ultimately broke Liddell 's appearances record . Liddell 's last league game came in the 1960 – 61 season , in a 1 – 0 defeat to Southampton . The match gave him the distinction of being the oldest footballer to play for the club in a post @-@ war senior match ( at 38 years and 224 days ) until Kenny Dalglish in 1990 . To recognise Liddell 's 22 @-@ year service , Liverpool organised a testimonial in September between the club and an International XI at Anfield . The game had an attendance of 38 @,@ 789 and generated £ 6 @,@ 340 in revenue , enabling Liddell to purchase a home . He ended his career in the reserves and made his final appearance on 29 April 1961 , scoring one of his side 's five goals against Blackburn . 
 His influence gained the club the nickname " <unk> " , but a retired Liddell insisted that he had never carried the team . In remembering Liddell in his " 50 greatest Liverpool players " , The Times ' Tony Evans noted that he had been a leader who had inspired hope amongst the club 's support in " bleak times " . As of August 2010 , Liddell remains the oldest player to score for Liverpool ( at 38 years and 55 days ) , and is ranked as the club 's fourth highest goalscorer , bettered only by Ian Rush ( 346 goals ) , Roger Hunt ( 286 goals ) , and Gordon Hodgson ( 241 goals ) . 
 = = = International = = = 
 Liddell debuted for Scotland in a 5 – 4 wartime win over England at Hampden Park , equalising Tommy Lawton 's opening goal . He gained several more wartime caps . He gained his first full cap against Switzerland scoring twice in a 3 @-@ 1 win at Hampden Park on 15 May 1946 At international level , Liddell played predominantly as an outside left , in competition with Scotland @-@ based Lawrie Reilly and Willie Ormond . The Scottish Football Association ( SFA ) denied Liddell and his teammates the opportunity to participate in the 1950 World Cup , hosted by Brazil , because of an earlier decision not to sanction involvement as British Home Championship runners @-@ up . The decision meant qualification depended on the final match against England on 25 May 1950 , which Scotland lost 1 @-@ 0 when joint @-@ first needed only a draw . Despite pressure from players , the SFA maintained its position . 
 In 1951 , Scotland won the Home Championship , with Liddell scoring twice . His goal against England in a 3 @-@ 2 win followed a clash of heads with Wilf Mannion that fractured the English player 's cheek bone . For the 1954 World Cup , the SFA decided to authorise World Cup participation regardless of placement . After a 3 @-@ 3 draw with Wales , the SFA omitted Liddell from the starting lineup and he did not accompany the team to Switzerland . Scotland struggled in the World Cup and lost their two matches 1 – 0 and 7 – 0 to Austria and Uruguay , respectively . The team 's first manager , Andy Beattie , resigned in protest because of SFA interference in the selection process . 
 Having been overlooked for four matches that followed , Liddell was re @-@ called by the SFA after a 7 – 2 loss to England at Wembley . He returned as an outside left and scored one of Scotland 's three goals against Portugal on 4 May 1955 . His involvement in the tour of Yugoslavia , Austria and Hungary later in the month proved eventful . In a 2 – 2 draw with Yugoslavia , Liddell received a black eye when accidentally punched by goalkeeper Vladimir Beara while attempting a header . He scored his last goal for Scotland in an ill @-@ tempered 4 – 1 win over Austria at <unk> , where a brief pitch invasion involving large numbers of supporters reportedly resulted in altercations between players and fans . Late in the match against Hungary , Liddell missed his second penalty for Scotland while the side were losing 3 – 1 to the " Golden Team " . During his career with Liverpool , Liddell converted 34 of his 41 penalties . 
 Liddell gained two additional caps representing a Great Britain XI against the Rest of Europe in 1947 and 1955 . He became one of only two players ( the other being Stanley Matthews ) to twice be selected . The first exhibition had been arranged to celebrate FIFA 's readmission of the four Home Nations . Promoted as the " Match of the Century " and watched by 135 @,@ 000 spectators , the game ended in an emphatic 6 @-@ 1 victory for Britain . Liddell sustained a pulled muscle , which severely impaired his movement on the pitch and forced him out of two domestic matches . In the second match , organised to observe the 75th anniversary of the Irish FA 's creation , the Rest of Europe won decisively by a scoreline of 4 – 1 . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 Liddell settled in Liverpool with Phyllis and their twin sons , residing in Merseyside until his death . When his father died in January 1951 , Liddell arranged for his mother , sister , and younger brothers to relocate to the city , concentrating his family in the region . While still a player , Liddell was appointed a Justice of the Peace for Liverpool in 1958 and contributed a column to the Echo 's football edition . He became occupied with voluntary work , which entailed him being an occasional disc jockey for the Women 's Voluntary Service at Alder Hey Children 's Hospital , working for local youth clubs , and teaching at a Sunday school . Although religious , Liddell had not been a lay preacher as some believed . His wife dismissed it as a misapprehension , recalling that , while Liddell had abstained from drinking and smoking , he had not objected to others doing so in his presence and never " rammed any of his views down people 's throats . " After retiring in 1961 , Liddell served as assistant permanent secretary and bursar to the University of Liverpool until 1984 , and authored a memoir , titled " My Soccer Story " . 
 While he had no desire to be a manager , Liddell , as a shareholder , had wanted to become a Liverpool director ; however , his repeated applications to board elections were unsuccessful . He continued to play football for a magistrates ' team until he decided to focus on tennis after breaking a cheek bone . In 1967 , Liddell and other footballing personalities appeared in a charity match to generate funds for Bankfield House Community Centre . More than 10 @,@ 000 people watched Liddell play opposite retired Hungarian international Ferenc Puskás at South Liverpool 's Holly Park ground , raising £ 1 @,@ 100 in the process . He later became chairman of Littlewoods ' Spot the Ball panel and president of the Liverpool FC Supporters Club . After being diagnosed with Parkinson 's disease in the early 1990s , Liddell resigned from the panel on the insistence of Phyllis . His wife had first noticed atypical behaviour on a visit to Anfield following the Hillsborough disaster in 1989 , when he did not appear able to register what had happened in Sheffield . When his condition worsened , Liddell moved to a nursing home in Mossley Hill . He died on 3 July 2001 , within a week of the deaths of former Liverpool manager Joe Fagan and director Tom Saunders . 
 In 2002 , former Liverpool Reserve player Jimmy Rolfe loaned to Anfield Museum a No. 11 shirt believed to be the only surviving example worn by Liddell in the league . He had acquired it from trainer Albert Shelley on leaving for Chester in 1953 . On 4 November 2004 , widow Phyllis and Ian Callaghan unveiled a commemorative plaque adjacent to the museum . Liddell 's biographer John Keith , who also presented on BBC Radio Merseyside , had proposed the memorial to then chairman David Moores and chief executive Rick Parry . Further recognition came in 2006 when Liddell attained sixth place in a poll of more than 110 @,@ 000 people conducted by Liverpool 's official website to determine a list of " 100 Players Who Shook The Kop " . When Liverpool approached former players to identify their personal favourites as a complement to the list , Ian Callaghan , Tommy Smith , David Johnson , and Roy Evans included Liddell in their " top five " . The Football League included Liddell in a 1998 list of notable players , titled the " 100 Legends " . 
 The Billy Liddell Memorial Group formed in 2007 to advocate further recognition for Liddell , specifically in his home village of Townhill , and secure induction into the Scottish FA 's Hall of Fame . A petition to the Scottish Parliament , to have Liddell inducted , succeeded in November 2008 when he became one of eight players admitted . His village renamed its sports complex in his honour and completed a memorial garden , with cairn , in May 2010 . The Deputy Provost of Fife Council , Councillor Lizz Mogg , officially unveiled the cairn on the 22nd in the presence of Liddell 's widow and other relatives . The memorial group announced its intention to disband in July , citing the success of its campaign . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Liverpool 
 English First Division ( 1 ) : 1946 – 47 
 FA Cup Runners @-@ up ( 1 ) : 1949 – 50 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Domestic = = = 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 Scores and results list Scotland 's goal tally first . 
 = Lenyadri = 
 Lenyadri ( Marathi : <unk> ् <unk> ् री , <unk> ) represents a series of about 30 rock @-@ cut Buddhist caves , located near Junnar in Pune district in the Indian state of Maharashtra . Cave 7 is a famous Hindu temple dedicated to the god Ganesha . It is one of the Ashtavinayak shrines , a set of the eight prominent Ganesha shrines in Western Maharashtra . 
 Twenty @-@ six of the caves are individually numbered . The caves face to the south and are numbered serially from east to west . Caves 6 and 14 are chaitya @-@ <unk> ( chapels ) , while the rest are viharas ( dwellings for monks ) . The latter are in the form of dwellings and cells . There are also several rock @-@ cut water cisterns ; two of them have inscriptions . The layout of the caves , in general , are similar in pattern and shape . They generally have one or two sides with two long benches for occupants ' use . 
 The caves date from between the 1st and 3rd century AD ; the Ganesha shrine situated in Cave 7 is dated to the 1st century AD , though the date of conversion to a Hindu shrine is unknown . All of the caves arise from Hinayana Buddhism . 
 = = Names = = 
 The current name " Lenyadri " literally means " mountain cave " . It is derived from ' Lena ' in Marathi meaning " cave " and ' <unk> ' in Sanskrit meaning " mountain " or " stone " . The name " Lenyadri " appears in the Hindu scripture Ganesha Purana as well as in a Sthala Purana , in association to the Ganesha legend . It is also called <unk> and <unk> <unk> ( " <unk> mountain " ) . 
 The hill is also known as Suleman Pahar ( " Suleman hill " ) or Ganesh Pahar ( " Ganesha hill " ) . An ancient inscription calls the place <unk> ( <unk> ) . The caves are also known as Ganesh Lena or Ganesh Caves . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Lenyadri is located at 19 ° 14 ′ 34 ″ N 73 ° 53 ′ 8 ″ E , in the Indian state of Maharashtra in Pune district . Lenyadri is a deserted location , with no human settlement nearby . It is located at about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) from Junnar , the headquarters of Junnar taluka . It is situated on the north @-@ west banks of river <unk> , which flows between <unk> and Junnar . It is also approached through <unk> , which was originally on the trade route between <unk> or the northern Konkan and the Deccan and descending to the plains of the Junnar town , dated to about 100 years before Christ was born . The circular hill , where Lenyadri caves have been <unk> , raises about 100 ft above the plains in the <unk> and Suleiman ranges . 
 Lenyadri is the only Ashtavinayaka temple on a mountain and within the precincts of Buddhist caves . 
 = = Cave 7 : Ganesha Temple = = 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 The Ganesha temple is located in Cave 7 , the largest excavation around Junnar , about 100 feet ( 30 m ) above the plains . It is essentially a Buddhist Vihara ( a dwelling for monks , mostly with meditation cells ) in design , an <unk> hall with 20 cells with varying dimensions ; 7 on either side and 6 on the rear wall . The hall is large , can be entered by a central door , under a pillared veranda . The hall is 17 @.@ 37 metres ( 57 @.@ 0 ft ) long ; 15 @.@ 54 metres ( 51 @.@ 0 ft ) wide and 3 @.@ 38 metres ( 11 @.@ 1 ft ) high . There are 2 windows on either side of the entrance . The hall is treated now as a sabha @-@ mandapa ( " assembly hall " ) of the Ganesha temple . 283 steps built ( by devotees ) in stone masonry over eight flights lead to the entrance . The steps are believed to represent sensual pleasures , which Ganesha has overcome . The veranda has six pillars and two pilasters ( half @-@ pillars ) , that support " an architrave from which projects eaves relieved with a railing resting on beams and rafters " . The pillars have octagonal shafts and " over benches and back rest and topped by an inverted <unk> , compressed amalaka in between two square plates , inverted stepped pyramid and finally crowned by a bracket " with tigers , elephants and bulls . 
 In a later period , the two central cells of the rear wall have been combined by breaking the partition in between to house the Ganesha image . The old entrance was also widened during the conversion to the Ganesha temple . There are two other smaller entrances to the hall . All entrances bear marks of sockets for fixing wooden doors , added during the conversion , and still have doors . The hall also has traces of plaster and paintings , both added during the conversion and renewed in later times - possibly as late as the 19th century . The Gazetteer of the Bombay Presidency ( 1882 ) records that the hall was plastered and white @-@ washed . The paintings depicted Ganesha 's childhood , marriage preparations , battle with demons and so forth , along with scenes of other Hindu deities like Devi , Krishna , Vishnu and Shiva . Some of the cells fitted with wooden doors were used for storage . Nine Sati memorials were added on the left wall during the conversion , each is in the shape of a long pillar with an arched top , and to the right of each pillar a hand raised above the elbow , with an open palm , signifies Sati 's blessing . While three panels were plain , the other memorials were sculpted . All of them are worn out , but one of them hints that its subject may be the immolation of Sati on her husband 's funeral pyre . 
 Icon 
 The Ganesha form worshipped here is called <unk> ( Sanskrit : <unk> ् <unk> ) . The name is either interpreted as " mountain @-@ born " or as " <unk> of Girija " , the son of Parvati , who herself is daughter of the mountain Himavan , a personification of the mountains of Himalayas . The features of the Ganesha icon , seen on the back wall of the cave , are the least distinct vis @-@ a @-@ vis the other Ashtavinayak temples . Though the temple faces the inauspicious south , - according to a local tradition - the deity faces north , with his back to his worshipper and his face visible on the other side of the mountain . The Peshwa rulers even tried in vain to locate the face of Ganesha on the other side . The central icon was covered with brass @-@ plated wooden armour , given as a gift by Junnar . Brahmins , The armour is not present currently . After it was removed , Ganesha could be seen with his trunk turned to the left side , facing east , with one of his eyes visible . The icon is covered with sindoor and is directly formed / sculpted on the stone wall of the cave . 
 Like all Ashtavinayaka temples , the central Ganesha image is believed to be <unk> ( self @-@ existent ) , a naturally occurring stone formation resembling an elephant @-@ face . 
 = = = Legend = = = 
 According to the Ganapatya scripture Ganesha Purana , Ganesha incarnated as Mayuresvara or <unk> ( <unk> ) , who had six arms and a white complexion . His mount was a peacock . He was born to Shiva and Parvati in the Treta yuga , for the purpose of killing the demon Sindhu . 
 Once Parvati ( Girija ) asked her husband Shiva who he was mediating on . He said he was mediating on " the supporter of the entire universe " - Ganesha , and initiated Parvati with the Ganesha Mantra " Gam " . Desiring to have a son , Parvati underwent austerities meditating on Ganesha , for twelve years at Lenyadri . Pleased by her penance , Ganesha blessed her with the boon that he will be born as her son . Accordingly , on the fourth lunar day of the bright fortnight of the Hindu month Bhadrapada ( Ganesh <unk> day ) , Parvati worshipped a clay image of Ganesha , which came alive . Thus , Ganesha was born to Parvati at Lenyadri . Later , he was named Gunesha by Shiva . Shiva gave him a boon that whosoever remembers him before starting a job , will successfully complete that task . For 15 years Gunesha grew up at Lenyadri . Sindhu , who knew that his death would be at the hands of Gunesha , sent demons like <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and many more , to kill Gunesha , but all of them were instead killed by him . At the age of six , the architect @-@ god Vishwakarma worshipped Gunesha and endowed him with the weapons Pasha ( noose ) , <unk> ( axe ) , <unk> ( hook ) and Padma ( Lotus ) . Once , little Gunesha knocked an egg from a mango tree , from which emerged a peacock . Gunesha mounted the peacock and assumed the name Mayuresvara . Mayuresvara later killed Sindhu and his army @-@ generals at Morgaon , the most important Ashtavinayaka temple . 
 = = = Worship = = = 
 Lenyadri is one of the eight revered Ganesha temples collectively called Ashtavinayaka . While some believe that order of visiting the temples in an Ashtavinayaka pilgrimage is irrelevant , Lenyadri is usually visited as the 6th temple . 
 The caves including the temple lie under the control of the Archaeological Survey of India . Sardar Deshpande is the priest in charge of the temple 's activities . He does not stay in Lenyadri . The priests there claim to be Yajurvedi Brahmins . The festivals of Ganesh Jayanti and Ganesh Chaturthi are celebrated in the temple , when pilgrims crowd all Ashtavinayak temples . 
 = = Other viharas ( monk dwellings ) = = 
 Cave 1 
 Cave 1 is divided into four parts : a veranda , a middle room , a cell , and a half cell . The veranda has a bench along the right wall . Its front possibly had two quadrangular pillars , traces of one are seen around the ceiling . A rock beam was present over the pillars , above the beam ribs and a rail pattern could have existed . In a recess below the veranda is an earth @-@ filled cistern . A door with a small window to the left leads into the middle room . The middle room has a bench along the right wall . Towards the back of the middle room , to the left , is the half cell and to the right the cell . The half @-@ cell has a bench along the right wall and to the left , has a square window connecting it to cave 2 . A door with grooves for fitting a wooden frame , leads into the cell which has a bench along its right wall . 
 Cave 2 
 Cave 2 is similar to cave 1 in design . The veranda has two pillars and two pilasters , a bench between each pillar and pilaster with curtains in the back , which have a rail pattern . Over the pillars rests the rail @-@ patterned rock beam , above which is the ceiling . Parts of the pillars and pilasters are broken . In front over the beam project rock imitations of rafters . A doorway with grooves for a wooden frame , leads into a middle room , with a bench along the left wall . The position of the hall @-@ cell and cell are exchanged with respect to cave 1 design . Each has a bench . 
 Cave 3 
 Cave 3 has an open veranda and a cell . The veranda has a bench along the back wall . A door leads to a cell , which has a seat in a left recess . In front of the recess , below the seat , are vertical bands . Between caves 2 and 3 there is a seat in the front , in a recess . 
 Cave 4 
 Cave 4 has an open veranda and a cell . The veranda has a bench , along the back wall . A grooved door leads to a cell , which has a bench along the right wall . A broken window is to the left of door and to its right , a small hole , which could have been used to wash feet before entering the cell . 
 Cave 5 
 Cave 5 is located 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) lower to left of cave 4 . It is divided into 3 parts : veranda , a middle hall and seven cells of varying size , three in the back wall and two in each side wall . Thus it is known as a <unk> <unk> ( seven cell dwelling ) . The veranda had two pillars and two pilasters with pot capitals of the Satakarni period ( B.C. 90 @-@ A.D. 300 ) , of which only the right broken pilaster and a trace of the base of the right pillar remain . In front of the veranda , an open court with two steps lead to the veranda . To the right of the court is a cistern . In the back wall of the veranda , to the left of the door to the middle hall , close under the broken verandah ceiling , is a single line inscription , flanked by the Buddhist trident in the beginning and swastika at the end . It is translated as : " A meritorious gift of a seven @-@ celled cave and cistern by a guild of corn @-@ dealers . " The door also has windows on both its sides . Throughout the middle hall in the front of the cells is a bench . A bench is also built in the back wall of the cells . 
 Cave 8 
 Cave 8 is a difficult @-@ to @-@ reach dwelling . It consists of a veranda with a cell and a half cell in its back wall , both entered through the veranda . The cell has a broken door , a small window , benched recess and a peg hole . The half cell has an open front and a bench at the back . 
 Cave 9 
 Cave 9 located to the right of Cave 8 , can be entered via the latter 's veranda . Cave 9 has its own veranda and a hall . The veranda has four Satakarni @-@ period , broken pillars . The hall has a larger central door - with windows on either side - and a side door , both having grooves for wooden frames . The purpose of this hall is unknown and speculated to be a school or study . 
 Cave 10 
 Cave 10 is located at a higher level than cave 9 and is difficult to reach as its front is broken . An open veranda with a broken ceiling and floor leads to a middle room through a grooved broken door , which has windows on either side . The right wall of the hall has a recess with a seat . A cell to the left of the room has a seat in a recess . A door from the cell leads to a half @-@ cell which has a recess and seat . Traces of painting are seen on the ceiling . Outside the veranda to the left is a cistern . 
 Cave 11 
 Cave 11 is difficult to reach with a broken front and a hall . To the left of a hall is a cell , lower in height than the hall . The hall has a grooved doorway and a recess with a seat at the back . Outside the hall is a view seat . The cave bears traces of paint . 
 Cave 12 
 Cave 12 is a small dwelling entered by a door from the veranda of cave 11 . It has its own open veranda , which has a partly broken floor and ceiling and recessed benches on the left and right of the door to the middle room . The middle room has a small window to the left of the door and a seat recess in its right wall . In the back wall of the middle room to the left is a half cell - which has a seat recess - and a cell with a grooved door . The floor of the cave has a coating of cement , while the ceiling of the middle room bears painted concentric circles . 
 Cave 13 
 Cave 13 on a slightly higher level than cave 12 , is a small dwelling with an open court and from 2 steps lead to a veranda . To the right of the court is a cistern . The veranda has a bench along its right wall . The front of the veranda has 2 benches , flanked by a plain eight @-@ sided pillar and pilaster ; some remnants of these survive . On the right pilaster is a double crescent ornament . A grooved door leads to a middle room , which has a bench along the right wall and seat recess to the left . A window is to the left of door . In the back wall of the middle room a cell ( left ) - with a grooved bench and a bench - and a half cell ( right ) are seen . The ceiling has traces of painting . 
 Cave 15 
 Cave 15 is a small dwelling consisting of a cell with an unproved doorway and a veranda . Though the side walls of the cave are still preserved , the ceiling is half broken . 
 Cave 16 
 Cave 16 is a small dwelling , on a slightly higher level above cave 15 . It has a cell with a bench along its right wall and a veranda , which leads to the cell through a door . The side walls as well as a part of the ceiling are broken . 
 Cave 17 
 Cave 17 comprises a series of three small dwellings located along a row with a shared veranda . The first dwelling has a doorway flanked by broken windows on either side , leading to a middle room . The back room of the middle dwelling has a cell to the right and a half cell to the left . A window is located to left of door to the cell . The cell also has traces of painting . The half cell has a bench . The second dwelling has a middle room , a half cell to the left , and a cell , reached from the right of the half cell . The middle room has a bench . The half cell has a recess in its back wall , along with a bench . A grooved door leads from the half @-@ cell to the cell , which also has a bench . A window in the right cell overlooks in to the middle room . In front of the doorway is a bench . The third and largest of the three dwellings consists of a middle hall . At the back wall of the hall there are two cells and two seat recesses . Along the right and rear walls runs a bench . The right cell as well as the left cell have grooved doorways , a window to the left of the doorway and a bench along each of their rear walls . In front of the hall door is a bench . In front of the broken veranda are holes for fixing wooden pillars . To the left of the veranda are two cisterns . Between cave 17 and cave 18 , there are three other cisterns . In the recess of the first cistern , an inscription reads translated : " A meritorious gift of a cistern by <unk> a goldsmith , son of <unk> of Kalyana . " Another inscription in the recess of the second cistern reads translated : " A meritorious gift of a cistern by <unk> ( wife ) of <unk> the Na <unk> [ and ] <unk> , wife of <unk> . " 
 Cave 18 
 Cave 18 is a dining hall with a front wall and a grooved doorway , on either side of which are windows . A bench runs along the back and side walls . The passage to the hall has 3 broken steps and an open court in the front . A cistern is located to the left of the court . 
 Cave 19 
 Cave 19 is a cell without a front wall and a bench runs along the left wall . The ceiling shows signs of a dressed stone or wooden screen from the right wall to the end of the bench . To the right is a small cell in the same roof , probably connected with cave 19 . The small cell has a bench along its right wall and the grooved doorway . The cave has two cisterns . 
 Cave 20 
 Cave 20 is a small dwelling , hard to reach as the front is broken . To the right is a passage and to the left a cell with a bench along the entire left wall . 
 Cave 21 
 Cave 21 is approached through a small crevice from cave 20 , in the absence of any direct approach . Its living space has a veranda of fairly large size . There is also an inner cell with a grooved door frame . Seating benches have been cut into shallow spaces both in the cell and in the veranda . 
 Cave 22 
 Cave 22 adjoins cave 21 on the left and it was also a dwelling unit with a bench for the entire length of the back wall . A window from this hall overlooks another smaller room . An entry through a grooved door gives access to a long corridor and in the back wall of which is an inscription that discloses the name of the donor and the monastic order . 
 Cave 23 
 Cave 23 has two dwelling units with a long passage with shallow niches with seating provisions on the left wall . A door provides links to the rooms . A 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) niche in the back wall between the two rooms gives no clue of its purpose . 
 Cave 24 
 Cave 24 is a long cave with difficult access that leads into a cistern with seating arrangements in the niches . There is a door access to the passage , which also has benches for seating . 
 Cave 25 
 Cave 25 is longer than cave 24 with several small and big rooms . These rooms also have seating arrangements in niches which display irregular excavations denoting poor condition of the rock , which probably stopped further work on this cave . 
 Cave 26 
 This is plain cave located below cave 6 , which is a chaitya ( chapel ) cave . 
 = = <unk> ( chapels ) = = 
 Cave 6 
 Cave 6 is the main chaitya @-@ griha of the Lenyadri caves and one of the earliest examples of a Hinayana chaitya @-@ griha . Its plan is similar to the Ajanta Caves chaitya @-@ griha , though smaller in size . It has a veranda , pillars and pilasters with animal @-@ capitals , and a shrine with 5 steps at the entrance . The shrine hall is entered by a plain and a socketed @-@ door measuring 1 @.@ 8 metres ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) in width and 2 @.@ 79 metres ( 9 @.@ 2 ft ) in height . The hall measures 13 @.@ 3 metres ( 44 ft ) in length ; 6 @.@ 7 metres ( 22 ft ) in width and 7 metres ( 23 ft ) in height . It has a row of five pillars and one pilaster on each side of the chaitya or <unk> or stupa ( central relic @-@ shrine ) , located at the rear of the hall . The Satakarni period pillars begin with a four @-@ plated pyramid structure , then a <unk> base , followed by an eight @-@ sided shaft , above a reversed pot , then a capital in five plates , and on the top the amalaka or cogwheel pattern . The capital has animal figures like lions , elephants , a sphinx and tigers . Parts of the pillar are broken . Behind the relic @-@ shrine , are six eight @-@ sided pillars , arranged in a curve . " The stupa consists of a drum with a moulding below and railing above , a globular dome and a corbelled ( with " a projection jutting out from a wall to support a structure above it " ) dome with a railing at the base . " The stupa has Buddhist tridents carved on it . A hole is carved for fixing garlands in the front and 5 holes on the top probably to fix a central wooden umbrella and side flags . A 2nd century , swastika @-@ flanked inscription on the back wall of the veranda translates : " A meritorious gift of a chapel cave by the distinguished <unk> , son of <unk> of Kalyana [ modern Kalyan near Mumbai ] . " 
 Between caves 5 and 6 , on higher level , is an excavation originally intended either for a dwelling or for a seat , but converted into a cistern following discovery of a rock @-@ fault . On its left side is a bench . 
 Cave 14 
 This cave , also a chaitya @-@ griha , has a flat roof . However , it has no pillars in the hall that measures 6 @.@ 75 metres ( 22 @.@ 1 ft ) in length ; 3 @.@ 93 metres ( 12 @.@ 9 ft ) in width and 4 @.@ 16 metres ( 13 @.@ 6 ft ) in height . It has a pillared veranda ; pillars are in octagonal shape . The stupa is in three steps with a base of 2 @.@ 6 metres ( 8 @.@ 5 ft ) diameter . The rim has a railing design surrounded by a cylindrical drum with “ a square <unk> with railing pattern and an inverted stepped pyramidal abacus . ” A carved <unk> covers the ceiling . The pillars of the veranda consist of octagonal shafts resting on <unk> base over a stepped pedestal . An inverted <unk> adorns the top , which also has a corbelled abacus . Inscription on the back wall of the veranda dates the cave to the 2nd century A.D. The inscription translates as : " A meritorious gift of a chapel cave given by ' nanda , a son of <unk> an <unk> , and grandson of Kapila an <unk> . " 
 = = Unnumbered Caves = = 
 On another spur of the same Lenyadri hill , there are four more caves ( not numbered ) that face south @-@ south west and are cut into precipitous hill slopes . Based on their unfinished conditions , they are interpreted as early caves . The details are : a small chaitya with a relic @-@ shrine and a door , with unfinished irregular rock faces . The entrance is decorated with ornamentation that depict relic @-@ shrine , a lotus flower and geometrical patterns ; another is an inaccessible cave with two rooms , a well , and stone beds in three adjoining rooms with an incomplete relic @-@ shrine in low relief ; two other adjoining caves have a chapel and a front veranda . 
 = Beyond : Two Souls = 
 Beyond : Two Souls is an interactive drama action @-@ adventure video game for the PlayStation 3 home video game console , created by French game developer Quantic Dream and published by Sony Computer Entertainment . It was released in October of 2013 . The game features Jodie Holmes , one of two player characters . The other is an incorporeal entity named Aiden : a separate soul linked to Jodie since birth . Jodie , who is portrayed by actress Ellen Page , possesses supernatural powers through her psychic link to Aiden , growing from adolescence to adulthood while learning to control Aiden and the powers they share . Willem Dafoe co @-@ stars as Nathan Dawkins , a researcher in the Department of Paranormal Activity and Jodie 's surrogate @-@ father @-@ figure . The actors in the game worked during the year @-@ long project in Quantic Dream 's Paris studio to perform on @-@ set voice acting and motion capture acting . 
 Despite being a video game , Beyond : Two Souls premiered at the 2013 Tribeca Film Festival , marking only the second time the film festival recognised a video game . David Cage , writer and director of the game , explained that game development studios should provide " interactive storytelling " that can be played by everyone , including non @-@ gamers . The game received polarized critical reception upon its release . Sales reached over one million copies worldwide by the end of 2013 , two months after the game 's release . A PlayStation 4 version was released as both a standalone title in November 2015 and in the Quantic Dream Collection with Heavy Rain , in March 2016 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Beyond : Two Souls is an interactive drama action @-@ adventure game , requiring the player to move and guide the character into interactions with objects and other non @-@ player characters in the scene to progress the story . The player primarily controls Jodie through the in @-@ game environments . At almost any time , however , the player ( or second player during a two @-@ player game ) can switch to control Aiden instead . Aiden , as an incorporeal entity , exists permanently in <unk> mode and can move through walls , ceilings , and other obstacles ; however , he is limited to moving only within a certain radius around Jodie due to their spiritual tethering . 
 While playing as Jodie , the game mechanics include interactive objects marked with a white dot , which can be interacted with by tilting the controller stick in its direction . If Jodie must perform a specific action , icons pop up on the screen to prompt the player to press and / or hold certain controller buttons . Conversation prompts float in the air , defaulting to a certain choice if too much time passes before selection . During action sequences , like chases or hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat , the cinematography moves into slow motion whilst Jodie performs the physical manoeuvre ; during this time , the player must determine the direction Jodie is moving and push the controller stick in that direction to complete the action . Other sequences require real @-@ time stealth , which has the player sneak Jodie through environments while coordinating certain actions with Aiden . Failing certain action sequences will alter the course of a chapter ( and sometimes later chapters ) and in some cases lead to the death of a non @-@ playable character . 
 While playing as Aiden , the game becomes monochromatic . Amongst the shades of greys , interactive objects are highlighted by an aura shining in one of several colours , with the colour of the aura indicating his potential interaction : orange characters can be possessed , red characters strangled , blue objects ( or characters with environmental effects ) knocked around , and green characters healed . Jodie frequently calls upon Aiden to provide different abilities , such as form a protective shield around her , allow the dead to speak to the living through her , grant her an ability to see events of the recent past , and enable her to heal a character 's wounds . 
 As the player makes choices throughout the game , the gameplay 's plot is revealed . Besides affecting dialogue and story developments , the outcome of entire scenes ( and in some cases , the outcome of scenes several chapters later ) can be manipulated to a certain extent based on player choices . These choices are typically moral decisions made through Jodie 's dialogue options , interventions with various characters , success or failure in her combat scenes , or psychic actions that the player chooses to have Aiden perform . Examples of choice @-@ based outcomes are the chapter titled The Party , where the player is given the choice of unleashing brutal revenge toward a group of bullies or simply running away , and the chapter titled The Embassy , where the player can either engage in psychic information retrieval or can jeopardize the mission by forcing one of the guards to commit suicide . Choices also determine the finale of Beyond : Two Souls , as any number of possible plot endings can be experienced by the player . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While the story is told through nonlinear narrative , this summary is given in chronological order . 
 Young Jodie Holmes ( Caroline Wolfson ) lives on a military base with her foster parents . Since birth , Jodie has had a psychic connection with a mysterious entity named Aiden , with whom she can communicate and perform telepathic acts , such as possessing peoples ' minds and manipulating certain objects . After an incident with some neighbourhood kids results in Aiden almost killing one of them , Jodie 's foster parents seek help to care for her condition , permanently leaving her under the custody of doctors Nathan Dawkins ( Willem Dafoe ) and Cole Freeman ( Kadeem Hardison ) of the United States Department of Paranormal Activity . 
 Under the two doctors ' care , Jodie slowly learns to control Aiden and the powers they share . During this time , Nathan and Cole are building the condenser , a portal that connects the world of the living with the world of the dead — the Infraworld . One night , Nathan learns that his wife and daughter were killed in a car accident . While trying to comfort him , Jodie discovers that she can channel spirits of the dead from the Infraworld ; she helps the spirits speak to the living through a psychic link created by her physical contact . As the years pass , a teenage Jodie ( Ellen Page ) seeks her independence , both from the doctors and from Aiden , and tries several times to live a normal life . At each attempt , Aiden intervenes , ending in disaster . 
 At one point , Nathan asks for Jodie 's help with the condenser , which has broken open . After braving hostile entities from the Infraworld , Jodie manages to shut down the condenser and warns Nathan not to build another . This gets the attention of the CIA , who send agent Ryan Clayton ( Eric Winter ) to forcibly recruit Jodie . After training , the now @-@ adult Jodie goes on multiple missions as a field agent , often with Ryan , to whom she slowly becomes attracted . On one such mission in Somalia , Jodie learns that the target she killed was not a warlord , but the country 's benign president . An enraged Jodie flees in disgust , despite Ryan 's pleas . Branded a traitor , Jodie becomes a fugitive , evading and fighting pursuing CIA forces . Along the way , she befriends a group of homeless people , one of whom she helps give birth , and a family of Native Americans whom she saves from a malevolent entity . The CIA eventually recaptures Jodie after she attempts to reconnect with her catatonic biological mother , who has been held and forcibly drugged for decades in a military hospital . 
 The CIA hands Jodie over to Nathan , now executive director of the DPA , overseeing the DPA 's newest condenser , code @-@ named the Black Sun . He reveals that the CIA is willing to let Jodie go if she agrees to a final mission . Jodie and a CIA team led by Ryan destroy a facility housing a Chinese @-@ developed condenser before it is used to attack the United States . Jodie then learns that Nathan built a miniature condenser to speak exclusively to his family , but without success . After showing Nathan that his refusal to let them go is only making them suffer , Jodie tries to leave , only to be held in captivity by the CIA — the organisation has deemed her too dangerous to be freed . Jodie is subjected to the same fate as her mother . Nathan appears and informs Jodie that he 's decided to shut down the containment field to the Black Sun , merging the two worlds together and making death meaningless . Too weak to free Jodie , Aiden contacts Ryan and Cole , leading them to her . After Nathan shuts down the containment field , the three chase after him into the heart of the Black Sun , with the intent of destroying it . 
 During the trek towards the Black Sun , Cole is injured by entities and Ryan sacrifices his own safety to keep Jodie alive . Eventually , Jodie confronts Nathan near the Black Sun . He commits suicide to reunite with his family . As Jodie shuts down the condenser , she has a vision — Aiden is her stillborn twin brother . Jodie must make a choice : go back to the world of the living , or go on to the Infraworld and be reunited with everyone she has lost . By the story 's end , the Infraworld has become a widespread threat in the not @-@ so @-@ distant future . One or two heroines prepare to confront the threat . 
 = = Development = = 
 David Cage , founder and CEO of Quantic Dream , announced Beyond : Two Souls at Sony 's press conference during the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2012 . He showed the crowd a debut trailer featuring the game 's in @-@ game graphics . When he was asked to compare Beyond : Two Souls to Quantic Dream 's previous game Heavy Rain , Cage described Beyond as a " more action @-@ driven experience " that offers " much more direct control " and " much more spectacular action " than the 2010 thriller . Unlike Quantic Dream 's previous game , Beyond was not to be PlayStation Move compatible . Earlier games created by Cage , which have been called " wrought psychological thrillers " , demonstrate that emotional narrative is a critical element in a Quantic Dream game 's development . In an interview , actress Ellen Page noted that the script for the game was around 2 @,@ 000 pages long ( an average screenplay is between 95 and 125 pages long ; each page is approximately one minute of screen time ) . " We 'd do 30 , 40 pages a day . It 's insane compared to a film . Jody goes through a lot . This is an incredibly emotional story and journey for this girl . " 
 Quantic Dream , an advanced motion capture studio as well as video game developer , required the Beyond : Two Souls actors to perform motion capture acting as well as on @-@ set voice acting . Ellen Page , Willem Dafoe , Kadeem Hardison , Eric Winter , Caroline Wolfson , and other actors cast in the game worked during the year @-@ long project in the Paris studio to perform the physical actions seen onscreen as performed by their fully realised video game graphic characters . Meanwhile , Quantic Dream programmers , artists , and animators , led by art director Christophe <unk> , designed the computer @-@ generated imagery seen in the game . David Cage provided writing and direction and Guillaume de <unk> was the video game producer . 
 Beyond : Two Souls is dedicated to video game composer Normand Corbeil , who died of pancreatic cancer on 25 January 2013 . Corbeil had worked on Quantic Dream 's Heavy Rain and its predecessor Fahrenheit and was unable to finish his work on Beyond . Lorne Balfe , who wrote the score for Assassin 's Creed III , replaced Corbeil as the game 's composer after Corbeil 's death . Balfe 's collaborator Hans Zimmer joined him as producer in August 2013 . 
 On 27 April 2013 , five months before the game 's debut , Quantic Dream released a new trailer and demonstrated 35 minutes of the game at the 2013 Tribeca Film Festival , with both Page and Cage in attendance . This marks only the second time the film festival recognised a video game , the first being 2011 's L.A. Noire . In interviews conducted immediately prior to the game 's worldwide release , Cage explained that development studios like Quantic Dream have an obligation to provide " interactive storytelling " that can be played by everyone , including non @-@ gamers . 
 = = Release = = 
 On 5 September 2013 , the PlayStation Blog announced that a demo for Beyond : Two Souls would be released 1 October 2013 in the United States , 2 October for Europe , and 3 October for Japan , about a week prior to the full game 's worldwide release . Despite the demo 's official release date , a few users of the paid subscription service PlayStation Plus were allowed to receive the demo a week earlier , on 24 September 2013 . GameStop also gave out a limited number of beta keys on that day . The full game was released on 8 October 2013 in North America , 9 October 2013 in Australia , 11 October 2013 in Europe , and 17 October 2013 in Japan . 
 The European version of the game is censored to keep the PEGI rating at 16 instead of 18 . Two changes were made amounting to 5 – 10 seconds of gameplay . 
 Immediately after the game was released , nude images of Jodie , actress Ellen Page , surfaced on the Reddit online community . The game did include one nude scene of Jodie — showering , shown at an angle that preserves the character 's modesty — however the leaked images were full @-@ frontal . Industry analysts deduced that a person in possession of a developer PlayStation 3 that allowed quality assurance features such as " free camera " mode had used the special PlayStation to create and upload the images . Sony immediately took steps to remove them , asking for the community 's assistance and explaining that the images were of a digital model and not of Page , who has a " no nudity " policy in titles she appears in . The images were removed from the website . 
 In June 2015 , Quantic Dream announced a PlayStation 4 version of Beyond : Two Souls for North America , Europe , and the PAL region alongside Heavy Rain . The PlayStation 4 version of Beyond : Two Souls was released on 24 November , with the remake of Heavy Rain following on 1 March 2016 . A package containing both games was then released physically on a Blu @-@ ray disc . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Beyond : Two Souls received mostly positive to mixed critical reception upon release . Aggregating review websites GameRankings and Metacritic rated the game 72 @.@ 04 % and 70 / 100 respectively . Reviewers praised Page 's character portrayal of Jodie Holmes and Dafoe 's performance as Nathan Dawkins , as well as the amount of technical details in the game 's animations and graphics . Praise was also generally given toward the elaborate motion capture , interactive storytelling mechanics , emotional soundtrack , and ability to appeal to non @-@ gamers . 
 IGN gaming website criticised the game for offering a gaming experience too passive and unrewarding and a plot too muddy and unfocused . Joystiq criticised the game 's lack of solid character interaction and its unbelievable , unintentionally silly plot . Destructoid criticised the game 's thin character presentation and frequent narrative dead ends , as well as its lack of meaningful interactivity . Ben " Yahtzee " Croshaw of Zero Punctuation was heavily critical of the game , focusing on the overuse of quick time events , the underuse of the game 's central stealth mechanics , and the inconsistent tone and atmosphere . 
 At Spike 's VGX award show , Beyond : Two Souls earned two nominations : " Best Voice Actress " ( Ellen Page ) and " Best Voice Actor " ( Willem Dafoe ) . 
 The British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTA ) nominated the game for Best Artistic Achievement ( John Rostron , David Cage , Guillaume De <unk> ) , Best Original Music ( Lorne Balfe ) , and Best Performer ( Ellen Page ) . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 It was reported in July 2013 that Beyond : Two Souls was in the top twenty most pre @-@ ordered games of 2013 , and that by the end 2013 , the game sold one million copies worldwide during its first three months of availability . The game sold over 70 @,@ 000 copies in Quantic Dream 's home country France during that time , more than its previous game Heavy Rain during its three @-@ month debut . Heavy Rain 's budget was $ 22 million and the budget for Beyond : Two Souls was $ 27 million , not including approximately $ 18 million in costs for marketing and distribution . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 In November 2014 , David Cage discussed the future of video games and referred to the generally negative reviews Beyond received from hardcore gamers . " There will always be games for the hardcore gamers who see games as a skill @-@ based sport , or as a way to compete with their friends " , he said . He referred to other types of gamers who play games " as a mere hobby , like many titles for smartphones " . He stated , " We try to develop a middle way , with games that try to tell a story , to carry meaning , and where violence isn 't the core activity . Most of all , we try to create an emotion , to make players live something strong and unique , which remains an ambitious challenge in a video game . " 
 = Flaming Moe 's = 
 " Flaming Moe 's " is the tenth episode of The Simpsons ' third season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 21 , 1991 . In the episode , Homer tells Moe Szyslak of a secret alcoholic cocktail that includes cough medicine and fire that he calls " Flaming Homer " . Moe steals the recipe from Homer , renames the drink the " Flaming Moe " and begins selling it at his tavern . The drink is a success and boosts business and patronage , but Homer is angry at Moe for his betrayal , and seeks revenge . 
 The episode was written by Robert Cohen and directed by Rich Moore , with assistance from Alan Smart . " Flaming Moe 's " was the first episode of the show to feature Moe in a prominent role . The main plot of the episode in which Moe 's Tavern becomes famous because of a drink is loosely based on the Los Angeles establishment Coconut <unk> . The episode also parodies the television series Cheers , including the theme song " Where Everybody Knows Your Name " , and a character named Collette is modeled after Shelley Long 's character Diane Chambers . Catherine O 'Hara originally recorded dialogue for the part of Colette , but the writers felt her voice did not fit the role and instead used a track recorded by regular Jo Ann Harris . 
 American rock band Aerosmith ( Steven Tyler , Tom Hamilton , Joey Kramer , Joe Perry and Brad Whitford ) appears in the episode . They were the first band to make a guest appearance on the show . Their dialogue was recorded in Boston with Hank Azaria , the voice of Moe , who flew over to record his part with them and help them with their lines . 
 The episode has been well received by critics and has been included in best Simpsons episode lists by IGN , Entertainment Weekly , AskMen.com and AOL . In its original airing during the November sweeps period , the episode had a 14 @.@ 4 Nielsen rating and finished the week ranked 29th . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After Bart and Lisa 's slumber party fighting drives him to distraction at home one night , Homer visits Moe 's Tavern , where he finds Moe is struggling financially as fewer people are drinking in bars nowadays and he ran out of Duff Beer after neglecting to pay his distributor . Homer tells him about a drink recipe that he accidentally invented one night , called the " Flaming Homer " . He explains that after Patty and Selma made the Simpson family watch slides from their latest vacation , he was unable to find a beer . He decided to mix together drops of liquor from near @-@ empty bottles and accidentally included a bottle of Krusty Brand non @-@ narcotic cough syrup . When Patty dropped cigarette ash in the drink and set it on fire , Homer discovered that fire greatly enhanced the taste of the drink . 
 Moe tries making Homer 's drink , and gives it to a customer , who loves it . When the customer asks what the drink is called , Homer starts to respond , but Moe butts in and calls it a " Flaming Moe " . Word of mouth spreads , and Moe sees his business boom because of the drink . To help out with the extra customers , he hires a waitress named Colette . Moe 's Tavern , renamed " Flaming Moe 's " , soon becomes one of the trendiest nightspots in Springfield and Aerosmith 's new hangout . Homer becomes angry with Moe and vows never to return to the tavern . He subsequently becomes obsessed with Moe and his betrayal , even having a hallucination where he sees Moe 's face everywhere . 
 A restaurant chain becomes interested in purchasing the recipe for the drink , of which they have managed to identify all but the secret ingredient ( cough syrup ) . A representative offers Moe $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , but he refuses . Colette quickly discovers that Moe stole the recipe from Homer and not only makes him promise to sell the drink , but also apologize to Homer and give half of the money to him in compensation . Later , as Moe is about to accept the deal — and share half of the money with Homer — Homer , unhinged by resentment , arrives at the tavern . He gets his revenge on Moe by revealing to everyone in the bar that the secret ingredient is " nothing but plain , ordinary , over the @-@ counter children 's cough syrup ! " The representative quickly retracts the offer and leaves . 
 Within one week , nearly all restaurants in Springfield are serving " Flaming <unk> " , and Moe 's business has gone back to the way it was before . Homer stops in , and he and Moe reconcile . Moe gives Homer a " Flaming Homer " free of charge . 
 = = Production = = 
 Al Jean said that the opening two minutes of the episode were inspired by his own childhood where " My sister would have sleepover parties and her friends would always try to kiss me and stuff . " 
 The main plot of the episode , in which Moe 's Tavern becomes famous because of a drink , is loosely based on the Los Angeles establishment Coconut <unk> . According to IGN , " Flaming Moe 's " was " one of the first [ episodes ] to really give Moe the spotlight . " There was originally a joke in the episode in which a gay couple walked into " Flaming Moe 's " , assuming that it was a gay bar because of the name . Matt Groening feels that it was a good thing the joke was cut because he did not feel the writers should bring attention to the name . 
 Catherine O 'Hara originally agreed to provide the voice of Collette the waitress , and went into the studio and recorded her part for the character . According to Mike Reiss , " Something about her did not animate correctly . The voice did not work for our purposes . " Jo Ann Harris , a regular voice actor in the show , had recorded a temporary track using an impression of Shelley Long 's character Diane Chambers from Cheers . The producers thought it fit the role better and used it instead of O 'Hara , although O 'Hara is still credited at the end of the episode . Sam Simon had previously written for Cheers , and contributed much of Collette 's dialogue , as he was familiar with writing dialogue for Diane . Originally , there was more to the subplot featuring Moe and Colette , but it was cut because the writers felt it did not work . The third act opens with a parody of " Where Everybody Knows Your Name " , the theme song from Cheers . The parody was written by Jeff Martin , and the sequence was designed by future Simpsons director Nancy Kruse . 
 American rock band Aerosmith were the first band to make a guest appearance on the show . The writers had heard that the band had wanted to appear in an episode , so they wrote the guest spot for them . According to Al Jean , they later found out that part of the reason why Aerosmith agreed to appear was the drink being called the " Flaming Moe " . The band was recorded in Boston , and Hank Azaria , the voice of Moe , flew over to record his part with them and help them with their lines . In the original script , Moe tempted the band to play by offering them free beer , but the band members asked that the joke be changed . The writers changed the line to " free pickled eggs . " The band is shown sitting at a table with a bearded man , who is modeled after their A & R man John Kalodner . One of the stipulations from the band was to include him in the episode . Kalodner also received a " special thanks to " credit at the end of the episode . Aerosmith 's song " Young Lust " from the album Pump plays over the end credits . According to Al Jean , the band recorded a special shortened version of the song just for the episode . 
 The episode was directed by Rich Moore and Alan Smart . Moore 's daughter was born during the production of the episode , and he missed several weeks of layout , which Smart oversaw . When Sam Simon was asked if the premise of the episode was inspired by the tumultuous relationship between himself and Matt Groening , Simon acknowledged , " That may be true . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The basic premise of the episode is similar to the film Cocktail . Several references are made to the sitcom Cheers . Collette the waitress is a parody of Cheers character Diane Chambers , and the " theme sequence " for Flaming Moe 's , is a direct parody of the famous Cheers theme . Barney Gumble is given a Norm Peterson entrance . Aerosmith sings " Walk This Way " in Moe 's Tavern and " Young Lust " during the closing credits . When Homer reveals the secret of the " Flaming Moe " , the scene has many parallels to The Phantom of the Opera including Homer standing high up in the roof , covering half of his face . The scene in which Professor Frink analyzes a " Flaming Moe " is an homage to The Nutty Professor . The scene where Bart runs away from Lisa and her friends makes reference to the Alfred Hitchcock film North by Northwest . Lionel Hutz says that a drink can not be copyrighted , citing the " Frank <unk> case of ' 78 " . This refers to the Harvey <unk> cocktail . Near the end of the episode , several bars with names similar to " Flaming Moe 's " can be seen . This parodies Ray 's Pizza in New York City where dozens of individual establishments have similar names . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original airing on the Fox Network during November sweeps , the episode had a 14 @.@ 4 Nielsen rating and was viewed in approximately 13 @.@ 26 million homes . It finished the week ranked 29th , up from the season 's average rank of 32nd . It finished second in its timeslot behind The Cosby Show , which finished 17th with a 15 @.@ 9 rating . It was the highest rated show on Fox that week . 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , called it " Possibly the best Simpsons episode , with a constant stream of gags , inspired animation ( in particular the sequence when Homer begins to see and hear Moe everywhere , from Maggie 's gurgles to the leaves on the trees ) , and a superb plot that twists about in every direction but the one you might expect . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson wrote " From Lisa ’ s slumber party at the opening through the Cheers spoof at Moe ’ s , this episode ’ s another real winner . Homer gets some of his all @-@ time best lines , including a great run where he mocks Marge ’ s attempts to have him accept his fate . We even find a great twist on Bart ’ s prank phone calls when he asks for “ Hugh <unk> ” . All in all , “ Flaming ” provides a terrific show . " Nate Meyers of Digitally Obsessed gave the episode 5 / 5 , calling it " another great chapter in the history of The Simpsons , with tons of laughs throughout . " Todd VanDerWerff of Slant Magazine called it " a very funny episode " and highlighted the plot 's focus on Moe as " an example of the show gradually expanding its supporting townspeople into characters in their own right , " as " Moe was just an angry bartender before this episode . After this one , he 's the sad man who sometimes tastes success but always lets it slip away because of his inability to do the right thing until it 's too late . " VanDerWerff also interpreted the episode as a metaphor for Simon 's relationship with fellow The Simpsons ' developers Groening and James L. Brooks and Simon 's belief that he was not receiving enough credit for The Simpsons . 
 In 2006 , IGN named " Flaming Moe 's " the best episode of the third season . They wrote , " This episode has tons of standout moments , from the appearance by Aerosmith ( the first time a musical act of that caliber appeared as themselves on the series ) ; a funny payoff for all of Bart 's prank calls to Moe 's , when a man named Hugh <unk> actually does turn out to be a customer ; a deftly done Cheers parody at the height of Moe 's success ; and Homer turning into a Phantom of the Opera type lunatic . " In Entertainment Weekly 's 2003 list of the top 25 The Simpsons episodes ever , it was placed sixteenth . In 2003 , Rich Weir of AskMen.com placed the episode in second on his list of his ten favorite episodes of the show . He wrote , " As one of the early episodes that helped solidify the show 's sharp wit and satirical ability , " Flaming Moe 's " has everything a classic Simpsons episode should have : gut @-@ busting humor , nifty parody , and some superstar cameos to seal the deal . [ ... ] highlights include a performance by Aerosmith ( in a guest @-@ starring role ) , Bart actually apologizing to Moe for one of his infamous prank calls , and a memorable spoof of Cheers ' theme song . " In 2003 , executive producer Al Jean listed the episode as one of his favorites . Niel Harvey of The Roanoke Times called " Flaming Moe 's " a " classic bit of Simpsonia . " AOL placed the episode sixth on their list of the top 25 Simpsons episodes . In 2006 , the members of Aerosmith were collectively named the 24th best Simpsons guest stars by IGN . 
 The song " Flaming Moe 's " , which parodies " Where Everybody Knows Your Name " from Cheers , was well received . Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly named the song the " Best Theme Song Parody " of 1991 . It was later included in the 1997 album Songs in the Key of Springfield , a compilation of songs from the first seven seasons of the show . 
 = U.S. Route 197 = 
 U.S. Route 197 ( US 197 ) is a north – south United States Highway , of which all but 2 @.@ 76 miles of its 69 @.@ 93 miles ( 4 @.@ 44 of 112 @.@ 54 km ) are within the state of Oregon . The highway starts in rural Wasco County in Central Oregon at an intersection with US 97 . US 197 travels north as a continuation of The Dalles @-@ California Highway No. 4 through the cities of Maupin , Tygh Valley , and Dufur to The Dalles . Within The Dalles , the highway becomes concurrent with US 30 and intersects Interstate 84 ( I @-@ 84 ) before it crosses over the Columbia River on The Dalles Bridge into Washington . The highway continues through the neighboring city of Dallesport in Klickitat County and terminates at a junction with State Route 14 ( SR 14 ) . 
 US 197 was established in 1952 using the existing The Dalles @-@ California Highway , itself created as a part of the initial named Oregon highways in 1917 . US 197 traveled from its current northern terminus at Dallesport to US 97 in Maryhill along Primary State Highway 8 ( PSH 8 ) and US 830 , successors to the original State Road 8 designated along the corridor in 1907 . The Dallesport – Maryhill section was transferred to SR 14 in 1979 , but was not recognized by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials ( AASHTO ) until 2006 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 197 runs 69 @.@ 93 miles ( 112 @.@ 54 km ) in Oregon and Washington and is maintained by the Oregon Department of Transportation ( ODOT ) and Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) . 
 = = = Oregon = = = 
 US 197 begins at an intersection with US 97 at Shaniko Junction in unincorporated Wasco County , located between the cities of Madras and Shaniko in Central Oregon . The highway , a continuation of The Dalles @-@ California Highway No. 4 , travels northwest over the 3 @,@ 363 @-@ foot @-@ high ( 1 @,@ 025 m ) Criterion Summit and down along Stag Canyon through the community of Criterion towards Maupin . US 197 crosses the Deschutes River and a BNSF rail line on a warren truss bridge , becoming Deschutes Avenue as it passes South Wasco County High School and through the city of Maupin . The highway continues west into the Juniper Flat and intersects Oregon Route 216 ( OR 216 ) , designated as <unk> Highway No. 44 , and forms a concurrency . US 197 and OR 216 travel north and northwest to Tygh Valley , where OR 216 leaves the concurrency and heads east on <unk> Bridge Highway No. 290 towards Grass Valley . The lone highway continues north up Butler Canyon onto Tygh Ridge , passing through the 2 @,@ 710 @-@ foot @-@ high ( 830 m ) Tygh Grade Summit . US 197 travels east of Dufur and down into the Columbia River Gorge , entering the city of The Dalles . The highway begins a 0 @.@ 24 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 0 @.@ 39 km ) concurrency with US 30 , traveling north over an east – west BNSF rail line to a diamond interchange with I @-@ 84 . US 197 leaves the interchange and the state of Oregon on The Dalles Bridge , crossing over the Columbia River into Washington . An ODOT survey measuring traffic volume for any average day of the year , expressed in terms of annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) , was conducted in 2011 on US 197 and calculated that the busiest section of the highway in Oregon was on The Dalles Bridge , serving 5 @,@ 800 vehicles , while the least busiest section of the highway was north of its terminus at US 97 , serving 390 vehicles . 
 = = = Washington = = = 
 US 197 enters Washington on The Dalles Bridge , a steel cantilever truss bridge that crosses the Columbia River downstream of The Dalles Dam , and travels into Dallesport in Klickitat County . The 2 @.@ 76 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 4 @.@ 44 km ) highway continues north past Columbia Gorge Regional Airport to its northern terminus , an intersection with SR 14 . US 197 is defined by the Washington State Legislature as SR 197 , part of the Revised Code of Washington as § 47 @.@ 17 @.@ 382 . Every year , WSDOT conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume , expressed in terms of AADT . In 2012 , WSDOT calculated that the Washington section of US 197 served between 3 @,@ 700 and 6 @,@ 100 vehicles , mostly on The Dalles Bridge . 
 = = History = = 
 US 197 within Washington was added to the state highway system in 1907 as State Road 8 , later designated as PSH 8 in 1937 , traveling east along the Columbia River from Vancouver to Maryhill . US 197 within Oregon is designated as a segment of The Dalles @-@ California Highway No. 4 , created as part of the initial named state highway system , adopted by the Oregon State Highway Commission on November 27 , 1917 . The highway traveled south from The Dalles through Central Oregon to the California state line south of Klamath Falls . Under the United States Numbered Highway system , approved by the American Association of State Highway Officials ( AASHO ) on November 11 , 1926 , State Road 8 in Washington was co @-@ signed with US 830 from Vancouver to Maryhill and The Dalles @-@ California Highway in Oregon was co @-@ signed with US 97 from Shaniko Junction to the California state line . The Oregon State Highway Department created a numbered state highway system to compliment the U.S. route system on May 18 , 1937 , and The Dalles @-@ California Highway from Shaniko Junction to The Dalles was numbered as OR 50 . OR 50 was renumbered to OR 23 on May 26 , 1950 and became the Oregon section of US 197 when it was established in 1952 . 
 US 197 traveled north onto the newly constructed The Dalles Bridge over the Columbia River to US 830 and PSH 8 northeast of Dallesport and traveled east with the two highways to end at US 197 in Maryhill . US 830 and its concurrency with US 197 were removed from the U.S. route system in 1968 , leaving US 197 concurrent with the successor to PSH 8 , SR 14 , after the 1964 state highway renumbering . The concurrency with SR 14 was removed from the Washington state highway system in 1979 , but remained as a part of US 197 as defined by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials ( AASHTO ) until September 22 , 2006 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Typhoon Ewiniar ( 2006 ) = 
 Typhoon Ewiniar , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Ester , was the third named storm of the 2006 Pacific typhoon season and one that lasted for twelve days as a tropical cyclone , moving on a generally northward track . During its lifespan , it affected Palau , Yap , eastern China , the Ryūkyū Islands of Japan , South Korea as well as North Korea , briefly threatening to make landfall in North Korea before doing so in South Korea . Ewiniar is responsible for at least 181 deaths . However , an unofficial report stated that up to 10 @,@ 000 people had been killed by flooding in North Korea , with 4 @,@ 000 people missing . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On June 29 , a persistent tropical disturbance was classified as a tropical depression by the JTWC while east of Palau . The depression moved northwestward and was upgraded to Tropical Storm 04W by the JTWC the next day on June 30 , while the JMA named the storm Tropical Storm Ewiniar at around the same time . The name " Ewiniar " was submitted by the Federated States of Micronesia , and refers to a traditional storm god of Chuuk . 
 Ewiniar moved west @-@ northwestward over the next two days , bringing heavy rain and localized flooding to the Yap Islands . Ewiniar turned to the northwest and reached its peak intensity of 130 knots ( 240 km / h or 150 mph ) on the U.S. method of measuring windspeeds by one @-@ minute averages , or 100 knots ( 185 km / h or 115 mph ) on the international method of measuring windspeeds by ten @-@ minute averages , and its minimum pressure of 930 hPa ( mbar ) . Ewiniar turned northward and brushed eastern China , forcing evacuations in many cities . 
 Ewiniar gradually weakened as it moved over colder waters , and made landfall in South Korea on July 10 as a severe tropical storm , having briefly threatened to make landfall on impoverished North Korea . Ewiniar passed within 50 km ( 31 mi ) of Seoul as it moved across the country before becoming extratropical over the Sea of Japan the next day . Ewiniar had also earlier brushed the Ryūkyū Islands of Japan . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 = = = People 's Republic of China = = = 
 As Ewiniar started to threaten the coast of China , the government in Beijing ordered emergency evacuations for all villagers in low @-@ lying areas . A reported 7 @,@ 634 people were evacuated from Ningbo , and over 8 @,@ 000 ships were asked to return to dock in harbours in Ningbo and Zhoushan . The municipal flood control headquarters in Shanghai also asked officials to prepare for the approaching typhoon , which was forecast to begin affecting the city on July 9 . 
 = = = Japan = = = 
 As Ewiniar started to approach the Ryūkyū Islands , Sasebo Naval Base in Kyūshū announced a Tropical Cyclone Condition of Readiness 3 at 4 p.m. local time on July 7 , while a day earlier , on July 6 , the USS Harpers Ferry had unanchored from the harbour for an area of safer weather conditions . The USS Essex also evacuated the area on July 7 . The USS Juneau and USS Bowditch , however , both remained anchored in Sasebo , while the USS Guardian and USS Safeguard were both moved to a nearby dry dock . 
 All United States military stations and bases on Okinawa were put into a Tropical Cyclone Condition of Readiness 2 on July 7 with an upgrade to a Condition of Readiness 1 expected the following day , and Commander 's Cup softball tournaments that had been scheduled for the weekend of July 8 and July 9 at Camp Hansen and Marine Corps Air Station <unk> had to be postponed . Tropical Cyclone Condition of Readiness 1E , which means that all outdoor activities are prohibited as there are sustained winds of at least 50 knots ( 95 km / h , 60 mph ) in force , was declared early on the morning of July 9 . 
 = = = South Korea = = = 
 As Ewiniar cleared the Ryūkyū Islands and began to threaten the Korean Peninsula , the Korea Meteorological Administration issued typhoon warnings for most of the country . The KMA also issued typhoon advisories for Liancourt Rocks and Ulleungdo . 
 United States Navy commands in South Korea were put into a Tropical Cyclone Condition of Readiness level 3 , with Condition of Readiness 2 declared on July 8 . TCCOR Level 1 was later declared by United States Forces Korea , which was cancelled after landfall on July 10 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Ewiniar affected many areas due to its track and relatively long life , killing at least 40 people along the way and leaving much damage in its path . 
 = = = Yap and Palau = = = 
 Early in its life as a tropical cyclone , Ewiniar affected Yap and Palau , which fall under the warning jurisdiction of the National Weather Service office in Tiyan , Guam . Ewiniar caused coastal flooding in Yap of up to 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) , especially near the port and around the Colonia Bay area . Ewiniar also caused an island @-@ wide power outage in Yap , although according to an NWS post @-@ storm report , damage was minimised on Yap due to steadier structures after Super Typhoon Sudal of 2004 tore through the islands . Damage was also reported to agriculture due to salt spray . The total amount of damage caused was estimated to be just over $ 100 thousand ( 2006 USD ) . 
 About 2 @.@ 4 inches ( 61 mm ) of rain fell on Yap , while Koror in Palau reported a 24 @-@ hour total of 1 @.@ 88 inches ( 48 mm ) of rain through 6 a.m. UTC on July 3 . The peak wind gusts reported were 53 knots ( 98 km / h , 61 mph ) on Yap at the Weather Service Office ( WSO ) in Yap and 46 knots ( 85 km / h , 53 mph ) at the WSO in Koror . During its course through the islands , Tropical Storm Ewiniar also necessitated tropical storm warnings and watches for Ngulu , Yap , Koror and <unk> . No deaths in Yap or Palau were reported due to Ewiniar . 
 = = = People 's Republic of China = = = 
 Typhoon Ewiniar killed at least 34 people in China , with areas as far northwest as Gansu and Shanxi affected by landslides . It is not known if the landslides were triggered directly as a result of Ewiniar , or whether it was caused by a combination of Ewiniar and other weather . Therefore , the deaths that can be attributed to Ewiniar from the landslides are assumed to be indirectly caused , and not directly . Average rainfall reported in Shandong was 3 @.@ 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 133 inches ) per hour from 6 a.m. July 9 through midnight July 10 ( totalling about 61 @.@ 2 mm or 2 @.@ 4 inches ) . At least 300 flights out of Beijing 's Capital International Airport had to be delayed due to thunderstorms and effects of Ewiniar , while Air China and China Eastern Airlines cancelled flights to South Korea heading out of China . As Ewiniar did not affect the mainland directly , there are little to no reports of major damage . 
 = = = Japan = = = 
 Ewiniar hammered Okinawa with heavy rain , creating mass confusion and troubles for tourists . Flights and ferries out of Okinawa to neighbouring islands were cancelled , and as many as 3 @,@ 500 tourists were left stranded at various airports because most hotels were already near full capacity . Other tourists reportedly stayed in the homes of some Okinawa residents , while some residents in landslide @-@ prone areas evacuated to higher ground . Seven people were injured in Nanjo from a fallen signboard , while an elderly woman in Nago City and a young girl in <unk> suffered wind @-@ related injuries . 
 The highest winds reported during the storm were 34 @.@ 9 m / s ( 78 mph , 126 km / h ) . These winds blew sand about 7 cm ( 3 in ) deep off the beach and into residents ' yards . Typhoon Ewiniar caused a reported 20 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 yen ( $ 173 @,@ 778 ) worth of sugar cane and vegetable damage , and farmers experienced profit losses when ripe fruits were unable to be shipped to Asian markets . 
 = = = South Korea = = = 
 In South Korea , much damage was reported . 150 km2 ( 58 sq mi ) of farmland was reported to have been flooded across the nation , while most domestic ferry and air travel was disrupted or cancelled . Landslides and flooding destroyed roads and levees , while in South Cholla province , a landslide damaged a temple . According to an official , floods also damaged over 600 homes and houses . 
 Rainfall totals varied from province to province . The KMA said up to 234 mm ( 9 @.@ 36 inches ) of rain had fallen on the southern areas of South Korea , while <unk> County in South <unk> province reported a total rainfall of 199 mm ( 7 @.@ 83 inches ) to 260 mm ( 10 @.@ 2 inches ) . 
 About 300 schools were ordered to be closed down in South Cholla , South <unk> and on Jeju . However , two injuries were reported at a school in Jeju which ignored the orders . Injuries were also reported elsewhere across South Korea , while 62 people were killed due to Ewiniar . 
 Alongside the effects of flooding immediately following Typhoon Ewiniar , damage throughout the country amounted to ₩ 2 @.@ 06 trillion ( US $ 2 @.@ 2 billion ) . 
 = = = North Korea = = = 
 Due to the secrecy in North Korea , not much information is available on damage caused in the country . However , a TIME Asia report on North Korea noted that Ewiniar left 60 @,@ 000 villagers homeless . Floods in the country killed at least 141 people and left 112 others missing . However , an unofficial report stated that as many as 10 @,@ 000 people may have been killed . Another report indicated that the typhoon caused a " disaster of biblical proportions " , with an estimated 54 @,@ 700 people being killed , mainly by landslides . 
 = Agar.io = 
 Agar.io is a massively multiplayer action game created by Matheus Valadares . Players control a cell in a map representing a petri dish ; the goal is to gain as much mass as possible by swallowing smaller cells without being swallowed by bigger ones . The name Agar.io comes from the substance agar , used to culture bacteria . 
 The game was released to positive critical reception ; critics particularly praised its simplicity , competition , and mechanics , while criticism targeted its repetitive gameplay . Largely due to word of mouth on social networks , it was a quick success , becoming one of the most popular web and mobile games in its first year . A downloadable Steam version was announced on 3 May 2015 , and the mobile version of Agar.io for iOS and Android was released on 8 July 2015 by Miniclip . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The objective of Agar.io is to grow a cell by swallowing both randomly generated pellets , which slightly increase a cell 's mass , and smaller cells without being swallowed by larger cells . It currently holds four game modes : FFA ( Free @-@ for All ) , Teams , Experimental , and Party . The goal of the game is to obtain the largest cell ; players restart when all of their cells are swallowed . Players can change their cell 's appearance with predefined words , phrases , symbols or skins . The more mass a cell has , the slower it will move . Cells gradually lose mass over time . 
 Viruses split cells larger than them into many pieces ( 16 or less , depending on the mass ) and smaller cells can hide underneath a virus for protection against larger cells . Viruses are normally randomly generated , but players can make new viruses by feeding a virus , i.e. ejecting a small fraction of a player 's cell 's mass into the virus a few times , causing the virus to split up and hence create another virus . 
 Players can split their cell into two , and one of the two evenly divided cells will be flung in the direction of the cursor ( a maximum of 16 split cells ) . This can be used as a ranged attack to swallow other smaller cells , to escape an attack from another cell , or to move more quickly around the map . Split cells eventually merge back into one cell . Aside from feeding viruses , players can eject ( release ) a small fraction of their mass to feed other cells , an action commonly recognized as an intention to team with another player . A player can also eject mass to trick enemies into coming closer to the player . Once an enemy cell is close enough , the player can split his / her cell to eat the baited enemy . 
 = = Development = = 
 Agar.io was first announced on 4chan on 27 April 2015 by Matheus Valadares , a then @-@ 19 @-@ year @-@ old Brazilian developer . Written in JavaScript and C + + , the game was developed in a few days . The game originally did not have a name , and users had to connect to Valadares ' IP address in order to play . The name Agar.io was suggested by an anonymous 4chan user , as other domain names such as <unk> were already taken . Valadares continued updating and adding new features to the game , such as an experience system and an " experimental " <unk> for testing experimental features . One week later , Agar.io entered Steam Greenlight with Valadares announcing a future free @-@ to @-@ play version of the game for download . He planned to include features in the Steam version not available in the browser version , including additional gamemodes , custom styling , and an account system . It was approved for listing on Steam due to community interest . 
 On 8 July 2015 , Miniclip published a mobile version of Agar.io for iOS and Android . Sergio <unk> , head of mobile at Miniclip , explained that the main goal of the mobile version was to " recreate the gaming experience " on mobile , citing the challenges with recreating the game on touchscreen controls . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Agar.io was released to a positive critical reception . Particular praise was given to the simplicity , competition , and mechanics of the game . Engadget described the game as " a good abstraction of the fierce survival @-@ of @-@ the @-@ fittest competition that you sometimes see on the microscopic level . " <unk> praised its simplicity , strategic element , and " personality . " 
 Criticism was mainly targeted towards its repetitiveness and the controls of the mobile version . Tom Christiansen of Gamezebo was mixed on the game , saying that there was " nothing to hold my attention " and that it was " highly repetitive , overall . " Pocket Gamer , reviewing the mobile version , described its controls as " floaty . " 
 Because it was frequently propagated through social media and broadcast on Twitch.tv and YouTube , Agar.io was a quick success . The <unk> website ( for the browser version ) was ranked by Alexa as one of the 1 @,@ 000 most visited websites and the mobile versions were downloaded more than ten million times during their first week . During 2015 , Agar.io was Google 's most searched game . 
 Agar.io was featured ( including some details of its gameplay as well as a shot of an actual game ) in " Chapter 48 " of Netflix TV @-@ series House of Cards . Its gameplay was compared to the presidential campaigning . 
 = = = Use as a political soapbox = = = 
 During the campaigns of the June 2015 Turkish elections , Agar.io was used in Turkey as a medium of political advocacy ; many players were naming their cells after Turkish political parties and references , with alliances formed between players with similar political views , battling against other players with opposing views . Some political parties have used Agar.io in campaign posters as a symbol of support . 
 = Banksia sessilis = 
 Banksia sessilis , commonly known as parrot bush , is a species of shrub or tree in the plant genus Banksia in the Proteaceae family . It had been known as Dryandra sessilis until 2007 , when the genus Dryandra was sunk into Banksia . Widespread throughout southwest Western Australia , it is found on sandy soils over laterite or limestone , often as an understorey plant in open forest , woodland or shrubland . Encountered as a shrub or small tree up to 6 m ( 20 ft ) in height , it has prickly dark green leaves and dome @-@ shaped cream @-@ yellow flowerheads . Flowering from winter through to late spring , it provides a key source of food — both the nectar and the insects it attracts — for honeyeaters in the cooler months , and species diversity is reduced in areas where there is little or no parrot bush occurring . Several species of honeyeater , some species of native bee , and the European honey bee seek out and consume the nectar , while the long @-@ billed black cockatoo and Australian ringneck eat the seed . The life cycle of Banksia sessilis is adapted to regular bushfires . Killed by fire and regenerating by seed afterwards , each shrub generally produces many flowerheads and a massive amount of seed . It can recolonise disturbed areas , and may grow in thickets . 
 Banksia sessilis has a somewhat complicated taxonomic history . It was collected from King George Sound in 1801 and described by Robert Brown in 1810 as Dryandra floribunda , a name by which it was known for many years . However , Joseph Knight had published the name Josephia sessilis in 1809 , which had precedence due to its earlier date , and the specific name was formalised in 1924 . Four varieties are recognised . It is a prickly plant with little apparent horticultural potential , and none of the varieties are commonly seen in cultivation . A profuse producer of nectar , B. sessilis is valuable to the beekeeping industry . 
 = = Description = = 
 Banksia sessilis grows as an upright shrub or small tree up to 6 m ( 20 ft ) high , without a lignotuber . In most varieties , new stems are covered in soft , fine hairs that are lost with maturity ; but new stems of B. sessilis var. flabellifolia are usually hairless . Leaves are blue @-@ green or dark green . Their shape differs by variety : in var. cygnorum and var. flabellifolia they are wedge @-@ shaped , with teeth only near the apex ; in var. cordata they are wedge @-@ shaped , but with teeth along the entire margin ; and in var. sessilis they are somewhat broader at the base , sometimes almost oblong in shape . Leaf size ranges from 2 to 6 cm ( 1 to 2 @.@ 5 in ) in length , and 0 @.@ 8 – 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 31 – 1 @.@ 57 in ) in width . They may be sessile ( that is , growing directly from the stem without a petiole ) or on a petiole up to 0 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 20 in ) long . 
 The inflorescences are cream or yellow , and occur in domed heads 4 to 5 cm ( 1 1 ⁄ 2 to 2 in ) wide , situated at the end of a stem . Each head contains from 55 to 125 individual flowers , surrounded at the base by a whorl of short involucral bracts . As with most other Proteaceae , individual flowers consist of a tubular perianth made up of four united tepals , and one long wiry style . The style end is initially trapped inside the upper perianth parts , but breaks free at anthesis . In B. sessilis the perianth is straight , 20 to 32 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 to 1 @.@ 26 in ) long , and pale yellow . The style is slightly shorter , also straight , and cream @-@ coloured . Thus in B. sessilis , unlike many other Banksia species , the release of the style at anthesis does not result in a showy flower colour change . One field study found that anthesis took place over four days , with the outer flowers opening first and moving inwards . 
 Flowering mostly takes place from July to November , although var. sessilis can start as early as May . After flowering , the flower parts wither and fall away , and up to four follicles develop in the <unk> ( the base of the flower head ) . Young follicles are covered in a fine fur , but this is lost as they mature . Mature follicles are ovoid in shape , and measure 1 – 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 39 – 0 @.@ 59 in ) in length . Most follicles open as soon as they are ripe , revealing their contents : a woody seed separator and up to two winged seeds . 
 = = Discovery and naming = = 
 Specimens of B. sessilis were first collected by Scottish surgeon Archibald Menzies during the visit of the Vancouver Expedition to King George Sound in September and October 1791 . No firm location or collection date can be ascribed to Menzies ' specimens , as their labels simply read " New Holland , King Georges Sound , Mr. Arch . Menzies " , and Menzies ' journal indicates that he collected over a wide area , visiting a different location every day from 29 September to 8 October . In addition to B. sessilis , Menzies collected plant material of B. <unk> , and seeds of at least four more Banksia species . This was therefore an important early collection for the genus , only seven species of which had previously been collected . 
 Menzies ' seed specimens were sent to England from Sydney in 1793 , but his plant material remained with him for the duration of the voyage , during which some material was lost . On his return to England in 1795 , the surviving specimens were deposited into the herbarium of Sir Joseph Banks , where they lay undescribed for many years . 
 The next collection was made in December 1801 , when King George Sound was visited by HMS Investigator under the command of Matthew Flinders . On board were botanist Robert Brown , botanical artist Ferdinand Bauer , and gardener Peter Good . All three men gathered material for Brown 's specimen collection , including specimens of B. sessilis , although neither Brown 's nor Good 's diary can be used to assign a precise location or date for their discovery of the species . Good also made a separate seed collection , which included B. sessilis , and the species was drawn by Bauer . Like nearly all of his field drawings of Proteaceae , Bauer 's original field sketch of B. sessilis was destroyed in a Hofburg fire in 1945 . A painting based on the drawing survives , however , at the Natural History Museum in London . 
 On returning to England in 1805 , Brown began preparing an account of his Australian plant specimens . In September 1808 , with Brown 's account still far from finished , Swedish botanist Jonas <unk> asked him to prepare a separate paper on the Proteaceae , so that he could use the genera erected by Brown in a new edition of Hortus Kewensis . Brown immediately began a study of the Proteaceae , and in January 1809 he read to the Linnean Society of London a monograph on the family entitled On the Proteaceae of Jussieu . Among the eighteen new genera presented was one that Brown named Josephia in honour of Banks . 
 Brown 's paper was approved for printing in May 1809 , but did not appear in print until March the following year . In the meantime , Joseph Knight published On the cultivation of the plants belonging to the natural order of Proteeae , which appeared to draw heavily on Brown 's unpublished material , without permission , and in most cases without attribution . It contained the first publication of Brown 's Josephia , for which two species were listed . The first , Josephia sessilis , was based on one of Menzies ' specimens : " This species , discovered by Mr. A. Menzies on the West coast of New Holland , is not unlike some varieties of Ilex <unk> , and now in his Majesty 's collection at Kew . " The etymology of the specific epithet was not explicitly stated , but it is universally accepted that it comes from the Latin sessilis ( sessile , stalkless ) , in reference to the sessile leaves of this species . Blame for the alleged plagiarism largely fell on Richard Salisbury , who had been present at Brown 's readings and is thought to have provided much of the material for Knight 's book . Salisbury was ostracized by the botanical community , which undertook to ignore his work as much as possible . By the time Brown 's monograph appeared in print , Brown had exchanged the generic name Josephia for Dryandra , giving the name Dryandra floribunda to Knight 's Josephia sessilis . As there were then no firm rules pertaining to priority of publication , Brown 's name was accepted , and remained the current name for over a century . 
 Another significant early collection was the apparent discovery of the species at the Swan River in 1827 . In that year , the colonial botanist of New South Wales Charles Fraser visited the area as part of an exploring expedition under James Stirling . Among the plants that Fraser found growing on the south side of the river entrance was " a beautiful species of Dryandra " , which was probably this species . 
 Over the course of the 19th century , the principle of priority in naming gradually came to be accepted by botanists , as did the need for a mechanism by which names in current usage could be conserved against archaic or obscure prior names . By the 1920s , Dryandra R.Br. was effectively conserved against Josephia Knight , although a mechanism for formal conservation was not put in place until 1933 . Brown 's specific name , however , was not conserved , and Karel Domin overturned Dryandra floribunda R.Br. by transferring Knight 's name into Dryandra as Dryandra sessilis ( Knight ) Domin in 1924 . This name was current until 2007 , when all Dryandra species were transferred into Banksia by Austin Mast and Kevin Thiele . The full citation for the current name is thus Banksia sessilis ( Knight ) <unk> & <unk> 
 = = = Common names = = = 
 The first common names for this species were literal translations of the scientific names . When published as Josephia sessilis in 1809 , it was given the common name sessile Josephia . Brown did not offer a common name when he published Dryandra floribunda in 1810 , but later that year the Hortus Kewensis translated it as many flowered dryandra . This name was also used when the plant was featured in Curtis 's Botanical Magazine in 1813 . In Australia , the names prickly banksia and shaving @-@ brush flower were offered up by Emily <unk> in 1921 , the latter because " when in bud the flower very much resembles a shaving @-@ brush " . Shaving @-@ brush flower was still in use as late as the 1950s . The name holly @-@ leaved dryandra was used when the plant was featured as part of a series of articles in the Western Mail of 1933 – 34 , and this was taken up by William Blackall in 1954 , and was still in use as late as 1970 . Meanwhile , Gardner used the name parrot bush in 1959 , a name derived from the observation that the blooms attract parrots . , by which the species was already " well @-@ known to bee @-@ keepers " . This name was widely adopted , and since 1970 has been in almost exclusive usage . 
 The only indigenous names reported for the plant are <unk> and But @-@ yak . These were published by Ian Abbott in his 1983 Aboriginal Names for Plant Species in South @-@ western Australia , with Abbott suggesting that the latter name should be preferred , but with the orthography " <unk> " . However , Abbott sources these names to George Fletcher Moore 's 1842 A Descriptive Vocabulary of the Language of the Aborigines , which in fact attributes these names to the species Dryandra <unk> ( now Banksia <unk> ) . It is unclear whether Abbott has corrected Moore 's error , or introduced an error of his own . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 = = = Infrageneric placement = = = 
 Brown 's 1810 monograph did not include an infrageneric classification of Dryandra , and neither did his Prodromus , published later that year . In 1830 , however , he introduced the first taxonomic arrangement of Dryandra , placing D. floribunda in section Dryandra verae along with most other species , because its follicles contain a single seed separator . Dryandra verae was renamed Eudryandra by Carl Meissner in 1845 . Eleven years later Meissner published a new arrangement , retaining D. floribunda in D. sect . Eudryandra , and further placing it in the unranked subgroup § Ilicinae , because of the similarity of its leaves to those of Ilex ( holly ) . In 1870 , George Bentham published a revised arrangement in his Flora Australiensis . Bentham retained section Eudryandra , but abandoned almost all of Meissner 's unranked groups , including § Ilicinae . D. floribunda was instead placed in D. ser . Floribundae along with four other species with small , mostly terminal flowers , left exposed by their having unusually short floral leaves . 
 Bentham 's arrangement stood for over a hundred years , eventually replaced in 1996 by the arrangement of Alex George . Section Eudryandra was promoted to subgenus rank , but replaced by the autonym D. subg . Dryandra . D. sessilis , as this species was now called , was retained in D. ser . Floribundae , but alone , as the series was redefined as containing only those taxa that apparently lack floral bracts altogether . The placement of D. sessilis in George 's arrangement , with 1999 and 2005 amendments , may be summarised as follows : 
 Dryandra ( now Banksia ser . Dryandra ) 
 D. subg . Dryandra 
 D. ser . Floribundae 
 D. sessilis ( now B. sessilis ) 
 D. sessilis var. sessilis ( now B. sessilis var. sessilis ) 
 D. sessilis var. flabellifolia ( now B. sessilis var. flabellifolia ) 
 D. sessilis var. cordata ( now B. sessilis var. cordata ) 
 D. sessilis var. cygnorum ( now B. sessilis var. cygnorum ) 
 D. ser . Armatae 
 D. ser . Marginatae 
 D. ser . <unk> 
 D. ser . <unk> 
 D. ser . <unk> 
 D. ser . Ilicinae 
 D. ser . Dryandra 
 D. ser . <unk> 
 D. ser . <unk> 
 D. ser . <unk> 
 D. ser . <unk> 
 D. ser . <unk> 
 D. ser . <unk> 
 D. ser . <unk> 
 D. ser . <unk> 
 D. ser . <unk> 
 D. ser . <unk> 
 D. ser . <unk> 
 D. ser . <unk> 
 D. ser . <unk> 
 D. ser . <unk> 
 D. ser . <unk> 
 D. ser . <unk> 
 D. subg . <unk> 
 D. subg . <unk> 
 George 's arrangement remained current until 2007 , when Austin Mast and Kevin Thiele transferred Dryandra into Banksia . They also published B. subg . Spathulatae for the Banksia taxa having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons , thus redefining B. subg . Banksia as comprising those that do not . They were not ready , however , to tender an infrageneric arrangement encompassing Dryandra , so as an interim measure they transferred Dryandra into Banksia at series rank . This minimised the nomenclatural disruption of the transfer , but also caused George 's rich infrageneric arrangement to be set aside . Thus under the interim arrangements implemented by Mast and Thiele , B. sessilis is placed in B. subg . Banksia , ser . Dryandra . 
 = = = Varieties = = = 
 Four varieties are recognised : 
 B. sessilis var. sessilis is an autonym that encompasses the type material of the species . This is the most widespread variety , occurring from Regans Ford and Moora in the north , south @-@ east to Albany , and inland as far as Wongan Hills , <unk> and Kulin . Its blue @-@ green leaves are cuneate ( wedge @-@ shaped ) or oblong , and are usually two to three centimetres long but may reach five . 
 B. sessilis var. cordata was published as Dryandra floribunda var. cordata by Carl Meissner in 1848 . In 1870 , George Bentham published D. floribunda var. major , but this is now considered a taxonomic synonym of B. sessilis var. cordata . It has larger inflorescences than var. sessilis , as well as larger dark green rather than blue green leaves . It is found in the state 's far southwest , between Capes Leeuwin and Naturaliste , and east to Walpole , and grows on sandy soils over limestone . 
 B. sessilis var. cygnorum has its roots in Michel Gandoger 's publication of two new species names in 1919 . He published Dryandra cygnorum and Dryandra <unk> , but in 1996 both of these were found to refer to the same taxon , which Alex George gave variety rank as Dryandra sessilis var. cygnorum . The term cygnorum is Latin for " swan " and relates to the Swan River , which runs past the suburb of Melville where the type material was collected . It has smaller dark green leaves only 2 – 3 cm ( 1 – 1 in ) long and 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 7 cm ( 0 @.@ 31 – 0 @.@ 67 in ) wide , whose teeth are limited to the distal part of the leaf . The range is along the Western Australian coastline from <unk> southwards past Fremantle , and east to Lake <unk> and Kings Park . 
 B. sessilis var. flabellifolia was published by George in 1996 , the type specimen having been collected northwest of Northampton in 1993 . The northernmost of the four varieties , it is found from Kalbarri south to Geraldton and Northampton . There are some scattered records further south towards Moora . Its specific name is derived from the Latin <unk> " fan " and folium " leaf " . Its leaves are fan shaped , with a long , toothless lower margin , and a toothed end . Its stems are hairless , unlike the other varieties . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Banksia sessilis is endemic to the Southwest Botanical Province , a floristic province renowned as a biodiversity hotspot , located in the southwest corner of Western Australia . This area has a Mediterranean climate , with wet winters and hot , dry summers . B. sessilis occurs throughout much of the province , ranging from Kalbarri in the north , south to Cape Leeuwin , east along the south coast as far as Bremer Bay , and inland to Wongan Hills and Kulin . It thus spans a wide range of climates , occurring in all but the semi @-@ arid areas well inland . It is also absent from the Karri forest in the cool , wet , southwest corner of the province , but even there , B. sessilis var. cordata occurs along the coast . 
 The species tolerates a range of soils , requiring only that its soil be well @-@ drained . Like most <unk> , it grows well in lateritic soils and gravels , although this species is also found in deep sand , sand over laterite , and sand over limestone . It also occurs in a range of vegetation complexes , including coastal and kwongan heath , tall shrubland , woodland and open forest . It is a common understorey plant in drier areas of Jarrah forest , and forms thickets on limestone soils of the Swan Coastal Plain . Banksia sessilis sets a large amount of seed and is an aggressive coloniser of disturbed and open areas ; for example , it has been recorded colonising gravel pits in the Darling Scarp . 
 Nothing is known of the conditions that affect its distribution , as its biogeography is as yet unstudied . An assessment of the potential impact of climate change on this species found that its range is likely to contract by half in the face of severe change , but unlikely to change much under less severe scenarios . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = As food = = = 
 The nectar of B. sessilis is an important component of the diet of a number of species of honeyeater . In one study , B. sessilis was found to be the main source of nectar for all six species studied , namely the tawny @-@ crowned honeyeater ( Gliciphila melanops ) , white @-@ cheeked honeyeater ( Phylidonyris niger ) , western spinebill ( Acanthorhynchus superciliosus ) , brown honeyeater ( Lichmera indistincta ) , brown @-@ headed honeyeater ( Melithreptus brevirostris ) , and black honeyeater ( Certhionyx niger ) . Moreover , B. sessilis played an important role in their distributions , with species that feed only on nectar occurring only where B. sessilis occurs , and remaining for longest at sites where B. sessilis is most abundant . Other honeyeaters that have been recorded feeding on B. sessilis include the red wattlebird ( Anthochaera carunculata ) , western wattlebird ( A. lunulata ) , and New Holland honeyeater ( Phylidonyris novaehollandiae ) . Furthermore , a study of bird species diversity in wandoo woodland around Bakers Hill found that honeyeater species and numbers were much reduced in forest that lacked a Banksia sessilis understory ; the plant is a key source of nectar and insects during the winter months . A field study in jarrah forest 9 km south of Jarrahdale , where B. sessilis grows in scattered clumps , found that western wattlebirds and New Holland honeyeaters sought out groups of plants with the greatest numbers of new inflorescences , particularly those one or two days after anthesis , where nectar yield was highest . The birds likely recognises these by visual clues . 
 Banksia sessilis is also a source of food for the Australian ringneck ( Barnardius zonarius ) , and the long @-@ billed black cockatoo ( Calyptorhynchus baudinii ) , which tear open the follicles and consume the seeds . 
 The introduced European honey bee ( Apis mellifera ) has also been observed feeding on B. sessilis , as have seven species of native bee , comprising four species of Hylaeus ( including the banksia bee H. <unk> ) , two of Leioproctus , and a <unk> . 
 = = = Life cycle = = = 
 Honeyeaters are clearly the most important pollination vector , as inflorescences from which honeyeaters are excluded generally do not set any fruit . Moreover , honeyeaters have been observed moving from tree to tree with significant loads of B. sessilis pollen on their foreheads , beaks and throats , having acquired it by brushing against pollen presenters while foraging for nectar ; experiments have shown that some of this pollen may be subsequently deposited on stigmas during later foraging . 
 The flowers of B. sessilis have a number of adaptations that serve to encourage outcrossing . Firstly , they are protandrous : a flower 's pollen is released around 72 hours before it becomes itself receptive to pollen , by which time around half of its pollen has lost its viability . Secondly , the period of maximum nectar production closely matches the period during which the flower is sexually active , so honeyeaters are enticed to visit at the most opportune time for pollination . This has proven an effective strategy : almost all pollen is removed within two to three hours of presentation . In addition , honeyeaters tend to move between inflorescences on different plants , rather than between inflorescences on the same plant , at least in high density sites . These factors combine to make it fairly unusual for a flower to be fertilised by its own pollen . When self @-@ fertilisation does occur , whether autogamous or <unk> , the resulting seed is almost always aborted , and the species ultimately achieves an outcrossing rate of nearly 100 % , at least in high density sites . Limited data for low @-@ density sites , where honeyeaters move from plant to plant less frequently , suggest more of a mixed @-@ mating system . 
 The species is a prolific <unk> , and this , combined with the very high outcrossing rates , results in massive seed output . In one study , the average number of seeds produced per B. sessilis plant was 622 , compared with an average of 2 for B. <unk> . This exceptionally high fecundity can be understood as an adaption to regular bushfire . Most Banksia species can be placed in one of two broad groups according to their response to fire : resprouters survive fire , resprouting from a lignotuber or , more rarely , epicormic buds protected by thick bark ; reseeders are killed by fire , but populations are rapidly re @-@ established through the recruitment of seedlings . B. sessilis is a reseeder , but it differs from many other reseeders in not being strongly serotinous : the vast majority of seeds are released spontaneously in autumn , even in the absence of fire . The degree of serotiny is a matter of some contradiction in the scientific literature : it has been treated as " serotinous " , " weakly serotinous " and " non @-@ serotinous " . Regardless of the terminology used , the massive spontaneous seed output of B. sessilis is its primary survival strategy , and is so effective that the species has a reputation as an excellent coloniser . However , this strategy , together with its relatively long juvenile period , makes it vulnerable to overly frequent fire . 
 Seeds of B. sessilis are short @-@ lived , and must germinate in the winter following their release , or they die . They are also very sensitive to heating , and thus killed by bushfire ; in one study , just 30 seconds in boiling water reduced the germination rate from 85 % to 22 % , and not a single seed survived one minute of boiling . 
 Like most other Proteaceae , B. sessilis has compound cluster roots , roots with dense clusters of short lateral rootlets that form a mat in the soil just below the leaf litter . These exude a range of carboxylates , including citrate , malonate and trans @-@ <unk> , that act as acid phosphatase , allowing the absorption of nutrients from nutrient @-@ poor soils , such as the phosphorus @-@ deficient native soils of Australia . 
 = = = Disease = = = 
 Banksia sessilis is highly susceptible to dieback caused by the introduced plant pathogen Phytophthora cinnamomi , a soil @-@ borne water mould that causes root rot ; in fact it is so reliably susceptible that it is considered a good indicator species for the presence of the disease . Most highly susceptible species quickly become locally extinct in infected areas , and in the absence of hosts the disease itself eventually dies out . However , B. sessilis , being an aggressive coloniser of disturbed and open ground , often colonises old disease sites . The new colonies are themselves infected , and thus P. cinnamomi survives at these sites indefinitely . 
 The application of phosphite inhibits growth of P. cinnamomi in B. sessilis , but does not kill the pathogen . In one study , a foliar spray containing phosphite inhibited the growth of P. cinnamomi by over 90 % in plants infected with B. sessilis two weeks after spraying , and by 66 % in plants infected one year after spraying ; yet most plants infected shortly before or after spraying were dead 100 days later , while nearly all plants infected seven months later spraying survived a further 100 days . Phosphite is not known to affect plant growth , but has been shown to reduce pollen fertility : one study recorded fertility reductions of up to 50 % , and , in a separate experiment , fertility reductions that persisted for more than a year . 
 Infection of coastal stands of B. sessilis by the fungus Armillaria luteobubalina has also been recorded . The apparent infection rate of 0 @.@ 31 is quite slow compared to the progress of other Armillaria species through pine plantations . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 It is not known whether the seed collection sent to the Royal Botanic Gardens , Kew , by Menzies in 1793 included seeds of B. sessilis , but if it did then it did not germinate . The species was successfully germinated , however , from Good 's seed , which was sent from Sydney on 6 June 1802 and arrived at Kew the following year . According to Brown 's notes it was flowering at Kew by May 1806 , and in 1810 it was reported in the second edition of Hortus Kewensis as flowering " most part of the Year " . In 1813 a flowering specimen from the nursery of Malcolm and Sweet was featured as Plate 1581 in Curtis 's Botanical Magazine . 
 By the 1830s the species was in cultivation in continental Europe . It was recorded as being cultivated in the garden of Karl von Hügel in Vienna , Austria in 1831 , and in 1833 it was listed amongst the rare plants that had been introduced into Belgium . Along with several hundred other native Australian plants it was exhibited at plant shows held at Utrecht and Haarlem in the Netherlands in the 1840s and 1850s . By this time , however , English gardeners had already begun to lose interest in the Proteaceae , and by the end of the 19th century European interest in the cultivation of Proteaceae was virtually non @-@ existent . 
 In Australia , there was little interest in the cultivation of Australian plants until the mid @-@ 20th century , despite a long @-@ standing appreciation of their beauty as wildflowers . For example , in 1933 and 1934 The Western Mail published a series of Edgar Dell paintings of Western Australian wildflowers , including a painting of B. sessilis . These were subsequently republished in Charles Gardner 's 1935 West Australian Wild Flowers . One of the first published colour photographs of the species appeared in William Blackall 's 1954 How to know Western Australian wildflowers , but this publication was restricted to plant identification . The species was discussed and illustrated in the 1959 Wildflowers of Western Australia , and in the 1973 Flowers and plants of Western Australia , but these books did not provide cultivation advice either . 
 Possibly the first published information on the cultivation of Dryandra appeared in the magazine Australian Plants in June and September 1961 . D. sessilis was among the species treated , but as there was not yet any experimental data on cultivation , information was restricted to its aesthetic qualities and the soil in which it naturally occurs . 
 From its inception in 1962 , the Kings Park and Botanic Garden undertook extensive research into the cultivation of native plants , resulting in two early publications that mentioned the cultivation potential of B. sessilis . In 1965 , John Stanley Beard published Descriptive catalogue of Western Australian plants , " a work of reference in which the horticultural characteristics of the plants concerned could be looked up by the staff " , which described D. sessilis as an erect shrub with pale yellow flowers appearing from May to October , growing in sand and gravel . Five years later , Arthur Fairall published West Australian native plants in cultivation . This presented largely the same information as Beard 's catalogue , adding only that the species flowers well in its third season . 
 = = = Current knowledge = = = 
 According to current knowledge , B. sessilis as an extremely hardy plant that grows in a range of soils and aspects , so long as it is given good drainage , and tolerates both drought and moderate frost . Unlike many <unk> , it grows well on limestone ( alkaline ) soils . It flowers very heavily and is an excellent producer of honey . It attracts birds , and is also popular with beekeepers . However , its size makes it unsuitable for smaller gardens , and if given an ideal situation it may produce a great many seedlings . It is propagated only from seed , as propagating it from cuttings has proven virtually impossible . Germination takes about five or six weeks , and plants may take two years to flower . 
 = Abra , Kadabra , and Alakazam = 
 Abra , Kadabra , and Alakazam , known in Japan as Casey ( <unk> , <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) , and Foodin ( <unk> , <unk> ) , are three Pokémon species in Nintendo and Game Freak 's Pokémon franchise that are linked through evolution . Abra evolves into Kadabra after gaining enough experience in battle , and Kadabra evolves into Alakazam after being traded to another trainer . Created by Ken Sugimori , they first appeared in the video games Pokémon Red and Blue and later appear in subsequent sequels . They have appeared in various merchandise , spinoff titles and animated and printed adaptations of the franchise . Known as the Psi Pokémon , using self @-@ hypnosis , Abra spends 18 hours a day sleeping , unable to utilize its abilities unless rested . This behavior ceases once it evolves into Kadabra , a strong psychic that emits alpha waves affected by its current mental state . Able to remember everything , Alakazam 's IQ is around 5000 and can outperform a supercomputer . Alakazam is one of the handful of Pokémon to be given a mega @-@ evolution in generation VI , giving it more strength along with a few physical changes such as a large white moustache . 
 In the Pokémon anime , Abra and Kadabra appear under the ownership of Sabrina . In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon Alakazam plays a large supporting role in the plot of the game . All three appear in the Pokémon Adventures manga in various roles . IGN described Abra , Kadabra , and Alakazam as " losing most of its charm " as it progressed . Calling Abra cute , they describe Kadabra as having " a bit of that personality " , and Alakazam as being a " distinctly grim , foreboding character " . 
 = = Design and characteristics = = 
 Abra , Kadabra , and Alakazam were three of several different designs conceived by Game Freak 's character development team and finalized by Ken Sugimori for the first generation of Pocket Monsters games Red and Green , which were localized outside Japan as Pokémon Red and Blue . Originally called " Casey " , " <unk> " , and " Foodin " in Japanese , Nintendo decided to give the various Pokémon species " clever and descriptive names " related to their appearance or features when translating the game for western audiences as a means to make the characters more relatable to American children . Abra and Kadabra were initially intended to be named Hocus and Pocus for American audiences , but were instead changed to Abra and Kadabra , based on the famous incantation along with Alakazam . Alakazam 's Japanese name Foodin was inspired by a rough translation of Harry Houdini 's last name . 
 Abra , Kadabra , and Alakazam are bipedal Pokémon characterized by their humanoid body structure and somewhat fox @-@ like appearance . They look like they are wearing armor , as they have two pauldron @-@ shaped pieces on their shoulders and a fauld @-@ like piece around their chest . Abra , Kadabra , and Alakazam have three fingers on each hand and three toes on each foot , with two toes in the front on either side and one in the back near the ankle . Abra and Kadabra also have thick tails the same gold color as the rest of its body , except for a brown band located near the top . Kadabra and Alakazam have relatively large mustaches , which are shorter in female species . Kadabra has a red star @-@ shaped symbol on its forehead , and three red wavy lines on its fauld @-@ like torso . After evolving into Alakazam , the creatures no longer have the <unk> markings and tails , while their heads become much larger , resulting in extremely powerful mental powers . Alakazam undergoes slight changes upon Mega Evolving into Mega Alakazam , as its overall color scheme becomes slightly paler , it gains a white beard alongside its now white mustache , a considerably thinner torso , and a red gem @-@ like organ on its forehead . 
 Possessing the ability to read minds , Abra can sense danger , teleporting when it does and can do so quickly enough to create visual doubles . Using self @-@ hypnosis , Abra spends 18 hours a day sleeping , unable to utilize its abilities unless rested . This behavior ceases once it evolves into Kadabra , a strong psychic that emits alpha waves affected by its current mental state . These waves can trigger headaches in nearby people and can cause machines to malfunction . Once it evolves into Alakazam , it has mastered every type and form of psychic ability , and its brain continually grows . This causes its head to become too heavy for its neck , requiring psychokinesis to hold it upright . Able to remember everything , its IQ is around 5000 and can outperform a supercomputer . Both Kadabra and Alakazam utilize spoons generated mentally to enhance their abilities , two for the latter , and can increase them further by closing their eyes . Upon Mega Evolving , Mega Alakazam 's mental abilities become even more pronounced due to it manifesting a red gem @-@ like organ on its forehead that emits psychic power . It also manifests three additional spoons alongside the two it possessed as Alakazam . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In video games = = = 
 The first video game appearance of Abra , Kadabra , and Alakazam was in Pokémon Red and Blue versions . When encountered in the wild , Abra will always use Teleport to attempt to escape the battle on the first turn . Abra evolves into Kadabra after gaining enough experience in battle , and Kadabra evolves into Alakazam after being traded to another trainer . Abra and Kadabra later appear in every subsequent sequel . In Pokémon Gold , Silver , and Crystal , before the Elite Four are defeated for the first time , an Abra appears as an NPC at the Indigo Plateau which will teleport the player back to New Bark Town . This NPC appears again in their remakes , but does not perform this function . In the main game series , many trainers use Abra , Kadabra , and Alakazam in their teams . Notable trainers include Saffron City Gym Leader Sabrina ; Blue , the player 's rival in Pokémon Red and Blue and their remakes ; Silver , the player 's rival in Pokémon Gold and Silver and their remakes ; Salon Maiden Anabel from the Hoenn Battle Frontier ; and Sinnoh Elite Four member Lucian . Outside of the main series , Abra , Kadabra , and Alakazam appeared in Pokémon Pinball , the Pokémon Mystery Dungeon games , and the Pokémon Ranger games , while Abra and Alakazam appeared in Pokémon Puzzle League and Abra appeared in PokéPark Wii : Pikachu 's Adventure and its sequel , PokéPark 2 : Wonders Beyond . In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon , Alakazam plays a large supporting role in the plot as the leader of a Gold Rank rescue team along with <unk> and Charizard . 
 = = = In anime = = = 
 In the Pokémon anime , the Saffron City Gym Leader , Sabrina owns an Abra , which she sends out in a battle against the series protagonist , Ash . After battling , Sabrina 's Abra evolves into Kadabra , causing Ash to forfeit the match due to Kadabra 's new and more powerful psychic abilities . Ash later returns for a rematch , and Ash 's <unk> makes Sabrina laugh , which causes Kadabra to laugh due to the psychic bond it has with Sabrina . Because of Kadabra and Sabrina 's laugh , they are unable to fight , and hand over the gym badge . Abra later appears in the series under the ownership of Mira , who offers to teleport everyone to <unk> city using her Abra , but instead teleports them to a flooded city to find a Poké Ball containing a <unk> that was lost in the newly flooded lake . One of Abra and Kadabra 's other appearances is living in an abandoned mining colony with several other Psychic @-@ type Pokémon . Alakazam 's first appearance was as a giant Alakazam awakened near the site of the <unk> ruins . Alakazam has also been owned by many notable trainers , such as Luana , the Gym Leader of <unk> Island , <unk> , Anabel , and Kenny . 
 = = = In printed adaptations = = = 
 In the Pokémon Adventures manga , Abra makes a cameo as the stolen Pokémon of the Pokémon Fan Club President . Later when Red frees the Pokémon kidnapped by Lt. Surge ; instead of his beloved Abra , the President of the Pokémon Fan Club finds himself with a not @-@ so @-@ cute Alakazam . Like her anime counterpart , Sabrina also owns a Kadabra . After Red 's aptitude test to be the Gym Leader of Viridian City , a swarm of wild Pokémon suddenly appear outside the Gym after being attracted by Pokémon March music , one of which is an Alakazam . Blue captures all of them with his <unk> . Alakazam is seen again as part of Blue 's team for the Gym Leader faceoff , and again as one of the Pokémon in Viridian Gym . It defeated Yellow 's Pikachu easily using a combination of Role Play and <unk> . Green is seen to have an Abra , using its Teleport move to transport Silver away to a safer location . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 IGN described Abra , Kadabra , and Alakazam as " losing most of its charm " as it progressed . Calling Abra cute , they describe Kadabra as having " a bit of that personality " , and Alakazam as being a " distinctly grim , foreboding character " . At the same time , they cited them as one of the most versatile groups of characters in the franchise . IGN also listed Alakazam , and to a lesser extent Kadabra , as one of the best Psychic types , alongside Mew , Mewtwo , and Starmie . They commented that Alakazam was good for " down @-@ to @-@ Earth " players who don 't want to use <unk> like Mew or Mewtwo . They further described Alakazam as " arguably the single most popular non @-@ legendary Psychic type in any of the current games " , also calling it a " brilliant yet brittle brainiac " . Boys ' Life named Abra one of the five " coolest " Pokémon from Pokémon FireRed and LeafGreen at fourth . The St. Petersburg Times also praised the characters , describing their names as " clever " . 
 IGN called Abra unimpressive , but worth raising because it evolves into the more powerful Kadabra . GameSpy further commented that Kadabra makes up for the shortcomings of Abra . 1UP FM praised the characters ' design , as the hosts noted them as some of their favorite Pokémon in the series and that they were impressed with their appearance . GamesRadar editor Henry Gilbert praised Kadabra and Alakazam 's mustaches , listing them on their list of " The 10 greatest mustaches in gaming history " . GamesRadar editor Brett Elston labelled Abra 's moveset " lame " , while acknowledging its potential to evolve into more powerful Pokémon . However , he claimed that Alakazam was useful only in limited circumstances . Elston also called Alakazam one of the most disturbing Pokémon of all time for the game 's assertion that its brain cells continually multiply until it dies a horrible death . In a poll conducted by IGN , Kadabra was voted as the 91st best Pokémon , where it was called " much cooler " than Alakazam because " He doesn ’ t need to show off by bending two spoons " . Alakazam was voted as the 20th best Pokémon , where the staff commented on the evolution line , stating they " not only loved the clever naming system but the creatures ’ designs and abilities as well " . They further stated that " Abra has always been a bit of a pain to raise and evolve , but the end result , an Alakazam , is well worth it in my book . " 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 Some conservative Christian groups have targeted Kadabra as representing anti @-@ Christian aspects of the franchise . In Palm Beach , Florida , Pastor Eugene Walton distributed pamphlets that described the symbol on its head as " a pentagram " ( even though Kadabra simply has a red five @-@ pointed star on its head , different than a pentagram ) and claimed the symbol on its chest was representative of Nazi Germany 's Waffen @-@ SS . In the book It 's a Dark World , Roger Boehm argued that due to its psychic @-@ status and the symbols on its body of the latter , Kadabra represented the occult , further arguing that the etymology of its name tied directly to them . 
 In November 2000 , it was reported that Uri Geller , an Israeli " psychic " <unk> who claims to bend spoons with his mind , sued Nintendo over the Pokémon Kadabra , due to its Japanese name which he claimed was an unauthorized appropriation of his identity . Geller learned of the similarity after fans of both himself and Pokémon noted a resemblance to the character 's Japanese name , behavior and face , and presented him with cards of the character to autograph after he had finished taping a television special in Japan . He further claimed that the star on Kadabra 's forehead , and the lightning patterns on its abdomen , were symbols popular with the Waffen @-@ SS and that , through the character , Nintendo had " turned [ him ] into an evil , occult Pokémon character " . Nintendo countered by stating there was no connection between the two and that they had not named any of the Pokémon after actual people to the knowledge of their staff . In 2008 , Pokémon anime director and storyboard artist Masamitsu Hidaka confirmed in an interview that Kadabra would not be used on a Pokémon Trading Card until an agreement was reached on the case . 
 = SM UB @-@ 43 = 
 SM UB @-@ 43 was a Type UB II submarine or U @-@ boat for the German Imperial Navy ( German : Kaiserliche Marine ) during World War I. UB @-@ 43 was sold to the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ( German : Kaiserliche und Königliche Kriegsmarine or K.u.K. Kriegsmarine ) during the war . In Austro @-@ Hungarian service the B was dropped from her name and she was known as SM U @-@ 43 or U @-@ XLIII as the lead boat of the Austro @-@ Hungarian U @-@ 43 class . 
 UB @-@ 43 was ordered in July 1915 and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in September . UB @-@ 43 was a little more than 121 feet ( 37 m ) in length and displaced between 270 and 305 tonnes ( 266 and 300 long tons ) , depending on whether surfaced or submerged . She was equipped to carry a complement of four torpedoes for her two bow torpedo tubes and had an 8 @.@ 8 @-@ centimeter ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) deck gun . As part of a group of six submarines selected for Mediterranean service , UB @-@ 43 was broken into railcar sized components and shipped to Pola where she was assembled and launched in early April 1916 , and commissioned later in the month . Over the next year the U @-@ boat sank twenty @-@ two ships , which included the Peninsular and Oriental liner Arabia . UB @-@ 43 also damaged the British cruiser Grafton . 
 The German Imperial Navy was having difficulties filling submarine crews with trained men and offered to sell UB @-@ 43 and a sister boat , UB @-@ 47 , to the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . After the terms were agreed to in June 1917 , both boats were handed over at Pola . When commissioned into the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , the B in her designation was dropped so that she became U @-@ 43 or U @-@ XLIII . She damaged one Italian steamer in limited Austro @-@ Hungarian service through the end of the war . U @-@ 43 was ceded to France as a war reparation in 1920 and broken at Bizerta that same year . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 The German UB II design improved upon the design of the UB I boats , which had been ordered in September 1914 . In service , the UB I boats were found to be too small and too slow . A major problem was that , because they had a single propeller shaft / engine combo , if either component failed , the U @-@ boat became almost totally disabled . To rectify this flaw , the UB II boats featured twin propeller shafts and twin engines ( one shaft for each engine ) , which also increased the U @-@ boat 's top speed . The new design also included more powerful batteries , larger torpedo tubes , and a deck gun . As a UB II boat , U @-@ 43 could also carry twice the torpedo load of her UB I counterparts , and nearly ten times as much fuel . To accommodate all of these changes the boats ' had larger hulls , and surface and submerged displacements more than twice those of the UB I boats . 
 The Imperial German Navy ordered UB @-@ 43 from AG Weser on 31 July 1915 as one of a series of six UB II boats ( numbered from UB @-@ 42 to UB @-@ 47 ) UB @-@ 43 was 36 @.@ 90 metres ( 121 ft 1 in ) long and 4 @.@ 37 metres ( 14 ft 4 in ) abeam . She had a single hull with saddle tanks and had a draft of 3 @.@ 68 metres ( 12 ft 1 in ) when surfaced . She displaced 305 tonnes ( 300 long tons ) while submerged but only 272 tonnes ( 268 long tons ) on the surface . 
 The submarine was equipped with twin Daimler diesel engines and twin Siemens @-@ Schuckert electric motors — for surfaced and submerged running , respectively — that drove one propeller shaft . UB @-@ 43 had a surface speed of up to 8 @.@ 82 knots ( 16 @.@ 33 km / h ; 10 @.@ 15 mph ) and could go as fast as 6 @.@ 22 knots ( 11 @.@ 52 km / h ; 7 @.@ 16 mph ) while underwater . The U @-@ boat could carry up to 27 tonnes ( 27 long tons ) of diesel fuel , giving her a range of 6 @,@ 940 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 850 km ; 7 @,@ 990 mi ) at 5 knots ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ; 5 @.@ 8 mph ) Her electric motors and batteries provided a range of 45 nautical miles ( 83 km ; 52 mi ) at 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ; 4 @.@ 6 mph ) while submerged . 
 UB @-@ 43 was equipped with two 50 @-@ centimeter ( 19 @.@ 7 in ) bow torpedo tubes and could carry four torpedoes . The U @-@ boat was also armed with one 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) Uk L / 30 deck gun . 
 UB @-@ 43 was laid down by AG Weser at its Bremen shipyard on 3 September 1915 . As one of six U @-@ boats selected for service in the Mediterranean while under construction , UB @-@ 43 was broken into railcar @-@ sized components and shipped overland to the Austro @-@ Hungarian port of Pola . Shipyard workers from Weser assembled the boat and her five sisters at Pola , where she was launched on 8 April . 
 = = German Imperial Navy career = = 
 SM UB @-@ 43 was commissioned into the German Imperial Navy on 24 April 1916 under the command of Oberleutnant zur See Dietrich Niebuhr ; UB @-@ 43 was the only U @-@ boat command for the 27 @-@ year @-@ old officer . UB @-@ 43 was assigned to the Navy 's Pola Flotilla ( German : Deutsche U @-@ Halbflotille Pola ) in which she remained throughout her German career . Although the flotilla was based in Pola , the site of the main Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy base , boats of the flotilla operated out of the Austro @-@ Hungarian base at Cattaro which was located farther south and closer to the Mediterranean . German U @-@ boats typically returned to Pola only for repairs . 
 Under Niebuhr 's command , UB @-@ 43 had no success , and he was replaced by Kapitänleutnant Hans @-@ Joachim von Mellenthin on 29 August . After two weeks under von Mellenthin 's command , UB @-@ 43 sank her first ship . While 112 nautical miles ( 207 km ; 129 mi ) east of Malta , the British steamer Italiana with her cargo of hay destined for Salonica was torpedoed and sunk . Three days later , and some 60 nautical miles ( 110 km ; 69 mi ) closer to Malta , von Mellenthin sank a pair of British steamers . Dewa was in ballast headed for Port Said when attacked by UB @-@ 43 ; three of the steamer 's crew lost their lives in the attack . Lord Tredegar was carrying a general cargo when she was sent down with the loss of four men . The Wall Street Journal reported that the sinking of Lord Tredegar resulted in a loss of $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 for her American insurer . 
 In October , von Mellenthin and UB @-@ 43 sank an additional two ships . On 10 October , the British tanker <unk> , carrying fuel oil from Rangoon was sunk off Cape Matapan without casualties . Three days later , two men were killed when UB @-@ 43 torpedoed and sank their ship , the British steamer Welsh Prince , of 4 @,@ 934 gross register tons ( GRT ) . 
 On 18 November , the British Admiralty , released a report that listed all of UB @-@ 43 's first five victims as evidence of German wrongdoing . According to the British report , Italiana , Dewa , Lord Tredegar , and <unk> — four of the twenty @-@ two ships listed — had all been torpedoed without warning . This type of attack was counter to German pledges to adhere cruiser warfare , which required that ships be allowed time for the crews to escape before any attack could commence . UB @-@ 43 's fifth victim , Welsh Prince , was on another list of 107 British ships sunk whose lifeboats had been fired upon by German submarines . 
 In the meantime , UB @-@ 43 had continued sinking British ships , sending down five in a nine @-@ day span in early November . Statesman , a 6 @,@ 153 @-@ ton steamer carrying a general cargo , was first on 3 November ; six crewmen were killed when the ship went down 200 nautical miles ( 370 km ; 230 mi ) east of Malta . The following day , the 3 @,@ 937 @-@ ton Clan Leslie and the 5 @,@ 398 @-@ ton <unk> were sunk in the same area . Clan Leslie was carrying a general cargo from Bombay when sunk with three casualties . Seven were killed when <unk> , traveling in ballast for Algiers , was sunk . 
 On 6 November , UB @-@ 43 torpedoed the Peninsular and Oriental liner Arabia 112 nautical miles ( 207 km ; 129 mi ) off Cape Matapan . According to contemporary news accounts , gunners on Arabia fired upon UB @-@ 43 after the liner was torpedoed , but recorded no hits . All 437 passengers aboard the steamer , en route from Sydney to London when attacked , were rescued after an hour in the water . The liner went down 90 minutes after the torpedo struck . Eleven died in the attack , including two of Arabia 's engineers killed in the initial blast of the torpedo . Six days after Arabia 's sinking , UB @-@ 43 sank the 3 @,@ 383 @-@ ton British steamer Kapunda east of Malta . Kapunda 's loss brought the U @-@ boat 's November tally to 26 @,@ 774 gross register tons , which accounted for more than 15 % of the November tally for all German U @-@ boats in the Mediterranean . 
 UB @-@ 43 and von Mellenthin sank three more British steamers in December : Bretwalda on the 13th , and Russian and Westminster on the 14th . Bretwalda — which had escaped destruction from a mine laid by UC @-@ 5 in August 1915 — and her cargo of jute were sent down 220 nautical miles ( 410 km ; 250 mi ) from Malta . Russian , at 8 @,@ 825 tons , was the largest ship sunk by UB @-@ 43 ; the horse transport ship was sailing in ballast from Salonica when she went down with 28 of her crewmen . After UB @-@ 43 torpedoed Westminster , the U @-@ boat shelled the survivors in their lifeboats , according to authors R. H. Gibson and Maurice Prendergast . Fifteen men from Westminster died in the sinking . 
 UB @-@ 43 sank no ships over the next eight weeks . Author Paul Halpern reports that the majority of the German U @-@ boats in the Mediterranean fleet were undergoing repairs and refits at Pola and Cattaro during January . Although no specific mention is made of repairs done on UB @-@ 43 , the U @-@ boat 's inactivity in this period may be for that reason . 
 = = = Unrestricted submarine warfare = = = 
 On 1 February 1917 , Kaiser Wilhelm II personally approved a resumption of unrestricted submarine warfare in order to try to force the British to make peace . The new rules of engagement specified that no ship was to be left afloat , although British reports for several of UB @-@ 43 's victims suggest that von Mellenthin was already operating in this manner . 
 Under these new rules of engagement , UB @-@ 43 first sank the Greek steamer <unk> 130 nautical miles ( 240 km ; 150 mi ) from Benghazi on 24 February , while she was carrying cottonseed to London . Two days later , the turret hull steamer Clan Farquhar , carrying cotton and coal for London , was torpedoed and sunk . After the attack , which killed 49 of her crew , the ship 's second engineer was taken captive by von Mellenthin . On the 27th , <unk> and her cargo of frozen meat from Majunga were sunk off Libya ( and her master taken prisoner ) , and on the 28th the Japanese steamer Shinsei Maru was sunk nearby . 
 She was nearly a month later before von Mellenthin and UB @-@ 43 sank their next target . On 26 March , the British steamer Ledbury , carrying wheat from Karachi , was sunk 90 nautical miles ( 170 km ; 100 mi ) from Benghazi . Eight days later , Vasilefs Constantinos , a Greek steamer of 4 @,@ 070 gross register tons ( GRT ) , was sunk in the Ionian Sea ; the Constantinos was the last ship sunk by UB @-@ 43 under von Mellenthin 's command . On 9 April , von Mellenthin was succeeded by Oblt.z.S. Horst Obermüller , a 26 @-@ year @-@ old first time U @-@ boat commander . Under von Mellenthin 's command , UB @-@ 43 had sunk 86 @,@ 236 gross register tons ( GRT ) of merchant shipping . 
 On 1 May , Obermüller sank the American @-@ owned ( but British @-@ flagged ) tanker British Sun carrying a load of fuel oil . According to a report in The New York Times , the 5 @,@ 565 @-@ ton vessel , valued at $ 2 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 , was " one of the finest " tankers . The collier Repton was sent down off Cape Matapan six days later ; three of the British steamer 's crewmen died in the attack . Later in the month , the Greek steamer Dorothy and her cargo of wheat from Karachi were sunk 45 nautical miles ( 83 km ; 52 mi ) from Cap D 'Armi . UB @-@ 43 's final attack of note was upon the cruiser HMS Grafton , torpedoed 150 nautical miles ( 280 km ; 170 mi ) east of Malta . Grafton was damaged but suffered no casualties . The 7 @,@ 350 @-@ tonne ( 7 @,@ 230 @-@ long @-@ ton ) <unk> British ship was brought safely into port at Malta . 
 On 21 July , UB @-@ 43 was decommissioned at Pola and handed over to the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . In her German Imperial Navy career of fourteen months , UB @-@ 43 sank twenty @-@ two merchant ships totaling 99 @,@ 176 gross register tons ( GRT ) , and damaged one warship with a displacement of 7 @,@ 350 tonnes ( 7 @,@ 230 long tons ) . 
 = = Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy service = = 
 In November 1916 , the German Imperial Navy , having a hard time finding trained submarine crews , inquired to find out if its ally Austria @-@ Hungary was interested in purchasing some of its Mediterranean submarines . A general agreement led to protracted negotiations , which stalled over the outflow of Austro @-@ Hungarian gold reserves to Germany . But , with all of the details worked out , the two parties agreed on the sale of UB @-@ 43 and sister ship UB @-@ 47 to Austria @-@ Hungary in June 1917 . 
 When handed over by the Germans on 21 July , UB @-@ 43 was in a " worn out condition " . Despite the rough condition of the boat , the U @-@ boat was commissioned into the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy on 30 July 1917 as SM U @-@ 43 , dropping the B from her former designation . Linienschiffsleutnant Friedrich Schlosser was installed as the new commander of the U @-@ boat , which remained at Pola for the next three months undergoing repairs . Departing that port on 1 November , U @-@ 43 made way to Cattaro , and then went out on patrol . Schlosser torpedoed the Italian steamer <unk> on 16 November , but the Italian ship did not sink ; she was towed to safety in Taranto . 
 On 30 November , a leak on U @-@ 43 partially flooded the boat and caused her to sink to a depth of 100 metres ( 330 ft ) before she was bought under control and raised to the surface . The flooding damaged the U @-@ boat 's electrical systems , preventing her from submerging on her return to port for repairs . An unidentified submarine launched a torpedo at the surfaced U @-@ 43 , but the torpedo 's aim was off and it passed harmlessly in front of the bow . The boat made port at Cattaro on 1 December and at Pola on 6 December for two months of repairs . 
 During U @-@ 43 's time under repair , Schlosser was reassigned to command U @-@ 14 , and Linienschiffsleutnant Eugen <unk> Edler von Horn was named to take his place aboard U @-@ 43 on 18 January 1918 . Under von Horn , U @-@ 43 patrolled off Cattaro , having to crash dive at least once to escape attack from enemy torpedo boats . On 17 March , while returning to Cattaro from patrol , the crew of the Austro @-@ Hungarian destroyer Dinara mistook U @-@ 43 for an enemy submarine and rammed her , damaging the diving planes . U @-@ 43 sailed for Fiume for three months of repairs . 
 The U @-@ boat returned to action in June and patrolled off Montenegro , Durazzo , and Cattaro for the next five months . On 13 June , U @-@ 43 was slightly damaged in an air raid on Cattaro and , on 5 September , had to crash dive to avoid another air attack while off Cattaro . On 20 September , the boat rendezvoused with U @-@ 47 and received a French prisoner of war . The prisoner was the only survivor of the French submarine Circé , which U @-@ 47 had torpedoed the night before . 
 At the end of the war , U @-@ 43 was at Cattaro . In her Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy career , U @-@ 43 damaged a single merchant ships of 4 @,@ 016 gross register tons . U @-@ 43 was ceded to France as a war reparation in 1920 , towed to Bizerta , and broken up there within a year . 
 = = Ships sunk or damaged = = 
 = = = As the German UB @-@ 43 = = = 
 = = = As the Austro @-@ Hungarian U @-@ 43 = = = 
 = Priscilla Dailey = 
 Priscilla Dailey , previously known as the Elizabeth E. Newell , is a wooden canal boat constructed in 1929 in Whitehall , New York . The barge was used to transport bulk cargo in New York , New Jersey , and Connecticut harbors . It sunk in 1974 along with the Elmer S. Dailey and the Berkshire No. 7 . The sunken boat has deteriorated to the point that a salvage operation could result in it breaking apart . It was added to the National Register of Historic Places on December 21 , 1978 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The barge measures 111 @.@ 1 feet ( 33 @.@ 9 m ) long with a 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) beam . The depth of the hold is listed at 11 @.@ 8 feet ( 3 @.@ 6 m ) and it had a listed capacity of 311 tons . Clouette describes the Priscilla Dailey as having a " nearly rectangular hull in profile , section and plan , with squared @-@ off stern and bluntly rounded bow . Low bulwarks with scuppers rise slightly to a peak where they join the prominently projecting stem . There are several raised strakes in the bow . The superstructure consists mainly of a single low coaming which extends nearly the length of the vessel " . Toward the stern is a small cabin that has the same width and height of the coaming . In 1978 , the National Register of Historic Places nomination noted that the convex hatch covers likely floated away and that the squarish hood over the companionway had washed away . 
 = = History = = 
 The wooden canal boat Priscilla Dailey was originally known as Elizabeth E. Newell until it was purchased by Stewart J. Dailey in 1941 . It was constructed in 1929 in Whitehall , New York , by William J. Ryan for Anthony O. Boyle . The ship was built 24 years after the Champlain Canal 's enlargement , but more closely resembles the specifications of the 19th @-@ century canal boats . It was used to transport materials in New York , New Jersey and Connecticut harbors between 1941 and 1972 , and afterward was moored in Bridgeport Harbor together with the Elmer S. Dailey and Berkshire No. 7 . 
 In the spring of 1974 , one of the barges began to take on water , dragging down the other two . At neap tide , one @-@ third of the hull of the Priscilla Dailey is visible above water . Priscilla Dailey is listed in the U.S. Registry as # <unk> . 
 = = Importance = = 
 The Priscilla Dailey is historically significant because it is one of the few surviving wooden canal boats and is " a rare and representative artifact of canal transportation " . Its design is characteristic of its 19th @-@ century predecessors despite being a 20th @-@ century vessel . It was added to the National Register of Historic Places on December 21 , 1978 . Its nomination and listing is unusual because it was not yet 50 years old at the time of its nomination , and it sunk in 1974 . It and the other two barges that sank with it are the only shipwrecks in Connecticut listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 In 1998 , the historic status of the barges was a concern for the Port Authority of Bridgeport Harbor , as the sunken ships interfered with a billion @-@ dollar redevelopment project . Over the years , the barges had deteriorated so that an operation to salvage them would likely result in them breaking apart . No action had been taken by 2003 , but a report noted that prior to any activity of the Priscilla Dailey , the Federal Transit Administration and / or the City of Bridgeport would document the barge with photos and a technical description . Specifics regarding the documentation based on the activity would be archived at the State Historic Preservation Office and the Mystic Seaport Museum . 
 = Jane Harris ( Neighbours ) = 
 Jane Harris is a fictional character from the Australian Network Ten soap opera Neighbours , played by Annie Jones . She debuted on @-@ screen during the episode broadcast on 31 July 1986 and was created by writer Ray <unk> . Jones originally auditioned for the role of Charlene Mitchell ( Kylie Minogue ) , but she was not successful . This prompted Jones to telephone the producers for two months asking for a role in the show until she was cast . In 1989 , Jones decided to quit the serial in order to pursue other projects and the character departed on 9 September the same year . In 2005 , Jones was one of many ex @-@ cast members who agreed to return to the serial , marking the 20th anniversary of Neighbours . On @-@ screen she was featured making a cameo in Annalise Hartman 's ( Kimberley Davies ) documentary about Ramsay Street . 
 Throughout her duration she held a nickname " Plain Jane Superbrain " , for her early intelligent , yet geeky image , which she was referred to by other character and media alike . She is portrayed as a mousy type character , going on a journey of self @-@ discovery as she transformed into a heart breaker . Her most notable point in this storyline is her makeover in which she wears make @-@ up in place of her glasses , dresses sexy and acts thick in order to win Mike Young 's ( Guy Pearce ) heart . Her makeover has been well documented by critics and holds a place in popular culture , where she is often referred to in cases of extreme makeovers . However , some academic publications have criticised her makeover for conforming to the stereo type that females cannot be sexy and intelligent at the same time . Jones also received the Logie Award for Most Popular Actress while portraying Jane . 
 = = Casting = = 
 The creation of Jane developed a different way to the usual process and there was no regular audition sessions . Aspiring actress Annie Jones spent two months ringing the Neighbours production company asking for a role on the show . She said " I had appeared on several other Australian TV shows , but desperately wanted to get into Neighbours " . Jones originally auditioned for the role of Charlene Mitchell , before she was given the small role , for what was a planned six weeks of appearances . Jones was 19 when she landed the role and became a permanent cast member . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 Jane was originally portrayed as being dowdy , lonely and quiet . She was a bookworm and mousey , thus generating her nickname " Plain Jane the Superbrain " to which she was often referred at the beginning of her role . Jones describes her character as a " goody @-@ goody " . . Her clothing style was forced upon her by her mother who believed she should be dressed in " dowdy " clothing . Jane is very clever and was bullied because of this whilst at school . When she meets Charlene Mitchell ( Kylie Minogue ) , she begins to transform into a different person . With Charlene 's help , she began to dress differently and as she became more confident , she began drawing the attention of male characters , most notably Mike Young ( Guy Pierce ) and eventually was seen as a " heart @-@ breaker " . Jane 's grandmother Nell Mangel ( Vivean Gray ) does not approve of her change in personality , but Jane ignores her worries and becomes a model . Following her make over , she becomes more assertive and takes the initiative to end her relationship with Mike Young . She then begins an affair with an older man . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 In 1987 , producers cast actress Briony <unk> to play Jane 's mother Amanda Harris to explore her backstory . She arrives in Erinsborough to reconnect with her daughter after two years . She had abandoned her to start a new life in Hong Kong . She was billed as a " glamorous but ageing socialite " . But Amanda notices that Jane has become attractive and the " scheming " character decides to try and compete against her to get more attention . <unk> soon left the show as Amanda was only intended to be a guest character . 
 The producers devised a romance storyline for the character alongside Mike Young ( Guy Pearce ) . Jane 's grandmother is not happy with the prospect of Jane and Mike forming a relationship . Jane decides not to pursue their relationship any further . Pearce told Patrice <unk> from TV Week that his character mainly shared a " platonic " relationship with Jane . But writers introduced a temporary love interest for Jane , pilot Glen Matheson ( Richard Moss ) who is much older than her . Nell disapproves of her new boyfriend because of the age difference . But Jane decides to end the romance , Pearce explained that " she realises this was not going to work out and calls it quits . " This wins Nell 's support of Jane 's involvement with Mike who is of a similar age . The pair had not been on good terms prior to working together on a photography assignment . They spend the day with Charlene and Scott Robinson ( Jason Donovan ) but after they leave the pair spend time alone and resolve their past problems . Pearce added that his character had been trying to charm Jane for some time . Eventually " she gives in " to Mike , Pearce believed that she felt sorry for Mike but over time comes to the realisation that she " really likes him " . 
 It was reported in June 1988 that Jones had signed a new contract to appear as Jane for another twelve months . But Jane and Mike 's relationship would not last as writers decided to pair her with another established character , Des Clarke ( Paul Keane ) . Their relationship is formed when Des decides to help Mike set up a photography dark room for a birthday gift . Jane offers to help but nearly electrocutes herself but Des manages to rescue her . Jane believes Des has saved her life and they develop a connection . Jones told TV Week 's Lawrie Masterson that " it builds towards a full on affair . Jane becomes virtually a stand @-@ in mother for little Jamie ( Des ' son ) and all those maternal instincts that girls have start to emerge . This results in the final break @-@ down of her relationship with Mike , Jones added " Mike gets the flick basically . " 
 Mike is hurt when new love interest Bronwyn Davies ( Rachel Friend ) chose to be with Henry Ramsay ( Craig McLachlan ) . He incorrectly believes he and Jane have a chance of reconciling because when Jane and Des share a meal to discuss Mike , but Jane believed Des had invited her with romantic intentions in mind . Des does feel drawn to Jane and Jones told Darren Devlyn from the magazine that her character is " really upset " when Des wants to discuss Mike . Jane is nearly hit by a car and this makes Des realise that he is in love with Jane and asks her to marry him . Mike is left feeling worse that both women in his life have chosen other men . Jones told Devlyn that Des ' friends still believe he is attached to the memory of his late wife Daphne Clarke ( Elaine Smith ) . She explained that because of Daphne " it 's natural that the proposal comes as a big shock . " Both characters had been left emotionally damaged from previous relationships but Jones believed the duo had no hesitations once they made the commitment . The actress added " it 's great that Des is finally over his mourning . " She was also looking forward to her character taking the role of step @-@ mother to Jamie . It was interesting for her to see how Jane copes with the responsibility of looking after a child . Keane was happy with the storyline because he believed it was time for Des to move on . He was also excited to work more closely alongside Jones on the storyline . 
 = = = Departure and return = = = 
 In 1989 , Jones decided to quit the serial in order to pursue other projects . Jones ' contract had been up for renewal but she chose not to proceed . Jones told Chrissie Camp ( TV Week ) that three years on a soap opera was long enough and the right time to leave . Jones filmed her final scenes with Neighbours in July that year . Camp revealed that Jane 's exit storyline would see her receiving bad news about Nell 's health and performing a " mercy dash overseas " . But her fiance Des pleads with her not to leave . She leaves regardless of Des ' request and their wedding plans are put on hold . Camp added that Jane 's departure comes as a " total shock " to the other residents of Ramsay Street . Jane departed during the episode broadcast on 4 September 1989 . 
 In 2005 , it was confirmed that Jones would be reprising her role to join the many ex @-@ cast members returning for the show 's 20th anniversary episode . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Jane was born in Erinsborough , to Peter and Amanda Harris , in 1969 . Her parents were constantly busy and never really had time for her , but she could always count on her grandmother , Nell ( who she went to live with at 16 , when her parents moved to Hong Kong ) . She is teased at school for being somewhat clever , and is given the nickname " Plain Jane the Super @-@ brain " . This ends after her neighbours , Helen Daniels ( Anne Haddy ) and Daphne give her a makeover . 
 She gradually becomes friends with Charlene and Scott Robinson ( Jason Donovan ) . Jane later starts to date Mike . Nell bans her from seeing Mike after her love rival Sue Parker ( Kate Gorman ) begins to send Nell poison pen letters about Mike . She later allows them be together when Daphne finds out Sue is behind the letters . After becoming lost in the bush with Shane Ramsay ( Peter O 'Brien ) , they strike up a friendship and share a bond , this makes Mike jealous . Her relationship with Mike gradually comes to an end after he cheats on her . Amanda comes back to Erinsborough , under the ruse of getting to know her daughter when in reality she is hiding from being fined for insurance fraud . Jane and Nell eventually tell her to leave . 
 Jane then starts working for Paul Robinson ( Stefan Dennis ) at the Robinson Corporation , Jane and Scott spend more time together as she is helping him revise for his HSC retakes , Jane always had a crush on him , they later kiss but Henry Ramsay ( Craig McLachlan ) witnesses it , he tells Charlene , who dumps Scott and refuses to talk to Jane , she eventually gets them back together when she pretends to pursue Scott , Charlene wants nothing more to do with her . Wanting to get away she is happy when Rosemary Daniels ( Joy Chambers ) then sees Jane 's potential and tries to get her to work for her in New York for the Daniels Corporation , but Jane later decides she is not willing to leave her friends and family behind . Her next love interest is Mark Granger ( Colin Handley ) who proposes to her on 25 December 1988 . While she accepts , the engagement does not last as Mark 's mother ( Mary Ward ) takes an instant dislike towards Jane . Tony Romeo ( Nick <unk> ) later tries to pass Jane off as his fiance to his mother , when his mother arrives Jane is furious with Tony and reveals the truth when she finds out he also pursuing Sally Wells ( Rowena Mohr ) . 
 She falls in love with Des , Daphne 's widower and they became engaged . This engagement comes to an end when Nell suffers a heart attack and she goes to England to nurse her back to health . Des waits for his bride @-@ to @-@ be , but a few months later , Jane phones and tells Des that she can not go through with the wedding and settles down in England with her grandmother . Jane appears in Annalise Hartman 's ( Kimberley Davies ) documentary focusing on past residents of Ramsay Street , she reveals that she is still living with Nell . 
 = = Reception = = 
 For her portrayal of Jane , Jones won the ' Most Popular Actress ' award at the 1989 Logie Awards . The Times named her transformation as one of their top 15 most memorable Neighbours moments . They said " Again , a barely remembered moment , but long before the days of makeover television the momentous reveal of Jane – previously memorable in her <unk> blazer and terribly parted hair – as super @-@ foxy , big haired <unk> @-@ wearing lovely sent Mrs Mangel , and us , into shock " . 
 Comedy Central a satellite television station which airs in the UK , branded her the ' Original Lassiters girl ' . Also opining , Jones won Jane " a legion of male fans " , the author himself confessed his attraction to her . Neil Wallis and Dave Hogan in their book The Neighbours Factfile , comment on Jane stating : " Brought in to replace Kylie Minogue as the main love interest in the show , her character Jane Harris proves to be much raunchier and man @-@ hungry than Charlene ever was ! " Orange UK describe Jane 's style as " shy genius " and state she is famous for her " transformation from ugly duckling to beautiful swan " and obtained the serial 's " hottest <unk> " . 
 Nick Harris of newspaper The Independent compared the Rangers Football Club 's makeover to hers . They said she was a " geeky girl wearing <unk> sweaters " before a " glamour puss " and joked she looked " knock @-@ down gorgeous – At least by late 1980s Ramsay Street standards . " Entertainment website Lowculture published an article criticising various soap operas for using each other 's storyline , in which they brand Jane 's " geek makeover " as the most famous of all and that other storylines of the same nature , are repetitive . 
 Naomi Alderman of The Guardian branded her purposely failing her maths tests to get Mike 's attention as " ridiculous " , however she added : " As a teenager I remember having earnest discussions with other girls about it : was it really true ? Did men not like clever girls ? Ought we to try to appear less clever ? " Whilst Owen Gibson of the newspaper said she was the " school swot " before she turned into a " beauty queen " . Columnist Felicity Cloake compiled an advice guide to attending Christmas parties for the workplace , on style she advised her readers to look to Jane for inspiration if they want to " dress to impress " . Josh Burt of entertainment website Hecklerspray ran a make over feature inspired by Jane 's make over , he also branded Jane a whore and said he thought her make over was astonishing . He also stated : " Ever since Plain Jane the Superbrain took off her glasses , smeared some slutty red lipstick around her mouth , and rubbed ice cubes on her stupid nipples , the celebrity makeover has been a must for anyone hoping to increase their fame . For those unaware , the whole Plain Jane thing happened in the Australian drama serial , Neighbours . She went from geek to whore in a matter of moments . " 
 Leeds culture website , Leeds Confidential stated the " makeover genre " has always fascinated them and mentioned the makeover as their prime example . Europe ’ s leading drinks trade publication , The Drinks Business compared Jane to their brand of Antipodean beer commenting it 's not as bland as it first appears . However they said that Jane is " notoriously nerdy " . TV Cream refer to Jane as the " neighbourhood dag " and stated that she conformed to the " plain , bespectacled , bookish female " taking her glasses off and becoming the " ravishing beauty " , they also brand her a minx for her antics with Scott . Sky Showbiz brand Jane as the serial 's " super swot " . Rod McPhee of Yorkshire Evening Post , stated that she went from " ostracised bookworm , who one day went from mousey nobody to sought @-@ after siren , all because she lost the lenses " . <unk> , he was confused why popular culture feels the need downgrade or upgrade someone 's sex appeal because of the presence or absence of glasses . Geoff Dean also agrees with this point in his book " English for Gifted and Talented Students : 11 – 18 Years " . However he added that able students seem to " lack a positive collective story or identity " , making an example of Jane . 
 Lorna Cooper a columnist of website MSN TV , branded Jane and Des one of " TV 's gruesome <unk> " . She has listed Jane as one of Soap Opera 's forgotten characters , claiming her as a favourite out of the golden era of Neighbours . Cooper once described her as " Seemingly mousey girl , who turned into a heartbreaker " and opines that she seemed to have liking for a " succession of older men " . Jane is referred to in Emily Barr 's fictitious novel " Out of My Depth " , in which character Amanda is watching her on Neighbours . Jane is mentioned in radio presenter Tony Horne tour guide book " <unk> Down Under " in which he states he was not excited about visiting the set of Neighbours because in his opinion nothing good happened after the departures of Jane and Mike . 
 = Italian cruiser San Giorgio = 
 The Italian cruiser San Giorgio was the name ship of her class of two armored cruisers built for the Royal Italian Navy ( Regia Marina ) in the first decade of the 20th century . Commissioned in 1910 , the ship was badly damaged when she ran aground before the start of the Italo @-@ Turkish War in 1911 , although she was repaired before its end . During World War I , San Giorgio 's activities were limited by the threat of Austro @-@ Hungarian submarines , although the ship did participate in the bombardment of Durazzo , Albania , in late 1918 . 
 She acted as a royal yacht for Crown Prince Umberto 's 1924 tour of South America and then deployed to the Indian Ocean to support operations in Italian Somaliland in 1925 – 26 . San Giorgio served as a training ship from 1930 to 1935 and was then rebuilt in 1937 – 38 to better serve in that role . As part of her reconstruction , she received a modern anti @-@ aircraft suite that was augmented before she was transferred to bolster the defences of Tobruk shortly before Italy declared war on the Allies in mid @-@ 1940 . San Giorgio was forced to scuttle herself in early 1941 as the Allies moved in to occupy the port . Her wreck was used as an immobile repair ship by the British from 1943 through 1945 . <unk> in 1952 , she sank while under tow to Italy to be broken up . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The ships of the San Giorgio class were designed as improved versions of the Pisa @-@ class design . San Giorgio had a length between perpendiculars of 131 @.@ 04 metres ( 429 ft 11 in ) and an overall length of 140 @.@ 89 metres ( 462 ft 3 in ) . She had a beam of 21 @.@ 03 metres ( 69 ft 0 in ) and a draught of 7 @.@ 35 metres ( 24 ft 1 in ) . The ship displaced 10 @,@ 167 tonnes ( 10 @,@ 006 long tons ) at normal load , and 11 @,@ 300 tonnes ( 11 @,@ 100 long tons ) at deep load . Her complement was 32 officers and 666 to 673 enlisted men . 
 The ship was powered by a pair of vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one propeller shaft using steam supplied by 14 mixed @-@ firing Blechynden boilers . Designed for a maximum output of 23 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 17 @,@ 000 kW ) and a speed of 22 @.@ 5 knots ( 41 @.@ 7 km / h ; 25 @.@ 9 mph ) , San Giorgio handily exceeded this , reaching a speed of 23 @.@ 2 knots ( 43 @.@ 0 km / h ; 26 @.@ 7 mph ) during her sea trials from 19 @,@ 595 ihp ( 14 @,@ 612 kW ) . The ship had a cruising range of 6 @,@ 270 nautical miles ( 11 @,@ 610 km ; 7 @,@ 220 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The main armament of the San Giorgio @-@ class ships consisted of four Cannone da 254 / 45 A Modello 1908 guns in twin @-@ gun turrets fore and aft of the superstructure . The ships mounted eight Cannone da 190 / 45 A Modello 1908 in four twin @-@ gun turrets , two in each side amidships , as their secondary armament . For defense against torpedo boats , they carried 18 quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 40 @-@ caliber 76 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns . Eight of these were mounted in embrasures in the sides of the hull and the rest in the superstructure . The ships were also fitted with a pair of 40 @-@ caliber QF 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) guns . The San Giorgios were also equipped with three submerged 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes . During World War I , eight of the 76 mm guns were replaced by six 76 mm anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns and one torpedo tube was removed . 
 The ships were protected by an armoured belt that was 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) thick amidships and reduced to 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) at the bow and stern . The armoured deck was 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick and the conning tower armour was 254 mm thick . The 254 mm gun turrets were protected by 200 mm of armour while the 190 mm turrets had 160 mm ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 San Giorgio , named after Saint George , the patron saint of Genoa , was ordered on 3 August 1904 and laid down on 2 January 1907 at the Regio Cantieri di Castellammare di Stabia in Castellammare di Stabia . The ship was launched on 27 July 1908 and completed on 1 July 1910 . San Giorgio ran aground on a reef off Naples @-@ Posillipo on 12 August 1910 , and was badly damaged . An estimated 4 @,@ 369 tonnes ( 4 @,@ 300 long tons ) of water flooded the boiler rooms , magazines and lower compartments . To refloat the ship , her guns and turrets , together with her conning tower and some of her armour had to be removed . 
 San Giorgio was under repair at the outbreak of the Italo @-@ Turkish War in September and only rejoined the fleet in June 1912 . In February 1913 , the ship cruised the Aegean Sea and made a port visit to Salonica , Greece , the next month . The ship ran aground again in November in the Strait of Messina , but she was only lightly damaged . The captain was dismissed as a result of the incident . 
 San Giorgio was based at Brindisi when Italy declared war on the Central Powers on 23 May 1915 . That night , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy bombarded the Italian coast in an attempt to disrupt the Italian mobilization . Of the many targets , Ancona was hardest hit , with disruptions to the town 's gas , electric , and telephone service ; the city 's stockpiles of coal and oil were left in flames . All of the Austrian ships safely returned to port , putting pressure on the Regia Marina to stop the attacks . When the Austrians resumed bombardments on the Italian coast in mid @-@ June , Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel responded by sending San Giorgio and the other armored cruisers at Brindisi — the navy 's newest — to Venice to supplement the older ships already there . Shortly after their arrival at Venice , Amalfi was sunk by a submarine on 7 July and her loss severely restricted the activities of the other ships based at Venice . San Giorgio participated in the bombardment of Durazzo on 2 October 1918 which sank one merchantman and damaged two others . 
 San Giorgio was relieved by the scout cruiser Brindisi as flagship of the Eastern Squadron on 16 July 1921 at Istanbul , Turkey . She later served in the Far East and China . In 1924 she conducted Crown Prince Umberto on his tour of South America . The ship departed Naples on 1 July and the outbreak of the second Tenente revolt in Brazil the following day forced the ships to divert to Argentina , where they arrived at Buenos Aires on 6 August . Three days later the government hosted a military parade in his honor which included a detachment of sailors from San Giorgio . He visited Chile before departing Montevideo , Uruguay on 5 September , bound for Bahia , Brazil . The ship sailed for home on 18 September . 
 After her return , she was assigned to the Red Sea and Indian Ocean Naval Division ( Divisione Navale del Mar Rosso e dell <unk> <unk> ) in 1925 – 26 , supporting operations in Italian Somaliland . From 1930 to 1935 , the ship was based in Pola as a training ship for naval cadets and was sent to Spain after the Spanish Civil War began in 1936 to protect Italian interests . In 1937 – 38 she was reconstructed to serve as a dedicated training ship for naval cadets at the Arsenale di La Spezia : six boilers were removed and the remaining eight were converted to burn fuel oil which reduced her speed to 16 – 17 knots ( 30 – 31 km / h ; 18 – 20 mph ) . Each pair of funnels was trunked together and her 76 / 40 guns were replaced by eight 47 @-@ caliber 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) guns in four twin turrets abreast the funnels . Her torpedo tubes were also removed while she received a light AA suite for the first time with the addition of six 54 @-@ caliber Breda 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns in single mounts , a dozen 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) Breda Model 35 autocannon in six twin mounts and four 13 @.@ 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 52 in ) Breda Model 31 machine guns in two twin mounts . 
 Prior to her being sent to reinforce the defences of Tobruk in early May 1940 , a fifth 100 / 47 gun turret was added on the forecastle and five more twin 13 @.@ 2 mm machine gun mounts were added to better suit her new role as a floating battery . Two days after Italy declared war on Britain on 10 June , the British launched a co @-@ ordinated sea and land attack against Tobruk . The British naval force , including the light cruisers Gloucester and Liverpool bombarded the port and engaged San Giorgio , which suffered no damage , while Royal Air Force Blenheim bombers from No. 45 , No. 55 , and No. 211 Squadrons also attacked Tobruk , striking San Giorgio with a bomb . On 19 June , the British submarine HMS Parthian fired two torpedoes at San Giorgio , but they detonated before hitting the ship . Her principal role was to supplement the anti @-@ aircraft defences of Tobruk although she fired on Australian forces attacking Tobruk on 21 January 1941 . As British and Australian troops were entering Tobruk , San Giorgio was scuttled in shallow water on the morning of 22 January by placing demolition charges in her magazines . The ship was awarded the Gold Medal of Military Valor ( Medaglia d 'Oro al Valor Militare ) for her actions in the defence of Tobruk . 
 San Giorgio 's hulk was commissioned by the British in March 1943 as HMS San Giorgio for use as a repair ship and was used by them for the rest of the war . The wreck was refloated in 1952 , but it sank en route to Italy . 
 = Uranus = 
 Uranus is the seventh planet from the Sun . It has the third @-@ largest planetary radius and fourth @-@ largest planetary mass in the Solar System . Uranus is similar in composition to Neptune , and both have different bulk chemical composition from that of the larger gas giants Jupiter and Saturn . For this reason , scientists often classify Uranus and Neptune as " ice giants " to distinguish them from the gas giants . Uranus 's atmosphere is similar to Jupiter 's and Saturn 's in its primary composition of hydrogen and helium , but it contains more " ices " such as water , ammonia , and methane , along with traces of other hydrocarbons . It is the coldest planetary atmosphere in the Solar System , with a minimum temperature of 49 K ( − 224 @.@ 2 ° C ) , and has a complex , layered cloud structure with water thought to make up the lowest clouds and methane the uppermost layer of clouds . The interior of Uranus is mainly composed of ices and rock . 
 Uranus is the only planet whose name is derived from a figure from Greek mythology , from the Latinized version of the Greek god of the sky Ouranos . Like the other giant planets , Uranus has a ring system , a magnetosphere , and numerous moons . The Uranian system has a unique configuration among those of the planets because its axis of rotation is tilted sideways , nearly into the plane of its solar orbit . Its north and south poles , therefore , lie where most other planets have their <unk> . In 1986 , images from Voyager 2 showed Uranus as an almost featureless planet in visible light , without the cloud bands or storms associated with the other giant planets . Observations from Earth have shown seasonal change and increased weather activity as Uranus approached its equinox in 2007 . Wind speeds can reach 250 metres per second ( 900 km / h , 560 mph ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Like the five classical planets , Uranus is visible to the naked eye , but it was never recognized as a planet by ancient observers because of its dimness and slow orbit . Sir William Herschel announced its discovery on 13 March 1781 , expanding the known boundaries of the Solar System for the first time in history and making Uranus the first planet discovered with a telescope . 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 Uranus had been observed on many occasions before its recognition as a planet , but it was generally mistaken for a star . Possibly the earliest known observation was by <unk> , who in 128 BC may have recorded it as a star for his star catalogue that was later incorporated into Ptolemy 's Almagest . The earliest definite sighting was in 1690 when John Flamsteed observed it at least six times , cataloguing it as 34 Tauri . The French astronomer Pierre Lemonnier observed Uranus at least twelve times between 1750 and 1769 , including on four consecutive nights . 
 Sir William Herschel observed Uranus on 13 March 1781 from the garden of his house at 19 New King Street in Bath , Somerset , England ( now the Herschel Museum of Astronomy ) , and initially reported it ( on 26 April 1781 ) as a comet . Herschel " engaged in a series of observations on the parallax of the fixed stars " , using a telescope of his own design . 
 He recorded in his journal " In the quartile near ζ Tauri ... either [ a ] Nebulous star or perhaps a comet " . On 17 March he noted , " I looked for the Comet or Nebulous Star and found that it is a Comet , for it has changed its place " . When he presented his discovery to the Royal Society , he continued to assert that he had found a comet , but also implicitly compared it to a planet : 
 " The power I had on when I first saw the comet was 227 . From experience I know that the diameters of the fixed stars are not proportionally magnified with higher powers , as planets are ; therefore I now put the powers at 460 and 932 , and found that the diameter of the comet increased in proportion to the power , as it ought to be , on the supposition of its not being a fixed star , while the diameters of the stars to which I compared it were not increased in the same ratio . Moreover , the comet being magnified much beyond what its light would admit of , appeared hazy and ill @-@ defined with these great powers , while the stars preserved that lustre and distinctness which from many thousand observations I knew they would retain . The sequel has shown that my surmises were well @-@ founded , this proving to be the Comet we have lately observed " . 
 Herschel notified the Astronomer Royal , Nevil Maskelyne , of his discovery and received this flummoxed reply from him on 23 April : " I don 't know what to call it . It is as likely to be a regular planet moving in an orbit nearly circular to the sun as a Comet moving in a very eccentric ellipsis . I have not yet seen any coma or tail to it " . 
 Although Herschel continued to describe his new object as a comet , other astronomers had already begun to suspect otherwise . Finnish @-@ Swedish astronomer Anders Johan Lexell , working in Russia , was the first to compute the orbit of the new object and its nearly circular orbit led him to a conclusion that it was a planet rather than a comet . Berlin astronomer Johann Elert Bode described Herschel 's discovery as " a moving star that can be deemed a hitherto unknown planet @-@ like object circulating beyond the orbit of Saturn " . Bode concluded that its near @-@ circular orbit was more like a planet than a comet . 
 The object was soon universally accepted as a new planet . By 1783 , Herschel acknowledged this to Royal Society president Joseph Banks : " By the observation of the most eminent Astronomers in Europe it appears that the new star , which I had the honour of pointing out to them in March 1781 , is a Primary Planet of our Solar System . " In recognition of his achievement , King George III gave Herschel an annual stipend of £ 200 on condition that he move to Windsor so that the Royal Family could look through his telescopes . 
 = = = Name = = = 
 Uranus is named after the ancient Greek deity of the sky Uranus ( Ancient Greek : <unk> ) , the father of Cronus ( Saturn ) and grandfather of Zeus ( Jupiter ) , which in Latin became " <unk> " . It is the only planet whose name is derived from a figure of Greek mythology . The adjective of Uranus is " Uranian " . The pronunciation of the name Uranus preferred among astronomers is / <unk> / , with stress on the first syllable as in Latin <unk> , in contrast to / <unk> / , with stress on the second syllable and a long a , though both are considered acceptable . 
 Consensus on the name was not reached until almost 70 years after the planet 's discovery . During the original discussions following discovery , Maskelyne asked Herschel to " do the astronomical world the <unk> [ sic ] to give a name to your planet , which is entirely your own , [ and ] which we are so much obliged to you for the discovery of " . In response to Maskelyne 's request , Herschel decided to name the object Georgium Sidus ( George 's Star ) , or the " Georgian Planet " in honour of his new patron , King George III . He explained this decision in a letter to Joseph Banks : 
 In the fabulous ages of ancient times the appellations of Mercury , Venus , Mars , Jupiter and Saturn were given to the Planets , as being the names of their principal heroes and divinities . In the present more philosophical era it would hardly be allowable to have recourse to the same method and call it Juno , Pallas , Apollo or Minerva , for a name to our new heavenly body . The first consideration of any particular event , or remarkable incident , seems to be its chronology : if in any future age it should be asked , when this last @-@ found Planet was discovered ? It would be a very satisfactory answer to say , ' In the reign of King George the Third ' . 
 Herschel 's proposed name was not popular outside Britain , and alternatives were soon proposed . Astronomer Jérôme Lalande proposed that it be named Herschel in honour of its discoverer . Swedish astronomer Erik <unk> proposed the name Neptune , which was supported by other astronomers who liked the idea to commemorate the victories of the British Royal Naval fleet in the course of the American Revolutionary War by calling the new planet even Neptune George III or Neptune Great Britain . 
 In a March 1782 treatise , Bode proposed Uranus , the Latinized version of the Greek god of the sky , Ouranos . Bode argued that the name should follow the mythology so as not to stand out as different from the other planets , and that Uranus was an appropriate name as the father of the first generation of the Titans . He also noted that elegance of the name in that just as Saturn was the father of Jupiter , the new planet should be named after the father of Saturn . In 1789 , Bode 's Royal Academy colleague Martin Klaproth named his newly discovered element uranium in support of Bode 's choice . Ultimately , Bode 's suggestion became the most widely used , and became universal in 1850 when HM Nautical Almanac Office , the final holdout , switched from using Georgium Sidus to Uranus . 
 Uranus has two astronomical symbols . The first to be proposed , <unk> , was suggested by Lalande in 1784 . In a letter to Herschel , Lalande described it as " un globe <unk> par la première lettre de votre nom " ( " a globe surmounted by the first letter of your surname " ) . A later proposal , <unk> , is a hybrid of the symbols for Mars and the Sun because Uranus was the Sky in Greek mythology , which was thought to be dominated by the combined powers of the Sun and Mars . 
 Uranus is called by a variety of translations in other languages . In Chinese , Japanese , Korean , and Vietnamese , its name is literally translated as the " sky king star " ( <unk> ) . In Thai , its official name is Dao <unk> ( <unk> ) , as in English . Its other name in Thai is Dao <unk> ( <unk> , Star of <unk> ) , after the Sanskrit word for " death " , <unk> ( <unk> ् <unk> ) . In Mongolian , its name is <unk> Van ( <unk> <unk> ) , translated as " King of the Sky " , reflecting its namesake god 's role as the ruler of the heavens . In Hawaiian , its name is Hele ‘ <unk> . In Māori , its name is <unk> . It is also named in Māori as <unk> . In Nahuatl , Uranus is known as " <unk> " , named after the word for " sky " , " <unk> " . It is also named in Nahuatl as " <unk> " , after the god <unk> . 
 = = Orbit and rotation = = 
 Uranus orbits the Sun once every 84 years . Its average distance from the Sun is roughly 3 billion km ( about 20 AU ) . The difference between its minimum and maximum distance from the Sun is 1 @.@ 8 AU , larger than that of any other planet , though not as large as that of dwarf planet Pluto . The intensity of sunlight varies inversely with the square of distance , and so on Uranus ( at about 20 times the distance from the Sun compared to Earth ) it is about 1 / 400 the intensity of light on Earth . Its orbital elements were first calculated in 1783 by Pierre @-@ Simon Laplace . With time , discrepancies began to appear between the predicted and observed orbits , and in 1841 , John Couch Adams first proposed that the differences might be due to the gravitational tug of an unseen planet . In 1845 , Urbain Le Verrier began his own independent research into Uranus 's orbit . On September 23 , 1846 , Johann Gottfried Galle located a new planet , later named Neptune , at nearly the position predicted by Le Verrier . 
 The rotational period of the interior of Uranus is 17 hours , 14 minutes . As on all the giant planets , its upper atmosphere experiences strong winds in the direction of rotation . At some latitudes , such as about 60 degrees south , visible features of the atmosphere move much faster , making a full rotation in as little as 14 hours . 
 = = = Axial tilt = = = 
 The Uranian axis of rotation is approximately parallel with the plane of the Solar System , with an axial tilt of 97 @.@ 77 ° ( as defined by prograde rotation ) . This gives it seasonal changes completely unlike those of the other planets . Near the solstice , one pole faces the Sun continuously and the other faces away . Only a narrow strip around the equator experiences a rapid day – night cycle , but with the Sun low over the horizon . At the other side of Uranus 's orbit the orientation of the poles towards the Sun is reversed . Each pole gets around 42 years of continuous sunlight , followed by 42 years of darkness . Near the time of the equinoxes , the Sun faces the equator of Uranus giving a period of day – night cycles similar to those seen on most of the other planets . In contrast to the other planets , whose motions around the Sun resemble that of spinning tops , Uranus 's motion can be visualized as that of a ball rolling on the ecliptic plane near solstices and of a spinning rifle bullet near equinoxes . 
 Uranus reached its most recent equinox on December 7 , 2007 . 
 One result of this axis orientation is that , averaged over the Uranian year , the polar regions of Uranus receive a greater energy input from the Sun than its equatorial regions . Nevertheless , Uranus is hotter at its equator than at its poles . The underlying mechanism that causes this is unknown . The reason for Uranus 's unusual axial tilt is also not known with certainty , but the usual speculation is that during the formation of the Solar System , an Earth @-@ sized protoplanet collided with Uranus , causing the skewed orientation . Uranus 's south pole was pointed almost directly at the Sun at the time of Voyager 2 's flyby in 1986 . The labelling of this pole as " south " uses the definition currently endorsed by the International Astronomical Union , namely that the north pole of a planet or satellite is the pole that points above the invariable plane of the Solar System , regardless of the direction the planet is spinning . A different convention is sometimes used , in which a body 's north and south poles are defined according to the right @-@ hand rule in relation to the direction of rotation . 
 = = = Visibility = = = 
 From 1995 to 2006 , Uranus 's apparent magnitude fluctuated between + 5 @.@ 6 and + 5 @.@ 9 , placing it just within the limit of naked eye visibility at + 6 @.@ 5 . Its angular diameter is between 3 @.@ 4 and 3 @.@ 7 arcseconds , compared with 16 to 20 arcseconds for Saturn and 32 to 45 arcseconds for Jupiter . At opposition , Uranus is visible to the naked eye in dark skies , and becomes an easy target even in urban conditions with binoculars . In larger amateur telescopes with an objective diameter of between 15 and 23 cm , Uranus appears as a pale cyan disk with distinct limb darkening . With a large telescope of 25 cm or wider , cloud patterns , as well as some of the larger satellites , such as Titania and Oberon , may be visible . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 = = = Internal structure = = = 
 Uranus 's mass is roughly 14 @.@ 5 times that of Earth , making it the least massive of the giant planets . Its diameter is slightly larger than Neptune 's at roughly four times that of Earth . A resulting density of 1 @.@ 27 g / cm3 makes Uranus the second least dense planet , after Saturn . This value indicates that it is made primarily of various ices , such as water , ammonia , and methane . The total mass of ice in Uranus 's interior is not precisely known , because different figures emerge depending on the model chosen ; it must be between 9 @.@ 3 and 13 @.@ 5 Earth masses . Hydrogen and helium constitute only a small part of the total , with between 0 @.@ 5 and 1 @.@ 5 Earth masses . The remainder of the non @-@ ice mass ( 0 @.@ 5 to 3 @.@ 7 Earth masses ) is accounted for by rocky material . 
 The standard model of Uranus 's structure is that it consists of three layers : a rocky ( silicate / iron – nickel ) core in the centre , an icy mantle in the middle and an outer gaseous hydrogen / helium envelope . The core is relatively small , with a mass of only 0 @.@ 55 Earth masses and a radius less than 20 % of Uranus 's ; the mantle comprises its bulk , with around 13 @.@ 4 Earth masses , and the upper atmosphere is relatively insubstantial , weighing about 0 @.@ 5 Earth masses and extending for the last 20 % of Uranus 's radius . Uranus 's core density is around 9 g / cm3 , with a pressure in the center of 8 million bars ( 800 GPa ) and a temperature of about 5000 K. The ice mantle is not in fact composed of ice in the conventional sense , but of a hot and dense fluid consisting of water , ammonia and other volatiles . This fluid , which has a high electrical conductivity , is sometimes called a water – ammonia ocean . 
 The extreme pressure and temperature deep within Uranus may break up the methane molecules , with the carbon atoms condensing into crystals of diamond that rain down through the mantle like hailstones . Very @-@ high @-@ pressure experiments at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory suggest that the base of the mantle may comprise an ocean of liquid diamond , with floating solid ' diamond @-@ bergs ' . 
 The bulk compositions of Uranus and Neptune are different from those of Jupiter and Saturn , with ice dominating over gases , hence justifying their separate classification as ice giants . There may be a layer of ionic water where the water molecules break down into a soup of hydrogen and oxygen ions , and deeper down <unk> water in which the oxygen crystallises but the hydrogen ions move freely within the oxygen lattice . 
 Although the model considered above is reasonably standard , it is not unique ; other models also satisfy observations . For instance , if substantial amounts of hydrogen and rocky material are mixed in the ice mantle , the total mass of ices in the interior will be lower , and , correspondingly , the total mass of rocks and hydrogen will be higher . Presently available data does not allow science to determine which model is correct . The fluid interior structure of Uranus means that it has no solid surface . The gaseous atmosphere gradually transitions into the internal liquid layers . For the sake of convenience , a revolving oblate spheroid set at the point at which atmospheric pressure equals 1 bar ( 100 kPa ) is conditionally designated as a " surface " . It has equatorial and polar radii of 25 559 ± 4 and 24 973 ± 20 km , respectively . This surface is used throughout this article as a zero point for altitudes . 
 = = = = Internal heat = = = = 
 Uranus 's internal heat appears markedly lower than that of the other giant planets ; in astronomical terms , it has a low thermal flux . Why Uranus 's internal temperature is so low is still not understood . Neptune , which is Uranus 's near twin in size and composition , radiates 2 @.@ 61 times as much energy into space as it receives from the Sun , but Uranus radiates hardly any excess heat at all . The total power radiated by Uranus in the far infrared ( i.e. heat ) part of the spectrum is 1 @.@ 06 ± 0 @.@ 08 times the solar energy absorbed in its atmosphere . Uranus 's heat flux is only 0 @.@ 042 ± 0 @.@ 047 W / m2 , which is lower than the internal heat flux of Earth of about 0 @.@ 075 W / m2 . The lowest temperature recorded in Uranus 's tropopause is 49 K ( − 224 ° C ) , making Uranus the coldest planet in the Solar System . 
 One of the hypotheses for this discrepancy suggests that when Uranus was hit by a supermassive impactor , which caused it to expel most of its primordial heat , it was left with a depleted core temperature . Another hypothesis is that some form of barrier exists in Uranus 's upper layers that prevents the core 's heat from reaching the surface . For example , convection may take place in a set of compositionally different layers , which may inhibit the upward heat transport ; perhaps double <unk> convection is a limiting factor . 
 = = = Atmosphere = = = 
 Although there is no well @-@ defined solid surface within Uranus 's interior , the outermost part of Uranus 's gaseous envelope that is accessible to remote sensing is called its atmosphere . Remote @-@ sensing capability extends down to roughly 300 km below the 1 bar ( 100 kPa ) level , with a corresponding pressure around 100 bar ( 10 MPa ) and temperature of 320 K. The tenuous thermosphere extends over two planetary radii from the nominal surface , which is defined to lie at a pressure of 1 bar . The Uranian atmosphere can be divided into three layers : the troposphere , between altitudes of − 300 and 50 km and pressures from 100 to 0 @.@ 1 bar ( 10 MPa to 10 kPa ) ; the stratosphere , spanning altitudes between 50 and 4000 km and pressures of between 0 @.@ 1 and 10 − 10 bar ( 10 kPa to 10 µPa ) ; and the thermosphere extending from 4 @,@ 000 km to as high as 50 @,@ 000 km from the surface . There is no mesosphere . 
 = = = = Composition = = = = 
 The composition of Uranus 's atmosphere is different from its bulk , consisting mainly of molecular hydrogen and helium . The helium molar fraction , i.e. the number of helium atoms per molecule of gas , is 0 @.@ 15 ± 0 @.@ 03 in the upper troposphere , which corresponds to a mass fraction 0 @.@ 26 ± 0 @.@ 05 . This value is close to the protosolar helium mass fraction of 0 @.@ 275 ± 0 @.@ 01 , indicating that helium has not settled in its centre as it has in the gas giants . The third @-@ most @-@ abundant component of Uranus 's atmosphere is methane ( CH4 ) . Methane has prominent absorption bands in the visible and near @-@ infrared ( IR ) , making Uranus aquamarine or cyan in colour . Methane molecules account for 2 @.@ 3 % of the atmosphere by molar fraction below the methane cloud deck at the pressure level of 1 @.@ 3 bar ( 130 kPa ) ; this represents about 20 to 30 times the carbon abundance found in the Sun . The mixing ratio is much lower in the upper atmosphere due to its extremely low temperature , which lowers the saturation level and causes excess methane to freeze out . The abundances of less volatile compounds such as ammonia , water , and hydrogen sulfide in the deep atmosphere are poorly known . They are probably also higher than solar values . Along with methane , trace amounts of various hydrocarbons are found in the stratosphere of Uranus , which are thought to be produced from methane by photolysis induced by the solar ultraviolet ( UV ) radiation . They include ethane ( <unk> ) , acetylene ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , and diacetylene ( <unk> ) . Spectroscopy has also uncovered traces of water vapor , carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide in the upper atmosphere , which can only originate from an external source such as infalling dust and comets . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 The troposphere is the lowest and densest part of the atmosphere and is characterized by a decrease in temperature with altitude . The temperature falls from about 320 K at the base of the nominal troposphere at − 300 km to 53 K at 50 km . The temperatures in the coldest upper region of the troposphere ( the tropopause ) actually vary in the range between 49 and 57 K depending on planetary latitude . The tropopause region is responsible for the vast majority of Uranus 's thermal far infrared emissions , thus determining its effective temperature of 59 @.@ 1 ± 0 @.@ 3 K. 
 The troposphere is thought to have a highly complex cloud structure ; water clouds are hypothesised to lie in the pressure range of 50 to 100 bar ( 5 to 10 MPa ) , ammonium hydrosulfide clouds in the range of 20 to 40 bar ( 2 to 4 MPa ) , ammonia or hydrogen sulfide clouds at between 3 and 10 bar ( 0 @.@ 3 to 1 MPa ) and finally directly detected thin methane clouds at 1 to 2 bar ( 0 @.@ 1 to 0 @.@ 2 MPa ) . The troposphere is a dynamic part of the atmosphere , exhibiting strong winds , bright clouds and seasonal changes . 
 = = = = Upper atmosphere = = = = 
 The middle layer of the Uranian atmosphere is the stratosphere , where temperature generally increases with altitude from 53 K in the tropopause to between 800 and 850 K at the base of the thermosphere . The heating of the stratosphere is caused by absorption of solar UV and IR radiation by methane and other hydrocarbons , which form in this part of the atmosphere as a result of methane photolysis . Heat is also conducted from the hot thermosphere . The hydrocarbons occupy a relatively narrow layer at altitudes of between 100 and 300 km corresponding to a pressure range of 10 to 0 @.@ 1 mbar ( 1000 to 10 kPa ) and temperatures of between 75 and 170 K. The most abundant hydrocarbons are methane , acetylene and ethane with mixing ratios of around 10 − 7 relative to hydrogen . The mixing ratio of carbon monoxide is similar at these altitudes . Heavier hydrocarbons and carbon dioxide have mixing ratios three orders of magnitude lower . The abundance ratio of water is around 7 × 10 − 9 . <unk> and acetylene tend to condense in the colder lower part of stratosphere and tropopause ( below 10 <unk> level ) forming haze layers , which may be partly responsible for the bland appearance of Uranus . The concentration of hydrocarbons in the Uranian stratosphere above the haze is significantly lower than in the <unk> of the other giant planets . 
 The outermost layer of the Uranian atmosphere is the thermosphere and corona , which has a uniform temperature around 800 to 850 K. The heat sources necessary to sustain such a high level are not understood , as neither the solar UV nor the auroral activity can provide the necessary energy to maintain these temperatures . The weak cooling efficiency due to the lack of hydrocarbons in the stratosphere above 0 @.@ 1 <unk> pressure level may contribute too . In addition to molecular hydrogen , the thermosphere @-@ corona contains many free hydrogen atoms . Their small mass and high temperatures explain why the corona extends as far as 50 000 km , or two Uranian radii , from its surface . This extended corona is a unique feature of Uranus . Its effects include a drag on small particles orbiting Uranus , causing a general depletion of dust in the Uranian rings . The Uranian thermosphere , together with the upper part of the stratosphere , corresponds to the ionosphere of Uranus . Observations show that the ionosphere occupies altitudes from 2 000 to 10 000 km . The Uranian ionosphere is denser than that of either Saturn or Neptune , which may arise from the low concentration of hydrocarbons in the stratosphere . The ionosphere is mainly sustained by solar UV radiation and its density depends on the solar activity . Auroral activity is insignificant as compared to Jupiter and Saturn . 
 Uranus 's atmosphere 
 = = = Magnetosphere = = = 
 Before the arrival of Voyager 2 , no measurements of the Uranian magnetosphere had been taken , so its nature remained a mystery . Before 1986 , scientists had expected the magnetic field of Uranus to be in line with the solar wind , because it would then align with Uranus 's poles that lie in the ecliptic . 
 Voyager 's observations revealed that Uranus 's magnetic field is peculiar , both because it does not originate from its geometric centre , and because it is tilted at 59 ° from the axis of rotation . In fact the magnetic dipole is shifted from the Uranus 's center towards the south rotational pole by as much as one third of the planetary radius . This unusual geometry results in a highly asymmetric magnetosphere , where the magnetic field strength on the surface in the southern hemisphere can be as low as 0 @.@ 1 gauss ( 10 µT ) , whereas in the northern hemisphere it can be as high as 1 @.@ 1 gauss ( 110 µT ) . The average field at the surface is 0 @.@ 23 gauss ( 23 µT ) . In comparison , the magnetic field of Earth is roughly as strong at either pole , and its " magnetic equator " is roughly parallel with its geographical equator . The dipole moment of Uranus is 50 times that of Earth . Neptune has a similarly displaced and tilted magnetic field , suggesting that this may be a common feature of ice giants . One hypothesis is that , unlike the magnetic fields of the terrestrial and gas giants , which are generated within their cores , the ice giants ' magnetic fields are generated by motion at relatively shallow depths , for instance , in the water – ammonia ocean . Another possible explanation for the magnetosphere 's alignment is that there are oceans of liquid diamond in Uranus 's interior that would deter the magnetic field . 
 Despite its curious alignment , in other respects the Uranian magnetosphere is like those of other planets : it has a bow shock at about 23 Uranian radii ahead of it , a magnetopause at 18 Uranian radii , a fully developed magnetotail , and radiation belts . Overall , the structure of Uranus 's magnetosphere is different from Jupiter 's and more similar to Saturn 's . Uranus 's magnetotail trails behind it into space for millions of kilometres and is twisted by its sideways rotation into a long corkscrew . 
 Uranus 's magnetosphere contains charged particles : mainly protons and electrons , with a small amount of H2 + ions . No heavier ions have been detected . Many of these particles probably derive from the hot atmospheric corona . The ion and electron energies can be as high as 4 and 1 @.@ 2 megaelectronvolts , respectively . The density of low @-@ energy ( below 1 <unk> ) ions in the inner magnetosphere is about 2 cm − 3 . The particle population is strongly affected by the Uranian moons , which sweep through the magnetosphere , leaving noticeable gaps . The particle flux is high enough to cause darkening or space weathering of their surfaces on an astronomically rapid timescale of 100 @,@ 000 years . This may be the cause of the uniformly dark colouration of the Uranian satellites and rings . Uranus has relatively well developed aurorae , which are seen as bright arcs around both magnetic poles . Unlike Jupiter 's , Uranus 's aurorae seem to be insignificant for the energy balance of the planetary thermosphere . 
 = = Climate = = 
 At ultraviolet and visible wavelengths , Uranus 's atmosphere is bland in comparison to the other giant planets , even to Neptune , which it otherwise closely resembles . When Voyager 2 flew by Uranus in 1986 , it observed a total of ten cloud features across the entire planet . One proposed explanation for this dearth of features is that Uranus 's internal heat appears markedly lower than that of the other giant planets . The lowest temperature recorded in Uranus 's tropopause is 49 K , making Uranus the coldest planet in the Solar System , colder than Neptune . 
 = = = Banded structure , winds and clouds = = = 
 In 1986 , Voyager 2 found that the visible southern hemisphere of Uranus can be subdivided into two regions : a bright polar cap and dark equatorial bands . Their boundary is located at about − 45 ° of latitude . A narrow band straddling the latitudinal range from − 45 to − 50 ° is the brightest large feature on its visible surface . It is called a southern " collar " . The cap and collar are thought to be a dense region of methane clouds located within the pressure range of 1 @.@ 3 to 2 bar ( see above ) . Besides the large @-@ scale banded structure , Voyager 2 observed ten small bright clouds , most lying several degrees to the north from the collar . In all other respects Uranus looked like a dynamically dead planet in 1986 . Voyager 2 arrived during the height of Uranus 's southern summer and could not observe the northern hemisphere . At the beginning of the 21st century , when the northern polar region came into view , the Hubble Space Telescope ( HST ) and Keck telescope initially observed neither a collar nor a polar cap in the northern hemisphere . So Uranus appeared to be asymmetric : bright near the south pole and uniformly dark in the region north of the southern collar . In 2007 , when Uranus passed its equinox , the southern collar almost disappeared , and a faint northern collar emerged near 45 ° of latitude . 
 In the 1990s , the number of the observed bright cloud features grew considerably partly because new high @-@ resolution imaging techniques became available . Most were found in the northern hemisphere as it started to become visible . An early explanation — that bright clouds are easier to identify in its dark part , whereas in the southern hemisphere the bright collar masks them – was shown to be incorrect . Nevertheless there are differences between the clouds of each hemisphere . The northern clouds are smaller , sharper and brighter . They appear to lie at a higher altitude . The lifetime of clouds spans several orders of magnitude . Some small clouds live for hours ; at least one southern cloud may have persisted since the Voyager flyby . Recent observation also discovered that cloud features on Uranus have a lot in common with those on Neptune . For example , the dark spots common on Neptune had never been observed on Uranus before 2006 , when the first such feature dubbed Uranus Dark Spot was imaged . The speculation is that Uranus is becoming more Neptune @-@ like during its <unk> season . 
 The tracking of numerous cloud features allowed determination of zonal winds blowing in the upper troposphere of Uranus . At the equator winds are retrograde , which means that they blow in the reverse direction to the planetary rotation . Their speeds are from − 100 to − 50 m / s . Wind speeds increase with the distance from the equator , reaching zero values near ± 20 ° latitude , where the troposphere 's temperature minimum is located . Closer to the poles , the winds shift to a prograde direction , flowing with Uranus 's rotation . Wind speeds continue to increase reaching maxima at ± 60 ° latitude before falling to zero at the poles . Wind speeds at − 40 ° latitude range from 150 to 200 m / s . Because the collar obscures all clouds below that parallel , speeds between it and the southern pole are impossible to measure . In contrast , in the northern hemisphere maximum speeds as high as 240 m / s are observed near + 50 ° latitude . 
 = = = Seasonal variation = = = 
 For a short period from March to May 2004 , large clouds appeared in the Uranian atmosphere , giving it a Neptune @-@ like appearance . Observations included record @-@ breaking wind speeds of 229 m / s ( 824 km / h ) and a persistent thunderstorm referred to as " Fourth of July fireworks " . On August 23 , 2006 , researchers at the Space Science Institute ( Boulder , Colorado ) and the University of Wisconsin observed a dark spot on Uranus 's surface , giving scientists more insight into Uranus 's atmospheric activity . Why this sudden upsurge in activity occurred is not fully known , but it appears that Uranus 's extreme axial tilt results in extreme seasonal variations in its weather . Determining the nature of this seasonal variation is difficult because good data on Uranus 's atmosphere have existed for less than 84 years , or one full Uranian year . Photometry over the course of half a Uranian year ( beginning in the 1950s ) has shown regular variation in the brightness in two spectral bands , with maxima occurring at the solstices and minima occurring at the equinoxes . A similar periodic variation , with maxima at the solstices , has been noted in microwave measurements of the deep troposphere begun in the 1960s . Stratospheric temperature measurements beginning in the 1970s also showed maximum values near the 1986 solstice . The majority of this variability is thought to occur owing to changes in the viewing geometry . 
 There are some indications that physical seasonal changes are happening in Uranus . Although Uranus is known to have a bright south polar region , the north pole is fairly dim , which is incompatible with the model of the seasonal change outlined above . During its previous northern solstice in 1944 , Uranus displayed elevated levels of brightness , which suggests that the north pole was not always so dim . This information implies that the visible pole brightens some time before the solstice and darkens after the equinox . Detailed analysis of the visible and microwave data revealed that the periodical changes of brightness are not completely symmetrical around the solstices , which also indicates a change in the meridional albedo patterns . In the 1990s , as Uranus moved away from its solstice , Hubble and ground @-@ based telescopes revealed that the south polar cap darkened noticeably ( except the southern collar , which remained bright ) , whereas the northern hemisphere demonstrated increasing activity , such as cloud formations and stronger winds , bolstering expectations that it should brighten soon . This indeed happened in 2007 when it passed an equinox : a faint northern polar collar arose , and the southern collar became nearly invisible , although the zonal wind profile remained slightly asymmetric , with northern winds being somewhat slower than southern . 
 The mechanism of these physical changes is still not clear . Near the summer and winter solstices , Uranus 's hemispheres lie alternately either in full glare of the Sun 's rays or facing deep space . The brightening of the sunlit hemisphere is thought to result from the local thickening of the methane clouds and haze layers located in the troposphere . The bright collar at − 45 ° latitude is also connected with methane clouds . Other changes in the southern polar region can be explained by changes in the lower cloud layers . The variation of the microwave emission from Uranus is probably caused by changes in the deep tropospheric circulation , because thick polar clouds and haze may inhibit convection . Now that the spring and autumn equinoxes are arriving on Uranus , the dynamics are changing and convection can occur again . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Many argue that the differences between the ice giants and the gas giants extend to their formation . The Solar System is hypothesized to have formed from a giant rotating ball of gas and dust known as the <unk> nebula . Much of the nebula 's gas , primarily hydrogen and helium , formed the Sun , and the dust grains collected together to form the first protoplanets . As the planets grew , some of them eventually accreted enough matter for their gravity to hold on to the nebula 's leftover gas . The more gas they held onto , the larger they became ; the larger they became , the more gas they held onto until a critical point was reached , and their size began to increase exponentially . The ice giants , with only a few Earth masses of nebular gas , never reached that critical point . Recent simulations of planetary migration have suggested that both ice giants formed closer to the Sun than their present positions , and moved outwards after formation ( the Nice model ) . 
 = = Moons = = 
 Uranus has 27 known natural satellites . The names of these satellites are chosen from characters in the works of Shakespeare and Alexander Pope . The five main satellites are Miranda , Ariel , Umbriel , Titania , and Oberon . The Uranian satellite system is the least massive among those of the giant planets ; the combined mass of the five major satellites would be less than half that of Triton ( largest moon of Neptune ) alone . The largest of Uranus 's satellites , Titania , has a radius of only 788 @.@ 9 km , or less than half that of the Moon , but slightly more than Rhea , the second @-@ largest satellite of Saturn , making Titania the eighth @-@ largest moon in the Solar System . Uranus 's satellites have relatively low albedos ; ranging from 0 @.@ 20 for Umbriel to 0 @.@ 35 for Ariel ( in green light ) . They are ice – rock conglomerates composed of roughly 50 % ice and 50 % rock . The ice may include ammonia and carbon dioxide . 
 Among the Uranian satellites , Ariel appears to have the youngest surface with the fewest impact craters and Umbriel 's the oldest . Miranda has fault canyons 20 kilometres deep , terraced layers , and a chaotic variation in surface ages and features . Miranda 's past geologic activity is thought to have been driven by tidal heating at a time when its orbit was more eccentric than currently , probably as a result of a former 3 : 1 orbital resonance with Umbriel . <unk> processes associated with upwelling diapirs are the likely origin of Miranda 's ' racetrack ' -like <unk> . Ariel is thought to have once been held in a 4 : 1 resonance with Titania . 
 Uranus has at least one horseshoe orbiter occupying the Sun – Uranus L3 Lagrangian point — a gravitationally unstable region at 180 ° in its orbit , <unk> Crantor . Crantor moves inside Uranus 's co @-@ orbital region on a complex , temporary horseshoe orbit . 2010 <unk> is also a promising Uranus horseshoe <unk> candidate . 
 = = = Planetary rings = = = 
 The rings are composed of extremely dark particles , which vary in size from micrometres to a fraction of a metre . Thirteen distinct rings are presently known , the brightest being the ε ring . All except two rings of Uranus are extremely narrow – they are usually a few kilometres wide . The rings are probably quite young ; the dynamics considerations indicate that they did not form with Uranus . The matter in the rings may once have been part of a moon ( or moons ) that was shattered by high @-@ speed impacts . From numerous pieces of debris that formed as a result of those impacts , only a few particles survived , in stable zones corresponding to the locations of the present rings . 
 William Herschel described a possible ring around Uranus in 1789 . This sighting is generally considered doubtful , because the rings are quite faint , and in the two following centuries none were noted by other observers . Still , Herschel made an accurate description of the epsilon ring 's size , its angle relative to Earth , its red colour , and its apparent changes as Uranus travelled around the Sun . The ring system was definitively discovered on March 10 , 1977 by James L. Elliot , Edward W. Dunham , and Jessica Mink using the Kuiper Airborne Observatory . The discovery was serendipitous ; they planned to use the occultation of the star SAO <unk> ( also known as HD <unk> ) by Uranus to study its atmosphere . When their observations were analysed , they found that the star had disappeared briefly from view five times both before and after it disappeared behind Uranus . They concluded that there must be a ring system around Uranus . Later they detected four additional rings . The rings were directly imaged when Voyager 2 passed Uranus in 1986 . Voyager 2 also discovered two additional faint rings , bringing the total number to eleven . 
 In December 2005 , the Hubble Space Telescope detected a pair of previously unknown rings . The largest is located twice as far from Uranus as the previously known rings . These new rings are so far from Uranus that they are called the " outer " ring system . Hubble also spotted two small satellites , one of which , Mab , shares its orbit with the outermost newly discovered ring . The new rings bring the total number of Uranian rings to 13 . In April 2006 , images of the new rings from the Keck Observatory yielded the colours of the outer rings : the outermost is blue and the other one red . One hypothesis concerning the outer ring 's blue colour is that it is composed of minute particles of water ice from the surface of Mab that are small enough to scatter blue light . In contrast , Uranus 's inner rings appear grey . 
 Uranus 's rings 
 = = Exploration = = 
 In 1986 , NASA 's Voyager 2 interplanetary probe encountered Uranus . This flyby remains the only investigation of Uranus carried out from a short distance and no other visits are planned . Launched in 1977 , Voyager 2 made its closest approach to Uranus on January 24 , 1986 , coming within 81 @,@ 500 kilometres of the cloudtops , before continuing its journey to Neptune . The spacecraft studied the structure and chemical composition of Uranus 's atmosphere , including its unique weather , caused by its axial tilt of 97 @.@ 77 ° . It made the first detailed investigations of its five largest moons and discovered 10 new ones . It examined all nine of the system 's known rings and discovered two more . It also studied the magnetic field , its irregular structure , its tilt and its unique corkscrew magnetotail caused by Uranus 's sideways orientation . 
 Voyager 1 was unable to visit Uranus because investigation of Saturn 's moon Titan was considered a priority . This trajectory took Voyager 1 out the plane of the ecliptic , ending its planetary science mission . 
 The possibility of sending the Cassini spacecraft from Saturn to Uranus was evaluated during a mission extension planning phase in 2009 . It would take about twenty years to get to the Uranian system after departing Saturn . A Uranus orbiter and probe was recommended by the 2013 – 2022 Planetary Science Decadal Survey published in 2011 ; the proposal envisages launch during 2020 – 2023 and a 13 @-@ year cruise to Uranus . A Uranus entry probe could use Pioneer Venus <unk> heritage and descend to 1 – 5 atmospheres . The ESA evaluated a " medium @-@ class " mission called Uranus Pathfinder . A New Frontiers Uranus Orbiter has been evaluated and recommended in the study , The Case for a Uranus Orbiter . Such a mission is aided by the ease with which a relatively big mass can be sent to the system — over 1500 kg with an Atlas 521 and 12 @-@ year journey . For more concepts see Proposed Uranus missions . 
 = = In culture = = 
 In astrology , the planet Uranus ( ) is the ruling planet of Aquarius . Because Uranus is cyan and Uranus is associated with electricity , the colour electric blue , which is close to cyan , is associated with the sign Aquarius ( see Uranus in astrology ) . 
 The chemical element uranium , discovered in 1789 by the German chemist Martin Heinrich Klaproth , was named after the newly discovered planet Uranus . 
 " Uranus , the Magician " is a movement in Gustav Holst 's The Planets , written between 1914 and 1916 . 
 Operation Uranus was the successful military operation in World War II by the Soviet army to take back Stalingrad and marked the turning point in the land war against the Wehrmacht . 
 The lines " Then felt I like some watcher of the skies / When a new planet swims into his ken " , from John Keats 's " On First Looking Into Chapman 's Homer " , are a reference to Herschel 's discovery of Uranus . 
 = Mark Hanna = 
 Marcus Alonzo " Mark " Hanna ( September 24 , 1837 – February 15 , 1904 ) was an American businessman and Republican politician , who served as a United States Senator from Ohio . A friend and political ally of President William McKinley , Hanna used his wealth and business skills to successfully manage McKinley 's presidential campaigns in 1896 and 1900 . 
 Hanna was born in New Lisbon ( today Lisbon ) , Ohio , in 1837 . His family moved to the growing city of Cleveland in his teenage years , where he attended high school with John D. Rockefeller . He was expelled from college , and entered the family mercantile business . He served briefly during the American Civil War and married Charlotte Rhodes ; her father , Daniel Rhodes , took Hanna into his business after the war . Hanna was soon a partner in the firm , which grew to have interests in many areas , especially coal and iron . He was a millionaire by his 40th birthday , and turned his attention to politics . 
 Despite Hanna 's efforts on his behalf , Ohio Senator John Sherman failed to gain the Republican nomination for president in 1884 and 1888 . With Sherman becoming too old to be considered a contender , Hanna worked to elect McKinley . In 1895 , Hanna left his business career to devote himself full @-@ time to McKinley 's campaign for president . Hanna paid all expenses to get McKinley the nomination the following year , although he was in any event the frontrunner . The Democrats nominated former Nebraska Congressman William Jennings Bryan , who ran on a bimetallism , or " Free Silver " , platform . Hanna 's fundraising broke records , and once initial public enthusiasm for Bryan and his program subsided , McKinley was comfortably elected . 
 Declining a Cabinet position , Hanna secured appointment as senator from Ohio after Sherman was made Secretary of State ; he was re @-@ elected by the Ohio General Assembly in 1898 and 1904 . After McKinley 's assassination in 1901 , Senator Hanna worked for the building of a canal in Panama , rather than elsewhere in Central America , as had previously been proposed . He died in 1904 , and is remembered for his role in McKinley 's election , thanks to savage cartoons by such illustrators as Homer Davenport , who lampooned him as McKinley 's political master . 
 = = Early life and business career = = 
 Marcus Alonzo Hanna was born on September 24 , 1837 , in New Lisbon ( in 1895 renamed Lisbon ) , Ohio , to Dr. Leonard and Samantha Hanna . Leonard 's father , Benjamin Hanna , a Quaker of Scotch @-@ Irish descent , was a wealthy store owner in New Lisbon . Dr. Hanna practiced in Columbiana County , where New Lisbon was located , until he suffered a spinal injury while riding . After the accident , he joined the family business , B. , L. , and T. Hanna , by now a major grocery and goods brokering firm . Samantha , née Converse , and her parents had journeyed west from Vermont when she was 11 ; she was of English , possibly Irish , and French Huguenot descent . 
 Mark 's uncle Kersey Hanna described Mark as a boy as " short , strong and rugged , with a full round figure " . Young Mark attended the local public school , which conducted class in the basement of the Presbyterian church . He competed in the local boys ' debating society , and on the question of whether the black man had more cause for complaint than the Indian , carried the day arguing for the blacks . 
 Members of the Hanna family invested in a canal project to connect New Lisbon , distant from waterways , to the Ohio River . The canal was a failure , and the family lost large sums of money . Most Hanna family members left New Lisbon in the early 1850s . Dr. Hanna went into partnership with his brother Robert , starting a grocery business in Cleveland , and relocated his family there in 1852 . In Cleveland , Mark attended several public schools , including Cleveland Central High School , which he went to at the same time as John D. Rockefeller . After graduation in 1857 , Hanna attended Western Reserve College , but was dismissed for distributing mock programs at a solemn ceremonial . Hanna served in various capacities in the family business , learning it from the bottom up . 
 = = Civil War service = = 
 By the start of the Civil War , he was a major participant in the business . Dr. Hanna had fallen ill with complications from his spinal injury ( he died on December 15 , 1862 ) , and Mark Hanna , even before his father 's death , was made a partner . 
 With an ill father and many business responsibilities , Mark Hanna could not be spared by his family to join the Union Army , hiring a substitute to enlist in his place . Instead , he became a member of the Perry Light Infantry , a regiment of National Guard troops consisting mostly of young Cleveland business men . In 1864 , his regiment was briefly mustered into active service as the 150th Ohio Infantry and sent to be garrison troops at Fort Stevens , part of Washington , D.C. ' s defenses . During the time the Perry Light Infantry was in service , it saw brief combat action as Confederate General Jubal Early feigned an attack on Washington . However , Hanna , who had been commissioned a second lieutenant , was absent during that time , having been sent to escort the body of a deceased soldier back to Ohio . The regiment was mustered out in August 1864 . After the war , Hanna was elected a companion of the Ohio Commandery of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States - a military society of officers of the Union armed forces and their descendants . 
 = = Post war = = 
 Even before his service during the Civil War , Hanna had fallen in love with Charlotte Augusta Rhodes , whom he met in 1862 , shortly after her return from a finishing school . Her father Daniel Rhodes was an ardent Democrat and was distantly related to Illinois Senator Stephen A. Douglas , the unsuccessful Democratic candidate for president in 1860 . Rhodes disliked the fact that Hanna had supported the successful Republican candidate , former Illinois Congressman Abraham Lincoln . Daniel Rhodes eventually yielded , and Mark and Charlotte Augusta Hanna were married on September 27 , 1864 . 
 The 1850s and 1860s were a time of great expansion for Cleveland , which grew from a small lakeside town to a major player in Great Lakes commerce and a rival to the southern Ohio city of Cincinnati . With peace restored in 1865 , Hanna struck out on his own ventures . Foreseeing a demand for petroleum products , he built a refinery , and also invested his own money in the Lac La Belle , a swift Great Lakes steamer . The ship sank and the refinery burned , uninsured . The losses reduced Hanna to near @-@ insolvency . According to Hanna biographer Herbert Croly , " he had gained little from the first nine years of his business life except experience . " His father @-@ in @-@ law , appreciating Hanna 's potential , took him into his own business in 1867 as a partner , and soon retired . The firm , Rhodes and Company ( later M.A. Hanna and Company ) , dealt principally in coal and steel , but under Hanna expanded into many fields . The firm had close dealings with the railroads — especially the Pennsylvania Railroad , which carried much of its freight . Hanna later became director of two railroads , including one of the Pennsylvania 's leased lines . 
 In the 1868 presidential election , Hanna supported the Republican , former Union General Ulysses S. Grant . The flood of inflationary greenback currency issued during the war made Rhodes and Company 's dealings in the new confederation of Canada difficult ; merchants would accept a dollar in paper money as the equivalent of 35 cents in gold . Hanna hoped that Grant , who was elected , would institute policies which would return full value to the currency . The firm built many vessels and also gained interests in a wide variety of firms , which in turn used the Rhodes steamers . Hanna also purchased Cleveland 's opera house , allowing it to remain open at times when it could not pay its full rent . 
 During Grant 's first four @-@ year term , Hanna began to involve himself in politics . At first his interest was purely local , supporting Republican candidates for municipal and Cuyahoga County offices . In 1869 , he was elected to the Cleveland Board of Education , but as he was traveling a good deal for business at the time , was able to attend less than half the meetings . In 1873 , disgusted by local scandals and the influence of party bosses , he and other Republicans briefly abandoned the party to elect a Democrat running for mayor of Cleveland on a reform agenda . 
 = = Aspiring kingmaker ( 1880 – 1888 ) = = 
 In 1880 , Hanna added The Cleveland Herald newspaper to his business empire . This was resented by Edwin Cowles , who owned the Republican newspaper in Cleveland , The Cleveland Leader . For the next five years , until Hanna sold the newspaper , he was bitterly attacked by Cowles in his paper . According to Hanna biographer William T. Horner , the episode was the start of the negative image of Hanna in the press which would be further developed by the Hearst newspapers over a decade later . Cowles ' paper attacked Hanna personally , dubbing him " Marcus Aurelius " . Cowles ' choice of nickname was dictated by the coincidence of name , without regard to that emperor 's good reputation . The nickname remained with Hanna throughout the remainder of his career . 
 The incumbent in 1880 , President Rutherford Hayes , had no interest in seeking a second term ; after 36 ballots , the Republicans nominated Ohio Representative James Garfield . The nominee had gone to the convention as manager of the campaign of his fellow Ohioan , Secretary of the Treasury John Sherman . Garfield had emerged as a candidate after delegates were impressed by his nomination speech of Sherman . Although Hanna did not attend the convention , he was very active in the fall campaign . The industrialist helped found a businessman 's fundraising club to raise money for Garfield 's personal expenses in the campaign . Garfield , who ran a front porch campaign , often had to entertain politicians and others who came to meet him at his home in Mentor . According to Charles Dick , who succeeded Hanna in the Senate after the latter 's death in 1904 , " Mr. Hanna had as much to do with the election of Mr. Garfield as any single individual in the country . " 
 Hanna , according to his biographer Croly , was in charge of the arrangements for the campaign visit of former President Grant and New York Senator Roscoe Conkling to the state . Croly credits him with persuading the two men , who were Stalwarts hostile to Garfield 's Half @-@ Breed wing of the party , to visit Garfield in Mentor . Having Grant go to Mentor would be an important show of party unity — Grant had sought the presidency again in 1880 , but his faction had failed to gain the nomination for him . However , later biographer Horner believes the tale dubious , suggesting that Grant made the decision unaided by Hanna . Garfield favored civil service reform , a position disliked by Hanna , who felt that public jobs should be used to reward campaign workers . Nevertheless , he strongly supported Garfield as a fellow Ohioan , and the Republican candidate defeated his fellow Civil War general Winfield Hancock by a narrow margin in the November election . Hanna did much fundraising work , roaming the state to persuade business owners to contribute to the Garfield campaign . 
 Hanna sought no position in the Garfield administration , although Horner states that his services to the campaign entitled him to a reward , and speculates that Hanna did not make any request of Garfield because of their political differences . Garfield 's short @-@ lived administration ended with his assassination after six months in office . Hanna was in charge of the committee which took charge of the late president 's body when it was brought to Cleveland and saw to the funeral arrangements and interment at Lake View Cemetery — where Hanna himself was to be laid to rest over 20 years later . 
 In 1884 , Hanna sought election as a delegate to the Republican National Convention in support of the presidential bid of Senator Sherman ( as he was by then ) — President Chester A. Arthur , Garfield 's successor , was seeking re @-@ nomination , but was opposed by a number of other Republicans Hanna supported Sherman as the candidate favored the gold standard and worked to solve the problems of business , and because he was from Ohio . The industrialist was successfully opposed by Cowles at the local convention , but was elected a delegate at @-@ large from Ohio at the state convention . At the national convention , Hanna joined forces in support of Sherman with another delegate at @-@ large from Ohio , former Cincinnati judge Joseph B. Foraker , whose rise in state and national politics over the next 20 years would parallel Hanna 's . The Ohio delegation proved bitterly divided between supporters of Sherman and those supporting Maine Senator James G. Blaine . Foraker gained national acclaim with his speech nominating Sherman , and Hanna worked for the senator 's nomination , but Blaine won easily . With a non @-@ Ohioan the nominee , Hanna worked less energetically for the Republicans than he had in 1880 . Blaine lost to the Democratic candidate , New York Governor Grover Cleveland . 
 During the first Cleveland administration , Hanna continued to run his businesses , and prepared for another run by Sherman , whom he did not actually meet until 1885 . Once he did , however , a warm relationship grew between the two men . President Cleveland selected Hanna as one of the Union Pacific Railroad 's directors — part of the corporate board was then appointed by the government . The appointment was most likely at the recommendation of Senator Sherman . The industrialist 's work for the railroad was highly praised by its president , Charles Francis Adams ; Hanna 's knowledge of the coal business led to him being appointed head of one of the board 's committees with responsibility in that area . Hanna was a major campaign adviser and fundraiser for Foraker 's successful runs for governor in 1885 and 1887 . 
 = = McKinley partisan ( 1888 – 96 ) = = 
 = = = Early relationship = = = 
 It is uncertain when William McKinley and Mark Hanna first met — neither man in later life could remember the first meeting . McKinley , in 1896 , referred to a friendship with Hanna that had lasted over twenty years ; Hanna , in 1903 , stated after some thought that he had met McKinley before 1876 . McKinley biographer H. Wayne Morgan suggests that the two men may have met as early as 1871 , although initially without making much impression on each other . 
 The two men certainly met in 1876 , when McKinley , a lawyer , represented a number of coal miners who had rioted following attempts by owners to cut wages . Hanna was one of the mine owners affected by the unrest . The militia , called in by Governor Rutherford Hayes , had fired on the strikers , and 23 miners were arrested and put on trial in Canton , Ohio , the hometown of Major McKinley ( as he was often known , for his Civil War service ) . McKinley was hired to represent them , and only one was convicted . McKinley 's victory won him the gratitude of labor elements in both major parties , and he won election to Congress later that year . Hanna remembered , " I became intimate with him soon after he entered Congress , and our friendship ripened with each succeeding year . " 
 With Cowles ' enmity ended by Hanna 's sale of the Herald , the latter had little trouble being elected as a district delegate to the 1888 Republican National Convention . Among the delegates at @-@ large were Governor Foraker and Congressman McKinley . Hanna financed many of the arrangements for the Sherman campaign and was widely regarded as its manager . Sherman , as was customary at the time , remained in Washington and did not attend the convention in Chicago . There was widespread speculation in the press that Governor Foraker , nominally a Sherman supporter , would declare a favorite son candidacy or else support Blaine if he entered the race . The convention deadlocked , with Sherman in the lead but unable to secure the nomination . According to Hanna biographer Thomas Beer , 
 At the Republican convention of 1888 an accident displayed Major McKinley favorably to Marcus Hanna . A distinct faction , made up of men from every part of the country , approached him with a suggestion that he let himself be nominated . McKinley refused , and bluntly . He had come there pledged to support John Sherman and he would support John Sherman ... Mr. Hanna 's admiration of Major McKinley was profuse . He appreciated men who stuck to a losing bargain . 
 McKinley began to pick up small numbers of votes although not a declared candidate . Hanna became convinced that McKinley was the only Ohioan who could gain the nomination , and by telegram hinted that Sherman should withdraw in the congressman 's favor as the only Ohio Republican with a chance at the presidency . Sherman , believing this to be his best chance for election , refused , a decision which Hanna accepted , fighting for Sherman to the end . Hanna was greatly impressed by McKinley 's loyal conduct in refusing to begin a run himself . Foraker threw his support to Blaine , though he returned to Sherman when the New Englander did not run . In the end , the nomination fell to former Indiana senator Benjamin Harrison . Hanna never forgave what he saw as Foraker 's treason . After 1888 , there was a strong dislike between the two men , and the separation split the Ohio Republican Party into two factions , a rupture that did not heal until after Hanna 's death in 1904 . Foraker stated in his memoirs that the break occurred because Hanna bribed black delegates from the South in 1888 . However , Ohio newspaper publisher J. B. Morrow contradicted Foraker 's account , stating : " I was at the convention in 1888 and know Senator Foraker [ as he later became ] brought great scandal to the Ohio people who were there and to the delegates with his secret work with Mr. Blaine 's friends ... Mr. Hanna became thoroughly angered at what he thought was Senator Foraker 's bad faith . " According to Horner , Foraker was the more embittered of the two as the years passed , feeling that if it had not been for that dispute , Foraker , not McKinley , might have become president . 
 Harrison was elected president after a campaign in which Hanna fundraised considerably , consoling himself with the thought that though Harrison was an <unk> , he had at least been born in Ohio . Harrison gave Hanna no control of any patronage in return for his fundraising . In the aftermath of Harrison 's victory , Hanna determined to bring an Ohioan to the presidency . With Harrison likely to be the Republican candidate in 1892 , the first real chance would be in 1896 . Sherman would be 73 in 1896 , likely considered too old to seek the presidency . Hanna had come to admire McKinley ; the two men shared many political views . Beginning in 1888 , they forged an increasingly close relationship . According to McKinley biographer Margaret Leech : 
 In choosing McKinley as the object on which to lavish his energies , Hanna had not made a purely rational decision . He had been magnetized by a polar attraction . Cynical in his acceptance of contemporary political practices , Hanna was drawn to McKinley 's scruples and idealistic standards , like a hardened man of the world who becomes infatuated with virgin innocence . 
 However , Hanna biographer Clarence A. Stern suggested that while the industrialist admired McKinley 's loyalty to Sherman , the principal reason that he decided to promote McKinley 's career was the congressman 's advocacy of high tariffs , which he also favored . 
 Hanna and his allies , such as Congressman Benjamin Butterworth , opposed Foraker 's effort to secure a third term as governor in 1889 . Foraker gained renomination , but fell in the general election . In November 1889 , Hanna traveled to Washington to manage McKinley 's campaign for Speaker of the House . The effort failed ; another Republican , Thomas B. Reed of Maine , was elected . 
 In 1890 McKinley was defeated for re @-@ election to Congress . This was not seen as a major setback to his career ; he was deemed beaten by Democratic gerrymandering in redistricting , and because of his sponsorship of a tariff bill — the increased tariffs had caused prices to rise . In 1891 , McKinley proved the consensus choice for the Republican nomination for governor . With McKinley 's candidacy needing little of his attention , Hanna spent much of his time working to secure Sherman 's re @-@ election by the Ohio Legislature ( senators were elected by state legislatures until the ratification of the 17th Amendment in 1913 ) by raising funds to gain the election of Republican candidates . Hanna traveled as far away from Ohio as New York and Iowa , soliciting funds , some of which went to McKinley , but which for the most part went to the state Republican committee . 
 Victories by McKinley in the gubernatorial race and by the Republicans in securing a majority in the legislature in 1891 did not guarantee Sherman another term , as he was challenged for his seat by Foraker . Hanna was instrumental in keeping enough Republican support to secure victory by Sherman in the Republican caucus , assuring his election by the legislature . Hanna hired detectives to find legislators who had gone into hiding and were believed to be Foraker supporters , and saw to it they supported Sherman . Stern notes that the defeat of Foraker " was <unk> largely to the efforts of Hanna " . McKinley 's victory in what was generally a bad year for Republicans made him a possible presidential contender , and Hanna 's involvement in the McKinley and Sherman victories established him as a force in politics . President Harrison attempted to neutralize Hanna , who was ill @-@ disposed to the President and likely to oppose his renomination , by offering to make him treasurer of the Republican National Committee . Hanna declined , feeling it would make him beholden to the administration . 
 = = = Preparing for a run = = = 
 As early as 1892 , McKinley and Hanna began to prepare for the 1896 campaign . Charles Dick recalled being asked to take the Republican state chairmanship : 
 I went first to see Governor McKinley . He urged me to accept and asked me to see Mr. Hanna , which I did the next day . The reasons both urged were that the campaigns from 1892 down to 1896 must be conducted with a view to bringing about McKinley 's nomination in 1896 . McKinley spoke of it and so did Mr. Hanna . 
 President Harrison had proven unpopular even in his own party , and with the start of 1892 , McKinley was talked about as a potential candidate . At the 1892 Republican National Convention in Minneapolis , McKinley 's keynote address sparked wild applause from a convention friendly to him . This popularity did not translate into delegate votes ; Harrison 's supporters were in control of the convention throughout . Hanna , a delegate from Ohio , promoted McKinley to delegates . McKinley , never a declared candidate , finished third , a fraction of a vote behind Blaine , who had declared himself not to be a candidate . Despite Harrison 's success , McKinley was carried from the convention hall to his hotel by supporters after he adjourned the convention . According to Morgan , many delegates " saw in [ McKinley ] their nominee for 1896 " . 
 Harrison and his adherents were unimpressed by McKinley 's conduct , recalling that he had cut off talk of a candidacy in 1888 , but had not done so in 1892 . Nevertheless , Hanna wrote in a letter that " I do not consider that Governor McKinley was placed in any false position by what was done ... Governor McKinley 's position today as a result of all that transpired at Minneapolis is in the best possible shape for his future . His bearing and conduct and personal magnetism won the hearts and respect of everybody . " McKinley campaigned loyally for President Harrison , who was defeated by former president Cleveland in the November election , and according to the governor 's secretary , Charles <unk> , " [ McKinley ] is bound to be the nominee for the presidency , and the very fact of the defeat this year will elect him the next time . " 
 Among those who suffered reverses in the financial Panic of 1893 was a McKinley friend in Youngstown . McKinley , out of gratitude for loans in his younger days , had guaranteed the friend 's business notes , without ever grasping the full amount of the obligations he was taking on . He was called upon to pay over $ 100 @,@ 000 and proposed to resign as governor and earn the money as an attorney . Hanna was absent from the state when the crisis broke , causing the governor to say " I wish Mark was here . " McKinley 's wealthy supporters , including Hanna once he learned of the situation , undertook to buy up or pay the notes . McKinley was reluctant to take gifts , and eventually agreed to accept money only from those who expected nothing by lending the money but repayment . Even though both McKinley and his wife Ida insisted on putting their property in the hands of the supporters , who served as trustees , Hanna and his associates fundraised with such success from business owners and the general public that all McKinley property was returned intact , and when President McKinley died in 1901 , no claims were made against his estate . A request by McKinley for the names of the subscribers so he might repay them was refused by the trustees . The episode made McKinley more popular with the public , as many Americans had suffered in the hard times and sympathized with the Ohio governor . 
 McKinley was easily re @-@ elected as governor in 1893 . Despite the poor economic times in Ohio , he remained popular , and spoke across much of the nation for Republican candidates . He followed the usual Ohio custom and stepped down at the end of two two @-@ year terms , returning home to Canton in January 1896 to municipal celebrations . The Canton Repository stated , " It is just plain Mr. McKinley of Canton now , but wait a little while . " To devote full @-@ time to McKinley 's presidential campaign , Hanna in 1895 turned over management of his companies to his brother Leonard . Mark Hanna was certain , as he stated as McKinley 's campaign began , that " nothing short of a miracle or death will prevent his being the nominee of the party in ' 96 " . 
 = = Campaign of 1896 = = 
 = = = Nominating McKinley = = = 
 After leaving business , Hanna rented a house in Thomasville , Georgia , expressing a dislike for northern winters . He was joined there by the McKinleys in 1895 , even before the governor left office , and also in the winter of 1896 . The location was a plausibly nonpolitical vacation spot for McKinley , and also permitted him to meet many southern Republicans , including blacks . Although southern Republicans rarely had local electoral success , they elected a substantial number of delegates to the national convention . 
 During 1895 , Hanna journeyed east to meet with political bosses such as Senators Matthew Quay of Pennsylvania and Thomas Platt of New York . When Hanna returned to Canton , he informed McKinley that the bosses would guarantee his nomination in exchange for control of local patronage . McKinley was unwilling to make such a deal , and Hanna duly undertook to gain the former governor 's nomination without machine support . 
 Historian R. Hal Williams summarized the relationship between McKinley and Hanna : 
 McKinley and Hanna made an effective team . The Major commanded , decided general strategies , selected issues and programs . He stressed ideals ... Hanna organized , built coalitions , performed the rougher work for which McKinley had neither taste nor energy . Importantly , they shared a Hamiltonian faith in the virtue of industrialism , central authority , and expansive capitalism . That faith , triumphant in the 1896 presidential election , became one of the reasons for the vital importance of that election . 
 Through the months leading up to the Republican convention in June in St. Louis , Hanna built his organization , paying for expenses , and applying the techniques of business to politics . Hanna met with many politicians at his Cleveland home . He paid for thousands of copies of McKinley 's speeches to be printed , and shipped quantities of McKinley posters , badges , and buttons across the nation . New Hampshire Senator William E. Chandler commented , " If Mr. Hanna has covered every district in the United States in the same manner he did those in Alabama , McKinley will be nominated . " 
 McKinley 's most formidable rival for the nomination was former president Harrison , but in February 1896 , Harrison declared he would not run for president a third time . The eastern bosses were hostile to McKinley for failing to agree to the offer they had made to Hanna , and they decided to seek support for local favorite son candidates , believing that McKinley could be forced to bargain for support at the convention if he was denied a majority . The bosses supported candidates such as Speaker Reed , Senator Quay and former vice president Levi P. Morton of New York . Hanna spent much money and effort to undercut Reed in his native New England , and on " McKinley Clubs " in Pennsylvania to force Quay to spend time and money shoring up his base . 
 A key to defeating the bosses ' " favorite son " strategy was Illinois . A young Chicago businessman and McKinley supporter , Charles Dawes ( who would thirty years later be vice president under Coolidge ) worked at Illinois district and state conventions to elect delegates pledged to McKinley . Dawes and Hanna worked closely together , with the latter relying on the young entrepreneur to secure support from his connections in the Chicago business community . Despite the opposition of Illinois ' Republican political machine , Dawes and Hanna were able to secure all but a few of Illinois ' delegates for McKinley , giving the former Ohio governor a strong advantage going into the convention . According to Williams , " As early as March 1896 , the bandwagon had become a steamroller . " 
 As the convention approached , journalists awoke to the fact that McKinley would , most likely , be the Republican nominee . Those newspapers that were Democratic in their outlook , including publisher William Randolph Hearst 's New York Journal , sent reporters to Canton to dig up dirt on McKinley . The candidate had a sterling reputation for personal and political honesty , and reporters found that even McKinley 's few personal enemies spoke well of him . McKinley 's financial problem in 1893 was one of the few marks on his record , and the newspapers began to suggest that those who had made large contributions to aid him would own him as president . Attacks on some of McKinley 's associates , such as Chicago publisher H. H. Kohlsaat or McKinley 's old friend from his days as a practicing lawyer , Judge William R. Day , cut little ice with voters ; the press had better luck with Hanna . The Journal began to describe McKinley 's backers as a " Syndicate " , staking money to secure a bought @-@ and @-@ paid @-@ for president . Journal reporter Alfred Henry Lewis attracted considerable attention when he wrote , " Hanna and the others will shuffle and deal him like a pack of cards . " 
 In St. Louis , the bosses again tried to secure political favors in exchange for their support ; with little need to deal , Hanna , backed by McKinley via telephone from Canton , refused . McKinley was nominated easily . To balance the ticket , McKinley and Hanna selected New Jersey party official and former state legislator Garret Hobart , an <unk> , as vice @-@ presidential candidate . The convention duly nominated Hobart ; Hanna was elected chairman of the Republican National Committee for the next four years . 
 = = = Currency question ; Democratic nomination = = = 
 A major issue , going into the 1896 election cycle , was the question of the currency . The United States , since 1873 , had effectively been on the gold standard — the metal , if presented to the government , would be assayed and struck into coin for a slight charge to cover expenses . Silver , on the other hand , though widely mined , could not be presented for conversion into coin , but had to be sold as a commodity . The gold standard was unpopular in many agricultural and mining areas , as the quantity of gold available limited the money supply , making it difficult for farmers to obtain loans and pay debts . Advocates of the free and unlimited coinage of silver believed that doing so would cure the country 's economic malaise by increasing the money supply . Advocates of the gold standard argued that a " free silver " policy ( sometimes called " bimetallism " ) would inflate the currency , and lead to difficulties in international trade with nations on the gold standard . At the time , the precious metal in a silver dollar was worth about $ 0 @.@ 53 , and under such proposals , silver worth that much would be returned to depositors as a one @-@ dollar coin , " free " — that is , without a charge for the Mint 's costs for assaying and coining . 
 Despite the controversy in the country , McKinley and Hanna decided that an explicit mention of the gold standard in the party platform would be a better strategy than remaining silent on the issue . McKinley sent Hanna to the convention with a draft plank calling for maintenance of the gold standard , which Hanna successfully placed in the party platform . The adoption of the plank caused some Republicans , mostly from the West , to walk out of the convention . As they left , Hanna stood on a chair , shouting " Go ! Go ! Go ! " 
 McKinley expected the election to be fought on the issue of tariffs ; he was a well @-@ known protectionist . The Democrats met in convention in July in Chicago ; former Missouri congressman Richard P. Bland was deemed likely to be the nominee . As McKinley awaited his opponent , he privately commented on the nationwide debate over silver , stating to his Canton crony , Judge Day , that " This money matter is unduly prominent . In thirty days you won 't hear anything about it . " The future Secretary of State and Supreme Court justice responded : " In my opinion in thirty days you won 't hear of anything else . " 
 On the third day of the Democratic convention , former Nebraska representative William Jennings Bryan concluded the debate on the party platform . Bryan stampeded the convention with what came to be known as the " Cross of Gold speech " , decrying the gold standard , which he believed disproportionately hurt the working classes . To the horror of Wall Street , the Democrats nominated Congressman Bryan for president , a nomination in which the Populist Party soon joined . Hanna had taken a yachting vacation in early July before beginning general election work ; with a wave of popular support for Bryan , Hanna wrote " The Chicago convention has changed everything " and returned to his labors . 
 = = = General election campaign = = = 
 According to Horner , " In 1896 , as the country was mired in an economic slowdown that affected millions , a real , substantive policy debate was conducted by candidates who believed firmly in their respective positions . " Bryan , whose campaign was ill @-@ financed , felt that his best means of persuading the voter of his position was personal communication , and embarked on an unprecedented itinerary of whistle stop appearances by train . If the train passed any large group of homes and did not stop for Bryan to speak , it would at least disgorge a bundle of political tracts for local distribution . McKinley felt he could not match Bryan 's speaking tour , as the Democrat was a better stump speaker . Despite Hanna 's urgings to the candidate to get on the road , the former governor decided on a front porch campaign ; he would remain at home in Canton and allow the people to come to him . As McKinley 's wife , Ida , was an invalid , this also boosted his image as a good husband . 
 When McKinley , Hanna and their associates saw the emotional appeal of the Bryan campaign for free silver , they decided upon an extensive and expensive effort to educate the electorate . The McKinley campaign had two main offices ; one in Chicago , effectively run by Dawes , and one in New York , used by Hanna as a base of operations as he sought to gain support from New York financiers . Hanna 's task was to raise the money ; other campaign officials , such as Dawes , determined how to spend it . Being relatively unknown on the national scene , Hanna initially had little success , despite Wall Street 's fear of Bryan . Some Wall Street titans , although disliking Bryan 's positions , did not take him seriously as a candidate and refused to contribute to the McKinley campaign . Those who did know Hanna , such as his old schoolmate Rockefeller — the magnate 's Standard Oil gave $ 250 @,@ 000 — vouched for him . Beginning in late July 1896 , Hanna had an easier time persuading industrialists to give to the McKinley / Hobart campaign . He also gave large sums himself . This money went to pay for advertising , brochures , printed speeches and other means of persuading the voter ; the country was flooded with such paper . 
 According to Rhodes , McKinley " spoke from the front veranda of his house in Canton to many deputations , some of them spontaneous , others arranged for . " Any delegation was welcome in Canton , so long as its leader wrote to McKinley in advance and introduced himself and his group . Delegations ranged up to thousands of people ; if possible , delegation leaders were brought to Canton in advance to settle with McKinley what each would say . If this could not be arranged , the delegation was met at the train station by a McKinley agent , who would greet it and learn what the leader proposed to say in his address . The agent would suggest any fine @-@ tuning necessary to make it fit within campaign themes , and send the information ahead by runner to McKinley , giving him time to prepare his response . The delegations left behind gifts , which were put to use when possible , but four eagles , named " McKinley " , " Mark Hanna " , " Republican " , and " Protection " , were donated to the local zoo . 
 Despite the initial popularity of Bryan 's message , Hanna was convinced the Democrat 's support would recede . " He 's talking Silver all the time , and that 's where we 've got him " , Hanna stated , pounding his desk , in July . He proved correct ; the silver enthusiasm waned by September and Bryan had no ready replacement for it . McKinley , on the other hand , convinced that his " sound money " campaign had worked , began to promote his tariff issue , stating to the crowds on his front lawn , " I do not know what you think about it , but I believe it is a good deal better to open the mills of the United States to the labor of America than to open the mints of the United States to the silver of the world . " 
 During the campaign , the Democratic newspapers , especially the papers owned by Hearst , attacked Hanna for his supposed role as McKinley 's political master . The articles and cartoons have contributed to a lasting popular belief that McKinley was not his own man , but that he was effectively owned by the corporations , through Hanna . Homer Davenport 's cartoons for the Hearst papers were especially effective in molding public opinion about Hanna . The Clevelander was often depicted as " Dollar Mark " , in a suit decorated with dollar signs ( a term for which " dollar mark " was a common alternative ) . McKinley 's personal financial crisis allowed him to be convincingly depicted as a child , helpless in the hands of businessmen and their mere tool in the 1896 campaign . Historian Stanley Jones , who studied the 1896 election , stated of this view : 
 The popularly accepted picture of Hanna 's domination was not true . Though McKinley did leave to Hanna the immensely complicated and exceedingly arduous task of organizing the campaign and although he usually deferred to Hanna 's judgment in this area , he himself retained control of the general structure and program . Nothing of significance was done without his approval . Hanna raised money , hired men , established headquarters offices , bought literature , with the same drive and skill that he managed his business . He was confident of his mastery of that kind of operation , but he never ceased to defer to McKinley 's mastery of the grand strategy of politics . 
 Hanna 's fundraising campaign , in which he asked banks and millionaires for a contribution equal to 0 @.@ 25 % of their assets , was unprecedented in its scale , but the basic concept was not unusual . According to Hanna biographer Croly , " Mr. Hanna merely systematized and developed a practice which was rooted deep in contemporary American political soil , and which was sanctioned both by custom and , as he believed , by necessity . " The largest election fundraising before that time had occurred in the 1888 presidential race , which was a polarizing election , closely fought over the tariff issue . In the 1888 campaign , Senator Quay ( on behalf of Harrison ) had sought funds from businessmen much as Hanna would eight years later . The first Harrison campaign raised about $ 1 @.@ 8 million ; Dawes , in charge of campaign spending for the Republicans in 1896 , later stated that the McKinley campaign raised just over $ 3 @.@ 5 million , though this did not include spending by state and local committees . In addition , the Republicans were supported by " in @-@ kind " corporate contributions , such as discounted railway fares for delegations coming to Canton . These discounts were so steep that they led to the quip that it was cheaper to visit Canton than to stay at home . Contributions to Bryan 's campaign were much smaller ; he had few wealthy supporters and the largest donor was most likely Hearst ; he donated about $ 40 @,@ 000 , and gave the Bryan campaign support in his papers . 
 In late October , Hanna wrote to Harrison , thanking him for his campaigning efforts , " The outlook is generally encouraging , and I feel there is no doubt of our success . " On Tuesday , November 3 , the voters had their say in most states . McKinley won 271 electoral votes to Bryan 's 176 . The Democratic candidate won in the South and in the western states except California and Oregon . Bryan was also successful in his native Nebraska and neighboring Kansas and South Dakota . McKinley swept the populous northeastern states , and the Midwest . He had hoped to end sectionalism , but his only successes in the " Solid South " were in the border states of Delaware , Maryland , West Virginia and Kentucky . McKinley took 51 @.@ 0 % of the vote , the first presidential majority since Grant in 1872 ; the intense voter interest in the campaign resulted in a turnout of 79 @.@ 3 % . On Election Night , Hanna wired from Cleveland to Canton , " The feeling here beggars description ... I will not attempt bulletins . You are elected to the highest office of the land by a people who always loved and trusted you . " 
 On November 12 , 1896 , the President @-@ elect wrote to his longtime friend , offering him a position in his Cabinet , and stating : 
 We are through with the election , and before turning to the future I want to express to you my great debt of gratitude for your generous life @-@ long and devoted service to me . Was there ever such unselfish devotion before ? Your unfaltering and increasing friendship through more than twenty years has been to me an encouragement and a source of strength which I am sure you have never realized , but which I have constantly felt and for which I thank you from the bottom of my heart . The recollection of all those years of uninterrupted loyalty and affection , of mutual confidences and growing regard fill me with emotions too deep for the pen to portray . I want you to know , but I cannot find the right words to tell you , how much I appreciate your friendship and faith . 
 = = Senator ( 1897 – 1904 ) = = 
 = = = McKinley advisor ( 1897 – 1901 ) = = = 
 = = = = Securing a Senate seat = = = = 
 In the wake of McKinley 's election , according to historian James Ford Rhodes ( who was also Hanna 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , though a Democrat ) , " Mark Hanna occupied an enviable position . Had it been usual , the freedom of Cleveland would have been conferred upon him . " According to John Hay , who would later become Secretary of State under McKinley , " What a glorious record Mark Hanna has made this year ! I never knew him intimately until we went into this fight together , but my esteem and admiration for him have grown every hour . " 
 Hanna stated that he would accept no office in the McKinley administration , as he feared it would be seen as a reward for his political efforts . He had long wished to be a senator , speaking of this desire as early as 1892 . Senator Sherman , now aged almost 74 , faced a difficult re @-@ election battle with the Democrats and the Foraker faction in 1898 . On January 4 , 1897 , McKinley offered Sherman the office of Secretary of State ; he immediately accepted . The poor record Sherman posted prior to his departure from office in 1898 led to attacks on Hanna , suggesting that a senile man had been placed in a key Cabinet position to accommodate him . Foraker , in his memoirs , strongly implied that Sherman was moved out of the way to allow Hanna to have his Senate seat . An embittered Sherman stated in a letter after his departure as secretary , " When [ McKinley ] urged me to accept the position of Secretary of State , I accepted with some reluctance and largely to promote the wishes of Mark Hanna . The result was that I lost the position both of Senator and Secretary ... They deprived me of the high office of Senator by the temporary appointment as Secretary of State . " 
 Horner argues that the position of Secretary of State was the most important non @-@ elective post in government , then often seen as a stepping stone to the presidency , and though Sherman no longer sought to be president , he was aware of the prestige . According to Rhodes , " Sherman was glad to accept the Secretaryship of State . He exchanged two years in the Senate with a doubtful succession for apparently a four years ' tenure of the Cabinet head of the new Republican administration , which was undoubtedly a promotion . " Rhodes suggested that Hanna did not give credence to warnings about Sherman 's mental capacity in early 1897 , though some of those tales must have been told by New York businessmen whom he trusted . The stories were not believed by McKinley either ; the President @-@ elect in February 1897 called accounts of Sherman 's mental decay " the cheap inventions of sensational writers or other evil @-@ disposed or mistaken people " . 
 Sherman 's acceptance of the post of Secretary of State did not assure Hanna of succeeding him as senator . A temporary appointment to the Senate was to be made by Ohio 's governor , Republican Asa Bushnell ; the legislature would then , in 1898 , hold elections both for the final portion of Sherman 's term ( expiring in March 1899 ) and for the full six @-@ year term to follow . Bushnell was of the Foraker faction — Foraker was by then a senator @-@ elect , selected by the legislature to fill Ohio 's other Senate seat for the term 1897 to 1903 . Sherman , who was at that time still grateful for his Cabinet appointment , used his influence on Hanna 's behalf ; so did McKinley . Governor Bushnell did not want to appoint a leader of the opposing faction and authorized Foraker to offer the place to Representative Theodore E. Burton , who declined it . Rhodes suggests that the difficulty over obtaining a Senate seat for Hanna led McKinley to persist in his offer to make his friend Postmaster General into mid @-@ February 1897 . Bushnell was a candidate for renomination and re @-@ election in 1897 ; without Hanna 's support his chances were smaller , and on February 21 , Bushnell wrote to Hanna that he would appoint him in Sherman 's place . Foraker , in his memoirs , stated that Hanna was given the Senate seat because of McKinley 's desires . 
 The 1897 legislative elections in Ohio would determine who would vote on Hanna 's bid for election for a full six @-@ year term , and were seen as a referendum on McKinley 's first year in office — the President visited Ohio to give several speeches , as did Bryan . McKinley was active behind the scenes , urging Republicans both inside and outside Ohio to support the senator . The 1897 Ohio Republican convention voted to support Hanna , as did county conventions in 84 of Ohio 's 88 counties . The Republicans won the election , with the overwhelming number of Republican victors pledged to vote for Hanna . However , a number of Republicans , mostly of the Foraker faction , did not want to re @-@ elect Hanna , and formed an alliance with the Democrats . 
 When the legislature met on January 3 , 1898 , the anti @-@ Hanna forces succeeded in organizing both houses of the legislature , The dissidents had not yet agreed upon a candidate ; after several days of negotiation , they settled on the Republican mayor of Cleveland , Robert McKisson . The Cleveland mayor was the insurgents ' candidate for both the short and long Senate term , and had been elected in 1895 to his municipal position despite the opposition of Hanna and the Cleveland business community . Rumors flew in Columbus that legislators had been kidnapped by either or both sides , and allegations of bribery were made . James Rudolph Garfield , the late president 's son , stated that he had been told by one Republican from Cleveland that he had to vote for McKisson because if he did not , his contracts to sell the city brick pavers would be cut off . According to Horner , 
 Given Hanna 's determination to win and his willingness to play by the rules as they existed , money may have changed hands during the campaign , but if it did , it is important to remember the context . If Hanna engaged in such behavior , that was the way the game was played on both sides ... Hanna , of course , was not without resources . It is helpful , for example , when you are good friends with the president of the United States , a man also personally very influential in Ohio politics . 
 In the end , " Hanna 's tactics — whatever they really were " succeeded ; he was re @-@ elected with the barest possible majority . 
 = = = = Relationship with the President = = = = 
 Mark Hanna and William McKinley continued their friendship as they assumed their offices in March 1897 . Senator Hanna was looking for a residence ; President McKinley suggested that he stay at the Executive Mansion ( as the White House was still formally known ) until he found one . According to Hearst 's New York Journal , " the Senator doubtless feels that if anyone has the right to make himself at home in the White House he is the man " . Hanna soon moved into the Arlington Hotel , close to the White House , where he occupied a large suite . After the death of Vice President Hobart in November 1899 , Hanna took over the lease on his house on Lafayette Square , across Pennsylvania Avenue from the White House . 
 Despite civil service reform , a president had a large number of posts to fill . It was customary at the time to fill many of the lower level positions with party political workers . Hanna had a voice in some of McKinley 's appointments , but the President made the final decision . Hanna was allowed to recommend candidates for the majority of federal positions in Ohio , and was permitted a veto over Foraker 's candidates . Hanna was also dominant in the South , where there were few Republican congressmen to lobby the President . He and McKinley decided on a system where many southern appointees were recommended by the state 's member of the Republican National Committee and the defeated Republican congressional candidate for the area in question . Hanna and McKinley gave few places to those who had served under Harrison , as the two presidents were not friendly . " Silver Republicans " , who had bolted the party at the convention or later , received nothing . 
 Although Hanna was reputed to control the administration 's patronage , in fact , other men were more influential . McKinley 's friend Joseph Smith , who had served as State Librarian of Ohio during McKinley 's tenure as governor , probably had more influence over federal jobs until his death in 1898 . Charles Dawes , who was slated to be Comptroller of the Currency as soon as the incumbent left office , was also a McKinley confidant . Joseph Bristow , whose duties as Fourth Assistant Postmaster General under McKinley involved patronage appointments , later wrote that the President " gave Hanna 's requests great consideration and had confidence in the clearness of his opinion , but in the end he always followed his own judgment " . 
 As the year 1900 began , Hanna hinted that he might not want to run McKinley 's re @-@ election campaign , stating that he was suffering from rheumatism . In spite of his statement , the senator did want to run the campaign , but McKinley ( who apparently saw an opportunity to show the public that he was not Hanna 's creature ) was slow to ask him . This was a source of great stress to Hanna , who was concerned about the campaign and his relationship with McKinley ; the senator fainted in his office during the wait and may have suffered a heart attack . In late May , the President announced that Hanna would run his campaign . Margaret Leech suggested that McKinley was angry at Hanna for unknown reasons , thus the President 's " uncharacteristic coldness " . Morgan , on the other hand , wrote that " the president was using his usual indirect pressure and the power of silence . He wanted and needed Hanna , but on his own terms . " 
 = = = = Spanish – American War = = = = 
 Even during the second Cleveland administration , Americans took keen interest in the ongoing revolt in Cuba , then a Spanish colony . Most Americans believed that Cuba should be independent and that Spain should leave the Western Hemisphere . Beginning in 1895 , Congress passed a number of resolutions calling for Cuban independence . Although Cleveland pursued a policy of neutrality , his Secretary of State , Richard Olney , warned Spain that the patience of the United States was not inexhaustible . Sherman , then a senator , favored neutrality but believed that the US would inevitably go to war over Cuba . Soon after Hanna was appointed to the Senate , McKinley called Congress into special session to consider tariff legislation . Despite the stated purpose of the session , a number of resolutions were introduced calling for independence for Cuba , by force if necessary . When the press asked Hanna if he felt there would be action on Cuba during the session , he responded : " I don 't know . You can 't tell about that . A spark might drop in there at any time and precipitate action . " 
 Through 1897 , McKinley maintained neutrality on Cuba , hoping to negotiate autonomy for the island . Nevertheless , pro @-@ war elements , prominently including the Hearst newspapers , pressured McKinley for a more aggressive foreign policy . On May 20 , 1897 , the Senate passed a resolution favoring intervention in Cuba , 41 – 14 , with Hanna in the minority . As the crisis slowly built through late 1897 and early 1898 , Hanna became concerned about the political damage if McKinley , against popular opinion , kept the nation out of war . " Look out for Mr. Bryan . Everything that goes wrong will be in the Democratic platform in 1900 . You can be damn sure of that ! " Nevertheless , the Ohio senator believed that McKinley 's policy of quietly pressing Spain for colonial reform in Cuba had already yielded results without war , and would continue to do so . 
 On February 15 , 1898 , the American warship Maine sank in Havana harbor . Over 250 officers and men were killed . It was ( and is ) unclear if the explosion which caused Maine 's sinking was from an external cause or internal fault . McKinley ordered a board of inquiry while asking the nation to withhold judgment pending the result , but he also quietly prepared for war . The Hearst newspapers , with the slogan , " Remember the Maine and to hell with Spain ! " pounded a constant drumbeat for war and blamed Hanna for the delay . According to the Hearst papers , the Ohio senator was the true master in the White House , and was vetoing war as bad for business . Heart 's New York Journal editorialized in March 1898 : 
 Senator Hanna , fresh from the bargain for a seat in the United States Senate , probably felt the need of recouping his Ohio expenses as well as helping his financial friends out of the hole when he began playing American patriotism against Wall Street money ... Hanna said there would be no war . He spoke as one having authority . His edict meant that Uncle Sam might be kicked and cuffed from one continent to another . 
 As the nation waited for the report of the board of inquiry , many who favored war deemed McKinley too timid . Hanna and the President were burned in effigy in Virginia . Assistant Secretary of the Navy Theodore Roosevelt shook his fist under Hanna 's nose at the Gridiron Dinner and stated , " We will have this war for the freedom of Cuba in spite of the timidity of the commercial classes ! " Nevertheless , Hanna supported McKinley 's patient policy and acted as his point man in the Senate on the war issue . 
 The Navy 's report blamed an external cause , believed by many to be a Spanish mine or bomb , for the sinking of Maine ( modern reports have suggested an internal explosion within a coal bunker ) . Despite the increased calls for war , McKinley hoped to preserve peace . However , when it became clear that the United States would accept nothing but Cuban independence , which the Spanish were not prepared to grant , negotiations broke off . On April 11 , McKinley asked Congress for authority to secure Cuban independence , using force if necessary . Hanna supported McKinley in obtaining that authority , though he stated privately , " If Congress had started this , I 'd break my neck to stop it . " Spain broke off diplomatic relations on April 20 ; Congress declared war five days later , retroactive to April 21 . 
 The war resulted in a complete American victory . Nevertheless , Hanna was uncomfortable with the conflict . He stated during the war to a member of the public , " Remember that my folks were Quakers . War is just a damn nuisance . " After the Battle of El Caney , he viewed the American casualty lists and stated , " Oh , God , now we 'll have this sort of thing again ! " After the war , Hanna supported McKinley 's decision to annex Spanish colonies such as Puerto Rico and Guam . 
 = = = = Campaign of 1900 = = = = 
 Vice President Hobart had died in late 1899 . President McKinley was content to leave the choice of a vice presidential candidate for 1900 to the upcoming Republican convention . New York Senator Platt disliked his state 's governor , former Assistant Secretary of the Navy Theodore Roosevelt , who had pursued a reformist agenda in his year and a half in office . Platt hoped to sideline Roosevelt politically by making him vice president . Roosevelt was a popular choice in any event because of his well @-@ publicized service during the Spanish – American War , and Platt had little trouble persuading state delegations to vote for Roosevelt after McKinley 's renomination . Quay was a close Platt ally in the effort to make Roosevelt vice president . Hanna , who felt Roosevelt was overly impulsive , did not want him on the ticket , but did not realize that the efforts were serious until he was already at the convention in Philadelphia . As many of the delegates were political appointees , Hanna hoped to persuade McKinley to use patronage to get the delegates to vote for another candidate . After emerging from the telephone booth from which he had tried and failed to get McKinley to agree , Senator Hanna stated , " Do whatever you damn please ! I 'm through ! I won 't have anything more to do with the convention ! I won 't take charge of the campaign ! I won 't be chairman of the national committee again ! " When asked what the matter was , Hanna replied , 
 Matter ! Matter ! Why , everybody 's gone crazy ! What is the matter with all of you ? Here 's this convention going headlong for Roosevelt for Vice President . Don 't any of you realize that there 's only one life between that madman and the Presidency ? Platt and Quay are no better than idiots ! What harm can he do as Governor of New York compared to the damage he will do as President if McKinley should die ? 
 On his return to Washington after the convention nominated McKinley and Roosevelt , Hanna wrote to the President , " Well , it was a nice little scrap at Phila [ <unk> ] . Not exactly to my liking with my hand tied behind me . However , we got through in good shape and the ticket is all right . Your duty to the country is to live for four years from next March . " 
 The Democrats nominated Bryan a second time at their convention . This time , Bryan ran with a broader agenda , and attacked McKinley as an imperialist for taking the Spanish colonies . The Democratic candidate also urged increased use of the antitrust laws , and alleged that McKinley had been lax in their enforcement . Hanna summed up the Republican campaign in four words , " Let well enough alone . " 
 Hanna was called upon to do only small amounts of fundraising this time : no great educational campaign was required , and the corporations were willing to give . The President gave only one speech , the formal acceptance of his nomination in Canton in July . Roosevelt , on the other hand , traveled widely across the nation giving speeches . The New Yorker traveled 21 @,@ 000 miles ( 34 @,@ 000 km ) in the campaign , reaching 24 of the 45 states . Hanna was now a public figure , and wanted to campaign for the Republicans in the western states . McKinley , however , was reluctant , as Hanna had varied from the administration 's position on trusts in a recent speech . McKinley sent Postmaster General Charles Emory Smith to Chicago , where Hanna then was , to talk him out of the trip . Hanna rapidly discerned that Smith had been sent by the President , and told him , " Return to Washington and tell the President that God hates a coward . " McKinley and Hanna met in Canton several days later and settled their differences over lunch . Hanna made his speaking tour in the West . According to Hanna biographer Thomas Beer , Hanna 's tour was a great success , though many viewers were surprised he did not wear suits decorated with the " dollar mark " . 
 Hanna spent much of his time based at the campaign 's New York office , while renting a seaside cottage in Elberon , New Jersey . In September , a strike by the United Mine Workers threatened a crisis which might cause problems for McKinley . Hanna believed that the miners ' grievances were just , and he persuaded the parties to allow him to arbitrate . With Hanna 's aid , the two sides arrived at a negotiated settlement . 
 On November 6 , 1900 , the voters re @-@ elected McKinley , who took 51 @.@ 7 % of the popular vote , a slight increase from 1896 . He won 292 electoral votes to Bryan 's 155 . McKinley took six states that Bryan had taken in 1896 while holding all the states he had won . Although the majority was not large by later standards , according to historian Lewis L. Gould in his study of the McKinley presidency , " in light of the election results since the Civil War , however , it was an impressive mandate . " 
 = = = = Assassination of McKinley = = = = 
 McKinley traveled much during his presidency , and in September 1901 , journeyed to the Pan @-@ American Exposition in Buffalo , New York . On September 6 , 1901 , while receiving the public in the Temple of Music on the Exposition grounds , McKinley was shot by an anarchist , Leon Czolgosz . Hanna , along with many of the President 's close allies , hurried to his bedside . 
 As the President lay , wounded , he enquired " Is Mark there ? " ; the doctors told him that Senator Hanna was present , but that he should not exert himself with an interview . McKinley appeared to be improving , and Hanna , with the doctors ' reassurance , left Buffalo for an encampment of the Grand Army of the Republic in Cleveland , at which Hanna was to speak . While there , he received a telegram stating that the President had taken a turn for the worse , and hurried back to Buffalo . There he found an unconscious McKinley , whose sickbed had become a deathbed . On the evening of September 13 , Hanna was allowed to see the dying man , as were others close to the President , such as his wife and his brother , Abner McKinley . Hanna , weeping , went to the library in the Milburn House where the President lay , and as he awaited the end , made the necessary plans and arrangements to return his friend 's remains to Canton . At 2 : 15 am on September 14 , President McKinley died . 
 = = = Roosevelt years and death ( 1901 – 04 ) = = = 
 McKinley 's death left Hanna devastated both personally and politically . Although the two had not been allies , the new president , Roosevelt , reached out to Hanna , hoping to secure his influence in the Senate . Hanna indicated that he was willing to come to terms with Roosevelt on two conditions : that Roosevelt carry out McKinley 's political agenda , and that the President cease from his habit of calling Hanna " old man " , something which greatly annoyed the senator . Hanna warned Roosevelt , " If you don 't , I 'll call you Teddy . " Roosevelt , who despised his nickname , agreed to both terms , though he imperfectly carried out the second condition . 
 = = = = Panama Canal involvement = = = = 
 Hanna was a supporter of building a canal across Central America to allow ships to pass between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans without making the lengthy journey around Cape Horn . The senator believed a route across the Colombian province of Panama to be superior to its Nicaraguan rival . How he came to support this route is uncertain , though attorney and lobbyist William Nelson Cromwell later claimed to have personally converted Hanna to the Panama cause in 1901 . This was disputed by the French canal promoter , Philippe Bunau @-@ Varilla , who stated that at the end of his meeting with Hanna at the Arlington Hotel , the senator exclaimed , " Monsieur Bunau @-@ Varilla , you have convinced me . " 
 The Nicaragua route had many supporters and a bill sponsored by Iowa Congressman William Peters Hepburn , which would authorize the construction of a canal on the Nicaragua route , had passed the House of Representatives . In June 1902 , it was considered by the Senate , and on June 5 and 6 , Hanna made a speech against the Hepburn Bill . In his speech , he referred to enormous maps , which were displayed in the Senate Chamber as he spoke . This was a novel technique , especially as he referred to the possibility of active volcanoes on the Nicaragua route in his speech , and the maps showed active volcanoes marked with red dots and extinct ones with black . There was an almost continuous band of black dots through Nicaragua , with eight red ones ; no dots were placed on the map of Panama . Hanna pointed out many advantages of the Panama route : it was shorter than the Nicaraguan route , would require much less digging , and had existing harbors at either end . Hanna was in poor health as he gave the speech ; Alabama Senator John Tyler Morgan , the Senate sponsor of the Hepburn Bill , tried to ask Hanna a question , only to be met with , " I do not want to be interrupted , for I am very tired . " At the end , Hanna warned that if the US built the Nicaragua canal , another power would finish the Panama route . One senator stated that he had been converted to the " <unk> Canal " . The bill was amended to support a Panama route , according to some accounts in part because Cromwell remembered that Nicaragua depicted volcanos on its postage stamps , and combed the stock of Washington stamp dealers until he found enough to send to the entire Senate . The House afterwards agreed to the Senate amendment , and the bill authorizing a Panama canal passed . 
 The US entered into negotiations with Colombia for rights to build a canal ; a treaty was signed but was rejected by the Colombian Senate . In November 1903 , Panama , with the support of the United States , broke away from Colombia , and Bunau @-@ Varilla , the representative of the new government in Washington , signed a treaty granting the US a zone in which to build a canal . The United States Senate was called upon to ratify the treaty in February 1904 ; the debate began as Hanna lay dying . The treaty was ratified on February 23 , 1904 , eight days after Hanna 's death . 
 = = = = Re @-@ election , rumors of a presidential run , and death = = = = 
 At the 1903 Ohio Republican convention , Foraker filed a resolution to endorse Roosevelt for re @-@ election . This would normally have been introduced at the 1904 convention , but Foraker hoped to use the resolution to take control of the Ohio party from Hanna . The resolution placed Hanna in a difficult position : if he supported it , he proclaimed he would not run for president ; if he opposed it , he risked Roosevelt 's wrath . Hanna wired Roosevelt , who was on a western trip , that he intended to oppose it and would explain all when both men were in Washington . Roosevelt responded that while he had not requested support from anyone , those friendly to his administration would naturally vote for such a statement . Hanna <unk> supported the resolution . 
 The 1903 convention also endorsed Hanna for re @-@ election to the Senate , and nominated Hanna 's friend Myron Herrick for governor . The Foraker faction was allowed the nomination for lieutenant governor , given to Warren G. Harding , who later became president . Hanna campaigned for several weeks for the Republicans in Ohio , and was rewarded with an overwhelming Republican victory . With no drama , Hanna was re @-@ elected in January 1904 for the term 1905 – 1911 by a legislative vote of 115 – 25 , a much larger margin than Foraker had received in 1902 . 
 Despite the differences between the two men , Roosevelt in November 1903 asked Hanna to run his re @-@ election campaign . Hanna saw this as an unsubtle attempt by the President to ensure that Hanna would not oppose him , and was slow to respond to his request . In the interim , he allowed talk of a Hanna for president campaign to continue , although he did not plan to run . Financier J. P. Morgan , who disliked Roosevelt 's policies , offered to finance the Hanna presidential campaign when he hosted the <unk> at Thanksgiving , though the senator remained silent at the offer . In December , Hanna and Roosevelt had a lengthy meeting and resolved many of their differences . Roosevelt agreed that Hanna would not have to serve another term as chairman of the Republican National Committee . This in theory freed Hanna to run for president , but Roosevelt could see that Hanna was an exhausted man and would not run . 
 On January 30 , 1904 , Hanna attended the Gridiron Club dinner at the Arlington Hotel . He neither ate nor drank , and when asked how his health was , responded " Not good . " He never again left his Washington residence , having fallen ill with typhoid fever . As the days passed , politicians began to wait in the Arlington lobby , close to Hanna 's house , for news ; a letter from the President , " May you soon be with us , old fellow , as strong in body and as vigorous in your leadership as ever " was never read by the recipient . Hanna drifted in and out of consciousness for several days ; on the morning of February 15 , his heart began to fail . Roosevelt visited at 3 pm , unseen by the dying man . At 6 : 30 pm , Senator Hanna died , and the crowd of congressional colleagues , government officials , and diplomats who had gathered in the lobby of the Arlington left the hotel , many sobbing . Roosevelt biographer Edmund Morris noted Hanna 's achievement in industry and in politics , " He had not done badly in either field ; he had made seven million dollars , and a President of the United States . " 
 = = Views and legacy = = 
 According to Professor Gerald W. Wolff , " the one solid absolute in [ Hanna 's ] life was a profound belief in the living standard capitalism had brought to America . " Hanna believed , like many conservative businessmen of his time , that labor , business , and government should work together cooperatively for the benefit of society . These views , which had coalesced in Hanna by the 1876 coal strike , informed his political views once he turned to that field . According to Croly , Hanna always did his best to foster good relations with his workers ; the biographer proffered in support of his statement a quote from the Cleveland Leader of April 28 , 1876 : " This morning Mr. Hanna , of Rhodes & Co . , met the striking laborers on the docks at Ashtabula Harbor , and after consultation the men accepted the terms offered and resumed work . " According to Wolff , after the coal strike , Hanna " tried diligently to show by example how relations between labor , capital , and management could be ordered for the benefit of all " . 
 Despite his efforts at harmonious worker relations , Hanna was often depicted by Davenport during the 1896 campaign with his foot on a skull labeled " Labor " . During the following year 's Ohio legislative elections , which determined Hanna 's electors for his 1898 re @-@ election bid , he was accused of being harsh to his employees . He responded in a speech , 
 Go to any of the five thousand men in my employ ... Ask them whether I ever pay less than the highest going wages , ask them whether I ever asked them whether they belonged to a union or not ... Ask them whether , when any men or any committee of men , came to me with a complaint if I ever refused to see them ... Ask them if I ever in my life intentionally wronged any workingman . I never did . 
 After Hanna issued the challenge , unions representing his workers confirmed his statement . Hanna became the first president of the National Civic Federation ( NCF ) , which tried to foster harmonious relations between business and labor . The NCF opposed militant labor unions ; it also resisted businessmen who sought to entirely prevent regulation . It recognized labor 's right to organize to seek better wages and conditions . In a 1903 speech to a labor convention , Hanna stated that the efforts of labor to organize into unions should be considered no more shocking than those of businesses organizing into trade groups . 
 A phrase sometimes attributed to Hanna is : " No man in public office owes the public anything " . This phrase supposedly appeared in a letter by Hanna to Ohio Attorney General David K. Watson in 1890 , urging him to drop a lawsuit against the Standard Oil Company . The phrase became an issue against Hanna in the 1897 campaign in Ohio . Watson , a Republican , denied that Hanna had written the phrase , but refused to discuss the matter further with reporters . Hanna 's early biographers , Croly and Beer , found the supposed quote dubious but as they did not definitely deny that Hanna had written it , a number of later works attribute the quote to Hanna . However , Professor Thomas E. Felt , who wrote an article about the controversy , believed Hanna unlikely to use such an inflammatory phrase to a man with whom he was not close , and which , in any event , did not accurately represent his political views . 
 Hanna is often credited with the invention of the modern presidential campaign . His campaign for McKinley in 1896 broke new ground because of its highly systematized and centralized nature , as well as for its fundraising success . Although Hanna has been depicted as the first national political boss , historians agree that McKinley dominated the relationship between the two . Nevertheless , Hanna is recognized for his innovative campaign work . 
 = = Public image today = = 
 New Jersey Senator Bill Bradley published a volume of memoirs , Time Present , Time Past in 1996 . In it , the Democrat mentioned having written a high @-@ school report on Hanna — his history teacher , Bradley related , told him that the lesson of the 1896 campaign is that money is power . Bradley , a former basketball player , mentioned that when he was being interviewed in high school , he stated that Hanna was one of his heroes . By the time he wrote the book , however , Bradley had come to believe in limits on campaign spending and blamed Hanna for a sharp escalation in campaign costs . Bradley also stated what Horner terms <unk> of Hanna : that he was the Republican boss of Ohio , and that he did his best to disrupt Roosevelt 's presidency . Bradley alleged that since 1896 , Republicans have raised money easily from the rich . Despite his condemnation of Hanna , Bradley wrote that he regretted that he could not find a Hanna @-@ like figure who could play an analogous role in advancing his political career . 
 In 2000 , Texas Governor George W. Bush successfully ran for the presidency . As the campaign progressed , the media compared Hanna and Bush adviser Karl Rove , who was believed by some to hold a Svengali @-@ like influence over the Texas governor . During the campaign , and until his departure from the White House in 2007 , media members often suggested that Rove was able to manipulate Bush , and that Rove exerted considerable control over the government . Bush 's advisor was deemed a present @-@ day incarnation of Hanna , who was almost invariably presented negatively and at variance with historical fact . For example , writer Jack Kelly in a 2000 column incorrectly stated that McKinley 's front porch campaign was at the direction of Hanna to ensure the candidate did not vary from campaign themes , rather than McKinley deciding that it was his best response to Bryan 's national tour . These comparisons were fueled by Rove 's interest in , and by some reports , liking for Hanna . Rove studied the McKinley administration at the University of Texas under McKinley biographer Lewis L. Gould , and believes that Hanna 's influence has been overrated . 
 According to Horner , Davenport 's depiction of Hanna still lingers as the modern image of the former senator : 
 The portrait of Hanna that has stood the test of time is of a man who was grossly obese ; a cutthroat attack dog for the " Trusts " ; a cigar @-@ smoking man clad in a suit covered with dollar signs who stood side by side with a gigantic figure representing the trusts , and a tiny , childlike William McKinley . He will forever be known as " Dollar Mark " . 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 All elections are by the Ohio General Assembly , as state legislatures elected senators until the ratification of the 17th Amendment in 1913 . 
 = John Martin Scripps = 
 John Martin ( born John Martin Scripps , 9 December 1959 – 19 April 1996 ) was an English spree killer who murdered three tourists — Gerard Lowe in Singapore , and Sheila and Darin Damude in Thailand — with another three unconfirmed victims . He posed as a tourist himself when committing the murders , for which British tabloids nicknamed him " the tourist from Hell " . He cut up all his victims ' bodies , using butchery skills he had acquired in prison , before disposing of them . 
 Martin was arrested in Singapore ( where he had killed Lowe ) when he returned there after murdering the Damudes . Photographs of decomposed body parts were shown as evidence during his trial , making it " one of the most grisly " ever heard in Singapore . He defended himself by saying that Lowe 's death was an accident and that a friend of his killed the Damudes . The judge did not believe Martin 's account of events and sentenced him to death by hanging , making him the first Briton since Singapore 's independence from Britain and Malaysia to be given the death penalty . He is also one of the first Westerners to be executed in Singapore since independence , the first one being Johannes Van Damme . 
 = = Early life = = 
 John Martin Scripps was born in Letchworth , Hertfordshire , 9 December 1959 to Leonard and Jean Scripps , an East End lorry driver and a Fleet Street barmaid respectively . He travelled often in childhood , occasionally accompanied by his father , with whom he was very close . Leonard Scripps committed suicide when his son was nine . After his father 's death , Scripps developed problems with reading and writing , which led to him leaving school at the age of 15 . After dropping out of school he continued to travel , raising money for his trips by doing odd jobs and selling antiques . 
 = = Criminal career = = 
 Scripps was convicted of his first crime in May 1974 , when he was sentenced to a 12 @-@ month conditional discharge and fined £ 10 by Highgate Juvenile Court for burglary . The punishment did nothing to deter him from stealing , and by August 1976 he had stolen again three times . In June 1978 , he was fined £ 40 for indecent assault . 
 While traveling in Mexico , Scripps met María Pilar <unk> , of Cancún , and married her in 1980 . They travelled together for two years until 1982 , when he was sentenced to a three @-@ year jail term for theft , burglary and resisting arrest . His imprisonment upset María , and their relationship was further soured when he ran away from jail during home leave in June 1985 — just months short of completing his term — and burgled again . He was sentenced to another three years ' imprisonment , during which she filed for divorce and married Police Constable Ken Cold , an officer in the Royal Protection Squad . This angered Scripps , who acted in revenge , stealing some of Cold 's clothing while released on home leave . He was appeased only when she divorced her new husband and returned to her hometown . After he was released , Scripps legally changed his name to John Martin . 
 Scripps began trafficking in drugs , and carried heroin between Asia and Europe for a syndicate . Singapore authorities first encountered his name in 1987 , when he was arrested at Heathrow Airport for possessing drugs . Police found a key on him that belonged to a safe deposit box in a bank in Orchard Road in Singapore , from which officers from Singapore 's Central Narcotics Bureau seized 1 @.@ 5 kilogrammes ( 3 @.@ 3 lb ) of heroin worth about US $ 1 million . For this and another drug offence , Southwark Crown Court in January 1988 sentenced him to seven years in jail . He escaped while on home leave but was later re @-@ arrested . In July 1992 , Winchester Crown Court added another six years to the original sentence , which would have kept him behind bars until 2001 had he not escaped again . 
 He was in custody at Albany Prison on the Isle of Wight from February 1992 to August 1993 , where he became a model prisoner . Initially he did menial jobs such as dishwashing and general cleaning and was later promoted to the position of butcher , under the training of James Quigley , a prison caterer with more than 20 years ' experience , and another inmate only identified as " Ginger " , who had been a professional butcher . They taught him how to dismember and remove the bone from animals after slaughtering them . Martin performed his duties with such efficiency that he once told Quigley he wished to open a butcher 's shop after his release . 
 On 20 August 1993 , Martin was transferred from Albany Prison to The Mount Prison in Hemel Hempstead , Hertfordshire , as a result of a change in his security categorisation . In October 1994 he escaped while on home leave , which was granted only two days after being refused parole . His mother , noting that he had sold all his belongings to fellow inmates while in prison ( a clear notice of his intention to escape ) , asked prison authorities not to release him . After Martin was sentenced to death , she reiterated : 
 The Home Office have buried their head in the sand over this . They know full well that if they had done what I told them , none of this would have ever happened . I begged them not to let him go . 
 His mother gave Scripps £ 200 to go overseas after his arrest . To avoid recapture , he used the birth certificate of another inmate , Simon James Davis , to get a passport in Davis ' name . Within a month of his escape , he turned up in Mexico as John Martin . He reported to the British Embassy there that he had lost his passport , and managed to get a replacement . Martin arrived in Singapore from San Francisco at about 2 a.m. SST on 8 March 1995 ( 6 p.m. UTC on 7 March ) . 
 = = Murder of tourists = = 
 Martin killed at least three people in Singapore and Thailand , and may have killed others in Belize , Mexico , and the United States . His modus operandi was to pose as a tourist and converse with another randomly chosen caucasian , either aboard their flights or while waiting at airports . He stayed in the same hotels as his victims in a room near theirs . Once he had an excuse to be in their rooms , he used an electroshock weapon to immobilise them before killing them by striking their heads with a hammer and cutting them up in their bathrooms . He chose caucasians as his victims because they were vacationing far away from their home countries , which made him less likely to be discovered . His motive apparently included money , as large amounts were withdrawn using the credit cards of Gerard Lowe and Timothy MacDowall . 
 = = = Gerard Lowe = = = 
 Gerard George Lowe came from Johannesburg , South Africa . He was a chemical engineer with South African Breweries . He went to Singapore to shop for electrical and electronic goods . Before he left Johannesburg on 7 March 1995 , he told his wife Vanessa , a local airlines employee , his exact schedule , saying : " I will call you the moment I check into the hotel to give you the contact number . If you do not hear from me on 10 March , it would mean that I would have a seat on the plane to return to South Africa and would arrive home on 11 March . But if I do call you on 10 March , that would mean that I have not managed to get a seat and would return on 12 March . " 
 When Lowe arrived at Singapore Changi Airport on the morning of 8 March , he was accosted by Martin ( under the assumed name of Simon Davis ) , who struck up a conversation with him and suggested that they share a room , to which Lowe agreed . They managed to book Room 1511 in the River View Hotel off Havelock Road . The next morning , Martin asked a hotel receptionist to delete Lowe 's name from the room registration system , saying that he had kicked Lowe out the previous night for being a homosexual . Martin checked out on 11 March and flew to Bangkok the same day . 
 On 13 March 1995 , a pair of legs , severed at the knees , was found in a plastic bag floating off Clifford Pier . Three days later , a pair of thighs and a torso were found in the same area , also in a plastic bag . Initially , Singapore police could only determine that the body parts belonged to a Caucasian , and they had a possible name after receiving a missing person report for Lowe from the South African High Commission . Vanessa Lowe filed the report because she was distressed that her husband , who used to make daily contact with his family when overseas , had not called home or returned to South Africa by 12 March . Lowe 's colleagues at work also tried to determine his whereabouts through personal contacts in Singapore . On 1 April , she confirmed that the body parts were her husband 's through visual identification . However , his arms and head were never found . 
 = = = Sheila and Darin Damude = = = 
 Sheila Mae Damude and her son Darin Jon Damude came from Saanich , British Columbia , Canada . She was an administrator at the Pacific Christian School in Victoria , while Darin was a college student . They had come to Thailand on holiday , with Darin flying to Asia first before Sheila met him in Bangkok during spring break . They flew to Phuket on 15 March with Martin ( still using his assumed name ) who was sitting in the same row as them . He befriended the two and they checked into <unk> 's Marina Inn facing <unk> Beach . Martin was given Room 48 and the Damudes were given the adjacent Room 43 . The Damudes were not seen again after they ate breakfast the next morning ; at about 11 a.m. THA ( 5 a.m. UTC ) , Martin asked the inn 's receptionist to switch his room to Room 43 , saying that the Damudes had left and that he would pay their bill . 
 Martin checked out and returned to Singapore on 19 March . On that day the skulls of the Damudes were found in a disused tin mine in <unk> district . A torso and a pair each of arms and legs were found along Bahn Nai Trang Road , 9 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 6 mi ) away , five days later . The body parts were so badly decomposed that visual identification was impossible ; Royal Thai Police used dental records to identify the skulls and forensic analysis concluded that the torso , arms , and legs were likely to be Sheila 's . The other parts of Darin 's body were never found . 
 = = = Unconfirmed victims = = = 
