 Scotland Yard suspected Martin of having separately killed two men from south London : financial adviser Timothy MacDowall and accountant William Shackel . In Mexico , Martin had discussed with his wife about going scuba diving with MacDowall , who was taking scuba lessons while on holiday on an island off Belize . MacDowall disappeared in Belize in early 1995 but police could not conclusively match him to body parts later found in that country ; the only suspicious activity they uncovered was the transfer of £ 21 @,@ 000 from MacDowall 's bank account to an account in San Francisco under Martin 's name . MacDowall is believed to have been murdered as he slept and his remains thrown into a crocodile @-@ infested river . Martin refused to be interviewed by Scotland Yard while he was on death row in Changi Prison , thus whether he killed MacDowall remains unconfirmed . Shackel was reported missing while on holiday in Cancún , Mexico . Police reports said that Martin was in Cancún the day Shackel cashed traveller 's cheques worth £ 4 @,@ 000 , after which he disappeared . 
 Martin was also wanted in San Francisco in the United States for the murder of homosexual prostitute Tom Wenger on 28 March 1994 . Wenger 's body was chopped up and drained of blood ; it was found in a garbage skip ( dumpster ) in <unk> Alley , in the Polk Street district . Although Martin was supposed to be in jail in the United Kingdom at the time , his photograph matched a facial composite picture made by San Francisco police . 
 = = Arrest and remand = = 
 Martin was arrested when he arrived at Changi Airport on the evening of 19 March 1995 and produced a passport with his assumed name , Simon Davis . Police had put the name on their wanted list on 14 March after they determined that Lowe had checked into River View Hotel with someone by that name . In a police interview room in the airport , Martin smashed a glass panel and cut his wrist with a shard of glass in a suicide attempt , fearing that he would be hanged like Flor <unk> , a Filipino who had been hanged two days before for a double murder . He was taken to Alexandra Hospital for treatment . 
 The police found five passports on Martin in addition to his own — two British passports issued to Simon Davis , two Canadian passports issued to Sheila and Darin Damude , and a South African passport issued to Gerard Lowe — each with Martin 's photograph affixed . They also found credit cards belonging to Sheila Damude and Gerard Lowe . In addition , police found Simon Davis ' birth certificate , and items that Martin had used to immobilise and kill : a hammer weighing 1 @.@ 5 kilogrammes ( 3 @.@ 3 lb ) , a battery @-@ operated Z @-@ Force III electroshock weapon , a can of mace , two pairs of handcuffs , a pair of <unk> , two Police brand foldable knives , an <unk> and two Swiss army knives . Importation of some of these into Singapore is illegal . 
 On 21 March 1995 , Martin was taken to court on an initial charge , naming him as Simon James Davis and accusing him of forging Lowe 's signature on a DBS Bank credit card transaction slip to obtain S $ 6 @,@ 000 in cash on 9 March . Three days later , he was charged under his real name for the murder of Gerard Lowe in a River View Hotel room some time between 8 March and 9 . In subsequent hearings , he was additionally charged with forgery ( forging Lowe 's signature five more times to obtain cash and goods worth $ 3 @,@ 200 ) , vandalism ( smashing the glass panel ) , possession of an offensive weapon ( the electroshock weapon ) , and possession of a controlled drug ( he had 24 sticks of cannabis at the time of his arrest ) . 
 On 18 September , a preliminary enquiry in a district court was held to determine whether there was sufficient evidence for a trial to proceed . The magistrate overseeing the enquiry ordered Martin to stand trial for Gerard Lowe 's murder on 2 October after hearing statements from 39 witnesses , and looking at more than 100 exhibits and 100 photographs that the prosecution had prepared as evidence . 
 = = Trial = = 
 Before the trial , Martin made a statement explaining that he killed Lowe in self @-@ defence . He said he had fallen asleep after checking in , but woke up after someone touched his buttocks ; it was Lowe , who was clad only in his underwear and smiling at him . To him , this behaviour made Lowe appear to be a homosexual , so he kicked Lowe away . This angered Lowe , who threw Martin 's hammer at his stomach . Martin then grabbed the hammer and " hit [ Lowe ] several times on the head until he collapsed onto the carpeted floor . " A friend later helped him to dispose of Lowe 's body by throwing it into the Singapore River . Martin continued , " I am not sure what was the next thing I did ... everything was such a blur to me after this incident that I was walking around in a dream world for the next few days . " He refused to identify his friend , saying , " I cannot tell you his identity because if he knew he would harm my family back in Britain . " On 15 March , he flew to Phuket , where he met his friend again . His friend gave him the passports and other items belonging to the Damudes , whom he never met . 
 In court , Martin argued that he was by nature not a violent person . " I may have worked in the ( prison ) butchery , but cutting up a human body is another thing . When I saw the photographs ( of Lowe 's body parts ) , it made me feel sick . " He maintained that he had killed Lowe after the latter made homosexual advances that caused him to " freak out " ; he had previously fended off homosexual attacks twice while imprisoned : in Israel in 1978 , and in England in 1994 . When Deputy Public Prosecutors Jennifer Marie and <unk> Rashid asked him what he did after killing Lowe , he said that he could not remember anything because he had drunk heavily and consumed Valium after Lowe 's death until he was arrested . He repeated that he had not killed the Damudes , and that he had come back to Singapore from Phuket to clear his conscience about Lowe 's death . 
 On 7 November , Judge T. S. Sinnathuray adjourned the trial for three days to consider his verdict . ( Singapore abolished jury trials in 1969 . ) When the trial resumed , the judge was satisfied that the prosecution had made its case and dismissed Martin 's version of events . In his verdict , he said : 
 I 'm satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Martin had intentionally killed Lowe . After that , he disarticulated Lowe 's body into separate parts , and it was he who subsequently disposed of the body parts by throwing them into the river behind the hotel . 
 On the evidence , I had no difficulty to find that it was Martin who was concerned with the deaths of Sheila and Darin and for the disposal of their body parts found in different sites in Phuket . The disarticulation of the body parts of Lowe , Sheila and Darin have the hallmark signs of having been done by the same person . Altogether , this similar fact evidence reinforces the decision I have made , for it puts beyond doubt that Martin is guilty on the charge of murder . 
 The sentence of this court upon you is that you will be taken from this place to a lawful prison and taken to a place to be hanged by the neck until you are dead . And may the Lord have mercy on your soul . 
 = = Appeal and hanging = = 
 On 15 November 1995 , Martin announced he would appeal the sentence . He later dropped the appeal without giving an explanation on 4 January 1996 , four days before it was to have been heard . He turned down a subsequent chance to petition the President of Singapore for clemency , saying that he was impatient to be executed . 
 In the days before his hanging , Martin wrote of an " emptiness " inside him and lamented that no one had loved him besides his family and his ex @-@ wife María , in a series of misspelled notes ( he was semi @-@ literate ) : 
 One day poor . One day reach . Money <unk> the pane of hunger but what will fill the <unk> inside ? I know that love is beyond me . So do I give myself to god . The god that has <unk> me . Can I be a person again ? Only time will tell me . 
 You may take my life for what it is worth , but grant <unk> that I love , pease and happiness . 
 He complained that in prison , " You are told every day that you are not a member of the <unk> <unk> [ a misspelling of ' human race ' ] . " The week before he was due to hang , he dreamed that he had avoided the sentence by committing suicide : 
 I tied the rope around my little neck before I got up on the old creaky chair . I reached down and picked up a handful of earth and put it in my mouth . Then I crawled up to the old creaky chair and pulled the rope tighter and tighter still . I was on tiptoe , just one more pull , then my feet left the chair knocking it over and darkness embraced me as the heavens opened . I woke up in darkness and felt a heavy weight on my chest . I cried out , " Mummy , I am here . " 
 Martin 's mother remarked , " Whoever he is now , he 's the person the prison service trained him to be . These bastards have no right to take my son 's life . I brought him into the world . I am the only person who can take him out of it . " However , no one formally protested against the hanging . At dawn on 19 April 1996 , Martin was hanged in Changi Prison together with two Singaporean drug traffickers . On that day , the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and the Royal Thai Police closed their files on the murders of Sheila and Darin Damude , declaring the case effectively solved . 
 When Martin 's ex @-@ wife María heard that he had been hanged , she said : 
 John disappeared on several trips and went to the United States and Southeast Asia . I knew something awful was happening , but I could not believe he had started killing people . 
 I knew this would happen to John but I didn 't know it would hurt so much . The last memory I have of him is a message he sent promising we would meet in the next life and that he would never let me go again . 
 = = Post @-@ death coverage = = 
 In May 1996 , Tan Ooi Boon , a reporter from The Straits Times who covered Martin 's case from start to finish , wrote a book on the case , titled Body Parts : A British Serial Killer in Singapore . He wrote the book in three months using material he had prepared for the newspaper . It mixed fictional narrative with fact and described how Martin disposed of his victims ' bodies . 
 In July 1996 , the story of how Martin murdered Gerard Lowe , and the investigation that followed , was featured in an episode of the Singapore Crimewatch , which was shown on Television Corporation of Singapore 's Channel 5 and Channel 8 . In the episode , actual photographs from the autopsy were shown , causing the series to be the first current affairs programme in Singapore to be given the PG ( Parental Guidance ) warning tag . Police justified their use of the photographs , saying that they wanted to " give an accurate account of the case to the public . " The story was also re @-@ enacted in the last episode of MediaCorp TV 's Channel 5 docu @-@ drama True Files on 23 July 2002 . 
 On 31 January 1997 , eight police officers who made significant contributions towards Martin 's conviction were awarded commemorative plaques by the High Commissioner for Canada in Singapore , Barry Carin . 
 = Northanger Abbey ( 2007 film ) = 
 Northanger Abbey is a 2007 British television film adaptation of Jane Austen 's eponymous novel . It was directed by British television director Jon Jones and the screenplay was written by Andrew Davies . Felicity Jones stars as the protagonist Catherine Morland and JJ Feild plays her love interest Henry Tilney . The story unfolds as the teenaged Catherine is invited to Bath to accompany some family friends . There she finds herself the object of Henry Tilney 's and John Thorpe 's ( William Beck ) affections . When she is asked to stay at Northanger Abbey , Catherine 's youthful and naive imagination takes hold and she begins to confuse real life with the Gothic romance of her favorite novels . 
 Northanger Abbey was one of three novels adapted for ITV 's Jane Austen season . It was shot on location in Ireland from late August 2006 on a budget of £ 2 million . The drama was co @-@ produced by Granada Productions and American studio WGBH Boston . Northanger Abbey premiered on 25 March 2007 in the United Kingdom and on 16 December 2007 in Canada . It was broadcast in the United States and Australia in 2008 . The drama was viewed by 5 @.@ 6 million people in the UK , making it the second most watched of the 2007 adaptations . Northanger Abbey garnered mostly positive reviews from television critics , with many praising the cast 's performances . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Seventeen @-@ year @-@ old Catherine Morland ( Felicity Jones ) , daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Morland ( Gerry O 'Brien and Julia Dearden ) , is a tomboy with a wild imagination and a passion for Gothic novels . Family friends Mr. and Mrs. Allen ( Desmond <unk> and <unk> Le Touzel ) , invite Catherine to spend the season in Bath and she readily accepts . At her first ball , Catherine meets and dances with Henry Tilney ( JJ Feild ) . The following day , Catherine makes the acquaintance of the Thorpe family . She becomes good friends with Isabella Thorpe ( Carey Mulligan ) and she meets Isabella 's brother , John ( William Beck ) , when she is reunited with her own brother , James ( Hugh O 'Conor ) . 
 John flirts with Catherine at a ball , but she is more interested in meeting with Henry and his sister , Eleanor ( Catherine Walker ) . Catherine is pressured by Isabella and John into riding to Blaise Castle , despite her having made plans for a walk with Henry and Eleanor . John assures her that he saw Henry driving a phaeton to Wick Rocks , but while Catherine is in John 's carriage , she sees the <unk> walking along the street . Catherine asks John to stop , knowing he lied to her , but he refuses . Catherine runs into the Tilney family at the opera and makes her apologies , before planning another walk . John tells Henry 's father , General Tilney ( Liam Cunningham ) , that Catherine is the Allens ' heir , and the General invites her to spend the day with the family . Catherine is delighted when she learns Henry and Eleanor love books as much as she does . 
 On her return home , Isabella tells Catherine that she and James are engaged . James and John announce that they are to leave Bath for a few weeks and after talking about marriage with Catherine , John leaves believing she is in love with him . Isabella catches the eye of Henry 's older brother , Captain Frederick Tilney ( Mark Dymond ) , and flirts with him after she learns how low James ' income will be . General Tilney invites Catherine to stay with his family at Northanger Abbey and she accepts . When Isabella tells Catherine that John is going to propose to her , Catherine tells her friend to write to him and explains that he is mistaken . Isabella continues to flirt with Frederick and Catherine asks Henry to convince his brother to leave her alone . However , he tells Catherine that Frederick will be leaving town soon to re @-@ join his regiment . 
 Catherine states that Northanger Abbey looks exactly as she imagined it and she becomes intrigued by Mrs. Tilney 's death . Due to her overactive imagination , Catherine starts to believe that General Tilney murdered his wife . Henry catches her in his mother 's chamber and becomes offended when he realises what she has been thinking . Catherine apologises and Henry tells her that perhaps it is possible to read too many novels . Catherine receives a letter from James , in which he reveals that his engagement to Isabella has been called off , because she allowed Frederick to seduce her . Eleanor explains to Catherine that her brother has no intention of marrying Isabella . Catherine gets a letter from Isabella , asking her to apologise to James for her , but Catherine states that she will do no such thing . 
 General Tilney returns home from a trip away and orders Eleanor to send Catherine home to Fullerton that night . Catherine endures the trip alone and believes that Henry told the General about her suspicions . A few days later , Henry comes to Fullerton and explains that the General discovered that Catherine 's family were not as rich as John led him to believe . He apologises for his father 's actions and explains that even though he will probably be disinherited , he loves Catherine and proposes . Catherine accepts and the couple marry . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and adaptation = = = 
 On 10 November 2005 , Julia Day from The Guardian reported ITV controller of drama , Nick Elliott , had ordered three new adaptations of Mansfield Park , Northanger Abbey and Persuasion . Elliot commented that the adaptations would be " important remakes for the new generation " . He explained , " About every 10 years , all the great stories need retelling . These films will be very much 2007 films ... we 've asked and pushed the production team to make them young . Her stories always make great TV drama and our Jane Austen season will feature the absolute cream of British acting talent . " Elliott revealed that he had deliberately shied away from ordering adaptations of Pride and Prejudice and Sense and Sensibility to focus on Austen 's lesser known works . Each of the productions were made by a different company , cast and directors , so they had " a distinct look " . They were also made to appeal to a younger audience that might have previously switched off other Austen adaptations . Northanger Abbey was given a budget of £ 2 million , and it marked only the second filmed adaptation of the book ; with the first being made and broadcast in 1986 . 
 Andrew Davies , the screenwriter who adapted Pride and Prejudice for the BBC , was commissioned to write the script for Northanger Abbey . He had previously written an adaptation of the novel for Weekend Television in 1998 . It was optioned by Harvey Weinstein for Miramax Films and drafts from other writers were added , before the project was abandoned . Davies told The Daily Telegraph 's Hugh Davies that Northanger Abbey was much more straightforward to adapt than Pride and Prejudice , which was " quite a fiendish bit of compression " . The reporter explained , " A young heroine thinks she has stumbled across a Gothic conspiracy of murder and concealed corpses . In fact , the true crimes are those of psychological cruelty and selfishness . Davies said that part of the back story was having the heroine read the 1764 best @-@ seller The Castle of Otranto by Horace Walpole , which he uses to fill Catherine 's head with the expectation of unspeakable secrets in the Abbey . " The writer admitted that he used artistic license when it came to the scene in which Catherine 's friend , Isabella , goes off with Captain Frederick Tilney . Austen did not state what happened to them in the novel , but Davies believed Frederick would have seduced Isabella . 
 During an interview with Marion McMullen from the Coventry Evening Telegraph , Davies explained that the Gothic elements to the novel gave him inspiration to add dream sequences and fantasies to the script . He told McMullen , " I 've been very faithful to the book , but one of the differences has been writing the scenes showing Catherine 's fantasies . Catherine is a great reader of horror fiction – the gothic novel was fairly popular in those days , like a young girl today who would read a lot of rather steamy romances . In this production , we see some of Catherine 's fantasies , some of which are quite steamy for a young girl . " Davies admitted that he was proud of his reputation for " sexing up " the novels he had adapted and commented that none of his scenes were gratuitous . He told McMullen that he often looked for excuses to get the characters out of their clothes , as he felt they were always being " buttoned up to the neck " . Producer Keith Thompson said Davies had made Northanger Abbey a bit more erotic than the novel and thought the script had " a wonderful cheekiness to it . " Davies chose to use a narrator to speak Austen 's words and help set the scene at the beginning and end of the film . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Karen Price from the Western Mail reported ITV were looking for " big names " and promised the best British acting talent , while they were casting the three adaptations . In July 2006 , Thompson revealed the cast had yet to be confirmed and that the casting agent , John Hubbard , was " scouring " Ireland and the United Kingdom for actors to fit the roles . On 14 August , a writer for the Irish Film and Television Network stated the casting for Northanger Abbey had finished and had been confirmed . British actress Felicity Jones was chosen to play Catherine , the protagonist and eldest daughter of the Morland family . Jones received the part upon her first audition , just two weeks after graduating from Oxford University . She revealed that she really wanted the role , explaining " sometimes when you read a script , you think ' God , I 'd love to do that . ' " While speaking of his fondness for the characters , Davies commented that Jones ' casting as Catherine was " perfect " . American @-@ born actor JJ Feild was cast as Henry Tilney , the " highly eligible young clergyman " , and William Beck received the role of John Thorpe , Henry 's rival for Catherine 's affections . 
 Actress Carey Mulligan was given the role of Catherine 's shallow and selfish friend Isabella Thorpe . The actress had previously worked with Davies on an adaptation of Bleak House . Speaking to Graham Fuller of The Arts Desk , Mulligan commented , " I wanted to play Isabella because I 'd never played a character like that before . " Irish actor Hugh O 'Conor was chosen to play James Morland , Catherine 's brother and Isabella 's fiancé . Other Irish actors cast in the production included Liam Cunningham as the " eccentric " General Tilney and Gerry O 'Brien and Julia Dearden as Mr. and Mrs. Morland respectively . Desmond <unk> and <unk> Le Touzel were cast as Mr. and Mrs. Allen , the wealthier older couple that invites Catherine to go to Bath with them . Le Touzel previously portrayed Fanny Price in the 1983 adaptation of Mansfield Park . Catherine Walker and Mark Dymond appeared as Henry 's siblings Eleanor and Captain Tilney . Geraldine James was credited as the narrator and voice of Austen . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Northanger Abbey was shot on location in Ireland from late August 2006 . The Independent 's Sarah Shannon stated that ITV had filmed in the country " largely thanks to the generous tax incentives offered by the republic 's government . " Filming lasted for five weeks and the drama was shot on Super 16 mm film . Twenty @-@ first century Dublin streets doubled for nineteenth century Bath , the setting for the novel . Shannon thought some viewers might be annoyed with this and Thompson commented , " But isn 't that shot of the Royal Crescent in Bath a bit of a cliché ? What we 've done is create our own Bath . " Lismore Castle in County Waterford was chosen as Northanger Abbey , home of the Tilney family . <unk> House , near County Meath , served as the exterior to the Morland family 's home . The house was later used in Becoming Jane , a film about Austen 's early life . Other shooting locations included Dublin Castle , <unk> House and Charleville Castle . Jones told Paul Byrne of the Evening Herald that she enjoyed shooting in Ireland as she got to see a lot of the country . 
 = = = Music and choreography = = = 
 British composer Charlie Mole wrote the score to Northanger Abbey , while the Pemberley Players provided other authentic pieces of music . Sue <unk> choreographed the ballroom scenes . Speaking to Benji Wilson of the Radio Times , Jones revealed the dance sessions were the most taxing part of the shoot . She explained that the cast had to learn all of the ballroom dances from scratch and they spent a week going over them to make sure they were right . She explained , " But what happens is as soon as you put the dialogue in , the dancing just goes to pot ! So it 's all about putting the movement and the dialogue together and remembering what your character is supposed to be thinking at the same time – that 's quite tricky ! " Jones praised <unk> and said the teacher often reminded the actors to relax into the dance and remember that their character would have been doing it for years , as they would have learnt at an early age . Jones added " the novelty for us with three weeks of dancing is not quite the same ! " 
 = = Promotion and broadcast = = 
 ITV launched a nationwide campaign to promote its Jane Austen Season . The campaign included three television adverts and cinema , outdoor and press adverts . ITV Creative made the 20 , 30 and 60 second promotional trailers , which began airing on ITV channels from 25 February 2007 . The following day adverts began appearing in selected national press publications . The outdoor and press adverts were created by M & C Saatchi and <unk> carried out the media buying . 
 Northanger Abbey was the second of the Austen adaptations to be shown in the UK . It was broadcast on ITV at 9 : 00 pm on 25 March 2007 . The drama aired on the <unk> channel in Canada on 16 December 2007 . Northanger Abbey was shown on 20 January 2008 on the US channel PBS as part of their Austen Masterpiece Theatre series . On 15 June , the film was broadcast on Australia 's ABC1 channel . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Northanger Abbey was released on a single disc DVD and as part of a box @-@ set in the UK on 26 March 2007 . The Region 1 DVD was released on 22 January 2008 . In April of that year , ITV announced they would be making a range of classic programmes , including the adaptation of Northanger Abbey , available to purchase through the iTunes Store . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon its first broadcast in the United Kingdom , Northanger Abbey was viewed by 5 @.@ 6 million people and had a 26 @.@ 6 % audience share . This made it the second most popular of the adaptations , behind Mansfield Park . 931 @,@ 000 Australians watched the drama when it aired on ABC1 in June 2008 . Northanger Abbey garnered mostly positive reviews from critics . Shortly before it aired in the UK , reporters for four newspaper publications selected the drama as their " Pick of the Day . " Jade Wright of the Liverpool Echo thought the adaptation had showed " a good @-@ natured and frank Catherine " , with Jones managing to " combine humility and humour with perfect aplomb . " Wright praised the decision to cast Mulligan and said the actress " shone " as Isabella . A The Guardian reporter included Northanger Abbey in their feature on the week 's television highlights , saying " Yes , yes , more Austin [ sic ] , but Andrew Davies ' adaptation of one of her lighter novels is the perfect Sunday evening blend of <unk> and pretty frocks . " 
 The Sydney Morning Herald 's Lenny Ann Low also praised the cast and their performances , stating " Lush with straining bosoms , knowing looks and segments bringing Morland 's wild dreams and fantasies to life , Northanger Abbey is well cast . Felicity Jones catches Morland 's mix of youthful naivety , heart @-@ whole feelings and mindful beliefs perfectly and J.J. Feild , as the dishy but sensible Tilney , grows in appeal as this feature @-@ length drama builds to a climax . " Low 's colleague , Joyce Morgan later selected Northanger Abbey as one of the week 's best television programmes . However , Ruth Ritchie , writing for the same newspaper , stated that the makers of the adaptation tried " desperately to create an air of mystery about the dastardly deeds at Northanger Abbey , " but the audience knew it was about as scary as " a ninja turtle . " Ritchie likened the ITV Austen adaptations to a " Posh Country Home and Away . " Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times wrote " Northanger Abbey the novel was as fun as it gets for Austen , and the television film quite lives up to the same standard . " 
 Ginia Bellafante , a critic for The New York Times , proclaimed the drama gave the audience " innocent faces and heaving breasts , <unk> the sex that always lurks beneath the surface of Austen 's astringent presence . " She went on to say Northanger Abbey was made to be a television movie and commented that it was more fun than the book . The San Francisco Chronicle 's David Wiegand wrote " Persuasion is a bigger challenge to try to squeeze into 90 minutes , the real difference between that film and Northanger is the latter 's consistency of high @-@ quality performances , a careful and attentive adaptation by Andrew Davies and solid direction by Jon Jones . " Writing for The Daily Telegraph , James Walton observed " Northanger Abbey was a perfectly acceptable costume drama – but not one that ever really caught fire . " Simon Hoggart , writing for The Spectator , commented that Davies 's adaptation of Northanger Abbey " was much bolder and more confident than Mansfield Park the week before . " 
 The Hollywood Reporter 's Ray Bennett praised Northanger Abbey , calling it " a wonderfully evocative version " , which was " written with flair and imagination by Andrew Davies " . He proclaimed " Capturing vividly the flush and wonder of adolescence , the film mines Austen 's first @-@ written but last @-@ published novel to find purest nuggets of wit , romance and social satire . The story 's 18th @-@ century heroine , Catherine Morland , has a fevered imagination and Davies draws on Austen 's droll illustrations of it to create scenes of gothic adventure . " Bennett added " the film is shot beautifully by Ciarán <unk> while composer Charlie Mole 's score adds to the quickening pace of Catherine 's fantasies . " For his work on Northanger Abbey , cinematographer <unk> was nominated for Best Director of Photography at the 5th Irish Film and Television Awards . 
 = The Way You Make Me Feel = 
 " The Way You Make Me Feel " is a song by American recording artist Michael Jackson . Released by Epic Records in November 1987 , it was the third single from Jackson 's seventh studio album Bad . Written and composed by Jackson , and produced by Quincy Jones ( and co @-@ produced by Jackson ) , the song is credited as being a pop and rhythm and blues song . 
 Aside from appearing on Jackson 's Bad album , the song has also been featured on the first disc of Jackson 's compilation album HIStory : Past , Present and Future , Book I in 1995 , Number Ones in 2003 , The Ultimate Collection in 2004 , The Essential Michael Jackson in 2005 , Visionary : The Video Singles in 2006 and This Is It in 2009 . " The Way You Make Me Feel " has been covered by multiple recording artists since its release . 
 The song received positive reviews from contemporary critics . " The Way You Make Me Feel " became Bad 's third consecutive single to peak at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 , and charted mainly within the top ten and twenty internationally . A music video for " The Way You Make Me Feel " was released at the time showing Jackson pursuing and dancing with a woman . Since the music video 's release , it has become influential on other artists ' material . The song has been performed on all of Jackson 's world concert tours as a solo artist , and was planned to have been performed during the This Is It concerts from 2009 to 2010 . Notable live performances of the song by Jackson include a performance at the 1988 Grammy Awards ceremony . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " The Way You Make Me Feel " was recorded by Michael Jackson in 1987 for his seventh studio album Bad , which was released the same year it was recorded . Epic Records released the song as the third single from the album in November that year . " The Way You Make Me Feel " was written and co @-@ produced by Jackson , and produced by Quincy Jones . Before the recording of Bad , Jackson had written over sixty songs for the album , with plans of releasing a three disc album , but after Jones convinced Jackson to make Bad a one disc LP , " The Way You Make Me Feel " , as well as ten other songs were selected for the album . According to Bad 25 , a documentary about the 25th anniversary of Bad 's release , the song and subsequent video was intended to show another aspect to public 's perception of Michael Jackson in addition to his reputation as a lover ( I Just Can 't Stop Loving You ) and being streetwise ( Bad ) they wanted to show him as a flirt or able to pick up girls . 
 " The Way You Make Me Feel " has been featured on multiple greatest hits and compilation albums by Jackson since the song 's release , including the first disc of Jackson 's two disc compilation album HIStory : Past , Present and Future , Book I in 1995 , Jackson 's greatest hits album , Number Ones in 2003 and the This Is It compilation album in 2009 . 
 Musically , " The Way You Make Me Feel " is a pop and rhythm and blues song composed of blues harmonies . The song 's opening lyrics are " Hey , pretty baby with the high heels on " . " The Way You Make Me Feel " ' s lyrics pertain to being in love , as well as the feeling of loving someone . Throughout the song Jackson 's vocal range spans from B3 to A5 . The song is played in the key of E major . " The Way You Make Me Feel " has a mid @-@ tempo of medium rock and has a metronome of 120 beats per minute . The song follows in the chord progression of C — E ♭ / C — C — C / E ♭ in the first line , when Jackson sings " Hee @-@ hee ! Ooh Go on ! " and continues on the same progression in the second line , when Jackson sings " Girl ! <unk> ! " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " The Way You Make Me Feel " generally received positive reviews from contemporary music critics . AllMusic reviewer Stephen Thomas Erlewine listed " The Way You May Me Feel " as well as the album 's title track , " I Just Can 't Stop Loving You " and " Man In The Mirror " as being a ' track picks ' from Bad . Erlewine commented that out of all of Bad 's songs , " only three can stand alongside album tracks from its predecessor " which were " Bad " , " The Way You Make Me Feel , " and " I Just Can 't Stop Loving You " . Jon Pareles , a writer for The New York Times , commented that Jackson 's songs , " The Way You Make Me Feel " and " I Just Can 't Stop Loving You " , " say nothing more personalized than their titles " . 
 Richard Cromelin , from the Los Angeles Times , described " The Way You Make Me Feel " as being a " loping shuffle " . Rolling Stone ' David Sigerson commented that " The Way You Make Me Feel " was " nearly as good " as being the third best song on Bad . Greg Quill , who writes for the Toronto Star , commented that " The Way You Make Me Feel " was to a " lesser extent in the love songs " because the song dealt " more with surrender than conquest or self @-@ gratification . " The Washington Post ' Rickard Harrington commented that on songs like " The Way You Make Me Feel , " Jackson " sings the way he dances " . " The Way You Make Me Feel " tied at number 22 on The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop critics ' poll of 1987 . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " The Way You Make Me Feel " generally charted within the top ten and top twenty positions on music charts worldwide . The song climbed to number seven on the Billboard Hot 100 on the chart 's issue date of December 26 , 1987 . After charting within the top ten for five weeks , the song peaked at number one on the Hot 100 on January 23 , 1988 . " The Way You Make Me Feel " became the album 's third consecutive single to reach number one on the Hot 100 . " The Way You Make Me Feel " also charted on Billboard 's Adult Contemporary chart , peaking at number nine , and on the Hot Dance Music / Maxi Single Sales chart at the peak of number three . The song also charted at number one on the Billboard Hot Black Singles chart and Dance Club Play Singles chart . 
 The song entered the United Kingdom singles charts at number sixteen on December 5 , 1987 . The following week the song moved up thirteen spaces to number three , which was the song 's peak position . The song stayed at its peak position for two consecutive weeks , and remained on the country 's chart for ten weeks , before falling out of the top 100 positions , only to re @-@ enter the charts two weeks later . 
 The song peaked at number two on New Zealand music charts on January 17 , 1988 , and remained on the chart for a total of eleven weeks in 1987 and 1988 . In the Netherlands , the song debuted on the chart at number twenty on November 28 , 1987 . Two weeks later the song charted at its peak position , at number six . " The Way You Make Me Feel " debuted at number fourteen on Switzerland charts on December 13 , 1987 ; the following week , the song charted at its peak position at number eight . The song charted within the top thirty positions for ten consecutive weeks from 1987 to 1988 . The song debuted on French music charts on December 26 , 1987 at number 47 , and eventually peaked within the top thirty positions at number 29 . The song charted within the top 50 positions for ten consecutive weeks on the country 's chart . The song has sold over 1 @.@ 1 million digital copies . 
 " The Way You Make Me Feel " re @-@ entered music charts worldwide after Jackson 's music was re @-@ issued for the Visionary album . The song debuted on the Spanish Singles Chart at number one on April 9 , 2006 . The song remained on the country 's chart for ten weeks . In Italy , the song debuted within the top ten , peaking at number seven , on April 6 , 2006 ; after two weeks , the song charted out of the top 100 positions . " The Way You Make Me Feel " re @-@ entered Dutch charts on April 1 , 2006 at number 24 . The song re @-@ entered French music charts on April 1 , 2006 at number 59 ; the song remained within the top 100 positions for two consecutive weeks . 
 Following Jackson 's death , his music experienced a surge in popularity . The song re @-@ entered Dutch charts for the third time on July 4 , 2009 , at its peak position at number 40 ; the song remained on the chart for four consecutive weeks in 2009 . The song charted within the top ten , peaking at number six , on the Billboard Hot Digital Songs on July 11 , due to digital download sales . The song debuted on Swedish charts at number 30 on July 3 , and peaked at number 24 the following week . On July 4 , the song re @-@ entered the United Kingdom charts at number 47 , and peaked at number 34 the following week . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " The Way You Make Me Feel " was directed by Joe Pytka and produced by Michael Nesmith . It was choreographed by Vincent Paterson . The short version of the video is seven minutes and fifty @-@ four seconds long and the full version is nine minutes and thirty @-@ three seconds long . The video begins with a group of males trying to pick up women , but they don 't get any luck . One of the males ( Michael Jackson ) is told to go home and not to hang around with the other guys anymore . When the male walks home , an elderly man ( played by Joe Seneca ) , who is sitting on the steps of his house , tells him to just be himself . The male notices a female , played by model / dancer Tatiana Thumbtzen , walking down the streets alone . 
 Shortly after the male walks out of an alley and stands in front of the female while she 's walking down the street , although she ignores him and keeps walking . He gets her attention by shouting , and then begins singing " The Way You Make Me Feel " to her while also dancing . <unk> , she walks away . He follows her , having been cheered on by his friends to pursue her . Another dance routine begins , involving the males friends , which leads to the male pursuing the female throughout the neighborhood . The video ends with the male eventually winning the female over , and embraces her , while a fire hydrant is spraying out water . The <unk> also features an appearance by his sister La Toya as one of Thumbtzen 's friends . 
 The music video was released on October 31 , 1987 , and received one nomination at the 1988 MTV Video Music Awards Ceremony . The video , alongside Jackson 's ' " Bad " video , was nominated for Best Choreography , but lost to Jackson 's younger sister Janet 's video " The Pleasure Principle " . 
 The music video was included on the video albums : Video Greatest Hits – HIStory ( long version on DVD and short version on VHS ) , Number Ones ( short version ) , Michael Jackson 's Vision ( long version ) and the Target version DVD of Bad 25 ( long version ) . 
 The introduction of the full version of the video also samples the Roy Ayers 1985 song " Hot " from his You Might Be Surprised album . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " The Way You Make Me Feel " was performed by Jackson on all three of his world concert series tours as a solo artist as well as during award shows . For a majority of the songs performances , Jackson would wear a blue dress shirt with a white t @-@ shirt and black pants with a white belt . The song was first performed in concert by Jackson during the encore of the second leg of his Bad World Tour from 1987 to 1989 . A live version of the song is available on the DVD Live at Wembley July 16 , 1988 . 
 He performed " The Way You Make Me Feel " at the 1988 Grammy Awards Ceremony , during which Jackson wore his signature outfit and his signature black fedora , while doing a dance routine with four other dancers , and performed the song along with another one of his songs , " Man in the Mirror " . This performance was staged and choreographed by Vincent Paterson . 
 Tatiana Thumbtzen , who appeared in the short film for The Way You Make Me Feel , joined Jackson in some concerts of his Bad World Tour , and performed the song with him , strutting across the stage whilst he pursued her . However , she was fired from the tour by Jackson 's manager after an incident during one of the performances in which she approached Jackson and kissed him onstage . 
 " The Way You Make Me Feel " was also performed during the first leg of Jackson 's Dangerous World Tour from June 1992 to November 1993 . The tour was supposed to be longer , but was canceled due to Jackson 's health concerns and stress from the child sexual abuse accusations made against him . The next performance of the song was during select dates of Jackson 's world concert series tour , HIStory . The song was performed during selected concerts from September 1996 to June 1997 . The last performance of the song was at the Michael Jackson : 30th Anniversary Special in 2001 at Madison Square Garden on September 7 and September 10 , 2001 . The video footage from the performance ( which included Britney Spears ) was featured on CBS in November 2001 , as a two @-@ hour television special . 
 Since March 2009 , Jackson was preparing to perform " The Way You Make Me Feel ' " during his This Is It concert series from 2009 to 2010 . Following Jackson 's death in June of the same year , video footage of Jackson rehearsing the song was featured in the 2009 concert documentary film , Michael Jackson 's This Is It . The video rehearsal footage was also featured on the films DVD in January 2010 . 
 = = Cover versions and influences = = 
 " The Way You Make Me Feel " has been covered by multiple artists since its release , and the song 's music video has been influential on other artists ' material as well . 
 In 1989 , German comedian Otto <unk> parodies the music video in his film Otto – Der <unk> . 
 In 2003 , the music group <unk> covered " The Way You Make Me Feel " and released their version as a non @-@ album single . The song only charted on Australian charts , peaking at number 21 on the country 's music charts . 
 In December 2009 , Stacey Solomon , a contestant on the X Factor in the United Kingdom , performed a cover of the song during the show 's semi @-@ finals , which received mixed opinions from the show 's judges . 
 In January 2010 , Jonas Brothers band member Nick Jonas performed the song during a concert at the Warner Theatre in promotion for his Nick Jonas & the Administration album . Dave McKenna , a writer for The Washington Post , commented on Jonas ' performance of the song that " whatever spots of trouble his ambition got him into " citing Jonas ' " falsetto faltered " cover of " The Way You Make Me Feel " , as well as another song , were able to be " carried through " by Jonas ' band members . 
 In February 2010 , Whitney Houston performed " The Way You Make Me Feel " , along with Jackson 's " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " , during her I Look to You Tour . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Official versions = = 
 Album Version – 4 : 59 
 Album Version # 2 – 4 : 58 – Full @-@ length version of the single remix sans the finger snap after the second verse . 
 7 " Re @-@ Mix – 4 : 25 
 Album Version # 2 ( Edit ) – 4 : 26 – Attempt at re @-@ creating the original 7 " version . 
 Instrumental – 4 : 25 
 Dance Extended Mix – 7 : 52 
 Dance Remix Radio Edit – 5 : 22 
 Dub Version – 5 : 02 
 A Cappella – 4 : 29 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = SMS Dresden ( 1907 ) = 
 SMS Dresden ( " His Majesty 's Ship Dresden " ) was a German light cruiser built for the Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) , the lead ship of her class . She was laid down at the Blohm & Voss shipyard in Hamburg in 1906 , launched in October 1907 , and completed in November 1908 . Her entrance into service was delayed by accidents during sea trials , including a collision with another vessel that necessitated major repairs . Like the preceding Königsberg @-@ class cruisers upon which her design was based , Dresden was armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns and two torpedo tubes . 
 Dresden spent much of her career overseas . After commissioning , she visited the United States in 1909 during the Hudson @-@ Fulton Celebration , before returning to Germany to serve in the reconnaissance force of the High Seas Fleet for three years . In 1913 , she was assigned to the Mediterranean Division . She was then sent to the Caribbean to protect German nationals during the Mexican Revolution . In mid @-@ 1914 , she carried the former dictator Victoriano Huerta to Jamaica , where the British had granted him asylum . She was due to return to Germany in July 1914 , but was prevented by the outbreak of World War I from doing so . At the onset of hostilities , Dresden operated as a commerce raider in South American waters in the Atlantic , then moved to the Pacific Ocean in September and joined Maximilian von Spee 's East Asia Squadron . 
 Dresden saw action in the Battle of Coronel in November , where she engaged the British cruiser HMS Glasgow , and at the Battle of the Falkland Islands in December , where she was the only German warship to escape destruction . She eluded her British pursuers for several more months , until she put into Robinson Crusoe Island in March 1915 . Her engines were worn out and she had almost no coal left for her boilers , so the ship 's captain contacted the local Chilean authorities to have Dresden interned . She was trapped by British cruisers , including her old opponent Glasgow . The British violated Chilean neutrality and opened fire on the ship in the Battle of Más a Tierra . The Germans scuttled Dresden and the majority of the crew escaped to be interned in Chile for the duration of the war . The wreck remains in the harbor ; several artifacts , including her bell and compass , have been returned to Germany . 
 = = Design = = 
 Dresden was 118 @.@ 3 meters ( 388 ft 1 in ) long overall with a beam of 13 @.@ 5 m ( 44 ft 3 in ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 53 m ( 18 ft 2 in ) forward . She displaced 4 @,@ 268 t ( 4 @,@ 201 long tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two Parsons steam turbines , designed to give 14 @,@ 794 shp ( 11 @,@ 032 kW ) for a top speed of 24 knots ( 44 km / h ; 28 mph ) . The engines were powered by twelve coal @-@ fired water @-@ tube boilers . Dresden carried up to 860 tonnes ( 850 long tons ) of coal , which gave her a range of 3 @,@ 600 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 700 km ; 4 @,@ 100 mi ) at 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . She had a crew of 18 officers and 343 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 40 guns in single mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , six were located amidships , three on either side , and two were placed side by side aft . The guns could engage targets out to 12 @,@ 200 m ( 13 @,@ 300 yd ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 500 rounds of ammunition , for 150 shells per gun . The secondary battery comprised eight 5 @.@ 2 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) SK L / 55 guns , with 4 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition . She was also equipped with two 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with four torpedoes , mounted on the deck . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was up to 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the guns were protected by 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick shields . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Dresden was ordered under the contract name Ersatz Comet . She was laid down at the Blohm & Voss shipyard in Hamburg in 1906 and launched on 5 October 1907 . The Oberbürgermeister of her namesake city , Otto Beutler , christened the ship . Fitting @-@ out work then commenced , and Dresden was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 14 November 1908 . Following her commissioning , Dresden began her sea trials . On 28 November she accidentally collided with and sank the Swedish <unk> Cäcilie outside Kiel . Dresden 's starboard propeller shaft was shoved in 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) , and she required six months of repair work . She resumed sea trials in 1909 , but a turbine accident necessitated further repairs , which lasted until September . 
 Although Dresden had not completed the required testing , her trials were declared over on 7 September , as she had been ordered to visit the United States . The purpose of the voyage was to represent Germany at the Hudson @-@ Fulton Celebration in New York ; Dresden was joined by the protected cruisers Hertha and Victoria Louise and the light cruiser Bremen . Dresden left Wilhelmshaven on 11 September and stopped in Newport , where she met the rest of the ships of the squadron . The ships arrived in New York on 24 September , remained there until 9 October , and arrived back in Germany on 22 October . 
 Dresden then joined the reconnaissance force for the High Seas Fleet ; the following two years consisted of the peacetime routine of squadron exercises , training cruises , and annual fleet exercises . On 16 February 1910 , she collided with the light cruiser Königsberg . The collision caused significant damage to Dresden , though no one on either vessel was injured . She made it back to Kiel for repairs , which lasted eight days . Dresden visited Hamburg on 13 – 17 May that year . From 14 to 20 April 1912 , she was temporarily transferred to the Training Squadron , along with the armored cruiser Friedrich Carl and the light cruiser Mainz . For the year 1911 – 12 , Dresden won the Kaiser 's Schießpreis ( Shooting Prize ) for excellent gunnery amongst the light cruisers of the High Seas Fleet . From September 1912 through September 1913 , she was commanded by Fregattenkapitän ( Frigate Captain ) Fritz Lüdecke , who would command the ship again during World War I. 
 On 6 April 1913 , she and the cruiser Strassburg were sent from Kiel to the Adriatic Sea , where she joined the Mittelmeer @-@ Division ( Mediterranean Division ) , centered on the battlecruiser Goeben and commanded by Konteradmiral ( Rear Admiral ) Konrad <unk> . The ships cruised the eastern Mediterranean for several months , and in late August , Dresden was ordered to return to Germany . After arriving in Kiel on 23 September , she was taken into the Kaiserliche Werft ( Imperial Shipyard ) for an overhaul that lasted until the end of December . She was scheduled to return to the Mediterranean Division , but the Admiralstab ( Admiralty Staff ) reassigned Dresden to the North American station to protect German interests in the Mexican Revolution . The cruiser Bremen , then in North American waters , was also due to return to Germany , but her intended replacement , Karlsruhe , had not yet entered service . On 27 December 1913 , Dresden departed Germany and arrived off Vera Cruz on 21 January 1914 , under the command of Fregattenkapitän Erich Köhler . The United States had already sent a squadron of warships to the city , as had several other countries . 
 The Admiralstab ordered Hertha , which had been on a training cruise for naval cadets , to join Dresden off Mexico . Bremen was also recalled to reinforce the German naval contingent ; after arriving , she was tasked with transferring European nationals to German HAPAG liners . Dresden and the British cruiser HMS Hermione rescued 900 American citizens trapped in a hotel in Vera Cruz and transferred them to American warships . The German consul in Mexico City requested additional forces , and so Dresden provided a landing party of a maat ( Junior Petty Officer ) and ten sailors , armed with two MG 08 machine guns . On 15 April 1914 , Dresden steamed to Tampico on Mexico 's Caribbean coast . That month , the German @-@ flagged merchant ship SS Ypiranga arrived in Mexico , carrying a load of small arms for the regime of Mexican dictator Victoriano Huerta . The United States had put an arms embargo into effect in an attempt to reduce the violence of the civil war . The US Navy intercepted Ypiranga on 21 April . Dresden arrived , confiscated the merchantman , and pressed her into naval service to transport German refugees out of Mexico . Despite the American embargo , the Germans delivered the weapons and ammunition to the Mexican government on 28 May . 
 On 20 July , after the Huerta regime was toppled , Dresden carried Huerta , his vice president , Aureliano Blanquet , and their families to Kingston , Jamaica , where Britain had granted them asylum . Upon arriving in Kingston on the 25th , Köhler learned of the rising political tensions in Europe during the July Crisis that followed the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand . By this time , the ship was in need of a refit in Germany , and met with her replacement , Karlsruhe , in Port @-@ au @-@ Prince , Haiti , the following day . Lüdecke , who had arrived in command of Karlsruhe , traded places with Köhler aboard Dresden . The Admiralstab initially ordered Dresden to return to Germany for overhaul , but the heightened threat of war by the 31st led the staff to countermand the order , instead instructing Lüdecke to prepare to conduct Handelskrieg ( trade war ) in the Atlantic . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 After receiving the order to remain in the Atlantic , Lüdecke turned his ship south while maintaining radio silence to prevent hostile warships from discovering his vessel . On the night of 4 – 5 August , he received a radio report informing him of Britain 's declaration of war on Germany . He chose the South Atlantic as Dresden 's operational area , and steamed to the Brazilian coast . Off the mouth of the Amazon River , he stopped a British merchant ship on 6 August . The ship , SS <unk> , whose captain professed to know nothing of Britain 's entry into the war , was permitted to proceed unmolested in accordance with the rules set forth in the Hague Convention of 1907 . Dresden rendezvoused with the German collier SS Corrientes , a converted <unk> vessel . The cruiser moved to the Rocas Atoll on the 12th , along with the HAPAG steamers Prussia , Baden , and Persia . After departing the atoll , en route to Trinidade , Dresden caught the British steamer SS Hyades ; Lüdecke took off the ship 's crew and then sank the merchantman . Dresden captured the British collier SS Holmwood on 24 August and sank her after evacuating her crew . After arriving in Trinidade , she rendezvoused with the gunboat Eber and several steamers . 
 On 26 August , while steaming off the mouth of the Río de la Plata , she caught two more British steamers , but the poor condition of Dresden 's engines curtailed further operations . On 5 September , Dresden put into Hoste Island for engine maintenance until the 16th . While the ship was there , the HAPAG steamer Santa Isabel arrived from Punta Arenas with news of the war , and the heavy merchant traffic off the western coast of South America . Lüdecke decided to steam there , and on 18 September Dresden passed the Strait of Magellan . While en route , Dresden encountered the French steamer SS Ortega ; Lüdecke refrained from attacking the transport ship , since she had fled into neutral waters . After steaming up the Chilean coast , she stopped in the Juan Fernández Islands , where she made radio contact with the light cruiser Leipzig , which was operating on the Pacific coast of South America . Dresden saw no further success against British shipping , and on 12 October , she joined Vizeadmiral ( Vice Admiral ) Maximilian von Spee 's East Asia Squadron , which had crossed the Pacific and was coaling at Easter Island . The following day , Lüdecke was promoted to Kapitän zur See ( Captain at Sea ) . 
 On 18 October , Dresden and the East Asia Squadron , centered on the armored cruisers Scharnhorst and Gneisenau , departed Easter Island for the South American coast . They arrived at Más a Fuera island on 26 October . The following evening , the German cruisers escorted the auxiliary cruiser SS Prinz Eitel Friedrich and the merchant ships SS Yorck and SS Göttingen to Chile . The flotilla arrived off Valparaiso on 30 October , and the following evening , von Spee received intelligence that a British cruiser was at the Chilean port of Coronel . Von Spee decided that his squadron should ambush the cruiser — HMS Glasgow — when it was forced to leave port due to Chile 's neutral status , which required belligerent warships to leave after twenty @-@ four hours . Von Spee did not realize that Glasgow was in the company of Rear Admiral Christopher Craddock 's 4th Cruiser Squadron , which also included the armored cruisers Monmouth and Good Hope and the auxiliary cruiser Otranto . 
 = = = = Battle of Coronel = = = = 
 Early on the morning of 1 November , von Spee took his squadron out of Valparaiso , steaming at 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) south toward Coronel . At around 16 : 00 , Leipzig spotted the smoke column from the leading British cruiser . By 16 : 25 , the other two ships had been spotted . The two squadrons slowly closed the distance , until the Germans opened fire at 18 : 34 , at a range of 10 @,@ 400 m ( 11 @,@ 400 yd ) . The German ships engaged their opposite numbers , with Dresden firing on Otranto . After Dresden 's third salvo , Otranto turned away ; the Germans claimed a hit that caused a fire , though Otranto reported taking no damage . Following Otranto 's departure , Dresden shifted her fire to Glasgow , which was also targeted by Leipzig . The two German cruisers hit their British opponent five times . 
 At around 19 : 30 , von Spee ordered Dresden and Leipzig to launch a torpedo attack against the damaged British armored cruisers . Dresden increased speed to position herself off the British bows , and briefly spotted Glasgow as she was withdrawing , but the British cruiser disappeared in the haze and gathering darkness . Dresden then encountered Leipzig ; both ships initially thought the other was hostile . Dresden 's crew was loading a torpedo when the two ships confirmed each other 's identity . By 22 : 00 , Dresden and the other two light cruisers were deployed in a line that searched unsuccessfully for the British cruisers . Dresden had emerged from the battle completely unscathed . 
 On 3 November , von Spee took Scharnhorst , Gneisenau , and Nürnberg back to Valparaiso for provisioning and to consult with the Admiralstab . Neutrality laws permitted only three belligerent warships in a port at a given time . Dresden and Leipzig remained with the squadron 's colliers in Más a Fuera . Von Spee returned to Más a Fuera on 6 November , and detached Dresden and Leipzig for a visit to Valparaiso , where they also restocked their supplies . The two cruisers arrived on 12 November , left the following day , and met the rest of the squadron at sea on 18 November . Three days later , the squadron anchored in St. Quentin Bay in the Gulf of Penas , where they coaled . The Royal Navy had deployed Vice Admiral Doveton Sturdee 's pair of battlecruisers , Invincible and Inflexible , to hunt down the German squadron . They left Britain on 11 November , and arrived in the Falkland Islands on 7 December . There , they joined the armored cruisers Cornwall , Kent , and Carnarvon , and the light cruisers Glasgow and Bristol . 
 On 26 November , the German East Asia Squadron left St. Quentin Bay , bound for the Atlantic . On 2 December , they caught the Canadian sailing ship Drummuir , which was carrying 2 @,@ 750 metric tons ( 2 @,@ 710 long tons ; 3 @,@ 030 short tons ) of high @-@ grade Cardiff coal . The following morning , the Germans anchored off Picton Island , where they unloaded the coal from Drummuir into their own auxiliaries . On the morning of 6 December , von Spee held a council aboard Scharnhorst to discuss their next moves . With the support of the captains of Scharnhorst and Gneisenau , he successfully argued for an attack on the Falklands to destroy the British wireless station and coal stocks there . Lüdecke and the captains of Leipzig and Nürnberg all opposed the plan , and were in favor of bypassing the Falklands and proceeding to the La Plata area to continue to raid British shipping . 
 = = = = Battle of the Falkland Islands = = = = 
 On the afternoon of 6 December , the German ships departed Picton Island , bound for the Falklands . On 7 December , they rounded Tierra del Fuego and turned north into the Atlantic . They arrived off the Falklands at around 02 : 00 ; three hours later , von Spee detached Gneisenau and Nürnberg to land a party ashore . By 08 : 30 , the ships were approaching Port Stanley , when they noticed thick columns of smoke rising from the harbor . After closing to the harbor entrance , they quickly realized they were confronted by a much more powerful squadron , which was just getting up steam . Von Spee immediately broke off the operation and turned east to flee before the British ships could catch his squadron . By 10 : 45 , Gneisenau and Nürnberg had rejoined the fleet , and the German auxiliaries were detached to seek shelter in the maze of islands off Cape Horn . 
 The British ships set off in pursuit , and by 12 : 50 , Sturdee 's two battlecruisers had overtaken the Germans . A minute later , he gave the order to open fire at the trailing German ship , Leipzig . Von Spee ordered the three small cruisers to try to escape to the south , while he turned back with Scharnhorst and Gneisenau in an attempt to hold off the British squadron . Sturdee had foreseen this possibility , and so had ordered his armored and light cruisers to pursue the German light cruisers . The battlecruisers quickly overwhelmed von Spee 's armored cruisers , and destroyed them with heavy loss of life . Dresden , with her turbine engines , was able to outpace her pursuers , and was the only German warship to escape destruction . Lüdecke decided to take his ship into the islands off South America to keep a steady supply of coal available . 
 On 9 December , she passed back around Cape Horn to return to the Pacific . That day , she anchored in Sholl Bay , with only 160 t ( 160 long tons ; 180 short tons ) of coal aboard . Oberleutnant zur See ( lieutenant at sea ) Wilhelm Canaris convinced the Chilean naval representative for the region to permit Dresden to remain in the area for an extra twenty @-@ four hours so enough coal could be taken aboard to reach Punta Arenas . She arrived there on 12 December , and received 750 t ( 740 long tons ; 830 short tons ) of coal from a German steamer . The Admiralstab hoped that Dresden would be able to break through to the Atlantic and return to Germany , but the poor condition of her engines precluded this . Lüdecke instead decided to attempt to cross the Pacific via Easter Island , the Solomon Islands , and the Dutch East Indies and raid commerce in the Indian Ocean . Dresden took on another 1 @,@ 600 t ( 1 @,@ 600 long tons ; 1 @,@ 800 short tons ) of coal on 19 January . On 14 February , Dresden left the islands off the South American coast for the South Pacific . On 27 February , the cruiser captured the British barque Conway Castle south of Más a Tierra . From December to February , the German liner Sierra Cordoba had supplied Dresden and had accompanied her northward to a final coaling at Juan Fernández Islands just before the cruiser was sunk . 
 On 8 March , Dresden was drifting in dense fog when lookouts spotted Kent , which also had her engines off , about 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ; 17 mi ) away . Both ships immediately raised steam , and Dresden escaped after a five @-@ hour chase . The strenuous effort depleted her coal stocks and overtaxed her engines . Lüdecke decided that his ship was no longer operational , and determined to have his ship interned to preserve it . The following morning , she put into Más a Fuera , dropping anchor in Cumberland Bay at 8 : 30 . The following day , Lüdecke received by wireless the Kaiser 's permission to let Dresden be interned , and so Lüdecke informed the local Chilean official of his intention to do so . 
 = = = = Battle of Más a Tierra = = = = 
 On the morning of 14 March , Kent and Glasgow approached Cumberland Bay ; their appearance was relayed back to Dresden by one of her pinnaces , which had been sent to patrol the entrance to the bay . Dresden was unable to maneuver , owing to her fuel shortage , and Lüdecke signaled that his ship was no longer a combatant . The British disregarded this message , as well as a Chilean vessel that approached them as they entered the bay . Glasgow opened fire , in violation of Chile 's neutrality ; Britain had already informed Chile that British warships would disregard international law if they located Dresden in Chilean territorial waters . Shortly thereafter , Kent joined in the bombardment as well . The German gunners fired off three shots in response , but the guns were quickly knocked out by British gunfire . 
 Lüdecke sent the signal " Am sending negotiator " to the British warships , and dispatched Canaris in a pinnace ; Glasgow continued to bombard the defenseless cruiser . In another attempt to stop the attack , Lüdecke raised the white flag , which prompted Glasgow to cease fire . Canaris came aboard to speak with Captain John Luce ; the former strongly protested the latter 's violation of Chile 's neutrality . Luce simply replied that he had his orders , and demanded an unconditional surrender . Canaris explained that Dresden had already been interned by Chile , and thereafter returned to his ship , which had in the meantime been prepared for scuttling . 
 At 10 : 45 , the scuttling charge detonated in the bow and exploded the forward ammunition magazines . The bow was badly mangled ; in about half an hour , the ship had taken on enough water to sink . As it struck the sea floor , the bow was torn from the rest of the ship , which rolled over to starboard . As the rest of the hull settled below the waves , a second scuttling charge exploded in the ship 's engine rooms . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Most of the ship 's crew managed to escape ; only eight men were killed in the attack , with another twenty @-@ nine wounded . The British auxiliary cruiser HMS Orama took fifteen severely wounded men to Valparaiso ; four of them died . The destruction of his ship had left Lüdecke in shock , and so Canaris took responsibility for the fate of the ship 's crew . They remained on the island for five days until two Chilean warships brought a German passenger ship to take the men to <unk> Island , where they were interned for the duration of the war . Canaris escaped from the internment camp on 5 August 1915 and reached Germany exactly two months later . On 31 March 1917 , a small group of men escaped on the Chilean barque Tinto ; the voyage back to Germany lasted 120 days . The rest of the crew did not return to Germany until 1920 . 
 The wreck lies at a depth of 70 meters ( 230 ft ) . In 2002 , the first survey of the wreck was done by a team led by James P. Delgado for the Sea Hunters documentary produced by the National Underwater and Marine Agency . The team included the archaeologist Dr. Willi Kramer , the first German to visit the wreck since she sank 88 years before . Dresden lies on her starboard side pointed north , toward the beach . The wreck is heavily damaged ; much of the upper works , including the bridge , the masts , the funnels , and many of the guns have been torn from the ship . The bow has been cut off by the scuttling charges detonated by the ship 's crew , and sits upright on the sea floor . The stern is also badly damaged , with the main deck blasted away and many shell holes in the ship 's side . Some of the damage to the aft of the ship appears to have been done by an undocumented salvage operation before Delgado 's survey . According to German records , Dresden was carrying gold coins from their colony at Tsingtau ; Delgado speculated that this salvage work was an attempt to retrieve these . 
 In 1965 , the ship 's compass and several flags were recovered and returned to Germany , where they are held at the German Naval Academy Mürwik in Flensburg @-@ Mürwik . In 2006 , Chilean and German divers found and recovered Dresden 's bell , which is now in Germany . CS Forester 's novel Brown on Resolution , and two subsequent movies , were inspired by the Dresden 's escape and subsequent destruction . 
 = Diamond = 
 Diamond ( pronunciation : / <unk> / or / <unk> / ) is a metastable allotrope of carbon , where the carbon atoms are arranged in a variation of the face @-@ centered cubic crystal structure called a diamond lattice . Diamond is less stable than graphite , but the conversion rate from diamond to graphite is negligible at standard conditions . Diamond is renowned as a material with superlative physical qualities , most of which originate from the strong covalent bonding between its atoms . In particular , diamond has the highest hardness and thermal conductivity of any bulk material . Those properties determine the major industrial application of diamond in cutting and polishing tools and the scientific applications in diamond knives and diamond anvil cells . 
 Because of its extremely rigid lattice , it can be contaminated by very few types of impurities , such as boron and nitrogen . Small amounts of defects or impurities ( about one per million of lattice atoms ) color diamond blue ( boron ) , yellow ( nitrogen ) , brown ( lattice defects ) , green ( radiation exposure ) , purple , pink , orange or red . Diamond also has relatively high optical dispersion ( ability to disperse light of different colors ) . 
 Most natural diamonds are formed at high temperature and pressure at depths of 140 to 190 kilometers ( 87 to 118 mi ) in the Earth 's mantle . Carbon @-@ containing minerals provide the carbon source , and the growth occurs over periods from 1 billion to 3 @.@ 3 billion years ( 25 % to 75 % of the age of the Earth ) . Diamonds are brought close to the Earth 's surface through deep volcanic eruptions by magma , which cools into igneous rocks known as kimberlites and lamproites . Diamonds can also be produced synthetically in a HPHT method which approximately simulates the conditions in the Earth 's mantle . An alternative , and completely different growth technique is chemical vapor deposition ( CVD ) . Several non @-@ diamond materials , which include cubic zirconia and silicon carbide and are often called diamond simulants , resemble diamond in appearance and many properties . Special gemological techniques have been developed to distinguish natural diamonds , synthetic diamonds , and diamond simulants . The word is from the ancient Greek <unk> – adámas " unbreakable " . 
 = = History = = 
 The name diamond is derived from the ancient Greek <unk> ( adámas ) , " proper " , " unalterable " , " unbreakable " , " untamed " , from ἀ- ( a- ) , " un- " + <unk> ( <unk> ) , " I overpower " , " I tame " . Diamonds are thought to have been first recognized and mined in India , where significant alluvial deposits of the stone could be found many centuries ago along the rivers Penner , Krishna and Godavari . Diamonds have been known in India for at least 3 @,@ 000 years but most likely 6 @,@ 000 years . 
 Diamonds have been treasured as gemstones since their use as religious icons in ancient India . Their usage in engraving tools also dates to early human history . The popularity of diamonds has risen since the 19th century because of increased supply , improved cutting and polishing techniques , growth in the world economy , and innovative and successful advertising campaigns . 
 In 1772 , Antoine Lavoisier used a lens to concentrate the rays of the sun on a diamond in an atmosphere of oxygen , and showed that the only product of the combustion was carbon dioxide , proving that diamond is composed of carbon . Later in 1797 , Smithson Tennant repeated and expanded that experiment . By demonstrating that burning diamond and graphite releases the same amount of gas , he established the chemical equivalence of these substances . 
 The most familiar uses of diamonds today are as gemstones used for adornment , a use which dates back into antiquity , and as industrial abrasives for cutting hard materials . The dispersion of white light into spectral colors is the primary gemological characteristic of gem diamonds . In the 20th century , experts in <unk> developed methods of grading diamonds and other gemstones based on the characteristics most important to their value as a gem . Four characteristics , known informally as the four Cs , are now commonly used as the basic descriptors of diamonds : these are carat ( its weight ) , cut ( quality of the cut is graded according to proportions , symmetry and polish ) , color ( how close to white or colorless ; for fancy diamonds how intense is its hue ) , and clarity ( how free is it from inclusions ) . A large , flawless diamond is known as a paragon . 
 = = = Natural history = = = 
 The formation of natural diamond requires very specific conditions — exposure of carbon @-@ bearing materials to high pressure , ranging approximately between 45 and 60 <unk> ( 4 @.@ 5 and 6 GPa ) , but at a comparatively low temperature range between approximately 900 and 1 @,@ 300 ° C ( 1 @,@ 650 and 2 @,@ 370 ° F ) . These conditions are met in two places on Earth ; in the lithospheric mantle below relatively stable continental plates , and at the site of a meteorite strike . 
 = = = = Formation in cratons = = = = 
 The conditions for diamond formation to happen in the lithospheric mantle occur at considerable depth corresponding to the requirements of temperature and pressure . These depths are estimated between 140 and 190 kilometers ( 87 and 118 mi ) though occasionally diamonds have crystallized at depths about 300 km ( 190 mi ) . The rate at which temperature changes with increasing depth into the Earth varies greatly in different parts of the Earth . In particular , under oceanic plates the temperature rises more quickly with depth , beyond the range required for diamond formation at the depth required . The correct combination of temperature and pressure is only found in the thick , ancient , and stable parts of continental plates where regions of lithosphere known as cratons exist . Long residence in the <unk> lithosphere allows diamond crystals to grow larger . 
 Through studies of carbon isotope ratios ( similar to the methodology used in carbon dating , except with the stable isotopes C @-@ 12 and C @-@ 13 ) , it has been shown that the carbon found in diamonds comes from both inorganic and organic sources . Some diamonds , known as <unk> , are formed from inorganic carbon originally found deep in the Earth 's mantle . In contrast , <unk> diamonds contain organic carbon from organic detritus that has been pushed down from the surface of the Earth 's crust through subduction ( see plate tectonics ) before transforming into diamond . These two different source of carbon have measurably different 13C : 12C ratios . Diamonds that have come to the Earth 's surface are generally quite old , ranging from under 1 billion to 3 @.@ 3 billion years old . This is 22 % to 73 % of the age of the Earth . 
 Diamonds occur most often as euhedral or rounded octahedra and twinned octahedra known as <unk> . As diamond 's crystal structure has a cubic arrangement of the atoms , they have many facets that belong to a cube , octahedron , <unk> , tetrakis <unk> or <unk> dodecahedron . The crystals can have rounded off and <unk> edges and can be elongated . Sometimes they are found grown together or form double " twinned " crystals at the surfaces of the octahedron . These different shapes and habits of some diamonds result from differing external circumstances . Diamonds ( especially those with rounded crystal faces ) are commonly found coated in nyf , an opaque gum @-@ like skin . 
 = = = = Transport from mantle = = = = 
 Diamond @-@ bearing rock is carried from the mantle to the Earth 's surface by deep @-@ origin volcanic eruptions . The magma for such a volcano must originate at a depth where diamonds can be formed — 150 km ( 93 mi ) or more ( three times or more the depth of source magma for most volcanoes ) . This is a relatively rare occurrence . These typically small surface volcanic craters extend downward in formations known as volcanic pipes . The pipes contain material that was transported toward the surface by volcanic action , but was not ejected before the volcanic activity ceased . During eruption these pipes are open to the surface , resulting in open circulation ; many xenoliths of surface rock and even wood and fossils are found in volcanic pipes . Diamond @-@ bearing volcanic pipes are closely related to the oldest , coolest regions of continental crust ( cratons ) . This is because cratons are very thick , and their lithospheric mantle extends to great enough depth that diamonds are stable . Not all pipes contain diamonds , and even fewer contain enough diamonds to make mining economically viable . 
 The magma in volcanic pipes is usually one of two characteristic types , which cool into igneous rock known as either kimberlite or lamproite . The magma itself does not contain diamond ; instead , it acts as an elevator that carries deep @-@ formed rocks ( xenoliths ) , minerals ( xenocrysts ) , and fluids upward . These rocks are characteristically rich in magnesium @-@ bearing olivine , pyroxene , and amphibole minerals which are often altered to serpentine by heat and fluids during and after eruption . Certain indicator minerals typically occur within diamantiferous kimberlites and are used as mineralogical tracers by prospectors , who follow the indicator trail back to the volcanic pipe which may contain diamonds . These minerals are rich in chromium ( Cr ) or titanium ( Ti ) , elements which impart bright colors to the minerals . The most common indicator minerals are chromium garnets ( usually bright red chromium @-@ <unk> , and occasionally green <unk> @-@ series garnets ) , <unk> garnets , orange titanium @-@ <unk> , red high @-@ chromium <unk> , dark chromite , bright green chromium @-@ diopside , glassy green olivine , black <unk> , and magnetite . <unk> deposits are known as blue ground for the deeper <unk> part of the deposits , or as yellow ground for the near surface smectite clay and carbonate weathered and oxidized portion . 
 Once diamonds have been transported to the surface by magma in a volcanic pipe , they may erode out and be distributed over a large area . A volcanic pipe containing diamonds is known as a primary source of diamonds . Secondary sources of diamonds include all areas where a significant number of diamonds have been eroded out of their kimberlite or lamproite matrix , and accumulated because of water or wind action . These include alluvial deposits and deposits along existing and ancient shorelines , where loose diamonds tend to accumulate because of their size and density . Diamonds have also rarely been found in deposits left behind by glaciers ( notably in Wisconsin and Indiana ) ; in contrast to alluvial deposits , glacial deposits are minor and are therefore not viable commercial sources of diamond . 
 = = = = Space diamonds = = = = 
 Not all diamonds found on Earth originated on Earth . Primitive interstellar meteorites were found to contain carbon possibly in the form of diamond . A type of diamond called carbonado that is found in South America and Africa may have been deposited there via an asteroid impact ( not formed from the impact ) about 3 billion years ago . These diamonds may have formed in the <unk> environment , but as of 2008 , there was no scientific consensus on how carbonado diamonds originated . 
 Diamonds can also form under other naturally occurring high @-@ pressure conditions . Very small diamonds of micrometer and nanometer sizes , known as <unk> or <unk> respectively , have been found in meteorite impact craters . Such impact events create shock zones of high pressure and temperature suitable for diamond formation . Impact @-@ type <unk> can be used as an indicator of ancient impact craters . <unk> crater in Russia may have the world 's largest diamond deposit , estimated at trillions of carats , and formed by an asteroid impact . 
 Scientific evidence indicates that white dwarf stars have a core of crystallized carbon and oxygen nuclei . The largest of these found in the universe so far , BPM <unk> , is located 50 light @-@ years ( 4 @.@ 7 × 1014 km ) away in the constellation Centaurus . A news release from the Harvard @-@ Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics described the 2 @,@ 500 @-@ mile ( 4 @,@ 000 km ) -wide stellar core as a diamond . 
 = = Material properties = = 
 A diamond is a transparent crystal of tetrahedrally bonded carbon atoms in a covalent network lattice ( sp3 ) that crystallizes into the diamond lattice which is a variation of the face centered cubic structure . Diamonds have been adapted for many uses because of the material 's exceptional physical characteristics . Most notable are its extreme hardness and thermal conductivity ( 900 – 2320 W · m − 1 · K − 1 ) , as well as wide bandgap and high optical dispersion . Above 1700 ° C ( 1973 K / <unk> ° F ) in vacuum or oxygen @-@ free atmosphere , diamond converts to graphite ; in air , transformation starts at ~ 700 ° C. Diamond 's ignition point is 720 – 800 ° C in oxygen and 850 – 1000 ° C in air . Naturally occurring diamonds have a density ranging from 3 @.@ 15 – 3 @.@ 53 g / cm3 , with pure diamond close to 3 @.@ 52 g / cm3 . The chemical bonds that hold the carbon atoms in diamonds together are weaker than those in graphite . In diamonds , the bonds form an inflexible three @-@ dimensional lattice , whereas in graphite , the atoms are tightly bonded into sheets , which can slide easily over one another , making the overall structure weaker . In a diamond , each carbon atom is surrounded by neighboring four carbon atoms forming a tetrahedral shaped unit . 
 = = = Hardness = = = 
 Diamond is the hardest known natural material on both the Vickers and the Mohs scale . Diamond 's hardness has been known since antiquity , and is the source of its name . 
 Diamond hardness depends on its purity , crystalline perfection and orientation : hardness is higher for flawless , pure crystals oriented to the < 111 > direction ( along the longest diagonal of the cubic diamond lattice ) . Therefore , whereas it might be possible to scratch some diamonds with other materials , such as boron nitride , the hardest diamonds can only be scratched by other diamonds and nanocrystalline diamond aggregates . 
 The hardness of diamond contributes to its suitability as a gemstone . Because it can only be scratched by other diamonds , it maintains its polish extremely well . Unlike many other gems , it is well @-@ suited to daily wear because of its resistance to scratching — perhaps contributing to its popularity as the preferred gem in engagement or wedding rings , which are often worn every day . 
 The hardest natural diamonds mostly originate from the <unk> and <unk> fields located in the New England area in New South Wales , Australia . These diamonds are generally small , perfect to <unk> octahedra , and are used to polish other diamonds . Their hardness is associated with the crystal growth form , which is single @-@ stage crystal growth . Most other diamonds show more evidence of multiple growth stages , which produce inclusions , flaws , and defect planes in the crystal lattice , all of which affect their hardness . It is possible to treat regular diamonds under a combination of high pressure and high temperature to produce diamonds that are harder than the diamonds used in hardness gauges . 
 Somewhat related to hardness is another mechanical property toughness , which is a material 's ability to resist breakage from forceful impact . The toughness of natural diamond has been measured as 7 @.@ 5 – 10 MPa · m1 / 2 . This value is good compared to other ceramic materials , but poor compared to most engineering materials such as engineering alloys , which typically exhibit <unk> over 100 MPa · m1 / 2 . As with any material , the macroscopic geometry of a diamond contributes to its resistance to breakage . Diamond has a cleavage plane and is therefore more fragile in some orientations than others . Diamond cutters use this attribute to cleave some stones , prior to faceting . " Impact toughness " is one of the main indexes to measure the quality of synthetic industrial diamonds . 
 = = = Pressure resistance = = = 
 Used in so @-@ called diamond anvil experiments to create high @-@ pressure environments , diamonds are able to withstand crushing pressures in excess of 600 gigapascals ( 6 million atmospheres ) . 
 = = = Electrical conductivity = = = 
 Other specialized applications also exist or are being developed , including use as semiconductors : some blue diamonds are natural semiconductors , in contrast to most diamonds , which are excellent electrical insulators . The conductivity and blue color originate from boron impurity . Boron substitutes for carbon atoms in the diamond lattice , donating a hole into the valence band . 
 Substantial conductivity is commonly observed in nominally <unk> diamond grown by chemical vapor deposition . This conductivity is associated with hydrogen @-@ related species adsorbed at the surface , and it can be removed by annealing or other surface treatments . 
 = = = Surface property = = = 
 Diamonds are naturally lipophilic and hydrophobic , which means the diamonds ' surface cannot be wet by water but can be easily wet and stuck by oil . This property can be utilized to extract diamonds using oil when making synthetic diamonds . However , when diamond surfaces are chemically modified with certain ions , they are expected to become so hydrophilic that they can stabilize multiple layers of water ice at human body temperature . 
 The surface of diamonds is partially oxidized . The oxidized surface can be reduced by heat treatment under hydrogen flow . That is to say , this heat treatment partially removes oxygen @-@ containing functional groups . But diamonds ( <unk> ) are unstable against high temperature ( above about 400 ° C ( 752 ° F ) ) under atmospheric pressure . The structure gradually changes into <unk> above this temperature . Thus , diamonds should be reduced under this temperature . 
 = = = Chemical stability = = = 
 Diamonds are not very reactive . Under room temperature diamonds do not react with any chemical reagents including strong acids and bases . A diamond 's surface can only be oxidized at temperatures above about 850 ° C ( 1 @,@ 560 ° F ) in air . Diamond also reacts with fluorine gas above about 700 ° C ( 1 @,@ 292 ° F ) . 
 = = = Color = = = 
 Diamond has a wide bandgap of 5 @.@ 5 eV corresponding to the deep ultraviolet wavelength of 225 nanometers . This means pure diamond should transmit visible light and appear as a clear colorless crystal . Colors in diamond originate from lattice defects and impurities . The diamond crystal lattice is exceptionally strong and only atoms of nitrogen , boron and hydrogen can be introduced into diamond during the growth at significant concentrations ( up to atomic percents ) . Transition metals nickel and cobalt , which are commonly used for growth of synthetic diamond by high @-@ pressure high @-@ temperature techniques , have been detected in diamond as individual atoms ; the maximum concentration is 0 @.@ 01 % for nickel and even less for cobalt . Virtually any element can be introduced to diamond by ion implantation . 
 Nitrogen is by far the most common impurity found in gem diamonds and is responsible for the yellow and brown color in diamonds . Boron is responsible for the blue color . Color in diamond has two additional sources : irradiation ( usually by alpha particles ) , that causes the color in green diamonds ; and plastic deformation of the diamond crystal lattice . Plastic deformation is the cause of color in some brown and perhaps pink and red diamonds . In order of rarity , yellow diamond is followed by brown , colorless , then by blue , green , black , pink , orange , purple , and red . " Black " , or <unk> , diamonds are not truly black , but rather contain numerous dark inclusions that give the gems their dark appearance . Colored diamonds contain impurities or structural defects that cause the coloration , while pure or nearly pure diamonds are transparent and colorless . Most diamond impurities replace a carbon atom in the crystal lattice , known as a carbon flaw . The most common impurity , nitrogen , causes a slight to intense yellow coloration depending upon the type and concentration of nitrogen present . The Gemological Institute of America ( GIA ) classifies low saturation yellow and brown diamonds as diamonds in the normal color range , and applies a grading scale from " D " ( colorless ) to " Z " ( light yellow ) . Diamonds of a different color , such as blue , are called fancy colored diamonds , and fall under a different grading scale . 
 In 2008 , the Wittelsbach Diamond , a 35 @.@ 56 @-@ carat ( 7 @.@ 112 g ) blue diamond once belonging to the King of Spain , fetched over US $ 24 million at a Christie 's auction . In May 2009 , a 7 @.@ 03 @-@ carat ( 1 @.@ 406 g ) blue diamond fetched the highest price per carat ever paid for a diamond when it was sold at auction for 10 @.@ 5 million Swiss francs ( 6 @.@ 97 million euro or US $ 9 @.@ 5 million at the time ) . That record was however beaten the same year : a 5 @-@ carat ( 1 @.@ 0 g ) vivid pink diamond was sold for $ 10 @.@ 8 million in Hong Kong on December 1 , 2009 . 
 = = = Identification = = = 
 Diamonds can be identified by their high thermal conductivity . Their high refractive index is also indicative , but other materials have similar <unk> . Diamonds cut glass , but this does not positively identify a diamond because other materials , such as quartz , also lie above glass on the Mohs scale and can also cut it . Diamonds can scratch other diamonds , but this can result in damage to one or both stones . Hardness tests are infrequently used in practical <unk> because of their potentially destructive nature . The extreme hardness and high value of diamond means that gems are typically polished slowly using painstaking traditional techniques and greater attention to detail than is the case with most other gemstones ; these tend to result in extremely flat , highly polished facets with exceptionally sharp facet edges . Diamonds also possess an extremely high refractive index and fairly high dispersion . Taken together , these factors affect the overall appearance of a polished diamond and most <unk> still rely upon skilled use of a <unk> ( magnifying glass ) to identify diamonds ' by eye ' . 
 = = Industry = = 
 The diamond industry can be separated into two distinct categories : one dealing with gem @-@ grade diamonds and another for industrial @-@ grade diamonds . Both markets value diamonds differently . 
 = = = Gem @-@ grade diamonds = = = 
 A large trade in gem @-@ grade diamonds exists . Although most gem @-@ grade diamonds are sold newly polished , there is a well @-@ established market for resale of polished diamonds ( e.g. pawnbroking , auctions , second @-@ hand jewelry stores , <unk> , bourses , etc . ) . One hallmark of the trade in gem @-@ quality diamonds is its remarkable concentration : wholesale trade and diamond cutting is limited to just a few locations ; in 2003 , 92 % of the world 's diamonds were cut and polished in Surat , India . Other important centers of diamond cutting and trading are the Antwerp diamond district in Belgium , where the International Gemological Institute is based , London , the Diamond District in New York City , the Diamond Exchange District in Tel Aviv , and Amsterdam . One contributory factor is the geological nature of diamond deposits : several large primary kimberlite @-@ pipe mines each account for significant portions of market share ( such as the <unk> mine in Botswana , which is a single large @-@ pit mine that can produce between 12 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 carats ( 2 @,@ 500 kg ) to 15 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 carats ( 3 @,@ 000 kg ) of diamonds per year ) . Secondary alluvial diamond deposits , on the other hand , tend to be fragmented amongst many different operators because they can be dispersed over many hundreds of square kilometers ( e.g. , alluvial deposits in Brazil ) . 
 The production and distribution of diamonds is largely consolidated in the hands of a few key players , and concentrated in traditional diamond trading centers , the most important being Antwerp , where 80 % of all rough diamonds , 50 % of all cut diamonds and more than 50 % of all rough , cut and industrial diamonds combined are handled . This makes Antwerp a de facto " world diamond capital " . The city of Antwerp also hosts the <unk> <unk> , created in 1929 to become the first and biggest diamond bourse dedicated to rough diamonds . Another important diamond center is New York City , where almost 80 % of the world 's diamonds are sold , including auction sales . 
 The De Beers company , as the world 's largest diamond mining company , holds a dominant position in the industry , and has done so since soon after its founding in 1888 by the British imperialist Cecil Rhodes . De Beers is currently the world 's largest operator of diamond production facilities ( mines ) and distribution channels for gem @-@ quality diamonds . The Diamond Trading Company ( DTC ) is a subsidiary of De Beers and markets rough diamonds from De Beers @-@ operated mines . De Beers and its subsidiaries own mines that produce some 40 % of annual world diamond production . For most of the 20th century over 80 % of the world 's rough diamonds passed through De Beers , but by 2001 – 2009 the figure had decreased to around 45 % , and by 2013 the company 's market share had further decreased to around 38 % in value terms and even less by volume . De Beers sold off the vast majority of its diamond stockpile in the late 1990s – early 2000s and the remainder largely represents working stock ( diamonds that are being sorted before sale ) . This was well documented in the press but remains little known to the general public . 
 As a part of reducing its influence , De Beers withdrew from purchasing diamonds on the open market in 1999 and ceased , at the end of 2008 , purchasing Russian diamonds mined by the largest Russian diamond company Alrosa . As of January 2011 , De Beers states that it only sells diamonds from the following four countries : Botswana , Namibia , South Africa and Canada . Alrosa had to suspend their sales in October 2008 due to the global energy crisis , but the company reported that it had resumed selling rough diamonds on the open market by October 2009 . Apart from Alrosa , other important diamond mining companies include BHP Billiton , which is the world 's largest mining company ; Rio Tinto Group , the owner of Argyle ( 100 % ) , <unk> ( 60 % ) , and <unk> ( 78 % ) diamond mines ; and Petra Diamonds , the owner of several major diamond mines in Africa . 
 Further down the supply chain , members of The World Federation of Diamond <unk> ( WFDB ) act as a medium for wholesale diamond exchange , trading both polished and rough diamonds . The WFDB consists of independent diamond bourses in major cutting centers such as Tel Aviv , Antwerp , Johannesburg and other cities across the USA , Europe and Asia . In 2000 , the WFDB and The International Diamond Manufacturers Association established the World Diamond Council to prevent the trading of diamonds used to fund war and inhumane acts . WFDB 's additional activities include sponsoring the World Diamond Congress every two years , as well as the establishment of the International Diamond Council ( IDC ) to oversee diamond grading . 
 Once purchased by <unk> ( which is a trademark term referring to the companies that have a three @-@ year supply contract with DTC ) , diamonds are cut and polished in preparation for sale as gemstones ( ' industrial ' stones are regarded as a by @-@ product of the gemstone market ; they are used for abrasives ) . The cutting and polishing of rough diamonds is a specialized skill that is concentrated in a limited number of locations worldwide . Traditional diamond cutting centers are Antwerp , Amsterdam , Johannesburg , New York City , and Tel Aviv . Recently , diamond cutting centers have been established in China , India , Thailand , Namibia and Botswana . Cutting centers with lower cost of labor , notably Surat in Gujarat , India , handle a larger number of smaller carat diamonds , while smaller quantities of larger or more valuable diamonds are more likely to be handled in Europe or North America . The recent expansion of this industry in India , employing low cost labor , has allowed smaller diamonds to be prepared as gems in greater quantities than was previously economically feasible . 
 Diamonds which have been prepared as gemstones are sold on diamond exchanges called bourses . There are 28 registered diamond bourses in the world . <unk> are the final tightly controlled step in the diamond supply chain ; wholesalers and even retailers are able to buy relatively small lots of diamonds at the bourses , after which they are prepared for final sale to the consumer . Diamonds can be sold already set in jewelry , or sold unset ( " loose " ) . According to the Rio Tinto Group , in 2002 the diamonds produced and released to the market were valued at US $ 9 billion as rough diamonds , US $ 14 billion after being cut and polished , US $ 28 billion in wholesale diamond jewelry , and US $ 57 billion in retail sales . 
 = = = = Cutting = = = = 
 Mined rough diamonds are converted into gems through a multi @-@ step process called " cutting " . Diamonds are extremely hard , but also brittle and can be split up by a single blow . Therefore , diamond cutting is traditionally considered as a delicate procedure requiring skills , scientific knowledge , tools and experience . Its final goal is to produce a faceted jewel where the specific angles between the facets would optimize the diamond luster , that is dispersion of white light , whereas the number and area of facets would determine the weight of the final product . The weight reduction upon cutting is significant and can be of the order of 50 % . Several possible shapes are considered , but the final decision is often determined not only by scientific , but also practical considerations . For example , the diamond might be intended for display or for wear , in a ring or a necklace , singled or surrounded by other gems of certain color and shape . Some of them may be considered as classical , such as round , pear , <unk> , oval , hearts and arrows diamonds , etc . Some of them are special , produced by certain companies , for example , Phoenix , Cushion , Sole Mio diamonds , etc . 
 The most time @-@ consuming part of the cutting is the preliminary analysis of the rough stone . It needs to address a large number of issues , bears much responsibility , and therefore can last years in case of unique diamonds . The following issues are considered : 
 The hardness of diamond and its ability to cleave strongly depend on the crystal orientation . Therefore , the crystallographic structure of the diamond to be cut is analyzed using X @-@ ray diffraction to choose the optimal cutting directions . 
 Most diamonds contain visible non @-@ diamond inclusions and crystal flaws . The cutter has to decide which flaws are to be removed by the cutting and which could be kept . 
 The diamond can be split by a single , well calculated blow of a hammer to a pointed tool , which is quick , but risky . Alternatively , it can be cut with a diamond saw , which is a more reliable but tedious procedure . 
 After initial cutting , the diamond is shaped in numerous stages of polishing . Unlike cutting , which is a responsible but quick operation , polishing removes material by gradual erosion and is extremely time consuming . The associated technique is well developed ; it is considered as a routine and can be performed by technicians . After polishing , the diamond is reexamined for possible flaws , either remaining or induced by the process . Those flaws are concealed through various diamond enhancement techniques , such as <unk> , crack filling , or clever arrangement of the stone in the jewelry . Remaining non @-@ diamond inclusions are removed through laser drilling and filling of the voids produced . 
 = = = = Marketing = = = = 
 Marketing has significantly affected the image of diamond as a valuable commodity . 
 N. W. Ayer & Son , the advertising firm retained by De Beers in the mid @-@ 20th century , succeeded in reviving the American diamond market . And the firm created new markets in countries where no diamond tradition had existed before . N. W. Ayer 's marketing included product placement , advertising focused on the diamond product itself rather than the De Beers brand , and associations with celebrities and royalty . Without advertising the De Beers brand , De Beers was advertising its competitors ' diamond products as well , but this was not a concern as De Beers dominated the diamond market throughout the 20th century . De Beers ' market share dipped temporarily to 2nd place in the global market below Alrosa in the aftermath of the global economic crisis of 2008 , down to less than 29 % in terms of carats mined , rather than sold . The campaign lasted for decades but was effectively discontinued by early 2011 . De Beers still advertises diamonds , but the advertising now mostly promotes its own brands , or licensed product lines , rather than completely " generic " diamond products . The campaign was perhaps best captured by the slogan " a diamond is forever " . This slogan is now being used by De Beers Diamond Jewelers , a jewelry firm which is a 50 % / 50 % joint venture between the De Beers mining company and LVMH , the luxury goods conglomerate . 
 Brown @-@ colored diamonds constituted a significant part of the diamond production , and were predominantly used for industrial purposes . They were seen as worthless for jewelry ( not even being assessed on the diamond color scale ) . After the development of Argyle diamond mine in Australia in 1986 , and marketing , brown diamonds have become acceptable gems . The change was mostly due to the numbers : the Argyle mine , with its 35 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 carats ( 7 @,@ 000 kg ) of diamonds per year , makes about one @-@ third of global production of natural diamonds ; 80 % of Argyle diamonds are brown . 
 = = = Industrial @-@ grade diamonds = = = 
 Industrial diamonds are valued mostly for their hardness and thermal conductivity , making many of the gemological characteristics of diamonds , such as the 4 Cs , irrelevant for most applications . 80 % of mined diamonds ( equal to about 135 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 carats ( 27 @,@ 000 kg ) annually ) , are unsuitable for use as gemstones , and used industrially . In addition to mined diamonds , synthetic diamonds found industrial applications almost immediately after their invention in the 1950s ; another 570 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 carats ( 114 @,@ 000 kg ) of synthetic diamond is produced annually for industrial use ( in 2004 ; in 2014 it 's 4 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 carats ( 900 @,@ 000 kg ) , 90 % of which is produced in China ) . Approximately 90 % of diamond grinding grit is currently of synthetic origin . 
 The boundary between gem @-@ quality diamonds and industrial diamonds is poorly defined and partly depends on market conditions ( for example , if demand for polished diamonds is high , some lower @-@ grade stones will be polished into low @-@ quality or small gemstones rather than being sold for industrial use ) . Within the category of industrial diamonds , there is a sub @-@ category comprising the lowest @-@ quality , mostly opaque stones , which are known as bort . 
 Industrial use of diamonds has historically been associated with their hardness , which makes diamond the ideal material for cutting and grinding tools . As the hardest known naturally occurring material , diamond can be used to polish , cut , or wear away any material , including other diamonds . Common industrial applications of this property include diamond @-@ tipped drill bits and saws , and the use of diamond powder as an abrasive . Less expensive industrial @-@ grade diamonds , known as bort , with more flaws and poorer color than gems , are used for such purposes . Diamond is not suitable for machining ferrous alloys at high speeds , as carbon is soluble in iron at the high temperatures created by high @-@ speed machining , leading to greatly increased wear on diamond tools compared to alternatives . 
 Specialized applications include use in laboratories as containment for high pressure experiments ( see diamond anvil cell ) , high @-@ performance bearings , and limited use in specialized windows . With the continuing advances being made in the production of synthetic diamonds , future applications are becoming feasible . The high thermal conductivity of diamond makes it suitable as a heat sink for integrated circuits in electronics . 
 = = = Mining = = = 
 Approximately 130 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 carats ( 26 @,@ 000 kg ) of diamonds are mined annually , with a total value of nearly US $ 9 billion , and about 100 @,@ 000 kg ( 220 @,@ 000 lb ) are synthesized annually . 
 Roughly 49 % of diamonds originate from Central and Southern Africa , although significant sources of the mineral have been discovered in Canada , India , Russia , Brazil , and Australia . They are mined from kimberlite and lamproite volcanic pipes , which can bring diamond crystals , originating from deep within the Earth where high pressures and temperatures enable them to form , to the surface . The mining and distribution of natural diamonds are subjects of frequent controversy such as concerns over the sale of blood diamonds or conflict diamonds by African paramilitary groups . The diamond supply chain is controlled by a limited number of powerful businesses , and is also highly concentrated in a small number of locations around the world . 
 Only a very small fraction of the diamond ore consists of actual diamonds . The ore is crushed , during which care is required not to destroy larger diamonds , and then sorted by density . Today , diamonds are located in the diamond @-@ rich density fraction with the help of X @-@ ray fluorescence , after which the final sorting steps are done by hand . Before the use of X @-@ rays became commonplace , the separation was done with grease belts ; diamonds have a stronger tendency to stick to grease than the other minerals in the ore . 
 Historically , diamonds were found only in alluvial deposits in Guntur and Krishna district of the Krishna River delta in Southern India . India led the world in diamond production from the time of their discovery in approximately the 9th century BC to the mid @-@ 18th century AD , but the commercial potential of these sources had been exhausted by the late 18th century and at that time India was eclipsed by Brazil where the first non @-@ Indian diamonds were found in 1725 . Currently , one of the most prominent Indian mines is located at Panna . 
 Diamond extraction from primary deposits ( kimberlites and lamproites ) started in the 1870s after the discovery of the Diamond Fields in South Africa . Production has increased over time and now an accumulated total of 4 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 carats ( 900 @,@ 000 kg ) have been mined since that date . Twenty percent of that amount has been mined in the last five years , and during the last 10 years , nine new mines have started production ; four more are waiting to be opened soon . Most of these mines are located in Canada , Zimbabwe , Angola , and one in Russia . 
 In the U.S. , diamonds have been found in Arkansas , Colorado , Wyoming , and Montana . In 2004 , the discovery of a microscopic diamond in the U.S. led to the January 2008 bulk @-@ sampling of kimberlite pipes in a remote part of Montana . The Crater of Diamonds State Park in Arkansas is open to the public , and is the only mine in the world where members of the public can dig for diamonds . 
 Today , most commercially viable diamond deposits are in Russia ( mostly in Sakha Republic , for example Mir pipe and Udachnaya pipe ) , Botswana , Australia ( Northern and Western Australia ) and the Democratic Republic of the Congo . In 2005 , Russia produced almost one @-@ fifth of the global diamond output , according to the British Geological Survey . Australia boasts the richest diamantiferous pipe , with production from the Argyle diamond mine reaching peak levels of 42 metric tons per year in the 1990s . There are also commercial deposits being actively mined in the Northwest Territories of Canada and Brazil . Diamond prospectors continue to search the globe for diamond @-@ bearing kimberlite and lamproite pipes . 
 = = = Political issues = = = 
 In some of the more politically unstable central African and west African countries , revolutionary groups have taken control of diamond mines , using proceeds from diamond sales to finance their operations . Diamonds sold through this process are known as conflict diamonds or blood diamonds . Major diamond trading corporations continue to fund and fuel these conflicts by doing business with armed groups . 
 In response to public concerns that their diamond purchases were contributing to war and human rights abuses in central and western Africa , the United Nations , the diamond industry and diamond @-@ trading nations introduced the Kimberley Process in 2002 . The Kimberley Process aims to ensure that conflict diamonds do not become intermixed with the diamonds not controlled by such rebel groups . This is done by requiring diamond @-@ producing countries to provide proof that the money they make from selling the diamonds is not used to fund criminal or revolutionary activities . Although the Kimberley Process has been moderately successful in limiting the number of conflict diamonds entering the market , some still find their way in . According to the International Diamond Manufacturers Association , conflict diamonds constitute 2 – 3 % of all diamonds traded . Two major flaws still hinder the effectiveness of the Kimberley Process : ( 1 ) the relative ease of smuggling diamonds across African borders , and ( 2 ) the violent nature of diamond mining in nations that are not in a technical state of war and whose diamonds are therefore considered " clean " . 
 The Canadian Government has set up a body known as the Canadian Diamond Code of Conduct to help authenticate Canadian diamonds . This is a stringent tracking system of diamonds and helps protect the " conflict free " label of Canadian diamonds . 
 = = Synthetics , simulants , and enhancements = = 
 = = = Synthetics = = = 
 Synthetic diamonds are diamonds manufactured in a laboratory , as opposed to diamonds mined from the Earth . The gemological and industrial uses of diamond have created a large demand for rough stones . This demand has been satisfied in large part by synthetic diamonds , which have been manufactured by various processes for more than half a century . However , in recent years it has become possible to produce gem @-@ quality synthetic diamonds of significant size . It is possible to make colorless synthetic gemstones that , on a molecular level , are identical to natural stones and so visually similar that only a gemologist with special equipment can tell the difference . 
 The majority of commercially available synthetic diamonds are yellow and are produced by so @-@ called high @-@ pressure high @-@ temperature ( HPHT ) processes . The yellow color is caused by nitrogen impurities . Other colors may also be reproduced such as blue , green or pink , which are a result of the addition of boron or from irradiation after synthesis . 
 Another popular method of growing synthetic diamond is chemical vapor deposition ( CVD ) . The growth occurs under low pressure ( below atmospheric pressure ) . It involves feeding a mixture of gases ( typically 1 to 99 methane to hydrogen ) into a chamber and splitting them to chemically active radicals in a plasma ignited by microwaves , hot filament , arc discharge , welding torch or laser . This method is mostly used for coatings , but can also produce single crystals several millimeters in size ( see picture ) . 
 As of 2010 , nearly all 5 @,@ 000 million carats ( 1 @,@ 000 tonnes ) of synthetic diamonds produced per year are for industrial use . Around 50 % of the 133 million carats of natural diamonds mined per year end up in industrial use . Mining companies ' expenses average $ 40 to $ 60 per carat for natural colorless diamonds , while synthetic manufacturers ' expenses average $ 2 @,@ 500 per carat for synthetic , gem @-@ quality colorless diamonds . However , a purchaser is more likely to encounter a synthetic when looking for a fancy @-@ colored diamond because nearly all synthetic diamonds are fancy @-@ colored , while only 0 @.@ 01 % of natural diamonds are . 
 = = = Simulants = = = 
 A diamond simulant is a non @-@ diamond material that is used to simulate the appearance of a diamond , and may be referred to as diamante . Cubic zirconia is the most common . The gemstone moissanite ( silicon carbide ) can be treated as a diamond simulant , though more costly to produce than cubic zirconia . Both are produced synthetically . 
 = = = Enhancements = = = 
 Diamond enhancements are specific treatments performed on natural or synthetic diamonds ( usually those already cut and polished into a gem ) , which are designed to better the gemological characteristics of the stone in one or more ways . These include laser drilling to remove inclusions , application of sealants to fill cracks , treatments to improve a white diamond 's color grade , and treatments to give fancy color to a white diamond . 
 Coatings are increasingly used to give a diamond simulant such as cubic zirconia a more " diamond @-@ like " appearance . One such substance is diamond @-@ like carbon — an amorphous carbonaceous material that has some physical properties similar to those of the diamond . Advertising suggests that such a coating would transfer some of these diamond @-@ like properties to the coated stone , hence enhancing the diamond simulant . Techniques such as Raman spectroscopy should easily identify such a treatment . 
 = = = Identification = = = 
 Early diamond identification tests included a scratch test relying on the superior hardness of diamond . This test is destructive , as a diamond can scratch another diamond , and is rarely used nowadays . Instead , diamond identification relies on its superior thermal conductivity . Electronic thermal probes are widely used in the gemological centers to separate diamonds from their imitations . These probes consist of a pair of battery @-@ powered thermistors mounted in a fine copper tip . One thermistor functions as a heating device while the other measures the temperature of the copper tip : if the stone being tested is a diamond , it will conduct the tip 's thermal energy rapidly enough to produce a measurable temperature drop . This test takes about 2 – 3 seconds . 
 Whereas the thermal probe can separate diamonds from most of their simulants , distinguishing between various types of diamond , for example synthetic or natural , irradiated or non @-@ irradiated , etc . , requires more advanced , optical techniques . Those techniques are also used for some diamonds simulants , such as silicon carbide , which pass the thermal conductivity test . Optical techniques can distinguish between natural diamonds and synthetic diamonds . They can also identify the vast majority of treated natural diamonds . " Perfect " crystals ( at the atomic lattice level ) have never been found , so both natural and synthetic diamonds always possess characteristic imperfections , arising from the circumstances of their crystal growth , that allow them to be distinguished from each other . 
 Laboratories use techniques such as spectroscopy , microscopy and luminescence under shortwave ultraviolet light to determine a diamond 's origin . They also use specially made instruments to aid them in the identification process . Two screening instruments are the <unk> and the <unk> , both produced by the DTC and marketed by the GIA . 
 Several methods for identifying synthetic diamonds can be performed , depending on the method of production and the color of the diamond . CVD diamonds can usually be identified by an orange fluorescence . D @-@ J colored diamonds can be screened through the Swiss <unk> Institute 's Diamond Spotter . Stones in the D @-@ Z color range can be examined through the <unk> UV / visible spectrometer , a tool developed by De Beers . Similarly , natural diamonds usually have minor imperfections and flaws , such as inclusions of foreign material , that are not seen in synthetic diamonds . 
 Screening devices based on diamond type detection can be used to make a distinction between diamonds that are certainly natural and diamonds that are potentially synthetic . Those potentially synthetic diamonds require more investigation in a specialized lab . Examples of commercial screening devices are D @-@ Screen ( <unk> / HRD Antwerp ) and Alpha Diamond Analyzer ( <unk> / HRD Antwerp ) . 
 = = Stolen diamonds = = 
 Occasionally large thefts of diamonds take place . In February 2013 armed robbers carried out a raid at Brussels Airport and escaped with gems estimated to be worth $ 50m ( £ <unk> ; 37m euros ) . The gang broke through a perimeter fence and raided the cargo hold of a Swiss @-@ bound plane . The gang have since been arrested and large amounts of cash and diamonds recovered . 
 The identification of stolen diamonds presents a set of difficult problems . Rough diamonds will have a distinctive shape depending on whether their source is a mine or from an alluvial environment such as a beach or river - alluvial diamonds have smoother surfaces than those that have been mined . Determining the provenance of cut and polished stones is much more complex . 
 The Kimberley Process was developed to monitor the trade in rough diamonds and prevent their being used to fund violence . Before exporting , rough diamonds are certificated by the government of the country of origin . Some countries , such as Venezuela , are not party to the agreement . The Kimberley Process does not apply to local sales of rough diamonds within a country . 
 Diamonds may be etched by laser with marks invisible to the naked eye . Lazare Kaplan , a US @-@ based company , developed this method . However , whatever is marked on a diamond can readily be removed . 
 = = Books = = 
 C. Even @-@ Zohar ( 2007 ) . From Mine to Mistress : Corporate Strategies and Government Policies in the International Diamond Industry ( 2nd ed . ) . Mining Journal Press . 
 G. Davies ( 1994 ) . Properties and growth of diamond . <unk> . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 875 @-@ 2 . 
 M. O 'Donoghue , M ( 2006 ) . Gems . Elsevier . ISBN 0 @-@ 7506 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 M. O 'Donoghue and L. Joyner ( 2003 ) . Identification of gemstones . Great Britain : Butterworth @-@ Heinemann . ISBN 0 @-@ 7506 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 A. Feldman and <unk> Robins ( 1991 ) . Applications of Diamond Films and Related Materials . Elsevier . 
 J.E. Field ( 1979 ) . The Properties of Diamond . London : Academic Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 12 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 J.E. Field ( 1992 ) . The Properties of Natural and Synthetic Diamond . London : Academic Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 12 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 W. Hershey ( 1940 ) . The Book of Diamonds . <unk> Press New York . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 S. Koizumi , C.E. Nebel and M. <unk> ( 2008 ) . Physics and Applications of CVD Diamond . Wiley VCH . ISBN 3 @-@ 527 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 L.S. Pan and D.R. Kani ( 1995 ) . Diamond : Electronic Properties and Applications . Kluwer Academic Publishers . ISBN 0 @-@ 7923 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Pagel @-@ Theisen , Verena ( 2001 ) . Diamond Grading ABC : the Manual . Antwerp : Rubin & Son . ISBN 3 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 @-@ 0 . 
 R.L. <unk> , P.M. Walker and P.A. Thrower ( 1965 ) . Chemistry and physics of carbon : a series of advances . New York : Marcel Dekker . ISBN 0 @-@ 8247 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 M. <unk> ( 1919 ) . Diamond Design : A Study of the Reflection and Refraction of Light in a Diamond . London : E. & F.N. <unk> . 
 R.W. Wise ( 2003 ) . Secrets of the Gem Trade : The Connoisseur 's Guide to Precious Gemstones . Brunswick House Press . 
 A.M. Zaitsev ( 2001 ) . Optical Properties of Diamond : A Data Handbook . Springer . ISBN 3 @-@ 540 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 = 2015 Brazilian Grand Prix = 
 The 2015 Brazilian Grand Prix ( formally known as the Formula 1 Grande Prêmio Petrobras do Brasil 2015 ) was a Formula One motor race held at the Autódromo José Carlos Pace , in São Paulo , Brazil on 15 November 2015 . The race was the eighteenth round of the 2015 season , and marked the forty @-@ fourth running of the Brazilian Grand Prix as a round of the Formula One World Championship since its inception in 1950 . 
 Nico Rosberg , driving for Mercedes , was the defending race winner . His teammate Lewis Hamilton entered the race as World Drivers ' Champion , having secured the title two races earlier in the United States . Mercedes had also already clinched the Constructors ' Title , having done so at the 2015 Russian Grand Prix . 
 Rosberg took pole position in Saturday 's qualifying session , the twenty @-@ first of his career . He would go on to win the race from his teammate , in what many commentators perceived as a " boring " race . Sebastian Vettel completed the podium for Scuderia Ferrari . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 After the 2014 race had been held at a resurfaced circuit , causing the teams to fight with the soft tyre choice by Pirelli , speculations arose if drivers would be able to challenge the eleven @-@ year old track record set by Rubens Barrichello in 2004 . However , practice showed that lap times actually slowed due to changes to the kerbs , forcing the drivers to stay away from the insides of the corners . Pirelli chose the soft and medium compounds for the event . 
 In the wake of the terrorist attacks in Paris on the Friday evening of the race weekend , Formula One decided to honour the victims with all drivers wearing black armbands during the parade lap on race day as well as the French tricolore being displayed on the truck that took the drivers around the track . French driver Romain Grosjean had already worn an armband with the flag of his country during Saturday 's sessions . However , a long planned minute of silence for the World Day of Remembrance for Road Traffic Victims was upheld and plans to dedicate the salute to the Paris attacks discarded . 
 After passing on using Renault 's new power unit in the United States and Mexico , Red Bull equipped Daniel Ricciardo 's car with the new specification unit , which earned him a ten @-@ place grid penalty in the process . Once he had tried the new unit during the free practice and qualifying sessions , Ricciardo lamented that the upgrade had not improved the performance . He said : " In hindsight , it didn 't give us any laptime , it 's just for now a penalty for a little bit of knowledge . " During the first practice session on Friday , Mercedes tried out what was dubbed a " S @-@ duct " , a vent to channel airflow through the nose of the car , a feature already seen at other cars over the course of the season . However , Mercedes decided not to run the device over the whole weekend . 
 Going into the weekend Lewis Hamilton and his Mercedes team had already secured their respective World Championships . Fellow Mercedes driver Nico Rosberg was second in the Drivers ' Championship , 21 points ahead of Ferrari 's Sebastian Vettel . The two were followed by Finns Valtteri Bottas ( Williams ) and Kimi Räikkönen ( Ferrari ) , three points apart from each other , with Felipe Massa another six points behind in sixth . In the Constructors ' standings , Ferrari was second on 374 points , followed by Williams with 243 points . 
 = = = Free practice = = = 
 Per the regulations for the 2015 season , three practice sessions were scheduled , two 1 @.@ 5 @-@ hour sessions on Friday and another one @-@ hour session before qualifying on Saturday . Lewis Hamilton was fastest in the first session on Friday morning , setting a time of 1 : 13 @.@ 543 , more than half a second clear of his teammate Nico Rosberg , who was second fastest . Sebastian Vettel and Daniel Ricciardo in third and fourth respectively were the only other drivers to lap inside one second of Hamilton . The session was held in dry conditions , albeit earlier reports had indicated that thunderstorms could interrupt the weekend . Hamilton set his fastest time on the medium compound , but was caught out twice on other laps , locking up and running wide in the Senna S. In the later parts of the session , he also complained about a " weird " feeling clutch , but returned to the track soon after . Kimi Räikkönen , who was fifth fastest , spun out ten minutes before the end of the session , while eighth @-@ placed Max Verstappen had done the same early in the session at turn three . Jolyon Palmer replaced Romain Grosjean at Lotus , finishing twelfth fastest . 
 It was Hamilton 's teammate and defending race winner Rosberg who topped the time sheets at the second session on Friday afternoon , setting a 1 : 12 @.@ 385 lap time . He led Hamilton by almost half a second , with the two Ferraris of Vettel and Räikkönen about a second adrift . Slight rain saw most drivers head out early , but the conditions never became wet enough to require intermediate tyres . After starting on the medium compound tyres , many drivers switched to the softer compound for race simulations , only for the session to be red flagged shortly after when Fernando Alonso spun at turn four , only to pull over at the side of the road with smoke coming from his car some corners later . Valtteri Bottas was sixth fastest , behind Daniel Ricciardo , suffering a spin at turn nine . 
 Despite several problems during the third session on Saturday morning , Lewis Hamilton was fastest , setting a time of 1 : 12 @.@ 070 , just over a tenth of a second in front of his teammate . Earlier in the session , he needed to return to pit lane due to a gear @-@ selection problem which had caused him to temporarily stop on track and later spun at turn eleven . Vettel was again third fastest , more than six tenths of a second behind Hamilton . He was followed by teammate Räikkönen , Valtteri Bottas and Nico Hülkenberg in the Force India , all more than a second slower than Hamilton . 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Qualifying consisted of three parts , 18 , 15 and 12 minutes in length respectively , with five drivers eliminated from competing after each of the first two sessions . During the first part of qualifying , all drivers used the softer compound tyres at least for their second run of timed laps , including the Mercedes pair . While Valtteri Bottas was the last driver to switch from the medium tyres , his Williams teammate Felipe Massa needed a quick lap at the end of the session to secure his participation in the second qualifying round , after he had been held up by compatriot Felipe Nasr earlier in the session . Fernando Alonso 's McLaren broke down due to a loss of power before he was able to set a time , with teammate Jenson Button likewise unable to proceed . Both Manor Marussias failed to advance , while Pastor Maldonado in fifteenth was the last driver to be eliminated . 
 During the second part , the Mercedes drivers set only one run of timed laps as they were able to save their tyres for the race , well clear of the competition . Lewis Hamilton was fastest , half a second ahead of Rosberg , with Sebastian Vettel between the two . Romain Grosjean was eliminated after a spin at turn six . He was joined on the sidelines by both Saubers , Carlos Sainz , Jr. and Sergio Pérez . 
 When the top ten drivers took to the track for the third and final part of qualifying , Nico Rosberg was able to beat his teammate Hamilton to pole position by 0 @.@ 078 seconds , securing his fifth pole in a row . Third was Sebastian Vettel , ahead of Bottas , who would be demoted three places due to a penalty . Following a mistake on his last timed lap , Kimi Räikkönen finished fifth fastest , ahead of Nico Hülkenberg . Albeit racing with an updated power unit , Daniel Ricciardo qualified slower than teammate Daniil Kvyat , and a ten @-@ place grid penalty for the change left him nineteenth on the grid . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 On his way to the starting grid , Carlos Sainz , Jr. stopped on track and had to be pushed back to pit lane , where he eventually started , only to retire after just a few hundred metres . At the start , both Mercedes drivers got away well and Hamilton tried to overtake Rosberg for the lead around the outside of the first corner , but were unable to do so . Jenson Button made a good start , moving from 16th to 13th , while Marcus Ericsson fell from 13th to 18th . Behind the leaders , the Ferraris retained third and fourth place respectively . Bottas moved into fifth after moving around the outside . Hamilton was able to follow Rosberg closely in the opening laps , while Daniel Ricciardo was the first driver to pit for new tyres on lap four . One lap later , Grosjean was able to use drag reduction system ( DRS ) to overtake Felipe Nasr for eleventh . With his back row start and an early pit stop , Ricciardo overtook the two Manor Marussias around lap nine . 
 Regular pit stops started on lap eleven , with Massa , Kvyat , Pérez and Grosjean being the first to come in . In addition , Nico Hülkenberg pitted and exited ahead of both Massa and Kvyat , who both had been in front of him before their respective stops . Bottas came in a lap later and maintained position . Kimi Räikkönen , who had been complaining about lack of grip in his front tyres , pitted on lap 13 . Race leader Rosberg came in for his tyre change on lap fourteen , simultaneously with Vettel , while Hamilton stayed out for another lap . He was ultimately unable to use his additional lap to come out in front of his teammate and remained second . On lap 18 , Nico Hülkenberg , who was suffering from an unstable car , overtook Maldonado for sixth place . Around lap 20 , Hamilton was moving closer to Rosberg , being in DRS range for multiple laps before reporting to the garage that his tyres would not last long and eased up . On lap 22 , Kvyat moved ahead of Maldonado as well and was now seventh . Lap 24 witnessed Massa go around Maldonado as well , while Felipe Nasr overtook Button for 14th . 
 Daniel Ricciardo was the first driver to pit for a second time on lap 30 . At the same time , a three @-@ way fight had emerged for ninth place , with Pérez in front of Grosjean and Verstappen . On lap 32 , Verstappen moved ahead of Grosjean and took another position from Pérez , who in turn lost another place to Grosjean in the same manoeuvre . Vettel pitted for a second time on lap 33 , prompting Rosberg to follow suit one lap later . Hamilton briefly held the lead , but pitted as well soon after , emerging to set a new fastest lap of the race albeit emerging behind both Ferraris . Lap 36 saw a collision between Pastor Maldonado and Marcus Ericsson , but both drivers were able to continue the race . Two laps later , Maldonado was in another fight for position with the other Sauber of Felipe Nasr , moving ahead . He ultimately received a five @-@ second penalty for his part in the incident with Ericsson . 
 By lap 43 , Romain Grosjean had managed to overtake Verstappen for tenth place . Hamilton started to lose ground on Rosberg , trailing him by 3 @.@ 4 seconds on lap 44 ; however , he managed to close the gap in the succeeding laps . Kimi Räikkönen put in his second stop on lap 47 , followed by Vettel 's third just one lap later , with Rosberg reacting and changing tyres as well . Hamilton changed tyres on lap 50 , and went on to set the fastest lap of the race one lap later . On lap 53 , Massa moved ahead of Grosjean into eighth place , but was already reported under investigation for his pre @-@ race tyre temperatures at that point . After serving his penalty , Maldonado managed to overtake Nasr for ninth place on lap 57 . Nasr , who was utilizing a two @-@ stop strategy , struggled with his tyres and fell back behind Ricciardo on lap 61 . Ricciardo gained another position at Pérez 's expense on lap 67 , while Verstappen moved into tenth place one lap later , overtaking Maldonado . At the front , Hamilton 's tyre started to wear off in the closing stages , enabling Rosberg to take victory 7 @.@ 7 seconds ahead of his teammate . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 At the podium interviews , which were conducted by former Formula One driver Martin Brundle , Nico Rosberg expressed delight about his victory , but also remembered the events of Paris which , as he put it , rendered " everything relative " . Replying to Brundle 's notion that driving the way he did earlier in the season would have given him a chance for the championship , Rosberg replied : " Thank you very much for that piece of advice , I could figure that out for myself ! " Lewis Hamilton on the other hand lamented the fact that he was unable to follow Rosberg closely on track without damaging his tyres too much , saying that he would have otherwise had the pace to pass him . Third placed Sebastian Vettel called it " a good race " , but also " not very exciting " , since the Ferraris had been " in no @-@ mans land " behind the Mercedes . 
 The main talking point after the race was Hamilton 's assertion that he would have preferred to go on a different strategy compared to his teammate to have a chance of passing him , an option denied by his team . Hamilton lobbied for his team to allow the drivers to take more risks , while his team principal , Toto Wolff , insisted that the team , not the drivers , were at liberty to make calls about strategy . Opinions on the matter were divided in the following days . 1996 world champion Damon Hill shared Hamilton 's frustration , saying : " I have some sympathy with what Lewis was saying , the drivers should be allowed to call the shots - and if he wants to try something different and basically zag when the other guy is <unk> . " Daniel Johnson , writing for The Daily Telegraph , concurred : " It was not just Hamilton 's failure to win the Brazilian Grand Prix , following home an obdurate Nico Rosberg ; it was the manner of it , lacking the killer move while obeying a Mercedes strategy which rendered the drivers more robots than racers . " Meanwhile , the Daily Mail 's Jonathan McEvoy agreed with Mercedes ' call , saying that it was " a no @-@ brainer for Mercedes to keep their drivers comfortably first and second by the safest means " . 
 After the race Felipe Massa was disqualified after it was found that his tyres were too hot at the start of the race . Pirelli stated that the highest temperature at his right rear tyre was found to be 137 ° C ( 279 ° F ) , while a maximum temperature of 110 ° C ( 230 ° F ) was allowed . Williams announced that they would appeal the penalty . However , on 19 November 2015 , Williams decided to drop the appeal , stating that since a decision was unlikely to be made before the end of the year , the matter would draw attention away from the preparations for the 2016 season . Following his collision with Marcus Ericsson , Pastor Maldonado came under criticism by Sauber team principal Monisha Kaltenborn , who called him " very annoying " , pointing to the fact that Maldonado had been involved in similar situations in the past . 
 Reception of the race was mainly negative . Italian newspaper Corriere dello Sport – Stadio called it " boring " , while fellow Italian paper Corriere della Sera wrote of " Formula One like a sleeping pill " . Sky Sports described the race as " mundane " and " soporific " . Spanish newspaper Sport highlighted Max Verstappen 's " spectacular " overtaking as bringing " the only colour " into the race . The Independent wrote , referring to Hamilton 's desperate attempts to pass Rosberg : " If there was ever a race which confirmed that Formula One should be looking at ways to facilitate overtaking , this was it . " In the wake of his experience , Hamilton called for Formula One to adjust rules to enhance overtaking , saying : " I guess for fans it 's probably not too exciting to watch . Of course , it 's always nice when you 're at the front , as we have been for some time now - but still , being able to race is what ... and also down the back , the rest of the field is probably what fans want to see . That 's probably a change that would be looked positively on . " Sebastian Vettel agreed , calling for more grip created by the tyres to make it easier to follow a car closely . 
 As a result of the race , Nico Rosberg secured second place in the Drivers ' Championship ahead of Vettel . Further back , Kimi Räikkönen closed the gap to fourth placed Valtteri Bottas to just one point ahead of the final race of the season . In the Constructors ' Championship , Williams and Force India secured their respective third and fifth places , with no team able to overcome them on points . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Notes : 
 ^ 1 — Valtteri Bottas received a three @-@ place grid penalty for overtaking Felipe Nasr under red @-@ flag conditions in Practice Two . 
 ^ 2 — Daniel Ricciardo was handed a ten @-@ place grid penalty for switching to a new power unit , having already used more than the allowed number of five . 
 ^ 3 — Felipe Nasr was given a three @-@ place grid penalty for impeding Felipe Massa during qualifying . 
 ^ 4 — Fernando Alonso was permitted to start the race by the stewards despite failing to set a qualifying time within the 107 % limit . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Notes : 
 ^ 5 — Carlos Sainz , Jr. stopped on the way to the grid and had to start from pit lane . His 10th spot on the starting grid was left open . 
 ^ 6 — Felipe Massa originally finished eighth , but was disqualified for a breach of temperature limits in his rear right tyre . 
 = = = Championship standings after the race = = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 Bold text indicates 2015 World Champions . 
 = Akodon caenosus = 
 Akodon caenosus is a rodent in the genus Akodon found in northwestern Argentina and south @-@ central Bolivia . Since its description in 1918 , it has been alternatively classified as a separate species or a subspecies of Akodon lutescens ( formerly Akodon puer ) . The species Akodon aliquantulus , described from some very small Argentine specimens in 1999 , is now recognized as a synonym of A. caenosus . 
 Akodon caenosus is very small , averaging 19 @.@ 3 g ( 0 @.@ 68 oz ) in weight , and variable in coloration , but generally brown . The underparts are sharply different in color from the upperparts . The skull has a short rostrum ( front part ) , broad interorbital region ( between the eyes ) , and narrow braincase . The karyotype includes 34 chromosomes . A. caenosus mostly occurs in Yungas vegetation and breeds mainly during the winter . It shares its range with many other sigmodontine rodents , including three other species of Akodon . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 E. <unk> collected the first specimen of the species on August 21 , 1917 , in Jujuy Province , northwestern Argentina , and the next year Oldfield Thomas used the animal as the holotype of a new subspecies of Akodon puer , a Bolivian species . He described the new subspecies Akodon puer <unk> as darker and duller in color than the Bolivian form , but otherwise identical . In 1920 , Thomas recognized additional differences between the two after examining more specimens and classified the Argentine form as a separate species , Akodon <unk> . Most subsequent authors followed this arrangement , but since the 1980s some have placed the form ( now spelled caenosus ) in A. puer again . In 1990 , Philip Myers and others reviewed the Akodon boliviensis group , which includes A. puer and A. caenosus , and again considered caenosus as a subspecies of puer . They retained caenosus as a separate subspecific name for the Argentine populations of puer because of its small size , dark fur , and distinctive karyotype . Myers and colleagues had included the name lutescens J.A. Allen , 1901 , as a subspecies of Akodon puer Thomas , 1902 , and in 1997 Sydney Anderson noted that the older name lutescens should instead be used for the species because of the Principle of Priority ; therefore , he utilized the combination Akodon lutescens caenosus for the Argentine subspecies . Through the 1990s and 2000s , authors continued to differ on the classification of caenosus as either a full species or a subspecies or puer ( = lutescens ) . 
 Two small Akodon collected in 1993 in Tucumán Province , northwestern Argentina , were given the name Akodon <unk> in 1994 , but that name is a nomen nudum and therefore not available for use under the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature . In 1999 , Mónica Díaz and others described these animals more fully as a new species , Akodon aliquantulus , which they considered closely related to A. puer caenosus . The specific name means " how little " or " how few " in Latin and refers to the small size of the species and the small sample Díaz and colleagues could use . In the 2005 third edition of Mammal Species of the World , Guy Musser and Michael Carleton termed the differentiation between A. aliquantulus and A. lutescens ( = puer ) " unimpressive " and recommended further taxonomic research . Common names proposed for A. aliquantulus include " Diminutive <unk> " and " Tucumán Grass Mouse " . 
 In 2010 , Pablo <unk> and colleagues reviewed the members of the Akodon boliviensis group in Argentina . On the basis of sequences from the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene , they found A. caenosus to be closest to A. lutescens and A. subfuscus , forming a clade that was the sister group to a clade of the remaining species in the A. boliviensis group — A. boliviensis , A. spegazzinii , A. sylvanus , and A. polopi . They classified A. caenosus as a species separate from A. lutescens because the two forms did not form a single clade ( A. caenosus was instead closer to A. subfuscus ) , and because the difference between the cytochrome b sequences of A. lutescens and A. caenosus was relatively high at 3 @.@ 5 % . A. aliquantulus was reduced to a synonym of A. caenosus , because they found no substantial morphometrical differentiation between the two and could not replicate the characters Díaz and colleagues had noted as diagnostic for A. aliquantulus . 
 = = Description = = 
 Akodon caenosus is the smallest of the Argentine members of the A. boliviensis group – indeed , among the smallest of all species of Akodon . The upperparts are uniformly colored , but their tone is variable : generally ochraceous brown , but approaching yellow , red , or olivaceous in some individuals . Reddish tones occur mostly in lactating females . High @-@ altitude animals are generally lighter , but there is also conspicuous variation within populations . The ears are similar to the upperparts , but some individuals have the sides more rich and clear in color . The underparts are clearly different in color , varying from light gray to yellowish or reddish . There are yellowish rings around the eyes , which are more highly developed in high @-@ altitude populations . There are white to yellowish hairs on the fore- and hindfeet . The tail is variably covered with hair and is dark brown above and white to buffy below . 
 In the skull , the rostrum ( front part ) is short , the interorbital region ( between the eyes ) is broad and hourglass @-@ shaped , and the braincase is small . The zygomatic plate , the flattened front part of the zygomatic arch , is narrow , with poorly developed zygomatic notches at their front , but there is considerable variation in the features of the plate . The incisive foramina ( openings in the front part of the palate ) extend back to between the first molars . The mesopterygoid fossa , the openings behind the bony palate , is very narrow . In the mandible ( lower jaw ) , the masseteric ridges , which anchor some of the chewing muscles , extend to near the front margin of the first molar . The capsular process , a raising in the back part of the mandibular bone that accommodates the root of the incisor , is poorly developed . The upper incisors are orthodont ( with the chewing edge in the horizontal plane ) to slightly opisthodont ( with the chewing edge inclined backwards ) . The molars show some accessory crests and other features , such as the anteroloph on the first upper molar and the mesoloph on the first and second upper molar . 
 In twelve adult Argentine A. caenosus , total length is 124 to 169 mm ( 4 @.@ 9 to 6 @.@ 7 in ) , averaging 151 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) ; tail length is 46 to 75 mm ( 1 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 0 in ) , averaging 62 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) ; hindfoot length is 20 to 26 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 to 1 @.@ 02 in ) , averaging 21 mm ( 0 @.@ 83 in ) ; ear length is 12 to 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 47 to 0 @.@ 59 in ) , averaging 13 mm ( 0 @.@ 51 in ) ; and weight is 10 @.@ 5 to 27 @.@ 5 g ( 0 @.@ 37 to 0 @.@ 97 oz ) , averaging 19 @.@ 3 g ( 0 @.@ 68 oz ) . The karyotype includes 34 chromosomes with a fundamental number of 40 major arms ( 2n 
 = 34 , FN = 
 40 ) . The autosomes includes three large and one very small pairs of metacentrics , with two long arms , and twelve small to medium @-@ sized acrocentric pairs , which have a long and a very short arm . The X chromosome is medium @-@ sized and subtelocentric , with a long and a short arm , and the Y chromosome is very small and is acrocentric in Jujuy specimens , but metacentric in those from Tucumán . The karyotype is separated from that of A. lutescens by three Robertsonian translocations . 
 Members of the Akodon boliviensis group , including A. caenosus , are generally similar and difficult to separate , but they differ in relative cranial measurements and some other characters . A. spegazzinii is larger than A. caenosus ; A. sylvanus is darker and has less contrast between the upper- and underparts and less well @-@ developed eye @-@ rings ; A. polopi has a squared interorbital region and more well @-@ developed ridges on its skull ; and A. boliviensis is paler and has more densely furred ears . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Akodon caenosus is found from northwestern Argentina into south @-@ central Bolivia . In Bolivia , it occurs in Tarija and Chuquisaca Departments . Its Argentine distribution extends from far northern Salta to southern Catamarca at altitudes ranging from 400 to 3 @,@ 100 m ( 1 @,@ 300 to 10 @,@ 200 ft ) . It is mostly found in Yungas , but also in the highest levels of the Chaco and the lowest of the Andean mountain grasslands . It occurs together with A. boliviensis , A. sylvanus , A. simulator , and species of Oxymycterus , Calomys , Phyllotis , Oligoryzomys , Necromys , <unk> , <unk> , and Abrothrix . Breeding occurs throughout the year , but mostly from November to January , during the summer . Molting occurs mostly during the winter and autumn . The <unk> fly Cuterebra apicalis and the flea <unk> gracilis have been recorded from A. caenosus . The mites Androlaelaps fahrenholzi , Androlaelaps rotundus , and <unk> <unk> have been found on A. aliquantulus . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The IUCN currently assesses A. aliquantulus as " Data Deficient " because so little is known about it , but notes that ranching and fire may threaten it . Akodon lutescens , including A. caenosus , is assessed as " Least Concern " because of its wide distribution , large population , and ability to persist in disturbed habitats . However , habitat loss may threaten Yungas populations . 
 = Yamhad = 
 Yamhad was an ancient Semitic kingdom centered on <unk> ( Aleppo ) , Syria . The kingdom emerged at the end of the 19th century BC , and was ruled by the Yamhadite dynasty kings , who counted on both military and diplomacy to expand their realm . From the beginning of its establishment , the kingdom withstood the aggressions of its neighbors Mari , Qatna and Assyria , and was turned into the most powerful Syrian kingdom of its era through the actions of its king Yarim @-@ Lim I. By the middle of the 18th century BC , most of Syria minus the south came under the authority of Yamhad , either as a direct possession or through vassalage , and for nearly a century and a half , Yamhad dominated northern , northwestern and eastern Syria , and had influence over small kingdoms in Mesopotamia at the borders of Elam . The kingdom was eventually destroyed by the Hittites , then annexed by Mitanni in the 16th century BC . 
 Yamhad 's population was predominately Amorite , and had a typical Bronze Age Syrian culture . Yamhad was also inhabited by a substantial Hurrian population that settled in the kingdom , adding the influence of their culture . Yamhad controlled a wide trading network , being a gateway between the eastern Iranian plateau and the Aegean region in the west . Yamhad worshiped the traditional Northwest Semitic deities , and the capital Halab was considered a holy city among the other Syrian cities as a center of worship for Hadad , who was regarded as the main deity of northern Syria . 
 = = History = = 
 Little of Halab has been excavated by archaeologists , as Halab was never abandoned during its long history and the modern city is situated above the ancient site . Therefore , most of the knowledge about Yamhad comes from tablets discovered at Alalakh and Mari . 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 The name Yamhad was likely an Amorite tribal name and is used synonymously with Halab when referring to the kingdom . The city of Halab was a religious center in northern Syria , and was mentioned by the name Ha @-@ lam , as a vassal of the Eblaite empire , which controlled most of Syria in the middle of the third millennium BC . Halab 's fame as a Holy City contributed to its later prominence , the main temple of the north Syrian storm god Hadad was located in the city , which was known as the " City of Hadad " . Ebla was destroyed twice at the end of the 3rd millennium , and the power vacuum in the region caused by its fall paved the way for Halab later rise . 
 The name Halab as well as that of Yamhad appeared for the first time during the Old Babylonian period , when Sumu @-@ Epuh , the first Yamhadite king , was attested in a seal from Mari as the ruler of the land of Yamhad , which included , in addition to Halab , the cities of Alalakh and Tuba . Sumu @-@ Epuh consolidated the kingdom and faced Yahdun @-@ Lim of Mari who had a dynastic alliance with Yamhad to oppose Assyria , but eventually campaigned in the north threatening the kingdom . The Yamhadite king supported the <unk> tribes and formed an alliance with other Syrian states including Urshu , Hassum and Carchemish , against the Mariote king who defeated his enemies , but was eventually killed by his son Sumu @-@ <unk> . 
 = = = Rivalry with Assyria and expansion = = = 
 The rise of Shamshi @-@ Adad I of Assyria proved more dangerous to Yamhad than Mari . The Assyrian king was an ambitious conqueror with the aim to rule Mesopotamia and the Levant , and called himself king of the World . Shamshi @-@ Adad surrounded Yamhad by alliances with <unk> , Hassum and Urshu to the north and by conquering Mari to the east forcing Zimri @-@ Lim the heir of Mari to flee . Sumu @-@ Epuh welcomed Zimri @-@ Lim and aimed to use him against Assyria since he was the legitimate heir of Mari . 
 Shamshi @-@ Adad most dangerous alliance was with Qatna , whose king Ishi @-@ Adad , became Assyria 's agent at Yamhad borders and married his daughter to Yasmah @-@ Adad , the son of the Assyrian king who was installed by his father as king of Mari . Sumu @-@ Epuh was apparently killed during his fight with Shamshi @-@ Adad and was succeeded by his son Yarim @-@ Lim I , who consolidated his father 's kingdom and turned it into the most powerful kingdom in Syria and northern Mesopotamia . Yarim @-@ Lim surrounded Shamshi @-@ Adad by alliances with Hammurabi of Babylon and <unk> @-@ pi @-@ el II of Eshnunna , then in 1777 BC he advanced to the east conquering Tuttul and installing Zimri @-@ Lim as governor of the city . The death of the Assyrian king came a year later . Yarim @-@ Lim then sent his army with Zimri @-@ Lim , to restore his ancestors throne as an ally @-@ vassal to Yamhad , cementing the relationship through a dynastic marriage between the new Mariote king and Shibtu , the daughter of Yarim @-@ Lim . 
 Yarim @-@ Lim spent the next years of his reign expanding the kingdom , which reached the upper Khabur valley in the east , and Mamma in the north . The Syrian city @-@ states were subdued through alliances or force ; Mamma , Ebla and Ugarit became vassals of Yamhad , while Qatna remained independent but was forced into peace , as it has lost its ally , the late Shamshi @-@ Adad I and was left alone in the face of Yamhad . A sample of Yarim @-@ Lim policy of diplomacy and war can be read in a tablet discovered at Mari , that was sent to the king of <unk> in southern Mesopotamia , which included a declaration of war against Der and its neighbor <unk> , the tablet mentions the stationing of 500 Yamhadite warships for twelve years in <unk> , and the Yamhadite military support of Der for 15 years . Yarim @-@ Lim 's accomplishments elevated Yamhad into the status of a Great Kingdom and the Yamhadite king title became the Great King . 
 Yarim @-@ Lim I was succeeded by his son Hammurabi I who had a peaceful reign . He was able to force <unk> into submission , and sent troops to aid Hammurabi of Babylon against Larsa and Elam . The alliance ended after the Babylonian king sacked Mari and destroyed it . Babylon did not attack Yamhad , however , and the relations between the two kingdoms remained peaceful in later years . Hammurabi I was succeeded by his son Abba @-@ El I , whose reign witnessed the rebellion of the city <unk> , which was under the authority of prince Yarim @-@ Lim , Abba @-@ El 's brother . The king responded to the rebellion by destroying <unk> , and compensating his brother by giving him the throne of Alalakh , thus creating a cadet branch of the dynasty . 
 = = = Decline and end = = = 
 The era of Abba @-@ El I 's successors is poorly documented , and by the time of Yarim @-@ Lim III in the mid @-@ 17th century BC , the power of Yamhad declined due to internal dissent . Yarim @-@ Lim III ruled a weakened kingdom , and although he imposed Yamhadite hegemony over Qatna , the weakening was obvious as Alalakh had become all but independent under the self @-@ declared king <unk> . In spite of this regression , the king of Yamhad remained the strongest king of the Syrian states , as he was referred to as a Great King by the Hittites , the diplomatic equal of the Hittite king . 
 The rise of the Hittite kingdom in the north posed the biggest threat to Yamhad , although Yarim @-@ Lim III and his successor Hammurabi III were able to withstand the aggressions of the Hittite king Hattusili I through alliances with the Hurrian principalities . Hattusili chose not to attack Halab directly and began with conquering Yamhad 's vassals and allies , starting with Alalakh in the second year of his Syrian campaigns c . 1650 BC ( Middle chronology ) or slightly later . Hattusili then turned to attack the Hurrians in Urshu northeast of Halab , and won in spite of military support from Halab and Carchemish for the Hurrians . The Hittite king then defeated Yamhad in the battle of Mount <unk> , and sacked Hassum along with several other Hurrian cities in the sixth year of his Syrian wars . After many campaigns , Hattusili I finally attacked Halab during the reign of Hammurabi III . The attack ended in a defeat , the wounding of the Hittite king and his later death c . 1620 BC . Hattusili 's campaigns considerably weakened Yamhad , causing it to decline in status : the monarch ceased to be styled a Great King . 
 Hattusili was succeeded by his grandson Mursili I , who conquered Halab c . 1600 BC and destroyed Yamhad as a major power in the Levant . Mursili then left for Babylon and sacked it , but was assassinated upon his return to his capital <unk> , and his empire disintegrated . Halab was rebuilt and the kingdom expanded to include Alalakh again . The reestablished kingdom was ruled by kings of whom nothing but their names is known ; the first is Sarra @-@ El , who might have been the son of Yarim @-@ Lim III . The last king of the dynasty to rule as king of Halab was <unk> @-@ <unk> I , who was killed during a rebellion orchestrated by king <unk> of Mitanni who annexed Halab c . 1525 BC . <unk> @-@ <unk> 's son , Idrimi , fled to Emar then conquered Alalakh c . 1518 BC . Seven years following his conquest of Alalakh , Idrimi made peace with Mitanni and was acknowledged as a vassal , and allowed to control Halab , though he had to relocate the dynasty 's residence to Alalakh and relinquish the title of " King of Halab " ; the use of the name Yamhad also ended . 
 = = = Kings of Yamhad = = = 
 Dates are estimated and given by the Middle chronology . 
 = = People and culture = = 
 The people of Yamhad were Amorites and spoke the Amorite language , and apart from a few Mesopotamian , Egyptian and Aegean influences , Yamhad belonged mainly to middle Bronze Age Syrian culture . This culture influenced the architecture and the functions of the temples , which were mainly cultic , while political authority was invested in the royal palace , in contrast to the important political role of the temples in Mesopotamia . 
 Since the capital Halab has not been excavated , the architecture of the kingdom is archaeologically best represented by the city of Alalakh , which was subordinate to Halab and ruled by a king belonging to the Yamhadite royal house . The Amorites in general built large palaces that bear architectural similarities to old <unk> @-@ era palaces . They were adorned with grand central courtyards , throne rooms , tiled floors , drainage systems and plastered walls , which suggest the employment of specialized labor . Evidence exists for the presence of Minoan Aegean fresco artists who painted elaborate scenes on the walls of the palaces in Alalakh . 
 Yamhad had a distinctive Syrian iconography , which is clear in the seals of the kings that gave prominence to the Syrian gods . Egyptian influence was minimal and limited to the ankh , which cannot be interpreted as an emulation of Egyptian rituals but rather as merely a substitute for the cup held by the deity elsewhere . Yamhad had a special pattern of trim called the Yamhad style , which was favored in Mari during the reign of king Zimri @-@ Lim , whose queen Shibtu was the daughter of Yarim @-@ Lim I. 
 After the fall of the Akkadian Empire , Hurrians began to settle in the city and its surroundings , and by c . 1725 BC they constituted a sizable portion of the population . The presence of a large Hurrian population brought Hurrian culture and religion to Halab , as evidenced by the existence of certain religious festivals that bear Hurrian names . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Halab 's location has always been a factor in its prominence as an economic center . Yamhad 's economy was based on trade with the Iranian Plateau , Mesopotamia , Cyprus and Anatolia , with the city of Emar as its port on the Euphrates , and Alalakh with its proximity to the sea as its port on the Mediterranean . 
 The actions of Yarim @-@ Lim I and his alliance with Babylon proved vital for the kingdom 's economy , for they secured the trade between Mesopotamia and northern Syria , with the king of Mari protecting the caravans crossing from the Persian Gulf to Anatolia . Emar attracted many Babylonian merchants , who lived in the city and had a lasting impact on the local scribal conventions . As late as the 14th century BC , texts of the so @-@ called Syrian type from Emar preserve distinct Babylonian traits . 
 The markets of Yamhad became a source of copper , which was imported from the mountains ( probably Anatolian ) and Cyprus . However , the Babylonian invasion of Mari had a negative impact on the trade between the two kingdoms , as the road became dangerous because of the loss of Mari 's protection to the caravans . This led the Babylonian king Samsu @-@ iluna to build many strongholds up the river valley , and to establish colonies of mercenaries known as the " Kassite Houses " to protect the middle Euphrates area . Those colonies later evolved into semi @-@ independent polities that waged a war against the Babylonian king Ammi @-@ <unk> and caused the trade temporarily to stop . 
 = = Religion = = 
 The people of Yamhad practiced the Amorite religion , and mainly worshiped the Northwest Semitic deities . The most important of these were Dagon , who was considered the father of the gods , and Hadad , who was the most important deity and the head of the pantheon . The kingdom was known as the " land of Hadad " , who was famous as the Storm @-@ God of Halab beginning in the middle of the 3rd millennium BC . His main temple was located on the citadel hill in the center of the city and remained in use from the 24th century BC until at least the 9th century BC . 
 The title " Beloved of Hadad " was one of the king 's titles . Hadad was the kingdom 's patron god , and all treaties were concluded in his name , which was also used to threaten other kingdoms and to declare wars . As the Hurrian presence grew , so did Hurrian religious influences and some of the Hurrian deities found a place in the Yamhadite pantheon . King Abba @-@ El I mentioned receiving the support of the Hurrian goddess <unk> in one of the Alalakh tablets ( <unk> was the spouse of the Hurrian main deity Teshub , but in Abba @-@ El I 's tablet , she is associated with Hadad ) . Later , the Hurrians started to identify Teshub with Hadad , who became Teshub the Storm @-@ God of Halab . 
 Beside the general gods , the kings had a " head god " , that is , a deity who had an intimate connection for the worshiper . King Yarim @-@ Lim I described Hadad as the god of the state , but the Mesopotamian deity Sin as the god of his head . His son Hammurabi I did likewise . 
 = Battle of Beersheba ( 1917 ) = 
 The Battle of Beersheba ( Turkish : <unk> <unk> , German : Schlacht von <unk> ) , was fought on 31 October 1917 , when the Egyptian Expeditionary Force ( EEF ) attacked and captured the Yildirim Army Group garrison at Beersheba , beginning the Southern Palestine Offensive of the Sinai and Palestine campaign of World War I. After successful limited attacks in the morning , by infantry from the 60th ( London ) and the 74th ( Yeomanry ) Divisions of the XX Corps from the south @-@ west , the Anzac Mounted Division ( Desert Mounted Corps ) launched a series of attacks . These attacks , against the strong defences which dominated the eastern side of Beersheba , eventually resulted in their capture during the late afternoon . Shortly afterwards , the Australian Mounted Division 's 4th and 12th Light Horse Regiments ( 4th Light Horse Brigade ) conducted a mounted infantry charge with bayonets in their hands , their only weapon for mounted attack , as their rifles were slung across their backs . While part of the two regiments dismounted to attack entrenchments on Tel es Saba defending Beersheba , the remainder of the light horsemen continued their charge into the town , capturing the place and part of the garrison as it was withdrawing . 
 After the EEF defeats at the first and second battles of Gaza in March and April 1917 , the victorious German General Friedrich Freiherr Kress von Kressenstein ( commander of the three divisions of the Fourth Army ) further strengthened his defensive line stretching from Gaza to Beersheba , and received reinforcements of two divisions . Meanwhile , Lieutenant General Philip Chetwode ( commanding the EEF 's Eastern Force ) began the Stalemate in Southern Palestine , defending more @-@ or @-@ less the same entrenched lines held at the end of the second battle , initiated regular mounted reconnaissance into the open eastern flank of the Gaza to Beersheba line , towards Beersheba . In June the Ottoman Fourth Army was reorganised when the new Yildirim Army Group was established , commanded by German General Erich von Falkenhayn . At about the same time , the British General Edmund Allenby replaced General Archibald Murray as commander of the EEF . Allenby reorganised the EEF to give him direct command of three corps , in the process deactivating Chetwode 's Eastern Force and placing him in command of one of the two infantry corps . At the same time Chauvel 's Desert Column was renamed the Desert Mounted Corps . As the stalemate continued through the summer in difficult conditions on the northern edge of the Negev Desert , EEF reinforcements began to strengthen the divisions ( which had suffered more than 10 @,@ 000 casualties during the two battles for Gaza ) . While the primary functions of the EEF and the Ottoman Army during this time were to man the front lines and patrol the open eastern flank , both sides conducted training of all units . By mid @-@ October , while the battle of Passchendaele continued on the Western Front , the XXI Corps maintained the defences in the Gaza sector of the line . Further , Allenby 's preparations for the manoeuvre warfare attacks on the Ottoman defensive line , beginning with Beersheba , and the subsequent advance to Jerusalem , were nearing completion with the arrival of the last reinforcements . 
 Beersheba was defended by lines of trenches , supported by isolated redoubts on earthworks and hills , which covered all approaches to the town . The Ottoman garrison was eventually encircled by the two infantry and two mounted divisions , as they ( and their supporting artillery ) launched their attacks . The 60th ( London ) Division 's preliminary attack and capture of the redoubt on Hill 1070 , led to the bombardment of the main Ottoman trench line . Then a joint attack by the 60th ( London ) and 74th ( Yeomanry ) Divisions captured all their objectives . Meanwhile , to the north @-@ east of Beersheba the Anzac Mounted Division cut the road from Beersheba to Hebron ( which continued to Jerusalem ) . Continuous fighting against the main redoubt and defences on Tel el Saba ( dominating the eastern approaches to the town ) , resulted eventually in its capture in the afternoon . During this fighting the 3rd Light Horse Brigade had been sent to reinforce the Anzac Mounted Division , while the 5th Mounted Brigade ( armed with swords ) remained in corps reserve . With all brigades of both mounted divisions already committed to the battle , the only brigade available ( the 4th Light Horse Brigade ) , was ordered to capture Beersheba . These sword @-@ less mounted infantrymen galloped over the plain , riding towards the town and a redoubt supported by entrenchments , on a mound of Tel es Saba south @-@ east of Beersheba . While the 4th Light Horse Regiment on the right , jumped trenches before turning to make a dismounted attack on the Ottoman infantry ( in the trenches , gun pits and redoubts on rising ground ) , most of the 12th Light Horse Regiment on the left rode on across the face of the main redoubt , to find a gap in the Ottoman defences . These squadrons rode on across the railway line and into Beersheba , to complete the first step of an offensive which would see the EEF capture Jerusalem , six weeks later . 
 = = Background = = 
 After their second defeat at Gaza in April , General Archibald Murray sacked the commander of Eastern Force , Lieutenant General Charles Dobell . Lieutenant General Philip Chetwode was promoted to command Eastern Force , while Harry Chauvel was promoted to Lieutenant General with command of the Desert Column . Major General Edward Chaytor was promoted from the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade , to command the Anzac Mounted Division replacing Chauvel . With the arrival of General Edmund Allenby in June , Murray was also relieved of command of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force ( EEF ) , and sent back to England . 
 Although the strategic priorities of Enver Pasha and the Ottoman general staff , were to push the EEF back to the Suez Canal and retake Baghdad , Mesopotamia , and Persia , the EEF was fortunate that the victorious Ottoman forces , were not in a position in April 1917 , to launch a large @-@ scale counterattack immediately after their second victory at Gaza . Such an attack against rudimentary EEF defences on the northern edge of the Negev could have been disastrous for the EEF . Instead , both sides constructed permanent defences stretching from the sea west of Gaza to Shellal on the Wadi Ghazzeh . From Shellal , the lightly @-@ entrenched EEF line extended to El <unk> before continuing south 7 miles ( 11 km ) to Tel el Fara . The western sector ( stretching from Gaza to Tel el Jemmi ) was strongly entrenched , wired and defended by EEF and Ottoman infantry . The eastern sector , stretching east and south across the open plain , was patrolled by Desert Column 's mounted infantry and yeomanry . At every opportunity patrols and outposts harassed opposing forces , while wells and cisterns were mapped . 
 The town of Gaza was strongly defended , having been developed into " a strong modern fortress , well entrenched and wired , with good observation and a glacis on its southern and south – eastern face . " From Gaza , the formidable 30 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 48 km ) Ottoman front line stretching eastwards , dominated the country to the south , where the EEF was deployed in open , low @-@ lying country cut by deep wadis . The Ottoman defences in the centre of the line , at Atawineh and Hairpin redoubts ( at Hareira and <unk> ) , supported each other as they overlooked the plain , making a frontal attack virtually impossible . Between Gaza and Hareira , the Ottoman defences were strengthened and extended along the Gaza @-@ to @-@ Beersheba road , east of the Palestine Railway line from Beersheba . Although these trenches did not extend to Beersheba , strong fortifications made the isolated town into a fortress . 
 The open eastern flank was dominated by the Wadi Ghazzeh , which , at the beginning of the stalemate , could only be crossed in five places . These were at the mouth on the Mediterranean coast , the main Deir el Belah @-@ to @-@ Gaza road crossing , the Tel el Jemmi crossing ( used during the first battle of Gaza ) , the Shellal crossing on the Khan Yunis @-@ to @-@ Beersheba road , and the Tel el Fara crossing on the Rafa @-@ to @-@ Beersheba road . The difficulty of crossing the wadi elsewhere was due to the 50 – 60 feet ( 15 – 18 m ) perpendicular banks cut into the Gaza – Beersheba plain by regular floods . Additional crossings were constructed during the stalemate . 
 Beersheba ( Hebrew : Be @-@ er Sheva ; Arabic : Bir es Sabe ) at the foot of the Judean Hills , was built on the eastern bank of the Wadi es Saba , which joins the Wadi Ghazzeh at Bir el Esani , before stretching to the Mediterranean Sea . Located at the north @-@ west end of a flat , treeless plain about 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) long by 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) wide , the town is surrounded by rocky hills and outcrops . To the north – north – east , 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) away on the southern edge of the Judean Hills , the <unk> Abu <unk> rises to 1 @,@ 558 feet ( 475 m ) behind the town , overlooking it by 700 feet ( 210 m ) ; lower hills range east and south , with a spur of the plateau of Edom on the south @-@ east , extending towards the town . 
 Since ancient times , the town had been a trading centre , with roads radiating from it in all directions . To the north @-@ east the only sealed , metalled motor road in the region , stretched along a spine of the Judean Hills to Jerusalem , via <unk> <unk> , Hebron and Bethlehem , along the Wadi el Khalil ( a tributary of the Wadi es Saba ) . To the north @-@ west the road to Gaza 26 miles ( 42 km ) away crossed the open plain , to the west the track to Rafa via Tel el Fara ( on the Wadi Ghazzeh ) , while the southern road to Asluj and Hafir el Auja continued the metalled road from Jerusalem . 
 Beersheba was developed by the Ottoman Empire from a camel @-@ trading centre on the northern edge of the Negev , halfway between the Mediterranean and the Dead Sea . It was on the railway line which ran from Istanbul to Hafir el Auja ( the main Ottoman desert base during the raid on the Suez Canal in 1915 until the EEF advance to Rafa outflanked it ) , and which was damaged beyond repair in May 1917 during an EEF raid . Beersheba 's hospital , army barracks , railway station ( with water tower ) , engine sheds , large storage buildings , and a square of houses , were well @-@ designed and strongly @-@ constructed stone buildings , with red tiled roofs and a German beer garden . The inhabitants of the region from Beersheba northwards varied ; the population was mainly Arabs belonging to Sunni Islam , with some Jewish and Christian colonists . 
 The EEF had already decided to invade Ottoman territory before the first battle of Gaza , on the basis of Britain 's three major war objectives : to maintain maritime supremacy in the Mediterranean , preserve the balance of power in Europe , and protect Egypt , India and the Persian Gulf . Despite the EEF 's defeats during the first two battles of Gaza ( with about 10 @,@ 000 casualties ) , Allenby planned an advance into Palestine and the capture of Jerusalem to secure the region and cut off the Ottoman forces in Mesopotamia from those in the Levant and on the Arabian Peninsula . The capture of Gaza , which dominated the coastal route from Egypt to Jaffa , was a first step towards these aims . 
 = = = Lines of communication = = = 
 During the stalemate from April to the end of October , 1917 the EEF and the Ottoman Army improved their lines of communication , laid more railway and water lines and sent troops , guns and ammunition forward to defend their front lines . While the Ottoman lines of communication were shortened by the retreat across the Sinai , the EEF advance across the Sinai Peninsula into southern Palestine lengthened theirs , requiring a large investment in infrastructure . Since a brigade of light horse , mounted rifles , or mounted yeomanry ( including infantry divisions ) consisted of about 2 @,@ 000 soldiers requiring ammunition , rations and supplies , this was a major undertaking . By March 1917 , 203 miles ( 327 km ) of metalled road , 86 miles ( 138 km ) of wire @-@ and @-@ brushwood roads and 300 miles ( 480 km ) of water pipeline had been constructed , and 388 miles ( 624 km ) of railway lines laid at a rate of one kilometre a day . The railhead had been 30 miles ( 48 km ) from Gaza , but by mid @-@ April the line had reached Deir el Belah , with a branch line to Shellal completed . Since the Egyptian Camel Transport Corps alone could not support a large offensive in advance of the railhead , horse- and mule @-@ drawn wagon trains were established . Supply columns were designed to support military operations by infantry and mounted troops for about 24 hours beyond the railhead . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Ottoman force = = = 
 Several weeks after the Ottoman victory at the Second Battle of Gaza , General Friedrich Freiherr Kress von Kressenstein ( commander of the victorious 3rd , 16th and 53rd Divisions of the Fourth Army ) was reinforced by the 7th and 54th Divisions . Until June 1917 , Sheria was the headquarters of the German commanded Ottoman force defending the Gaza @-@ Beersheba line , but as a consequence of EEF aerial bombing , it was moved to Huj in July . This force was reorganised into two corps to hold the Gaza @-@ to @-@ Beersheba line : the XX Corps ( 16th and 54th Infantry Divisions with the 178th Infantry Regiment and the 3rd Cavalry Division ) , and the XXII Corps ( 3rd , 7th , and 53rd Infantry Divisions ) . By July , the Ottoman force defending the Gaza @-@ to @-@ Beersheba line had increased to 151 @,@ 742 rifles , 354 machine guns and 330 artillery guns . While the XXII Corps defended Gaza with the 3rd and 53rd Divisions , the XX Corps was headquartered at Huj . 
 Beersheba was defended by the III Corps ; it was commanded by the recently arrived Ismet ( or <unk> ) Bey , who had his headquarters in the town . The III Corps had defended Gallipoli in 1915 . " [ T ] he Ottoman Army could still hold its own against the British Army ... [ and ] showed a high level of operational and tactical mobility " during the battles for the Gaza to Beersheba line . This corps consisted of the 67th and 81st Regiments ( 27th Division ) , a total of 2 @,@ 408 rifles ( of whom 76 percent were Arab ) , the 6th and the 8th Regiments of Lancers ( 3rd Cavalry Division ) , the 48th Regiment ( 16th Division ) and the 2nd Regiment ( 24th Divisions ) . The 143rd Regiment of the Ottoman XX Corps was about 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) north @-@ north @-@ west of Beersheba in the Judean Hills , but took " no part in the action " . A total of 4 @,@ 400 rifles , 60 machine guns and 28 field guns in these lancer and infantry regiments were available for the defence of Beersheba . 
 The tactical deployment of the Ottoman III , XX and XXII Corps defending the Gaza @-@ to @-@ Beersheba line did not change when Enver Pasa activated the Yildirim Army Group ( also known as Thunderbolt Army Group and Group F ) in June 1917 . This new group ( commanded by German General and Ottoman Marshal Erich von Falkenhayn , former Prussian Minister of War , Chief of Staff of the German field armies and commander of the Ninth Army ) was reinforced by surplus Ottoman units transferred from Galicia , Romania and Thrace after the collapse of Russia . Yildirim Army Group consisted of the Fourth Army headquarters and Syrian units commanded by Cemal Pasa which remained in Syria , and the Fourth Army headquarters in Palestine commanded by Kress von Kressenstein . The Fourth Army headquarters in Palestine was inactivated on 26 September 1917 to be reorganised into two armies and renamed . Six days later it was reactivated as the new Ottoman Eighth Army headquarters , still commanded by Kress von Kressenstein and responsible for the Palestine front . The new Seventh Army was also activated , commanded by Fevzi Pasa after the resignation of Mustafa Kemal . 
 = = = = Beersheba defences = = = = 
 The natural features around the town favoured defence . Beersheba , on a rolling plain devoid of trees or water to its west , was dotted with hills and tells to its north , south and east . These geographic features were strengthened by a series of entrenchments , fortifications and redoubts . Well @-@ constructed trenches , protected by wire , fortified defences north @-@ west , west and south @-@ west of Beersheba . This semicircle of entrenchments included well @-@ sited redoubts on a series of high points extending up to 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) from the town . 
 Defending the east of Beersheba , Tel el Saba redoubt was manned a battalion of the 48th Regiment and a machine @-@ gun company , while the 6th and 8th Regiments of the 3rd Cavalry Division were deployed on the high ground to the north @-@ east ( in the foothills of the Judean Hills ) to guard the Jerusalem road and keep Beersheba from being surrounded . To the west and south @-@ west of the town , the 27th Division 's 67th and 81st Infantry Regiments were deployed in a fortified semicircular line of deep trenches and redoubts strengthened by barbed wire . These regiments consisted primarily of " Arab farmers from the surrounding region , and although inexperienced fighters they were defending their own fields " . 
 The defenders were deployed as follows : 
 the 67th Infantry and the 81st Infantry Regiments ( 27th Division ) , defended Beersheba from the west and from south of the Wadi el Saba , 
 the 3rd Cavalry Division was deployed in the high ground northeast of the town , 
 one battalion of the 48th Infantry Regiment ( 16th Division ) and a machine gun company defended Tel es Saba , with the remainder of the regiment deployed to the south from the Khalasa road to Ras Ghannam , 
 two battalions of the 2nd Regiment of Anatolian riflemen from Chanak ( commanded by German officers ) were deployed in trenches defending the south @-@ east , facing the open plain south of Tel el Saba . 
 = = = EEF = = = 
 The EEF was reinforced by the arrival in June and July of the 7th and 8th Mounted Brigades and the 60th ( London ) Division , transferred from Salonika ; the 75th Division was formed in Egypt from Territorial and Indian battalions . The arrival of the two mounted brigades , made it possible to expand and reorganise the Desert Column into three divisions ( with the establishment of the Yeomanry Mounted Division ) . However , 5 @,@ 150 infantry and 400 yeomanry reinforcements were still needed in July to bring the infantry and mounted divisions that had taken part in the first two battles for Gaza , back up to strength . The last reinforcements to arrive before the battle , the 10th ( Irish ) Division , were marching north from Rafa on 29 October . 
 After General Edmund Allenby took command of the EEF at midnight on 28 June , he reorganised the force to reflect contemporary thinking and to resemble the organisation of Allenby 's army in France . He deactivated Eastern Force , establishing in its place two infantry and one mounted corps under his command : the XX , the XXI Corps and the Desert Mounted Corps ( formerly the Desert Column ) . 
 By 30 October there were 47 @,@ 500 rifles in the XX Corps ' 53rd ( Welsh ) Division , the 60th ( London ) Division , the 74th ( Yeomanry ) Division ( with the 10th ( Irish ) Division and the 1 / 2nd County of London Yeomanry attached ) and about 15 @,@ 000 troopers in two divisions of the Desert Mounted Corps , deploying for the attack on Beersheba . Most of Allenby 's infantry were Territorial Force divisions mobilised following the outbreak of the war . Several of the divisions had fought in the Gallipoli Campaign , the 52nd ( Lowland ) at Cape Helles , 53rd ( Welsh ) at Suvla Bay along with the 54th ( East Anglian ) Division . The 60th ( London ) Division had served on the Western Front and at Salonika . The 74th ( Yeomanry ) Division had recently been formed from 18 under – strength yeomanry regiments which had fought dismounted at Gallipoli . The 10th ( Irish ) Division , a New Army ( K1 ) division , had also fought at Gallipoli , at Suvla Bay and Salonika . The light horse and mounted rifle brigades in the Anzac and the Australian Mounted Divisions had also fought dismounted on Gallipoli . 
 = = = = Plan of attack = = = = 
 Chetwode 's XX Corps ( with the Imperial Camel Corps Brigade attached ) and Chauvel 's Desert Mounted Corps ( less the Yeomanry Mounted Division at Shellal ) , would make the main attack on Beersheba , while Bulfin 's XXI Corps held the Gaza sector entrenchments and the front line to the Mediterranean coast . Success at Beersheba depended on an attack with " resolution and vigour " because if unsuccessful , the dry , inhospitable country on the northern edge of the Negev would force attacking divisions to retire . 
 Allenby 's army – level and corps – level plans set out their objectives . The XX Corps would advance from the south and south @-@ west towards Beersheba , with the 60th ( London ) and 74th ( Yeomanry ) Divisions attacking the defences between the Khalassa @-@ to @-@ Beersheba road and the Wadi Saba . Beginning immediately after dawn , the two infantry divisions would attack the outer defences on the high ground west and south @-@ west of Beersheba in two stages , preceded by a bombardment . The left of the 60th ( London ) Division was to capture Hill 1070 ( also known as Point / Hill 1069 , part of the outer defences ) , while the main attack would begin when commanders of the 60th ( London ) and 74th ( Yeomanry ) Divisions were " satisfied that the wire was adequately cut " . Their objectives were the trenches defending Beersheba and the Ottoman artillery batteries supporting them . Subsequently , they would hold the high ground on the west side of the town . 
 Their left flank would be protected by " Smith 's Group " , consisting of the 158th Brigade ( 53rd Division ) minus two battalions and the Imperial Camel Brigade . This group , under orders from the 74th ( Yeomanry ) Division , held the section of the Beersheba defence stretching north from the Wadi es Saba towards the Beersheba @-@ to @-@ Tel el Fara road . The 53rd ( Welsh ) Division ( with a brigade of the 10th ( Irish ) Division attached ) was deployed on a 7 miles ( 11 km ) -long line stretching west to about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the Karm railway station . They would watch for a counterattack from Hareira to the north , and capture the Beersheba garrison if it attempted to retreat along the road to Gaza . The remainder of the 10th ( Irish ) Division in XX Corps reserve was deployed east of the Wadi Ghuzzee at Shellal , where the Yeomanry Mounted Division ( under Allenby ) was to deploy a line of outposts connecting the XX and XXI Corps ( holding the Gaza end of the line near el <unk> ) . 
 The first stage of the attack by the Anzac Mounted Division , with the Australian Mounted Division in reserve , was to seize the Ottoman garrison 's northern line of retreat by cutting the road to Jerusalem . Secondly , the mounted divisions were to attack and capture Beersheba ( and its water wells ) as quickly as possible to prevent the retreat of the Ottoman garrison . On their left , the 7th Mounted Brigade 's two regiments would link the XX Corps with the Desert Mounted Corps and attack the defences south of the town . 
 = = = = Preliminary moves = = = = 
 Beginning on 24 October the Australian Mounted Division moved to Rashid Bek ; the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade moved to Esani , following the 2nd Light Horse Brigade 's move to Bir ' Asluj 15 miles ( 24 km ) away , to develop the water supply , which remained inadequate on 27 October ( when two regiments of the brigade at Asluj were sent back to water at Khalasa — returning at dawn on 29 October — so there would be enough water for the Anzac Mounted Division at Asluj ) . Allenby inspected the three projects to expand the water supply , at Khalasa 10 miles ( 16 km ) from Esani , at Asluj , and the project at Shellal . He inspected preparations for the building of the forward railway ( to begin simultaneously with the attack ) , and the rear units working in the deserted camps , making them appear still in use . He also inspected EEF formations as they made their way towards their assembly places , and while they waited in the forward areas . Allenby instilled in all a sense of the importance he attached to their work . However , the Ottoman forces were informed of the build @-@ up : " There is evidence that they [ Yildirim Army Group ] were fairly accurately informed of the British dispositions " . This was confirmed on 28 October when the Yildirim Army Group knew that the camps at Khan Yunis and Rafa were empty . They placed three infantry divisions east of the Wadi Ghuzzee with a fourth — the 10th ( Irish ) Division — approaching the wadi , estimating more cavalry at Asluj and Khalasa . 
 Reconnaissance continued on Sunday , 28 October when the 5th Mounted Brigade rode to Ras <unk> , south of the Ras Ghannam area , reporting Ottoman troops occupying redoubts and a trench line east of Abu Shar and tents at Ras <unk> . The 6th Light Horse Regiment of the 2nd Light Horse Brigade , reconnoitred the Wadi Shegeib el <unk> area , reporting that the Ras Ghannam entrenchments were occupied by Ottoman Army soldiers . By 13 : 15 on 29 October , the water supply at Asluj was reported capable of providing one " drink per day per horse for the whole division " . An hour later the Desert Mounted Corps ordered the Anzac Mounted Division ( less two brigades ) to move from Esani to Asluj " tonight " , and at dusk the Australian Mounted Division began their night march ( following the Anzac Mounted Division ) to Esani . 
 While the Australian Mounted Division and the Anzac Mounted Division prepared to move east on 29 October , the guns of British and French naval ships on the Mediterranean Sea joined in the bombardment of Gaza ( which had begun two days earlier ) . Under orders from XX Corps the Yeomanry Mounted Division , detached from the Desert Mounted Corps , moved from the Mediterranean coast to the Wadi Ghuzzee between Shellal and Tel el Fara ; the infantry brigades of the 74th ( Yeomanry ) Division advanced to the right of the 53rd ( Welsh ) Division , holding the line in front of el Buqqar while the leading units of the 60th ( London ) Division approached <unk> and the 10th ( Irish ) Division approached from Rafa . By 21 : 15 on 29 October , the Anzac Mounted Division ( Desert Mounted Corps ) had assembled at Asluj , while the Australian Mounted Division began to arrive at Khalasa from Esani . 
 = = = = Approach marches , 30 – 31 October = = = = 
 The extensive and complex arrangements required to support the infantry attack from the west and the mounted attack from the east were completed by 30 October , when these attacking forces moved to positions within a day 's march of their deployment . Three divisions of XX Corps were concentrated in position : the 53rd ( Welsh ) Division at Goz el <unk> , the 60th ( London ) Division at Esani and the 74th ( Yeomanry ) Division at <unk> . In preparation for their final approach march , the Civil Service Rifles and the Queen 's Westminster Rifles ( 179th Brigade , 60th Division ) were supplied with tea and rum for the following day . In their haversack rations were five onions , a tin of bully beef , a slice of cooked bacon , biscuits and dates . 
 Chetwode opened his advance XX Corps headquarters at 17 : 00 at el Buqqar , and a half @-@ hour later the infantry approach marches began . The 74th ( Yeomanry ) Division advanced along the Tel el Fara @-@ to @-@ Beersheba road led by the 229th Brigade , with one brigade following to the north and another to the south of the road . The 60th ( London ) Division advanced from Abu <unk> , Bir el Esani and Rashid Bek in three brigade groups , the 181st Brigade ( on the left ) advanced north and south of the Wadi es Saba , while the 179th Brigade ( on the right ) advanced towards the Khalasa @-@ to @-@ Beersheba road . Their advance guard , the 2 / 13th Battalion , London Regiment , was attacked as they crossed the Wadi <unk> . Behind the 179th Brigade , the 180th Brigade in reserve advanced straight across from Esani . The XX Corps Cavalry Regiment , the Westminster Dragoons concentrated to the south @-@ east , covering the corps ' right flank with orders to connect with the Desert Mounted Corps south of Beersheba . In the rear , the 53rd ( Welsh ) Division dug in along the Wadi <unk> ; the XX Corps artillery , the last to move , approached from el Buqqar to the Wadi <unk> , arriving at 03 : 15 on 31 October . Reconnaissance had established that the Tel el Fara @-@ to @-@ Beersheba track ( via <unk> and el Buqqar ) could be used by the mechanical transport required to move the heavy gun battery and ammunition into position before the attack . This job was done by 135 lorries in three companies which travelled across the Sinai from Cairo . In addition , ammunition was hauled forward by 134 Holt tractors . 
 The deployment of the infantry divisions was completed by the light of a full moon . The 60th ( London ) Division linked with the 74th ( Yeomanry ) Division , after reaching their line of deployment at 03 : 25 while being targeted by rifle and shell fire . As the Civil Service Rifles battalion approached to between 2 @,@ 000 and 2 @,@ 500 yards ( 1 @,@ 800 and 2 @,@ 300 m ) from the Ottoman trenches , snipers fired on them . 
 Before they could deploy , the two mounted divisions of Desert Mounted Corps had to ride between 25 to 35 miles ( 40 to 56 km ) , to bring them within striking distance of Beersheba at dawn on 31 October . Chauvel arrived at the Asluj Desert Mounted Corps headquarters during the afternoon of 30 October , when arrangements were completed for the continuation of the marches by the Anzac and Australian Mounted Divisions . The Anzac Mounted Division was at Asluj , the Australian Mounted Division was at Khalasa ( three hours ' march behind ) and the 7th Mounted Brigade was at Bir el Esani . The No. 11 Light Armoured Motor Battery ( <unk> ) was sent ahead of the Anzac Mounted Division to a position on the north slopes of the Gebel el <unk> to guard their flank as they moved forward . The divisional headquarters at Asluj closed at 17 : 30 , and the last Anzac divisional troops left the railway station a half @-@ hour later . 
 From Asluj , the Anzac Mounted Division rode along the banks of the Wadi Imshash for about 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) , arriving about midnight at the crossroads east of Thaffha . Here , the division paused for two hours before continuing in two columns . The 2nd Light Horse Brigade column rode northeast , following the track to Bir Arara where the leading regiment , the 7th Light Horse arrived at 02 : 00 . They waited until 04 : 00 for the remainder of the brigade to arrive before continuing the advance towards Bir el Hamman . The 2nd Light Horse Brigade encountered an Ottoman outpost , occupying Hill 1390 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south @-@ west of Hamam , which fired on a screen of the New Zealand Mounted Rifle Brigade . The 7th Light Horse Regiment moved forward to occupy the Hill 1200 @-@ to @-@ Hill 1150 line 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) north of Hamam , at 07 : 00 , while the brigade remained at Bir el Hamam until 09 : 30 . The Anzac Mounted Division ( less the 2nd Light Horse Brigade ) — led by the Wellington Mounted Rifles Regiment ( New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade ) in the second column — rode north from the crossroads east of Thaffha past Goz Esh Shegeib . Here a small force of Ottoman soldiers were " brushed aside " before the advance continued to Iswaiwin . As the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade approached Iswaiwin at 06 : 45 , the 2nd Light Horse Brigade could be seen arriving at Bir el Hamman . Opposition units were seen in trenches near Hill 1070 ( also known as Hill 1069 , the EEF infantry 's first objective on the western side of Beersheba ) , and about two hostile squadrons were seen moving north from Beersheba towards Kh el <unk> . Dust and smoke were also seen rising from Chetwode 's XX Corps artillery bombardment , west and south @-@ west of Beersheba . After passing Iswaiwin , the Anzac Mounted Division concentrated near Khashim Zanna , on a line from Bir el Hamman to Bir Salim Abu Irgeig . 
 Following in reserve , the Australian Mounted Division marched out of Khalasa at 17 : 00 to arrive at Asluj at 20 : 30 on 30 October . After watering only their transport animals , they began their approach march from Asluj at 24 : 00 ( following the Anzac Mounted Division on their 32 to 34 miles ( 51 to 55 km ) ride ) arriving at 04 : 50 on 31 October at the Thaffha crossroads . The division continued , until linking with Desert Mounted Corps headquarters at 10 : 15 and establishing their divisional headquarters at Khashim Zanna ( on Hill 1180 ) at 12 : 30 . <unk> Zanna , 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) from Beersheba and 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) south of the main Ottoman defence on the eastern side of Beersheba at Tel el Saba , gave a clear view of the Beersheba plain and the battlefield . Their headquarters joined the headquarters of the Anzac Mounted Division and the Desert Mounted Corps , which had arrived at dawn on 31 October . 
 The 7th Mounted Brigade advanced direct from Bir el Esani to the vicinity of Goz en Naam , cutting the Khalasa @-@ to @-@ Beersheba road and holding a line connecting the XX Corps on their left and the Australian Mounted Division on their right . At 07 : 45 the brigade reported to the EEF by pigeon that they were holding a position from Goz el <unk> to Point 1210 , and that Ras <unk> and Ras <unk> were held by unknown numbers of defenders . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Bombardment = = = 
 The coordinated EEF bombardment began a " multiple – dimensional phased attack " at 05 : 55 , including successful wire @-@ cutting on two divisional fronts . The artillery was to subsequently shift its fire to target the Ottoman fortifications , trench lines and rear areas . During these bombardments , the newly organised Heavy Artillery Groups were to conduct counter – battery work targeting Ottoman guns . During this bombardment , shells from Ottoman counter @-@ battery artillery fire fell on some of the assembled infantry ; the 231st Brigade , 74th ( Yeomanry ) Division , and the 179th Brigade , 60th ( London ) Division , suffered severely : 
 High explosive is bursting between us and the guns . Shrapnel comes over . Burst above us and rains down on us . Steady stream of wounds . Young Morrison , elbow . Brown , arm . Low , head , and so on and so on . We ought to move back to our old position . Stupid to be in front of these guns which are banging away all the time , kicking up hells delight , and drawing fire which we are a catching . 
 The EEF bombardment was suspended to allow dust to settle and artillery observers to check their targets ; the wire appeared to be still intact , The bombardment resumed at 07 : 45 . 
 = = = Preliminary attacks = = = 
 At 08 : 20 a final , intense ten @-@ minute bombardment targeted the Ottoman trenches 30 yards ( 27 m ) in front of the infantry , to cover the work of wire @-@ cutting units . They cut gaps in the barbed wire entanglements so the battalions of the 181st Brigade , 60th ( London ) Division could launch their attack on Hill 1070 ( also known as Hill 1069 ) . Then the 2 / 22nd Battalion , London Regiment advanced to attack the redoubt on the hill , while the 2 / 24th Battalion , London Regiment attacked some defences just to the north . The 181st Brigade quickly captured both objectives , taking 90 prisoners while suffering about 100 casualties . 
 Our guns give a bang followed by another and we are smothered with flying bits . A <unk> <unk> from our guns 200 yards ( 180 m ) away . Cries of that 's got us . Several casualties . One fellow ( Rogers ) jaw all blown to fragments . Blood spurting from nose . Gives one or two heaves . Is bound up but expires and is carried away . High explosive busting lower down near the guns does not get them and they continue to bark in our ears . We [ are ] getting not only the report but the hungry rasp of the flame . Ground and stones and tunics spattered with blood but we still stay in front of the guns ! I take cover behind my spare water bottle and gas helmet so far as head is concerned ... We wonder how things are going . We have heard the bombardment and the machine guns , and the Stokes gun barrage of ten minutes which was to precede the assault by the 15th and 14th [ Regiments , 179th Brigade ] so presumably the dominating hill on our left , Hill 1070 , has come off all right . 
 During this attack , the leading brigades of the 74th ( Yeomanry ) Division advanced to conform to the 181st Brigade 's advance . As a consequence of the 231st Brigade suffered accurate shrapnel fire , it moved slightly to the right forcing the 230th Brigade ( on the left ) , to fill the gap with two supporting companies of the 10th Buffs . As the 74th ( Yeomanry ) Division 's advance approached the Ottoman trenches , heavy machine @-@ gun fire slowed their progress . By 10 : 40 , the 231st Brigade was within 500 yards ( 460 m ) of the front line ; the 230th Brigade was about 400 yards ( 370 m ) behind . These advances ( and the capture of Hill 1070 ) made it possible for the EEF 's heavy guns to move forward , to target barbed wire protecting the main Ottoman defensive line and Ottoman observation posts . 
 = = = XX Corps attack = = = 
 With the EEF guns moved forward into captured Ottoman positions , shelling recommenced at 10 : 30 , continuing with pauses to let the dust settle until noon , when there was still some concern that the wire in front of the 74th ( Yeomanry ) Division had not been cut . " In practice , much of the barbed wire had to be cut by the advancing troops as they came across the obstacle . " 
 The commanders of the 60th ( London ) and 74th ( Yeomanry ) Divisions decided to begin the main assault at 12 : 15 , screened by dust and smoke from another bombardment . Four brigades — the 179th , the 181st , ( 60th Division ) the 231st and the 230th ( 74th Division ) — launched the attack with two battalions in the first line ( except the 181st Brigade , which deployed three ) . The first @-@ line battalions were mainly organised with two of their " four companies in first line , each on a front of two platoons , the companies in two ' waves ' each of two lines " , advancing between 50 and 100 yards ( 46 and 91 m ) apart with a third wave to follow ( if required ) 300 yards ( 270 m ) behind . The 2 / 22nd Battalion , London Regiment remained to guard Hill 1070 . 
 At 12 o 'clock we heard that Hill 1070 had been taken and at 12 @.@ 15 we went over the top . I was in the front of the first assaulting wave as platoon runner to Sergeant <unk> . We were in a little wadi behind a ridge . It was necessary to get over the ridge , and off the skyline as quickly as possible . Once over the ridge it was a rush down the valley and a charge up the opposite ridge where the Turkish trenches were at the top . Over the ridge I noticed at once that there were scattered groups of machine gunners ... in emplacements of rocks and shallow trench . They were out there to keep a protecting fire on the Turkish trenches . To me they seemed to be right in the open and in suicide position ... Once over the ridge we all rushed down the slope past the machine gunners . Bullets were falling everywhere ... I just went on running , yelling , cheering and shouting out the Sergeant 's orders at the top of my voice . Every minute I was expecting a bullet to get me but my good luck stuck to me ... When we got to the Turkish trenches we jumped straight in and shot or bayoneted or took prisoner all that were there . I was lucky , the section of trench I jumped in was empty . On either side I could hear shooting and fighting but it was soon all over ... We advanced about 300 yards beyond the trenches where we worked " like hell " with our entrenching tools digging ourselves in . 
 The 2 / 15th Battalion , London Regiment on the right of the 179th Brigade , suffered severely from machine @-@ gun fire ; however , when the machine @-@ gun positions were captured all resistance ceased . The 24th and 25th Battalions of the Royal Welch Fusiliers of the 231st Brigade ( 74th Division ) " met with stout resistance " at one location , where the Ottoman soldiers fought to the last man . Intense hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting in the trenches continued until 13 : 30 , when the Ottoman trench line on the western side of Beersheba ( stretching from the Khalasa @-@ to @-@ Beersheba road in the south to the Wadi es Saba in the north ) was captured . During this fighting , the two Royal Welch Fusiliers battalions captured three @-@ quarters of the prisoners ( and suffered two @-@ thirds of the casualties ) of the XX Corps . The XX Corps captured 419 prisoners , six guns , " numerous machine guns " and materiel ; casualties included 136 killed , 1 @,@ 010 wounded and five missing ( most casualties from shrapnel from Ottoman artillery and machine guns during the preliminary bombardment ) . 
 The final objective of the XX Corps , as described in the " XX Corps Instructions " , was to destroy the opposition units at Beersheba , in cooperation with the Desert Mounted Corps . The instructions continued , " The objective of the attack by the XX Corps on Z day is the capture of the line of works between the <unk> – Beersheba road and the Wadi esh Sabe , the capture of the enemy guns between Beersheba and the trenches west of the town , and in co @-@ operation with the cavalry to drive the enemy from the remainder of his defences at Beersheba " . However , it is claimed , " West of Beersheba the XX Corps had all its objectives and could without doubt have captured Beersheba itself before the mounted troops . " The objective of the infantry divisions was not to capture Beersheba , but to keep the main garrison occupied while the Desert Mounted Corps captured the town . The official British historian stated , " The capture of Beersheba itself was the task of the Desert Mounted Corps , which required the water in the town for its horses " . " XX Corps Instructions " stated : " outposts will be placed approximately on the ' Blue Line ' ( Tracing " A " ) to cover the consolidation of the position and reorganization of the attacking troops . " No units were to go beyond the ' Blue Line ' without orders or to capture guns . 
 After the capture of the main trenches , some guns from the 60th ( London ) and 74th ( Yeomanry ) Divisions were to target defences north and south of the main attack ; others were deployed forward into the captured position to pursue the Ottoman forces with fire , attack stubborn defenders and deal with counterattacks . A further advance by the 2 / 13th Battalion , London Regiment , 60th ( London ) Division , through the forward infantry battalions , attacked and captured two field guns beyond the final objective with Lewis Guns after forcing the Ottoman detachments to retreat . Desert Mounted Corps headquarters reported seeing Ottoman troops retiring into Beersheba at midday , but it was not until late in the afternoon that two infantry brigades of the 54th ( East Anglian ) Division and the Imperial Camel Brigade , monitoring these defences north of the Wadi es Saba , became uncertain that the trenches were still defended . The 230th Brigade ( 74th Division ) was ordered to launch an attack at 18 : 00 and an hour later , the reserve 230th Brigade occupied the northern trenches " with little difficulty " . They had been abandoned by all but a few snipers , since Beersheba had already been captured by the light @-@ horsemen 's charge which had begun at 16 : 30 . The 60th ( London ) and 74th ( Yeomanry ) Divisions bivouacked on the battlefield behind a line of outposts ; the 53rd ( Welsh ) Division remained , covering the western flank while the 10th ( Irish ) Division bivouacked at Goz el Basal . 
 = = = Ottoman reinforcements and withdrawals = = = 
 With the loss of two battalions of the 67th Regiment defending the western side of Beersheba , Ismet Bey ( commanding the Beersheba garrison ) sent in his last reserve ( the third battalion of the 2nd Regiment ) to reinforce the south @-@ western sector . At the same time , he withdrew two companies of the 81st Regiment ( defending the area north of the Wadi es Saba ) back into Beersheba . 
 = = = Desert Mounted Corps attacks = = = 
 The Anzac and the Australian Mounted Divisions rode between 25 and 35 miles ( 40 and 56 km ) from Asluj and Khalasa respectively , circling south of Beersheba during the night of 30 – 31 October to get into position to attack from the east . The Australian Mounted Division ( in Desert Mounted Corps reserve ) deployed southeast of Beersheba ( near Khashim Zanna ) to support the Anzac Mounted Division 's attacks . The 8th Light Horse Regiment ( 3rd Light Horse Brigade , Australian Mounted Division ) was deployed as a screen , linking with the 7th Mounted Brigade on their left and the New Zealand Mounted Rifle Brigade on their right , in front of the Australian Mounted Division . 
 The first objective of the Anzac Mounted Division was to cut the road from Beersheba to Hebron and Jerusalem , about 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) north @-@ east of the town at Tel el Sakaty ( also known as <unk> ) , to prevent reinforcement and retreat in that direction . The second objective , the redoubt on the height of Tel es Saba ( which dominated the east side of Beersheba north and south ) had to be captured , before an attack across the open ground could be launched . By dawn the Anzac Mounted Division was deployed with the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade at Bir Salim abu <unk> , and the 1st Light Horse Brigade in support behind the New Zealanders , with the 2nd Light Horse Brigade concentrated near Bir Hammam . 
 While the infantry battle was being fought on the west side of Beersheba , Edward Chaytor ( commanding the Anzac Mounted Division ) ordered the 2nd Light Horse Brigade to attack Tel el Sakaty at 08 : 00 and gain control of the Jerusalem road . At the same time , he ordered the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade ( with the 1st Light Horse Brigade in support ) to attack the Ottoman garrison holding fortifications on Tel el Saba . These hard @-@ fought attacks continued into the afternoon , when two regiments of the 3rd Light Horse Brigade ( Australian Mounted Division ) were ordered to reinforce the Anzac Mounted Division 's attack on Tel el Saba . 
 If there was one lesson more than another I had learned at Magdhaba and Rafa , it was patience , and not to expect things to happen too quickly . At Beersheba , although progress was slow , there was never that deadly pause which is so disconcerting to a commander . 
 = = = = Tel el Sakaty = = = = 
 Soon after the Anzac Mounted Division 's 2nd Light Horse and the New Zealand Mounted Rifle Brigades advances began at 09 : 00 , they were targeted by heavy artillery fire from the hills on the north side of the Beersheba @-@ to @-@ Jerusalem road . The two brigades were also forced to slow their advance across the plain , cut by a number of narrow , deep wadis , which made fast riding impossible . At this time , shells from the XX Corps ' bombardment could be seen bursting on the hills west of Beersheba . 
 At 10 : 05 , the leading troops of the 7th Light Horse Regiment ( 2nd Light Horse Brigade ; not to be confused with the 7th Mounted Brigade near Ras Ghannam to the , south of Beersheba ) , were seen approaching Tel el Sakaty . By 11 : 17 , they reported their advance was increasingly difficult due to hostile units defending the high ground south of Sakaty . An Ottoman convoy of 10 wagons was seen leaving Beersheba on the road to Jerusalem , and the regiment was ordered to cut the road before the convoy escaped . Through heavy shell and shrapnel bombardment and point @-@ blank machine @-@ gun fire , they galloped to a position just south of the road . While an artillery battery got into position to support the light @-@ horse regiment 's attack on Tel el Sakaty , at 11 : 40 the 5th Light Horse Regiment ( 2nd Light Horse Brigade ) was ordered to engage the Ottoman left flank . As they crossed the Wadi Khalil and the road to Jerusalem , the 5th Light Horse Regiment was also heavily shelled by artillery and fired on by machine guns from the high ground north and northwest overlooking the area . Five minutes later , the 7th Light Horse Regiment cut the road and captured the convoy ( 47 prisoners , eight horses and eight wagons loaded with forage ) . However , the regiment was pinned down just beyond , in a small wadi in the rough country north of Wadi Khalil by the gun battery and machine guns located on Tel el Sakaty ( above the road ) . With the arrival of the 5th Light Horse Regiment , by 13 : 30 the two regiments ( supported by artillery ) were advancing to attack the high ground northeast of Sakaty . At 14 : 45 , the 2nd Light Horse Brigade reported that three Ottoman guns appeared to have been put out of action by EEF artillery fire . While they continued to hold the road to Jerusalem , the 5th and 7th Light Horse Regiments found cover in the Wadi <unk> ( although targeted from the high ground north of Sakaty by five Ottoman machine guns ) where they remained until evening . The 1 @,@ 100 @-@ strong Ottoman 3rd Cavalry Division defended this hilly area north of Beersheba . 
 The 5th and 7th Light Horse Regiments ( 2nd Light Horse Brigade ) continued to hold an outpost line during the night , covering the Beersheba @-@ to @-@ Jerusalem road and the northeastern approaches behind Tel el Sakaty . The remainder of the 7th Light Horse Regiment withdrew 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south at 18 : 00 to bivouac for the night , with the 5th Light Horse Regiment on the right . One squadron at a time was sent to water at Bir el Hamam , and a good water supply was also found in the Wadi Hora by the 2nd Light Horse Brigade . The 7th Light Horse Regiment with two men injured ( one wounded in action ) , captured a total of 49 prisoners ( 39 of whom were captured in the Wadi <unk> ) . 
 = = = = Tel el Saba = = = = 
 At about 08 : 55 , some 200 Ottoman cavalry with transport and guns were seen moving north from Beersheba along the road to Jerusalem ; shortly afterwards , an aircraft reported seeing a large camp at Tel el Saba . This was the main Ottoman defensive position on the east side of Beersheba , located on the prominent 20 acres ( 8 @.@ 1 ha ) of Tel el Saba and dominating the eastern side of the town . With its steep sides littered by boulders , this flat – topped hill was strongly garrisoned by a battalion ( described as 300 rifles and a machine gun company of eight machine guns ) deployed for general defence . Without trees or scrub for cover , the area " was swept by the fire of numerous machine guns and field guns concealed in the town ... [ and ] on the strongly entrenched hill of Tel el Saba . " <unk> fire from two directions would have annihilated attackers . 
 At 09 : 10 the Anzac Mounted Division 's New Zealand Mounted Rifle Brigade advanced towards Tel el Saba with the intention of enveloping it from the north , supported by Royal Horse Artillery ( RHA ) ( which came into action at a range of 3 @,@ 000 yards ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) ) . However , at that distance the artillery was unable to make a dent on the Ottoman defence . The brigade advanced with the Canterbury Mounted Rifle Regiment on the right and the Auckland Mounted Rifle Regiment on the left , each supported by four machine guns . Receiving heavy machine @-@ gun and artillery fire , the Auckland Mounted Rifles Regiment formed an advance guard and rode to within 1 @,@ 800 yards ( 1 @,@ 600 m ) of Tel el Saba across open country to the Wadi Saba . Here excellent cover for horses and machine guns was found , as well as good positions from which machine gunners could provide effective suppressive fire . The frontal attack would be launched on foot , since mounted attack from any direction was impossible . The Auckland regiment launched their attack under the north bank of the wadi , advancing on a narrow front under the good cover provided by the wadi . Due to heavy Ottoman machine @-@ gun fire , from a point 800 yards ( 730 m ) from the Ottoman position the attack was slowed ; one troop at a time advanced under cover from New Zealand machine guns . 
 By 10 : 00 , Chaytor ordered the 1st Light Horse Brigade to reinforce the attack on Tel el Saba from the south and cooperate in the attack . The brigade sent the 3rd Light Horse Regiment ( 1st Light Horse Brigade ) , with one subsection of a machine @-@ gun squadron , to cover the New Zealanders ' left flank . At 10 : 15 they made a " dashing advance " across the plain against artillery and machine @-@ gun fire . Shortly afterwards two of the squadrons took up an exposed position on the bank of the wadi , covering the attackers ' left flank . Heavy machine gun , Hotchkiss and rifle fire targeted the Ottoman position , providing covering fire for the Auckland Mounted Rifles Regiment attack . 
 The Auckland and Canterbury Mounted Rifles Regiments engaged Ottoman soldiers near a bend in the Wadi Saba southeast of Tel el Saba at 11 : 00 ; a dismounted attack was launched by the 3rd Light Horse Regiment ( with one troop from the Auckland Mounted Rifle Regiment ) along the south bank of the Wadi Saba . This force covered the main attack by the rest of the Auckland Mounted Rifles Regiment , which advanced on the north bank supported by machine @-@ gun cover fire . At the same time , the Inverness Battery attached to the 1st Light Horse Brigade came into action against Tel el Saba ; it covered the advances of the 3rd Light Horse Regiment and the Somerset Battery , which had moved to within 1 @,@ 300 yards ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) of Tel el Saba . By now , the attacking artillery was heavily shelling both Ottoman defensive positions and the hard @-@ to @-@ find Ottoman machine @-@ gun positions . Their positions were communicated to the artillery by flags , and accurate shelling targeted them . Hostile aircraft began to circle the battlefield , dropping bombs on groups of led horses with many casualties . 
 By 13 : 00 the 2nd Light Horse Regiment ( 1st Light Horse Brigade ) was ordered to reinforce the left of the 3rd Light Horse Regiment . About a half @-@ hour later , the Australian Mounted Division 's 9th and 10th Light Horse Regiments ( 3rd Light Horse Brigade ) and two artillery batteries were also ordered to reinforce the Anzac Mounted Division 's attack on Tel el Saba . The horses of the New Zealand Mounted Rifle Brigade were all watered at 13 : 10 in the Wadi Saba . 
 Orders for a general attack on Tel el Saba issued at 13 : 55 , while the 3rd Light Horse Brigade and B Battery , Honourable Artillery Company ( HAC ) moved to reinforce the attack at 14 : 00 . At 14 : 05 , a squadron of the 2nd Light Horse Regiment ( 1st Light Horse Brigade ) was deployed to give effective covering fire on the right flank with machine and Hotchkiss guns and rifles , while the rest of the 2nd Light Horse Regiment attacked and captured two blockhouses . From these recent captures , they targeted the flank of the Tel el Saba defences , causing the defenders ' fire to " slacken " . The Canterbury Mounted Rifles Regiment was , by now across the Wadi Khalil and firing on the rear of the Tel el Saba position , but they were held up by Ottoman defenders on the slopes of the hills overlooking the Beersheba @-@ to @-@ Jerusalem road . The Australian and New Zealand troops from across the Wadi Saba covered the attack on Tel el Saba by the 3rd Light Horse Regiment ( 1st Light Horse Brigade ) on the left , while the Auckland Mounted Rifles Regiment on the right closed in from the northeast . 
 The Auckland Mounted Rifles Regiment began their frontal assault at 14 : 05 , advancing steadily in short rushes under cover of all available guns and machine guns , to gain the trenches on a hill on the eastern flank 400 yards ( 370 m ) east of Tel el Saba at 14 : 40 . Here , they captured 60 prisoners and three machine guns . Two of the captured machine guns were turned against the main Ottoman redoubt , greatly weakening their position . The attacking troops of the Auckland Mounted Rifles Regiment reorganised before launching their final assault . They " moved forward steadily , and then rushed Tel el Saba , which fell at 15 : 00 " when a machine gun and several prisoners were captured . This captured machine gun was turned on escaping Ottoman soldiers running towards Beersheba . They killed about 25 Ottoman defenders on Tel el Saba and several others in the surrounding country ; while 132 prisoners , four machine guns , rifles , ammunition and horses were captured . The Auckland Mounted Rifles Regiment had seven killed and 200 wounded . One squadron of the 2nd Light Horse Regiment and one squadron of 3rd Light Horse Regiment ( 1st Light Horse Brigade ) followed the retreating Ottoman soldiers to take up a position near the junction of the wadis to the west of Tel el Saba . From there , they fired on the retiring Ottoman units moving northwest over the high ground . At the same time , one squadron of the 2nd Light Horse Regiment ( 1st Light Horse Brigade ) advanced against a counterattack launched from Beersheba , " and drove it off " . Orders were received by the New Zealand Mounted Rifle Brigade at 17 : 50 to put Tel el Saba " in a state of defence " against the possibility of more counterattacks . 
 Chaytor began to move his headquarters to Tel el Saba when he saw that it had been captured at 15 : 00 . Ottoman artillery began to target Tel el Saba a quarter @-@ hour after its capture , and several hostile aircraft bombed the Tel . The attacks continued throughout the afternoon , and when the rest of the Anzac Divisional Headquarters moved to Tel el Saba at 18 : 00 , they were machine @-@ gunned by hostile aircraft . Hostile aircraft dropped five bombs at 17 : 00 on the 3rd Light Horse Brigade , killing four and wounding twenty @-@ eight Australians . Forty @-@ six horses were killed , and sixteen wounded . A bomb was dropped on the 4th Light Horse Field Ambulance about the same time : " [ s ] ome six horses lay <unk> , blood running everywhere " . 
 Just before sunset , the bearers returned from watering their horses ... 16 men with two horses each . As they dismounted , a German Taube came over – for the third time in 24 hours ! With the setting sun behind him , and flying very low , it was impossible to see him until he was right overhead . I then saw the observer leaning out of the cockpit and the bomb leave the plane a few hundred feet up . The bomb burst on impact with the hard ground ... a direct hit on our bearer lines ! He then turned and machine @-@ gunned the camp , which added to the confusion . In the black dust and smoke , horses were rearing and neighing , while a few galloped madly away . Men were running and shrieking . Grabbed my medical haversack and ran about 20 yards to reach Brownjohn . His left leg had been blown off ... bleeding badly . His hand was also wounded . Staff Sergeant Stewart came running and together we got a tourniquet on his thigh in about 90 seconds ... Others were attending Oates , high right arm blown off , and Hay with his left buttock cut clean away . I found Hamlyn being dressed , with a bad wound over his heart , and in great pain . Gave him a shot of morphia . Cogan , Brown and Whitfield also slightly wounded . Bill Taylor was one of the worst types of casualty – shell shock . Apparently standing between two horses , only a few feet from the bomb , he was not hit . But we placed him on a stretcher , a pathetic , incoherent , weeping wreck , unable to walk . 
 = = = = Ottoman response = = = = 
 During the final attack and capture of Tel el Saba , the 1st Light Horse Brigade reported at 14 : 20 a squadron of Ottoman cavalry leaving Beersheba and heading north . At about 14 : 30 , they targeted the Anzac divisional headquarters with high @-@ explosive shells fired from Ottoman field guns . However , after the capture of Tel el Saba " Beersheba was now untenable and , unknown to the attackers , a withdrawal was ordered " . German commander of the Eighth Army Kress von Kressenstein explained : 
 The understrength Turkish battalion entrusted with its defence doggedly held out with great courage and in so doing fulfilled its obligation . They held up two English cavalry divisions for six hours and had prevented them from expanding their outflanking manoeuvres around the Beersheba @-@ Hebron road . 
 Ismet Bey , commanding the Beersheba garrison , ordered a general retirement north from Beersheba at 16 : 00 . He withdrew to the headquarters of the 143rd Regiment ( XX Corps ) , located about six miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) north of Beersheba in the Judean Hills . At the same time , the 27th Division 's engineers were ordered to destroy the Beersheba water supply . The 48th Regiment , which had been deployed to defend the southern sector of the Beersheba defences from the Khalasa road to Ras Ghannam with one battalion and a machine @-@ gun company defending Tel el Saba , was the first unit to retire . They moved to establish a rearguard position on the Wadi Saba before the Australian light horsemen captured the town . 
 = = = = Beersheba = = = = 
 When Tel el Saba was captured at 15 : 00 , the Anzac Mounted Division ordered an attack on the final objective : the town of Beersheba . Chaytor ordered the 1st and the 3rd Light Horse Brigades to make a dismounted advance to the Beersheba Mosque in the northern outskirts of Beersheba , on a line stretching from Point 1020 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) northwest of Tel el Saba to Point 970 south of the town . These brigades were deployed with the 9th and 10th Light Horse Regiments ( 3rd Light Horse Brigade ) on the right , the 1st Light Horse Brigade in the centre , and the 4th Light Horse Brigade ( Australian Mounted Division ) on their left . 
 As the 1st and 3rd Light Horse Brigades continued their dismounted attacks , they were shelled by Ottoman artillery . By 17 : 30 the 1st Light Horse Brigade had blocked all exits from Beersheba in the mosque area , including the hospital and barracks , capturing 96 prisoners , hospital staff , a priest , medical @-@ corps details and 89 patients . The brigade established an outpost line in this sector , having suffered seven men killed and 83 wounded , 68 horses killed and 23 wounded . The 10th Light Horse Regiment ( 3rd Light Horse Brigade ) held an outpost line north of Beersheba during the night , when a group of Ottoman soldiers approached the line at about 21 : 00 . They were surrounded on three sides before the regiment fired on them with machine @-@ guns , killing 50 . 
 = = = = Light Horse charge = = = = 
 Allenby was at Chetwode 's XX Corps headquarters at el Buqqar when he sent a telegram to Chauvel , ordering the capture of Beersheba " before nightfall " . However , before the telegram reached Chauvel the 4th Light Horse Brigade was preparing for their mounted attack . Aerial reconnaissance had established the feasibility of such an attack , since the trenches stretching across the direction of the charge were not reinforced by barbed wire or horse pits . The commander of the 12th Light Horse Regiment said : 
 It was clear to me that the job had to be done before dark , so I advised galloping the place as our only chance . I had some experience of successful mounted surprise attacks on the Boer camps in the South African war . 
 When the possibility of a charge by mounted infantry riding home , was raised in the Australian Mounted Division 's Preliminary Instruction No. 1 ( dated 26 October 1917 ) ; it suggested the bayonet was equal to the sword as a weapon for mounted attack " if used as a sword for pointing only " . The Preliminary Instruction advised that the bayonet be hand @-@ held , since controlling a horse during a charge would be difficult if the bayonet was fixed to the rifle . Divisional armourers were ordered to sharpen all bayonets " at once . " 
 At 11 : 30 Brigadier William Grant 's 4th Light Horse Brigade arrived at Iswaiwin , where men and horses rested while the battle was being fought by the XX Corps and the Anzac Mounted Division , until 15 : 45 when they were ordered to saddle up " at once " . At 16 : 00 Grant sent for the commanders and seconds @-@ in @-@ command of the 4th and 12th Light Horse Regiments , issuing orders for their attack on Beersheba . The 4th Light Horse Regiment of Victorians and the New South Wales ' 12th Light Horse Regiment were 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) from Beersheba when they formed up behind a ridge about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of Hill 1280 . On the left of the Anzac Mounted Division , the 4th Light Horse Regiment deployed north of the Iswaiwin @-@ to @-@ Beersheba road ( also known as the Black W road ) , with the 12th Light Horse Regiment south of the road on their left . They were armed with " neither sword nor lance [ but ] ... with bayonets in their hands " . The regiment 's " A " , " B " and " C " squadrons formed three squadron lines ( in that order ) between 300 and 500 yards ( 270 and 460 m ) apart , each squadron line extended to 5 yards ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) . One subsection of the 4th Machine Gun Squadron was attached to each regiment , although Lieutenant Colonel Murray Bourchier ( commander of the 4th Light Horse Regiment which fought in the trenches and redoubt ) said " The Hotchkiss guns were useless , the fast pace affording no time to get them into action " . 
 While " direction was given to the movement " by Grant and his brigade major , with Bourchier and Cameron leading their regiments the first half @-@ mile was covered at a walk . Afterwards , Grant joined the reserve squadrons and regimental headquarters , while the regimental commanders remained " never far behind the vanguard " ; " [ a ] t 16 : 30 the two regiments moved off at the trot , deploying at once " . As the leading squadrons , preceded by scouts 70 to 80 yards ( 64 to 73 m ) in front , came within range of Ottoman riflemen manning the defences " directly in their track " a number of horses were hit by sustained rapid fire . 
 In these Ottoman trenches ( primarily facing south , with a few shallow trenches facing east ) , the defenders saw the light horsemen charge and " opened fire with shrapnel on the 4th and 12th Regiments immediately they deployed " . As the advance became a gallop , the 12th Light Horse Regiment was fired from the trenches on Ras Ghannam . The Notts Battery opened fire on machine @-@ gunners in the trenches at Ras Ghannam ; after a second shot , the Ottoman soldiers were seen in retreat . The two regiments had ridden nearly 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) when the 12th Light Horse Regiment ( on the left ) was targeted by heavy machine @-@ gun fire from the direction of Hill 1180 , " [ c ] oming from an effective range which could have proved destructive ; but the vigilant officers of the Essex Battery ... got the range at once , and ... put them out of action with the first few shells " . The charging regiments were again fired on about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) east of Beersheba . Here the Notts Battery silenced and drove out a garrison in a redoubt at Point 980 ( indicated in red on the brigade 's war @-@ diary sketch map ) which was enfilading the charge . The remainder of the 4th Machine Gun Squadron and the reserve squadron of the 12th Light Horse Regiment , advanced towards Point 980 and the town in the wadi on the left , to protect the left flank of the charging regiments . 
 I consider that the success was due to the rapidity with which the movement was carried out . Owing to the volume of fire brought to bear from the enemy 's position by machine @-@ guns and rifles , a dismounted attack would have resulted in a much greater number of casualties . It was noticed also that the morale of the enemy was greatly shaken through our troops galloping over his positions thereby causing his riflemen and machine gunners to lose all control of fire discipline . When the troops came within short range of the trenches the enemy seemed to direct almost all his fire at the horses . 
 = = = = = 4th Light Horse Regiment attacks trenches = = = = = 
 [ A ] great sight suddenly sprung up on our left , lines and lines of horsemen moving . The Turks were on the run and the Aus . <unk> was after them . We could see the horses jumping the trenches , dust everywhere . 
 As the 4th Light Horse Regiment approached the fortifications directly in front of them , their leading squadron jumped the advance trenches at the gallop and the main 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) -deep , 4 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) -wide trenches , defended by Ottoman soldiers . The leading squadron then dismounted in an area of tents and dugouts in the rear , where they were joined by a troop of the 12th Light Horse Regiment . While the led horses were galloped to cover , the troopers launched a dismounted attack on the trenches and dugouts , killing between 30 and 40 , before the remainder surrendered . The defenders " fought grimly , and a considerable number were killed " , while four Gallipoli veterans were shot dead as they dismounted a few feet from the Ottoman trenches . As the second line of squadrons approached the Ottoman trenches one of the troops in " B " squadron dismounted , to attack and capture the advance trench before continuing to support the attack on the main trenches . Stretcher @-@ bearers rode forward , working amidst the dismounted fighting around the earthworks ; where one was shot dead at close range . After capturing the redoubt east of Beersheba it was consolidated by the 4th Light Horse Regiment , which held the area overnight in case of counterattack . 
 = = = = = 12th Light Horse Regiment captures Beersheba = = = = = 
 When the leading squadrons charged up to the trenches and the redoubt , the squadron commander and about 12 troopers of 12th Light Horse Regiment , dismounted to attack with rifle and bayonet , while the remainder of the regiment continued to gallop passed the redoubt on the right , to ride through a gap in the defensive line . When the second line squadron of the 12th Light Horse Regiment approached the trenches and redoubt , most of the squadron continued mounted riding through the gap . However , as both squadron commanders had dismounted to fight in the trenches and earthworks , the troopers who continued mounted were led by Captains Robey and Davies . These leading troops stopped to assemble at a point near where the road from Asluj crossed the Wadi Saba , behind the main Ottoman defences . When Robey and Davies mounted troopers were reorganised , they rode along the Asluj road into Beersheba in force , to capture the town . 
 When they reached a red brick building in Beersheba near the Mosque , Robey 's squadron rode towards the western side of the town , towards the north , to reach a point about 200 yards ( 180 m ) south of the railway station , then they proceeded across the railway line before turning to the right , to finish up near an oval roofed building on the northern outskirts of the town . Meanwhile , Davies ' squadron rode up the main street to join Robey on the northern outskirts . Here both squadrons turned about , to stop and capture an Ottoman column , attempting to escape Beersheba . Most of the column surrendered along with nine guns . One troop " silenced " Ottoman soldiers holding trenches east of Beersheba when about 60 of them tried to escape . They were recaptured by a troop from the 12th Light Horse Regiment 's " C " Squadron . A large proportion of the Ottoman troops in the town , were eventually killed or captured . It has been estimated more than half the Ottoman dismounted troops in Beersheba , were captured or killed , while 15 of the 28 guns in the town were captured . The 12th Light Horse Regiment handed over 37 officers and 63 other ranks prisoners to Brigade Headquarters at 23 : 00 with four guns and transport . Together the 4th and 12th Light Horse Regiments captured 1 @,@ 148 prisoners , 10 field guns , four machine guns , a huge quantity of military stores , an aerodrome , and railway rolling stock . Total captures by Desert Mounted Corps for the day amounted to 1 @,@ 528 prisoners . All available engineer units were sent to develop the wells in the town but the supply was not great . Fortunately on 25 October there had been thunderstorms which left pools of water over a wide area from which the horses were watered . 
 The prisoners were moved to an area , near the railway viaduct on the outskirts of Beersheba , where they were assembled and counted . Only the 3rd Cavalry Division had managed to withdraw earlier in the day . Meanwhile , the 12th Light Horse Regiment established all round defensive positions , including <unk> guarding the pumping station which were withdrawn at 23 : 00 , when brigade headquarters arrived , and took over garrisoning duties . A patrol of one NCO and eight men made a reconnaissance at 23 : 00 , towards the southwest returning at 03 : 00 , with 23 prisoners to report " All Clear . " The 12th Light Horse Regiment bivouacked at 24 : 00 in Beersheba before being ordered at 04 : 00 to stand to arms and saddled up . 
 The capture of Beersheba by the 12th Light Horse Regiment has been largely written out of history . " The honor and the glory of securing the town went to the 4th Australian Light Horse in a cavalry charge that in notoriety ranks with the charge of the Light Brigade at Balaklava in 1854 . " Allenby overlooks the 12th Light Horse Regiment 's capture of Beersheba in his report to Wigram intended for the King . According to him , only the 4th Light Horse Regiment , charged and captured the town . " Time was short , and the Brigade Commander , Brigadier – General Grant DSO , sent his leading regiment to charge the trenches . This Regiment , the 4th Light Horse , galloped over the trenches , which were 8 feet deep and 4 feet wide , and full of Turks . This ended all resistance , and put a neat finish to the battle . " His Despatches of 16 December 1917 to the Secretary of State for War , republished in The London Gazette do not identify further , the " Australian Light Horse , " be they regiments or brigades . 
 = = = = = Supporting units = = = = = 
 Chauvel ordered the 5th and 7th Mounted Brigades to move in support by following the charge , with the 7th Mounted Brigade covering the left as it advanced from the direction of Ras Ghannam ; and at 16 : 40 , the 11th Light Horse Regiment was ordered by the 4th Light Horse Brigade to advance in support . These supporting units have been described as the 11th Light Horse Regiment " follow [ ing ] at the trot , and then came FitzGerald 's 5th Mounted Brigade , while away on the left the 7th Mounted Brigade advanced briskly along the Khalasa road " , there was no " substantial following in close support . 
 The 11th Light Horse Regiment 's 489 troopers and 23 officers were about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to the southwest , covering the outpost line connecting the Australian Mounted Division with the 7th Mounted Brigade across the Iswaiwin @-@ to @-@ Beersheba road . They had replaced the 8th Light Horse Regiment ( 3rd Light Horse Brigade ) at 15 : 45 . At 17 : 30 the 11th Light Horse Regiment moved to rejoin the 4th Light Horse Brigade headquarters , arriving in Beersheba at 19 : 30 . The regiment then moved to the western and northern edges of the town , to man an outpost line against a counterattack . 
 The 5th Mounted Brigade , trained and armed for a mounted attack , was " close behind Chauvel 's headquarters , " while the 4th Light Horse Brigade was " nearer Beersheba " , when the decision to charge was made . " Chauvel had hesitated for a moment whether to employ the 5th Mounted Brigade , which was in reserve and was armed with the sword unlike the Australians , but as the 4th Light Horse Brigade was close in he decided that it should attack . " Although the 5th Mounted Brigade was ordered to advance on Beersheba in the rear of the 4th Light Horse Brigade , the Worcestershire Yeomanry saddled up and rode to water at Hannam at 16 : 00 . The regiment eventually " moved off as rearguard to Bde ( 5th Mounted Brigade ) " at 21 : 30 , arriving in Beersheba at 00 : 30 on 1 November . 
 The 7th Mounted Brigade , with one section of the Light Armoured Motor Battery and one Ford car attached , had ridden out of Esani at 20 : 00 on 30 October across country ( via <unk> el Semin ) to Ras Ghannam on the Asluj @-@ to @-@ Beersheba road . They were about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) south of Beersheba , when they established links with the Desert Mounted Corps on the right and the XX Corps on the left , at the Khalasa @-@ to @-@ Beersheba road . Their orders were to hold a line covering Point 1210 , 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) south of Ras Ghannam and Gos en Naam . They established observation posts on a line 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south of Ras Ghannam stretching to Gos en Naam , established communications with the Australian Mounted Division south @-@ west of Khashim Zanna at 09 : 00 , and was in close touch with the XX Corps Cavalry Regiment . The remainder of the brigade assembled south of their outpost line , " ready to act . " At about 10 : 00 the 8th Light Horse Regiment ( 3rd Light Horse Brigade ) reported that its headquarters were at Point 1180 , that Ras Ghannam was strongly defended , and that they were in touch with the 7th Mounted Brigade on their left . The 7th Mounted reported at 13 : 45 that their battery had shelled the opposition en masse on the northern slopes of Ras Ghannam . 
 At 16 : 00 , when the Ottoman garrison was reported to have begun its retreat from Beersheba , the 7th Mounted Brigade received orders to cooperate ( from the direction of Ras Ghannam ) in the Australian Mounted Division attack on Beersheba . Verbal orders to cooperate in the attack were also received by the 7th Mounted Brigade from the 4th Light Horse Brigade half @-@ an @-@ hour later . The leading squadron of the Sherwood Rangers Regiment pushed forward with a squadron of the Notts Hussars , which had been holding the line from Point 1210 to Ras Ghannam . They arrived at Ras Ghannam at 16 : 50 to find the defenders gone " without firing a shot " . The rest of the Sherwood Rangers Regiment were occupying the trenches east of Ras Ghannam when they were informed that Beersheba had been captured by the 4th Light Horse Brigade . Then the 7th Mounted Brigade rode unopposed down the Asluj road into Beersheba to water their horses at about 23 : 00 . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 The XX Corps captured 419 prisoners while Desert Mounted Corps captured 1 @,@ 528 Ottoman soldiers . Ottoman casualties were believed to be about half that number , while around 500 dead were found on the battlefield . 
 The heaviest Allied losses were suffered by the British infantry of XX Corps ( which lost 116 killed in action ) , although the total number of the British force killed during the battle was 171 . The 4th Light Horse Brigade suffered a total of 35 killed and 39 wounded ; of these , the 12th Light Horse Regiment suffered 20 killed and 19 wounded . Most of the wounded light horsemen fell during the charge , with the high percentage of killed @-@ to @-@ wounded occurring during hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting in the trenches . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The XX Corps and Desert Mounted Corps won a tactical victory of manouevre , forcing the Ottoman garrison at Beersheba to withdraw . However , although the 53rd ( Welsh ) Division — with one brigade of the 10th ( Irish ) Division attached — had been deployed to prevent Ottoman units escaping the battle , the Beersheba garrison was able to withdraw " up the Gaza road and to the north " into the Judean Hills , along the road towards Hebron , Bethlehem and Jerusalem . And although the Beersheba garrison suffered many casualties ; " stubborn fighting " by strong Ottoman rearguards at Hareira , Tel es Sheria and Tel el Khuweilfe , delayed the EEF for seven days , as they continued to hold the remainder of the Gaza line . The Ottoman III Corps headquarters ( which had withdrawn from Beersheba to Tel es Sheria during the battle ) moved back to support the defence of the road to Hebron at <unk> , followed by the 143rd Regiment ( 24th Division ) and 1 @,@ 500 rifles of the former Beersheba Group ( which had been reorganised at Tel es Sheria ) . The latter group moved to reinforce the defence of Tel el Khuweilfe , where the battle began on 1 November . 
 On 1 November attacks by the Anzac Mounted Division towards Tel el Khuweilfe and the road to Hebron and Jerusalem concerned the Ottoman defenders , who feared that a major cavalry attack could breakthrough the Ottoman line and capture the Seventh Army headquarters at Hebron . However , the EEF planned to break the Ottoman line in the center , at Hareira and Sheria . As the fighting at Khuweilfe continued , a minor attack on Gaza was made overnight on 1 / 2 November , while the main attacks on the centre at the Battle of Hareira and Sheria began on 6 November . Gaza was found to have been evacuated by its Ottoman defenders early on 7 November and Hareira was also captured that morning . After strong resistance against the 60th ( London ) Division 's attacks against the Ottoman defenders at Sheria ( supported by a light @-@ horse charge on 7 November ) , the position was captured by infantry just before dusk on 7 November . 
 The British Foreign Secretary Arthur Balfour contacted Baron Rothschild , a wealthy banker and head of the British branch of European Jewish causes , on 2 November ( two days after the capture of Beersheba ) . In the Balfour Declaration , he proposed a national home for the Jewish people in Palestine , published in The Times on 9 November 1917 . Also on 2 November , while congratulating Allenby for the victory at Beersheba , the War Office informed him that he was unlikely to receive reinforcements : 
 I wish to congratulate you , all concerned upon your success , which it is to be hoped you will be able to develop ... to press the Turks opposed to you to the fullest extent of your resources , so as to force the enemy to divert troops to Palestine and thus relieve pressure upon Maude [ in Mesopotamia ] , and to take advantage of Arab situation . In deciding on the extent to which you will be able to carry out safely the policy , you will be guided by the fact that an increase in the forces now at your disposal , is improbable . 
 The claim that " [ f ] rom then on to the end of the war the Turks never forgot Beersheba " and that the German and Ottoman infantry , " when galloped , as ... they frequently were , invariably shot wildly and surrendered early in the conflict , " was disproved when solid Ottoman defence met the 11th and 12th Light Horse Regiments ' charge during fighting for Sheria on 7 November , and the yeomanry 's charge at Huj on 8 November 1917 . 
 After Gaza was occupied on 7 November , the Imperial Service Cavalry Brigade ( XXI Corps ) rode through the ruins of Gaza to reach Beit Hanun at 13 : 00 ; and the 157th Brigade ( 52nd Division ) began the infantry pursuit along the Mediterranean shore , to reach Sheikh Hasan by 12 : 15 . In the centre of the line the Anzac Mounted Division found a gap on the eastern side of Sheria to begin their pursuit at daylight on 7 November . After being held up at Sheria , the Australian Mounted Division and the 60th ( London ) Division advanced to capture Huj on 8 November . By that evening , all the Ottoman positions which had made up the Gaza @-@ to @-@ Beersheba line had been captured , and the erstwhile defenders were in full retreat . 
 = Blakeney Point = 
 Blakeney Point ( designated as Blakeney National Nature Reserve ) is a National Nature Reserve situated near to the villages of Blakeney , Morston and Cley next the Sea on the north coast of Norfolk , England . Its main feature is a 6 @.@ 4 km ( 4 mi ) spit of shingle and sand dunes , but the reserve also includes salt marshes , tidal mudflats and reclaimed farmland . It has been managed by the National Trust since 1912 , and lies within the North Norfolk Coast Site of Special Scientific Interest , which is additionally protected through Natura 2000 , Special Protection Area ( SPA ) , International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) and Ramsar listings . The reserve is part of both an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty ( AONB ) , and a World Biosphere Reserve . The Point has been studied for more than a century , following pioneering ecological studies by botanist Francis Wall Oliver and a bird ringing programme initiated by ornithologist Emma Turner . 
 The area has a long history of human occupation ; ruins of a medieval monastery and " Blakeney Chapel " ( probably a domestic dwelling ) are buried in the marshes . The towns sheltered by the shingle spit were once important harbours , but land reclamation schemes starting in the 17th century resulted in the silting up of the river channels . The reserve is important for breeding birds , especially terns , and its location makes it a major site for migrating birds in autumn . Up to 500 seals may gather at the end of the spit , and its sand and shingle hold a number of specialised invertebrates and plants , including the edible samphire , or " sea asparagus " . 
 The many visitors who come to <unk> , sail or for other outdoor recreations are important to the local economy , but the land @-@ based activities jeopardize nesting birds and fragile habitats , especially the dunes . Some access restrictions on humans and dogs help to reduce the adverse effects , and trips to see the seals are usually undertaken by boat . The spit is a dynamic structure , gradually moving towards the coast and extending to the west . Land is lost to the sea as the spit rolls forward . The River Glaven can become blocked by the advancing shingle and cause flooding of Cley village , Cley Marshes nature reserve , and the environmentally important reclaimed grazing pastures , so the river has to be realigned every few decades . 
 = = Description = = 
 Blakeney Point , like most of the northern part of the marshes in this area , is part of the parish of Cley next the Sea . The main spit runs roughly west to east , and joins the mainland at Cley Beach before continuing onwards as a coastal ridge to Weybourne . It is approximately 6 @.@ 4 km ( 4 mi ) long , and is composed of a shingle bank which in places is 20 m ( 65 ft ) in width and up to 10 m ( 33 feet ) high . It has been estimated that there are 2 @.@ 3 million m3 ( 82 million ft3 ) of shingle in the spit , 97 per cent of which is derived from flint . 
 The Point was formed by longshore drift and this movement continues westward ; the spit lengthened by 132 @.@ 1 m ( 433 ft ) between 1886 and 1925 . At the western end , the shingle curves south towards the mainland . This feature has developed several times over the years , giving the impression from the air of a series of hooks along the south side of the spit . Salt marshes have formed between the shingle curves and in front of the coasts sheltered by the spit , and sand dunes have accumulated at the Point 's western end . Some of the shorter side ridges meet the main ridge at a steep angle due to the southward movement of the latter . There is an area of reclaimed farmland , known as Blakeney <unk> , to the west of Cley Beach Road . 
 Norfolk Coast Path , an ancient long distance footpath , cuts across the south eastern corner of the reserve along the sea wall between the farmland and the salt marshes , and further west at Holme @-@ next @-@ the @-@ Sea the trail joins Peddars Way . The tip of Blakeney Point can be reached by walking up the shingle spit from the car park at Cley Beach , or by boats from the quay at Morston . The boat gives good views of the seal colonies and avoids the long walk over a difficult surface . The National Trust has an information centre and tea room at the quay , and a visitor centre on the Point . The centre was formerly a lifeboat station and is open in the summer months . Halfway House , or the Watch House , is a building 2 @.@ 4 km ( 1 @.@ 5 mi ) from Cley Beach car park . Originally built in the 19th century as a look @-@ out for smugglers , it was used in succession as a coast guard station , by the Girl Guides , and as a holiday let . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = To 1912 = = = 
 Norfolk has a long history of human occupation dating back to the Palaeolithic , and has produced many significant archaeological finds . Both modern and Neanderthal people were present in the area between 100 @,@ 000 and 10 @,@ 000 years ago , before the last glaciation , and humans returned as the ice retreated northwards . The archaeological record is poor until about 20 @,@ 000 years ago , partly because of the very cold conditions that existed then , but also because the coastline was much further north than at present . As the ice retreated during the Mesolithic ( 10 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 BCE ) , the sea level rose , filling what is now the North Sea . This brought the Norfolk coastline much closer to its present line , so that many ancient sites are now under the sea in an area now known as Doggerland . Early Mesolithic flint tools with characteristic long blades up to 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) long found on the present @-@ day coast at Titchwell Marsh date from a time when it was 60 – 70 km ( 37 – 43 mi ) from the sea . Other flint tools have been found dating from the Upper Paleolithic ( 50 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 BCE ) to the Neolithic ( 5 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 500 BCE ) . 
 An " eye " is an area of higher ground in the marshes , dry enough to support buildings . Blakeney 's former Carmelite friary , founded in 1296 and dissolved in 1538 , was built in such a location , and several fragments of plain roof tile and pantiles dating back to the 13th century have been found near the site of its ruins . Originally on the south side of the Glaven , Blakeney Eye had a ditched enclosure during the 11th and 12th centuries , and a building known as " Blakeney Chapel " , which was occupied from the 14th century to around 1600 , and again in the late 17th century . Despite its name , it is unlikely that it had a religious function . Nearly a third of the mostly 14th- to 16th @-@ century pottery found within the larger and earlier of the two rooms was imported from the continent , suggesting significant international trade at this time . 
 The spit sheltered the Glaven ports , Blakeney , Cley @-@ next @-@ the @-@ Sea and Wiveton , which were important medieval harbours . Blakeney sent ships to help Edward I 's war efforts in 1301 , and between the 14th and 16th centuries it was the only Norfolk port between King 's Lynn and Great Yarmouth to have customs officials . Blakeney Church has a second tower at its east end , an unusual feature in a rural parish church . It has been suggested that it acted as a beacon for mariners , perhaps by aligning it with the taller west tower to guide ships into the navigable channel between the inlet 's sandbanks ; that this was not always successful is demonstrated by a number of wrecks in the haven , including a carvel @-@ built wooden ship . 
 Land reclamation schemes , especially those by Henry Calthorpe in 1640 just to the west of Cley , led to the silting up of the Glaven shipping channel and relocation of Cley 's wharf . Further enclosure in the mid @-@ 1820s aggravated the problem , and also allowed the shingle ridge at the beach to block the former tidal channel to the Salthouse marshes to the east of Cley . In an attempt to halt the decline , Thomas Telford was consulted in 1822 , but his recommendations for reducing the silting were not implemented , and by 1840 almost all of Cley 's trade had been lost . The population stagnated , and the value of all property decreased sharply . Blakeney 's shipping trade benefited from the silting up of its nearby rival , and in 1817 the channel to the Haven was deepened to improve access . Packet ships ran to Hull and London from 1840 , but this trade declined as ships became too large for the harbour . 
 = = = National Trust era = = = 
 In the decades preceding World War I , this stretch of coast became famous for its wildfowling ; locals were looking for food , but some more affluent visitors hunted to collect rare birds ; Norfolk 's first barred warbler was shot on the point in 1884 . In 1901 , the Blakeney and Cley Wild Bird Protection Society created a bird sanctuary and appointed as its " watcher " , Bob <unk> , the first of only six men , up to 2012 , to hold that post . 
 In 1910 , the owner of the Point , Augustus Cholmondeley Gough @-@ Calthorpe , 6th Baron Calthorpe , leased the land to University College London ( UCL ) , who also purchased the Old Lifeboat House at the end of the spit . When the baron died later that year , his heirs put Blakeney Point up for sale , raising the possibility of development . In 1912 , a public appeal initiated by Charles Rothschild and organised by UCL Professor Francis Wall Oliver and Dr Sidney Long enabled the purchase of Blakeney Point from the Calthorpe estate , and the land was then donated to the National Trust . UCL established a research centre at the Old Lifeboat House in 1913 , where Oliver and his college pioneered the scientific study of Blakeney Point . The building is still used by students , and also acts as an information centre . Despite formal protection , the tern colony was not fenced off until the 1960s . 
 The Point was designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) in 1954 , along with the adjacent Cley Marshes reserve , and subsumed into the newly created 7 @,@ 700 @-@ hectare ( 19 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ) North Norfolk Coast SSSI in 1986 . The larger area is now additionally protected through Natura 2000 , Special Protection Area ( SPA ) and Ramsar listings , IUCN category IV ( habitat / species management area ) and is part of the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty . The Point became a National Nature Reserve ( NNR ) in 1994 , and the coast from Holkham NNR to Salthouse , together with Scolt Head Island , became a Biosphere Reserve in 1976 . 
 = = Fauna and flora = = 
 = = = Birds = = = 
 Blakeney Point has been designated as one of the most important sites in Europe for nesting terns by the government 's Joint Nature Conservation Committee . In the early 1900s , the small colonies of common and little terns were badly affected by egg @-@ taking , disturbance and shooting , but as protection improved the common terns population rose to 2 @,@ 000 pairs by mid @-@ century , although it subsequently declined to no more than 165 pairs by 2000 , perhaps due to predation . Sandwich terns were a scarce breeder until the 1970s , but there were 4 @,@ 000 pairs by 1992 . Blakeney is the most important site in Britain for both Sandwich and little terns , the roughly 200 pairs of the latter species amounting to eight per cent of the British population . The 2 @,@ 000 pairs of black @-@ headed gulls sharing the breeding area with the terns are believed to protect the colony as a whole from predators like red foxes . Other nesting birds include about 20 pairs of Arctic terns and a few Mediterranean gulls in the tern colony , ringed plovers and oystercatchers on the shingle and common redshanks on the salt marsh . The waders ' breeding success has been compromised by human disturbance and predation by gulls , weasels and stoats , with ringed plovers particularly affected , declining to 12 pairs in 2012 compared to 100 pairs twenty years previously . The pastures contain breeding northern lapwings , and species such as sedge and reed warblers and bearded tits are found in patches of common reed . 
 The Point juts into the sea on a north @-@ facing coast , which means that migrant birds may be found in spring and autumn , sometimes in huge numbers when the weather conditions force them towards land . Numbers are relatively low in spring , but autumn can produce large " falls " , such as the hundreds of European robins on 1 October 1951 or more than 400 common redstarts , on 18 September 1995 . The common birds are regularly accompanied by scarcer species like greenish warblers , great grey shrikes or Richard 's pipits . Seabirds may be sighted passing the Point , and migrating waders feed on the marshes at this time of year . Vagrant rarities have turned up when the weather is appropriate , including a Fea 's or Zino 's petrel in 1997 , a trumpeter finch in 2008 , and an alder flycatcher in 2010 . Ornithologist and pioneering bird photographer Emma Turner started ringing common terns on the Point in 1909 , and the use of this technique for migration studies has continued since . A notable recovery was a Sandwich tern killed for food in Angola , and a Radde 's warbler trapped for ringing in 1961 was only the second British record of this species at that time . In the winter , the marshes hold golden plovers and wildfowl including common shelduck , Eurasian wigeon , brent geese and common teal , while common scoters , common eiders , common goldeneyes and red @-@ breasted mergansers swim offshore . 
 = = = Other animals = = = 
 Blakeney Point has a mixed colony of about 500 harbour and grey seals . The harbour seals have their young between June and August , and the pups , which can swim almost immediately , may be seen on the mud flats . Grey seals breed in winter , between November and January ; their young cannot swim until they have lost their first white coat , so they are restricted to dry land for their first three or four weeks , and can be viewed on the beach during this period . Grey seals colonised a site in east Norfolk in 1993 , and started breeding regularly at Blakeney in 2001 . It is possible that they now outnumber harbour seals off the Norfolk coast . Seal @-@ watching boat trips run from Blakeney and Morston harbours , giving good views without disturbing the seals . The corpses of 24 female or juvenile harbour seals were found in the Blakeney area between March 2009 and August 2010 , each with spirally cut wounds consistent with the animal having been drawn through a ducted propeller . 
 The rabbit population can grow to a level at which their grazing and burrowing adversely affects the fragile dune vegetation . When rabbit numbers are reduced by myxomatosis , the plants recover , although those that are toxic to rabbits , like ragwort , then become less common due to increased competition from the edible species . The rabbits may be killed by carnivores such as red foxes , weasels and stoats . Records of mammals that are rare in the NNR area include red deer swimming in the haven , a hedgehog and a beached Sowerby 's beaked whale . 
 An insect survey in September 2009 recorded 187 beetle species , including two new to Norfolk , the rove beetle <unk> <unk> and the fungus beetle <unk> ciliaris , and two very rarely seen in the county , the sap beetle <unk> <unk> and the clown beetle <unk> nanus . There were also 24 types of spider , and the five ant species included the nationally rare Myrmica <unk> . The rare millipede <unk> littoralis , a specialist of coastal shingle habitats , was found here in 1972 , and a red @-@ veined darter appeared in 2012 . Tens of thousands of migrant turnip sawflies were recorded for a few days in late summer 2006 , along with red @-@ eyed damselflies . The silver Y moth also appears in large numbers in some years . 
 The many inhabitants of the tidal flats include <unk> , polychaete worms , sand hoppers and other amphipod crustaceans , and gastropod molluscs . These molluscs feed on the algae growing on the surface of the mud , and include the tiny <unk> , an important food for waders because of its abundance at densities of more than 130 @,@ 000 m − 2 . Bivalve molluscs include the edible common cockle , although it is not harvested here . 
 = = = Plants = = = 
 Grasses such as sea couch grass and sea poa grass have an important function in the driest areas of the marshes , and on the coastal dunes , where marram grass , sand couch @-@ grass , lyme @-@ grass and grey hair @-@ grass help to bind the sand . Sea holly , sand sedge , bird 's @-@ foot trefoil and pyramidal orchid are other specialists of this arid habitat . Some specialised mosses and lichens are found on the dunes , and help to consolidate the sand ; a survey in September 2009 found 41 lichen species . The plant distribution is influenced by the dunes ' age as well as their moisture content , the deposits becoming less alkaline as calcium carbonate from animal shells is leached out of the sand to be replaced by more acidic humus from plant decomposition products . Marram grass is particularly discouraged by the change in acidity . A similar pattern is seen with mosses and lichens , with the various areas of the dunes containing different species according to the acidity of the sand . At least four moss species have been identified as important in dune stabilization , since they help to consolidate the sand , add nutrients as they decompose , and pave the way for more exacting plant species . The moss and lichen flora of Blakeney Point differs markedly from that of lime @-@ rich dunes on the western coasts of the UK . Non @-@ native tree <unk> have become established near the Lifeboat House , where they now grow wild . 
 The shingle ridge attracts biting stonecrop , sea campion , yellow horned poppy , sea thrift , bird 's foot trefoil and sea beet . In the damper areas , where the shingle adjoins salt marsh , rock sea lavender , matted sea lavender and scrubby sea @-@ blite also thrive , although they are scarce in Britain away from the Norfolk coast . The saltmarsh contains European glasswort and common cord grass in the most exposed regions , with a succession of plants following on as the marsh becomes more established : first sea aster , then mainly sea lavender , with sea purslane in the creeks , and smaller areas of sea plantain and other common marsh plants . Six previously unknown diatom species were found in the waters around the point in 1952 , along with six others not previously recorded in Britain . 
 European glasswort is picked between May and September and sold locally as " samphire " . It is a fleshy plant which when blanched or steamed has a taste which leads to its alternative name of " sea asparagus " , and it is often eaten with fish . It can also be eaten raw when young . <unk> is also a favourite food for the rabbits , which will venture onto the saltmarsh in search of this succulent plant . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 The 7 @.@ 7 million day visitors and 5 @.@ 5 million who made overnight stays on the Norfolk coast in 1999 are estimated to have spent £ 122 million , and secured the equivalent of 2 @,@ 325 full @-@ time jobs in that area . A 2005 survey at six North Norfolk coastal sites , including Blakeney , Cley and Morston found that 39 per cent of visitors gave birdwatching as the main purpose of their visit . The villages nearest to the Point , Blakeney and Cley , had the highest per capita spend per visitor of those surveyed , and Cley was one of the two sites with the highest proportion of pre @-@ planned visits . The equivalent of 52 full @-@ time jobs in the Cley and Blakeney area are estimated to result from the £ 2 @.@ 45 million spent locally by the visiting public . In addition to birdwatching and boat trips to see the seals , sailing and walking are the other significant tourist activities in the area . 
 The large number of visitors at coastal sites sometimes has negative effects . Wildlife may be disturbed , a frequent difficulty for species that breed in exposed areas such as ringed plovers and little terns , and also for wintering geese . During the breeding season , the main breeding areas for terns and seals are fenced off and signposted . Plants can be trampled , which is a particular problem in sensitive habitats such as sand dunes and vegetated shingle . A boardwalk made from recycled plastic crosses the large sand dunes near the end of the Point , which helps to reduce erosion . It was installed in 2009 at a cost of £ 35 @,@ 000 to replace its much less durable wooden predecessor . Dogs are not allowed from April to mid @-@ August because of the risk to ground @-@ nesting birds , and must be on a lead or closely controlled at other times . 
 The Norfolk Coast Partnership , a grouping of conservation and environmental bodies , divide the coast and its hinterland into three zones for tourism development purposes . Blakeney Point , along with Holme Dunes and Holkham dunes , is considered to be a sensitive habitat already suffering from visitor pressure , and therefore designated as a red @-@ zone area with no development or parking improvements to be recommended . The rest of the reserve is placed in the orange zone , for locations with fragile habitats but less tourism pressure . 
 = = Coastal changes = = 
 The spit is a relatively young feature in geological terms , and in recent centuries it has been extending westwards and landwards through tidal and storm action . This growth is thought to have been enhanced by the reclamation of the salt marshes along this coast in recent centuries , which removed a natural barrier to the movement of shingle . The amount of shingle moved by a single storm can be " spectacular " ; the spit has sometimes been breached , becoming an island for a time , and this may happen again . The northernmost part of Snitterley ( now Blakeney ) village was lost to the sea in the early Middle Ages , probably due to a storm . In the last two hundred years , maps have been accurate enough for the distance from the Blakeney Chapel ruins to the sea to be measured . The 400 m ( 440 yd ) in 1817 had become 320 m ( 350 yd ) by 1835 , 275 m ( 300 yd ) in 1907 , and 195 m ( 215 yd ) by the end of the 20th century . The spit is moving towards the mainland at about 1 m ( 1 yd ) per year ; and several former raised islands or " eyes " have already disappeared , first covered by the advancing shingle , and then lost to the sea . The massive 1953 flood overran the main beach , and only the highest dune tops remained above water . Sand was washed into the salt marshes , and the extreme tip of the point was breached , but as with other purely natural parts of the coast , like Scolt Head Island , little lasting damage was done . 
 Landward movement of the shingle meant that the channel of the Glaven was becoming blocked increasingly often by 2004 . This led to flooding of Cley village and the environmentally important Blakeney freshwater marshes . The Environment Agency considered several remedial options . It concluded that attempting to hold back the shingle or breaching the spit to create a new outlet for the Glaven would be expensive and probably ineffective , and doing nothing would be environmentally damaging . The Agency decided to create a new route for the river to the south of its original line , and work to realign a 550 m ( 600 yd ) stretch of river 200 m ( 220 yd ) further south was completed in 2007 at a cost of about £ 1 @.@ 5 million . The Glaven had previously been realigned from an earlier , more northerly , course in 1922 . The ruins of Blakeney Chapel are now to the north of the river embankment , and essentially unprotected from coastal erosion , since the advancing shingle will no longer be swept away by the stream . The chapel will be buried by a ridge of shingle as the spit continues to move south , and then lost to the sea , perhaps within 20 – 30 years . 
 = 2010 – 11 Temple Owls men 's basketball team = 
 The 2010 – 11 Temple Owls men 's basketball team ( the Owls ) represented Temple University in the 2010 – 11 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season . The team played their home games at the Liacouras Center , which has a capacity of 10 @,@ 206 . The Owls were in their 29th season as a member of the Atlantic 10 Conference . In the previous season , Temple Owls gained a record of 29 – 6 and reached the NCAA Tournament . The team returned three starters from the previous season , but leading scorer Ryan Brooks and point guard Luis Guzman left , having graduated . They were replaced by new players Aaron Brown , Anthony Lee , and Jimmy McDonnell and graduate student transfer Dutch Gaitley . In the off @-@ season , other Atlantic 10 coaches predicted that Temple Owls would win the league . 
 Temple Owls finished the season with a 26 – 8 record . Among the highlights of the year was an upset of # 10 Georgetown on December 9 , in coach Fran Dunphy 's 400th victory . In addition , Lavoy Allen became Temple Owls ' all @-@ time leading rebounder in a 66 – 52 rout of Saint Joseph 's . Allen snatched 12 boards to pass Temple Owls ' radio analyst Johnny Baum 's 1 @,@ 042 career rebounds . The Owls ' 14 – 2 mark in Atlantic 10 play earned them a two seed in the 2011 Atlantic 10 Men 's Basketball Tournament , where they lost in the semifinals to Richmond . 
 The team earned an at @-@ large bid to the 2011 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament as a seven seed , and defeated Penn State in the round of 64 on a last @-@ second shot by guard Juan Fernandez . The win ended Dunphy 's 11 @-@ game losing streak in the NCAA Tournament , the longest on record . Temple Owls ' season ended with a double overtime loss to San Diego State in the round of 32 . After the season , Allen was selected for the All @-@ Atlantic 10 First Team , Ramone Moore was selected for the All @-@ Atlantic 10 Second Team , Fernandez was an All @-@ Atlantic 10 Third Team selection , and Scootie Randall was recognized as an All @-@ Atlantic 10 Honorable Mention . Allen was drafted by the Philadelphia 76ers in the second round of the 2011 NBA Draft . 
 = = Preseason = = 
 In 2010 – 11 , the Temple Owls men 's basketball team were in their 29th season as a member of the Atlantic 10 Conference . Since 1997 , the team has played their home games at the Liacouras Center , which has a capacity of 10 @,@ 206 . In their previous season , an Atlantic 10 Preseason Poll predicted that Temple Owls would finish fifth in the conference , tied with Duquesne . Despite the low expectations , the Owls were tied with Xavier atop the Atlantic 10 standings with a 14 – 2 conference record , and won their third straight Atlantic 10 tournament title . The team drew a five seed in the 2010 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , where they lost to 12 seed Cornell in the first round , 78 – 65 , and finished with a record of 29 – 6 . Head coach Fran Dunphy was rewarded with a contract extension on May 5 , 2010 and will stay with Temple Owls until the 2017 – 18 season . 
 Before the 2010 – 11 season , Temple Owls men 's basketball team lost two starters from the previous year to graduation : Ryan Brooks and Luis Guzman . Brooks was the team 's highest scorer , with an average of 14 @.@ 3 points per game , and averages of 4 @.@ 2 rebounds and 2 @.@ 3 assists per game . In his final season , he was selected for the all @-@ conference second team and finished his career with 1 @,@ 225 points , the 31st highest in Temple Owls ' history . Guzman was the Owls ' starting point guard , leading the team in assist @-@ to @-@ turnover ratio at 2 @.@ 07 and averaged 4 @.@ 9 points , 4 @.@ 2 rebounds , and 3 @.@ 2 assists per game . He was the team 's captain and earned a degree in Bachelor of Business Administration in three and a half years . Walk @-@ on forward Rafael DeLeon also graduated . 
 Two players left Temple Owls voluntarily : sophomores Chris Clarke and Carmel <unk> . Clarke redshirted in 2009 – 10 after transferring from Pensacola Junior College , transferred again to Division II Morehouse College . <unk> appeared in nine games and tallied a total of 12 minutes and two points before returning to Tel Aviv , Israel . Lavoy Allen , a first team all @-@ conference selection and the team 's leading rebounder at 10 @.@ 7 rebounds per game . Allen briefly played with the 2010 NBA Draft , but returned to Temple Owls for his senior season . Forward Craig Williams had foot surgery and did not play that season . 
 On October 21 , 2010 , the Owls were voted by other Atlantic 10 coaches as the preseason favorite to win the league , receiving 19 first place votes . Allen was selected for the All @-@ Conference First Team and Defensive Team , while Juan Fernandez was selected for the second team . Allen was listed on the preseason Wooden and Naismith Award 50 @-@ man watchlist . Jay Bilas of ESPN named Temple Owls the third best team in the Atlantic 10 , behind Xavier and Dayton . He cited Allen 's summer experience on the USA select team and the development of Michael Eric as factors for a successful season . 
 = = = Recruiting = = = 
 = = = = Incoming signees = = = = 
 Anthony Lee , a center from Eustis , Florida , joined Temple Owls on September 26 , 2009 , becoming the first member of the Owls ' recruiting class . The Maryland native transferred from Eustis High School to West Oaks Academy after his junior year . As a senior , he averaged 23 @.@ 0 points , 14 @.@ 0 rebounds , and 3 @.@ 0 blocks per game while winning MVP honors from the Sunshine Independent Athletic Association . ESPN ranked him the # 38 center in his class . Lee picked Temple Owls over scholarship offers from Southern California , Georgia , and Seton Hall . After undergoing surgery for a herniated disc , Lee redshirted the season . 
 On November 2 , small forward Aaron Brown of Newark , New Jersey signed with the Owls . He posted per @-@ game averages of 17 @.@ 6 points , 4 @.@ 0 rebounds , 4 @.@ 5 assists , and 3 @.@ 0 steals in his senior campaign at St. Benedict 's Prep . Brown was a New Jersey All @-@ Prep First Team selection in 2010 and participated in the Jordan Brand Classic Regional . He chose Temple Owls over Harvard , Miami ( Fl . ) , Penn , Boston College , and Florida State . 
 Small forward Jimmy McDonnell , from Jackson , New Jersey , joined the team on August 11 , 2010 . In his senior season at Jackson Memorial High School , McDonnell averaged 13 @.@ 9 points , 6 @.@ 5 rebounds , and 4 @.@ 0 blocks per game as Jackson Memorial compiled a 16 – 8 record . McDonnell was selected for the first team all @-@ Division in the A @-@ Shore Conference , and was the most valuable player at the <unk> Holiday Classic . McDonnell was originally headed to Division II UMass Lowell , but after a strong performance at the West Virginia <unk> <unk> , he drew the attention of Owls coach Fran Dunphy . McDonnell redshirted the season to add bulk to his frame . 
 Dutch Gaitley was granted a one @-@ time transfer exception by the NCAA and was eligible immediately , instead of sitting out the customary season . The forward graduated in three years from Monmouth University , earning his Bachelor of Arts degree in 2009 . At Temple , Gaitley pursued a master 's degree in sports administration . A native of Haverford , Pennsylvania , he was a 2006 graduate of Archbishop Carroll High School . In 88 games at Monmouth , he averaged 2 @.@ 3 points and 4 @.@ 1 rebounds per game . 
 = = = = 2011 – 12 team recruits = = = = 
 The sole member of the Owls ' 2011 recruiting class was Will Cummings , a point guard from Jacksonville , Florida who committed on September 4 , 2010 . He averaged 18 @.@ 1 points , 8 @.@ 1 assists , 4 @.@ 0 steals per game as a senior at Providence School , in addition to carrying a 4 @.@ 0 grade point average . The Jacksonville Times @-@ Union named him the high school boys basketball player of the year . Cummings drew attention from Stanford , Miami ( Fl . ) , and Boston College , but chose Temple because of their winning tradition . 
 = = Roster = = 
 = = = Players = = = 
 = = = Coaches = = = 
 = = Schedule = = 
 = = Season = = 
 = = = Preconference season = = = 
 Temple Owls started their season with a 62 – 56 home win against Seton Hall Pirates on November 12 . Seton Hall last led with 8 : 15 in the first half , off a Herb Pope jump shot to make the score 20 – 17 . The Owls went on a 17 – 0 run to close the half . They led by up to 16 with 4 minutes and <unk> left in the game , but Seton Hall scored the next 12 points to cut their deficit to four . Despite retaining most of their players from the 2009 @-@ 2010 season , when they were the eighth @-@ highest scoring team in Division I at 80 @.@ 1 points per game , Seton Hall was held to 30 percent shooting by Temple Owls ' defense . Juan Fernandez led Temple Owls with 12 points , and Rahlir Jefferson recorded his first double @-@ double at 10 points and 10 rebounds . Owls player Lavoy Allen sat out much of the game with foul trouble . The Owls won their next game against Toledo 82 – 49 . All five starters scored above nine , and Micheal Eric was the highest scorer , with 14 points . 
 Over Thanksgiving weekend , the Owls traveled to Lake Buena Vista , Florida to participate in the Old Spice Classic . Temple Owls suffered their first loss of the season on November 25 , falling to California 57 – 50 . The Golden Bears went on a 16 – 1 run late in the second half to seal a victory . The next day , Temple Owls recovered to beat Georgia 65 – 58 . Scootie Randall had a career @-@ high 18 points for the Owls , including 15 in the first half . Rahlir Jefferson 's converted a three @-@ point play with 41 @.@ 4 seconds left , securing a win for Temple Owls . In the Old Spice Classic consolation game , Temple Owls lost to Texas A & M 54 – 51 . Texas A & M took a 51 – 50 lead when B.J. Holmes scored with 18 @.@ 5 seconds left . Juan Fernandez then missed an open jumper that would have given Temple Owls the lead . " We 've got to shoot the ball better . Our defense is pretty solid . We 've got a chance to be a good basketball team , " said Temple Owls ' coach Fran Dunphy after the game . 
 The team 's next challenge was the Central Michigan Chippewas , which Temple Owls handled 65 – 53 . The Owls were losing 31 – 41 with 16 : 35 left in the game , but then scored the next eight points . Temple Owls permanently took the lead off a Lavoy Allen layup with 9 : 30 remaining . Juan Fernandez notched 18 points led the Owls , and Allen had a double @-@ double of 13 points and 10 rebounds . In the teams ' first meeting since 2006 , Temple Owls knocked off Maryland 63 – 61 . Despite trailing by 15 at halftime , Maryland staged a comeback led by Terrell <unk> , who had 12 of his 16 points in the second half . James Padgett dunked with 1 : 49 left to tie the game at 56 . Afterwards , Lavoy Allen completed a three @-@ point play , and Khalif Wyatt stole a Dino Gregory pass to put Temple Owls in the lead permanently . The Owls outrebounded the Terrapins 42 – 32 , and Ramone Moore scored 16 points , leading the team . 
 On December 9 , Temple Owls matched up against Georgetown . Fran Dunphy earned his 400th career victory , as his Owls upset the tenth @-@ ranked Hoyas 68 – 65 . At their first home game in almost a month , Temple Owls took an early 6 – 0 lead and did not trail the entire game . They led by 11 in the first half , and a backdoor cut to Ramone Moore put the Owls up 39 – 32 at the break . The Hoyas manage to tie the game at 56 when Chris Wright sunk a pair of free throws . A three @-@ pointer from Moore and a putback shot from Rahlir Jefferson enabled Temple Owls to take a 61 – 56 lead . A hook shot by Georgetown 's Julian Vaughn cut the Hoya deficit to one with less than a minute remaining , but Hollis Thompson missed a layup that would have given the Hoyas the lead . Jefferson grabbed the rebound and then netted two foul shots , and a last @-@ second halfcourt shot by Austin Freeman went over the backboard . Temple Owls ' fans rushed the court after the buzzer , as Georgetown suffered their first loss of the year . Moore shot 12 @-@ for @-@ 18 from the floor for a career @-@ high 30 points . Dunphy congratulated his team 's defensive effort , holding the Hoyas to 44 percent shooting , and said , " it 's all about these guys . They 're all great players and great people . " 
 The Owls then defeated three Mid @-@ American Conference teams : Akron , Northern Illinois , and Ohio . On December 12 , behind Micheal Eric 's 16 points , Temple Owls routed Akron 82 – 47 . At halftime , the Owls led 40 – 15 after shooting 63 percent in the first half . Temple Owls shot 53 @.@ 4 percent from the field in an 84 – 74 win over Northern Illinois . Lavoy Allen had 22 points and Ramone Moore had 21 in the contest . Rahlir Jefferson 's career @-@ high 18 points led Temple Owls past Ohio 76 – 65 for the Owls ' sixth consecutive victory . 
 When Temple Owls squared off against # 7 Villanova on December 30 , it marked the first time since 1988 that two Philadelphia Big Five teams ranked in the Associated Press poll met . The Owls held star guard Corey Fisher to five points , but his backcourt mates Corey Stokes and <unk> <unk> tallied 24 and 21 points , respectively , to give Villanova a 78 – 74 victory . The game was back @-@ and @-@ forth all night , and Temple Owls held a 40 – 39 lead at the break . Villanova built a 10 @-@ point lead in the second half , but the Owls went on a 13 – 0 run to take a three @-@ point lead . With 2 @.@ 3 seconds left , Lavoy Allen hit a three to cut the Wildcats ' lead to 76 – 74 , but <unk> sealed the win with a pair of free throws . Allen scored 22 for Temple Owls , and Juan Fernandez had 20 points . 
 = = = Conference season = = = 
 To begin the conference season , the Owls won against Fordham 70 – 51 at the IZOD Center . Fordham last won a conference game on January 28 , 2009 , but Temple Owls had a 27 – 22 deficit in the first half . However , a balanced offensive attack , led by Juan Fernandez and Ramone Moore 's 15 points each , helped Temple Owls to take the lead . Michael Eric scored his first collegiate double @-@ double with 14 points and 11 rebounds , and Lavoy Allen was the fourth starter to score in double figures , with 12 points . On January 6 , starting point guard Juan Fernandez bruised his knee in practice and missed the January 9 game against Saint Louis . Despite shooting 30 @.@ 6 percent from the field , the Owls won 57 – 53 behind Ramone Moore 's 15 points . Temple Owls was behind 41 – 32 with 10 : 13 remaining , then went on an 11 – 2 run . Moore scored five consecutive points to break a tie at 49 , giving the Owls a lead . The Billikens missed all seven three @-@ point shots against the Temple Owls defense . Fernandez also missed the January 12 game against St. Bonaventure , but the Owls defeated the Bonnies nonetheless , 83 – 55 . Ramone Moore led all five starters in double @-@ digit scoring with 19 points . The team shot 30 of 59 from the field and 9 for 21 from three @-@ point land . 
 Temple Owls ' first loss in conference play was 78 – 66 against Duquesne Dukes , despite the return of Juan Fernandez . The Owls began the game by trailing 22 – 2 , missing their first 14 shots . Temple Owls scored their first field goal at the 8 : 18 mark of the first half , and shot 17 percent in the first half . Duquesne shot 67 percent in the first half en route to a 40 – 23 halftime lead . In the second half , the Owls scored the first six points , but the Dukes went on an 8 – 2 run from which Temple Owls could not recover . Ramone Moore contributed 18 points to lead the Owls . Temple Owls recovered with a 75 – 56 out @-@ of @-@ conference win against Philadelphia Big Five team Penn . Khalif Wyatt scored a career @-@ best 27 points , Ramone Moore added 12 points and Lavoy Allen scored 10 points and six blocks . 
 Xavier defeated Temple Owls 88 – 77 on January 22 , extending their in @-@ conference home @-@ court winning streak to 35 , surpassing Temple Owls ' 34 @-@ game in @-@ conference consecutive home victories for the longest in Atlantic 10 history . Former Xavier player Brian Grant had his jersey retired at halftime , and the team wore throwback uniforms in his honor . Grant gave the Musketeers a pep talk prior to the game , and Xavier opened an early 16 – 8 lead . Scootie Randall scored Temple Owls ' first 10 points , hitting five out of his first six shots . The Owls took their only lead of the half 29 – 28 off of a three by Randall . In the second half , the teams traded baskets before Xavier went on a 10 – 0 run . Randall led Temple Owls on an 11 – 1 run to tie the game at 66 , knocking down two fastbreak layups and a three @-@ point shot , and finished with a career @-@ high 28 points . The Owls took their final lead 69 – 68 off a Khalif Wyatt three @-@ pointer with 5 : 30 to go . Afterwards Tu Holloway hit a scoop shot and Mark Lyons had a layup and a steal to give Xavier a 75 – 69 advantage that they maintained . Holloway scored 21 points and Lyons 19 to score the most points against Temple Owls in the season . 
 Khalif Wyatt , who replaced Juan Fernandez after Fernandez had continuing knee problems , was key in Temple Owls ' 76 – 67 win over Charlotte . He scored 17 points , collected six dimes , and grabbed six rebounds . Ramone Moore added 16 points , Lavoy Allen recorded a double @-@ double ( 15 points and 11 rebounds ) , and Scootie Randall contributed 14 points . On January 29 , Temple Owls defeated city rival Saint Joseph 's 72 – 54 . Scootie Randall led Temple with 17 points . In their next game , Temple Owls won against La Salle by 71 – 67 . The Owls had a 61 – 47 lead with 3 : 17 left , but <unk> Murray led a late Explorers comeback as he connected on two three @-@ point shots . Khalif Wyatt scored 18 points for the Owls . 
 The Owls defeated Rhode Island 80 – 67 on February 5 . Scootie Randall scored 27 points as Temple Owls shot 53 @.@ 2 percent from the field . Against Fordham , Temple Owls ' 25 @-@ point lead was cut to three before winning 77 – 66 . Brandon Frazier of the Rams drained a three @-@ pointer with 13 : 17 left to trail 53 – 50 , but they would get no closer . Ramone Moore scored 22 points to lead the Owls . Lavoy Allen left the game in the second half with an injury to his right ankle . Allen missed the following game against Dayton , but Temple Owls managed a 75 – 63 victory nonetheless , sparked by Ramone Moore 's 26 points . Temple Owls missed their first seven shots , allowing Dayton to stay in the game . However , Moore hit a three @-@ pointer to start an 11 – 2 run to put the Owls ahead 18 – 12 . Their defense held Dayton to 37 percent shooting , and Temple Owls maintained their lead . After the game , Dayton coach Brian Gregory said : " ... they 're [ Temple Owls ] one of the best passing teams not just in the league , but in the country . " 
 Before the game against Richmond , Temple Owls announced that starting center Micheal Eric was unavailable for the season with a right patella injury . Lavoy Allen returned and Temple Owls ended the Spiders ' eight game road winning streak , scoring 73 – 53 . Ramone Moore scored 24 points . Juan Fernandez registered 20 points off of 9 – 10 shooting . Temple Owls controlled the game with a 16 – 0 run in the second half and shot 56 percent on the game . Lavoy Allen became Temple Owls ' all @-@ time leading rebounder in a 66 – 52 rout of Saint Joseph 's . Allen snatched 12 boards to surpass Temple Owls radio analyst Johnny Baum 's career 1 @,@ 042 rebounds . Ramone Moore 's 17 points led the team , and Allen scored 14 points to go along with his milestone rebounds . Temple Owls ' forward Scootie Randall was unavailable , having a foot injury . The Owls traveled to Cameron Indoor Stadium to play against top @-@ ranked Duke in a nonconference game . Temple Owls lost to the Blue Devils 78 – 61 , as Kyle Singler led Duke with 28 points . Lavoy Allen scored 17 points and had 13 rebounds for Temple Owls , but Duke increased their lead against the Owls with a second half run . 
 Temple Owls missed 16 of their first 18 shots against George Washington , trailing by 20 – 8 . Lavoy Allen then took control of the team , scoring 10 consecutive points ; at halftime the core was 26 – 23 . In the second half , the Temple Owls defense held the Colonials to two points over the last 11 : 22 , and Temple Owls won 57 – 41 . Allen contributed 19 points and 16 rebounds , while Khalif Wyatt scored 14 points . Juan Fernandez 's 19 points helped Temple Owls defeat UMass 73 – 67 , in the Owls ' first overtime game . Down four at halftime , Temple Owls tied the game at 65 with 48 seconds left off a free throw by Ramone Moore . Fernandez had a chance to win the game in regulation , but his layup with 1 second left was blocked by UMass 's Sampson Carter . In overtime , T.J. DiLeo hit a layup with 4 : 20 remaining that gave Temple Owls the lead . In Temple Owls ' regular season finale , the team earned a 90 – 82 win against La Salle , behind Lavoy Allen 's career @-@ high 24 points . 
 = = = Postseason = = = 
 In the 2011 Atlantic 10 Men 's Basketball Tournament , Temple Owls received a two seed by virtue of a 14 – 2 conference record and earned a bye into the quarterfinals . Due to La Salle beating St. Bonaventure in the first round , Temple Owls was matched up with La Salle . The Owls won the game 96 – 76 , posting their most points of the season in the process . Five players scored more than nine , and Ramone Moore led the charge with 23 points . Kevin Anderson of Richmond scored 22 , defeating the Owls in the semifinals 58 – 54 and ending Temple Owls ' ten @-@ game winning streak at Boardwalk Hall . Ramone Moore hit a layup to push the Owls ahead 54 – 53 with five minutes left . Richmond grabbed the lead 55 – 54 at the 3 : 48 mark as Justin Harper scored off a putback . Harper finished the game with 18 points and nine rebounds , and was involved in a controversial end @-@ of @-@ game play . With 30 seconds left , Khalif Wyatt attempted a 3 @-@ pointer and Harper came down on him , but no call was made . Wyatt proceeded to foul Harper , who hit the deciding free throws . Wyatt had 15 points , while Lavoy Allen added 12 points and 10 rebounds . Juan Fernandez made only 3 of his 17 field goal attempts . 
 On Selection Sunday , Temple Owls received a seven seed and was due to face Penn State in the 2011 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament on March 17 at the <unk> Center in Tucson , Arizona . The two teams had played each other in a scrimmage in the preseason . They had also met in the 2001 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament when the Owls earned an 84 – 72 victory in the Sweet Sixteen . Coming into the game , Fran Dunphy had a NCAA tournament record 11 @-@ game losing streak , at Penn and Temple Owls . " I probably think about it less than others do , " said Dunphy , " but you think about it . I would be lying if I said I didn 't . But I 'm so thrilled for these kids and so thrilled to be in the tournament . We 've had a nice run – this particular group , four straight years of going to the NCAA tournament is pretty special . " 
 Scootie Randall returned to the Owls and earned the start , although he only played for six minutes and did not score . The game began with hot shooting by Penn State 's Talor Battle , who drained three of his first four threes to put the Nittany Lions up 20 – 11 . A 17 @-@ point first half by Juan Fernandez helped Temple Owls take a 35 – 33 lead at halftime . Jeff Brooks , a starting forward for the Nittany Lions , dislocated his right shoulder a minute into the half and sat out the rest of the game . In the second half , there were ten lead changes , and neither team led by more than four points . Ramone Moore 's 15 foot shot with 1 : 10 remaining pulled the Owls ahead 62 – 61 . In Penn State 's ensuing possession , Battle took the ball to the hoop but was blocked by Rahlir Jefferson , and Temple Owls took possession . Fernandez was fouled , and his pair of free throws with 28 seconds left extended the Owl lead to 64 – 61 . With the clock at 12 @.@ 2 , Battle hit a three pointer from beyond the NBA line to tie the game at 64 @-@ 64 . Fran Dunphy called a timeout , and Khalif Wyatt advised Dunphy to draw up a play for Fernandez . Fernandez was double @-@ teamed and was forced to take an off @-@ balance 18 @-@ footer . The ball fell through the hoop with four seconds remaining , and Temple Owls won 66 – 64 . Fernandez and Moore finished with 23 points , a season high for Fernandez . 
 Temple Owls ' season ended on March 19 with a 71 – 64 loss to second @-@ seeded San Diego State in double overtime . The Aztecs took an 11 @-@ point lead in the first half , but Temple Owls recovered . Off a turnover , Lavoy Allen made a seven @-@ footer to tie the game at 54 with 51 seconds left in the second half . Chase Tapley of San Diego State missed a baseline shot at the end of regulation , and the game went into overtime . At the beginning of the first overtime period , Juan Fernandez hit a three @-@ pointer to give the Owls a 57 – 54 lead . Malcolm Thomas responded with a three @-@ point play to tie the game at 61 . Thomas could not hit a shot and the game went into a second overtime . With SDSU maintaining a 69 – 64 lead , Aztec star Kawhi Leonard stole the ball from Khalif Wyatt and his uncontested dunk assured his team 's victory . Ramone Moore had 17 points , and Allen had 12 points and 11 rebounds in his final game as a Temple Owl . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 The team posted the following statistics : 
 = = Rankings = = 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Lavoy Allen 
 Preseason All @-@ Atlantic 10 First Team 
 Preseason All @-@ Atlantic 10 Defensive Team 
 Preseason John R. Wooden Award Watchlist 
 Preseason Naismith College Player of the Year Watchlist 
 December 6 , 2010 Atlantic 10 Conference Player of the Week 
 February 28 , 2011 Atlantic 10 Conference Player of the Week 
 March 6 , 2011 Atlantic 10 Conference Player of the Week 
 All @-@ Atlantic 10 First Team 
 All @-@ Atlantic 10 Defensive Team 
 Philadelphia Big Five Player of the Year 
 All @-@ Philadelphia Big Five First Team 
 Juan Fernandez 
 Preseason All @-@ Atlantic 10 Second Team 
 Bob Cousy Award Watchlist 
 All @-@ Atlantic 10 Third Team 
 All @-@ Atlantic 10 Academic Team 
 All @-@ Philadelphia Big Five Second Team 
 Ramone Moore 
 All @-@ Atlantic 10 Second Team 
 National Association of Basketball Coaches District 4 Second Team 
 All @-@ Philadelphia Big Five First Team 
 Scootie Randall 
 February 7 , 2011 Atlantic 10 Conference Player of the Week 
 All @-@ Atlantic 10 Honorable Mention 
 Chris Daniels Most Improved Player of the Year 
 Khalif Wyatt 
 Atlantic 10 Sixth Man of the Year 
 = = NBA Draft = = 
 In the 2011 NBA Draft , the Philadelphia 76ers drafted Lavoy Allen in the second round with the 50th pick on June 23 . Allen became the 32nd Temple player to be drafted and the first since the New York Knicks selected Mardy Collins with the 29th pick in 2006 . " I am very happy for him , " said coach Fran Dunphy . " He accomplished so much as a college basketball player . It is a great reward to be drafted , and to go to the Sixers is icing on the cake . " 
 = Meteor @-@ class aviso = 
 The Meteor class was a pair of two avisos built by the Imperial German Navy in the late @-@ 1880s ; the class comprised two ships , Meteor and Comet . They were an improvement over the preceding Wacht class , being slightly faster and armed with quick @-@ firing guns rather than the slower , old @-@ pattern guns used on the earlier ships . Meteor and Comet nevertheless proved to be disappointments , primarily a result of extreme vibration caused by their propulsion system , particularly at higher speeds . As a result , their service careers were limited . They served less than two years on active duty , from 1893 to 1895 . They returned to limited duty in 1904 as guard ships , but by 1911 they had been stricken from the naval register and used in subsidiary roles . Both were scrapped in 1919 – 21 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Imperial Navy began building small avisos in the 1880s to serve in the main fleet in German waters . These vessels were intended to support the battle line , and so unlike the contemporary German unprotected cruisers , their designs emphasized offensive capability and high speed rather than a long cruising radius . The design for Meteor and Comet was based on the earlier Wacht class ; they were slightly smaller vessels and displaced around 25 % less than the earlier vessels . The savings in weight were used for a more powerful propulsion system , a new gun armament of quick @-@ firing guns , and slightly thicker armor plating . The Meteor class was the last aviso design produced by the Imperial Navy ; by the 1890s , German naval designers had taken the best characteristics of the avisos and the contemporary unprotected cruisers and combined them in the Gazelle class of light cruisers , the first vessels of that type of warship . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Meteor and Comet were 79 @.@ 86 meters ( 262 @.@ 0 ft ) long at the waterline and 79 @.@ 86 m ( 262 @.@ 0 ft ) long overall . They had a beam of 9 @.@ 56 m ( 31 @.@ 4 ft ) and a maximum draft of 3 @.@ 68 m ( 12 @.@ 1 ft ) forward . Meteor displaced 961 metric tons ( 946 long tons ; 1 @,@ 059 short tons ) as designed and up to 1 @,@ 078 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 061 long tons ; 1 @,@ 188 short tons ) at full combat load , while Comet was slightly heavier , at 992 t ( 976 long tons ; 1 @,@ 093 short tons ) and 1 @,@ 117 t ( 1 @,@ 099 long tons ; 1 @,@ 231 short tons ) , respectively . Their hulls were constructed from transverse steel frames . Meteor was initially fitted with a single pole mainmast , while Comet had the pole mainmast along with a smaller mast further aft for wireless telegraphy . In 1901 – 02 , Meteor was fitted with the second mast as well . 
 The Meteor @-@ class ships had a crew of 7 officers and 108 enlisted men . The ships carried several smaller boats , including one yawl , one dinghy , and one cutter . They were poor sea boats ; they were very unstable in anything but calm weather . They also vibrated excessively due to severe cavitation , particularly at high speeds . Both ships were , however , very maneuverable vessels . Their metacentric height was .41 m ( 1 ft 4 in ) . 
 = = = Machinery = = = 
 Their propulsion system consisted of two vertical 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines that drove a pair of 2 @.@ 8 m ( 9 ft 2 in ) wide , three @-@ bladed screw propellers . Steam for the engines was provided by four coal @-@ fired locomotive boilers that were trunked into two funnels on the centerline . The ships were equipped with a pair of electric generators with a combined output of 20 to 24 kilowatts ( 27 to 32 hp ) at 67 volts . Steering was controlled by a single rudder . 
 The ships ' propulsion system varied slightly in performance . Meteor 's engines were rated at 4 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 3 @,@ 400 kW ) for a top speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) , though she exceeded both figures on sea trials , reaching a speed of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . Comet 's engines were rated for 5 @,@ 000 ihp ( 3 @,@ 700 kW ) and 19 @.@ 5 kn ( 36 @.@ 1 km / h ; 22 @.@ 4 mph ) , which she did not exceed on her trials . Both ships had a range of approximately 960 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 780 km ; 1 @,@ 100 mi ) at 9 kn ( 17 km / h ; 10 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 The ships were armed with four 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 30 guns placed in single pivot mounts , two side @-@ by @-@ side forward , and two side @-@ by @-@ side aft . The guns were supplied with between 462 and 680 rounds of ammunition , and they had a range of 6 @,@ 900 m ( 22 @,@ 600 ft ) . They also carried three 35 cm ( 14 in ) torpedo tubes , one mounted submerged in the bow and the other two in deck @-@ mounted launchers on the broadside . They were supplied with eight torpedoes . Both ships were protected with steel armor . They had a 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) thick deck with 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) thick sloped sides . The conning tower had 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick plating on the sides , with a 15 mm thick roof . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Meteor was laid down at the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel in 1888 , and launched on 20 January 1890 . Fitting @-@ out work then commenced , and was completed by 19 May 1891 , when she was commissioned into the German fleet . Comet was built by the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin . She was laid down in 1890 and launched on 15 January 1892 . After fitting @-@ out was completed she was transferred to Kiel , where she was commissioned for sea trials . Comet was commissioned into the fleet on 29 April 1893 . 
 Neither ship remained on active service long , primarily due to their excessive vibration . Meteor was assigned as the dispatch vessel for the I Division of the Maneuver Squadron in 1893 , but was reduced to reserve status by 1895 . Comet served in the III Division for the annual maneuvers in August and September 1893 but she too was quickly placed in reserve . In 1904 , both ships were reactivated as guard ships , but this service did not last long either . By 1911 , both ships had again been withdrawn and stricken from the naval register ; Meteor became a barracks ship in Kiel while Comet was used as a mine hulk in Danzig . Meteor and Comet were sold for scrapping in 1919 and 1921 , respectively . 
 = Qianling Mausoleum = 
 The Qianling Mausoleum ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> ) is a Tang dynasty ( 618 – 907 ) tomb site located in Qian County , Shaanxi province , China , and is 85 km ( 53 mi ) northwest from Xi 'an , formerly the Tang capital . Built by 684 ( with additional construction until 706 ) , the tombs of the mausoleum complex house the remains of various members of the House of Li , the imperial family of the Tang dynasty . This includes Emperor Gaozong ( r . 649 – 83 ) , as well as his wife , Wu Zetian , who usurped the Tang throne and became China 's only governing female emperor from 690 – 705 . The mausoleum is renowned for its many Tang dynasty stone statues located above ground and the mural paintings adorning the subterranean walls of the tombs . Besides the main tumulus mound and underground tomb of Emperor Gaozong and Wu Zetian , there are 17 smaller attendant tombs or <unk> mu . Presently , only five of these attendant tombs have been excavated by archaeologists , three belonging to members of the imperial family , one to a chancellor , and the other to a general of the left guard . 
 = = History = = 
 Following his death in 683 , Emperor Gaozong 's mausoleum complex was completed in 684 . After her death , Wu Zetian was interred in a joint burial with Emperor Gaozong at Qianling on July 2 , 706 . Tang dynasty funerary epitaphs in the tombs of her son Li Xián ( Crown Prince <unk> , 653 – 84 ) , grandson Li Chongrun ( Prince of Shao , posthumously honored Crown Prince <unk> , 682 – 701 ) , and granddaughter Li Xianhui ( Lady Yongtai , posthumously honored as Princess Yongtai , 684 – 701 ) in the mausoleum are inscribed with the date of burial as 706 AD , allowing historians to accurately date the structures and artwork of the tombs . In fact , this Sui and Tang dynasty practice of interring an epitaph that records the person 's name , rank , and dates of death and burial was consistent amongst tombs for the imperial family and high court officials . Both the Old Book of Tang and New Book of Tang record that , in 706 , Wu Zetian 's son Emperor Zhongzong ( r . 684 , 705 – 10 , Li Chongrun 's and Li Xianhui 's father and Li Xián 's brother ) exonerated the victims of Wu Zetian 's political purges and provided them with honorable burials , including the two princes and princess mentioned above . Besides the attendant tombs of these royal family members , two others that have been excavated belonging to Chancellor Xue <unk> ( 622 – 83 ) and General of the Left Guard Li <unk> . 
 The five attendant tombs mentioned above were opened and excavated in the 1960s and early 1970s . In March 1995 , there was an organized petition to the Chinese government about efforts to finally excavate Emperor Gaozong and Wu Zetian 's tomb . 
 = = Location = = 
 The mausoleum is located on Mount Liang , north of the Wei River , and 1 @,@ 049 m ( 3 @,@ 442 ft ) above sea level . The grounds of the mausoleum are flanked by Leopard Valley to the east and Sand Canyon to the west . Although there are tumulus mounds to demarcate where each tomb is located , most of the tomb structures are subterranean . The tumulus mounds on the southern peaks are called <unk> or " Nipple Hills " , due to their resemblance to the shape of nipples . The Nipple Hills , with towers erected on the top of each to accentuate the hills ' name , form a sort of gateway into Qianling Mausoleum . The main tumulus mound is on the northern peak ; it is the tallest of the mounds and is the burial place of Gaozong and Wu Zetian . Halfway up this northern peak , the builders of the site dug a 61 m ( 200 ft ) long and 4 m ( 13 ft ) wide tunnel into the rock of the mountain that leads to the inner tomb chambers located deep within the mountain . The complex was originally enclosed by two walls , the remains of which have been discovered today , including what was four gatehouses of the inner wall . The inner wall was 2 @.@ 4 m ( 7 @.@ 8 ft ) thick , with a total perimeter of <unk> m ( 19 @,@ 422 ft ) enclosing a trapezoidal area of 240 @,@ 000 m2 ( 787 @,@ 400 ft2 ) . Only some corner parts of the outer wall have been discovered . During the Tang dynasty , there were hundreds of residential houses that surrounded Qianling , inhabited by families that maintained the grounds and buildings of the mausoleum . The remains of some of these houses have since been discovered . The building foundation of the timber offering hall situated at the south gate of the mausoleum 's inner wall has also been discovered . 
 = = Spirit Way = = 
 Leading into the mausoleum is a spirit way , which is flanked on both sides with stone statues like the later tombs of the Song dynasty and Ming Dynasty Tombs . The Qianling statues include horses , winged horses , horses with grooms , lions , ostriches , officials , and foreign envoys . The khan of the Western Turks presented an ostrich to the Tang court in 620 and the <unk> Kingdom sent another in 650 ; in carved reliefs of Qianling dated c . 683 , traditional Chinese phoenixes are modelled on the body of ostriches . Historian Tonia <unk> states that the artistic emphasis on the exotic foreign tribute of the ostrich at the mausoleum was " a sign of the greatness of China and the Chinese emperor , not of the foreigners who sent them , or of the places from which they came " . <unk> also asserts that the 61 statues of foreign diplomats sculpted in the 680s represents the " far @-@ reaching power and international standing " of the Tang Dynasty . These statues , now headless , represent the actual foreign diplomats who were present at Emperor Gaozong 's funeral . Historian Angela Howard notes that along the spirit ways of the auxiliary tombs — such as Li Xianhui 's — the statues are smaller , of lesser quality , and fewer in number than the main spirit way of Qianling leading to Emperor Gaozong and Wu 's burial . Besides the statues , there are also flanking sets of octagonal stone pillars meant to ward off evil spirits . A 6 @.@ 3 m ( 20 @.@ 7 ft ) tall , tiered stele dedicated to Emperor Gaozong is also located along the path , with a written inscription commemorating his achievements ; this is flanked by Wu Zetian 's stele which has no written inscriptions . An additional stele by the main tumulus was erected by the Qianlong Emperor ( r . 1735 – 96 ) during the mid @-@ Qing dynasty . 
 = = Tombs = = 
 The tomb chambers of Emperor Gaozong and Empress Wu are located deep within Mount Liang , a trend that was set by Emperor Taizong ( r . 626 – 49 ) with his burial at Mount <unk> . Of the 18 emperors of the Tang dynasty , 14 of these had natural mountains serving as the earthen mounds for their tombs . Only members of the imperial family were allowed to have their tombs located within natural mountains ; tombs for officials and nobles featured man @-@ made tumulus mounds and tomb chambers that were totally underground . <unk> Fu wrote that " Children of emperors were allowed tombs in the shape of truncated pyramids , but high @-@ ranking officials and lesser tomb constructors could only have conical mounds . The conical tombs of officials were allowed to have one wall surrounding it , but only one gate — positioned to the south — was permitted . The attendant tombs thus far excavated at Qianling feature truncated pyramid mounds above underground chambers that are approached by declining diagonal ramps with ground @-@ level entrances . There are six vertical shafts for the ramps of each of these tombs which allowed goods to be lowered into the side niches of the ramps . 
 The main hall in each of these underground tombs leads to two four @-@ sided brick @-@ laden burial chambers connected by a short corridor ; these chambers feature domed ceilings . The tomb of Li Xian features real fully stone doors , a tomb trend apparent in the Han and Western Jin dynasties that became more common by the time of the Northern Qi dynasty . The stylistic stone door of Lou Rui 's tomb of 570 closely resembles that of Tang stone doors , such as the one in Li Xian 's tomb . 
 Unlike many other Tang dynasty tombs , the treasures within the imperial tombs of the Qianling Mausoleum were never stolen by grave robbers . In fact , in Li Chongrun 's tomb alone , there were found over a thousand items of gold , copper , iron , ceramic figurines , three @-@ glaze colored figurines , and three @-@ glaze pottery wares . Altogether , the tombs of Li Xian , Li Chongrun , and Li Xianhui had over 4 @,@ 300 tomb articles when they were unearthed by archaeologists . However , the attendant tombs of the mausoleum were raided by grave robbers . Among the ceramic figurines found in Li Chongrun 's tomb were horses with gilt decoration supporting armed and armored soldiers , horsemen playing flutes , blowing trumpets , and waving whips to spur their horses . Ceramic sculptures found in the tomb of Li Xian included figurines of civil officials , warriors , and tomb guardian beasts , all of which were over a meter ( 3 ft ) in height . 
 = = Murals = = 
 The tombs thus far excavated for Li Xian , Li Chongrun , and Li Xianhui are all decorated with mural paintings and feature multiple shaft entrances and arched chambers . Historian Mary H. Fong states that the tomb murals in the subterranean halls of Li Xián 's , Li Chongrun 's , and Li Xianhui 's tombs are representative of anonymous but professional tomb decorators rather than renowned court painters of handscrolls . Although primarily funerary art , Fong asserts that these Tang tomb murals are " sorely needed references " to the sparse amount of description offered in Tang era documents about painting , such as the Tang Chao <unk> lu ( ' Celebrated Painters of the Tang Dynasty ' ) by Zhu <unk> in the 840s and the <unk> <unk> ji ( ' A Record of the Famous Painters of the Successive Dynasties ' ) by Zhang <unk> in 847 . Fong also asserts that the painting skill of portraying " animation through spirit consonance " or <unk> <unk> — an art critique associated with renowned Tang dynasty painters like Yan <unk> , Zhou Fang , and Chen Hong — was achieved by the anonymous Tang dynasty tomb painters . Fong writes : 
 The " Palace Guard " and the " Two Seated Attendants " from Prince Zhang Huai 's tomb are especially outstanding in this respect . Not only are the relative differences in age achieved , but it is evident that the robust guard officer who stands at attention displays an attitude of respectful self @-@ assurance ; and the seated pair are deeply engrossed in a serious conversation . 
 Another important feature in the murals of the tomb was the representation of architecture . Although there are numerous examples of existing Tang stone and brick pagoda towers for architectural historians to examine , there are only six remaining wooden halls that have survived from the 8th and 9th centuries . Only the rammed earth foundations of the great palaces of the Tang capital at Chang 'an have survived . However , some of the mural scenes of timber architecture in Li Chongrun 's tomb at Qianling have been suggested by historians as representative of the Eastern Palace , residence of the crown prince during the Tang dynasty . According to historian Fu <unk> , not only do the murals of Li Chongrun 's tomb represent buildings of the Tang capital , but also " the number of underground chambers , ventilation shafts , compartments , and air wells have been seen as indications of the number of courtyards , main halls , rooms , and corridors in residences of tomb occupants when they were alive . " The underground hall of the descending ramp approaching Li Chongrun 's tomb chambers , as well as the gated entrance to the front chamber , feature murals of multiple @-@ bodied que gate towers similar to those whose foundations were surveyed at Chang 'an . 
 Ann Paludan , an Honorary Fellow of Durham University , provides captions in her Chronicle of the Chinese Emperors ( 1998 ) for the following pictures of Qianling tomb murals : 
 = Liberty Bell ( Portland , Oregon ) = 
 Liberty Bell refers to one of two replicas in Portland , Oregon , United States , of the original Liberty Bell in Philadelphia . The first replica was purchased in 1962 , and installed in the rotunda of City Hall in 1964 . On November 21 , 1970 , it was destroyed in a bomb blast that also damaged the building 's east portico . The second replica was installed outside of City Hall soon after the blast ( c . 1972 ) with funds from private donations . It was constructed at the McShane Bell Foundry in Baltimore and dedicated on November 6 , 1975 . The bell is listed as a state veterans memorial by the Oregon Department of Veterans ' Affairs . 
 = = History = = 
 Portland has had two replicas of Philadelphia 's original Liberty Bell . The first replica was purchased in 1962 for $ 8 @,@ 000 . It arrived in Portland in June 1963 , with a damaged base and beam since the sculpture had slipped off its supports . Repairs were made before the replica was paraded through the city on a flatbed truck , then put into storage until Independence Day . The bell was publicly rung for the first time during holiday celebrations and installed in City Hall 's rotunda on May 5 , 1964 . 
 On November 21 , 1970 , a dynamite bomb that had been placed beneath the bell detonated , damaging City Hall 's east portico columns , shattering windows , and destroying the replica . No one was injured , but " shards of bell went everywhere through the main portico " . The crime remains unsolved ; no one claimed responsibility or was prosecuted for the blast . In 1993 , The Oregonian said : " Wild , highly vocal speculation blamed the blast on either left @-@ wing or right @-@ wing terrorists , depending , of course , on the accusers ' own political persuasions . Others guessed it was a monumental prank that careened out of control . " 
 Portland 's second replica is located outside of City Hall 's east portico , near the intersection of Southwest Fourth and Madison streets and across from Terry Schrunk Plaza . Private donations totaling $ 8 @,@ 000 allowed a new bell to be purchased for $ 6 @,@ 000 and installed not long after the blast ( c . 1972 ) . The bell has also been attributed as a gift from Philadelphia residents to Portland school children . It was constructed at the McShane Bell Foundry in Baltimore and received a 25 @-@ year guarantee against breakage . The replica was dedicated on November 6 , 1975 . It was surveyed and considered " treatment needed " by the Smithsonian Institution 's " Save Outdoor Sculpture ! " program in October 1993 . The Oregon Department of Veterans ' Affairs lists the bell as one of the state 's veterans memorials . 
 = = Description and reception = = 
 The 1 ton ( 910 kg ) sculpture is made of Best Genuine Bell Metal , a sixteen percent min @-@ copper alloy , and measures approximately 66 by 64 by 66 inches ( 1 @.@ 7 m × 1 @.@ 6 m × 1 @.@ 7 m ) . It is attached to a horizontal beam that is supported by two V @-@ shaped beams . The base is made of brick , metal ( steel ) and wood ( mahogany covering ) that measures approximately 13 by 76 by 54 @.@ 5 inches ( 0 @.@ 33 m × 1 @.@ 93 m × 1 @.@ 38 m ) . The west side displays the inscription Pass and Stow / Philada / <unk> . Raised lettering along the top of the bell reads <unk> LIBERTY <unk> ALL THE LAND <unk> ALL THE <unk> <unk> <unk> . XX <unk> . / BY ORDER OF THE <unk> OF THE <unk> OF <unk> FOR THE STATE HOUSE IN <unk> . The founder 's mark also appears . Smithsonian categorizes the sculpture as allegorical for symbolizing liberty . 
 The bell has been included in published walking tours of Portland . 
 = HMS Medway ( 1928 ) = 
 HMS Medway was the first purpose @-@ built submarine depot ship constructed for the Royal Navy . She was built by Vickers Armstrong at Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness during the late 1920s . The ship served on the China Station before the Second World War and was transferred to Egypt in early 1940 . Ordered to evacuate Alexandria in the face of the German advance after the Battle of Gazala in May 1942 , Medway sailed for Lebanon at the end of June , escorted by a light cruiser and seven destroyers . Her strong escort could not protect her ; on 30 June a German submarine torpedoed and sank her . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 Medway was designed to support up to 18 Odin and Parthian @-@ class submarines in peacetime and an additional three submarines during wartime . She carried three QF 4 @-@ inch Mk IV deck guns as spares together with 144 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes to resupply her submarines . The ship proved to be less top @-@ heavy than anticipated and had the enormously high metacentric height of 13 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) at full load . Built with bilge keels only 12 inches ( 305 mm ) deep , Medway once rolled 42 ° each way with a period of nine seconds , losing her main topmast . Her bilge keels were subsequently increased in depth to 36 inches ( 914 mm ) . 
 She was 580 feet ( 176 @.@ 8 m ) long overall and had a beam of 85 feet 1 inch ( 25 @.@ 9 m ) and a draft of 21 feet 3 inches ( 6 @.@ 5 m ) . The ship displaced 14 @,@ 650 long tons ( 14 @,@ 890 t ) at standard load and up to 18 @,@ 362 long tons ( 18 @,@ 657 t ) at ( full load ) . Her crew numbered 400 officers and enlisted men ; she could also accommodate up to 1 @,@ 335 additional men . 
 The ship was powered by MAN diesel engines rated at 8 @,@ 000 brake horsepower ( 6 @,@ 000 kW ) , driving two shafts , and had a top speed of about 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . Medway carried 810 long tons ( 820 t ) of diesel fuel for herself and an additional 1 @,@ 880 long tons ( 1 @,@ 910 t ) for her submarines . Figures for her range are not available . The ship had five 560 @-@ kilowatt ( 750 hp ) diesel generators for electrical power and special provisions to recharge submarine batteries . 
 She was armed with two low @-@ angle 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) guns in single mounts and four quick @-@ firing Mk V 4 @-@ inch anti @-@ aircraft guns , also in single mounts . The latter guns were controlled by a High @-@ Angle Control System mounted above the bridge . Medway was protected by an internal anti @-@ torpedo bulge which incorporated a water jacket of 1 @,@ 374 long tons ( 1 @,@ 396 t ) . Amidships a 1 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 38 mm ) torpedo bulkhead was located 13 feet inboard that inclined outwards above the waterline . The main deck was 1 @.@ 5 inches thick <unk> . 
 Medway was ordered on 14 September 1926 as part of the 1925 / 26 Naval Estimates . The ship was laid down in April 1927 by the Vickers Armstrong shipyard in Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness , launched on 19 July 1928 , and completed on 3 July 1929 . 
 = = Career = = 
 HMS Medway served on the China Station before the start of the Second World War , supporting the 4th Submarine Flotilla , and was under refit at Singapore from September 1939 through February 1940 . Upon completion of the refit , Medway sailed for Hong Kong where she remained until she departed for Alexandria on 2 April . She arrived there on 3 May and thereafter supported the 1st Submarine Flotilla , which operated in the Eastern Mediterranean . 
 Two years later , Vice @-@ Admiral Henry Harwood , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Mediterranean Fleet , ordered all non @-@ essential ships to leave Alexandria in June 1942 as he was preparing to demolish the port facilities there to prevent their capture by the advancing Panzer Army Africa . Medway loaded stores and 1 @,@ 135 personnel on 29 June to establish a new base at Beirut , Lebanon and sailed later that day for Beirut . Accompanied by the Greek ship SS Corinthia , Medway was escorted by the light cruiser Dido and the destroyers Sikh , Zulu , Hero , Exmoor , Aldenham , Croome , and <unk> . The next day , off Port Said , U @-@ 372 fired two torpedoes that sank Medway ; 30 men were lost in the sinking . 47 of the 90 spare torpedoes aboard floated free of the wreck and were salvaged . 
 = Battle of Cannae = 
 The Battle of Cannae ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ) was a major battle of the Second Punic War that took place on 2 August 216 BC in Apulia , in southeast Italy . The army of Carthage , under Hannibal , decisively defeated a larger army of the Roman Republic under the consuls Lucius Aemilius Paullus and Gaius Terentius Varro . It is regarded both as one of the greatest tactical feats in military history and as one of the worst defeats in Roman history . 
 Having recovered from their losses at Trebia ( 218 BC ) and Lake Trasimene ( 217 BC ) , the Romans decided to engage Hannibal at Cannae , with roughly 86 @,@ 000 Roman and allied troops . The Romans massed their heavy infantry in a deeper formation than usual , while Hannibal utilized the double @-@ envelopment tactic . This was so successful that the Roman army was effectively destroyed as a fighting force . Following the defeat , Capua and several other Italian city @-@ states defected from the Roman Republic to Carthage . 
 = = Strategic background = = 
 Shortly after the start of the Second Punic War , the Carthaginian general Hannibal crossed into Italy by traversing the Pyrenees and the Alps during the summer and early autumn . He quickly won major victories over the Romans at Trebia and at Lake Trasimene . After these losses , the Romans appointed Fabius Maximus as dictator to deal with the threat . Fabius used attrition warfare against Hannibal , cutting off his supply lines and avoiding pitched battles . These tactics proved unpopular with the Romans , who , as they recovered from the shock of Hannibal 's victories , began to question the wisdom of the Fabian strategy which had given the Carthaginian army a chance to regroup . The majority of Romans were eager to see a quick conclusion to the war . It was feared that , if Hannibal continued plundering Italy unopposed , Rome 's allies might defect to the Carthaginian side for self @-@ preservation . 
 Therefore , when Fabius came to the end of his term , the Senate did not renew his dictatorial powers and command was given to consuls Gnaeus Servilius Geminus and Marcus Atilius Regulus . In 216 BC , when elections resumed , Gaius Terentius Varro and Lucius Aemilius Paullus were elected as consuls , placed in command of a newly raised army of unprecedented size , and directed to engage Hannibal . Polybius wrote : 
