 The Senate determined to bring eight legions into the field , which had never been done at Rome before , each legion consisting of five thousand men besides allies . ... Most of their wars are decided by one consul and two legions , with their quota of allies ; and they rarely employ all four at one time and on one service . But on this occasion , so great was the alarm and terror of what would happen , they resolved to bring not only four but eight legions into the field . 
 = = = Estimates of Roman troop numbers = = = 
 Rome typically employed four legions each year , each consisting of four thousand foot soldiers and two hundred cavalry . Perceiving the Carthaginian army as a real threat , for the first time ever the Senate introduced eight legions , each legion consisting of five thousand foot soldiers and three hundred cavalry with allied troops numbering the same amount of foot soldiers , but nine hundred cavalry per legion ; triple the legion numbers . Eight legions , some 40 @,@ 000 Roman soldiers and an estimated 2 @,@ 400 cavalry , formed the nucleus of this massive new army . However , some have suggested that the destruction of an army of 90 @,@ 000 troops would be impossible . They argue that Rome probably had 48 @,@ 000 troops and 6 @,@ 000 cavalry against Hannibal 's 35 @,@ 000 troops and 10 @,@ 000 cavalry . Livy quotes one source stating the Romans added only 10 @,@ 000 men to their usual army . While no definitive number of Roman troops exists , all sources agree that the Carthaginians faced a considerably larger foe . 
 = = Roman command = = 
 Consuls were each assigned two of the four legions to command , rarely employing all four legions at once to the same assignment , however , the Senate feared a real threat and not only employed all four legions into the field , but all eight , including allies . Ordinarily , each of the two consuls would command his own portion of the army , but since the two armies were combined into one , Roman law required them to alternate their command on a daily basis . The traditional account puts Varro in command on the day of the battle , and much of the blame for the defeat has been laid on his shoulders . However , his low origins seem to be exaggerated in the sources , and Varro may have been made a scapegoat by the aristocratic establishment . Varro lacked the powerful descendants that Paullus had : descendants who were willing and able to protect his reputation — most notably , Paullus was the grandfather of Scipio Aemilianus , the patron of Polybius . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 In the spring of 216 BC , Hannibal took the initiative and seized the large supply depot at Cannae , in the Apulian plain , placing himself between the Romans and their crucial source of supply . Hannibal recently harvested his crops so he had a well fed army ready for action in the city of Cannae . As Polybius noted , the capture of Cannae " caused great commotion in the Roman army ; for it was not only the loss of the place and the stores in it that distressed them , but the fact that it commanded the surrounding district " . The consuls , resolving to confront Hannibal , marched southward in search of him . After two days ' march , they found him on the left bank of the Aufidus River , and encamped six miles ( 10 km ) away . 
 Reportedly , a Carthaginian officer named Gisgo commented on how much larger the Roman army was . Hannibal replied , " another thing that has escaped your notice , Gisgo , is even more amazing — that although there are so many of them , there is not one among them called Gisgo " . 
 Varro , in command on the first day , is presented by contemporary sources as a man of reckless nature and hubris , who was determined to defeat Hannibal . While the Romans were approaching Cannae , a small portion of Hannibal 's forces ambushed them . Varro successfully repelled the attack and continued on his way to Cannae . This victory , though essentially a mere skirmish with no lasting strategic value , greatly bolstered the confidence of the Roman army , perhaps to overconfidence on Varro 's part . Paullus , however , was opposed to the engagement as it was taking shape . Unlike Varro , he was prudent and cautious , and he believed it was foolish to fight on open ground , despite the Romans ' numerical strength . This was especially true since Hannibal held the advantage in cavalry ( both in quality and quantity ) . Despite these misgivings , Paullus thought it unwise to withdraw the army after the initial success , and camped two @-@ thirds of the army east of the Aufidus River , sending the remainder to fortify a position on the opposite side . The purpose of this second camp was to cover the foraging parties from the main camp and harass those of the enemy . 
 The two armies stayed in their respective locations for two days . During the second day ( August 1 ) , Hannibal , aware that Varro would be in command the following day , left his camp and offered battle , but Paullus refused . When his request was rejected , Hannibal , recognizing the importance of the water from the Aufidus to the Roman troops , sent his cavalry to the smaller Roman camp to harass water @-@ bearing soldiers that were found outside the camp fortifications . According to Polybius , Hannibal 's cavalry boldly rode up to the edge of the Roman encampment , causing havoc and thoroughly disrupting the supply of water to the Roman camp . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Armies = = = 
 Figures for troops involved in ancient battles are often unreliable , and Cannae is no exception . Figures should be treated with caution , especially those for the Carthaginian side . The Carthaginian army was a combination of warriors from numerous regions , and may have numbered between 40 @,@ 000 and 50 @,@ 000 . Along with the core of an estimated 8 @,@ 000 Libyans , there were 8 @,@ 000 Iberians , 16 @,@ 000 Gauls ( 8 @,@ 000 were left at camp the day of battle ) and around 5 @,@ 500 <unk> infantry . Hannibal 's cavalry also came from diverse backgrounds . He commanded 4 @,@ 000 Numidian , 2 @,@ 000 Iberian , 4 @,@ 000 Gallic and 450 <unk> @-@ Phoenician cavalry . Finally , Hannibal had around 8 @,@ 000 skirmishers consisting of Balearic slingers and mixed nationality spearmen . The uniting factor for the Carthaginian army was the personal tie each group had with Hannibal . 
 The Roman forces totaled up to 79 @,@ 000 men : 63 @,@ 000 infantry and 6 @,@ 000 cavalry , plus , in the two fortified camps , another 2 @,@ 600 heavily armed men and 7 @,@ 400 lightly armed men . 
 = = = Equipment = = = 
 Rome 's forces used typical Roman equipment including pila ( heavy javelins ) and hastae ( thrusting spears ) as weapons as well as traditional helmets , shields and body armor . On the other hand , the Carthaginian army used a variety of equipment . The Iberians fought with swords suited for cutting and thrusting , as well as javelins and various types of spears . For defense , Iberian warriors carried large oval shields and the falcata . The Gauls were likely wearing no armor , and the typical Gallic weapon was usually a long , slashing sword . The heavy Carthaginian cavalry carried two javelins and a curved slashing sword , with a heavy shield for protection . The Numidian cavalry were very lightly equipped , lacking saddles and bridles for their horses , and used no armor but carried small shields , javelins and possibly a knife or longer blade . Skirmishers acting as light infantry carried either slings or spears . The Balearic slingers , who were famous for their accuracy , carried short , medium and long slings used to cast stones or bullets . They may have carried a small shield or simple leather pelt on their arms , but this is uncertain . Hannibal himself was wearing <unk> armor and carried a falcata as well . 
 The equipment of the Libyan line infantry has been much debated . Head has argued in favor of short stabbing spears . Polybius states that the Libyans fought with equipment taken from previously defeated Romans . It is unclear whether he meant only shields and armor or offensive weapons as well , though a general reading suggests he meant the whole panoply of arms and armor , and even tactical organization . Apart from his description of the battle itself , when later discussing the subject of the Roman legion versus the Greek phalanx , Polybius says that " ... against Hannibal , the defeats they suffered had nothing to do with weapons or formations " because " Hannibal himself ... discarded the equipment with which he had started out ( and ) armed his troops with Roman weapons " . Daly is inclined to the view that Libyan infantry would have copied the Iberian use of the sword during their fighting there and so were armed similarly to the Romans . Connolly has argued that they were armed as a pike phalanx . This has been disputed by Head , because Plutarch states they carried spears shorter than the Roman Triarii and by Daly because they could not have carried an unwieldy pike at the same time as a heavy Roman @-@ style shield . 
 = = = Tactical deployment = = = 
 The conventional deployment for armies of the time was placement of infantry in the center , with the cavalry in two flanking wings . The Romans followed this convention fairly closely , but chose extra depth rather than breadth for the infantry in hopes of breaking quickly through the center of Hannibal 's line . Varro knew how the Roman infantry had managed to penetrate Hannibal 's center at Trebia , and he planned to recreate this on an even greater scale . The principes were stationed immediately behind the hastati , ready to push forward at first contact to ensure the Romans presented a unified front . As Polybius wrote , " the maniples were nearer each other , or the intervals were decreased ... and the maniples showed more depth than front " . Even though they outnumbered the Carthaginians , this depth @-@ oriented deployment meant that the Roman lines had a front of roughly equal size to their numerically inferior opponents . The typical style of ancient warfare was to continuously pour in infantry into the center and attempt to simply overpower the enemy . Hannibal understood that the Romans fought their battles like this , and he took his outnumbered army and strategically placed them around the enemy to win a tactical victory . 
 To Varro , Hannibal seemed to have little room to maneuver and no means of retreat as he was deployed with the Aufidus River to his rear . Varro believed that when pressed hard by the Romans ' superior numbers , the Carthaginians would fall back to the river and , with no room to maneuver , would be cut down in panic . Bearing in mind that Hannibal 's two previous victories had been largely decided by his trickery and ruse , Varro had sought an open battlefield . The field at Cannae was clear , with no possibility of hidden troops being brought to bear in an ambush . 
 Hannibal , on the other hand , had deployed his forces based on the particular fighting qualities of each unit , taking into consideration both their strengths and weaknesses . This aspect of Hannibal 's leadership was highlighted in the use of a Spanish unit , the Balearic Slingers , whom he placed behind the infantry to hurl their ranged missiles into the masses of Roman troops . He placed his Iberians and Gauls in the middle , alternating the ethnic composition across the front line , with himself at the front and center . Infantry from Punic Africa was on the wings at the very edge of his infantry line . These infantry were battle @-@ hardened , remained cohesive and would attack the Roman flanks . 
 Hasdrubal led the Iberian and Gaulish cavalry on the left ( south near the Aufidus River ) of the Carthaginian army . By placing the flank of his army on the Aufidus River , Hannibal prevented this flank from being overlapped by the more numerous Romans . Hasdrubal was given about 6 @,@ 500 cavalry , and Hanno had 3 @,@ 500 Numidians on the right . 
 Hannibal intended that his cavalry , comprising mainly medium Hispanic cavalry and Numidian light horse , and positioned on the flanks , would defeat the weaker Roman cavalry and swing around to attack the Roman infantry from the rear as it pressed upon Hannibal 's weakened center . His veteran African troops would then press in from the flanks at the crucial moment , and encircle the overextended Romans . 
 The Romans were in front of the hill leading to Cannae and hemmed in on their right flank by the Aufidus River , so that their left flank was the only viable means of retreat . In addition , the Carthaginian forces had maneuvered so that the Romans would face east . Not only would the morning sun shine low into the Romans ' eyes , but the southeasterly winds would blow sand and dust into their faces as they approached the battlefield . Hannibal 's unique deployment of his army , based on his perception of the terrain and understanding of the capabilities of his troops , proved decisive . 
 = = = Battle = = = 
 As the armies advanced on one another , Hannibal gradually extended the center of his line , as Polybius described : " After thus drawing up his whole army in a straight line , he took the central companies of Hispanics and Celts and advanced with them , keeping the rest of them in contact with these companies , but gradually falling off , so as to produce a crescent @-@ shaped formation , the line of the flanking companies growing thinner as it was prolonged , his object being to employ the Africans as a reserve force and to begin the action with the Hispanics and Celts . " Polybius described the weak Carthaginian center as deployed in a crescent , curving out toward the Romans in the middle with the African troops on their flanks in echelon formation . It is believed that the purpose of this formation was to break the forward momentum of the Roman infantry , and delay its advance before other developments allowed Hannibal to deploy his African infantry most effectively . While the majority of historians feel that Hannibal 's action was deliberate , some have called this account fanciful , and claim that the actions of the day represent either the natural curvature that occurs when a broad front of infantry marches forward , or the bending back of the Carthaginian center from the shock action of meeting the heavily massed Roman center . 
 When the battle was joined , the cavalry engaged in a fierce exchange on the flanks . Polybius described the Hispanic and Celtic horse dismounting in what he considers a barbarian method of fighting . When the Hispanic and Gauls got the upper hand , they cut down the Roman cavalry without giving quarter . On the other flank the Numidians engaged in a way that merely kept the Roman allied cavalry occupied . When the victorious Hispanic and Gallic cavalry came up , the allied cavalry broke and the Numidians pursued them off the field . 
 While the Carthaginians were in the process of defeating the cavalry , the masses of infantry on both sides advanced towards each other in the center of the field . The wind from the east blew dust in the Romans ' faces and obscured their vision . While the wind was not a major factor , the dust that both armies created would have been potentially debilitating to sight . Although it made seeing difficult , troops would still have been able to see others in the vicinity . The dust , however , was not the only psychological factor involved in battle . Because of the somewhat distant battle location , both sides were forced to fight on little sleep . Another Roman disadvantage was thirst caused by Hannibal 's attack on the Roman encampment during the previous day . Furthermore , the massive number of troops would have led to an overwhelming amount of background noise . All of these psychological factors made battle especially difficult for the infantrymen . 
 Hannibal stood with his men in the weak center and held them to a controlled retreat . The crescent of Hispanic and Gallic troops buckled inwards as they gradually withdrew . Knowing the superiority of the Roman infantry , Hannibal had instructed his infantry to withdraw deliberately , creating an even tighter semicircle around the attacking Roman forces . By doing so , he had turned the strength of the Roman infantry into a weakness . While the front ranks were gradually advancing , the bulk of the Roman troops began to lose their cohesion , as they began crowding themselves into the growing gap . Soon they were compacted together so closely that they had little space to wield their weapons . In pressing so far forward in their desire to destroy the retreating and seemingly collapsing line of Hispanic and Gallic troops , the Romans had ignored ( possibly due to the dust ) the African troops that stood uncommitted on the projecting ends of this now @-@ reversed crescent . This also gave the Carthaginian cavalry time to drive the Roman cavalry off on both flanks and attack the Roman center in the rear . The Roman infantry , now stripped of protection on both its flanks , formed a wedge that drove deeper and deeper into the Carthaginian semicircle , driving itself into an alley formed by the African infantry on the wings . At this decisive point , Hannibal ordered his African infantry to turn inwards and advance against the Roman flanks , creating an encirclement in one of the earliest known examples of a pincer movement . 
 When the Carthaginian cavalry attacked the Romans in the rear and the African flanking echelons assailed them on their right and left , the advance of the Roman infantry was brought to an abrupt halt . The Romans were enclosed in a pocket with no means of escape . The Carthaginians created a wall and began destroying them . Polybius wrote , " as their outer ranks were continually cut down , and the survivors forced to pull back and huddle together , they were finally all killed where they stood . " 
 As Livy described , " So many thousands of Romans were dying ... Some , whom their wounds , pinched by the morning cold , had roused , as they were rising up , covered with blood , from the midst of the heaps of slain , were overpowered by the enemy . Some were found with their heads plunged into the earth , which they had excavated ; having thus , as it appeared , made pits for themselves , and having suffocated themselves . " Cowley claims that nearly six hundred legionaries were slaughtered each minute until darkness brought an end to the bloodletting . Only 14 @,@ 000 Roman troops managed to escape , most of whom had cut their way through to the nearby town of <unk> . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 = = = = Roman = = = = 
 Polybius writes that of the Roman and allied infantry , 70 @,@ 000 were killed , 10 @,@ 000 captured , and " perhaps " 3 @,@ 000 survived . He also reports that of the 6 @,@ 000 Roman and allied cavalry , only 370 survived . 
 Livy wrote , " Forty thousand foot , two thousand seven hundred horse , there being an equal number of citizens and allies , are said to have been slain . " He also reports that 3 @,@ 000 Roman and allied infantry and 1 @,@ 500 Roman and allied cavalry were taken prisoner by the Carthaginians . Although Livy does not cite his source by name , it is likely to have been Quintus Fabius Pictor , a Roman historian who fought in and wrote on the Second Punic War . It is Pictor whom Livy names when reporting the casualties at the Battle of Trebia . In addition to the consul Paullus , Livy goes on to record that among the dead were 2 quaestors , 29 of the 48 military tribunes ( some of consular rank , including the consul of the previous year , Gnaeus Servilius Geminus , and the former Master of the Horse , Marcus Minucius Rufus ) , and 80 " senators or men who had held offices which would have given them the right to be elected to the Senate " . 
 Later Roman and Greco @-@ Roman historians largely follow Livy 's figures . Appian gave 50 @,@ 000 killed and " a great many " taken prisoner . Plutarch agreed , " 50 @,@ 000 Romans fell in that battle ... 4 @,@ 000 were taken alive " . Quintilian : " 60 @,@ 000 men were slain by Hannibal at Cannae " . Eutropius : " 20 officers of consular and praetorian rank , 30 senators , and 300 others of noble descent , were taken or slain , as well as 40 @,@ 000 foot @-@ soldiers , and 3 @,@ 500 horse " . 
 Some modern historians , while rejecting Polybius 's figure as flawed , are willing to accept Livy 's figure . Some more recent historians have come up with far lower estimates . <unk> proposed Roman losses of 10 @,@ 500 to 16 @,@ 000 . Samuels also regards Livy 's figure as far too high , on the grounds that the cavalry would have been inadequate to prevent the Roman infantry escaping to the rear . He doubts that Hannibal even wanted a high death toll , as much of the army consisted of Italians whom Hannibal hoped to win as allies . 
 = = = = Carthaginian = = = = 
 Livy recorded Hannibal 's losses at " about 8 @,@ 000 of his bravest men . " Polybius reports 5 @,@ 700 dead : 4 @,@ 000 Gauls , 1 @,@ 500 Spanish and Africans , and 200 cavalry . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Never when the city was in safety was there so great a panic and confusion within the walls of Rome . I shall therefore shrink from the task , and not attempt to relate what in describing I must make less than the reality . The consul and his army having been lost at the <unk> the year before , it was not one wound upon another which was announced , but a multiplied disaster , the loss of two consular armies , together with the two consuls : and that now there was neither any Roman camp , nor general nor soldiery : that Apulia and <unk> , and now almost the whole of Italy , were in the possession of Hannibal . No other nation surely would not have been overwhelmed by such an accumulation of misfortune . 
 For a brief period , the Romans were in complete disarray . Their best armies in the peninsula were destroyed , the few remnants severely demoralized , and the only remaining consul ( Varro ) completely discredited . As the story goes , Rome declared a national day of mourning as there was not a single person who was not either related to or acquainted with a person who had died . The Romans became so desperate that they resorted to human sacrifice , twice burying people alive at the Forum of Rome and abandoning an oversized baby in the Adriatic Sea ( perhaps one of the last instances of human sacrifices by the Romans , apart from public executions of defeated enemies dedicated to Mars ) . 
 Lucius Caecilius Metellus , a military tribune , despaired so much of the Roman cause as to suggest that everything was lost , and called the other tribunes to sail overseas and hire themselves into the service of some foreign prince . Afterwards , he was forced by his own example to swear an oath of allegiance to Rome for all time . The survivors of Cannae were reconstituted as two legions and assigned to Sicily for the remainder of the war as punishment for their humiliating desertion of the battlefield . In addition to the physical loss of her army , Rome suffered a symbolic defeat of prestige . A gold ring was a token of membership in the upper classes of Roman society ; Hannibal and his men collected more than 200 from the corpses on the battlefield , and sent this collection to Carthage as proof of his victory . The collection was poured on the floor in front of the Punic Senate , and was judged to be " three and a half measures . " 
 Hannibal had defeated the equivalent of eight consular armies ( 16 legions plus an equal number of allies ) . Within just three campaign seasons ( 20 months ) , Rome had lost one @-@ fifth ( 150 @,@ 000 ) of the entire population of male citizens over 17 years of age . Furthermore , the morale effect of this victory was such that most of southern Italy joined Hannibal 's cause . After Cannae , the Hellenistic southern provinces of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , including the cities of Capua and Tarentum ( two of the largest city @-@ states in Italy ) revoked their allegiance to Rome and pledged their loyalty to Hannibal . As Livy noted , " How much more serious was the defeat of Cannae than those which preceded it , can be seen by the behavior of Rome 's allies ; before that fateful day , their loyalty remained unshaken , now it began to waver for the simple reason that they despaired of Roman power . " In the same year the Greek cities in Sicily were induced to revolt against Roman political control , while the Macedonian king , Philip V , pledged his support to Hannibal , initiating the First Macedonian War against Rome . Hannibal also secured an alliance with the new King Hieronymus of Syracuse , the only independent left in Sicily . 
 Following the battle , the commander of the Numidian cavalry , Maharbal , urged Hannibal to seize the opportunity and march immediately on Rome . It is told that the latter 's refusal caused Maharbal 's exclamation : " Of a truth the gods have not bestowed all things upon the same person . You know how to conquer , Hannibal ; but you do not know how to make use of your victory . " Hannibal had good reasons to judge the strategic situation after the battle differently from Maharbal . As the historian Hans Delbrück pointed out , due to the high numbers of killed and wounded among its ranks , the Punic army was not in a condition to perform a direct assault on Rome . It would have been a fruitless demonstration that would have nullified the psychological effect of Cannae on the Roman allies . Even if his army was at full strength , a successful siege of Rome would have required Hannibal to subdue a considerable part of the hinterland to cut the enemy 's supplies and secure his own . Even after the tremendous losses suffered at Cannae and the defection of a number of her allies , Rome still had abundant manpower to prevent this and maintain considerable forces in Iberia , Sicily , Sardinia and elsewhere despite Hannibal 's presence in Italy . Hannibal 's conduct after the victories at Trasimene ( 217 BC ) and Cannae , and the fact that he first attacked Rome only five years later , in 211 BC , suggests that his strategic aim was not the destruction of his foe but to dishearten the Romans by carnage on the battlefield and to wear them down to a moderate peace agreement by stripping them of their allies . 
 Immediately after Cannae , Hannibal sent a delegation led by <unk> to negotiate a peace treaty with the Senate on moderate terms . Despite the multiple catastrophes Rome had suffered , the Senate refused to parley . Instead , they redoubled their efforts , declaring full mobilization of the male Roman population , and raised new legions , enlisting landless peasants and even slaves . So firm were these measures that the word " peace " was prohibited , mourning was limited to only 30 days , and public tears were prohibited even to women . For the remainder of the war in Italy , they did not amass such large forces under one command against Hannibal ; they utilized several independent armies , still outnumbering the Punic forces in numbers of armies and soldiers . The war still had occasional battles , but was focused on taking strongpoints and constant fighting according to the Fabian strategy . This finally forced Hannibal with his shortage of manpower to retreat to Croton from where he was called to Africa for the battle of Zama , ending the war with a complete Roman victory . 
 = = Historical significance = = 
 = = = Effects on Roman military doctrine = = = 
 Cannae played a major role in shaping the military structure and tactical organization of the Roman Republican army . At Cannae , the Roman infantry assumed a formation similar to the Greek phalanx . This left them vulnerable to Hannibal 's tactic of double envelopment since their inability to maneuver independently from the mass of the army made it impossible for them to counter the strategic encirclement used by the Carthaginian cavalry . The laws of the Roman state requiring command to alternate between the two consuls restricted strategic consistency . 
 In the years following Cannae , striking reforms were introduced to address these deficiencies . First , the Romans " articulated the phalanx , then divided it into columns , and finally split it up into a great number of small tactical bodies that were capable , now of closing together in a compact impenetrable union , now of changing the pattern with consummate flexibility , of separating one from the other and turning in this or that direction . " For instance , at <unk> and Zama , the principes were formed up well to the rear of the hastati — a deployment that allowed a greater degree of mobility and maneuverability . The culminating result of this change marked the transition from the traditional manipular system to the cohort under Gaius Marius , as the basic infantry unit of the Roman army . 
 In addition , a unified command came to be seen as a necessity . After various political experiments , Scipio Africanus was made general @-@ in @-@ chief of the Roman armies in Africa , and was assured this role for the duration of the war . This appointment may have violated the constitutional laws of the Roman Republic but , as Delbrück wrote , it " effected an internal transformation that increased her military potentiality enormously " while foreshadowing the decline of the Republic 's political institutions . Furthermore , the battle exposed the limits of a citizen @-@ militia army . Following Cannae , the Roman army gradually developed into a professional force : the nucleus of Scipio 's army at Zama was composed of veterans who had been fighting the Carthaginians in Hispania for nearly sixteen years , and had been moulded into a superb fighting force . 
 = = = Status in military history = = = 
 Cannae is as famous for Hannibal 's tactics as it is for the role it played in Roman history . Not only did Hannibal inflict a defeat on the Roman Republic in a manner unrepeated for over a century until the lesser @-@ known Battle of Arausio , the battle has acquired a significant reputation in military history . As military historian Theodore Ayrault Dodge wrote : 
 Few battles of ancient times are more marked by ability ... than the battle of Cannae . The position was such as to place every advantage on Hannibal 's side . The manner in which the far from perfect Hispanic and Gallic foot was advanced in a wedge in <unk> ... was first held there and then withdrawn step by step , until it had the reached the converse position ... is a simple masterpiece of battle tactics . The advance at the proper moment of the African infantry , and its wheel right and left upon the flanks of the disordered and crowded Roman legionaries , is far beyond praise . The whole battle , from the Carthaginian standpoint , is a consummate piece of art , having no superior , few equal , examples in the history of war . 
 As Will Durant wrote , " It was a supreme example of generalship , never bettered in history ... and it set the lines of military tactics for 2 @,@ 000 years " . 
 Hannibal 's double envelopment at Cannae is often viewed as one of the greatest battlefield maneuvers in history , and is cited as the first successful use of the pincer movement within the Western world to be recorded in detail . 
 = = = " Cannae Model " = = = 
 Apart from being one of the greatest defeats inflicted on Roman arms , Cannae represents the archetypal battle of annihilation , a strategy that has rarely been successfully implemented in modern history . As Dwight D. Eisenhower , the Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force in World War II , wrote , " Every ground commander seeks the battle of annihilation ; so far as conditions permit , he tries to duplicate in modern war the classic example of Cannae " . Furthermore , the totality of Hannibal 's victory has made the name " Cannae " a byword for military success , and is studied in detail in military academies around the world . The notion that an entire army could be encircled and annihilated within a single stroke led to a fascination among Western generals for centuries ( including Frederick the Great and Helmuth von Moltke ) , who attempted to emulate its tactical paradigm of envelopment and re @-@ create their own " Cannae " . Delbrück 's seminal study of the battle had a profound influence on German military theorists , in particular the Chief of the German General Staff , Alfred von Schlieffen , whose eponymous " Schlieffen Plan " was inspired by Hannibal 's double envelopment maneuver . Schlieffen taught that the " Cannae model " would continue to be applicable in maneuver warfare throughout the 20th century : 
 A battle of annihilation can be carried out today according to the same plan devised by Hannibal in long forgotten times . The enemy front is not the goal of the principal attack . The mass of the troops and the reserves should not be concentrated against the enemy front ; the essential is that the flanks be crushed . The wings should not be sought at the advanced points of the front but rather along the entire depth and extension of the enemy formation . The annihilation is completed through an attack against the enemy 's rear ... To bring about a decisive and annihilating victory requires an attack against the front and against one or both flanks ... 
 Schlieffen later developed his own operational doctrine in a series of articles , many of which were translated and published in a work entitled Cannae . 
 = = Historical sources = = 
 There are three main accounts of the battle , none of them contemporary . The closest is Polybius , who wrote his account 50 years after the battle . Livy wrote in the time of Augustus , and Appian later still . Appian 's account describes events that have no relation with those of Livy and Polybius . Polybius portrays the battle as the ultimate nadir of Roman fortunes , functioning as a literary device such that the subsequent Roman recovery is more dramatic . For example , some argue that his casualty figures are exaggerated — " more symbolic than factual " . Livy portrays the Senate in the role of hero and hence assigns blame for the Roman defeat to the low @-@ born Varro . Blaming Varro also serves to lift blame from the Roman soldiers , whom Livy has a tendency to idealize . Scholars tend to discount Appian 's account . The verdict of Philip Sabin — " a worthless farrago " — is typical . 
 Historian Martin Samuels has questioned whether it was in fact Varro in command on the day on the grounds that Paullus may have been in command on the right . The warm reception that Varro received after the battle from the Senate was in striking contrast to the savage criticism meted out to other commanders . Samuels doubts whether Varro would have been received with such warmth had he been in command . Gregory Daly notes that , in the Roman military , the right was always the place of command . He suggests that at the Battle of Zama Hannibal was quoted saying that he had fought Paullus at Cannae and concludes that it is impossible to be sure who was in command on the day . 
 = Stone Mountain Memorial half dollar = 
 The Stone Mountain Memorial half dollar was an American fifty @-@ cent piece struck in 1925 at the Philadelphia Mint . Its main purpose was to raise money on behalf of the Stone Mountain Confederate Monumental Association for the Stone Mountain Memorial near Atlanta , Georgia . Designed by sculptor Gutzon Borglum , the coin features a depiction of Confederate generals Robert E. Lee and Stonewall Jackson on the obverse and the caption : " Memorial to the Valor of the Soldier of the South " on the reverse . The piece was also originally intended to be in memory of the recently deceased president , Warren G. Harding , but no mention of him appears on the coin . 
 In the early 20th century , proposals were made to carve a large sculpture in memory of General Lee on Stone Mountain , a huge rock outcropping . The owners of Stone Mountain agreed to transfer title on condition the work was completed within 12 years . Borglum , who was , like others involved , a Ku Klux Klan member , was engaged to design the memorial , and proposed expanding it to include a colossal monument depicting Confederate warriors , with Lee , Jackson , and Confederate President Jefferson Davis leading them . 
 The work proved expensive , and the Association advocated the issuance of a commemorative half dollar as a fundraiser for the memorial . Congress approved it , though to appease Northerners , the coin was also made in honor of Harding , under whose administration work had commenced . Borglum designed the coin , which was repeatedly rejected by the Commission of Fine Arts . All reference to Harding was removed from the design by order of President Calvin Coolidge . 
 The Association sponsored extensive sales efforts for the coin throughout the South , though these were hurt by the firing of Borglum in 1925 , which alienated many of his supporters , including the United Daughters of the Confederacy . A 1928 audit of the fundraising showed excessive expenses and misuse of money , and construction halted the same year ; a scaled @-@ down sculpture was eventually completed in 1970 . Because of the large quantities issued — over a million remain extant — the Stone Mountain Memorial half dollar remains inexpensive compared with other U.S. commemoratives . 
 = = Background = = 
 The first European @-@ descended settlers inhabited the land around Stone Mountain , Georgia , today in the east Atlanta suburbs , around 1790 . They called the large outcropping , about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) long and 1 @,@ 686 feet ( 514 m ) high , " Rock Mountain " . Rev. <unk> Sherwood of Macon , Georgia , first named it Stone Mountain in 1825 . The town of New Gibraltar was founded nearby in 1839 ; its name would be changed to Stone Mountain by the Georgia Legislature in 1947 . From about the time of the American Civil War , the mountain was used as a quarry ; this would not entirely cease until the 1970s . 
 John Gutzon de la <unk> Borglum ( usually called Gutzon Borglum ) was born in Idaho Territory in 1867 , to one of several wives of a Dane who had converted to Mormonism . As a boy , Borglum lived in various places in the Far West . Turning to art as a career , he attended the San Francisco Art Academy , the Académie Julian , and the École des Beaux @-@ Arts . Greatly influenced by Rodin , whom he met , Borglum switched from painting to sculpture in 1901 . His Mares of Diomedes won a gold medal at the 1904 Louisiana Purchase Exposition in St. Louis , and became the first work of sculpture to be purchased by the Metropolitan Museum of Art . 
 = = Inception = = 
 In 1914 , editor John Temple Graves wrote in the Atlanta Georgian , suggesting the establishment of a memorial to Confederate General Robert E. Lee on Stone Mountain , " from this godlike eminence let our Confederate hero calmly look history and the future in the face ! " Others who called for the establishment of a Confederate memorial there included William H. Terrell , an Atlanta attorney who believed that while the North had spent millions of dollars on monuments to the Union , the South had not sufficiently honored Confederate heroes . Also active in the early days of the Stone Mountain proposal was Helen Plane ( 1829 – 1925 ) , who had been a belle from Atlanta before the war , and whose husband had given his life at the Battle of Antietam in 1862 . She devoted the remainder of her life to preserving the memory of the Southern cause . 
 The release of the film The Birth of a Nation in 1915 sparked increased interest in the Confederate cause in the South . Plane , who was lifetime honorary president of the Georgia organization of the United Daughters of the Confederacy ( UDC ) , asked Borglum to carve the image of General Lee on the mountain . The Stone Mountain project was initially a UDC endeavor . Officials originally contemplated a monument of perhaps 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) by 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) . Putting that on Stone Mountain , Borglum supposedly stated , would be like putting a postage stamp on a barn . He proposed a much larger sculpture , 200 feet ( 61 m ) high and 1 @,@ 300 feet ( 400 m ) long , and drew up plans in his Stamford , Connecticut , studio . He envisioned a huge depiction of the Confederate army , including artillery and infantry , as well as 65 Confederate generals , five to be nominated by the governor of each Southern state . In 1917 , the Stone Mountain Confederate Monumental Association ( the Association ) was founded to publicize and raise funds for a colossal sculpture at Stone Mountain . Samuel H. Venable and his family , owners of the land , agreed to deed it over for a monument , on condition that if the project was not completed in 12 years , title would revert to them . A formal dedication took place in May 1916 ; the preliminary work was interrupted by the US entry into World War I in 1917 . 
 Another organization which took an interest in the Stone Mountain work was the recently revived Ku Klux Klan , of which both Venable and Borglum were members . The Klan , through much of the 20th century , held regular encampments on or near Stone Mountain . Plane , in a 1915 letter to Borglum , stated that the original Klan had saved the South from " Negro domination " in the Reconstruction era , and suggested that the design include a small group of Klansmen in robes , seen in the distance , approaching . 
 Beginning in 1920 , the project slowly came under the control of Atlanta businessmen , brought in to aid with the massive fundraising , and the UDC became marginalized . The work on the sculpture resumed on June 18 , 1923 , when Borglum began carving Lee 's figure into the mountainside ; he planned for General Stonewall Jackson and Confederate President Jefferson Davis to be close by Lee . Borglum 's plans were for a huge sculpture depicting the Confederates , a memorial hall hewn from the granite at the base of the mountain in which artworks and artifacts could be displayed ( as well as rolls of honor listing the contributors ) and a giant amphitheater nearby . He estimated the total cost at $ 3 @.@ 5 million . Instead , the scope of the project was scaled back , though different sources give varying cost estimates and dimensions . Borglum signed a contract to complete the group of Lee , Jackson , and Davis within three years for $ 250 @,@ 000 . 
 The work was expensive and by November 1923 , the Association decided to advocate for a commemorative coin which it could buy from the government at face value and sell at a premium as a fundraiser . Two men each sought credit for coming up with the idea for a coin . Daniel W. Webb , executive secretary of the Association , said he had thought of it after finding an Alabama centennial half dollar at home ; journalist Harry Stillwell Edwards made a similar claim and apparently collected a reward from the Association . 
 On November 16 , 1923 , Edwards wrote to Bascom <unk> , secretary to President Calvin Coolidge ( the previous president , Warren G. Harding , had recently died ) . Edwards arranged a meeting between the President and himself , association president Hollins N. Randolph ( an Atlanta lawyer and direct descendant of early president Thomas Jefferson ) , and Borglum . President Coolidge agreed to support authorizing legislation for a Stone Mountain coin . 
 Borglum later stated that the Association asked him to write to people in Washington because of his contacts in the Republican Coolidge administration . He wrote to the powerful Republican Massachusetts senator , Henry Cabot Lodge , urging him to support legislation for a Stone Mountain commemorative coin ; the appeal apparently worked , as late in 1923 the committee chairmen having jurisdiction over coinage , Reed Smoot in the Senate and Louis Thomas McFadden in the House of Representatives , introduced legislation for a Stone Mountain Memorial half dollar . McFadden later wrote that he sponsored the legislation because of his friendship with Borglum . With the threat of sectional opposition if the coin only honored the South , the bill 's sponsors included language making the new half dollar also in memory of the recently deceased Harding ( an Ohioan ) , during whose presidency the renewed work had begun . The bill passed by unanimous consent in the House on March 6 , 1924 , and in the Senate five days later ; Coolidge signed it on March 17 . The bill authorizing the coin read : 
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled , That in commemoration of the commencement on June 18 , 1923 , of the work of carving on Stone Mountain , in the State of Georgia , a monument to the valor of the soldiers of the South , which was the inspiration of their sons and daughters and grandsons and granddaughters in the Spanish @-@ American and World Wars , and in memory of Warren G. Harding , President of the United States of America , in whose administration the work was begun ... 
 = = Preparation and design = = 
 Borglum was busy between the passage of the bill and the end of May 1924 , first working on the Children 's Founders Roll medal , and then the half dollar . The Children 's Founders Roll was open to white children up to the age of 18 who contributed one dollar to the building of the monument . Borglum must still have been fine @-@ tuning the monument 's design ; Jackson 's posture on the medal differs from that on the coin . Unlike the issued coin , Borglum 's models showed the front part of Davis 's horse , although the Confederate president is unseen , and marching soldiers appear in the background . Borglum met with Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon who questioned first why " In God We Trust " appeared directly over Lee 's head ; Borglum responded that it was to pay tribute to the Confederates ' faith . Mellon then asked what the thirteen stars on the obverse represented ; Borglum replied that those on the north side of the Mason – Dixon line could consider them to represent the thirteen original colonies ( those south of it , the implication was , could consider them to be a tribute to the Southern states ) . Mellon laughed and gave preliminary approval . On July 2 , Mellon showed the designs to President Coolidge ; they were then sent to the Commission of Fine Arts for its members ' opinions . 
 According to numismatists William D. Hyder and R.W. Colbert , " Borglum , to put it mildly , was a temperamental artist who managed to offend most everyone with whom he worked " . They note that " Borglum 's past insolence had not left him in the good graces of the art community " and his designs met a hostile reception at the commission . Sculptor member James Earle Fraser , designer of the Buffalo nickel , rejected Borglum 's initial design on July 22 , eight days after they were received . The inscription on the reverse included a tribute to Harding ; Fraser deemed it inartistic . Borglum submitted a second set on August 14 , this was again rejected ; the commission criticized the design , which seemed to be only a segment of a larger one , rather than specifically designed to fit a half dollar . Borglum wanted to ignore what he deemed " damn fool suggestions " , but the Association threatened to fire him if he did not complete the coin . Borglum was concerned the reverse was still too crowded , and proposed leaving off the eagle , but space was saved when Coolidge did not like the reference to Harding , and it was omitted . With the eagle still in place on the reverse , Fraser finally approved the designs on October 10 , 1924 . In all , Borglum made nine plaster models for the design . 
 Even though all necessary approvals had been received , the Philadelphia Mint refused to proceed with preparations because of the lack of the mention of Harding , which it believed was congressionally mandated . Borglum wired Coolidge on October 31 , notifying him of the problem ; the President confirmed his approval of the design the following day . Despite the support of the federal government for the coin , the Grand Army of the Republic ( GAR ) , an organization of Union Civil War veterans , tried to prevent the issuance of a coin they believed honored treason by lobbying in late 1924 and early 1925 . Work on the sculpture slowed ( the head of Jackson was then being carved ) because of the sculptor being distracted by designing the coin , flaws in the rock on Stone Mountain , and the fact that the Association had ceased fundraising efforts in anticipation of a campaign to sell the coin . Revenues from the medal were not sufficient to meet expenses . 
 The obverse of the half dollar depicts Confederate generals Lee and Jackson , the latter with head bare , mounted on horseback . Although both Lee and Jackson were respected in the North , Davis would not have been acceptable on a federal coin , and he was omitted , although he appears on the Children 's Founders Roll medal which Borglum adapted for the obverse of the half dollar . There are thirteen stars in the upper field of the obverse ; they represent the thirteen states which either joined the Confederacy or had Confederate factions . Borglum 's initials , " GB " , are found on the extreme right of the piece , near the horses ' tails . The reverse depicts an eagle with wings stretched , representative of liberty , perched upon a mountaintop . There are 35 stars in the field , supposedly to represent the number of states at the start of the Civil War , although there were in fact 34 in 1861 , and there were 35 states only from 1863 to 1864 , between the admissions of West Virginia and Nevada . 
 Art historian Cornelius Vermeule , writing in 1971 , noted that the half dollar represents an unusual circumstance in American art , where a designer uses a coin as a <unk> or small @-@ scale model of a work to be completed . Vermeule considered the children 's medal a better work of art , due to the inclusion of Davis . He believed that Borglum 's original design , before its rejection by the Commission of Fine Arts , was superior , as it included a sense of motion through the depiction of marching soldiers in the background , balanced by the inclusion of the head of Davis 's horse , though the Confederate president himself is unseen . According to Vermeule , the original design " would have made a magnificent coin , an unusual compression of monumentality and power into a limited and unorthodox historical space " . 
 = = Production and conflict = = 
 The Medallic Art Company of New York converted Borglum 's models to coinage dies . The first 1 @,@ 000 Stone Mountain Memorial half dollars were struck on a medal press at the Philadelphia Mint on January 21 , 1925 , the 101st anniversary of General Jackson 's birth ; Borglum and officials of the Association were present . The first piece struck was mounted on a plate made of gold mined in Georgia for presentation to President Coolidge . The second was mounted on a silver plaque , and presented to Secretary Mellon . The remainder of the first thousand were placed in numbered envelopes ; some were presented to officials or those involved in the Stone Mountain project . Between January and March 1925 , that mint struck 2 @,@ 310 @,@ 000 of the authorized mintage of 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , plus 4 @,@ 709 pieces reserved for inspection by the 1926 Assay Commission . Except for the first thousand , for which Randolph paid in gold , the pieces were sent to the Federal Reserve Bank in Atlanta , which advanced the funds to purchase them from the government . 
 Although the Association unveiled the completed head of Lee on January 19 , 1924 ( the general 's birthday ) , within months , its relations with Borglum had become strained . Technical problems over the medal and the work on the mountain caused tensions , and political differences between Borglum , a Republican , and Randolph , an active Democrat , led to poor relations between the two . Borglum , Venable , and Randolph backed different KKK members for national leadership . Both Borglum and the Association accused each other of graft ; the sculptor proposed that he form a syndicate to purchase the half dollars from the Mint and sell them with the profits to be applied directly to construction costs . Randolph ridiculed the suggestion , stating that it would allow Borglum to carve " whatever he pleased on the mountain " . Borglum accused Randolph of using donations for his own benefit , and spending freely on an expense account . These dissensions became public , and in February 1925 , the Association fired Borglum . Randolph stated , as one reason for dismissing the sculptor , that Borglum had taken seven months to design the coin , when , he said , any competent artist could have done it in three weeks . He accused Borglum of delaying so that the Association would be embarrassed . According to Freeman , " despite all the points of conflict between Borglum and the committee , it was actually the commemorative coin that ended his career at Stone Mountain . " 
 Upon being dismissed , Borglum wrecked his models for the monument ; the Association sought to have him jailed for destruction of property . Borglum was addressing the ladies of the Atlanta chapter of the UDC when his assistant , Jesse Tucker , burst in and hurried him out the door with a minimum of explanation , only moments before a sheriff 's deputy arrived to serve the warrant . He left the state , but was arrested in Greensboro , North Carolina , though quickly allowed bail , and the Association abandoned extradition proceedings . Freed , the sculptor soon took up a project in South Dakota , Mount Rushmore . The publicity surrounding these events hurt the Association 's fundraising , as did allegations that the Association had misused hundreds of thousands of dollars put aside for the project . 
 = = Marketing and distribution = = 
 The Association hired Augustus H. Lukeman as replacement sculptor ; all of Borglum 's work was eventually blasted away . Despite the dispute with Borglum , the Association proceeded to market the half dollars ; it hired New York publicist Harvey Hill to run the campaign . The Association hoped for the opportunity to present the first coin to President Coolidge in person as a means of overcoming the bad publicity ; White House officials warily declined , writing that " no good purpose would be served by a formal presentation " . The half dollars were officially released on July 3 , 1925 ( though some were displayed as early as May ) ; they were sold at a price of one dollar . They were sent to 3 @,@ 000 banks by the Federal Reserve , with the proceeds from sales credited to the Association . White Southerners applauded the piece as symbolizing sectional reconciliation , the federal government paying homage to its Confederate heritage . 
 The coins were to be distributed through banks , and the Federal Reserve System cooperated by moving coins as needed , though at the Association 's expense . The Association set up local affiliates , with organizations throughout the South , as well as Oklahoma and the District of Columbia . Each state 's governor served as nominal head of the organization within his jurisdiction ; on July 20 , 1925 , at a meeting of the Conference of Southern Governors called for the purpose , they ( or their representatives ) resolved that the Association allocate sales quotas among the states on the " basis of white population and bank deposits " . The pieces were to be sold at the price of one dollar , and local organizations were to generate promotions for selling them . The overall drive to sell half dollars was dubbed the " Harvest Campaign " and began with the governors ' meeting in July 1925 . Georgia Governor Clifford Walker told his colleagues that the " South would be eternally disgraced if it failed to accept the challenge " of meeting the sales goal of 2 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 coins ; nevertheless , the governors devoted little time to the campaign . 
 Although volunteer enthusiasm was essential to the Association 's plans in the Harvest Campaign , it did not rely on it at the higher levels ; the state chairs were compensated , both by salary and commission . J.W. Gibbes , clerk of the South Carolina House of Representatives , was hired as that state 's executive director ; he undertook to sell 100 @,@ 000 coins and received just under $ 3 @,@ 500 in salary and commissions , all paid in 1926 . Local volunteers organized Chamber of Commerce luncheons to sell coins throughout the South ; chapters of the UDC purchased pieces to present to surviving Civil War veterans . The quota for Florida was 175 @,@ 000 coins , with each town and city apportioned its share . Often , Kiwanis or Rotary groups underwrote local quotas . Mrs. N. Burton Bass of Atlanta was reported to be the leading seller , once disposing of 233 coins in an afternoon . A series of dance balls honored the UDC members who sold large numbers of pieces . Nevertheless , Hyder and Colbert suggested that there was " a general lack of more ladies such as Mrs. Bass " ; many municipalities had trouble finding local chairs . Outside the South , sales were promoted by three professional publicists hired by the Association . To keep public interest high , the Association released Lukeman 's conceptions for Stone Mountain , which were on a smaller scale than Borglum 's . Lukeman conceived a scaled @-@ down concept , of the three Confederate leaders on horseback . Despite the campaign , sales were slower than expected . In late 1925 , the Association offered Northern banks a commission of seven cents a coin ; it is uncertain if any took up the offer . The continuing opposition of the GAR to the coins dampened sales in the North , and there was considerable criticism of the coin issue in newspapers . 
 One means of fundraising that Harvest Campaign administrators decided on was to <unk> some of the coins for sale at premium prices . The letters and numbers are believed to have been punched by the Association , as they are almost entirely uniform . Some were given a state abbreviation and a number , and were sent to be auctioned in various towns . Gibbes reported that the <unk> pieces sent to South Carolina sold for an average of $ 23 , ranging from $ 10 to $ 110 , and recommended that the auctions be preceded with the account of the sale of one in Bradenton , Florida , for $ 1 @,@ 300 . Which town got which number was the luck of the draw . Others were marked with " <unk> " and a state abbreviation , together with a number which probably represents a membership or chapter number . These were intended for presentation to members deserving of special honor , such as an outgoing president . They did not sell well , as the Association had alienated many UDC members over the firing of Borglum . The Association also announced a program for sale to the Sons of Confederate Veterans , although whether any coins were sold under this program is unclear , as none have been identified . Pieces marked " G.L. " and " S.L. " were puzzled over by collectors for many years ; A. Steve <unk> in the January 2011 edition of The Numismatist identified the markings as " Gold <unk> " and " Silver <unk> " . These coins were given to county winners and runners @-@ up in a selling competition for young ladies . 
 The Association sold coins through other means . They asked companies to purchase them : the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad [ B & O ] , the Southern Fireman 's Fund Insurance Company , the Coca @-@ Cola Company , and a number of banks , purchased thousands of pieces , many of which were given away as promotions . Those outside the South could obtain coins by orders passed through local banks . A bank in St. Louis gave away the half dollars to those who opened an account with at least $ 5 ; the B & O used them in making change . 
 The Association called an end to the Harvest Campaign as of March 31 , 1926 , most likely because the sales did not justify the continued salary expenses . Coins remaining at banks were to be sent to the Federal Reserve , and any credit balances remitted to the Association . Thereafter , coins were available either through the Association or the Federal Reserve at an increased price of $ 2 . With a price increase and the end to the campaign , sales plummeted . Total sales from the Harvest Campaign were about 430 @,@ 000 pieces . One exception to the drop in sales was a drive in New York under the sponsorship of Mayor Jimmy Walker , which succeeded in selling 250 @,@ 000 coins in 1926 , though at the original price of one dollar . Bernard Baruch , then a prominent investor and later a counselor of presidents , was honorary chairman of the organizing committee , and personally subscribed for some of the pieces . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Atlanta chapter of the UDC in 1927 published a brochure accusing the Association of wrongfully firing Borglum and wasting between a quarter and a half million dollars . An audit of the Association 's books was performed in 1928 ; the examiners found its records in good order , excepting those regarding the Harvest Campaign , which were inadequate . The audit found that for every three dollars of revenue brought in from the half dollars , two were paid out in expenses , a ratio Hyder and Colbert called " incredible " . Of the total sum raised by the Association , only 27 cents of each dollar went to the carving . Venable stated that the Stone Mountain monument had " developed into the most colossal failure in history " . 
 The Association was discredited by the results of the audit ; the Georgia Senate voted to accuse it of gross mismanagement of funds . Randolph resigned when Venable made it clear he would not negotiate an extension of the twelve @-@ year deadline unless he did . The Atlanta lawyer had begun a political career ; the scandal finished it . With funds drying up , the Association stopped work on Stone Mountain on May 31 , 1928 , and when negotiations failed , the Venable family successfully sued to regain the property . Borglum was now a folk hero in Atlanta ; he was called upon to return to Stone Mountain in the early 1930s , but busy with Mount Rushmore , he did not . At the time of Borglum 's death in 1941 , no work was being done on Stone Mountain . The State of Georgia voted funds to purchase Stone Mountain in 1958 and five years later selected Walker Kirkland Hancock as architect . The sculpture , which depicts Lee , Jackson and Davis , and bears only a resemblance to Borglum 's original design , was dedicated in 1970 . At 90 feet ( 27 m ) by 190 feet ( 58 m ) , it is the largest relief sculpture in the world . 
 In 1930 , Secretary Mellon reported that although no Stone Mountain Memorial half dollars were held by the Mint , it was his understanding that large quantities of the piece were in the possession of banks . Eventually , arrangements were made to return a million half dollars to the Mint for melting . In spite of this , the State of Georgia still had Stone Mountain half dollars for sale at its exhibit at the 1933 Century of Progress Exposition . Many more were dumped into circulation in the 1930s . A quantity of half dollars once owned by Baruch were sold for $ 3 @.@ 25 each through a Georgia bank in the 1950s to finance a building in honor of Baruch 's mother , a Southerner , in Richmond , Virginia . A total of 1 @,@ 314 @,@ 709 Stone Mountain Memorial half dollars were distributed , after deducting those pieces melted . 
 Due to the large quantities extant , Stone Mountain Memorial half dollars remain inexpensive in comparison with other commemoratives . The 2014 edition of A Guide Book of United States Coins lists the piece at $ 65 in Almost Uncirculated condition ( AU @-@ 50 ) with pieces in near @-@ pristine MS @-@ 66 at $ 335 . 
 = Moonraker ( novel ) = 
 Moonraker is the third novel by the British author Ian Fleming to feature his fictional British Secret Service agent James Bond . It was published by Jonathan Cape on 5 April 1955 and featured a cover design conceived by Fleming . The plot is derived from a Fleming screenplay that was too short for a full novel so he added the bridge passage between Bond and the industrialist Hugo Drax . In the latter half of the novel , the premise of Bond seconded to Drax 's staff as the businessman builds the Moonraker , a prototype missile designed to defend England . Unknown to Bond , Drax is German , an ex @-@ Nazi now working for the Soviets ; his plan is to build the rocket , arm it with a nuclear warhead , and fire it at London . Uniquely for a Bond novel , Moonraker is set entirely in Britain , which raised comments from some readers , complaining about the lack of exotic locations . 
 Moonraker , like Fleming 's previous novels , was well received by critics . Moonraker plays on a number of 1950s fears , including attack by rockets ( following the V @-@ 2 strikes of the Second World War ) , Soviet communism , the re @-@ emergence of Nazism and the " threat from within " posed by both ideologies . Fleming examines Englishness , and the novel shows the virtues and strength of England . Adaptations include a broadcast on South African radio in 1956 starring Bob Holness and a 1958 Daily Express comic strip . The novel 's name was used in 1979 for the eleventh official film in the Eon Productions Bond series and the fourth to star Roger Moore as Bond ; the plot was significantly changed from the novel to include excursions into space . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The British Secret Service agent James Bond is asked by his superior , M , to join him at M 's club , Blades . A club member , the multi @-@ millionaire businessman Sir Hugo Drax , is winning considerable money playing bridge , seemingly against the odds . M suspects Drax is cheating , and while claiming indifference , is concerned as to why a multi @-@ millionaire and national hero would cheat . Bond confirms Drax 's deception and manages to turn the tables — aided by a pack of stacked cards — and wins £ 15 @,@ 000 . 
 Drax is the product of a mysterious background , purportedly unknown even to himself . Presumed to have been a British Army soldier during the Second World War , he was badly injured and stricken with amnesia in the explosion of a bomb planted by a German saboteur at a British field headquarters . After extensive rehabilitation in an army hospital , he returned home to become a wealthy industrialist . After building his fortune and establishing himself in business and society , Drax started building the " Moonraker " , Britain 's first nuclear missile project , intended to defend Britain against its Cold War enemies . The Moonraker rocket was to be an upgraded V @-@ 2 rocket using liquid hydrogen and fluorine as propellants ; to withstand the ultra @-@ high combustion temperatures of its engine , it used columbite , in which Drax had a monopoly . Because the rocket 's engine could withstand high heat , the Moonraker was able to use these powerful fuels , greatly expanding its effective range . 
 After a Ministry of Supply security officer working at the project is shot dead , M assigns Bond to replace him and also to investigate what has been going on at the missile @-@ building base , located between Dover and Deal on the south coast of England . All the rocket scientists working on the project are German . At his post on the complex , Bond meets Gala Brand , a beautiful police Special Branch officer working undercover as Drax 's personal assistant . Bond also uncovers clues concerning his predecessor 's death , concluding that the man may have been killed for witnessing a submarine off the coast . 
 Drax 's henchman Krebs is caught by Bond snooping through his room . Later , an attempted assassination by triggering a landslide nearly kills Bond and Brand , as they swim beneath the Dover cliffs . Drax takes Brand to London , where she discovers the truth about the Moonraker by comparing her own launch trajectory figures with those in a notebook picked from Drax 's pocket . She is captured by Krebs , and finds herself captive in a secret radio homing station — intended to serve as a beacon for the missile 's guidance system — in the heart of London . While she is being taken back to the Moonraker facility by Drax , Bond gives chase , but is also captured by Drax and Krebs . 
 Drax tells Bond that he was never a British soldier and has never suffered from amnesia : he was Graf Hugo von der Drache , the German commander of a Skorzeny commando unit . He was the saboteur whose team had placed the car bomb at the army field headquarters , only to be injured himself in the detonation . The amnesia story was simply a cover he used while recovering in hospital , in order to avoid Allied retribution , although it would lead to a whole new British identity . Drax remains a dedicated Nazi , bent on revenge against England for the wartime defeat of his Fatherland and his prior history of social slights suffered as a youth growing up in an English boarding school before the war . He explains that he now means to destroy London with the missile he had constructed , by means of a Soviet @-@ supplied nuclear warhead that has been secretly fitted to the Moonraker . He also plans to play the stock market the day before to make a huge profit from the imminent disaster . 
 Brand and Bond are imprisoned where the blast from the Moonraker 's engines will incinerate them , to leave no trace of them once the Moonraker is launched . Before the firing , the couple escape . Brand gives Bond the proper coordinates to redirect the gyros and send the Moonraker into the sea . Having been in collaboration with Soviet Intelligence all along , Drax and his henchman attempt to escape by Russian submarine — only to be killed as the vessel flees through the waters onto which the Moonraker has been retargeted . After their debriefing at headquarters , Bond meets up with Brand , expecting her company — but they part ways after she reveals that she is engaged to a fellow Special Branch officer . 
 = = Background and writing history = = 
 In early 1953 the film producer Alexander Korda read a proof copy of Live and Let Die , and informed its author , Ian Fleming , that he was excited by the book , but that it would not make a good basis for a film . Fleming told the producer that his next book was to be an expansion of an idea for a screenplay , set in London and Kent , adding that the location would allow " for some wonderful film settings in the old metropolis idiom " . 
 Fleming undertook a significant amount of background research in preparation for writing Moonraker ; he asked his fellow correspondent on The Sunday Times , Anthony Terry , for information on the Second World War German resistance force — the Werewolves — and German V @-@ 2 rockets . The latter was a subject on which he wrote to the science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke and the British Interplanetary Society . Fleming also visited the Wimpole Street psychiatrist Eric Strauss to discuss the traits of megalomaniacs ; Strauss lent him the book Men of Genius , which provided the link between megalomania and childhood thumb @-@ sucking . Fleming used this information to give Drax diastema , a common result of thumb @-@ sucking . According to his biographer Andrew Lycett , Fleming " wanted to make Moonraker his most ambitious and personal novel yet . " Fleming , a keen card player , was fascinated by the background to the 1890 royal baccarat scandal , and when in 1953 he met a woman who had been present at the game , he questioned her so intently that she burst into tears . 
 In January 1954 Fleming and his wife , Ann , travelled to their Goldeneye estate in Jamaica for their annual two @-@ month holiday . He had already written two Bond novels , Casino Royale , which had been published in April 1953 , and Live and Let Die , whose publication was imminent . He began writing Moonraker on his arrival in the Caribbean . He later wrote an article for Books and Bookmen magazine describing his approach to writing , in which he said : " I write for about three hours in the morning ... and I do another hour 's work between six and seven in the evening . I never correct anything and I never go back to see what I have written ... By following my formula , you write 2 @,@ 000 words a day . " By 24 February he had written over 30 @,@ 000 words , although he wrote to a friend that he felt like he was already parodying the two earlier Bond novels . Fleming 's own copy bears the following inscription , " This was written in January and February 1954 and published a year later . It is based on a film script I have had in my mind for many years . " He later said that the idea for the film had been too short for a full novel , and that he " had to more or less graft the first half of the book onto my film idea in order to bring it up to the necessary length " . 
 Fleming considered a number of titles for the story ; his first choice had been The Moonraker , until Noël Coward reminded him of a novel of the same name by F. Tennyson Jesse . Fleming then considered The Moonraker Secret , The Moonraker Plot , The Inhuman Element , Wide of the Mark , The Infernal Machine , Mondays are Hell and Out of the Clear Sky . George Wren Howard of Jonathan Cape suggested Bond & the Moonraker , The Moonraker Scare and The Moonraker Plan , while his friend , the writer William Plomer , suggested Hell is Here ; the final choice of Moonraker was a suggestion by Wren Howard . 
 Although Fleming provided no dates within his novels , two writers have identified different timelines based on events and situations within the novel series as a whole . John Griswold and Henry Chancellor — both of whom have written books on behalf of Ian Fleming Publications — put the events of Moonraker in 1953 ; Griswold is more precise , and considers the story to have taken place in May of that year . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Plot inspirations = = = 
 The locations draw from Fleming 's personal experiences . Moonraker is the only Bond novel that takes place solely in Britain , which gave Fleming the chance to write about the England he cherished , such as the Kent countryside , including the White Cliffs of Dover , and London clubland . Fleming owned a cottage in St Margaret 's at Cliffe , near Dover , and he went to great lengths to get the details of the area right , including lending his car to his stepson to time the journey from London to Deal for the car chase passage . Fleming used his experiences of London clubs for the background of the Blades scenes . As a clubman , he enjoyed membership of Boodle 's , White 's and the Portland Club , and a combination of <unk> and the Portland Club is thought to be the model for Blades ; the author Michael Dibdin found the scene in the club to be " surely one of the finest things that Ian Fleming ever did . " 
 The early chapters of the novel centre on Bond 's private life , with Fleming using his own lifestyle as a basis for Bond 's . Fleming used further aspects of his private life , such as his friends , as he had done in his previous novels : Hugo Drax was named after his brother @-@ in @-@ law Hugo Charteris and a navy acquaintance Admiral Sir Reginald Aylmer Ranfurly Plunkett @-@ Ernle @-@ Erle @-@ Drax , while Fleming 's friend Duff Sutherland ( described as " a scruffy looking chap " ) was one of the bridge players at Blades . The name of the Scotland Yard superintendent , Ronnie Vallance , was made up from those of Ronald Howe , the actual assistant commissioner at the Yard , and of Vallance Lodge & Co . , Fleming 's accountants . Other elements of the plot came from Fleming 's knowledge of wartime operations carried out by T @-@ Force , a secret British Army unit formed to continue the work of the Fleming @-@ established 30 Assault Unit . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 According to the author Raymond Benson , Moonraker is a deeper and more introspective book than Fleming 's previous work , which allows the author to develop the characters further . As such , Bond " becomes something more than ... [ the ] cardboard figure " that he had been in the previous two novels . The start of the book concentrates on Bond at home and his daily routines , which Fleming describes as " Elastic office hours from around ten until six , ... evenings spent playing cards in the company of a few close friends , ... or making love , with rather cold passion , to one of three similarly disposed married women . " This lifestyle was largely modelled on Fleming 's own , which the journalist and writer Matthew Parker sees as showing " a sourness " in the author 's character . According to Chancellor , two of Bond 's other vices were also displayed in the book : his fondness for gambling — illegal except in private members clubs in 1955 — and excessive drink and drug taking , neither of which were frowned upon in post @-@ war upper class circles . In preparation for beating Drax at cards , Bond consumes a vodka martini , a carafe of vodka shared with M , two bottles of champagne and a brandy ; he also mixes a quantity of Benzedrine , an amphetamine , into a glass of the champagne . According to The Times journalist and historian Ben Macintyre , to Fleming the alcohol consumption " meant relaxation , ritual and reliability " . Benzedrine was regularly taken by troops during the war to remain awake and alert , and Fleming was an occasional consumer . 
 Drax is physically abnormal , as are many of Bond 's later adversaries . He has very broad shoulders , a large head and protruding teeth with diastema ; his face is badly scarred from a wartime explosion . According to the writers Kingsley Amis and Benson — both of whom subsequently wrote Bond novels — Drax is the most successful villain in the Bond canon . Amis considers this to be " because the most imagination and energy has gone into his portrayal . He lives in the real world ... [ and ] his physical presence fills Moonraker . The view is shared by Chancellor , who considers Drax " perhaps the most believable " of all Fleming 's villains . The cultural historian Jeremy Black writes that as with Le Chiffre and Mr Big — the villains of the first two Bond novels — Drax 's origins and war history are vital to an understanding of the character . Like several other antagonists in the Bond canon , Drax was German , reminding readers of a familiar threat in 1950s Britain . Because Drax is without a girlfriend or wife he is , according to the norms of Fleming and his works , abnormal in Bond 's world . 
 Benson considers Brand to be one of the weakest female roles in the Bond canon and " a throwback to the rather stiff characterization of Vesper Lynd " from Casino Royale . Brand 's lack of interest in Bond removes sexual tension from the novel ; she is unique in the canon for being the one woman that Bond does not seduce . The cultural historians Janet Woollacott and Tony Bennett write that the perceived reserve shown by Brand to Bond was not due to frigidity , but to her engagement to a fellow police officer . 
 M is another character who is more fully realised than in the previous novels , and for the first time in the series he is shown outside a work setting at the Blades club . It is never explained how he received or could afford his membership of the club , which had a restricted membership of only 200 gentlemen , all of whom had to show £ 100 @,@ 000 in cash or gilt @-@ edged securities . Amis , in his study The James Bond Dossier , considers that on M 's salary his membership of the club would have been puzzling ; Amis points out that in the 1963 book On Her Majesty 's Secret Service it is revealed that M 's pay as head of the Secret Service is £ 6 @,@ 500 a year . 
 = = Style = = 
 Benson analysed Fleming 's writing style and identified what he described as the " Fleming Sweep " : a stylistic technique that sweeps the reader from one chapter to another using ' hooks ' at the end of each chapter to heighten tension and pull the reader into the next : Benson feels that the sweep in Moonraker was not as pronounced as Fleming 's previous works , largely due to the lack of action sequences in the novel . 
 According to the literary analyst LeRoy L. Panek , in his examination of 20th @-@ century British spy novels , in Moonraker Fleming uses a technique closer to the detective story than to the thriller genre . This manifests itself in Fleming placing clues to the plot line throughout the story , and leaving Drax 's unveiling of his plan until the later chapters . Black sees that the pace of the novel is set by the launch of the rocket ( there are four days between Bond 's briefing by M and the launch ) while Amis considers that the story to have a " rather hurried " ending . 
 Moonraker uses a literary device Fleming employs elsewhere , that of having a seemingly trivial incident between the main characters — the card game — that leads to the uncovering of a greater incident — the main plot involving the rocket . Dibdin sees gambling as the common link , thus the card game acts as an " introduction to the ensuing encounter ... for even higher stakes " . Savoye sees this concept of competition between Bond and villain as a " notion of game and the eternal fight between Order and Disorder " , common throughout the Bond stories . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Parker describes the novel as " a hymn to England " , and highlights Fleming 's description of the white cliffs of Dover and the heart of London as evidence . Even the German Krebs is moved by the sight of the Kent countryside in a country he hates . The novel places England — and particularly London and Kent — in the front line of the cold war , and the threat to the location further emphasises its importance . Bennett and Woollacott consider that Moonraker defines the strengths and virtues of England and Englishness as being the " quiet and orderly background of English institutions " , which are threatened by the disturbance Drax brings . 
 The literary critic Meir Sternberg considers the theme of English identity can be seen in the confrontation between Drax and Bond . Drax — whose real name Drache is German for dragon — is in opposition to Bond , who takes the role of Saint George in the conflict . 
 As with Casino Royale and Live and Let Die , Moonraker involves the idea of the " traitor within " . Drax , real name Graf Hugo von der Drache , is a " megalomaniac German Nazi who masquerades as an English gentleman " , while Krebs bears the same name as Hitler 's last Chief of Staff . Black sees that , in using a German as the novel 's main enemy , " Fleming ... exploits another British cultural antipathy of the 1950s . Germans , in the wake of the Second World War , made another easy and obvious target for bad press . " Moonraker uses two of the foes feared by Fleming , the Nazis and the Soviets , with Drax being German and working for the Soviets ; in Moonraker the Soviets were hostile and provided not just the atomic bomb , but support and logistics to Drax . Moonraker played on fears of the audiences of the 1950s of rocket attacks from overseas , fears grounded in the use of the V @-@ 2 rocket by the Nazis during the Second World War . The story takes the threat one stage further , with a rocket based on English soil , aimed at London and " the end of British invulnerability " . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 = = = Publication history = = = 
 Moonraker was published in the UK by Jonathan Cape in hardback format on 5 April 1955 with a cover designed by Kenneth Lewis , following Fleming 's suggestions of using a stylised flame motif ; the first impression was of 9 @,@ 900 copies . The US publication was by Macmillan on 20 September that year . In October 1956 Pan Books published a paperback version of the novel in the UK , which sold 43 @,@ 000 copies before the end of the year . In December that year the US paperback was published under the title Too Hot to Handle by <unk> . This edition was rewritten to Americanise the British idioms used , and Fleming provided a number of explanatory footnotes such as the value of English currency against the dollar . Since its initial publication the book has been issued in numerous hardback and paperback editions , translated into several languages and has never been out of print . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Fleming 's friend — and neighbour in Jamaica — Noël Coward considered Moonraker to be the best thing Fleming had written to that point : " although as usual too far @-@ fetched , not quite so much so as the last two ... His observation is extraordinary and his talent for description vivid . " Fleming received numerous letters from readers complaining about the lack of exotic locations ; one of which protested " We want taking out of ourselves , not sitting on the beach in Dover . " 
 Julian Symons , writing in The Times Literary Supplement , found Moonraker " a disappointment " , and considered that " Fleming 's tendency ... to parody the form of the thriller , has taken charge in the second half of this story . " Maurice Richardson , in his review for The Observer , was more welcoming : " Do not miss this " , he urged , saying that " Mr. Fleming continues to be irresistibly readable , however incredible " . Hilary Corke , writing in The Listener , thought that " Fleming is one of the most accomplished of thriller @-@ writers " , and considered that Moonraker " is as mercilessly readable as all the rest " . Corke warned Fleming away from being over @-@ dramatic , declaring that " Mr Fleming is evidently far too accomplished to need to lean upon these blood @-@ and @-@ thunder devices : he could keep our hair on end for three hundred pages without spilling more blood than was allowed to Shylock . " The reviewer in The Scotsman considered that Fleming " administers stimuli with no mean hand ... ' Astonish me ! ' the addict may challenge : Mr Fleming can knock him sideways . " 
 John Metcalf for The Spectator thought the book " utterly disgraceful — and highly enjoyable ... without [ Moonraker ] no forthcoming railway journey should be undertaken " , although he also considered that it was " not one of Mr. Fleming 's best " . Anthony Boucher , writing in The New York Times , was equivocal , saying " I don 't know anyone who writes about gambling more vividly than Fleming and I only wish the other parts of his books lived up to their gambling sequences " . Richard Lister in the New Statesman thought that " Mr. Fleming is splendid ; he stops at nothing . " Writing for The Washington Post , Al Manola believed that the " British tradition of rich mystery writing , copious description and sturdy heroism all blend nicely " in Moonraker , providing what he considered was " probably the best action novel of the month " . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 The actor John Payne attempted to take up the option on the film rights to the book in 1955 , but nothing came of the attempt . The Rank Organisation also came to an agreement to make a film , but this likewise fell through . The novel was not one of Fleming 's stories acquired by Eon Productions in 1961 ; in 1969 the company acquired the rights and commissioned Gerry Anderson to produce and co @-@ write a screenplay . Anderson and Tony Barwick prepared a 70 @-@ page treatment that was never filmed , but some elements were similar to the final screenplay of The Spy Who Loved Me . 
 The first adaptation of Moonraker was for South African radio in 1956 , with Bob Holness providing the voice of Bond . According to The Independent , " listeners across the Union thrilled to Bob 's cultured tones as he defeated evil master criminals in search of world domination " . The novel was adapted as a comic strip that was published in the Daily Express newspaper and syndicated worldwide . The adaptation was written by Henry Gammidge and illustrated by John McLusky , and ran daily from 30 March to 8 August 1959 . Titan Books reprinted the strip in 2005 along with Casino Royale and Live and Let Die as a part of the Casino Royale anthology . 
 " Moonraker " was used as the title for the eleventh James Bond film , produced by Eon Productions and released in 1979 . Directed by Lewis Gilbert and produced by Albert R. Broccoli , the film features Roger Moore in his fourth appearance as Bond . The Nazi @-@ inspired element of Drax 's motivation in the novel was indirectly preserved with the " master race " theme of the film 's plot . Since the screenplay was original , Eon Productions and Glidrose Publications authorised the film 's writer , Christopher Wood , to produce his second novelization based on a film ; this was entitled James Bond and Moonraker . Elements of Moonraker were also used in the 2002 film Die Another Day , with a scene set in the Blades club . The actress Rosamund Pike , who plays Miranda Frost in the film , later said that her character was originally to have been named Gala Brand . 
 = Storo ( station ) = 
 Storo is a rapid transit station on the Ring Line of the Oslo Metro , and a tram station on the Grünerløkka – Torshov Line of the Oslo Tramway . It is located at Storo in the Nordre Aker borough of Oslo , Norway . The tram station opened on 28 November 1902 , and the rapid transit station on 20 August 2003 . Metro lines 4 , 5 and 6 run to the station , with line 5 terminating there . The tram station serves lines 11 , 12 and 13 . The station is within walking distance of Grefsen Station on the Gjøvik Line . The station also functions as a bus hub , being located along Ring 3 . Storo is a mixed commercial and residential area , and a shopping center is located just north of the subway station . 
 = = History = = 
 Storo opened as a tram station as the terminus of the Grünerløkka – Torshov Line on 28 November 1902 . The line was extended northwards as the Kjelsås Line to Kjelsås on 25 September 1934 , and south @-@ eastwards as an extension of the Sinsen Line in 1939 . 
 The process of establishing a Ring Line to serve the northern parts of Oslo started in the late 1980s . The plans were passed by the city council in 1997 , and financing was secured in 2000 through Oslo Package 2 . Construction started in June 2000 , and the station building and platforms were completed in December 2002 . Until the opening , work continued on amenities and the tracks . Storo Station was opened on 20 August 2003 , at the same time as Nydalen . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The rapid transit station was designed by architects Jensen & <unk> Architects , and is visually and structurally very similar to the Sinsen Station , also one of their projects . It features a center platform with a roof , and uses wood , steel and concrete . The station is located just outside the tunnel that runs all the way to the connection with the Sognsvann Line . South of Storo , the metro tracks run parallel with the Gjøvik Line . The station is owned by Kollektivtransportproduksjon . 
 On the other side of the tracks , about 200 metres ( 660 ft ) away is Grefsen Station on the Gjøvik Line . It is served every 40 minutes by NSB Gjøvikbanen services of the Oslo Commuter Rail towards <unk> , <unk> and Gjøvik . The Norwegian National Rail Administration is planning to move the station platform to allow direct transfer . 
 Storo is a mixed residential and commercial area . It has traditionally been easily accessible by car due to being located along Ring 3 , a major highway . The shopping center Storo Storsenter is located just beside the station . Following the opening of the rapid transit station , a new housing complex was built on the west side of the station , on a former freight yard owned by the Norwegian State Railways . The first stage with 260 apartments was finished in 2006 ; when finished , it will feature 900 apartments . The area , named <unk> ( " the Station City " ) was developed by ROM Eiendom . Ridership at Storo increased from 2 @,@ 060 per day to 3 @,@ 630 per day from 2003 to 2007 . 
 = = Service = = 
 Lines 4 , 5 and 6 of the Oslo Metro operate to Storo , each with a 15 @-@ minute headway . Lines 4 and 5 operate counterclockwise through the ring via the western part of town into the Common Tunnel , while line 6 operates clockwise via the eastern part into the Common Tunnel . Line 5 terminates at Storo . Lines 4 and 6 swap numbers between Nydalen and Storo . Travel time from Storo to Stortinget is 11 minutes clockwise and 14 minutes counterclockwise . Therefore , any traveler heading for the city center can get on the first train , independent of its direction and it is ensured to be the fastest connection to the downtown area . The metro is operated by Oslo T @-@ banedrift on contract with Ruter . 
 The tram station is served by lines 11 , 12 and 13 of the Oslo Tramway . Southbound , all three follow the Grünerløkka – Torshov Line to the city center . Travel time to Kirkeristen is 15 minutes . Northwards , line 11 and 12 continue on the Kjelsås Line . Both run to Kjelsås outside rush hour , but during peak services , line 12 terminates at the next station , <unk> . Line 13 branches off and heads one stop to Grefsen . The tram service is provided by Oslo Sporvognsdrift on contract with Ruter . Storo is one of eight transfer points between the tramway and rapid transit systems . 
 The station serves several bus routes . Feeder line 55 to Lillo Terrasse to Nydalen passes by Storo . Lines 23 and 24 along Ring 3 from Lysaker to Simensbråten , and Brynseng to Fornebu stops at Storo . So does line 56 from Torshov to <unk> , and line 58 from Helsfyr to Nydalen . Most of the buses stop at a stop located on the motorway Ring 3 . 
 = Sirex woodwasp = 
 The Sirex woodwasp ( Sirex noctilio ) is a species of <unk> , native to Europe , Asia , and northern Africa . Adults vary in length from 9 to 36 mm ( 0 @.@ 35 to 1 @.@ 42 in ) . 
 This woodwasp is an invasive species in many parts of the world , including Australia , New Zealand , North America , South America , and South Africa , where it has become a significant economic pest of pine trees . The wasp can attack a wide variety of pine species , although some species seem to be more susceptible than others , and stressed trees often are attacked . 
 During oviposition , the female wasp lays two eggs with or without a mucoid substance and a symbiotic fungus for the larvae to feed on once they hatch . The mucoid substance is toxic to trees and aids in tree decline . The ascospores from the symbiotic fungus , Amylostereum areolatum , are also pathogenic . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Adult = = = 
 The Sirex woodwasp has a sturdy , cylindrical body without a waist , but with a pointed abdomen . The female body is 15 – 36 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 – 1 @.@ 42 in ) , and the male is 9 – 32 mm ( 0 @.@ 35 – 1 @.@ 26 in ) long . Both sexes have long , black , bristle @-@ shaped antennae , which are rather close together . 
 The body of the male is black , except for the orange middle part of the abdomen . The wings are yellowish @-@ translucent and the antennae are black . The front pair of legs have a yellowish @-@ orange colour , the back pair is heavily thickened and is coloured black on the posterior splint and tarsus , while the femur is orange . 
 The females are iron blue , and have orange legs and black antennae . This is a notable distinction from Sirex juvencus , which has red antennae . The females also have yellowish wings . The ovipositor is below the tapering tip of the abdomen . The sting is connected with the mycetangia , which are special organs on the abdomen , where the female stores the <unk> ( asexual fungus spores ) , from broken segments of hyphae . These spores are deposited , together with the eggs , in the host tree wood to germinate . Both larvae and adults have strong mandibles and can drill through lead plates . 
 = = = Larva = = = 
 The larvae of the Sirex woodwasp are almost colourless and only have three stub @-@ shaped pairs of sterna . They cut through host wood with their powerful mandibles . They have a pointed , dark tip at their rear end , which presses the drilling dust on the walls of the borehole . They closely resemble other larvae in the genus Sirex . 
 = = Native and introduced range = = 
 The native habitat of the Sirex woodwasp is the temperate Palaearctic , ranging from Maghreb over Europe , Siberia , and Mongolia , to the Kamchatka peninsula . They live in deep pine @-@ rich forests . 
 The species has reached other continents , such as Australia , South Africa and North America , through the export of timber and firewood . While invasion was prevented in North America for a long time , the Sirex woodwasp established itself in New Zealand around 1900 . There , it contributed to massive pine declines in the first half of the 19th century , spreading to Tasmania in the 1950s and then to the Australian mainland . Since 1980 , it has reached pine plantations in Uruguay , and later also Argentina , Brazil and Chile ; it was found in South Africa in 1994 . The population increased in the Great Lakes area from 2004 on ; the species had reached Vermont , New York , Pennsylvania , Ohio , and Michigan by 2009 . The wasps can swarm between 20 and 50 km ( 12 and 31 mi ) , and will take until about 2050 to spread to the far southeast of the USA at the current spreading rate . 
 Subsequently , forestry authorities intensified their pest control methods and additionally started education campaigns , such as warning not to transport firewood over large distances or to store it too long . Through wood export , the wasp can spread to East Asia , West Australia and parts of Africa . Remote locations , such as the Horn of Africa , may be spared from the Sirex woodwasp , providing the area is controlled . The Invasive Species Specialist Group ( <unk> ) of the IUCN has graded the wasp as heavily invasive . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The flight time of the adults or imagines begins in the late summer to early autumn , but the date depends on the region and climate . The males hatch out earlier than females and create swarms which gather around the treetops . The females seek out leks and couple with the males on the uppermost shoots . Then the females search for suitable host trees , if possible choosing weak and dry wood . They orient on monoterpene hydrocarbon compounds , which weakened trees produce . When a tree is stressed through dryness or exterior injuries , the compounds pervade osmotic barriers and escape from the bark . 
 The female drills several holes through the bark down to the xylem to place one egg in each . At the same time , she inserts spores of Amylostereum areolatum and a phytotoxic secretion . The holes branch out into several tubes , which lead away radially . The eggs are white , sausage @-@ shaped , and 1 @.@ 0 – 1 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 039 – 0 @.@ 059 in ) by 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 3 mm ( 0 @.@ 0079 – 0 @.@ <unk> in ) in size . Small females may lay 20 eggs , while the largest can lay up to 500 . Sometimes , eggs are not placed in every tube . In the last tube , the female injects only the secretion and the fungal spores . The females often die after just three or four days , sometimes even during oviposition ( egg @-@ laying ) , through overexertion . 
 = = = Development of larvae = = = 
 Larvae of Sirex woodwasp develop through <unk> : male larvae develop only from unfertilized eggs , the females only from fertilized ones . Usually , 10 males are produced per female , but the ratio varies between 20 : 1 and 1 : 1 . The larvae hatch after eight days at the earliest , but in some exterior conditions , they may remain in the egg for several months . At the optimal temperature of around 25 ° C ( 77 ° F ) , they hatch out after 10 to 12 days . Although the larvae hatch at 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) two to three days earlier , they are 20 % more likely to die . Such extreme temperatures result in slower development , and below 6 @.@ 2 ° C ( 43 ° F ) , the larvae die . A sufficient <unk> of the wood with the mycelium of the woodwasp is crucial for its hatching , as the fungus prevents the wood from drying out . Without these prerequisites , hatching is not possible . The tree can only ward off the infestation if it floods the boreholes with resin or halts the fungus by producing a wall of polyphenols . 
 Six to 12 larval stages occur . During the first two stages , the larvae live off surrounding fungal tissue , until they reach the inner wood . Up to the fourth stage , they eat through the final summer wood along the <unk> , and finally towards the heartwood . After the seventh stage , they usually reach their maximum size . While penetrating further , they normally turn either up or down , but they turn back if they meet a foreign borehole , encounter bubbles of resin , or dry out . The larvae only live off the fungal mycelium , which they digest through a secretion . They pupate several centimeters under the bark . Before this , female larvae sequester a secretion containing fungal <unk> , which adult females incorporate in their mycetangia above their ovipositors . The adults eat through the bark , but , depending on the weather , they remain in the hatch hole for up to three weeks before they leave the wood in warm and sunny weather . 
 The period from hatching to pupation lasts 10 days to two years , exceptionally up to six years . Climate is a major factor , because development is slower in colder regions . 
 = = = Symbiosis = = = 
 The Sirex woodwasp and Amylostereum areolatum have a mutualistic symbiotic relationship . The Sirex woodwasp is , together with Sirex juvencus and S. <unk> from eastern Asia , one of three symbionts of the fungus that in the first instance benefits from its vector function . Additionally , the wasp creates the optimal conditions for the infestation through the fungus by drilling into the underlying wood layers and weakening the host tree . The fungus adapted to this process in the course of the years and has created fruit bodies only rarely or in the crop . 
 Conversely , the woodwasp is fully dependent on the symbionts . Decomposition enables the larvae to unlock the wood by producing white rot . The mycetangia of this and other wasps from the family Siricidae support a close relationship with <unk> fungi . Without the process of decomposition of the host tree and weakening of the infested tree , the development of larvae is arrested . If the tree can recover from the consequences of the wasp secretion , it blocks the boreholes with resin , thus killing the larvae . 
 = = = Host spectrum = = = 
 The Sirex woodwasp only attacks conifers , especially pines . In its usual habitat , these are mainly Pinus sylvestris , Pinus pinaster and Pinus nigra . In the Southern Hemisphere and in North America , the wasp attacks exotic and domestic pine species , generally in plantations . Examples include Pinus radiata and Pinus taeda in the United States . 
 Unlike any other species of Siricidae , the Sirex woodwasp can damage relatively healthy trees so heavily , they die back . However , the wasp mainly infests weakened trees ; only when the population is high does the insect also attack intact and healthy trees . Because the wasp larvae and the fungus need healthy wood , the Sirex woodwasp does not infest dry or dead timber . However , wasps may hatch from processed wood which was already infested . 
 By the spring of 2011 , S. noctilio had been found in Michigan , Pennsylvania , New York , and Vermont . Pines in North America that have been attacked or confirmed as hosts are : Scots ( Pinus sylvestris ) , Monterey ( P. radiata ) , loblolly ( P. taeda ) , slash ( P. elliottii ) , <unk> ( P. echinata ) , ponderosa ( P. ponderosa ) , lodgepole ( P. contorta ) , and jack ( P. banksiana ) ( Haugen 1999 ) . 
 = = = Symptoms of infestation = = = 
 Infestation damage can be divided into four categories or phases , depending on whether it is caused by the imago , fungus , larvae or secondary parasites . 
 The first reaction of the host tree is traced to the adult wasp and occurs after 10 to 14 days . A phytotoxic secretion of the wasp impairs metabolism in the shoots and needles , causing loss of water balance . The result is brown coloration of the needles and leaf drop . As with many other wood pests , fine resin drops in wasp boreholes are found in the central trunk . Attacked pines tend to develop flagging . Tip dieback begins with the needles becoming chlorotic and changing from green to yellowish @-@ red , finally turning completely brown over a three- to six @-@ month period . The wasp bores 1 / 8- to 3 / 8 @-@ inch @-@ diameter holes in the tree . <unk> trees may be attacked uniformly along the main stem , while trees with low osmotic phloem pressure are preferentially attacked , with denser clusters of boreholes . 
 During this process , fungal spores germinate in the boreholes , a reaction caused by the dryness of the tree , creating an appropriate environment and an entry for air . The fungus breaks down the lignin , causing white rot . It moves towards the vertically aligned xylem . The vertical profile shows reddish and white streaks which run in the direction of growth . 
 In the third stage , the larva begins to bore into the wood . By doing this , it eats the path , which at first proceeds towards the trunk center , before turning and running back to the bark . The paths are not visible in cross @-@ section , because they are heavily blocked with wood flour ; they may also be unobserved during wood processing . The lengths of the paths vary , depending on the wood , between 5 and 20 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 and 7 @.@ 9 in ) in diameter , which depends on the size of the larvae . The exit holes are circular and of very small diameter . 
 Stressing of the host tree and visible larval boreholes appear in the fourth stage . The infestation is reinforced by further insects or fungi , which in turn may cause more symptoms . Imago , fungus , and larvae together can cause tree death in a period ranging from two weeks to eight months . 
 = = = Natural enemies and parasites = = = 
 Birds are the primary natural enemies of the Sirex woodwasp . The adults are frequently hunted by swallows ( <unk> ) and swifts ( Apodidae ) , both of which prefer males . The black woodpecker ( <unk> martius ) and great spotted woodpecker ( <unk> major ) consume some larvae , but do not specialize on the Sirex woodwasp . 
 Several parasites have a larger impact on woodwasp populations . These include <unk> leucospoides ( <unk> ) ; <unk> cinctipes , Megarhyssa nortoni ( Ichneumonidae ) ; and Rhyssa persuasoria . While I. leucospoides lay its eggs into the woodwasp 's egg and the hatching period is therefore similar to its host 's , the <unk> mentioned lay their eggs on larvae or adult woodwasps ; they hatch out later in the springtime . The parasites locate host larvae hidden in the wood using their antennae to detect cues , including the smell of leaking drill dust or fungus mycelium , weak vibrations , or differences in temperature . The majority of these insect <unk> feed on honeydew and nectar , both of which affect the woodwasps ' sensitivity . 
 Another parasite is the nematode <unk> ( <unk> ) siricidicola , which was suggested in the New World in the 1970s as a possible biological control . B. siricidicola causes infertility in female wasps , but does not impair the fertility of males . Inside the host tree , the nematodes primarily feed on fungal mycelium . If they get near the wasp larvae , they infect females , which then couple with males and finally infest the wasp larvae . These eventually exit the tree carrying the nematodes with them . Competition for food between B. siricidicola and the wasp larvae also occurs , resulting in slower growth and possible starvation of the woodwasp larvae . The population of the Sirex woodwasp is very prone to infestation by B. siricidicola ; infestation rates of up to 90 % have been recorded . The nematodes are often used to combat the wasps by combining them with the symbiosis partner Amylostereum . The related species B. wilsoni has a similar effect , but as it also lives parasitically with the genus Rhyssa , it is not used for pest control . 
 = = Management options = = 
 Several biological control agents have been employed to try to limit populations of the Sirex woodwasp . B. siricidicola has been shown to infect up to 70 % of the wasps , but delivery and inoculation have been an issue when delivering the organism to the tree . The introductions of parasitic wasps . Megarhyssa nortoni nortoni , Rhyssa persuasoria persuasoria and <unk> leucospoides leucospoides have been successful at <unk> , but do not reduce wasp populations below 40 % of the local population . Although some success in slowing the population growth of the wasp has been observed , these measures are not stopping the spread of the wasp . 
 As a consequence of forest damage in Australia and New Zealand , wood imports to those countries have been required to be certified free from living Sirex larvae . 
 Treatment has also been attempted with <unk> ( <unk> ) , through heat , or by removing the bark . 
 = SMS Frithjof = 
 SMS Frithjof was the third vessel of the six @-@ member Siegfried class of coastal defense ships ( Küstenpanzerschiffe ) built for the German Imperial Navy . Her sister ships were Siegfried , Beowulf , Heimdall , Hildebrand , and Hagen . Frithjof was built by the AG Weser shipyard between 1890 and 1893 , and was armed with a main battery of three 24 @-@ centimeter ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) guns . She served in the German fleet throughout the 1890s and was rebuilt in 1900 - 1902 . She served in the VI Battle Squadron after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , but saw no action . Frithjof was demobilized in 1915 and used as a barracks ship thereafter . She was rebuilt as a merchant ship in 1923 and served in this capacity until she was broken up for scrap in 1930 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Frithjof was 79 meters ( 259 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 14 @.@ 90 m ( 48 @.@ 9 ft ) and a maximum draft of 5 @.@ 74 m ( 18 @.@ 8 ft ) . She displaced 3 @,@ 741 long tons ( 3 @,@ 801 t ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two vertical 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines . Steam for the engines was provided by four coal @-@ fired boilers . The ship 's propulsion system provided a top speed of 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) and a range of approximately 1 @,@ 490 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 760 km ; 1 @,@ 710 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Frithjof had a crew of 20 officers and 256 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with three 24 cm K L / 35 guns mounted in three single gun turrets . Two were placed side by side forward , and the third was located aft of the main superstructure . They were supplied with a total of 204 rounds of ammunition . The ship was also equipped with eight 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 30 guns in single mounts . Frithjof also carried four 35 cm ( 14 in ) torpedo tubes , all in swivel mounts on the deck . One was at the bow , another at the stern , and two amidships . The ship was protected by an armored belt that was 240 mm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) amidships , and an armored deck that was 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick . The conning tower had 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Frithjof was laid down in 1890 at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen . She was launched on 21 July 1891 , and completed on 23 February 1893 . Following her commissioning , Frithjof joined the 1893 annual training exercises , alongside her sister ship Beowulf . On the first set of maneuvers , Frithjof and the other capital ships performed as the hostile French fleet , which was " attacked " by torpedo boats in the North Sea . The second set of maneuvers took place in the Baltic Sea , and Beowulf and the ironclads again simulated a French fleet . In 1897 , Frithjof again participated in the annual summer maneuvers , now in the IV Division , along with Heimdall and Hagen . Her other three sisters were assigned to the III Division . During the 1900 summer maneuvers , Frithjof served in the squadron that simulated the German navy , alongside the new battleship Kaiser Friedrich III and the coastal defense ship Odin . 
 Frithjof served on active duty with the fleet until 1902 , when she was taken into drydock at the Kaiserliche Werft shipyard in Kiel for an extensive reconstruction . The ship was lengthened to 86 @.@ 13 m ( 282 @.@ 6 ft ) , which increased displacement to 4 @,@ 367 t ( 4 @,@ 298 long tons ; 4 @,@ 814 short tons ) . Her old boilers were replaced with eight new Marine type boilers , and a second funnel was added . Her secondary battery was increased to ten 8 @.@ 8 cm guns , and the 35 cm torpedo tubes were replaced with three 45 cm ( 18 in ) tubes . Work was completed by 1903 . 
 She then returned to service with the fleet . In 1905 - 1906 , Erich Raeder served aboard the ship has her navigation officer . By 1908 , she was assigned to the gunnery training squadron and tasked with training the fleet 's gunners . She remained with the fleet until the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , when she was mobilized into the VI Battle Squadron for coastal defense , along with her sister ships . On 31 August 1915 , the VI Battle Squadron was demobilized , and Frithjof 's crew was transferred to other warships . She was then used as a barracks ship in Danzig . On 17 June 1919 , she was stricken from the naval register . She was sold to A. Bernstein in Hamburg . Frithjof was rebuilt as a merchant ship in 1923 at Deutsche Werke ; she only served in this capacity for seven years , and was dismantled for scrap in Danzig in 1930 . 
 = I @-@ 35W Mississippi River bridge = 
 The I @-@ 35W Mississippi River bridge ( officially known as Bridge 9340 ) was an eight @-@ lane , steel truss arch bridge that carried Interstate 35W across the Saint Anthony Falls of the Mississippi River in Minneapolis , Minnesota , United States . During the evening rush hour on August 1 , 2007 , it suddenly collapsed , killing 13 people and injuring 145 . The bridge was Minnesota 's third busiest , carrying 140 @,@ 000 vehicles daily . The NTSB cited a design flaw as the likely cause of the collapse , noting that a too @-@ thin gusset plate ripped along a line of rivets , and asserted that additional weight on the bridge at the time of the collapse contributed to the catastrophic failure . 
 Immediately after the collapse , help came from mutual aid in the seven @-@ county Minneapolis @-@ Saint Paul metropolitan area and emergency response personnel , charities , and volunteers . Within a few days of the collapse , the Minnesota Department of Transportation ( Mn / DOT ) planned a replacement bridge , the I @-@ 35W Saint Anthony Falls Bridge . Construction was completed rapidly , and it opened on September 18 , 2008 . 
 = = Location and site history = = 
 Located in Minneapolis , Minnesota 's largest city , the bridge connected the Minneapolis neighborhoods of Downtown East and Marcy @-@ Holmes . The south abutment was northeast of the Metrodome , and the north abutment was northwest of the University of Minnesota East Bank campus . The bridge was the southeastern boundary of the " Mississippi Mile " downtown riverfront parkland . Downstream is the 10th Avenue Bridge , once known as the Cedar Avenue Bridge . Immediately upstream is the lock and dam at Saint Anthony Falls , where Minneapolis began . The first bridge upstream is the historic Stone Arch Bridge , built for the Great Northern Railway and now used for bicycle and pedestrian traffic . 
 The north foundation pier of the bridge was near a hydroelectric plant , razed in 1988 . The south abutment was in an area polluted by a coal @-@ to @-@ gas processing plant and a facility for storing and processing petroleum products . These uses effectively created a toxic waste site under the bridge , leading to a lawsuit and the removal of the contaminated soil . No relationship between these prior uses and the bridge failure has been claimed . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 The bridge , officially designated " Bridge 9340 " , was designed by Sverdrup & Parcel to 1961 AASHO ( American Association of State Highway Officials , now American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials ) standard specifications . The construction contracts , worth in total more than US $ 5 @.@ 2 million at the time , went to <unk> Inc. and Industrial Construction Company , which built the steel trusses and deck . Construction on the bridge began in 1964 and the structure was completed and opened to traffic in 1967 during an era of large @-@ scale projects related to building the Twin Cities freeway system . When the bridge fell , it was still the most recent river crossing built on a new site in Minneapolis . After the building boom ebbed during the 1970s , infrastructure management shifted toward inspection and maintenance . 
 The bridge 's fourteen spans extended 1 @,@ 907 feet ( 580 m ) long . The three main spans were of deck truss construction while all but two of the eleven approach spans were steel multi @-@ girder construction , the two exceptions being concrete slab construction . The piers were not built in the navigation channel ; instead , the center span of the bridge consisted of a single 458 @-@ foot ( 140 m ) steel arched truss over the 390 @-@ foot ( 119 m ) channel . The two support piers for the main trusses , each with two load @-@ bearing concrete pylons at either side of the center main span , were located on opposite banks of the river . The center span was connected to the north and south approaches by shorter spans formed by the same main trusses . Each was 266 feet ( 81 m ) in length , and was connected to the approach spans by a 38 foot ( 11 @.@ 6 m ) cantilever . The two main trusses , one on either side , ranged in depth from 60 feet ( 18 @.@ 3 m ) above their pier and concrete pylon supports , to 36 feet ( 11 m ) at midspan on the central span and 30 feet ( 9 m ) deep at the outer ends of the adjoining spans . At the top of the main trusses were the deck trusses , 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 6 m ) in depth and integral with the main trusses . The transverse deck beams , part of the deck truss , rested on top of the main trusses . These deck beams supported longitudinal deck stringers 27 inches ( 69 cm ) in depth , and reinforced @-@ concrete pavement . The deck was 113 ft 4 in ( 34 @.@ 5 m ) in breadth and was split longitudinally . It had transverse expansion joints at the centers and ends of each of the three main spans . The roadway deck was approximately 115 feet ( 35 m ) above the water level . 
 = = = Black ice prevention system = = = 
 On December 19 , 1985 , the temperature reached − 30 ° F ( − 34 ° C ) . Cars coming across the bridge experienced black ice and there was a major pile up on the bridge on the northbound side . In February and December 1996 , the bridge was identified as the single most treacherous cold @-@ weather spot in the Twin Cities freeway system , because of the almost frictionless thin layer of black ice that regularly formed when temperatures dropped below freezing . The bridge 's proximity to Saint Anthony Falls contributed significantly to the icing problem and the site was noted for frequent <unk> and collisions . 
 By January 1999 , Mn / DOT began testing magnesium chloride solutions and a mixture of magnesium chloride and a corn @-@ processing byproduct to see whether either would reduce the black ice that appeared on the bridge during the winter months . In October 1999 , the state embedded temperature @-@ activated nozzles in the bridge deck to spray the bridge with potassium acetate solution to keep the area free of winter black ice . The system came into operation in 2000 . 
 Although there were no additional major multi @-@ vehicle collisions since the automated de @-@ icing system was installed , it has been raised as a possibility that the potassium acetate may have contributed to the collapse of the 35W bridge by corroding the structural supports . 
 = = Maintenance and inspection = = 
 Since 1993 , the bridge was inspected annually by Mn / DOT , although no inspection report was completed in 2007 , due to the construction work . In the years prior to the collapse , several reports cited problems with the bridge structure . In 1990 , the federal government gave the I @-@ 35W bridge a rating of " structurally deficient , " citing significant corrosion in its bearings . Approximately 75 @,@ 000 other U.S. bridges had this classification in 2007 . 
 According to a 2001 study by the civil engineering department of the University of Minnesota , cracking had been previously discovered in the cross girders at the end of the approach spans . The main trusses connected to these cross girders and resistance to motion at the connection point bearings was leading to unanticipated out @-@ of @-@ plane distortion of the cross girders and subsequent stress cracking . The situation was addressed prior to the study by drilling the cracks to prevent further propagation and adding support struts to the cross girder to prevent further distortion . The report also noted a concern about lack of redundancy in the main truss system , which meant the bridge had a greater risk of collapse in the event of any single structural failure . Although the report concluded that the bridge should not have any problems with fatigue cracking in the foreseeable future , regular inspection , structural health monitoring , and use of strain gauges had been suggested . 
 In 2005 , the bridge was again rated as " structurally deficient " and in possible need of replacement , according to the U.S. Department of Transportation 's National Bridge Inventory database . Problems were noted in two subsequent inspection reports . The inspection carried out June 15 , 2006 found problems of cracking and fatigue . On August 2 , 2007 , Governor Tim Pawlenty stated that the bridge had been scheduled to be replaced in 2020 . 
 The I @-@ 35W bridge ranked near the bottom of federal inspection ratings nationwide . Bridge inspectors use a sufficiency rating that ranges from the highest score , 100 , to the lowest score , zero . In 2005 , they rated the bridge at 50 , indicating that replacement may have been in order . Out of over 100 @,@ 000 heavily used bridges , only about 4 % scored below 50 . On a separate measure , the I @-@ 35W bridge was rated " structurally deficient , " but was deemed to have met " minimum tolerable limits to be left in place as it is . " 
 In December 2006 , a steel reinforcement project was planned for the bridge . However , the project was canceled in January 2007 in favor of periodic safety inspections , after engineers realized that drilling for the retrofitting would , in fact , weaken the bridge . In internal Mn / DOT documents , bridge officials talked about the possibility of the bridge collapsing , and worried that they might have to condemn it . 
 The construction taking place in the weeks prior to the collapse included joint work and replacing lighting , concrete and guard rails . At the time of the collapse , four of the eight lanes were closed for resurfacing , and there were 575 @,@ 000 pounds ( 261 @,@ 000 kg ) of construction supplies and equipment on the bridge . 
 = = Collapse = = 
 At 6 : 05 p.m. CDT on Wednesday , August 1 , 2007 , with rush hour bridge traffic moving slowly through the limited number of lanes , the central span of the bridge suddenly gave way , followed by the adjoining spans . The structure and deck collapsed into the river and onto the riverbanks below , the south part toppling 81 feet ( 25 m ) eastward in the process . A total of 111 vehicles were involved , sending their occupants and 18 construction workers as far as 115 feet ( 35 m ) down to the river or onto its banks . Northern sections fell into a rail yard , landing on three unoccupied and stationary freight cars . 
 Sequential images of the collapse were taken by an outdoor security camera located at the parking lot entrance of the control facility for the Lower Saint Anthony Falls Lock and Dam . The immediate aftermath of the collapse was also captured by a Mn / DOT traffic camera that was facing away from the bridge during the collapse itself . The federal government immediately launched a National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) investigation . NTSB chairman Mark Rosenker , along with a number of investigators , arrived on scene 9 hours after the collapse . Rosenker remained in Minneapolis for nearly one week , serving as the government 's designated primary interface with federal , state and local officials as well as briefing the press on the status of the investigation . 
 Mayor R. T. Rybak and Governor Tim Pawlenty declared a state of emergency for the city of Minneapolis and for the state of Minnesota on August 2 , 2007 . Rybak 's declaration was approved and extended indefinitely by the Minneapolis City Council the next day . As of the morning following the collapse , according to White House Press Secretary Tony Snow , Minnesota had not requested a federal disaster declaration . President Bush pledged support during a visit to the site on August 4 with Minnesota elected officials and announced that United States Secretary of Transportation ( USDOT ) Mary Peters would lead the rebuilding effort . Rybak and Pawlenty gave the president detailed requests for aid during a closed @-@ door meeting . Local authorities were assisted by the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) evidence team , and by United States Navy divers who began arriving on August 5 , 2007 . 
 = = = Victims = = = 
 Only a few of the vehicles were submerged , but many people were stranded on the collapsed sections of the bridge . Several involved vehicles caught fire , including a semi @-@ trailer truck , from which the driver 's body was later pulled . When fire crews arrived , they had to route hoses from several blocks away . 
 A school bus carrying 63 children ended up resting precariously against the guardrail of the collapsed structure , near the burning semi @-@ trailer truck . The children were returning from a field trip to a water park as part of the Waite House Neighborhood Center Day Camp based out of the Phillips community . Jeremy Hernandez , a 20 @-@ year @-@ old staff member on the bus , assisted many of the children by kicking out the rear emergency exit and escorting or carrying them to safety . One youth worker was severely injured . 
 Thirteen people were killed . Triage centers at the ends of the bridge routed 50 victims to area hospitals , some in trucks , as ambulances were in short supply . Many of the injured had blunt trauma injuries . Those near the south end were taken to Hennepin County Medical Center ( HCMC ) — those near the north end , to the Fairview University Medical Center and other hospitals . At least 22 children were injured . Thirteen children were treated at Children 's Hospitals and Clinics of Minnesota , five at HCMC and four or five at North Memorial Medical Center in Robbinsdale , Minnesota . During the first 40 hours , 11 area hospitals treated 98 victims . 
 About 1 @,@ 400 people gathered for an interfaith service of healing held at St. Mark 's Episcopal Cathedral on August 5 , 2007 , when many of the victims were still missing . Among the presenters were representatives of the Christian , Islamic , Jewish , Hindu , Native American and Hispanic communities , police , fire and emergency responders , the governor , the mayor , a choir and several musicians . Minnesotans held a minute of silence during National Night Out , on August 7 , 2007 , at 6 : 05 pm . On August 8 , 2007 , the Twin Cities chapter of the American Red Cross lowered the flags of the United States , the state of Minnesota and the American Red Cross in remembrance of the victims of the tragedy . Gold Medal Park near the Guthrie Theater was a gathering place for those who wished to leave flowers or remembrances for those who died . During an address to the city council on August 15 , 2007 , Rybak remembered each of the victims and " the details of their lives . " 
 The families of the deceased , survivors , and first responders who were directly impacted by the bridge collapse — together estimated at at least several hundred people — did not have United States disaster insurance for individuals . Sandy Vargas , president and CEO of the Minneapolis Foundation , one of seven foundations that form Minnesota Helps , believes the Minnesota Helps Bridge Disaster Fund cannot cover the uninsured medical costs for the victims of the bridge collapse . The fund may be able to make small grants as a gesture of acknowledgment . 
 Pawlenty and his office , during the last week of November , announced a " $ 1 million plan " for the victims . State law has limits that may limit awards to below that amount . No legislative action was needed for this step . " The administration wanted approval from the Joint House @-@ Senate Subcommittee on Claims as a sign of bipartisan support " — which it received . On May 2 , 2008 , the state of Minnesota reached a $ 38 million agreement to compensate victims of the bridge collapse . 
 Nearly a decade after the incident , Mohamed <unk> , one of the victims of the Minnesota River bridge collapse , is believed to be a member of ISIS according to court testimony . 
 = = = Rescue = = = 
 Civilians immediately took part in the rescue efforts . Minneapolis and Hennepin County received mutual aid from neighboring cities and counties throughout the metropolitan area . The Minneapolis Fire Department ( MFD ) arrived in six minutes and responded quickly , helping people who were trapped in their vehicles . They took 81 minutes to triage and transport 145 patients with the help of Hennepin County Medical Center ( HCMC ) , North Memorial and <unk> paramedics . By the next morning , they had shifted their focus to the recovery of bodies , with several vehicles known to be trapped under the debris and several people still unaccounted for . Twenty divers organized by the Hennepin County Sheriff 's Office ( <unk> ) used side @-@ scan sonar to locate vehicles submerged in the murky water . Their efforts were hampered by debris and challenging currents . The United States Army Corps of Engineers ( USACE ) lowered the river level by two feet ( 60 cm ) downriver at Ford Dam to allow easier access to vehicles in the water . Carl Bolander & Sons , a Saint Paul @-@ based earthworks and demolition company , brought in several cranes and other heavy machinery to assist in clearing debris for rescue workers . 
 The Minneapolis Fire Department ( MFD ) created the National Incident Management System command center in the parking lot of the American Red Cross and an adjacent printing company on the west bank . The Minneapolis Police Department ( MPD ) secured the area , MFD managed the ground operations , and <unk> was in charge of the water operation . The city provided 75 firefighters and 75 law enforcement units . 
 Rescue of victims stranded on the bridge was complete in three hours . " We had a state bridge , in a county river , between two banks of a city . ... But we didn 't have one problem with any of these issues , because we knew who was in charge of the assets , " said Rocco Forte , city Emergency Preparedness Director . City , metropolitan area , county and state employees at all levels knew their roles and had practiced them since the city received FEMA emergency management training the year following 9 / 11 . Their rapid response time is also credited to the Minnesota and United States Department of Homeland Security ( DHS ) investment in 800 MHz mobile radio communications that were operating in Minneapolis and three of the responding counties , the city of Minneapolis collapsed @-@ structures rescue and dive team , and the Emergency Operations Center established at 6 : 20 p.m. in Minneapolis City Hall . 
 = = = Recovery = = = 
 Recovery of victims took over three weeks . At the request of the NTSB Chairman Mark Rosenker , the Navy sent 17 divers and a five @-@ person command @-@ and @-@ control element from their Mobile Diving and Salvage Unit ( MDSU ) 2 ( TWO ) . Divers and Underwater Search Evidence Response Team from the FBI joined the response efforts on August 7 , bringing with them " truck @-@ loads " of specialized equipment including FBI @-@ provided side @-@ scan sonar and two submarines . 
 The Navy team started looking in the river at 2 a.m .. The FBI teams had planned to search with an unmanned submarine , but had to abandon this plan after they found it was too big to maneuver in the debris field and cloudy water . Minneapolis Police Captain Mike Martin stated that , " The public safety divers are trained up to a level where they can kind of pick the low @-@ hanging fruit . They can do the stuff that 's easy . The bodies that are in the areas where they can sweep shore to shore , the vehicles that they can get into and search that weren 't crushed . They were able to remove some of those . Now what we 're looking at is the vehicles that are under the bridge deck and the structural pieces . " 
 Seventy @-@ five local , state and federal agencies were involved in the rescue and recovery including emergency personnel and volunteers from the counties of Anoka ; Carver ; Dakota ; Hennepin ; Olmsted ; Ramsey ; Scott ; Washington ; Winona and Wright in Minnesota ; and St. Croix County , Wisconsin , St. Croix EMS & Rescue Dive Team , and others standing by . Federal assistance came from the United States Department of Defense , DHS , USACE and the United States Coast Guard . Adventure Divers of Minot , North Dakota , is a private firm who assisted local authorities . 
 Local businesses donated wireless Internet , ice , drinks and meals for first responders . Teams of officers were sent to hospitals to follow up with the injured , who had been transported to eight different medical facilities . 
 The Minneapolis Police Chaplain Corps Chaplain Director , Dr. Jeffrey Stewart , arrived and was asked to setup and manage a Family Assistance Center for the victim families . He coordinated site location and staffing arrangements with the City ’ s Department of Health and Family support and relevant Hennepin County offices . When Chaplain Supervisor John LeMay and Lead Chaplain Linda <unk> arrived on the scene , they assisted in setting up the FAC at the Holiday Inn by <unk> . As additional Minneapolis Police Chaplains arrived , they began providing services to the victim families , assisting them in locating family members , and providing a calm presence . On August 20 , the last victim was recovered from the river . 
 The Salvation Army canteens served food and water to rescue workers . 
 A Mayo Clinic transport helicopter was standing by at Flying Cloud Airport . The Minnesota National Guard launched a <unk> helicopter and had up to 10 @,@ 000 guard members ready to help . 
 As of August 8 , 2007 , more than 500 Red Cross volunteers and staff persons counseled 2 @,@ 000 people with grief , trauma , missing persons , and medical issues , and served 7 @,@ 000 meals to first responders . 
 Following the initial rescue , Mn / DOT retained Carl Bolander & Sons , an earthworks and demolition contractor of Saint Paul , Minnesota , to remove the collapsed bridge and demolish the remaining spans that did not fall . Divers left the water briefly on August 18 while the company 's crew used cranes , excavation drills and cutting torches to remove parts of the bridge deck , beams and girders , hoping to improve access for the divers . After the last person 's remains were pulled from the wreckage on August 21 , the company 's crews began dismantling the bridge 's remnants . Crews first removed the vehicles stranded on the bridge . By August 18 , 80 of the 88 stranded cars and trucks had been moved to the MPD impound lot where owners could claim their vehicles . Then workers shifted to removing the bridge deck using cranes and excavators equipped with hoe rams to break the concrete . Structural steel was then disassembled by cranes , and the concrete piers were removed by excavators . National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) officials asked demolition crews to use extreme care in removing the bridge remnants to preserve as much of the bridge materials as possible for later analysis . By the end of October 2007 , the demolition operation was substantially complete , enabling construction to begin on the new I @-@ 35W bridge on November 1 , 2007 . Much of the bridge debris was temporarily stored at the nearby Bohemian Flats as part of the ongoing investigation of the collapse ; it was removed to a storage facility in Afton , Minnesota , in the fall of 2010 . Federal officials planned to bring some of the bridge steel and concrete to the NTSB Material Laboratory in Washington , D.C. , for analysis toward determining the cause of the collapse on behalf of FHWA , Mn / DOT and Progressive Construction , Inc . NTSB also interviewed eyewitnesses . 
 Peters announced that USDOT had granted Minnesota US $ 5 million the day following the collapse . On August 10 , Peters announced an additional US $ 5 million " for Minneapolis " , or " the state " , " to reimburse Minneapolis for increased transit operations to serve commuters in the wake of last week ’ s bridge collapse " . U.S. Congress removed the US $ 100 million per @-@ incident cap on emergency appropriations . The United States House of Representatives and United States Senate each voted unanimously for US $ 250 million in emergency funding for Minnesota that President Bush signed into law on August 6 . On August 10 , 2007 Peters announced US $ 50 million in immediate emergency relief . The Associated Press clarified that the US $ 50 million was a <unk> on the US $ 250 million that has yet to be approved by appropriations committees . Minnesota could use the immediate relief for " clean @-@ up and recovery work , including clearing debris and re @-@ routing traffic , as well as for design work on a new bridge " . " On behalf of Minnesota , we are grateful for all of this help , " Pawlenty said . 
 = = = Investigation = = = 
 The National Transportation Safety Board immediately began a comprehensive investigation that was expected to take up to eighteen months . Immediately following the collapse , Governor Pawlenty and Mn / DOT announced that the Illinois @-@ based engineering firm of Wiss , Janney , Elstner Associates , Inc. had also been selected to provide essential analysis that would parallel the investigation being conducted by the NTSB . One week after the collapse , workers were just beginning to move debris and vehicles to further the process of recovering victims . Cameras and motion detectors were added to the site around the bridge to ward off intruders who , officials said , were hindering the investigation . Hennepin County Sheriff Richard W. Stanek stated , " We are treating this as a crime scene at this point . There 's no indication there was any foul play involved , [ but ] it 's a crime scene until we can determine what was the cause of the collapse . " 
 An employee of the NTSB had written his doctoral thesis on possible failure scenarios of this specific bridge while he was a student at the nearby University of Minnesota . That thesis , including his computer model of the bridge for failure mode analysis , was used by the NTSB to aid in its investigation . The Federal Highway Administration ( FHWA ) built a computer model of the bridge at the Turner Fairbank Highway Research Center in McLean , Virginia . NTSB investigators were particularly interested in learning why a part of the bridge 's southern end shifted eastward as it collapsed , but soon ruled that out as a starting point , and shifted focus to the north end of the structure . 
 Officials with DHS said there was no indication that terrorism was involved . Although officials emphasized that the cause of the collapse had not yet been determined , Peters cautioned states to " remain mindful of the extra weight construction projects place on bridges . " Within days , bridge inspections were stepped up throughout the United States . 
 FHWA advised states to inspect the 700 U.S. bridges of similar construction after identifying a possible design flaw related to large steel sheets called gusset plates , which connect girders in the truss structure . Officials raised questions as to why such a flaw would not have been discovered in over 40 years of inspections . The flaw was first discovered by Wiss , Janney , Elstner Associates , Inc . , an independent consulting firm hired by Mn / DOT to investigate the cause of the collapse . 
 On January 15 , 2008 , the NTSB announced it had determined that the bridge 's design specified steel gusset plates that were undersized and inadequate to support the intended load of the bridge , a load that had increased over time . This assertion was based on an interim report that calculated the demand @-@ to @-@ capacity ratio for the gusset plates . The NTSB recommended that similar bridge designs be reviewed for this problem . 
 " Although the Board 's investigation is still on @-@ going and no determination of probable cause has been reached , interim findings in the investigation have revealed a safety issue that warrants attention , " said NTSB Chairman Mark Rosenker . " During the wreckage recovery , investigators discovered that gusset plates at eight different joint locations in the main center span were fractured . The Board , with assistance from the FHWA , conducted a thorough review of the design of the bridge , with an emphasis on the design of the gusset plates . This review discovered that the original design process of the I @-@ 35W bridge led to a serious error in sizing some of the gusset plates in the main truss . " 
 On March 17 , 2008 , the NTSB announced an update on the investigation relating to load capacity , design issues , computer analysis and modeling , digital image analysis and analysis of the undersized and corroded gusset plates . The investigation revealed that photos from a June 2003 inspection of the bridge showed gusset @-@ plate bowing . 
 On November 13 , 2008 , the NTSB released the findings of its investigation . The primary cause was the undersized gusset plates , at 0 @.@ 5 inches ( 13 mm ) thick . Contributing to that design or construction error was the fact that 2 inches ( 51 mm ) of concrete were added to the road surface over the years , increasing the static load by 20 % . Also contributing was the extraordinary weight of construction equipment and material resting on the bridge just above its weakest point at the time of the collapse . That load was estimated at 578 @,@ 000 pounds ( 262 @,@ 000 kg ) , consisting of sand , water and vehicles . The NTSB determined that corrosion was not a significant factor , but that inspectors did not routinely check that safety features were functional . 
 = = = Lawsuits = = = 
 In August 2010 , the last of the lawsuits against URS Corporation were settled for $ <unk> to avoid prolonged litigation . The cases were handled via a novel consortium of legal entities that worked on a pro @-@ bono basis . URS had performed fatigue analysis consulting on the bridge for the Mn / DOT . 
 As of August 1 , 2011 , the lawsuit brought by the state of Minnesota against Jacobs Engineering Group , the successor of Sverdrup & Parcel , the firm that designed the bridge , was still pending . In May 2012 , the United States Supreme Court turned down an appeal by Jacobs who argued too much time had passed since the 1960s design work , allowing the state of Minnesota suit to proceed . To avoid protracted litigation , Jacobs paid $ 8 @.@ 9 million in Nov. 2012 to settle the suit without admitting wrongdoing . 
 = = = Impacts on business , traffic , and transportation funding = = = 
 The collapse of the bridge affected river , rail , road , bicycle and pedestrian , and air transit . Pool 1 , created by Ford Dam , was closed to river navigation between mile markers 847 and 854 @.@ 5 . A rail spur switched by the Minnesota Commercial Railway was blocked by the collapse . The Grand Rounds National Scenic Byway bike path was disrupted as well as two roads , West River Parkway and 2nd Street SE . The 10th Avenue Bridge , which parallels this bridge about a block downstream , was closed to both vehicle and pedestrian traffic until August 31 . The Federal Aviation Administration restricted pilots in the 3 @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) radius of the rescue and recovery . 
 Thirty @-@ five people lost their jobs when Aggregate Industries of Leicestershire , UK , a company that delivered construction materials by barge , cut production in the area . 
 Small businesses in metropolitan area counties that were harmed by the bridge collapse could apply beginning August 27 , 2007 for loans of up to US $ 1 @.@ 5 million at 4 % interest over up to 30 years from the U.S. Small Business Administration . The agency 's disaster declaration for Hennepin and contiguous counties came two days after Pawlenty 's request to the SBA on August 20 , 2007 . Open for business and unsure they could repay loans , owners near the collapse in some cases lost 25 % or 50 % of their income . Large retailers in a mall of chain stores lost about the same . As of early January 2008 , at least one business closed , one announced it was closing , seven of eight SBA applications had not been approved and merchants continued to explain how they are unable to shoulder more debt . 
 Seventy percent of the traffic served by the bridge was downtown @-@ bound . Mn / DOT published detour information , and made real @-@ time traffic information available for callers to 5 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 . The designated alternate route in the area was Trunk Highway 280 , which was converted to a temporary controlled @-@ access highway with all at @-@ grade access points closed . Other traffic was diverted to Interstates 694 , 494 , and 35E . The number of lanes was increased on several of the highways by repainting traffic lines to eliminate wide shoulders , and by widening various " choke @-@ points " . 
 Extra Metro Transit buses were added from park @-@ and @-@ ride locations in the northern suburbs during the rush hours . Abandoned vehicles on I @-@ 35W and 280 were towed immediately . On August 6 , I @-@ 35W was opened to local traffic at the access ramps on each side of the missing section ; some on @-@ ramps remained closed . 
 In the aftermath , pressure was exerted on the state legislature to increase the state fuel tax to provide adequate maintenance funding for Mn / DOT . Ultimately the tax was increased by $ 0 @.@ 055 per gallon via an override of Governor Pawlenty 's veto of the legislation . 
 = = = Public events and media = = = 
 The Minnesota Twins played their home game as scheduled , against the Kansas City Royals at the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome just west of I @-@ 35W , on the evening of the accident . Public safety officials told the team that postponing the game could hamper rescue and recovery efforts , since a postponement would send up to 25 @,@ 000 people back into traffic only blocks from the collapsed bridge . Before the game , a moment of silence was held for the victims of the collapse . The Twins postponed their August 2 game as well as the traditional groundbreaking ceremonies for Target Field also located in downtown Minneapolis . The Twins and Minnesota Vikings would honor the victims of the collapse by placing a decal of a simulated I @-@ 35W shield sign with the date " 8 @-@ 1 @-@ 07 " on the backstop wall within the Metrodome , which was always visible in the typical behind @-@ the @-@ pitcher viewpoint on televised games . The decal would remain for the rest of the 2007 season . 
 The collapse was of interest to national and international news organizations . On the evening of the collapse , CNN , MSNBC , and Fox News Channel stayed live with its coverage during the overnight hours , along with local stations WCCO @-@ AM ( 830 ) and KSTP ( 1500 ) , with most of the coverage in the opening hours coming via satellite from Twin Cities news operations WCCO @-@ TV , KSTP @-@ TV , <unk> @-@ TV , <unk> @-@ TV and Minnesota Public Radio . National TV networks sent CBS anchor Katie Couric , NBC 's Brian Williams and Matt Lauer , MSNBC 's Contessa Brewer , ABC 's Charles Gibson , CNN 's Soledad O 'Brien and Anderson Cooper , and Fox News Channel 's Greta Van Susteren and Shepard Smith to broadcast from the Twin Cities . U.S. news organizations interested in national and local bridge safety made a record number of requests for bridge information from Investigative Reporters and Editors , an organization that maintains several databases of federal information . News media made more inquiries for National Bridge Inventory data in the first 24 hours after the Minneapolis bridge collapse than for any previous data in the past 20 years . 
 = = = Disaster declarations = = = 
 The Hennepin County Board of Commissioners voted on August 7 , 2007 to request that Governor Pawlenty petition President George W. Bush to declare the city of Minneapolis and Hennepin County a major disaster area . About two weeks later , Pawlenty requested major disaster designation on August 20 . In a subsequent press release for a separate disaster declaration that month , he said , " Ordinarily , preliminary damage assessments are completed before the emergency disaster declaration is requested . " During a press conference and briefing with Bush at the Minneapolis / St.Paul Air Reserve Station base for the <unk> Airlift Wing on Tuesday , August 21 , Pawlenty estimated the total cost of emergency response at over US $ 8 million including Hennepin County 's cost at US $ 7 @.@ 3 million for rescue and recovery and US $ 1 @.@ 2 million for other state agencies . He estimated the cost of the collapse to the state at US $ 400 @,@ 000 to US $ 1 million per day . 
 That day , Bush gave an emergency rather than major disaster declaration for the state of Minnesota , allowing local and state agencies to recover costs incurred August 1 to 15 from the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) . FEMA can provide payment as required for emergency protective measures ( part of FEMA Category B ) at no less than 75 % federal funding to Hennepin County , the designated county , up to the initial limit of US $ 5 million . Pawlenty planned to ask that the date restriction and monetary cap be lifted . FEMA aid can compensate the county for the saving of lives , protection of public safety and health , and lessening damage to improved property , but not for the disaster @-@ related needs of the victims nor for removing debris and restoration of the bridge and riverfront nor many other categories of needs . 
 = = Replacement bridge = = 
 The replacement of the collapsed I @-@ 35W Mississippi River bridge crosses the Mississippi River at the same location as the original bridge , and carries north – south traffic on I @-@ 35W . It was constructed on an accelerated schedule , because of the highway 's function as a vital link for carrying commuters and truck freight . 
 Mn / DOT announced on September 19 , 2007 , that Flatiron Constructors and Manson Construction Company would build the replacement bridge for $ 234 million . The I @-@ 35W Saint Anthony Falls Bridge was opened to the public on September 18 , 2008 , at 5 a.m. Using the innovative design @-@ build project delivery method , the replacement bridge opened over three months ahead of schedule , and was awarded the " Best Overall Design @-@ Build Project Award " for 2009 from the Design @-@ Build Institute of America . 
 = = Memorial garden = = 
 The 35W Bridge Remembrance Garden is a memorial commemorating the victims and survivors of the I @-@ 35W bridge collapse . The memorial is located off West River Parkway , in Minneapolis . The memorial was revealed to the public on August 1 , 2011 , the four @-@ year anniversary of the collapse . Minnesota Governor , Mark Dayton and Minneapolis Mayor R. T. Rybak were present , and both spoke at the reveal . The ceremony included reading the names of the 13 victims , followed by a moment of silence held at exactly 6 : 05 p.m. , the time of the collapse four years prior . Afterwards , there was the release of 13 doves in memory of the people who died . 
 This $ 900 @,@ 000 memorial was funded by the Minneapolis Foundation , and the park land was provided by the Minneapolis Park and Recreation Board . The design of the remembrance garden was created by Tom <unk> , alongside survivors and relatives of the victims . 
 The design was meant to incorporate symbolic natural elements , including : 
 Stone , for stability and immortality 
 <unk> trees , for strength and to live for centuries 
 Water , able to purify and regenerate 
 Darkness and Light , the transition between tragedy and new life 
 A prime feature in the garden includes 13 steel I @-@ beam and opaque glass columns . Each column has a name engraved of someone lost , along with their story , some even written in their native language . These 13 columns ' linear length totals 81 feet ( 25 m ) , signifying the date of the collapse ( 08 / 01 / 07 ) . Behind the 13 columns is a black granite water wall . On the wall , stainless steel words form the quote , " Our lives are not only defined by what happens , but by how we act in the face of it , not only by what life brings us , but by what we bring to life . <unk> actions and compassion create enduring community out of tragic events . " Along with the quote , the names of the 171 survivors are etched into the black stone . Another part of the memorial includes a path leading to the bluff , overlooking the Mississippi River and the new I @-@ 35W Bridge . At night , the columns , pathway and water wall are illuminated by LED lights . 
 = = Musical <unk> = = 
 In May 2008 , an orchestral piece composed by Osmo Vänskä titled " The Bridge " was premiered by the Metropolitan Symphony Orchestra , led by William <unk> , assistant @-@ principal bassist of the Minnesota Orchestra . Vänskä himself attended the world premiere . 
 = Benjamin Disraeli = 
 Benjamin Disraeli , 1st Earl of Beaconsfield , KG , PC , FRS ( 21 December 1804 – 19 April 1881 ) was a British politician and writer , who twice served as Prime Minister . He played a central role in the creation of the modern Conservative Party , defining its policies and its broad outreach . Disraeli is remembered for his influential voice in world affairs , his political battles with the Liberal Party leader William Ewart Gladstone , and his one @-@ nation conservatism or " Tory democracy " . He made the Conservatives the party most identified with the glory and power of the British Empire . He is the only British Prime Minister of Jewish birth . 
 Disraeli was born in London . His father left Judaism after a dispute at his synagogue ; young Benjamin became an Anglican at the age of 12 . After several unsuccessful attempts , Disraeli entered the House of Commons in 1837 . In 1846 the Prime Minister , Sir Robert Peel split the party over his proposal to repeal the Corn Laws , which involved ending the tariff on imported grain . Disraeli clashed with Peel in the Commons . Disraeli became a major figure in the party . When Lord Derby , the party leader , thrice formed governments in the 1850s and 1860s , Disraeli served as Chancellor of the Exchequer and Leader of the House of Commons . He also forged a bitter rivalry with Gladstone of the Liberal Party . 
 Upon Derby 's retirement in 1868 , Disraeli became Prime Minister briefly before losing that year 's election . He returned to opposition , before leading the party to a majority in the 1874 election . He maintained a close friendship with Queen Victoria , who in 1876 created him Earl of Beaconsfield . Disraeli 's second term was dominated by the Eastern Question — the slow decay of the Ottoman Empire and the desire of other European powers , such as Russia , to gain at its expense . Disraeli arranged for the British to purchase a major interest in the Suez Canal Company ( in Ottoman @-@ controlled Egypt ) . In 1878 , faced with Russian victories against the Ottomans , he worked at the Congress of Berlin to obtain peace in the Balkans at terms favourable to Britain and unfavourable to Russia , its longstanding enemy . This diplomatic victory over Russia established Disraeli as one of Europe 's leading statesmen . 
 World events thereafter moved against the Conservatives . Controversial wars in Afghanistan and South Africa undermined his public support . He angered British farmers by refusing to <unk> the Corn Laws in response to poor harvests and cheap imported grain . With Gladstone conducting a massive speaking campaign , his Liberals bested Disraeli 's Conservatives in the 1880 election . In his final months , Disraeli led the Conservatives in opposition . He had throughout his career written novels , beginning in 1826 , and he published his last completed novel , Endymion , shortly before he died at the age of 76 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Disraeli was born on 21 December 1804 at 6 King 's Road , Bedford Row , Bloomsbury , London , the second child and eldest son of Isaac D 'Israeli , a literary critic and historian , and Maria ( Miriam ) , née Basevi . The family was of Sephardic Jewish Italian mercantile background . All Disraeli 's grandparents and great grandparents were born in Italy ; Isaac 's father , Benjamin , moved to England from Venice in 1748 . Disraeli later romanticised his origins , claiming that his father 's family was of grand Spanish and Venetian descent ; in fact Isaac 's family was of no great distinction , but on Disraeli 's mother 's side , in which he took no interest , there were some highly distinguished forebears . Historians differ on Disraeli 's motives for rewriting his family history : Bernard Glassman argues that it was intended to give him status comparable to that of England 's ruling élite ; Sarah Bradford believes " his dislike of the commonplace would not allow him to accept the facts of his birth as being as middle class and undramatic as they really were " . 
 Disraeli 's siblings were Sarah ( 1802 – 1859 ) , Naphtali ( born and died 1807 ) , Ralph ( 1809 – 1898 ) , and James ( " Jem " ) ( 1813 – 1868 ) . He was close to his sister , and on affectionate but more distant terms with his surviving brothers . Details of his schooling are sketchy . From the age of about six he was a day boy at a dame school in Islington that one of his biographers later described as " for those days a very high @-@ class establishment " . Two years later or so — the exact date has not been ascertained — he was sent as a boarder to Rev John <unk> 's St Piran 's school at Blackheath . While he was there events at the family home changed the course of Disraeli 's education and of his whole life : his father renounced Judaism and had the four children baptised into the Church of England in July and August 1817 . 
 Isaac D 'Israeli had never taken religion very seriously , but had remained a conforming member of the Bevis Marks Synagogue . His father , the elder Benjamin , was a prominent and devout member ; it was probably from respect for him that Isaac did not leave when he fell out with the synagogue authorities in 1813 . After Benjamin senior died in 1816 Isaac felt free to leave the congregation following a second dispute . Isaac 's friend Sharon Turner , a solicitor , convinced him that although he could comfortably remain unattached to any formal religion it would be disadvantageous to the children if they did so . Turner stood as godfather when Benjamin was baptised , aged twelve , on 31 July 1817 . 
 Conversion to Christianity enabled Disraeli to contemplate a career in politics . Britain in the early 19th century was not a greatly anti @-@ Semitic society , and there had been Members of Parliament ( MPs ) from Jewish families since Samson Gideon in 1770 . But until 1858 MPs were required to take the oath of allegiance " on the true faith of a Christian " , necessitating at least nominal conversion . It is not known whether Disraeli formed any ambition for a parliamentary career at the time of his baptism , but there is no doubt that he bitterly regretted his parents ' decision not to send him to Winchester College . As one of the great public schools of England , Winchester consistently provided recruits to the political élite . His two younger brothers were sent there , and it is not clear why Isaac D 'Israeli chose to send his eldest son to a much less prestigious school . The boy evidently held his mother responsible for the decision ; Bradford speculates that " Benjamin 's delicate health and his obviously Jewish appearance may have had something to do with it . " The school chosen for him was run by Eliezer Cogan at Higham Hill in Walthamstow . He began there in the autumn term of 1817 ; he later recalled his education : 
 I was at school for two or three years under the Revd . Dr Cogan , a Greek scholar of eminence , who had contributed notes to the A [ e ] <unk> of Bishop Blomfield , & was himself the Editor of the Greek Gnostic poets . After this I was with a private tutor for two years in my own County , & my education was severely classical . Too much so ; in the pride of boyish erudition , I edited the <unk> Eclogue of Theocritus , <unk> was privately printed . This was my first production : puerile pedantry . 
 = = = 1820s = = = 
 In November 1821 , shortly before his seventeenth birthday , Disraeli was articled as a clerk to a firm of solicitors — Swain , Stevens , Maples , Pearse and Hunt — in the City of London . T F Maples was not only the young Disraeli 's employer and friend of his father 's , but also his prospective father @-@ in @-@ law : Isaac and Maples entertained the possibility that the latter 's only daughter might be a suitable match for Benjamin . A friendship developed , but there was no romance . The firm had a large and profitable business , and as the biographer R W Davis observes , the clerkship was " the kind of secure , respectable position that many fathers dream of for their children " . Although biographers including Robert Blake and Bradford comment that such a post was incompatible with Disraeli 's romantic and ambitious nature , he reportedly gave his employers satisfactory service , and later professed to have learned a good deal from his time with the firm . He recalled , " I had some scruples , for even then I dreamed of Parliament . My father 's refrain always was ' Philip Carteret Webb ' , who was the most eminent solicitor of his boyhood and who was an MP . It would be a mistake to suppose that the two years and more that I was in the office of our friend were wasted . I have often thought , though I have often regretted the University , that it was much the reverse . " 
 The year after joining Maples 's firm , Benjamin changed his surname from D 'Israeli to Disraeli . His reasons for doing so are unknown , but the biographer Bernard Glassman surmises that it was to avoid being confused with his father . Disraeli 's sister and brothers adopted the new version of the name ; Isaac and his wife retained the older form . 
 Disraeli toured Belgium and the Rhine Valley with his father in the summer of 1824 ; he later wrote that it was while travelling on the Rhine that he decided to abandon his position : " I determined when descending those magical waters that I would not be a lawyer . " On their return to England he left the solicitors , at the suggestion of Maples , with the aim of qualifying as a barrister . He enrolled as a student at Lincoln 's Inn and joined the chambers of his uncle , Nathaniel <unk> , and then those of Benjamin Austen , who persuaded Isaac that Disraeli would never make a barrister and should be allowed to pursue a literary career . He had made a tentative start : in May 1824 he submitted a manuscript to his father 's friend , the publisher John Murray , but withdrew it before Murray could decide whether to publish it . Released from the law , Disraeli did some work for Murray , but turned most of his attention not to literature but to speculative dealing on the stock exchange . 
 There was at the time a boom in shares in South American mining companies . Spain was losing its South American colonies in the face of rebellions . At the urging of George Canning the British government recognised the new independent governments of Argentina ( 1824 ) , Colombia and Mexico ( both 1825 ) . With no money of his own , Disraeli borrowed money to invest . He became involved with the financier J. D. Powles , who was prominent among those encouraging the mining boom . In the course of 1825 , Disraeli wrote three anonymous pamphlets for Powles , promoting the companies . The pamphlets were published by John Murray , who invested heavily in the boom . 
 Murray had for some time had ambitions to establish a new morning paper to compete with The Times . In 1825 Disraeli convinced him that he should proceed . The new paper , The Representative , promoted the mines and those politicians who supported them , particularly Canning . Disraeli impressed Murray with his energy and commitment to the project , but he failed in his key task of persuading the eminent writer John Gibson Lockhart to edit the paper . After that , Disraeli 's influence on Murray waned , and to his resentment he was sidelined in the affairs of The Representative . The paper survived for only six months , partly because the mining bubble burst in late 1825 , and partly because , according to Blake , the paper was " atrociously edited " , and would have failed regardless . 
 The bursting of the mining bubble was ruinous for Disraeli . By June 1825 he and his business partners had lost £ 7 @,@ 000 . Disraeli could not pay off the last of his debts from this debacle until 1849 . He turned to writing , motivated partly by his desperate need for money , and partly by a wish for revenge on Murray and others by whom he felt slighted . There was a vogue for what was called " silver @-@ fork fiction " — novels depicting aristocratic life , usually by anonymous authors , read avidly by the aspirational middle classes . Disraeli 's first novel , Vivian Grey , published anonymously in four volumes in 1826 – 27 , was a thinly veiled re @-@ telling of the affair of The Representative . It sold well , but caused much offence in influential circles when the authorship was discovered . Disraeli , then just twenty @-@ three , did not move in high society , as the numerous solecisms in his book made obvious . Reviewers were sharply critical on these grounds of both the author and the book . Furthermore , Murray and Lockhart , men of great influence in literary circles , believed that Disraeli had caricatured them and abused their confidence — an accusation denied by the author but repeated by many of his biographers . In later editions Disraeli made many changes , softening his satire , but the damage to his reputation proved long @-@ lasting . 
 Disraeli 's biographer Jonathan Parry writes that the financial failure and personal criticism that Disraeli suffered in 1825 and 1826 were probably the trigger for a serious nervous crisis affecting him over the next four years : " He had always been moody , sensitive , and solitary by nature , but now became seriously depressed and lethargic . " He was still living with his parents in London , but in search of the " change of air " recommended by the family 's doctors Isaac took a succession of houses in the country and on the coast , before Disraeli sought wider horizons . 
 = = = 1830s = = = 
 Together with his sister 's fiancé , William Meredith , Disraeli travelled widely in southern Europe and beyond in 1830 – 31 . The trip was financed partly by another high society novel , The Young Duke , written in 1829 – 30 . The tour was cut short suddenly by Meredith 's death from smallpox in Cairo in July 1831 . Despite this tragedy , and the need for treatment for a sexually transmitted disease on his return , Disraeli felt enriched by his experiences . He became , in Parry 's words , " aware of values that seemed denied to his insular countrymen . The journey encouraged his self @-@ consciousness , his moral relativism , and his interest in Eastern racial and religious attitudes . " Blake regards the tour as one of the formative experiences of Disraeli 's whole career : " [ T ] he impressions that it made on him were life @-@ lasting . They conditioned his attitude toward some of the most important political problems which faced him in his later years — especially the Eastern Question ; they also coloured many of his novels . " 
 Disraeli wrote two novels in the aftermath of the tour . Contarini Fleming ( 1832 ) was avowedly a self @-@ portrait . It is subtitled " a psychological autobiography " , and depicts the conflicting elements of its hero 's character : the duality of northern and Mediterranean ancestry , the dreaming artist and the bold man of action . As Parry observes , the book ends on a political note , setting out Europe 's progress " from feudal to federal principles " . The Wondrous Tale of Alroy the following year portrayed the problems of a medieval Jew in deciding between a small , exclusively Jewish state and a large empire embracing all . 
 After the two novels were published , Disraeli declared that he would " write no more about myself " . He had already turned his attention to politics in 1832 , during the great crisis over the Reform Bill . He contributed to an anti @-@ Whig pamphlet edited by John Wilson Croker and published by Murray entitled England and France : or a cure for Ministerial Gallomania . The choice of a Tory publication was regarded as strange by Disraeli 's friends and relatives , who thought him more of a Radical . Indeed , he had objected to Murray about Croker 's inserting " high Tory " sentiment : Disraeli remarked , " it is quite impossible that anything adverse to the general measure of Reform can issue from my pen . " Moreover , at the time Gallomania was published , Disraeli was electioneering in High Wycombe in the Radical interest . 
 Disraeli 's politics at the time were influenced both by his rebellious streak and by his desire to make his mark . At that time , the politics of the nation were dominated by members of the aristocracy , together with a few powerful commoners . The Whigs derived from the coalition of lords who had forced through the Bill of Rights in 1689 and in some cases were their actual descendants , not merely spiritual . The Tories tended to support King and Church , and sought to thwart political change . A small number of Radicals , generally from northern constituencies , were the strongest advocates of continuing reform . In the early 1830s the Tories and the interests they represented appeared to be a lost cause . The other great party , the Whigs , were anathema to Disraeli : " Toryism is worn out & I cannot condescend to be a Whig . " There were two general elections in 1832 ; Disraeli unsuccessfully stood as a Radical at High Wycombe in each . 
 Disraeli 's political views embraced certain Radical policies , particularly democratic reform of the electoral system , and also some Tory ones , including protectionism . He began to move in Tory circles . In 1834 he was introduced to the former Lord Chancellor , Lord Lyndhurst , by Henrietta Sykes , wife of Sir Francis Sykes . She was having an affair with Lyndhurst , and began another with Disraeli . Disraeli and Lyndhurst took an immediate liking to each other . Lyndhurst was an indiscreet gossip with a fondness for intrigue ; this appealed greatly to Disraeli , who became his secretary and go @-@ between . In 1835 Disraeli stood for the last time as a Radical , unsuccessfully contesting High Wycombe once again . 
 In April 1835 Disraeli fought a by @-@ election at Taunton as a Tory . The Irish MP Daniel O 'Connell , misled by inaccurate press reports , thought Disraeli had slandered him while electioneering at Taunton ; he launched an outspoken attack , referring to Disraeli as : 
 a reptile ... just fit now , after being twice discarded by the people , to become a Conservative . He possesses all the necessary requisites of perfidy , selfishness , depravity , want of principle , etc . , which would qualify him for the change . His name shows that he is of Jewish origin . I do not use it as a term of reproach ; there are many most respectable Jews . But there are , as in every other people , some of the lowest and most disgusting grade of moral turpitude ; and of those I look upon Mr. Disraeli as the worst . 
 Disraeli 's public exchanges with O 'Connell , extensively reproduced in The Times , included a demand for a duel with the 60 @-@ year @-@ old O 'Connell 's son ( which resulted in Disraeli 's temporary detention by the authorities ) , a reference to " the inextinguishable hatred with which [ he ] shall pursue [ O 'Connell 's ] existence " , and the accusation that O 'Connell 's supporters had a " princely revenue wrung from a starving race of fanatical slaves " . Disraeli was highly gratified by the dispute , which propelled him to general public notice for the first time . He did not defeat the incumbent Whig member , Henry Labouchere , but the Taunton constituency was regarded as unwinnable by the Tories . Disraeli kept Labouchere 's majority down to 170 , a good showing that put him in line for a winnable seat in the near future . 
 With Lyndhurst 's encouragement Disraeli turned to writing propaganda for his newly adopted party . His Vindication of the English Constitution , was published in December 1835 . It was couched in the form of an open letter to Lyndhurst , and in Bradford 's view encapsulates a political philosophy that Disraeli adhered to for the rest of his life . Its themes were the value of benevolent aristocratic government , a loathing of political dogma , and the modernisation of Tory policies . The following year he wrote a series of satires on politicians of the day , which he published in The Times under the pen @-@ name " Runnymede " . His targets included the Whigs , collectively and individually , Irish nationalists , and political corruption . One essay ended : 
 The English nation , therefore , rallies for rescue from the degrading plots of a profligate oligarchy , a <unk> sectarianism , and a <unk> Papacy , round their hereditary leaders — the Peers . The House of Lords , therefore , at this moment represents everything in the realm except the Whig oligarchs , their tools the Dissenters , and their masters the Irish priests . In the mean time , the Whigs bawl that there is a " collision ! " It is true there is a collision , but it is not a collision between the Lords and the People , but between the Ministers and the Constitution . 
 Disraeli was now firmly in the Tory camp . He was elected to the exclusively Tory Carlton Club in 1836 , and was also taken up by the party 's leading hostess , Lady Londonderry . In June 1837 William IV died , the young Queen Victoria , his niece , succeeded him , and parliament was dissolved . On the recommendation of the Carlton Club , Disraeli was adopted as a Tory parliamentary candidate at the ensuing General Election . 
 = = Parliament = = 
 = = = Back @-@ bencher = = = 
 In the election in July 1837 Disraeli won a seat in the House of Commons as one of two members , both Tory , for the constituency of Maidstone . The other was Wyndham Lewis , who helped finance Disraeli 's election campaign , and who died the following year . In the same year Disraeli published a novel , Henrietta Temple , which was a love story and social comedy , drawing on his affair with Henrietta Sykes . He had broken off the relationship in late 1836 , distraught that she had taken yet another lover . His other novel of this period is Venetia , a romance based on the characters of Shelley and Byron , written quickly to raise much @-@ needed money . 
 Disraeli made his maiden speech in Parliament on 7 December 1837 . He followed O 'Connell , whom he sharply criticised for the latter 's " long , rambling , jumbling , speech " . He was shouted down by O 'Connell 's supporters . After this unpromising start Disraeli kept a low profile for the rest of the parliamentary session . He was a loyal supporter of the party leader Sir Robert Peel and his policies , with the exception of a personal sympathy for the Chartist movement that most Tories did not share . 
 In 1839 Disraeli married Mary Anne Lewis , the widow of Wyndham Lewis . Twelve years Disraeli 's senior , Mary Lewis had a substantial income of £ 5 @,@ 000 a year . His motives were generally assumed to be mercenary , but the couple came to cherish one another , remaining close until she died more than three decades later . " Dizzy married me for my money " , his wife said later , " But , if he had the chance again , he would marry me for love . " 
 Finding the financial demands of his Maidstone seat too much , Disraeli secured a Tory nomination for Shrewsbury , winning one of the constituency 's two seats at the 1841 general election , despite serious opposition , and heavy debts which opponents seized on . The election was a massive defeat for the Whigs across the country , and Peel became Prime Minister . Disraeli hoped , unrealistically , for ministerial office . Though disappointed at being left on the back benches , he continued his support for Peel in 1842 and 1843 , seeking to establish himself as an expert on foreign affairs and international trade . 
 Although a Tory ( or Conservative , as some in the party now called themselves ) Disraeli was sympathetic to some of the aims of Chartism , and argued for an alliance between the landed aristocracy and the working class against the increasing power of the merchants and new industrialists in the middle class . After Disraeli won widespread acclaim in March 1842 for <unk> the formidable Lord Palmerston in debate , he was taken up by a small group of idealistic new Tory MPs , with whom he formed the Young England group . They held that the landed interests should use their power to protect the poor from exploitation by middle @-@ class businessmen . 
 For many years in his parliamentary career Disraeli hoped to forge a paternalistic Tory @-@ Radical alliance , but he was unsuccessful . Before the Reform Act 1867 , the working class did not possess the vote and therefore had little political power . Although Disraeli forged a personal friendship with John Bright , a Lancashire manufacturer and leading Radical , Disraeli was unable to persuade Bright to sacrifice his distinct position for parliamentary advancement . When Disraeli attempted to secure a Tory @-@ Radical cabinet in 1852 , Bright refused . 
 Disraeli gradually became a sharp critic of Peel 's government , often deliberately taking positions contrary to those of his nominal chief . The best known of these stances were over the Maynooth Grant in 1845 and the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846 . But the young MP had attacked his leader as early as 1843 on Ireland and then on foreign policy interventions . In a letter of February 1844 , he slighted the Prime Minister for failing to send him a Policy Circular . He laid into the Whigs as freebooters , swindlers and conmen but Peel 's own Free Trade policies were directly in the firing line . 
 The President of the Board of Trade , William Gladstone , resigned from the cabinet over the Maynooth Grant . The Corn Laws imposed a tariff on imported wheat , protecting British farmers from foreign competition , but making the cost of bread artificially high . Peel hoped that the repeal of the Corn Laws and the resultant influx of cheaper wheat into Britain would relieve the condition of the poor , and in particular the suffering caused by successive failure of potato crops in Ireland — the Great Famine . 
 The first months of 1846 were dominated by a battle in Parliament between the free traders and the protectionists over the repeal of the Corn Laws , with the latter rallying around Disraeli and Lord George Bentinck . An alliance of free @-@ trade Conservatives ( the " Peelites " ) , Radicals , and Whigs carried repeal , and the Conservative Party split : the Peelites moved towards the Whigs , while a " new " Conservative Party formed around the protectionists , led by Disraeli , Bentinck , and Lord Stanley ( later Lord Derby ) . 
 The split in the Tory party over the repeal of the Corn Laws had profound implications for Disraeli 's political career : almost every Tory politician with experience of office followed Peel , leaving the rump bereft of leadership . In Blake 's words , " [ Disraeli ] found himself almost the only figure on his side capable of putting up the oratorical display essential for a parliamentary leader . " Looking on from the House of Lords , the Duke of Argyll wrote that Disraeli " was like a subaltern in a great battle where every superior officer was killed or wounded " . If the Tory Party could muster the electoral support necessary to form a government , then Disraeli now seemed to be guaranteed high office . However , he would take office with a group of men who possessed little or no official experience , who had rarely felt moved to speak in the House of Commons , and who , as a group , remained hostile to Disraeli on a personal level . In the event the matter was not put to the test , as the Tory split soon had the party out of office , not regaining power until 1852 . The Conservatives would not again have a majority in the House of Commons until 1874 . 
 = = = Bentinck and the leadership = = = 
 Peel successfully steered the repeal of the Corn Laws through Parliament , and was then defeated by an alliance of all his enemies on the issue of Irish law and order ; he resigned in June 1846 . The Tories remained split and the Queen sent for Lord John Russell , the Whig leader . In the 1847 general election , Disraeli stood , successfully , for the Buckinghamshire constituency . The new House of Commons had more Conservative than Whig members , but the depth of the Tory schism enabled Russell to continue to govern . The Conservatives were led by Bentinck in the Commons and Stanley in the Lords . 
 In 1847 a small political crisis occurred which removed Bentinck from the leadership and highlighted Disraeli 's differences with his own party . In that year 's general election , Lionel de Rothschild had been returned for the City of London . As a practising Jew he could not take the oath of allegiance in the prescribed Christian form , and therefore could not take his seat . Lord John Russell , the Whig leader who had succeeded Peel as Prime Minister and like Rothschild was a member for the City of London , proposed in the Commons that the oath should be amended to permit Jews to enter Parliament . 
 Disraeli spoke in favour of the measure , arguing that Christianity was " completed Judaism " , and asking the House of Commons " Where is your Christianity if you do not believe in their Judaism ? " Russell and Disraeli 's future rival Gladstone thought it brave of him to speak as he did ; the speech was badly received by his own party . The Tories and the Anglican establishment were hostile to the bill . Samuel Wilberforce , Bishop of Oxford , spoke strongly against the measure and implied that Russell was paying off the Jews for helping elect him . With the exception of Disraeli , every member of the future protectionist cabinet then in Parliament voted against the measure . One who was not yet an MP , Lord John Manners , stood against Rothschild when the latter re @-@ submitted himself for election in 1849 . Disraeli who had attended the Protectionists dinner at the Merchant Taylors Hall , joined Bentinck in speaking and voting for the bill , although his own speech was a standard one of toleration . The measure was voted down . 
 In the aftermath of the debate Bentinck resigned the leadership and was succeeded by Lord Granby ; Disraeli 's own speech , thought by many of his own party to be blasphemous , ruled him out for the time being . While these intrigues played out , Disraeli was working with the Bentinck family to secure the necessary financing to purchase Hughenden Manor , in Buckinghamshire . The possession of a country house , and incumbency of a county constituency were regarded as essential for a Tory with ambitions to lead the party . Disraeli and his wife alternated between Hughenden and several homes in London for the rest of their marriage . The negotiations were complicated by Bentinck 's sudden death on 21 September 1848 , but Disraeli obtained a loan of £ 25 @,@ 000 from Bentinck 's brothers Lord Henry Bentinck and Lord Titchfield . 
 Within a month of his appointment Granby resigned the leadership in the Commons , feeling himself inadequate to the post , and the party functioned without a leader in the Commons for the rest of the parliamentary session . At the start of the next session , affairs were handled by a triumvirate of Granby , Disraeli , and John Charles Herries — indicative of the tension between Disraeli and the rest of the party , who needed his talents but mistrusted him . This confused arrangement ended with Granby 's resignation in 1851 ; Disraeli effectively ignored the two men regardless . 
 = = Office = = 
 = = = First Derby government = = = 
 In March 1851 , Lord John Russell 's government was defeated over a bill to equalise the county and borough franchises , mostly because of divisions among his supporters . He resigned , and the Queen sent for Stanley , who felt that a minority government could do little and would not last long , so Russell remained in office . Disraeli regretted this , hoping for an opportunity , however brief , to show himself capable in office . Stanley , on the other hand , deprecated his inexperienced followers as a reason for not assuming office , " These are not names I can put before the Queen . " 
 At the end of June 1851 , Stanley 's father died , and he succeeded to his title as Earl of Derby . The Whigs were wracked by internal dissensions during the second half of 1851 , much of which Parliament spent in recess . Russell dismissed Lord Palmerston from the cabinet , leaving the latter determined to deprive the Prime Minister of office as well . Palmerston did so within weeks of Parliament 's reassembly on 4 February 1852 , his followers combining with Disraeli 's Tories to defeat the government on a Militia Bill , and Russell resigned . Derby had either to take office or risk damage to his reputation and he accepted the Queen 's commission as Prime Minister . Palmerston declined any office ; Derby had hoped to have him as Chancellor of the Exchequer . Disraeli , his closest ally , was his second choice and accepted , though disclaiming any great knowledge in the financial field . Gladstone refused to join the government . Disraeli may have been attracted to the office by the £ 5 @,@ 000 per year salary , which would help pay his debts . Few of the new cabinet had held office before ; when Derby tried to inform the Duke of Wellington of the names of the Queen 's new ministers , the old Duke , who was somewhat deaf , inadvertently branded the new government by incredulously repeating " Who ? Who ? " 
 In the following weeks , Disraeli served as Leader of the House ( with Derby as Prime Minister in the Lords ) and as Chancellor . He wrote regular reports on proceedings in the Commons to Victoria , who described them as " very curious " and " much in the style of his books " . Parliament was prorogued on 1 July 1852 as the Tories could not govern for long as a minority ; Disraeli hoped that they would gain a majority of about 40 . Instead , the election later that month had no clear winner , and the Derby government held to power pending the meeting of Parliament . 
 Disraeli 's task as Chancellor was to devise a budget which would satisfy the protectionist elements who supported the Tories , without uniting the free @-@ traders against it . His proposed budget , which he presented to the Commons on 3 December , lowered the taxes on malt and tea , provisions designed to appeal to the working class . To make his budget revenue @-@ neutral , as funds were needed to provide defences against the French , he doubled the house tax and continued the income tax . Disraeli 's overall purpose was to enact policies which would benefit the working classes , making his party more attractive to them . Although the budget did not contain protectionist features , the opposition was prepared to destroy it — and Disraeli 's career as Chancellor — in part out of revenge for his actions against Peel in 1846 . MP Sidney Herbert predicted that the budget would fail because " Jews make no converts " . 
 Disraeli delivered the budget on 3 December 1852 , and prepared to wind up the debate for the government on 16 December — it was customary for the Chancellor to have the last word . A massive defeat for the government was predicted . Disraeli attacked his opponents individually , and then as a force , " I face a Coalition ... This , too , I know , that England does not love coalitions . " His speech of three hours was quickly seen as a parliamentary masterpiece . As MPs prepared to divide , Gladstone rose to his feet and began an angry speech , despite the efforts of Tory MPs to shout him down . The interruptions were fewer , as Gladstone gained control of the House , and in the next two hours painted a picture of Disraeli as frivolous and his budget as subversive . The government was defeated by 19 votes , and Derby resigned four days later . He was replaced by the <unk> Earl of Aberdeen , with Gladstone as his Chancellor . Because of Disraeli 's unpopularity among the Peelites , no party reconciliation was possible while he remained Tory leader in the House of Commons . 
 = = = Opposition = = = 
 With the fall of the government , Disraeli and the Conservatives returned to the opposition benches . Disraeli would spend three @-@ quarters of his 44 @-@ year parliamentary career in opposition . Derby was reluctant to seek to unseat the government , fearing a repetition of the Who ? Who ? Ministry and knowing that despite his lieutenant 's strengths , shared dislike of Disraeli was part of what had formed the governing coalition . Disraeli , on the other hand , was anxious to return to office . In the interim , Disraeli , as Conservative leader in the Commons , opposed the government on all major measures . 
 In June 1853 Disraeli was awarded an honorary degree by Oxford University . He had been recommended for it by Lord Derby , the university 's Chancellor . The start of the Crimean War in 1854 caused a lull in party politics ; Disraeli spoke patriotically in support . The British military efforts were marked by bungling , and in 1855 a restive Parliament considered a resolution to establish a committee on the conduct of the war . The Aberdeen government chose to make this a motion of confidence ; Disraeli led the opposition to defeat the government , 305 to 148 . Aberdeen resigned , and the Queen sent for Derby , who to Disraeli 's frustration refused to take office . Palmerston was deemed essential to any Whig ministry , and he would not join any he did not head . The Queen reluctantly asked Palmerston to form a government . Under Palmerston , the war went better , and was ended by the Treaty of Paris in early 1856 . Disraeli was early to call for peace , but had little influence on events . 
 When a rebellion broke out in India in 1857 , Disraeli took a keen interest in affairs , having been a member of a select committee in 1852 which considered how best to rule the subcontinent , and had proposed eliminating the governing role of the British East India Company . After peace was restored , and Palmerston in early 1858 brought in legislation for direct rule of India by the Crown , Disraeli opposed it . Many Conservative MPs refused to follow him and the bill passed the Commons easily . 
 Palmerston 's grip on the premiership was weakened by his response to the Orsini affair , in which an attempt was made to assassinate the French Emperor Napoleon III by an Italian revolutionary with a bomb made in Birmingham . At the request of the French ambassador , Palmerston put forward amendments to the conspiracy to murder statute , proposing to make creating an infernal device a felony rather than a misdemeanour . He was defeated by 19 votes on the second reading , with many Liberals crossing the aisle against him . He immediately resigned , and Lord Derby returned to office . 
 = = = Second Derby government = = = 
 Derby took office at the head of a purely " Conservative " administration , not in coalition with any other faction . He again offered a place to Gladstone , who declined . Disraeli was once more leader of the House of Commons and returned to the Exchequer . As in 1852 , Derby led a minority government , dependent on the division of its opponents for survival . As Leader of the House , Disraeli resumed his regular reports to Queen Victoria , who had requested that he include what she " could not meet in newspapers " . 
 During its brief life of just over a year , the Derby government proved moderately progressive . The Government of India Act 1858 ended the role of the East India Company in governing the subcontinent . Disraeli had supported efforts to allow Jews to sit in Parliament — the oaths required of new members could only be made in good faith by a Christian . Disraeli had a bill passed through the Commons allowing each house of Parliament to determine what oaths its members should take . This was grudgingly agreed to by the House of Lords , with a minority of Conservatives joining with the opposition to pass it . In 1858 , Baron Lionel de Rothschild became the first MP to profess the Jewish faith . 
 Faced with a vacancy , Disraeli and Derby tried yet again to bring Gladstone , still nominally a Conservative MP , into the government , hoping to strengthen it . Disraeli wrote a personal letter to Gladstone , asking him to place the good of the party above personal animosity : " Every man performs his office , and there is a Power , greater than ourselves , that disposes of all this . " In responding to Disraeli , Gladstone denied that personal feelings played any role in his decisions then and previously whether to accept office , while acknowledging that there were differences between him and Derby " broader than you may have supposed " . 
 The Tories pursued a Reform Bill in 1859 , which would have resulted in a modest increase to the franchise . The Liberals were healing the breaches between those who favoured Russell and the Palmerston loyalists , and in late March 1859 , the government was defeated on a Russell @-@ sponsored amendment . Derby dissolved Parliament , and the ensuing general election resulted in modest Tory gains , but not enough to control the Commons . When Parliament assembled , Derby 's government was defeated by 13 votes on an amendment to the Address from the Throne . He resigned , and the Queen reluctantly sent for Palmerston again . 
 = = = Opposition and third term as Chancellor = = = 
 After Derby 's second ejection from office , Disraeli faced dissension within Conservative ranks from those who blamed him for the defeat , or who felt he was disloyal to Derby — the former Prime Minister warned Disraeli of some MPs seeking his removal from the front bench . Among the conspirators were Lord Robert Cecil , a young Conservative MP who would a quarter century later become Prime Minister as Lord Salisbury ; he wrote that having Disraeli as leader in the Commons decreased the Conservatives ' chance of holding office . When Cecil 's father objected , Lord Robert stated , " I have merely put into print what all the country gentlemen were saying in private . " 
 Disraeli led a toothless opposition in the Commons — seeing no way of unseating Palmerston , Derby had privately agreed not to seek the government 's defeat . Disraeli kept himself informed on foreign affairs , and on what was going on in cabinet , thanks to a source within it . When the American Civil War began in 1861 , Disraeli said little publicly , but like most Englishmen expected the South to win . Less reticent were Palmerston , Gladstone ( again Chancellor ) and Russell , whose statements in support of the South contributed to years of hard feelings in the United States . In 1862 , Disraeli met Prussian Count Otto von Bismarck for the first time and said of him , " be careful about that man , he means what he says " . 
 The party truce ended in 1864 , with Tories outraged over Palmerston 's handling of the territorial dispute between the German Confederation and Denmark known as the Schleswig @-@ Holstein Question . Disraeli had little help from Derby , who was ill , but he united the party enough on a no @-@ confidence vote to limit the government to a majority of 18 — Tory defections and absentees kept Palmerston in office . Despite rumours about Palmerston 's health as he passed his eightieth birthday , he remained personally popular , and the Liberals increased their margin in the July 1865 general election . In the wake of the poor election results , Derby predicted to Disraeli that neither of them would ever hold office again . 
 Political plans were thrown into disarray by Palmerston 's death on 18 October 1865 . Russell became Prime Minister again , with Gladstone clearly the Liberal Party 's leader @-@ in @-@ waiting , and as Leader of the House Disraeli 's direct opponent . One of Russell 's early priorities was a Reform Bill , but the proposed legislation that Gladstone announced on 12 March 1866 divided his party . The Conservatives and the dissident Liberals repeatedly attacked Gladstone 's bill , and in June finally defeated the government ; Russell resigned on 26 June . The dissidents were unwilling to serve under Disraeli in the House of Commons , and Derby formed a third Conservative minority government , with Disraeli again as Chancellor . In 1867 , the Conservatives introduced a Reform Bill . Without a majority in the Commons , the Conservatives had little choice but to accept amendments that considerably liberalised the legislation , though Disraeli refused to accept any from Gladstone . 
 The Reform Act 1867 passed that August , extending the franchise by 938 @,@ 427 — an increase of 88 % — by giving the vote to male householders and male lodgers paying at least £ 10 for rooms . It eliminated rotten boroughs with fewer than 10 @,@ 000 inhabitants , and granted constituencies to 15 unrepresented towns , with extra representation to large municipalities such as Liverpool and Manchester . This act was unpopular with the right wing of the Conservative Party , most notably Lord Cranborne ( as Robert Cecil was by then known ) , who resigned from the government and spoke against the bill , accusing Disraeli of " a political betrayal which has no parallel in our Parliamentary annals " . Cranborne , however , was unable to lead an effective rebellion against Derby and Disraeli . Disraeli gained wide acclaim and became a hero to his party for the " marvellous parliamentary skill " with which he secured the passage of Reform in the Commons . 
 Derby had long suffered from attacks of gout which sent him to his bed , unable to deal with politics . As the new session of Parliament approached in February 1868 , he was bedridden at his home , Knowsley Hall , near Liverpool . He was reluctant to resign , reasoning that he was only 68 , much younger than either Palmerston or Russell at the end of their premierships . Derby knew that his " attacks of illness would , at no distant period , incapacitate me from the discharge of my public duties " ; doctors had warned him that his health required his resignation from office . In late February , with Parliament in session and Derby absent , he wrote to Disraeli asking for confirmation that " you will not shrink from the additional heavy responsibility " . Reassured , he wrote to the Queen , resigning and recommending Disraeli as " only he could command the cordial support , en masse , of his present colleagues " . Disraeli went to Osborne House on the Isle of Wight , where the Queen asked him to form a government . The monarch wrote to her daughter , Prussian Crown Princess Victoria , " Mr. Disraeli is Prime Minister ! A proud thing for a man ' risen from the people ' to have obtained ! " The new Prime Minister told those who came to congratulate him , " I have climbed to the top of the greasy pole . " 
 = = First term as Prime Minister ; opposition leader = = 
 = = = First government ( February – December 1868 ) = = = 
 The Conservatives remained a minority in the House of Commons and the passage of the Reform Bill required the calling of a new election once the new voting register had been compiled . Disraeli 's term as Prime Minister , which began in February 1868 , would therefore be short unless the Conservatives won the general election . He made only two major changes in the cabinet : he replaced Lord Chelmsford as Lord Chancellor with Lord Cairns , and brought in George Ward Hunt as Chancellor of the Exchequer . Derby had intended to replace Chelmsford once a vacancy in a suitable sinecure developed . Disraeli was unwilling to wait , and Cairns , in his view , was a far stronger minister . 
 Disraeli 's first premiership was dominated by the heated debate over the Church of Ireland . Although Ireland was overwhelmingly Roman Catholic , the Protestant Church remained the established church and was funded by direct taxation , which was greatly resented by the Catholic majority . An initial attempt by Disraeli to negotiate with Archbishop Manning the establishment of a Roman Catholic university in Dublin foundered in March when Gladstone moved resolutions to disestablish the Irish Church altogether . The proposal united the Liberals under Gladstone 's leadership , while causing divisions among the Conservatives . 
 The Conservatives remained in office because the new electoral register was not yet ready ; neither party wished a poll under the old roll . Gladstone began using the Liberal majority in the House of Commons to push through resolutions and legislation . Disraeli 's government survived until the December general election , at which the Liberals were returned to power with a majority of about 110 . 
 Despite its short life , the first Disraeli government succeeded in passing a number of pieces of legislation of a politically <unk> sort . It ended public executions , and the Corrupt Practices Act did much to end electoral bribery . It authorised an early version of nationalisation , having the Post Office buy up the telegraph companies . Amendments to the school law , the Scottish legal system , and the railway laws were passed . Disraeli sent the successful expedition against Tewodros II of Ethiopia under Sir Robert Napier . 
 = = = Opposition leader ; 1874 election = = = 
 With Gladstone 's Liberal majority dominant in the Commons , Disraeli could do little but protest as the government advanced legislation . Accordingly , he chose to await Liberal mistakes . Having leisure time as he was not in office , he wrote a new novel , Lothair ( 1870 ) . A work of fiction by a former Prime Minister was a new thing for Britain , and the book became a best seller . 
 By 1872 there was dissent in the Conservative ranks over the failure to challenge Gladstone and his Liberals . This was quieted as Disraeli took steps to assert his leadership of the party , and as divisions among the Liberals became clear . Public support for Disraeli was shown by cheering at a thanksgiving service in 1872 on the recovery of the Prince of Wales from illness , while Gladstone was met with silence . Disraeli had supported the efforts of party manager John Eldon Gorst to put the administration of the Conservative Party on a modern basis . On Gorst 's advice , Disraeli gave a speech to a mass meeting in Manchester that year . To roaring approval , he compared the Liberal front bench to " a range of exhausted volcanoes . Not a flame flickers on a single pallid crest . But the situation is still dangerous . There are occasional earthquakes and ever and again the dark rumbling of the sea . " Gladstone , Disraeli stated , dominated the scene and " alternated between a menace and a sigh " . 
 At his first departure from 10 Downing Street in 1868 , Disraeli had had Victoria create Mary Anne Viscountess of Beaconsfield in her own right in lieu of a peerage for himself . Through 1872 the eighty @-@ year @-@ old peeress was suffering from stomach cancer . She died on 15 December . Urged by a clergyman to turn her thoughts to Jesus Christ in her final days , she said she could not : " You know Dizzy is my J.C. " After she died , Gladstone , who always had a liking for Mary Anne , sent her widower a letter of condolence . 
 In 1873 , Gladstone brought forward legislation to establish a Catholic university in Dublin . This divided the Liberals , and on 12 March an alliance of Conservatives and Irish Catholics defeated the government by three votes . Gladstone resigned , and the Queen sent for Disraeli , who refused to take office . Without a general election , a Conservative government would be another minority , dependent for survival on the division of its opponents . Disraeli wanted the power a majority would bring , and felt he could gain it later by leaving the Liberals in office now . Gladstone 's government struggled on , beset by scandal and unimproved by a reshuffle . As part of that change , Gladstone took on the office of Chancellor , leading to questions as to whether he had to stand for re @-@ election on taking on a second ministry — until the 1920s , MPs becoming ministers , thus taking an office of profit under the Crown , had to seek re @-@ election . 
 In January 1874 , Gladstone called a general election , convinced that if he waited longer , he would do worse at the polls . Balloting was spread over two weeks , beginning on 1 February . Disraeli devoted much of his campaign to decrying the Liberal programme of the past five years . As the constituencies voted , it became clear that the result would be a Conservative majority , the first since 1841 . In Scotland , where the Conservatives were perennially weak , they increased from seven seats to nineteen . Overall , they won 350 seats to 245 for the Liberals and 57 for the Irish Home Rule League . The Queen sent for Disraeli , and he became Prime Minister for the second time . 
 = = Second government ( 1874 – 80 ) = = 
 Disraeli 's cabinet of twelve , with six peers and six commoners , was the smallest since Reform . Of the peers , five of them had been in Disraeli 's 1868 cabinet ; the sixth , Lord Salisbury , was reconciled to Disraeli after negotiation and became Secretary of State for India . Lord Stanley ( who had succeeded his father , the former Prime Minister , as Earl of Derby ) became Foreign Secretary and Sir Stafford Northcote the Chancellor . 
 In August 1876 , Disraeli was elevated to the House of Lords as Earl of Beaconsfield and Viscount Hughenden . The Queen had offered to ennoble him as early as 1868 ; he had then declined . She did so again in 1874 , when he fell ill at Balmoral , but he was reluctant to leave the Commons for a house in which he had no experience . Continued ill health during his second premiership caused him to contemplate resignation , but his lieutenant , Derby , was unwilling , feeling that he could not manage the Queen . For Disraeli , the Lords , where the debate was less intense , was the alternative to resignation from office . Five days before the end of the 1876 session of Parliament , on 11 August , Disraeli was seen to linger and look around the chamber before departing the Commons . Newspapers reported his ennoblement the following morning . 
 In addition to the <unk> bestowed on Mary Anne Disraeli ; the earldom of Beaconsfield was to have been bestowed on Edmund Burke in 1797 , but he had died before receiving it . The name Beaconsfield , a town near Hughenden , also was given to a minor character in Vivian Grey . Disraeli made various statements about his elevation , writing to Selina , Lady Bradford on 8 August 1876 , " I am quite tired of that place [ the Commons ] " but when asked by a friend how he liked the Lords , replied , " I am dead ; dead but in the Elysian fields . " 
 = = = Domestic policy = = = 
 = = = = Reforming legislation = = = = 
 Under the stewardship of Richard Assheton Cross , the Home Secretary , Disraeli 's new government enacted many reforms , including the Artisans ' and Labourers ' Dwellings Improvement Act 1875 , which made inexpensive loans available to towns and cities to construct working @-@ class housing . Also enacted were the Public Health Act 1875 , modernising sanitary codes through the nation , the Sale of Food and Drugs Act ( 1875 ) , and the Education Act ( 1876 ) . 
 Disraeli 's government also introduced a new Factory Act meant to protect workers , the Conspiracy , and Protection of Property Act 1875 , which allowed peaceful picketing , and the Employers and Workmen Act ( 1875 ) to enable workers to sue employers in the civil courts if they broke legal contracts . As a result of these social reforms the Liberal @-@ Labour MP Alexander Macdonald told his constituents in 1879 , " The Conservative party have done more for the working classes in five years than the Liberals have in fifty . " 
 = = = = Patronage and Civil Service reform = = = = 
 Gladstone in 1870 had sponsored an Order in Council , introducing competitive examination into the Civil Service , diminishing the political aspects of government hiring . Disraeli did not agree , and while he did not seek to reverse the order , his actions often frustrated its intent . For example , Disraeli made political appointments to positions previously given to career civil servants . In this , he was backed by his party , hungry for office and its emoluments after almost thirty years with only brief spells in government . Disraeli gave positions to hard @-@ up Conservative leaders , even — to Gladstone 's outrage — creating one office at £ 2 @,@ 000 per year . Nevertheless , Disraeli made fewer peers ( only 22 , and one of those one of Victoria 's sons ) than had Gladstone — the Liberal leader had arranged for the bestowal of 37 peerages during his just over five years in office . 
 As he had in government posts , Disraeli rewarded old friends with clerical positions , making Sydney Turner , son of a good friend of Isaac D 'Israeli , Dean of Ripon . He favoured Low church clergymen in promotion , disliking other movements in Anglicanism for political reasons . In this , he came into disagreement with the Queen , who out of loyalty to her late husband , Albert , Prince Consort , preferred Broad church teachings . One controversial appointment had occurred shortly before the 1868 election . When the position of Archbishop of Canterbury fell vacant , Disraeli reluctantly agreed to the Queen 's preferred candidate , Archibald Tait , the Bishop of London . To fill Tait 's vacant see , Disraeli was urged by many people to appoint Samuel Wilberforce , the former Bishop of Winchester and leading figure in London society . Disraeli disliked Wilberforce and instead appointed John Jackson , the Bishop of Lincoln . Blake suggested that , on balance , these appointments cost Disraeli more votes than they gained him . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 Disraeli always considered foreign affairs to be the most critical and most interesting part of statesmanship . Nevertheless , his biographer Robert Blake doubts that his subject had specific ideas about foreign policy when he took office in 1874 . He had rarely travelled abroad ; since his youthful tour of the Middle East in 1830 – 1831 , he had left Britain only for his honeymoon and three visits to Paris , the last of which was in 1856 . As he had criticised Gladstone for a do @-@ nothing foreign policy , he most probably contemplated what actions would reassert Britain 's place in Europe . His brief first premiership , and the first year of his second , gave him little opportunity to make his mark in foreign affairs . 
 = = = = Suez = = = = 
 The Suez Canal , opened in 1869 , cut weeks and thousands of miles off the journey between Britain and India ; in 1875 , approximately 80 % of the ships using the canal were British . In the event of another rebellion in India , or of a Russian invasion , the time saved at Suez might be crucial . Built by French interests , much of the ownership and bonds in the canal remained in their hands , though some of the stock belonged to Isma 'il Pasha , the Khedive of Egypt , who was noted for his profligate spending . The canal was losing money , and an attempt by Ferdinand de Lesseps , builder of the canal , to raise the tolls had fallen through when the Khedive had threatened to use military force to prevent it , and had also attracted Disraeli 's attention . The Khedive governed Egypt under the Ottoman Empire ; as in the Crimea , the issue of the Canal raised the Eastern Question of what to do about the decaying empire governed from Constantinople . With much of the pre @-@ canal trade and communications between Britain and India passing through the Ottoman Empire , Britain had done its best to prop up the Ottomans against the threat that Russia would take Constantinople , cutting those communications , and giving Russian ships unfettered access to the Mediterranean . The French might also threaten those lines from colonies in Syria . Britain had had the opportunity to purchase shares in the canal but had declined to do so . 
 Disraeli had passed near Suez in his tour of the Middle East in his youth , and on taking office , recognising the British interest in the canal as a gateway to India , he sent the Liberal MP Nathan Rothschild to Paris to enquire about buying de Lesseps 's shares . On 14 November 1875 , the editor of the Pall Mall Gazette , Frederick Greenwood , learned from London banker Henry Oppenheim that the Khedive was seeking to sell his shares in the Suez Canal Company to a French firm . Greenwood quickly told Lord Derby , the Foreign Secretary , who notified Disraeli . The Prime Minister moved immediately to secure the shares . On 23 November , the Khedive offered to sell the shares for 100 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 francs . Rather than seek the aid of the Bank of England , Disraeli asked Lionel de Rothschild to loan funds . Rothschild did so and controversially took a commission on the deal . The banker 's capital was at risk as Parliament could have refused to ratify the transaction . The contract for purchase was signed at Cairo on 25 November and the shares deposited at the British consulate the following day . 
 Disraeli told the Queen , " it is settled ; you have it , madam ! " The public saw the venture as a daring British statement of its dominance of the seas . Sir Ian Malcolm described the Suez Canal share purchase as " the greatest romance of Mr. Disraeli 's romantic career " . In the following decades , the security of the Suez Canal , as the pathway to India , became a major focus of British foreign policy . A later Foreign Secretary , Lord Curzon , described the canal in 1909 as " the determining influence of every considerable movement of British power to the east and south of the Mediterranean " . 
 = = = = Royal Titles Act = = = = 
 Although initially curious about Disraeli when he entered Parliament in 1837 , Victoria came to detest him over his treatment of Peel . Over time , her dislike softened , especially as Disraeli took pains to cultivate her . He told Matthew Arnold , " Everybody likes flattery ; and , when you come to royalty , you should lay it on with a trowel " . Disraeli 's biographer , Adam Kirsch , suggests that Disraeli 's obsequious treatment of his queen was part flattery , part belief that this was how a queen should be addressed by a loyal subject , and part awe that a middle @-@ class man of Jewish birth should be the companion of a monarch . By the time of his second premiership , Disraeli had built a strong relationship with Victoria , probably closer to her than any of her Prime Ministers except her first , Lord Melbourne . When Disraeli returned as Prime Minister in 1874 and went to kiss hands , he did so literally , on one knee , and according to Richard Aldous on his book on the Disraeli / Gladstone rivalry , " for the next six years Victoria and Disraeli would exploit their closeness for mutual advantage . " 
 Victoria had long wished to have an imperial title , reflecting Britain 's expanding domain . She was irked when Czar Alexander II held a higher rank than her as an emperor , and was appalled that her daughter , the Prussian Crown Princess , would outrank her when her husband came to the throne . She also saw an imperial title as proclaiming Britain 's increased stature in the world . The title " Empress of India " had been used informally with respect to Victoria for some time and she wished to have that title formally bestowed on her . The Queen prevailed upon Disraeli to introduce a Royal Titles Bill , and also told of her intent to open Parliament in person , which during this time she did only when she wanted something from legislators . Disraeli was cautious in response , as careful soundings of MPs brought a negative reaction , and declined to place such a proposal in the Queen 's Speech . 
 Once the desired bill was prepared , Disraeli 's handling of it was not adept . He neglected to notify either the Prince of Wales or the opposition , and was met by irritation from the prince and a full @-@ scale attack from the Liberals . An old enemy of Disraeli , former Liberal Chancellor Robert Lowe , alleged during the debate in the Commons that two previous Prime Ministers had refused to introduce such legislation for the Queen . Gladstone immediately stated that he was not one of them , and the Queen gave Disraeli leave to quote her saying she had never approached a Prime Minister with such a proposal . According to Blake , Disraeli " in a brilliant oration of withering invective proceeded to destroy Lowe " , who apologised and never held office again . Disraeli said of Lowe that he was the only person in London with whom he would not shake hands and , " he is in the mud and there I leave him . " 
 Fearful of losing , Disraeli was reluctant to bring the bill to a vote in the Commons , but when he eventually did , it passed with a majority of 75 . Once the bill was formally enacted , Victoria began signing her letters " Victoria R & I " ( Regina et <unk> , that is , Queen and Empress ) . According to Aldous , " the unpopular Royal Titles Act , however , shattered Disraeli 's authority in the House of Commons " . 
 = = = = Balkans and Bulgaria = = = = 
 In July 1875 Serb populations in Bosnia and Herzegovina , then provinces of the Ottoman Empire , rose in revolt against their Turkish masters , alleging religious persecution and poor administration . The following January , Sultan Abdülaziz , who ruled the empire , agreed to reforms proposed by Hungarian statesman Julius Andrássy , but the rebels , suspecting they might win their freedom , continued their uprising , joined by militants in Serbia and Bulgaria . The Turks suppressed the Bulgarian uprising harshly , and when reports of these actions escaped , Disraeli and Derby stated in Parliament that they did not believe them . Disraeli called them " coffee @-@ house babble " and dismissed allegations of torture by the Ottomans since " Oriental people usually terminate their connections with culprits in a more expeditious fashion " . 
 Gladstone , who had left the Liberal leadership and retired from public life , was appalled by reports of atrocities in Bulgaria , and in August 1876 , penned a hastily written pamphlet arguing that the Turks should be deprived of Bulgaria because of what they had done there . He sent a copy to Disraeli , who called it " vindictive and ill @-@ written ... of all the Bulgarian horrors perhaps the greatest " . Gladstone 's pamphlet became an immense best @-@ seller and rallied the Liberals to urge that the Ottoman Empire should no longer be a British ally . Disraeli wrote to Lord Salisbury on 3 September , " Had it not been for these unhappy ' atrocities ' , we should have settled a peace very honourable to England and satisfactory to Europe . Now we are obliged to work from a new point of departure , and dictate to Turkey , who has forfeited all sympathy . " In spite of this , Disraeli 's policy favoured Constantinople and the territorial integrity of its empire . 
 Disraeli and the cabinet sent Salisbury as lead British representative to the Constantinople Conference , which met in December 1876 and January 1877 . In advance of the conference , Disraeli sent Salisbury private word to seek British military occupation of Bulgaria and Bosnia , and British control of the Turkish Army . Salisbury ignored these instructions , which his biographer , Andrew Roberts deemed " ludicrous " . Nevertheless , the conference failed to reach agreement with the Turks . 
 Parliament opened in February 1877 , with Disraeli now in the Lords as Earl of Beaconsfield . He spoke only once there in the 1877 session on the Eastern Question , stating on 20 February that there was a need for stability in the Balkans , and that forcing Turkey into territorial concessions would do nothing to secure it . The Prime Minister wanted a deal with the Ottomans whereby Britain would temporarily occupy strategic areas to deter the Russians from war , to be returned on the signing of a peace treaty , but found little support in his cabinet , which favoured partition of the Ottoman Empire . As Disraeli , by then in poor health , continued to battle within the cabinet , Russia invaded Turkey on 21 April , beginning the Russo @-@ Turkish War . 
 = = = = Congress of Berlin = = = = 
 The Russians pushed through Ottoman territory and by December 1877 had captured the strategic Bulgarian town of Plevna ; their march on Constantinople seemed inevitable . The war divided the British , but the Russian success caused some to forget the atrocities and call for intervention on the Turkish side . Others hoped for further Russian successes . The fall of Plevna was a major story for weeks in the newspapers , and Disraeli 's warnings that Russia was a threat to British interests in the eastern Mediterranean were deemed prophetic . The jingoistic attitude of many Britons increased Disraeli 's political support , and the Queen acted to help him as well , showing her favour by visiting him at Hughenden — the first time she had visited the country home of her Prime Minister since the Melbourne ministry . At the end of January 1878 , the Ottoman Emperor appealed to Britain to save Constantinople . Amid war fever in Britain , the government asked Parliament to vote £ 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to prepare the Army and Navy for war . Gladstone , who had involved himself again in politics , opposed the measure , but less than half his party voted with him . Popular opinion was with Disraeli , though some thought him too soft for not immediately declaring war on Russia . 
 With the Russians close to Constantinople , the Turks yielded and in March 1878 , signed the Treaty of San Stefano , conceding a Bulgarian state which would cover a large part of the Balkans . It would be initially Russian @-@ occupied and many feared that it would give them a client state close to Constantinople . Other Ottoman possessions in Europe would become independent ; additional territory was to be ceded directly to Russia . This was unacceptable to the British , who protested , hoping to get the Russians to agree to attend an international conference which German Chancellor Bismarck proposed to hold at Berlin . The cabinet discussed Disraeli 's proposal to position Indian troops at Malta for possible transit to the Balkans and call out reserves . Derby resigned in protest , and Disraeli appointed Salisbury as Foreign Secretary . Amid British preparations for war , the Russians and Turks agreed to discussions at Berlin . 
 In advance of the meeting , confidential negotiations took place between Britain and Russia in April and May 1878 . The Russians were willing to make changes to the big Bulgaria , but were determined to retain their new possessions Bessarabia in Europe and Batum and Kars on the east coast of the Black Sea . To counterbalance this , Britain required a possession in the Eastern Mediterranean where it might base ships and troops , and negotiated with the Ottomans for the cession of Cyprus . Once this was secretly agreed , Disraeli was prepared to allow Russia 's territorial gains . 
 The Congress of Berlin was held in June and July 1878 , the central relationship in it that between Disraeli and Bismarck . In later years , the German chancellor would show visitors to his office three pictures on the wall : " the portrait of my Sovereign , there on the right that of my wife , and on the left , there , that of Lord Beaconsfield " . Disraeli caused an uproar in the congress by making his opening address in English , rather than in French , hitherto accepted as the international language of diplomacy . By one account , the British ambassador in Berlin , Lord Odo Russell , hoping to spare the delegates Disraeli 's awful French accent , told Disraeli that the congress was hoping to hear a speech in the English tongue by one of its masters . 
 Disraeli left much of the detailed work to Salisbury , concentrating his efforts on making it as difficult as possible for the broken @-@ up big Bulgaria to reunite . Disraeli did not have things all his own way : he intended that Batum be demilitarised , but the Russians obtained their preferred language , and in 1886 , fortified the town . Nevertheless , the Cyprus Convention ceding the island to Britain was announced during the congress , and again made Disraeli a sensation . 
 Disraeli gained agreement that Turkey should retain enough of its European possessions to safeguard the Dardanelles . By one account , when met with Russian intransigence , Disraeli told his secretary to order a special train to return them home to begin the war . Although Russia yielded , Czar Alexander II later described the congress as " a European coalition against Russia , under Bismarck " . 
 The Treaty of Berlin was signed on 13 July 1878 at the Radziwill Palace in Berlin . For the first time , the title of Britain 's lead signatory was given as " Prime Minister " . Disraeli and Salisbury returned home to heroes ' receptions at Dover and in London . At the door of 10 Downing Street , he received flowers sent by the Queen . There , he told the gathered crowd , " Lord Salisbury and I have brought you back peace — but a peace I hope with honour . " The Queen offered him a dukedom , which he declined , though accepting the Garter , as long as Salisbury also received it . In Berlin , word spread of Bismarck 's admiring description of Disraeli , " Der alte Jude , das ist der Mann ! " 
 = = = = Afghanistan to Zululand = = = = 
 In the weeks after Berlin , Disraeli and the cabinet considered calling a general election to capitalise on the public applause he and Salisbury had received . Parliaments were then for a seven @-@ year term , and it was the custom not to go to the country until the sixth year unless forced to by events . Only four and a half years had passed since the last general election . Additionally , they did not see any clouds on the horizon that might forecast Conservative defeat if they waited . This decision not to seek re @-@ election has often been cited as a great mistake by Disraeli . Blake , however , pointed out that results in local elections had been moving against the Conservatives , and doubted if Disraeli missed any great opportunity by waiting . 
 As successful invasions of India generally came through Afghanistan , the British had observed and sometimes intervened there since the 1830s , hoping to keep the Russians out . In 1878 the Russians sent a mission to Kabul ; it was not rejected by the Afghans , as the British had hoped . The British then proposed to send their own mission , insisting that the Russians be sent away . The Viceroy , Lord Lytton , concealed his plans to issue this ultimatum from Disraeli , and when the Prime Minister insisted he take no action , went ahead anyway . When the Afghans made no answer , the British advanced against them in the Second Anglo @-@ Afghan War , and under Lord Roberts easily defeated them . The British installed a new ruler , and left a mission and garrison in Kabul . 
 British policy in South Africa was to encourage federation between the British @-@ run Cape Colony and Natal , and the Boer republics , the Transvaal ( annexed by Britain in 1877 ) and the Orange Free State . The governor of Cape Colony , Sir Bartle Frere , believing that the federation could not be accomplished until the native tribes acknowledged British rule , made demands on the Zulu and their king , <unk> , which they were certain to reject . As Zulu troops could not marry until they had washed their spears in blood , they were eager for combat . Frere did not send word to the cabinet of what he had done until the ultimatum was about to expire . Disraeli and the cabinet reluctantly backed him , and in early January 1879 resolved to send reinforcements . Before they could arrive , on 22 January , a Zulu impi , or army , moving with great speed and stealth , ambushed and destroyed a British encampment in South Africa in the Battle of Isandlwana . Over a thousand British and colonial troops were killed . Word of the defeat did not reach London until 12 February . Disraeli wrote the next day , " the terrible disaster has shaken me to the centre " . He reprimanded Frere , but left him in charge , attracting fire from all sides . Disraeli sent General Sir Garnet Wolseley as High Commissioner and Commander in Chief , and <unk> and the Zulus were crushed at the Battle of Ulundi on 4 July 1879 . 
 On 8 September 1879 Sir Louis Cavagnari , in charge of the mission in Kabul , was killed with his entire staff by rebelling Afghan soldiers . Roberts undertook a successful punitive expedition against the Afghans over the next six weeks . 
 = = = 1880 election = = = 
 Gladstone , in the 1874 election , had been returned for Greenwich , finishing second behind a Conservative in the two @-@ member constituency , a result he termed more like a defeat than a victory . In December 1878 , he was offered the Liberal nomination at the next election for Edinburghshire , a constituency popularly known as Midlothian . The small Scottish electorate was dominated by two noblemen , the Conservative Duke of Buccleuch and the Liberal Earl of Rosebery . The Earl , a friend of both Disraeli and Gladstone who would succeed the latter after his final term as Prime Minister , had journeyed to the United States to view politics there , and was convinced that aspects of American electioneering could be translated to the United Kingdom . On his advice , Gladstone accepted the offer in January 1879 , and later that year began his Midlothian campaign , speaking not only in Edinburgh , but across Britain , attacking Disraeli , to huge crowds . 
 Conservative chances of re @-@ election were damaged by the poor weather , and consequent effects on agriculture . Four consecutive wet summers through 1879 had led to poor harvests in the United Kingdom . In the past , the farmer had the consolation of higher prices at such times , but with bumper crops cheaply transported from the United States , grain prices remained low . Other European nations , faced with similar circumstances , opted for protection , and Disraeli was urged to <unk> the Corn Laws . He declined , stating that he regarded the matter as settled . Protection would have been highly unpopular among the newly enfranchised urban working classes , as it would raise their cost of living . Amid an economic slump generally , the Conservatives lost support among farmers . 
 Disraeli 's health continued to fail through 1879 . Owing to his infirmities , Disraeli was three @-@ quarters of an hour late for the Lord Mayor 's Dinner at the Guildhall in November , at which it is customary that the Prime Minister speaks . Though many commented on how healthy he looked , it took him great effort to appear so , and when he told the audience he expected to speak to the dinner again the following year , attendees chuckled — Gladstone was then in the midst of his campaign . Despite his public confidence , Disraeli recognised that the Conservatives would probably lose the next election , and was already contemplating his Resignation Honours . 
 Despite this pessimism , Conservatives hopes were buoyed in early 1880 with successes in by @-@ elections the Liberals had expected to win , concluding with victory in Southwark , normally a Liberal stronghold . The cabinet had resolved to wait before dissolving Parliament ; in early March they reconsidered , agreeing to go to the country as soon as possible . Parliament was dissolved on 24 March ; the first borough constituencies began voting a week later . 
 Disraeli took no public part in the electioneering , it being deemed improper for peers to make speeches to influence Commons elections . This meant that the chief Conservatives — Disraeli , Salisbury , and India Secretary Lord Cranbrook — would not be heard from . The election was thought likely to be close . Once returns began to be announced , it became clear that the Conservatives were being decisively beaten . The final result gave the Liberals an absolute majority of about 50 . 
 = = Final months , death , and memorials = = 
 Disraeli refused to cast blame for the defeat , which he understood was likely to be final for him . He wrote to Lady Bradford that it was just as much work to end a government as to form one , without any of the fun . Queen Victoria was bitter at his departure as Prime Minister . Among the honours he arranged before resigning as Prime Minister on 21 April 1880 was one for his private secretary , Montagu Corry , who became Baron Rowton . 
 Returning to Hughenden , Disraeli brooded over his electoral dismissal , but also resumed work on Endymion , which he had begun in 1872 and laid aside before the 1874 election . The work was rapidly completed and published by November 1880 . He carried on a correspondence with Victoria , with letters passed through intermediaries . When Parliament met in January 1881 , he served as Conservative leader in the Lords , attempting to serve as a moderating influence on Gladstone 's legislation . 
 Suffering from asthma and gout , Disraeli went out as little as possible , fearing more serious episodes of illness . In March , he fell ill with bronchitis , and emerged from bed only for a meeting with Salisbury and other Conservative leaders on the 26th . As it became clear that this might be his final sickness , friends and opponents alike came to call . Disraeli declined a visit from the Queen , " She would only ask me to take a message to Albert . " Almost blind , when he received the last letter from Victoria of which he was aware on 5 April , he held it momentarily , then had it read to him by Lord Barrington , a Privy Councillor . One card , signed " A Workman " , delighted its recipient , " Don 't die yet , we can 't do without you . " 
 Despite the gravity of Disraeli 's condition , the doctors concocted optimistic bulletins , for public consumption . The Prime Minister , Gladstone , called several times to enquire about his rival 's condition , and wrote in his diary , " May the Almighty be near his pillow . " There was intense public interest in the former Prime Minister 's struggles for life . Disraeli had customarily taken the sacrament at Easter ; when this day was observed on 17 April , there was discussion among his friends and family if he should be given the opportunity , but those against , fearing that he would lose hope , prevailed . On the morning of the following day , Easter Monday , he became incoherent , then comatose . Disraeli 's last confirmed words before dying in the early morning of 19 April were " I had rather live but I am not afraid to die " . 
 Disraeli 's executors decided against a public procession and funeral , fearing that too large crowds would gather to do him honour . The chief mourners at the service at Hughenden on 26 April were his brother Ralph and nephew Coningsby , to whom Hughenden would eventually pass . Queen Victoria was prostrated with grief , and considered ennobling Ralph or Coningsby as a memorial to Disraeli ( without children , his titles became extinct with his death ) but decided against it on the ground that their means were too small for a peerage . Protocol forbade her attending Disraeli 's funeral ( this would not be changed until 1965 , when Elizabeth II attended the rites for the former Prime Minister Sir Winston Churchill ) but she sent primroses ( " his favourite flowers " ) to the funeral , and visited the burial vault to place a wreath of china blooms four days later . 
 Disraeli is buried with his wife in a vault beneath the Church of St Michael and All Angels which stands in the grounds of his home , Hughenden Manor , accessed from the churchyard . There is also a memorial to him in the chancel in the church , erected in his honour by Queen Victoria . His literary executor was his private secretary , Lord Rowton . The Disraeli vault also contains the body of Sarah Brydges Willyams , the wife of James Brydges Willyams of St Mawgan in Cornwall . Disraeli carried on a long correspondence with Mrs. Willyams , writing frankly about political affairs . At her death in 1865 , she left him a large legacy , which helped clear up his debts . His will was proved at £ 84 @,@ 000 . 
 Disraeli has a memorial in Westminster Abbey . This monument was erected by the nation on the motion of Gladstone in his memorial speech on Disraeli in the House of Commons . Gladstone had absented himself from the funeral , with his plea of the press of public business met with public mockery . His speech was widely anticipated , if only because his dislike for Disraeli was well known , and caused the Prime Minister much worry . In the event , the speech was a model of its kind , in which he avoided comment on Disraeli 's politics , while praising his personal qualities . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Literary = = = 
 Blake comments that Disraeli " produced an epic poem , unbelievably bad , and a five @-@ act blank verse tragedy , if possible worse . Further he wrote a discourse on political theory and a political biography , the Life of Lord George Bentinck , which is excellent ... remarkably fair and accurate . " But it is on his novels that Disraeli 's literary achievements are generally judged . They have from the outset divided critical opinion . The writer R. W. Stewart observed that there have always been two criteria for judging Disraeli 's novels — one political and the other artistic . The critic Robert O <unk> , concurring , writes , " It is after all , even if you are a Tory of the staunchest blue , impossible to make Disraeli into a first @-@ rate novelist . And it is equally impossible , no matter how much you deplore the extravagances and improprieties of his works , to make him into an insignificant one . " 
 Disraeli 's early " silver fork " novels Vivian Grey ( 1826 ) and The Young Duke ( 1831 ) featured romanticised depictions of aristocratic life ( despite his ignorance of it ) with character sketches of well @-@ known public figures lightly disguised . In some of his early fiction Disraeli also portrayed himself and what he felt to be his Byronic dual nature : the poet and the man of action . His most autobiographical novel was Contarini Fleming ( 1832 ) , an avowedly serious work that did not sell well . The critic William Kuhn suggests that Disraeli 's fiction can be read as " the memoirs he never wrote " , revealing the inner life of a politician for whom the norms of Victorian public life appeared to represent a social straitjacket — particularly with regard to what Kuhn sees as the author 's " ambiguous sexuality " . 
 Of the other novels of the early 1830s , Alroy is described by Blake as " profitable but unreadable " , and The Rise of Iskander ( 1833 ) , The Infernal Marriage and Ixion in Heaven ( 1834 ) made little impact . Henrietta Temple ( 1837 ) was Disraeli 's next major success . It draws on the events of his affair with Henrietta Sykes to tell the story of a debt @-@ ridden young man torn between a mercenary loveless marriage and a passionate love @-@ at @-@ first @-@ sight for the eponymous heroine . Venetia ( 1837 ) was a minor work , written to raise much @-@ needed cash . 
 In the 1840s Disraeli wrote a trilogy of novels with political themes . With Coningsby ; or , The New Generation ( 1844 ) , Disraeli , in Blake 's view , " infused the novel genre with political sensibility , espousing the belief that England 's future as a world power depended not on the complacent old guard , but on youthful , idealistic politicians . " Coningsby was followed by Sybil ; or , The Two Nations ( 1845 ) , another political novel , which was less idealistic and more clear @-@ eyed than Coningsby ; the " two nations " of its sub @-@ title referred to the huge economic and social gap between the privileged few and the deprived working classes . The last in Disraeli 's political novel trilogy was Tancred ; or , The New Crusade ( 1847 ) , promoting the Church of England 's role in reviving Britain 's flagging spirituality . 
 Disraeli 's last completed novels were Lothair ( 1870 ) and Endymion ( 1880 ) . The first , described by Daniel R Schwarz as " Disraeli 's ideological Pilgrim 's Progress " , is a story of political life with particular regard to the roles of the Anglican and Roman Catholic churches . Endymion , despite having a Whig as hero , is a last exposition of the author 's economic policies and political beliefs . Disraeli continued to the last to pillory his enemies in barely disguised caricatures : the character St Barbe in Endymion is widely seen as a parody of Thackeray , who had offended Disraeli more than thirty years earlier by lampooning him in Punch as " <unk> " . Disraeli left an unfinished novel in which the priggish central character , Falconet , is unmistakably a caricature of Gladstone . 
 = = = Political = = = 
 In the years after Disraeli 's death , as Salisbury began his reign of more than twenty years over the Conservatives , the party emphasised the late leader 's " One Nation " views , that the Conservatives at root shared the beliefs of the working classes , with the Liberals the party of the urban élite . Disraeli had , for example , stressed the need to improve the lot of the urban labourer . The memory of Disraeli was used by the Conservatives to appeal to the working classes , with whom he was said to have had a rapport . This aspect of his policies has been re @-@ evaluated by historians in the 20th and 21st centuries . In 1972 B H Abbott stressed that it was not Disraeli but Lord Randolph Churchill who invented the term " Tory democracy " , though it was Disraeli who made it an essential part of Conservative policy and philosophy . In 2007 Parry wrote , " The tory democrat myth did not survive detailed scrutiny by professional historical writing of the 1960s [ which ] demonstrated that Disraeli had very little interest in a programme of social legislation and was very flexible in handling parliamentary reform in 1867 . " Despite this , Parry sees Disraeli , rather than Peel , as the founder of the modern Conservative party . The Conservative politician and writer Douglas Hurd wrote in 2013 , " [ Disraeli ] was not a one @-@ nation Conservative — and this was not simply because he never used the phrase . He rejected the concept in its entirety . " 
 Disraeli 's enthusiastic propagation of the British Empire has also been seen as appealing to working class voters . Before his leadership of the Conservative Party , imperialism was the province of the Liberals , most notably Palmerston , with the Conservatives murmuring dissent across the aisle . Disraeli made the Conservatives the party that most loudly supported both the Empire and military action to assert its primacy . This came about in part because Disraeli 's own views stemmed that way , in part because he saw advantage for the Conservatives , and partially in reaction against Gladstone , who disliked the expense of empire . Blake argued that Disraeli 's imperialism " decisively orientated the Conservative party for many years to come , and the tradition which he started was probably a bigger electoral asset in winning working @-@ class support during the last quarter of the century than anything else " . Some historians have commented on a romantic impulse behind Disraeli 's approach to Empire and foreign affairs : Abbott writes , " To the mystical Tory concepts of Throne , Church , Aristocracy and People , Disraeli added Empire . " Others have identified a strongly pragmatic aspect to his policies . Gladstone 's biographer Philip Magnus contrasted Disraeli 's grasp of foreign affairs with that of Gladstone , who " never understood that high moral principles , in their application to foreign policy , are more often destructive of political stability than motives of national self @-@ interest . " In Parry 's view , Disraeli 's foreign policy " can be seen as a gigantic castle in the air ( as it was by Gladstone ) , or as an overdue attempt to force the British commercial classes to awaken to the realities of European politics . " 
 During his lifetime Disraeli 's opponents , and sometimes even his friends and allies , questioned whether he sincerely held the views he propounded , or whether they were adopted by him as essential to one who sought to spend his life in politics , and were mouthed by him without conviction . Lord John Manners , in 1843 at the time of Young England , wrote , " could I only satisfy myself that D 'Israeli believed all that he said , I should be more happy : his historical views are quite mine , but does he believe them ? " Blake ( writing in 1966 ) suggested that it is no more possible to answer that question now than it was then . Nevertheless , Paul Smith , in his journal article on Disraeli 's politics , argues that Disraeli 's ideas were coherently argued over a political career of nearly half a century , and " it is impossible to sweep them aside as a mere bag of burglar 's tools for effecting felonious entry to the British political pantheon . " 
 Stanley Weintraub , in his biography of Disraeli , points out that his subject did much to advance Britain towards the 20th century , carrying one of the two great Reform Acts of the 19th despite the opposition of his Liberal rival , Gladstone . " He helped preserve constitutional monarchy by drawing the Queen out of mourning into a new symbolic national role and created the climate for what became ' Tory democracy ' . He articulated an imperial role for Britain that would last into World War II and brought an intermittently self @-@ isolated Britain into the concert of Europe . " 
 Frances Walsh comments on Disraeli 's multifaceted public life : 
 The debate about his place in the Conservative pantheon has continued since his death . Disraeli fascinated and divided contemporary opinion ; he was seen by many , including some members of his own party , as an adventurer and a charlatan and by others as a far @-@ sighted and patriotic statesman . As an actor on the political stage he played many roles : Byronic hero , man of letters , social critic , parliamentary virtuoso , squire of Hughenden , royal companion , European statesman . His singular and complex personality has provided historians and biographers with a particularly stiff challenge . 
 = = Cartoons , 1846 – 86 = = 
 = = Works by Disraeli = = 
 = = = Novels = = = 
 Vivian Grey ( 1826 ) 
 <unk> ( 1828 ) 
 The Young Duke ( 1831 ) 
 Contarini Fleming ( 1832 ) 
 Ixion in Heaven ( 1832 / 3 ) 
 The Wondrous Tale of Alroy ( 1833 ) 
 The Rise of Iskander ( 1833 ) 
 The Infernal Marriage ( 1834 ) 
 Henrietta Temple ( 1837 ) 
 Venetia ( 1837 ) 
 Coningsby , or the New Generation ( 1844 ) 
 Sybil , or The Two Nations ( 1845 ) 
 Tancred , or the New Crusade ( 1847 ) 
 Lothair ( 1870 ) 
 Endymion ( 1880 ) 
 Falconet ( unfinished 1881 ) 
 = = = Poetry = = = 
 The Revolutionary <unk> ( 1834 ) 
 = = = Drama = = = 
 The Tragedy of Count <unk> ( 1839 ) 
 = = = Non @-@ fiction = = = 
 An Inquiry into the Plans , Progress , and Policy of the American Mining Companies ( 1825 ) 
 Lawyers and Legislators : or , Notes , on the American Mining Companies ( 1825 ) 
 The present state of Mexico ( 1825 ) 
 England and France , or a Cure for the Ministerial Gallomania ( 1832 ) 
 What Is He ? ( 1833 ) 
 The Vindication of the English Constitution ( 1835 ) 
 The Letters of Runnymede ( 1836 ) 
 Lord George Bentinck ( 1852 ) 
 = Naomi ( Skins ) = 
 " Naomi " is the sixth episode of the third series of the British teen drama Skins , which first aired on 26 February 2009 on E4 in both Ireland and the United Kingdom . The episode was written by <unk> Sen Gupta and Jack Thorne , and was directed by Simon Massey . The episode focuses on the character of Naomi Campbell ( Lily Loveless ) as she competes against James Cook ( Jack O 'Connell ) in their college 's elections for Student President . She enters a romantic relationship with her classmate Emily Fitch ( Kathryn Prescott ) while also receiving affection from her teacher Kieran ( Ardal O 'Hanlon ) . 
 The episode was filmed in October 2008 . The weather was so cold during filming that one scene taking place in a lake had to be shortened when Prescott was taken to a standby ambulance with suspected hypothermia . " Naomi " brought in 957 @,@ 000 viewers and was E4 's highest @-@ rated programme of the week . Critical reviews of the episode were generally positive . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Naomi lives with her hippy mother Gina ( Olivia Colman ) and fifteen other people in a communal living arrangement . This is a source of annoyance to Naomi , whose privacy is invaded when she wakes up one morning , naked , to discover that a male hippy is sleeping in her bed . At college , she avoids Emily to meet with her politics teacher Kieran instead . In the students ' common room , they are informed of the upcoming elections for Student President . Emily encourages Naomi to run for president , but Naomi refuses . She later comes across Cook , who tries to persuade her to have sex with him . She jokingly tells him that he has a better chance of winning the student elections , which he sees as a challenge and decides to register . Kieran walks her home at the end of the day and urges her to run in the elections , giving her a registration form . When she arrives at her house , she finds Emily waiting in her bedroom with another registration form . Emily starts to leave when Naomi is rude and standoffish to her — despite taking Emily 's advice to enter the elections — but returns and confronts her . She coldly tells her that she is not obsessed with pursuing a sexual relationship with her , and Naomi suggests she stay the night with her . 
 The next morning , Naomi wakes up , with Emily asleep next to her . She is tempted to stroke her hair , but instead gets dressed and goes to college , leaving Emily in her bed . At college , she sees the massive presidential campaign staged by Cook and JJ ( Ollie Barbieri ) . She launches her own campaign to rival Cook , but finds that most of her classmates ' support is for Cook 's anarchist ideas . She is doubly humiliated in front of the form when Cook ridicules her and Emily subsequently stands up for her . She flees to Kieran for comfort but leaves him , shocked and disgusted , when he kisses her . She goes home and , after finding a note from Emily in her bed , cries herself to sleep . 
 Naomi and Emily escape to the countryside later that evening and cycle to one of Emily 's favourite places by a lake before sunset . After swimming in the lake , they light a campfire , and share a cannabis joint . An act of <unk> the joint leads the two to share a kiss and they proceed to make love . Emily wakes up the following morning to find Naomi preparing to leave . She pleads with Naomi not to leave her a second time and tells her that she should accept that she needs to be loved . Naomi goes home to find Kieran in bed with her mother , and leaves for college , devastated . She sees her teachers rigging the election to prevent Cook from winning , and reveals this to the form when she is announced the winner . As his first presidential act , Cook starts a riot . In the ensuing chaos , Naomi forgives Kieran , encouraging him that if he likes her mother , he should tell her so . Naomi begins to have sex with Cook before she realises that it " isn 't right " . Surprisingly , Cook doesn 't seem to mind , as he says that she must have a good reason not to follow through because she 's clever . Naomi leaves , with her and Cook now sharing a better understanding of each other . That night , she visits Emily 's house , but Emily refuses to open the door , not wanting Naomi to see her after she had been crying . They sit on opposite sides of the door , and Naomi admits that she does need somebody to love her . Emily offers her hand through the door 's cat flap to Naomi , who finally reciprocates Emily 's feelings . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Naomi " was filmed in October 2008 , in the same production block as the series ' fourth episode , " Pandora " , and the series ' opening title sequence . The riot scene in front of the college was filmed with 100 extras ; Cook 's petrol @-@ bombing of the car was described by costume assistant Ros Marshall as " probably the most hi @-@ tech special effect we 've had while filming Skins " . The students ' college common room was filmed in the show 's production canteen . Originally , an entire scene was supposed to be filmed with Naomi and Emily in the lake , but the water was so cold that the actors were unable to stay in the water , and Kathryn Prescott was taken to a standby ambulance with suspected hypothermia . Director Simon Massey choreographed Naomi and Emily 's sex scene prior to filming so that , on the set , the actions would come instinctively to the actors and they would be able to complete the scene in a limited number of takes . While Lily Loveless enjoyed filming those scenes because " stuff like that gives you experience " , Prescott said that it concerned her , though she said that she was not pressured to do anything in the script that made her uncomfortable . 
 Stylist Kirstie Stanway began to differentiate between Emily and her twin sister Katie 's hair and makeup with this episode to show that the twins are starting to " move along their own paths " . She re @-@ styled Katie 's character in particular to illustrate that she is now " desperate not to be lumped with her sister as she really doesn 't approve of the new girl in her life " . Ardal O 'Hanlon grew a beard for his role as Kieran and was given a scar under one eye to give his character a " more rugged look " . Ros Marshall said that Cook 's mock @-@ presentation of himself as " Cook Guevara " paid homage to The Clash 's Joe Strummer and " the youth cultures of days gone by " , and that his Dr. Martens <unk> were a reference to skinheads of the 1980s . Marshall made Cook and JJ 's campaign rosettes by hand from <unk> rolling papers . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Naomi " drew 957 @,@ 000 viewers and was E4 's highest @-@ rated programme of the week . 
 Sarah Warn , editor @-@ in @-@ chief of lesbian @-@ based website AfterEllen.com wrote that the episode 's focus on Naomi and Emily " was one of the best @-@ developed and most honest depictions of a lesbian teenage relationship that I 've ever seen on TV . " A critic for PopSugar.com thought both Naomi and Cook to be more likable after the episode and enjoyed the development of their friendship throughout . They found Emily 's plea to Naomi as Naomi left the campsite " heartbreaking " and called Kieran " one of my favourite recurring characters this series " . Digital Spy 's Dan French gave the episode a positive review , describing it as " chaotic " and " full of lady @-@ lovin ' " . He praised Naomi 's relationship with Kieran , which he saw as a reference to the affair between Chris Miles , a first generation character from Skins ' first and second series , and his teacher Angie . The entertainment editor for eurOut.org , a website for European lesbians , thought that Naomi and Emily 's storyline was " definitely one of the best portrayals of teenage lesbians I 've ever seen " , writing that " when the focus is more on cute girls falling for each other , this show isn 't half bad " . Another eurOut.org writer , Cate O 'Neil , said that " Naomi " was " probably the best individual lesbian episode I have seen on TV . Ever . " In response to O 'Hanlon 's nude scene as Kieran , Sara Nathan of The Sun said , " If seeing [ him ] clad in lycra as <unk> in My Hero wasn 't bad enough , now he 's leaving nothing to the imagination . " 
 = Myxogastria = 
 Myxogastria ( <unk> , ICZN ) or Myxomycetes ( ICBN ) , is a class of Myxogastria , itself a grouping of slime moulds , that contains 5 orders , 14 families , 62 genera and 888 species . They are colloquially known as the plasmodial or acellular slime moulds . 
 All species pass through several , very different morphologic phases , such as microscopic individual cells , slimy amorphous organisms visible with the naked eye and conspicuously shaped fruit bodies . Although they are monocellular , they can reach immense widths and weights : in extreme cases they can be up to 1 metre ( 3 ft 3 in ) across and weigh up to 20 kilograms ( 44 lb ) . 
 The class Myxogastria is distributed worldwide , but it is more common in temperate regions where it has a higher biodiversity than in polar regions , the subtropics or tropics . They are mainly found in open forests , but also in extreme regions such as deserts , under snow blankets or underwater . They also occur on the bark of trees , sometimes high in the canopy . These are known as <unk> myxomycetes . Most species are very small . 
 = = Taxonomy and classification = = 
 = = = Nomenclature = = = 
 The Latin name Myxomycota comes from the Ancient Greek words <unk> ( <unk> ) , which means " mucus " , and μύκης ( <unk> ) , which means " fungus " . The name Myxogastria was introduced in 1970 by Lindsay Shepherd Olive to describe the family <unk> , which was introduced in 1899 by Thomas Huston Macbride . Swedish mycologist Elias Magnus Fries described numerous slime moulds as <unk> in 1829 . Species in the class Myxomycota are colloquially known as plasmodial or acellular slime moulds . Some consider the Myxomycota to be a separate kingdom , with an unsettled phylogeny because of conflicting molecular and developmental data . The relations among <unk> orders are as yet unclear . 
 = = = Range = = = 
 The continuous classification of new taxa reveals that the class is not fully described . The class comprises around 900 to 1000 species . According to a 2000 inquiry , there were 1012 officially accepted taxa , including 866 on species level . Another study in 2007 stated a number of more than 1000 , in which the Myxogastria comprised the biggest group of slime moulds , with over 900 species . On the basis of sequenced environmental samples it is estimated that the group has between 1200 and 1500 species , more than previously estimated . Among the 1012 taxa only a few species are common : 305 were discovered in a single location or groupings , a further 258 species were found in a few areas between two and 20 times , and only 446 were common in several locations with over 20 discoveries . 
 <unk> encounter problems because the Myxogastriae are morphologically very plastic , which is to say susceptible to environmental influences ; only a few characteristics are diagnostic for a small number of species . In the past authors have unsuccessfully tried to describe a new taxon based on a small number of examples , but this leads to numerous duplications , sometimes even at genus level . For example , <unk> <unk> is actually a species from the genus Didymium . 
 = = = Classification and phylogeny = = = 
 The following classification is based on Adl et al . 2005 , while the classes and further divisions on Dykstra and Keller 2000 , who described the Myxogastria as " <unk> " . The sister taxon is the subclass <unk> . Together with the <unk> they formed the taxon of the <unk> . Other subclasses differ from the other species mainly in the development of fruit bodies ; while <unk> create a separate fruit body from each single mononuclear cell , <unk> develop cell complexes – the so @-@ called pseudo @-@ plasmodia – from separate cells , which then become fruit bodies . 
 Order <unk> 
 Family <unk> 
 Family <unk> 
 Family <unk> 
 Order <unk> 
 Family <unk> 
 Family <unk> 
 Order <unk> 
 Family <unk> 
 Subclass <unk> 
 Order <unk> 
 Family <unk> 
 Family <unk> 
 Order <unk> 
 Family <unk> 
 Family <unk> 
 Family <unk> 
 This is a traditional classification based on Lister and Lister , made in the early 20th century . Molecular <unk> studies confirm and stabilise this classification . The most basal group is <unk> . Other groups further contain two <unk> , which are morphologically definable by spore colour . 
 = = Characteristics and life cycle = = 
 = = = <unk> , mononuclear phase = = = 
 = = = = Spores = = = = 
 The spores of Myxogastria are haploid , mainly round and measure between 5 µm and 20 µm , rarely up to 24 µm in diameter . Their surface is generally reticular , sharp , warty or spiky and very rarely smooth . The typical colour of the spore mass becomes visible through the structure , since the spores themselves are not pigmented . In some species , especially of the genus <unk> , the spores produce lumps . The colour , shape and diameter of spores are important characteristics for identifying species . 
 Important factors for the germination of spores are mainly moisture and temperature . The spores usually remain <unk> after several years ; there were even spores preserved in herbarium specimens which germinated after 75 years . After the spores ' development , they first receive a diploid nucleus , and the meiosis takes place in the spore . At the germination , the spore shells open either alongside special germinal pores or chinks , or rip irregularly and then release one to four haploid protoplasts . 
 = = = = <unk> and Myxoflagellates = = = = 
 In those species which reproduce sexually , haploid cells bud from the spores . Depending on the environmental conditions , either a <unk> or a <unk> buds from the spore . <unk> move like amoebae – that is , crawling on the substrate – and are produced in dry conditions . Myxoflagellates , which are peritrichous and can swim , develop in moist to wet environments . Myxoflagellates almost always have two flagella ; one is generally shorter than the other and sometimes only vestigial . The flagella are used for locomotion and to help to move food particles closer . If the humidity changes , cells can switch between the two manifestations . Neither form has a cell wall . This developmental stage ( and the next one ) serves as a nourishment provider and is also known as the first trophic phase ( nourishment phase ) . In this monocellular phase , the Myxogastria consume bacteria and fungus spores , and probably dissolved substances , and they reproduce through simple cell division . If the environmental conditions change adversely in this phase , for example extreme temperature , extreme dryness or food shortage , the Myxogastria may switch to very long @-@ lived , thin @-@ shelled quiescent states – the so @-@ called <unk> . For that to happen , the <unk> assume a round shape and secrete a thin cell wall . In this state they can easily survive one year or longer . If living conditions improve , they become active again . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 If two cells of the same type meet in this phase , they cross @-@ fertilise to a diploid zygote through the fusion of <unk> and nuclei . The conditions which trigger this are not known . The diploid zygote becomes a multinucleated plasmodium through multiple nuclear divisions without further cell division . If the resulting cells were peritrichous , they change their shape before the fusion from the peritrichous form to the <unk> . For the production of a zygote , cells of different mating types ( heterothallic ) are required . 
 = = = Plasmodium = = = 
 The second trophic phase begins with the development of the plasmodium . The multinucleated organism now absorbs via phagocytosis as many nutrients as possible . These are bacteria , protists , dissolved substances , moulds , higher fungi and small particles of organic material . This enables the cell to undergo enormous growth . The nucleus divides multiple times , and the cell soon becomes visible to the naked eye and usually has a surface area – depending on the species – up to one square metre ; however , in 1987 one artificially cultivated cell of <unk> <unk> attained a surface area of 5 @.@ 5 sq m . Myxogastria species have numerous nuclei in their trophic plasmodium phase ; the small , non @-@ veined proto @-@ plasmodia have between 8 and 100 nuclei , while large , veined <unk> have between 100 and 10 million nuclei . All of these remain part of a single cell , which has a viscous , slimy consistency and may be transparent , white or brightly coloured in orange , yellow or pink . 
 The cell has <unk> and negative phototactic capabilities in this phase , meaning that it is able to move towards nutrients and away from dangerous substances and light . The movements originate in the grainy cytoplasm , which streams by pulsation in one direction within the cell . In this way the cell reaches a speed of up to 1000 µm per second – the speed in plant cells is 2 to 78 µm per second . A resting state , the so @-@ called sclerotium , may occur in this phase . The sclerotium is a hardened , resistant form composed of numerous " <unk> " , which enable the <unk> to survive in adverse conditions , for example during winter or dry periods , in this phase . 
 Fruit bodies of the <unk> 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Mature plasmodia can produce fruit bodies under appropriate circumstances , the exact triggers for this process are unknown . According to laboratory researchers , changes in humidity , temperature or pH value as well as starvation periods were thought to be the triggers in some species . The plasmodia abandon their nutrient intake and crawl , attracted by light – a positive phototaxis – towards a dry , light area , to get an optimal spread of the spores . Once the fructification begins , it can not be stopped . If disturbances occur , malformed spore @-@ bearing fruit bodies are often produced . 
 The plasmodium or parts of the fruit bodies can be smaller than one millimetre , in extreme cases they are up to a square metre and weigh up to 20 kilograms ( 44 lb ) ( <unk> maxima ) . Their shape is often <unk> or <unk> sporangia with non @-@ cellular stems , but can also appear as veined ar netted <unk> , pincushion @-@ shaped <unk> or seemingly pincushion @-@ shaped pseudo @-@ <unk> . The fruit bodies almost always have a <unk> on the edge . The abundantly produced spores are stored in a reticular or filamentous structure – the so @-@ called capillitium – and are found on nearly all species except <unk> and other species from the genus <unk> . When the open fruit bodies have dried , the spores are dispersed by wind or by small animals such as woodlice , mites or beetles , which either pick up the spores through contact with the fruit bodies or ingest and then excrete them . Dispersal by running water is also possible , but it plays a minor role . 
 = = = Asexual forms = = = 
 Some Myxogastria species may produce asexually . These are continuously diploid . There is no meiosis before the germination of the spores and the production of the plasmodium proceeds without germination of two cells . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 Myxogastria are distributed worldwide ; species were found by early researchers on all continents . However , as many parts of the world were yet not discovered or explored , the exact distribution is not fully known . Europe and North America are often considered the basic habitat of the Myxogastria species . According to recent research , the majority of species are not widely distributed . The Myxogastria are most commonly found in temperate latitudes , and rarely in the polar regions , the subtropics or tropics . The physical features of the substrate and climatic conditions are the major aspects of the species ' presence . Endemism is rare . 
 In the northern areas , the species can be found in Alaska , Iceland , northern Scandinavia , Greenland and Russia . These are not only particular , specialised species ; according to an overview study , more than 150 species were found in the arctic and subarctic regions of Iceland , Greenland , northern Russia and Alaska . These distinctly exceed the tree line . In Greenland , the habitat may reach the 77th latitude line . The Myxogastria species reach their largest biodiversity and highest frequency in forests of temperate regions , which are ideal habitats because of the amount of rich organic material , suitable humidity ( not too high ) and long @-@ lasting snow cover for snow @-@ inhabiting species . 
 Few Myxogastria species are found in the tropics and subtropics , mainly because of the high humidity which prevents the necessary dehydration of the fruit bodies to permit spore dispersal and promotes infestation by moulds . Other factors are low light levels under the forest canopy which reduces phototaxis , light winds , poor soils , natural enemies and heavy rainfall which can wash away or destroy cells . Species living in soil or deadwood decrease as humidity increases . In a study from Costa Rica , 73 % of the total findings were in the relatively dry Tropical Moist Forest , while 18 % were in the very moist Tropical Premontane Wet Forests and only 9 % in Lower Premontane Rain Forest . 
 In the Antarctic , species were found in the South Shetland Islands , South Orkney Islands , South Georgia and the Antarctic Peninsula . Species from the Antarctic or subantarctic regions are rarer than specimens in the Arctic regions , although lack of access may be a factor . Until 1983 , only five records were made , with only individual finds since then . According to two studies of the <unk> flora of these regions , more species were discovered in the subantarctic forests , for example 67 species in Argentinian Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego , and 22 on high ground on Macquarie Island . 
 = = = Habitats = = = 
 The majority of Myxogastria species live <unk> in open forests . The most important microhabitat is deadwood , but also the bark of living trees ( <unk> myxomycetes ) , rotting plant material , soil and animal excrements . Slime moulds may be found in numerous unusual locations . The comprehensive group of the <unk> Myxogastria populate closed snow blankets , to quickly <unk> at exposure – for example during thaws – and release their spores . Other habitats are deserts – 33 species were found in the Sonora desert , for example – or living on leaves from plants in the tropics . Some species live in aquatic environments , such as those of the genera Didymium , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Licea , which were found living underwater as <unk> and plasmodia . All but one species , Didymium <unk> , <unk> only when the water ebbed or when they left it . 
 = = = Relationship to other creatures = = = 
 The relationships of the Myxogastria to other creatures have not been thoroughly researched as of 2012 . Their natural predators include many arthropods , including mites and springtails , and especially beetles such as the rove beetles , round fungus beetles , wrinkled bark beetles , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ( false click beetles ) , <unk> , <unk> , and minute brown scavenger beetles . Various Nematodes have also been observed to be their predators ; they attach their posterior portion on the cytosol of the plasmodia or even live within the strands . Certain Diptera species have evolved to specialise in this way : these are mostly representatives of the Mycetophilidae , <unk> and Drosophilidae . The species <unk> <unk> was especially frequently found , especially on <unk> <unk> , <unk> splendens , <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> . 
 Some true fungi specialise in the colonisation of the Myxogastriae : almost all of these are species of sac fungi . The most common such fungus is Verticillium <unk> – mainly species from <unk> or <unk> . <unk> album and <unk> <unk> are often found on <unk> , while <unk> tomentosus is often found on certain species of <unk> . <unk> violacea specialises on <unk> <unk> . Bacterial associates , mainly from the family Enterobacteriaceae , were discovered on plasmodia . The combination of plasmodia and bacteria can bind atmospheric nitrogen or produce enzymes which make possible the decomposition of e.g. lignin , <unk> or xylan . In a few cases , the plasmodia acquired salt tolerance or tolerance of heavy metals through this association . 
 = = Fossil records = = 
 Fossil records of Myxogastria are extremely rare . Due to their short lifespan and the fragile structures of the plasmodia and the fruit body , fossilisation and similar processes are not possible . Only their spores can be mineralised . The few known examples of fossilised living states are preserved in amber . Up to 2010 , three fruit bodies , two spores and one plasmodium have been described . Two older taxa – Charles Eugène Bertrand 's Myxomycetes <unk> and <unk> <unk> from 1892 – are now considered dubious and are today often disregarded . Friedrich Walter <unk> described in 1952 a 35 to 40 million year old find in Baltic amber of <unk> splendens , an extant species . The state and completeness of the fruit bodies are remarkable , enabling accurate determination . From the same period , location and material is an <unk> sulcata , first described in 2003 by Heinrich <unk> and Alexander Schmidt , a species very similar to today 's <unk> <unk> . Both discoveries imply that the fruit bodies of the Myxogastria have changed only slightly in the last 35 to 40 million years . 
 However , the <unk> <unk> from Baltic amber , first described by <unk> and Schmidt in 2006 , is considered questionable . The fossil was inconsistent with the typical characteristics of the genus and it was not a valid publication because no Latin name was identified with it . Also , important details of its fruit bodies were not visible or contradicted the identification . Today it is assumed that the fossil belongs to a lichen similar to the genus <unk> . The only known discovery of a preserved plasmodium was found in amber in the Dominican Republic , and was then grouped into the <unk> . However , this claim is also considered doubtful as the publication was later classified as insufficient due to lack of evidence . The only known mineralised fossils are the two spore findings from 1971 , one of which , <unk> <unk> , is assumed to be from the postglacial period . In <unk> researches , by absorbing Myxogastria spores , the fossil was not recognised . 
 = = History of research = = 
 Because of their unprepossessing nature , the Myxogastriae were for a long time not well researched . Thomas <unk> first named the mould <unk> <unk> as " Fungus <unk> <unk> " in his 1654 book Herbarium <unk> , oder <unk> <unk> und <unk> . In 1729 , Pier Antonio Micheli thought that fungi are different from moulds , and Heinrich Friedrich Link agreed with this theory in 1833 . Elias Magnus Fries documented the plasmodial stage in 1829 , and 35 years later Anton de Bary observed the germination of the spores . De Bary also discovered the <unk> in the cell for the movement , he saw them as animal @-@ like creatures and reclassified them as <unk> , which literally translates " Fungus animals " . This theory dominated until the second half of the 20th century . 
 From 1874 to 1876 , <unk> Tomasz <unk> , a pupil of De <unk> , published the first extensive monography of the group . Three monographs by Arthur Lister and <unk> Lister were published in 1894 , 1911 and 1925 . These were groundbreaking works about the Myxogastria , as was the 1934 book The Myxomycetes by Thomas H. Macbride and George Willard Martin . Important works in the late 20th century were the 1969 monographs by George Willard Martin and Constantine John <unk> , and the 1975 monograph by Lindsay Shepherd Olive . The first is perhaps the most notable , as with it " the modern era of the taxonomy of the Myxogastria began " . Other notable researchers were Persoon , <unk> , Lister , <unk> , and Martin and <unk> , who discovered and classified many species . 
 = The Otto Show = 
 " The Otto Show " is the twenty @-@ second episode of The Simpsons ' third season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on April 23 , 1992 . In the episode , Bart decides that he wants to become a rock star after attending a Spinal Tap concert , so Homer and Marge buy him a guitar . He shows the guitar to Otto the bus driver , who plays it and consequently makes the children late for school . Racing to Springfield Elementary , Otto crashes the school bus and is suspended until he can get his license back . Bart , who respects Otto , invites him to move in with the Simpson family . 
 The episode was written by Jeff Martin and directed by Wes Archer . It was the first episode of the show to feature Otto Mann in a prominent role . " The Otto Show " features an appearance from Spinal Tap , a parody band that first appeared in the 1984 mockumentary film This Is Spinal Tap . The episode guest stars Michael McKean as David St. Hubbins and Christopher Guest as Nigel Tufnel . Harry Shearer , who is a regular Simpsons cast member , also starred in This Is Spinal Tap and reprises his role as Derek Smalls . 
 In its original airing on the Fox Network , the episode had an 11 @.@ 5 Nielsen rating and finished the week ranked 41st . The episode received positive reviews and Spinal Tap was ranked as the 18th best guest appearance on the show by IGN . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Bart and Milhouse attend a Spinal Tap concert , which degenerates into a riot . Nonetheless , Bart is impressed by the band and wants to become a rock guitarist . Homer and Marge decide to buy Bart his own electric guitar , but he finds it impossible to play as he is not musically gifted like Lisa ( when she tries to play a duet with her sax ) . The next morning on the school bus , Bart tells Otto he thinks his guitar is broken , but Otto wows his passengers with an impromptu concert . The performance meant that they are now late for school , so Otto is forced to drive recklessly to get there in time . The bus causes numerous incidents before turning over onto its side in the town square , where it also smashes into the statue of Jebediah Springfield . 
 When Officer Lou asks for Otto 's driver 's license , Otto is forced to admit he does not have a license ( nor is he wearing his own underwear on which he wrote his name as proof of his identity ) . He is suspended without pay , and Principal Skinner takes over his route . However , Skinner finds driving the bus hard going , being a less aggressive driver than Otto , and ends up being trapped at a busy intersection for an entire day . Otto , meanwhile , goes to the Springfield Department of Motor Vehicles but he fails the driver 's test that is administered by Marge 's sister Patty partly due to his poor driving ability and partly due to the fact he asks Patty if she was born male . He is also unable to find a new job , and therefore cannot pay his rent and is evicted from his apartment . Bart finds him living in a Trash Co . Waste Disposal Unit , and agrees to let him live in the Simpsons ' garage . Homer and Marge disapprove of this but reluctantly agree to let him stay . 
 Otto quickly makes a nuisance of himself . Homer begins to lose patience with Otto and demands that he be sent on his way . Marge and Bart encourage him to give the driving test one last try . Otto goes to the DMV to take the test again , angry that Homer called him a " sponge " . Patty refuses to let him take the test after a comment he made about her being born a man . However , when Otto tells her that he wants to pass so he can prove Homer wrong and " staple his licence to Homer Simpson 's Big Bald Head " , she relents out of spite for her brother @-@ in @-@ law . Otto performs even worse in his second test , but Patty grants Otto his license anyway after he entertains her with stories of Homer 's crude behavior . Now a properly licensed driver ( albeit under probationary status ) , Otto regains his job and Skinner is happy to return to his normal job as Principal . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Otto Show " was written by Jeff Martin and directed by Wes Archer . The episode 's title is a pun on auto show . The episode was the first to feature bus driver Otto Mann in a prominent role . Otto 's full name is revealed for the first time . Writers Jay Kogen and Wallace Wolodarsky had originally wanted to name him Otto Mechanic , but the animators gave him the last name Mann . 
 " The Otto Show " features an appearance from Spinal Tap , a parody band that first appeared in the 1984 mockumentary film This Is Spinal Tap . The episode guest stars Michael McKean as David St. Hubbins and Christopher Guest as Nigel Tufnel . Harry Shearer , who is a regular Simpsons cast member , also starred in This Is Spinal Tap and reprises his role as Derek Smalls , the third member of the group . The episode follows the approach of the film by presenting the band as if they were a real group . According to executive producer Al Jean , the executives at Fox were unhappy about having the band guest star , partially because it cost a lot of money to purchase rights to play their songs . Mike Reiss said that Fox felt that the show could have gotten a " real group " for that amount of money . The animators gave many of the members of the crowd at the Spinal Tap concert long bangs , so they would not have to animate many pairs of eyes . In the final scene to feature the band , their tour bus bursts into flames after being knocked off the road . According to the writers , the scene was not in the original script and was added because they felt the band 's final scene was not interesting enough . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When Homer puts on an old jacket he finds a can of Billy Beer in one of the pockets . While waiting in the car during the Spinal Tap concert ( as well as the ensuing riot ) , Homer sings along to the song " Spanish Flea " by Herb Alpert and the Tijuana Brass . The writers had a difficult time getting the rights to the song , but a writer who is related to a member of the band was able to get the rights at the last minute . Homer also hums along to " Summer Samba " at a later segment in the car . Homer makes a comment on their situation with Otto , saying " This is not Happy Days and he is not The Fonz ! " Otto then walks in and says to Homer , " <unk> , Mr. S , " in reference to the long @-@ running situation comedy . The song Otto plays on the school bus is " Free Bird " by Lynyrd Skynyrd . Otto 's statement that he would prefer to be sleeping in a <unk> brand trash container over a " Trash Co . Waste Disposal Unit " alludes to the word 's status as a registered trademark for a brand of large trash containers . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original airing on the Fox Network , the episode had an 11 @.@ 5 Nielsen rating and was viewed in approximately 10 @.@ 59 million homes . It finished the week of April 20 – 26 , 1992 ranked 41st , down from the season 's average rank of 35th . The Simpsons was the fourth highest rated show on Fox that week after Married ... with Children , Beverly Hills , 90210 and In Living Color . 
 The episode , like the whole of the third season , received mostly positive reviews from critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote , " A nice episode for Otto and some great moments for Skinner as he tries to drive the bus , but especially memorable for Homer 's moment of forgetfulness after the concert . Michael McKean , Christopher Guest and Harry Shearer reprise their roles from This Is Spinal Tap perfectly . " <unk> 's Dennis Landmann named " The Otto Show " as one of the stand @-@ out episodes from the third season . Nate Meyers of Digitally Obsessed was also positive about the episode , giving it a rating of five donuts out of five and writing " The writing is at full throttle here , cramming tons of jokes into the episode 's 20 @-@ minute runtime with stunning success . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson wrote that it was " another solid episode . Actually , it regresses somewhat from the high quality of its predecessors . The Spinal Tap material feels somewhat tacky – it was a tie @-@ in with their then @-@ current attempt to sell a new album – and Otto 's not a strong character . I don ’ t think the series ever made him the lead again , and he works best in small doses . " Otto : remains very good , but it doesn ’ t compete with the year ’ s best shows . " " 
 Especially the guest appearance of Spinal Tap was noticed . Bryce Wilson , in his review of the third season for Cinema Blend , wrote " Simpson ’ s [ sic ] voice actor Harry Shearer ... reunites Spinal Tap just for " The Otto Show " , an episode full of the trademark Tap banter and stage disasters that rival even the mighty 18 inch Stonehenge . " IGN named Spinal Tap as the ' 18th best guest stars ' in the show 's history for this episode . Andrew Martin of Prefix Mag named Spinal Tap his favorite musical guests on The Simpsons out of a list of ten . 
 = Sonic and the Secret Rings = 
 Sonic and the Secret Rings ( <unk> , Sonikku to Himitsu no Ringu ) is a video game developed by Sonic Team and published by Sega as part of the Sonic the Hedgehog series . It was released exclusively for the Wii on February 20 , 2007 in North America ; March 2 in Europe and March 15 in Japan . It is the first Sonic game for the console , released in place of an aborted attempt to port the 2006 video game Sonic the Hedgehog . Secret Rings is a three @-@ dimensional platform and action game whose plot follows the series ' main character , Sonic the Hedgehog , on a quest to stop an evil genie named the Erazor Djinn . In addition to the basic platforming gameplay of previous Sonic titles , Secret Rings uses a system of experience points and levels , as well as special moves that are unlocked via leveling up . 
 Producer Yojiro Ogawa conceived the game to tap into the Wii Remote 's capabilities . He chose the theme of Arabian Nights , using many elements of the stories in the game 's setting , characters , and Middle Eastern @-@ influenced music . Sega changed the title of the game several times , settling on Sonic and the Secret Rings to tie in the theme of Arabian Nights . Upon release , Secret Rings got mixed reviews . Reviewers praised its visuals but said that its controls and inconsistent difficulty take some time to get used to . It sold 83 @,@ 000 copies in its first month and continued to chart throughout the year . Sega released a sequel in March 2009 , Sonic and the Black Knight ; the two form what is known as the Storybook series . Sonic and the Secret Rings was de @-@ listed in 2010 , due to Sega 's decision to remove all Sonic titles with sub @-@ average Metacritic scores from retail stores in order to increase the value of their brand after positive reviews for Sonic the Hedgehog 4 : Episode I and Sonic Colors . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Sonic and the Secret Rings is a three @-@ dimensional platform and action game featuring an on @-@ rails style of movement . Sonic the Hedgehog , the series ' main character , is the game 's only player character . He is controlled exclusively with the Wii Remote , which is held horizontally like a traditional gamepad . Players adjust his forward movement by tilting the controller . He runs along a predesignated path ; players jump and brake using corresponding face buttons . <unk> the Wii Remote forwards allows Sonic to perform a homing attack , a mid @-@ air move that targets and damages enemies in his path . 
 Like in other games in the series , Sonic collects rings scattered throughout levels ; contact with certain obstacles and enemies scatters them away , and Sonic dies if he touches an enemy without any rings . Unlike previous titles , Secret Rings does not feature a life counter or game over screen , but instead Sonic reappears at the last visited checkpoint after dying , although the player will have to restart a mission if they fail a specified objective . The game contains 100 missions ( including boss battles ) over the course of eight levels . New missions , cutscenes , and sometimes new levels are unlocked by completing missions . Successful missions earn Sonic experience points , which advance him levels . 
 Sonic has 104 special moves called " skills " that are unlocked upon leveling up or reaching certain points in the story . The player can distribute these skills to four " Skill Rings " , which the player selects before starting a mission . Skills can provide Sonic with improved movement , offensive , and defensive capabilities , as well as special attacks . Skills are generally used by depleting the " Soul Gauge " , which is slowly filled by collecting pearls scattered throughout the levels . Notable skills Sonic can obtain are the " Speed Break " , which greatly increases his speed , and " Time Break " which slows down time , allowing the player to dodge obstacles more easily . 
 Secret Rings features three game modes : " Adventure " , " Party " , and " Special Book " . The story is played in the Adventure mode . The Party mode features multiplayer gameplay for up to four players simultaneously , in which players spar in a turn @-@ based tournament of motion control @-@ based minigames . The " Special Book " mode displays the game 's 225 unlockable bonuses , won by completing levels quickly and collecting " Fire Souls " — small fiery objects scattered throughout the levels . These bonuses are development documentaries , interviews , concept art , in @-@ game cutscenes , and game music . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Sonic is the game 's protagonist , and his sidekick throughout the game is Shahra , " Genie of the Ring " . Their enemy is Erazor Djinn , a genie who aspires to erase the entirety of the Arabian Nights book . He was once the Genie of the Lamp from the story of Aladdin and the Magic Lamp , who was punished for misdeeds and imprisoned in his lamp until he granted the wishes of one thousand people . Erazor did so , gaining a renewed hatred of humanity and deciding to take over the world . Several Sonic series characters appear in the form of figures from Arabian Nights , such as Miles " Tails " Prower as Ali Baba , Knuckles the Echidna as Sinbad the Sailor , and Dr. Eggman as <unk> . Though Sonic recognizes them as old acquaintances , they do not recognize him , and Shahra insists that Sonic 's perception is mistaken . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 After reading the Arabian Nights , Sonic falls asleep , only to be awoken by Shahra . She explains that Erazor is erasing the pages of the Arabian Nights and asks Sonic to help her , to which he agrees . He dons a ring that makes him Shahra 's master and grants him the ability to ask for any wishes within her power ; he then enters the book . Sonic and Shahra encounter Erazor inside ; he tells them of his intent to search for seven artifacts called the World Rings , which Shahra claims do not exist . Erazor shoots an arrow of fire at Shahra , but Sonic takes it for her . Erazor opportunistically tells Sonic that he will remove the arrow if Sonic gathers the World Rings for him . If Sonic does not do so before the flame goes out , his " life is forfeit " . Sonic and Shahra embark on a quest to retrieve the World Rings . Over the course of this quest , they learn that whoever collects the rings must be sacrificed to create a link between the Arabian Nights world and the real world . Elsewhere in the quest , Shahra gives Sonic Erazor 's lamp to use as a last resort . 
 Sonic manages to obtain the World Rings , and Erazor convinces Shahra to give them to him . To try to keep them out of Erazor 's hands , Sonic wishes for Shahra to do what she truly thinks is right , and she collapses on the ground as her mind cracks due to her conflicting emotions . Erazor attempts to sacrifice Sonic in order to open the gateway between worlds , but in a move of altruistic suicide , Shahra interrupts the attack , saving Sonic and asking for his forgiveness before dying in his arms . Without Sonic as the proper offering , Erazor mutates into the monster Alf Layla wa @-@ Layla , now intent on remaking the Arabian Nights in his image before moving on to Sonic 's world . Sonic absorbs three of the World Rings and transforms into <unk> Sonic , a darker , more violent version of Super Sonic , granting him the power to defeat Alf Layla wa @-@ Layla , but Erazor subsequently boasts that he is immortal and will always return . Sonic then reveals that he possesses Erazor 's lamp . Sonic then wishes for Erazor to bring Shahra back to life , restore the book to its original state , and be trapped in his lamp for all eternity . Erazor refuses to do so , but is helpless against the power of his lamp . After granting the third wish , Erazor pleads for Shahra to stop Sonic and save him , but she refuses , leaving him to be sucked into his lamp . Shahra then bursts into tears , and Sonic wishes for a mountain of handkerchiefs to help her through her crying . Sonic then disposes of the lamp in a pit of lava in a previously explored level . Sonic runs through the book until he finds a way home . Shahra states that his story will be forever remembered in the pages of the Arabian Nights , and the credits roll . An image of the title of " Aladdin and the Magic Lamp " in the book then changes to " Sonic and the Secret Rings " . 
 = = Development = = 
 Sonic and the Secret Rings was developed by Sonic Team and published by Sega . Sega originally planned to release a port of the 2006 Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 game Sonic the Hedgehog as the first Sonic game for the Wii . Citing lengthy development times for a port , Sega switched plans and conceived of a Sonic game that would use the capabilities of the Wii Remote . Producer Yojiro Ogawa , who had previously worked on Sonic Adventure , " already had this basic idea ( of Sonic constantly moving forward ) in [ his ] mind " , and immediately imagined its compatibility with the Wii . 
 He later decided that this could be done by using the Arabian Nights — a compilation of Middle @-@ Eastern fables — as the game 's setting . This inspired the use of Sonic characters as figures from Arabian Nights . Sega removed " some of the extraneous elements " of recent Sonic games to " get ... back to basics " . Storyboard director Zachary G. Brown stated that , " This game could put Sonic the Hedgehog in a whole new light . He could reach the top of the charts once more . " The game 's art and setting were heavily influenced by the games Shadow of the Colossus , Prince of Persia , and God of War . Its cutscenes consistently feature hand @-@ painted , static imagery resembling classic art through paint on parchment . On a technical level , Secret Rings uses the PhysX engine . Sega improved the game 's camera system to address criticisms of prior Sonic games . 
 On January 19 , 2006 , IGN staff writer Matt Casamassina revealed that " sources close to Sega " had informed IGN of an upcoming Revolution @-@ exclusive Sonic game , which was two months in development . Sega officially announced Sonic Wild Fire at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2006 , then as Hyper Sonic at a Nintendo press conference and again as Sonic Wild Fire in its trailers . Sega changed the title to Sonic and the Secret of the Rings , then slightly modified it to Sonic and the Secret Rings in August 2006 . Sega preferred Wild Fire over Secret Rings , but the latter better fit the game 's story and Arabian Nights . The game received a rating of E from the ESRB , 7 + from PEGI , and A from CERO . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music of Sonic and the Secret Rings was composed by Kenichi Tokoi , Fumie <unk> , <unk> Okamoto and Hideaki Kobayashi of Wave Master . Steve Conte and <unk> performed the vocal tracks . The music maintains the guitar @-@ based rock style of previous Sonic titles , adding elements of traditional Middle Eastern music to complement the game 's theme and aesthetic . Sega released a video game soundtrack album , Seven Rings in Hand : Sonic and the Secret Rings Original Sound Track , on March 15 , 2007 . The main theme and album title track of Secret Rings is " Seven Rings in Hand " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Sonic and the Secret Rings received scores of 70 @.@ 71 % and 69 % on review aggregators GameRankings and Metacritic , respectively ; Metacritic classifies its score as " mixed or average " . The game charted well ; it was the eleventh best @-@ selling game of February 2007 worldwide , and third for the Wii . It proved the best @-@ selling Wii game and fifth among all platforms in the United Kingdom . In North America , it was thirteenth overall , and fourth for the Wii , with 83 @,@ 000 copies . In June , July , and August 2007 , the game was the fourth , third , and seventh best @-@ selling game for the Wii , respectively . 
 Critics felt Secret Rings was a general improvement over recent Sonic games , whose popularity and critical reception had declined . According to Empire , which gave the game 3 / 5 stars , Secret Rings " reclaims the bewildering blend of platforming and racing that made the series famous " while " fixing the erratic stop @-@ start gameplay that marred recent editions " and showcasing " the best graphics the Wii has to offer this side of Zelda . " However , " the occasionally sluggish controls and spasmodic in @-@ game camera mean Sonic 's Wii debut is far from perfect . " Electronic Gaming Monthly stated that it " does a decent job at stopping the bleeding caused by the recent 360 / PS3 / PSP Sonics " , and 1UP.com 's Shane Bettenhausen wrote that the Sonic series was " definitely on the mend " after suffering progressively @-@ worse games after the release of Sonic Adventure . GameSpy 's Patrick Joynt agreed , writing that Sonic had been " reanimated to a lurching existence " . IGN 's Matt Casamassina , Nintendo Power 's Chris Shepperd , and GameSpot 's Greg Mueller named Secret Rings the best 3D Sonic game , but criticized 3D Sonic games in general . Eurogamer 's Rob Fahey praised the game for employing Sonic as the only playable character . 
 The game 's level design received mixed reviews . Joynt preferred fast levels and felt that the ones requiring players to " move carefully " detracted from the experience . Bettenhausen praised the visual appeal of Secret Rings and compared it to that of Resident Evil 4 , a game which critics acclaimed for its visuals . Casamassina agreed that the " Sonic Team has done a lot with [ the seven levels ] " , and praised the varying missions and levels ' aesthetic contrast . However , he criticized the placement of obstacles . Fahey denounced levels ' " avoidable blind spots and leaps of faith " , and found the number of stages and their re @-@ use over multiple missions " a little bit disconcerting " . He conceded that it added to the game 's replay value , comparing the levels to tracks in racing games . 
 Control and camera movement concerned reviewers . Bettenhausen called the controls " a tad reckless at first – Sonic 's momentum takes some getting used to , and trying to go in reverse is a pain – but become more natural and fluid as you get acclimated to the fast @-@ paced , twitchy action . " Casamassina and Mueller offered similar opinions , while Shepperd criticized the game 's low camera angle and arbitrary targeting system . Bettenhausen dismissed the game 's multiplayer mode as a failed adaptation of the Mario Party series . Fahey concurred , adding that a multiplayer racing mode would have been preferable to " lame " minigames . Casamassina compared the games to those in Super Monkey Ball : Banana Blitz : " only a handful of them really stand out and some are downright pointless , but overall gamers will probably be happy that they were included . " Shepperd agreed , but decried the necessity to " play the story mode extensively to unlock some of the party mode 's best features . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 To mark Sonic 's introduction in the 2008 Wii game Super Smash Bros. Brawl , Nintendo used " Seven Rings in Hand " and other Sonic series music as backing for the " Green Hill Zone " stage . Sonic Team and Sega later created Sonic and the Black Knight , a sequel to Secret Rings released on March 3 , 2009 . The two form the Storybook series ; Secret Rings is based on Arabian Nights , and Black Knight casts Sonic into the world of King Arthur . On March 18 , Secret Rings and Super Monkey Ball : Banana Blitz were compiled in a Wii release titled Sega Fun Pack : Sonic and the Secret Rings & Super Monkey Ball : Banana Blitz . 
 = The Moms = 
 " The Moms " is the twentieth episode of the fourth season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 78th overall episode of the series . It was written by co @-@ producer Kay Cannon and co @-@ show runner and executive producer Robert Carlock . The episode was directed by co @-@ executive producer John Riggi . It originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on May 6 , 2010 . Guest stars in " The Moms " include Buzz Aldrin , John Anderson , Elizabeth Banks , Kyoko Bruguera , Will Ferrell , Anita Gillette , Jan Hooks , Cheyenne Jackson , Patti LuPone , Novella Nelson , and Elaine Stritch . 
 In the episode , the fictitious show The Girlie Show with Tracy Jordan ( TGS ) celebrate the Mother 's Day holiday by having the mothers of its cast and staff ( Bruguera , Gillette , Hooks , LuPone , Nelson , and Stritch ) visit . Meanwhile , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) must deal with a visit from his mother Colleen Donaghy ( Stritch ) who begins to meddle in his relationships with Avery Jessup ( Banks ) and Nancy Donovan ( Julianne Moore ) . 
 " The Moms " received generally positive reviews from television critics . According to the Nielsen Media Research , the episode was watched by 5 @.@ 420 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 2 @.@ 6 rating / 7 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . For her performance in this episode , Elaine Stritch received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination in the category for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) , the head writer of the TGS with Tracy Jordan show , brings her boss Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) a budget approval on the show 's planned Mother 's Day episode by gathering around its cast and staff mothers . Liz reminds Jack that Mother 's Day is coming up , prompting Jack to realize he forgot to send his mother Colleen Donaghy ( Elaine Stritch ) flowers and informs his office assistant Jonathan ( Maulik Pancholy ) to send her flowers , however , Colleen is waiting outside Jack 's office door . Colleen 's real reason for visiting her son is that she learned from her friend in Florida that Jack is dating Nancy Donovan ( Julianne Moore ) , a recent divorcée , and a woman who happens to be Jack 's high school sweetheart . During dinner , Colleen does not bring Nancy up , but tells Jack she knows about his involvement with CNBC host Avery Jessup ( Elizabeth Banks ) after an awkward encounter between Avery and Jack in an elevator with Colleen present ; because of the encounter , Colleen knows that Avery and Jack are sleeping together . Colleen is appalled that Jack is dating two women at the same time , and demands that he end it and make a choice between Nancy and Avery . 
 While trying on her bridesmaid 's dress in the TGS fitting room , Colleen , Sylvia Rossitano ( Patti LuPone ) , and Verna Maroney ( Jan Hooks ) criticize Liz for not being married by now as she is in her late thirties , but Liz does not care what they think . Later , Liz has a conversation with her mother Margaret Lemon ( Anita Gillette ) regarding Liz being single . During their conversation , Margaret reveals that her true love was Buzz Aldrin and not Liz 's father Dick Lemon ( Buck Henry ) , which shocks Liz . She tells Jack about what her mother has revealed to her and ponders why her mother did not choose to be with Buzz . Jack offers to introduce her to Buzz with Liz accepting , and wanting to find out what her mother missed out on . During their meet , Buzz confesses that it was a good decision that Margaret did not stay with him as he spent many of his years as an alcoholic . After her encounter with Buzz , Liz tells her mother that she respects the decision she made by not ending up with Buzz . 
 At the same time , Verna visits Jack in hopes of getting the rest of the money he promised to give her in the episode " Verna " — as Jack paid her off to be a good mother to her daughter Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) and to visit her daughter on a regular basis — but Jack will give her the rest of the money once he believes Jenna is happy around her . While discussing what to wear for the Mother 's Day episode , Verna suggests that Jenna wear an outfit that she made , but Jenna does not want to . Nonetheless , Verna and Jenna make up and wear each other 's clothes on the broadcast . Meanwhile , TGS producer Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) learns that Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) does not know where his mother is , so he decides to cast actress Novella Nelson to be his mother for the Mother 's Day episode . Tracy and Novella have a dislike to one another , however , the two make amends with each other and sing together on the holiday episode . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Moms " was written by co @-@ producer Kay Cannon and co @-@ show runner and executive producer Robert Carlock . The episode was directed by 30 Rock co @-@ executive producer and staff writer John Riggi . This was Cannon 's seventh writing credit , and Carlock 's fifteenth penned episode . This was Riggi 's third directed episode for the series after " Goodbye , My Friend " and " The Problem Solvers " . " The Moms " originally aired on NBC in the United States on May 6 , 2010 , as the twentieth episode of the show 's fourth season and the 78th overall episode of the series . This episode of 30 Rock was filmed on March 5 and March 10 , 2010 . 
 Actresses Anita Gillette , Jan Hooks , Patti LuPone , and Elaine Stritch reprised their roles as Margaret Lemon , Verna Maroney , Sylvia Rossitano , and Colleen Donaghy , respectively , the mothers of the characters Liz Lemon , Jenna Maroney , Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) , and Jack Donaghy , respectively . John Lutz appears as the mother of his character , TGS writer J.D. Lutz , but it is unclear whether this is portrayed as a casting joke on the part of 30 Rock or whether the character of Lutz is impersonating his own mother within the show . In addition , actress Novella Nelson guest starred as herself as Tracy Jordan 's fake " mother " for the first time . Former astronaut Buzz Aldrin played himself in the episode as it is revealed that he was in a relationship with Liz 's mother . In an interview with TV Guide in discussion of his guest spot , Aldrin said " That was wonderful , carrying on a conversation with very professional actors I greatly admired . I felt very honored to be paired up with something that also has another connection to me . [ ... ] That was a lot of fun . " Aldrin revealed that when first notified about the guest appearance he had to " think about it a little bit " , and he mistook 30 Rock with the show 3rd Rock from the Sun , a program that previously aired on NBC . 
 The show made reference of Jack 's love triangle storyline with CNBC host Avery Jessup and his high school sweetheart Nancy Donovan , played by actresses Elizabeth Banks and Julianne Moore , respectively . This plot was first introduced in the April 22 , 2010 , episode " Lee Marvin vs. Derek Jeter " . The love triangle dilemma would continue throughout the season . Moore was announced as a love interest for Alec Baldwin 's Jack in November 2009 , while Banks ' guest spot as a love interest for the Jack character was confirmed in December 2009 . Actor Cheyenne Jackson made his sixth appearance as his 30 Rock character Danny Baker . In this episode , Danny introduces his mother Miho ( Kyoko Bruguera ) to J.D. Lutz ( John Lutz ) and Lutz tells Danny that he had no idea he was adopted as Miho is Asian and Danny is not . Actor John Anderson made his third appearance on the show and was credited as Astronaut Mike Dexter , an individual whom Liz considers to be her imaginary perfect husband . During a flashback of her younger years , Margaret — played by Tina Fey — is walking with a man named " Ed " — played by Anderson — later revealed that " Ed " was Buzz Aldrin , her first love . 
 Comedian actor Will Ferrell had a brief appearance in " The Moms " . In the beginning of the episode , Liz tells Jack that NBC wants TGS to have a Mother 's Day themed episode after the network received criticism for re @-@ airing the offensive action drama Bitch Hunter . In a clip , Ferrell — as the character Shane Hunter — says " Put the mimosas down , bitch ! " . 30 Rock staff writer Jack Burditt and Mad Men creator Matthew Weiner are credited as the writers of that Bitch Hunter episode . This was Ferrell 's second appearance as Shane Hunter having first appeared as the character in " Lee Marvin vs. Derek Jeter " . Ferrell has appeared in the main cast of Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) , a weekly sketch comedy series which airs on NBC in the United States . Fey was the head writer on SNL from 1999 until 2006 . The song Sincerely by The <unk> featured in this episode . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Verna confesses that she once sexually assaulted former professional basketball player Scottie Pippen . When Pete tells Tracy that actress Novella Nelson will be his " mother " , Tracy says he had his sights on actress Phylicia Rashad or professional tennis player Serena Williams to be his " mother " . When Liz learns that her mother could have been an astronaut 's wife , Margaret explains that it was not that simple as she had just graduated from secretary school and got a job as a secretary at Sterling Cooper . The latter is a fictional advertising agency on the AMC program Mad Men . In addition , actor Jon Hamm , who plays the lead role on Mad Men , has had a recurring role on 30 Rock as a love interest for Tina Fey 's character . Later , Liz gets angry at her mother 's admission of not marrying Buzz Aldrin and tells her that actress Laura Linney " could 've played you in the HBO original movie Moon Wives . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " The Moms " was watched by 5 @.@ 420 million households , according to the Nielsen Media Research . It received a 2 @.@ 6 rating / 7 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic , meaning that 2 @.@ 6 percent of all people in that group , and 7 percent of all people from that group watching television at the time , watched the episode . This was a decrease from the previous episode , " Argus " , which was watched by 5 @.@ 439 million households . Elaine Stritch received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards for her performance in this episode , but lost it to actress Betty White for hosting SNL . 
 IGN contributor Robert Canning gave the episode an 8 @.@ 7 out of 10 rating saying he liked all the mothers coming back and loved Buzz Aldrin 's appearance , writing that despite Aldrin not being a great actor " he had enough good lines to overcome this short fall . " The A.V. Club 's Todd <unk> <unk> gave " The Moms " episode a B grade rating , noting " ... I just liked the episode for having all of the characters have their moms wandering around . " Entertainment Weekly contributor Emily Exton gave the episode a positive review , writing that it was fun to see " the resemblances between all the moms and their kids " and enjoyed Will Ferrell 's cameo here . At the beginning of his review , Adam Mersel of TV Guide said that this episode was not funny and was " amused , a bit confused , and left wanting more . " After recapping the episode he said that he took his comments back , explaining that the episode " did have laughs . " Television columnist Alan Sepiwall for HitFix wrote this episode of 30 Rock " wasn 't a very funny episode of the show ... yet it did some nice things in trying to pull Liz and some of the other characters back into reality . " Sepinwall commented that Tracy and Jenna 's stories with their mothers were " nice grounded moments for the show 's two broadest main characters , and the sort of thing 30 Rock needs to do with them a few times a season . " Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad liked this episode better than the previous episode " Argus " , enjoyed Elaine Stritch 's return as Jack 's mother , and that Tracy 's story with Novella Nelson was " actually well done " , explaining that his situation makes sense in the TGS world . The Houston Press ' Daniel Carlson wrote that " The Moms " was " fun but lighter than air , content to string together a mild plot with a series of good jokes and callbacks . " Nick Catucci for New York magazine was positive about the episode , and reported that Tracy and Novella Nelson had the best chemistry of the night . 
 Time contributor James Poniewozik noted that " The Moms " had a lot of potential , explaining that the return of the television character 's mothers " [ had ] the ability to bring out the insecure children in their respective grown kids . But rather than advance any themes or storylines of the show , the episode mostly repeated them " , regarding Jack 's love triangle . Sean Gandert of Paste said that Jack 's relationship troubles in choosing between Nancy and Avery " feels like it 's been dragging on forever . " Nonetheless , Gandert commented Liz 's story " was the real heart of the episode . " 
 The return of Bitch Hunter received positive reviews from television critics . Exton said " thank you NBC for re @-@ airing Bitch Hunter , more Will Ferrell for us ! " Canning opined that 30 Rock " may want to be careful of overdoing this funny but one @-@ note joke . " Carlson enjoyed the reappearance , noting it was " a welcome touch . " 
 = Prior to the Fire = 
 Prior to the Fire is the second studio album by Canadian hard rock group Priestess . Recorded in Los Angeles with producer David Schiffman , the album was initially released on October 20 , 2009 , by Indica Records in Canada . By design , the album lacks the production values of the band 's debut album , Hello Master , in order to achieve a more natural sound . As the band took more progressive rock influences and applied them to their songwriting , they changed their lyrical focus and wrote about themes considered to be more unusual for rock music , such as film and television characters , for this album . 
 The record is known for the difficulty Priestess encountered in trying to release it . The band 's extensive touring schedule for their previous album Hello Master consumed much of the time they would have used to write new material , and after they began doing so , they had disputes with RCA Records , their international distributor at the time , as to whether the new songs were acceptable . After the completion of the recording sessions , which were themselves problematic , RCA ultimately refused to release the album , fearing it was not commercial enough , but allowed the group to release it on another label . Tee Pee Records signed the group thereafter and released the album internationally . Priestess were still signed to Indica Records , but only for Canadian distribution ; the release on Indica was withheld until an international distributor was found . 
 Critical reaction to the album was mixed , but largely positive . The departure in style from Hello Master was frequently noted for better or for worse , and comparisons of the group to influential hard rock and heavy metal acts such as Thin Lizzy and Black Sabbath were once again made . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2005 , Priestess released its debut album Hello Master , which spawned two minor hits : " Lay Down " became popular because it was included as a playable track in the best @-@ selling video game Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock , and " Talk to Her " peaked at # 33 on the Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks chart in 2006 . Even though the group have admitted that they were ultimately displeased with the sound of the record , which they described as " so tight and really produced " , they remain proud of their Guitar Hero achievement . The band spent roughly two and a half years performing concerts on behalf of Hello Master , supporting such acts as Dinosaur Jr . , the Sword , Mastodon and Megadeth . During that time they concentrated mostly on the existing material and had little chance to write anything new , and writing for the new album would not begin in earnest until the summer of 2007 . 
 Lead singer and guitarist Mikey Heppner , who listened to progressive rock in his youth , wrote things that he initially withheld from the band , because he felt that his bandmates would not understand him - he described his work as being " way too proggy " . Despite his initial doubt , they loved his work when he showed it to them . Thereafter , Heppner began describing the forthcoming record in progressive rock terms during interviews . He told the Whistler Question that it " is a little more musically complex ; deeper into the sort of metal side where we started out from " , but that " It still sounds like us " . He also told Jam ! that the new songs were " leaning toward progressive ( rock ) territory " . 
 However , RCA Records , their former label who released Hello Master outside their native Canada in all other territories starting in 2006 , became hopeful that the band 's next record would have similar success . As a result , the label continually rejected the material represented by the demo recordings the group were sending in , believing that none of the songs could perform as commercially @-@ successful singles . RCA continually delayed the band from entering the studio in hopes that they could write such a song , but by the time the group had written 20 songs ( including material that was eventually phased out of their concert setlist ) the label still had no confidence in the new material . " We really were in an amazing place , writing , jamming four to five times a week and coming up with great stuff , " recalled Heppner . " We felt at the peak of our creativity . [ ... ] And they were like , ' Can you write more songs ? ' ( We were , like ) , ' This is insane . ' " RCA would continue to differ with Priestess on the issue , even after the album was finished . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Realizing that the arguments were only consuming time , RCA relented for the time being and allowed the band to make studio arrangements . In December 2007 , the band made their first attempt at recording the album with producer Matt Bayles , who after only a few days was dismissed as he " wasn 't really the right fit " . In 2008 , after the band spent the winter looking for another producer , their A & R representative at RCA Records tried to schedule sessions with Tool guitarist Adam Jones but was unsuccessful ; as a result , the process did not begin in earnest for six more months . This also meant they could not plan a concert tour until they had the problems with their studio schedule resolved . Following several more attempts at securing a producer , Priestess finally got the recording sessions scheduled for October 2008 when David Schiffman signed on to the project after meeting with the group through their A & R representative ; Schiffman , whose résumé included artists from Johnny Cash to System of a Down , had expressed interest in helming the album for the band if they were in need of his services . After extensive pre @-@ production in Montreal , Priestess went to Los Angeles to record the album . 
 Once the recording sessions got off the ground , Priestess encountered another problem – this time with the law . The band were working in a house in a neighborhood , and the close proximity to other houses meant that they had to keep the amount of noise generated to a minimum . They had been assured that the house had not previously been served with noise violations of any kind , but after they had finished recording drums and many of the guitar parts , they learned that they had the volume set too high when working on the bass guitar tracks ; law enforcement came to the door and forced them to take their work elsewhere because they were shaking neighboring houses with the noise they were generating . The band did so with no objection , quickly moving their equipment to another studio , although they recalled the incident rather humorously later . Schiffman was able to arrange for the group to use another facility as early as the following day , and the band moved production to that new location the night of the incident . The sessions were completed in November 2008 . 
 During the sessions , the band played a single " secret " show in Los Angeles where they showed fans everything being recorded for the album . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 The band were enthusiastic about working with David Schiffman . His approach was more minimalistic compared to that of Gus van Go ( who produced Hello Master ) and did not involve many of the studio techniques van Go employed . Heppner stated , " Everything was way simpler [ than it had been for Hello Master ] . " He noted that Prior to the Fire more accurately reflected the band 's live sound , whereas Hello Master was , as he put it , a " studio production " . The recording was not specifically intended to emulate their live concert sound , but to sound more natural – " This is Priestess playing in a room , " Heppner clarified , thus emphasizing that they wanted to simply record the band and nothing else . Schiffman gave the band a lot of creative freedom as well , not interfering with song arrangements and simply allowing the band to record as they desired , which led Heppner to enthusiastically state that he was " all about recording it and not fucking with it . " Heppner noted that if Schiffman had any suggestions , he never forced them onto the group , which made them more willing to consider his suggestions . At least 14 of the 20 songs the band wrote were recorded at the sessions . 
 After Heppner introduced his bandmates to progressive rock , the band integrated minor influences from the genre in their songwriting and compositions , including touches of keyboards , while trying not to deviate too much from the sound of Hello Master . The change in style was largely adopted so they could challenge themselves musically , but not specifically to be heavier : " I don 't think we go in wanting to write a heavier record , " guitarist Dan Watchorn stated . " I don 't think we have a preconceived notion of what we want , the riffs and melodies just kind of come . The fact that Hello Master was a bit more on the poppy side and Prior to the Fire has a bit more edge to it is just where we 're at right now with music . " Of the end result , drummer Vince Nudo said , " Our individual tastes came out more [ on this record than they did on Hello Master ] . [ ... ] It 's more organic . We 're not holding back so much . " 
 The writing process for this album was more communal compared to that for Hello Master ; Heppner had written much of the band 's debut album himself and his bandmates helped him in arranging the material , but the sophomore album featured more contributions from each band member . Nudo once again wrote and sang a song for the record , and although Watchorn did not write the lyrics to an entire song by himself for this album , he and Heppner collaborated on several of them , including " Lady Killer " . Watchorn explained that the songs changed drastically between the time they were first written and when they got recorded , and that the songs " weren 't complete until they actually made the record . " He also said that the album 's protracted production history enabled the group to experiment with the songs and repeatedly alter them to taste , thus ironically yielding a record that was considered better than if they had been able to simply record it and be done with it sooner . 
 Lyrically , the album focused on more unusual themes for rock music than the band had written for Hello Master as they instead wrote about personal interests . For his part , Heppner described the songs as being about " mega geek shit " , and recalled some advice he had been given to simply write about things he liked , which became how most of the songs on the album were written . Heppner wrote " Murphy 's Law " as an ode to his favorite film , RoboCop ; he was inspired to write it when he was writing songs in his room and saw his poster for the movie on the wall . His lyrics to " It <unk> the Mind " recount a tournament in the manga / anime series Dragon Ball , while the seminal Lone Wolf and Cub inspired him to write " Sideways Attack " . The influential serial drama Twin Peaks served as the basis for a song that he wrote that did not make it into the final track listing ; outtakes from the album , of which there were at least three , were set for separate release on 7 " singles . Watchorn has noted that this album was not the first time the band had described their favorite films in songs ; although he did not specify which ones , he did note that there were songs from Hello Master that pertained to films as well . 
 Other themes were more general . " Lady Killer " has been cited as having a considerable thrash metal influence , and its topic of revenge against a serial killer is comparable to songs such as Iron Maiden 's " Murders in the Rue Morgue " and Judas Priest 's " The Ripper " . The song emerged when the band attempted to " write a theme song for Jack the Ripper , " according to Heppner , and its distinctive intro was created by generating feedback on a 1976 Gibson SG run through a 1970s MXR rack flanger . " The Gem " portrays the apocalypse as being a good thing because it wipes humanity off the planet ; whoever sets it in motion ( Heppner explained as by " open [ ing ] Pandora 's Box " ) is hailed as a hero for having done the right thing . " Communicating Via @-@ Eyes " is " the werewolf song " , as Heppner put it ; he wrote much of that song while on tour with Megadeth in the UK . He later stated a song loosely inspired by An American Werewolf in London was written for the album , but it is not clear whether he was referring to a song already on the album or an outtake from it . 
 = = Title and artwork = = 
 The Cincinnati CityBeat reported that the album had been titled Life Giver , but Heppner coined the album 's current name while at a hotel on tour . Flipping through the channels on the hotel television in search of shows like CSI , he was just in time to see a segment on A & E where a detective commented on a woman 's death in a house fire . He said something to the effect of , " The amount of carbon monoxide in the victim 's lungs proves that she had died prior to the fire , " and Heppner liked the way the last words sounded . 
 The artwork was designed by a friend named Mike Yardley in response to a mass e @-@ mail sent to all the artists Heppner knew . The band do not ascribe any particular meaning to it ; Heppner commented that the artwork , combined with the title , could be " a pre @-@ creation thing " or even " a Billy Joel reference . " In any case , the meaning of the artwork and title has been left open to interpretation , and the artwork was chosen specifically because it did not conform to an existing standard . 
 = = Continuing dispute with RCA = = 
 Much as the label had argued with the band over the quality of the songs before production , RCA continued to debate the issue with Priestess after the album sessions were finished in the fall of 2008 . Despite the confidence the band themselves had in the strength of the album 's material , RCA still did not share that sentiment and refused to release the album , as they felt it still lacked a potential single . Reflecting on the situation , Heppner remarked , " You can 't force write a single , it 's impossible to do that . At least it 's impossible for us . We 're not Tin Pan Alley songwriters ; we 're a rock band . " 
 RCA subsequently released the group from their contract . Despite having funded the album 's production , RCA gave the band the opportunity to find another label to release the finished product instead , thus losing any money the company had invested in it . The group had hoped to release the album in March 2009 , but RCA 's reluctance caused Priestess to miss this anticipated timeframe completely . A Canadian release ( on Indica Records , which has always been the band 's Canadian label ) was withheld until the band could find a new label to replace RCA . By all accounts , the band lost a year trying to get Prior to the Fire released . 
 Because of RCA 's leniency in the end , the band 's departure was peaceful despite complications , and they still hold respect for RCA for what the label allowed them to do . Heppner credits the label for allowing the record that RCA funded to go to some other company who would want it instead , while Watchorn acknowledges that recent economic troubles would have mandated that record labels only keep " the things that are going to sell " on their rosters . Heppner noted that labels usually shelve albums permanently if they are deemed unfit for commercial sale rather than give them to the artists who recorded them , and that the band were " really , really lucky " in comparison . Priestess found and signed with New York City independent record label Tee Pee Records to replace RCA in late 2009 ; Tee Pee Records had offered to sign the group years earlier , but the band chose RCA over Tee Pee . They enjoy being signed to Tee Pee Records rather than RCA , where they feel more " at home " . The band have stated that they feel less pressure to succeed on Tee Pee Records , and they do not feel any less important to the label compared to its higher @-@ profile artists , such as American Idol contestants . " Tee Pee is the perfect label for us right now , because they totally understand what we want to do , " Heppner stated . " I am alas [ sic ] stoked to be labelmates with so many wicked bands . " He additionally noted that the only advantage the band had when signed to RCA was more money , and that having a different kind of music meant that Priestess were not as lucrative as a band such as the Foo Fighters , who were more heavily promoted . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Prior to the Fire was released on October 20 , 2009 in Canada , and on February 2 , 2010 ( the soonest possible date Tee Pee Records could give the band ) in the United States . Priestess chose for an earlier release in Canada so that they could begin touring in support of the record at last . All CD pressings of the album contain 11 tracks , but with the deluxe edition from Tee Pee Records comes a code to obtain a 13 @-@ track edition from the Internet . It contains the original 11 tracks , plus two bonus tracks . ( As the band are signed only to Indica Records in Canada , all deluxe editions from Tee Pee Records are only released outside of Canada . ) Two deluxe editions were released by Tee Pee Records : both came with the code for the Internet download , and one came with an exclusive T @-@ shirt as well . 
 Critical opinions of the album have been mixed , but largely positive . Metacritic gave the album a rating of 68 out of 100 , based on 12 reviews . 
 AllMusic 's Phil Freeman said that the album , which he gave 4 out of 5 stars , was well worth the wait after the amount of time it took to get released , and that the stylistic variety of material , combined with the cover art ( which bore a striking resemblance to that of The Resistance , also released that year ) , could make Priestess " retro hard rock 's answer to Muse " . Rock Sound made a favorable comparison to Thin Lizzy for the track " Lunar " , and to Baroness for " The Gem " , giving the album a score of 9 out of 10 . The PRP described the album as " heavier " than Hello Master , with its songs having " an alarming amount of depth " , but referred to the track " Murphy 's Law " as " questionable " in an otherwise favorable review which gave the album 4 out of 5 stars . Artrocker 's Stuart Gadd also gave the album 4 out of 5 stars , as he enjoyed the stylistic reminders of Iron Maiden and other classic metal he heard on the album , and went as far as to say that despite being released in early 2010 it was already the best metal record of the year . David Marchese , writing for Spin , also praised the album with a score of 8 out of 10 , even saying that " Someone should be fired for the delay [ between Hello Master and Prior to the Fire ] , because this baby burns " . 
 By contrast , Pitchfork Media 's Tom Breihan offered a mixed opinion of 5 @.@ 9 out of 10 , stating that on its own the album is good , but it pales in comparison to an album like High on Fire 's Snakes for the Divine . PopMatters scored the record 5 out of 10 stars and wondered if RCA 's instincts were right in regards to the album 's lack of " catchier " material , as Adrien Begrand said that Heppner 's vocals were in general weaker on this album as compared to the band 's previous record . Nonetheless , he did compliment Vince Nudo for his vocals on " Lunar " , which he favorably compared to Black Sabbath , and also compared " Lady Killer " to Judas Priest . The Boston Phoenix reviewer Mikael Wood gave the album a star and a half out of four , and wrote that despite the cleverness behind the album 's title , the songs within were empty , and while fans of the style would be comfortable with it , " Everybody else should seek out Hello Master . " 
 Prefix writer Craig Hubert rated the album 5 out of 10 , and said it had more " definable hooks " than most other metal albums , but that still made the record no better or more accessible . He did note that he looked forward to when the band reached their full potential , which he felt the new record 's music indicated would be soon . Speaking from his perspective as an aged listener and someone who is not a fan of modern rock music , Jay Bennett of the Phoenix New Times gave the album a grade of B. He described the album as “ a pleasant surprise ” , saying that he was not a fan of metal from recent years but that the album has “ a lot more in common with the late- ‘ 70s and early- ‘ 80s @-@ era Judas Priest and Iron Maiden ” , which he liked . 
 After the album 's release in Canada , the band embarked on a tour in that country with Early Man and Trigger Effect in November 2009 . February 2010 saw them return to the UK and Europe with <unk> , and the group spent that spring supporting High on Fire in concert in the US . July saw them in Canada once more touring with High on Fire , and that November they played concerts as the headliner supported by new labelmates Naam in the US . 
 The band made a music video for " Lady Killer " ; it was shot in the band 's hometown of Montreal and directed by David <unk> . Released on February 4 , 2010 via Pitchfork Media , the video made extensive use of fur and taxidermy , which were noted by ChartAttack as qualities PETA would not approve of : " I can hear Ingrid <unk> screaming right now . " The video features the band members performing quite prominently in spite of Heppner 's previous assertion that no music video made for the album would feature the band members performing , citing his embarrassment from the production process of the band 's previous music videos . " Lady Killer " was listed by Noisecreep as the tenth best metal song of 2010 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Priestess = = = 
 Mikey Heppner – lead guitar , lead vocals 
