 Dan Watchorn – rhythm guitar , backing vocals 
 Mike <unk> – bass guitar 
 Vince Nudo – drums , backing vocals , lead vocals on " Lunar " 
 = = = Additional personnel = = = 
 Credits taken from AllMusic . 
 David Schiffman – producer , engineer 
 Gordon Ball – photography 
 Mike Yardley – illustrations , design 
 Jon <unk> & Brian <unk> – second engineers 
 Adrian Popovich – mixing 
 Ryan Morey – audio mastering 
 Ace – guitar technician 
 Lee Smith – drum technician 
 = Sussex Spaniel = 
 The Sussex Spaniel is a breed of dog developed in Sussex in southern England . It is a low , compact spaniel and is similar in appearance to the Clumber Spaniel . They can be slow paced , but can have a clownish and energetic temperament . They suffer from health conditions common to spaniels and some large dogs , as well as a specific range of heart conditions and spinal disc herniation . 
 First bred in 1795 in Hastings , East Sussex for specific hunting conditions , they nearly became extinct during the Second World War . They are now more popular in the United States than any other country and are recognised by all major kennel clubs . Notably , a Sussex Spaniel won the best in show in 2009 at the 133rd Westminster Kennel Club . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Sussex Spaniel is a low compact spaniel similar in appearance to a small , dark Clumber Spaniel . It is normally no taller than 13 – 15 in ( 33 – 38 cm ) at the withers and the usual weight range is 35 – 45 lb ( 16 – 20 kg ) with a roughly rectangular appearance . The Clumber Spaniel meanwhile is normally between 17 – 20 in ( 43 – 51 cm ) high at the shoulder , and weighing 55 – 85 lb ( 25 – 39 kg ) . 
 One of the noticeable features is their golden liver @-@ coloured coat which is unique to the breed . Historically however , there have also been examples of both black and sandy coloured Sussex Spaniels . The coat is thick ( sometimes with a slight wave to it ) , feathering on the chest , legs and ears and consists of a weather resistant undercoat with a silky outer coat . The eyes are hazel in colour . The silky ears are lobe @-@ shaped typical of the Spaniel , and set moderately low . The Sussex is a short , stocky kind of dog . 
 = = Temperament = = 
 The Sussex Spaniel is a slow paced , calm breed with somewhat clownish behaviour that normally keeps his energy and enthusiasm in check . He is always eager to be around people , is excellent around children , and can be quite protective of the family . They make excellent candidates for therapy dog work . Most Sussex Spaniels are primarily family pets , but they are competent enough to aid a hunter though quite stubborn to train . They tend to have a natural ability to quarter in the field , have excellent noses , and can be used to retrieve , given training . The breed is the only spaniel to howl once a game 's scent is picked up . 
 = = Health = = 
 The breed is generally healthy with an average life span of 12 to <unk> . Hip dysplasia , a genetic malformation of the hip joint , may be a concern but because of the breed 's compact nature is not often seriously debilitating . Surveys conducted by the Orthopedic Foundation For Animals showed that 41 @.@ 5 % of Sussex Spaniels were affected by hip dysplasia , and the breed was ranked 9th worst affected out of 157 breeds . 
 Another common condition is otitis externa ( outer ear infections ) , which is common to a variety of spaniels , as the long floppy ears trap moisture , making them more prone to recurrent infections than dogs with more upright ears . The infections can be caused by a variety of reasons including mites , ear fungi and generally dirt and germs . Treatment is relatively simple and can range from prescribed antibiotics to over @-@ the @-@ counter ear cleaning liquids . 
 <unk> sometimes presents difficulties and require caesarean section for successful delivery of the puppies . 
 Heart conditions in the Sussex Spaniel can include pulmonary valve stenosis , which is the most common of the congenital heart defects . Essentially , in an animal with this condition , the pulmonary valve is improperly formed which causes the heart to work much faster to pump blood around the body . The final results of this condition can be swelling of fluid in the chambers of the heart , thickening of the heart muscle known as ventricular hypertrophy leading to eventual heart failure . 
 Patent ductus arteriosus also appears in the breed . It is a condition where a small blood vessel connecting two major arteries does not close following birth . It can cause complications as it is positioned to allow the blood flow to bypass the lungs . It also appears in American Staffordshire Terriers . 
 A heart condition uncommon to the breed is tetralogy of <unk> , which is more common in the <unk> and English Bulldog breeds relatively . It is actually a combination of up to four conditions , including the previously mentioned pulmonary valve stenosis , with a secondary condition of right ventricular hypertrophy . The other conditions are ventricular septal defect which is a defect or hole in the wall of the heart between the two ventricles and the aorta which carries the blood from the left to the right side of the heart can be mis @-@ positioned . The effect on the dog depends on the severity of the condition , and can range from a heart murmur through to reduced activity levels to death . Symptoms in puppies are generally a failure to grow and a reduced tolerance for exercise . Active treatment is effective in around 50 % of cases . 
 = = = <unk> disc syndrome = = = 
 Also commonly called spinal disc herniation , this is where the intervertebral disc bulges or ruptures into the vertebral canal where the spinal cord resides . When the cord is compressed , the dog can experience symptoms ranging in scope from mild back or neck pain to paralysis of limbs , loss of sensation , and loss of bladder or bowel control . It is most commonly seen in the mid @-@ back area , but can occur anywhere along the spine . Mild cases that do not result in paralysis can be treated medically by confining the animal in a crate to restrict movement to a minimum for several weeks , which can be accompanied by pain medication . Surgery can restore sensation to a dog 's legs following paralysis but the success rate depends on how severe the herniation was . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1795 , Mr. Fuller of Rosehill Park , Hastings in East Sussex , England began breeding gun dogs to work in districts where the terrain was rough and the undergrowth very dense which meant that a spaniel was needed which could give tongue or to alert the hunter on his quarry . Fuller crossed various breeds such as the liver and white Norfolk Spaniel ( now extinct ) , the Field Spaniel , and possibly some early English Springer Spaniels . The Sussex was bred specifically to inherit the barking ability that was not common in most Spaniel breeds during this era . 
 The Sussex Spaniel was one of the first ten breeds admitted into the stud book by the American Kennel Club in 1884 , but lost what little popularity it had achieved in the 1940s . During World War II , breeding was discouraged but the Sussex saved from extinction by English breeder Joy Freer . All modern Sussex Spaniels are descended from the dogs she saved . In 1947 , only ten Sussex Spaniels were registered in the English Kennel Club . 
 In 2004 the breed was identified as a vulnerable native breed by Kennel Club of Great Britain which are described as having annual registration figures of less than 300 per year . In 2008 , only 56 puppies were registered . 
 In 2009 a Sussex Spaniel named " <unk> Three D <unk> Glee , " call name " Stump , " won best in show at the 133rd Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show . At 10 years old , Stump is the oldest dog to win this title . 
 The breed is more popular in the United States than any other country . It is recognised by the Continental Kennel Club , Fédération Cynologique Internationale , American Kennel Club , Kennel Club of Great Britain , Canadian Kennel Club , National Kennel Club , New Zealand Kennel Club , and the American Canine Registry . 
 = Ivan Vladislav of Bulgaria = 
 Ivan Vladislav ( Bulgarian : Иван <unk> ) ruled as emperor ( tsar ) of Bulgaria from August or September 1015 to February 1018 . The year of his birth is unknown ; he was born at least a decade before 987 , but probably not much earlier than that . 
 Saved from death by his cousin Gavril Radomir , the Bulgarian Emperor , in 976 , Ivan Vladislav murdered him in October 1015 and seized the Bulgarian throne . Due to the desperate situation of the country following the decades @-@ long war with the Byzantine Empire , and in an attempt to consolidate his position , he tried to negotiate truce with the Byzantine emperor Basil II . After the failure of the negotiations he continued the resistance , attempting unsuccessfully to push the Byzantines back . During his period of rule , Ivan Vladislav tried to strengthen the Bulgarian army , reconstructed many Bulgarian fortresses and even carried out a counter @-@ offensive , but he died at the Battle of Dyrrhachium in 1018 . After his death his widow , Empress Maria , the Patriarch and most of the nobility finally surrendered to Basil II , who soon suppressed the last remnants of resistance and brought about the end of the First Bulgarian Empire . 
 Ivan Vladislav left a mixed heritage , varying from a reputation of being ruthless murderer to a hero defending his country as best as he could . The descendants of Ivan Vladislav entered the Byzantine nobility and rose to the highest ranks of the hierarchy . Two women of his family became empresses of the Byzantine Empire and others became military commanders or high @-@ ranking officials . He was an ancestor of the Byzantine emperor John II Komnenos . 
 = = Life before the accession of the throne = = 
 Ivan Vladislav was the son of Aron , the brother of Emperor Samuel ( r . 997 – 1014 ) of the Cometopuli dynasty . In 976 or 987 Samuel ordered his brother Aron executed for treason together with his entire family near <unk> . Ivan Vladislav was the only survivor , being spared through the intercession of his cousin , Samuel 's son Gavril Radomir . His life during the subsequent decades and until his accession is unknown . 
 = = = Assumption of power = = = 
 By 1015 , Bulgaria had been embroiled in almost thirty years of war with the Byzantine Empire , and Gavril Radomir had succeeded Samuel , who died on 6 October 1014 after the disastrous Battle of Kleidion . However , from the outset Radomir 's position was insecure : Ivan Vladislav , as a son of the elder of the <unk> brothers , could lay claim on the throne based on seniority . During that time the Byzantine king Basil II campaigned deep into Bulgarian territory . He retook the previously lost town of <unk> ( Edessa ) and laid siege to the massive fortress of Maglen , situated to the north @-@ west . Gavril Radomir did not have enough forces and was unable to interfere and could only watch the course of the events from the nearby Lake Ostrovo . His inability to cope with the Byzantine threat aroused discontent among the nobility and Ivan Vladislav became their chosen leader . The fall of Maglen sealed Gavril Radomir 's fate — in the late summer of 1015 , while hunting near Ostrovo ( <unk> ) , he was murdered by his cousin , perhaps at the behest of Byzantine agents . Ivan Vladislav then seized the Bulgarian throne and took steps to ensure his position against potential rivals . 
 = = Emperor = = 
 = = = First months of the reign = = = 
 After assuming the throne , Ivan Vladislav immediately sent a delegation to Basil II , which arrived five days after the fall of Maglen . In his letter , Ivan Vladislav notified Basil that he had personally murdered Gavril Radomir and had seized all the power in the country and promised Basil deep humility and obedience , an act of submission which some in the nobility supported . After Ivan Vladislav firmly secured his hold on the throne , however , he openly declared to be against any kind of compromise with the Byzantines and quickly began to follow the determined policy of his predecessors against the ongoing Byzantine conquest . Basil II soon understood that Ivan Vladislav 's letter was a ruse and plotted a retaliatory action , bribing the <unk> Theodore , who was in Byzantine captivity , to murder the Bulgarian ruler . Theodore in turn paid a trusted man in Ivan Vladislav 's employ to commit the murder , but in the event the assassin actually killed Theodore himself . In the meantime Basil II continued his march , forcing the Bulgarian emperor to retreat to the Albanian mountains , and advanced into the heart of the Bulgarian state . The Byzantines took the capital Ohrid and burned the imperial palaces ; news , however , arrived that Ivan Vladislav had laid siege to Dyrrhachium and that to the south the Bulgarian general Ibatzes had defeated the Byzantine rear army near Bitola . With his supply routes cut , Basil II had to retreat back to Thessalonica leaving a small garrison in Ohrid , which was swiftly retaken by the Bulgarians . Back in his base at Mosynopolis , Basil divided the Byzantine army to harass the areas of Strumitsa and Sofia . In January 1016 the Byzantine emperor returned to Constantinople . 
 = = = Consolidation = = = 
 Meanwhile , Ivan Vladislav consolidated his positions in the mountains of Albania and Macedonia . As early as October 1015 he began the reconstruction of many strongholds destroyed during the war , including the fortress at Bitola ( as testified in the Bitola inscription ) . In 1016 he invited his vassal Prince Jovan Vladimir of <unk> , who was married to Gabriel Radomir 's sister Theodora Kosara , to come to his court . The emperor probably desired to seize the prince and so secure his western flank . The Prince was determined to attend the invitation of Tsar , but his wife Theodora Kosara did not trust the murderer of her brother , and fearing for her husband 's life persuaded him not to go . Ivan Vladislav however vowed not to threaten his vassal 's life , and sent him a golden cross as a proof of good will . Jovan Vladimir still hesitated , saying that God was nailed to a wooden not golden cross , but Ivan Vladislav repeated his vow and gave him a guarantee of safe @-@ conduct , also guaranteed by the Bulgarian patriarch David . Eventually Jovan Vladimir travelled to the court of the Tsar in Prespa , but upon his arrival on 22 May , he was immediately beheaded , and the emperor refused to allow the burial of his body . It was not until a number of miraculous events related to the corpse of the prince were observed that Vladislav returned the body to Kosara . 
 In the spring of 1016 Basil II led his armies along the Struma valley and besieged the strong fortress of Pernik . The fort 's defence was headed by the capable commander Krakra , who remained loyal to the Bulgarian cause . As all the previous attempts against Pernik , the 88 @-@ day siege was a failure , costing the Byzantines many casualties before they were forced to retreat south and regroup at Mosynopolis . 
 = = = Fighting in 1017 = = = 
 In the early days of 1017 the Byzantine emperor renewed his campaigns . He sent David Arianites and Constantine Diogenes to pillage along the River Vardar and captured the castle of <unk> . After that he marched south and besieged Kastoria . Under the walls of the town Basil II received messages from <unk> , the Byzantine strategos of Dorostolon ( Silistra ) , that Ivan Vladislav had sent Krakra to negotiate assistance from the Pechenegs and that they were crossing the Danube . The Byzantine emperor immediately abandoned the siege and hurried northwards , but in the vicinity of Lake Ostrovo he learned that the Pechenegs were unwilling to risk war . Returning south , Basil II captured <unk> , where Samuel used to have a palace and acquired for himself the large amount of provisions that were stored there . Ivan Vladislav , who was closely monitoring the Byzantine movements , ambushed the troops who were under the command of Constantine Diogenes , who would have perished had not Basil II come to relieve him . According to John Skylitzes , the Emperor charged alone in front of his army to Diogenes ' rescue . When the Bulgarians saw him , they shouted " Run , the Emperor " ( " <unk> <unk> " ) and retreated in panic . <unk> with their victory , the Byzantines moved on to <unk> and returned to Constantinople . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 In the early 1018 Ivan Vladislav besieged Dyrrhachium , but in February he was killed under the walls of the city . The accounts of his death are contradictory . According to some he became victim of a plot and was killed by his servants ; according to others , he perished in battle . The Bulgarian additions to the Skylitzes Chronicle are more detailed , saying that Ivan Vladislav dueled with the strategos of Dyrrhachium , the patrikios Niketas Pegonites , on horseback , and while fighting , two Byzantine infantrymen from the audience rushed to the emperor and wounded him mortally in the belly . A later Byzantine historian claimed that the duel was fair and Pegonites stabbed Ivan Vladislav in the chest with his spear , killing him instantly . The Chronicle of the Priest of Duklja reports an altogether different story : while having a meal in his camp , the emperor was attacked by an unknown soldier , in whom Ivan Vladislav seemed to have recognized the murdered Jovan Vladimir . Terrified , he cried for help but no one rushed to his rescue and the unknown soldier mortally wounded the Bulgarian ruler . 
 His death marked the effective end of the Bulgarian Empire . Ivan Vladislav 's sons were young and inexperienced , and even the strongest Bulgarian leaders doubted the advisability of further resistance . Upon learning of the death of the Tsar , Basil II left Constantinople . In Adrianople he was met by the brother of Krakra who acknowledged Byzantine authority . His example was followed by the larger part of the Bulgarian nobility who pledged loyalty to Basil II , giving up their fortresses . In Serres , Krakra along with the commanders of 35 castles met the emperor and surrendered , and in Strumitsa he received a message sent by the Empress @-@ dowager Maria to negotiate the surrender of the capital and the country . Basil II richly awarded those who surrendered , allowing them to keep their lands , wealth and titles . Short @-@ lived resistance continued under Ivan Vladislav 's eldest son Presian II and his brothers , but they also surrendered by the end of 1018 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Living more than one hundred years after Ivan Vladislav , the historian known as the Priest of Duklja , who wrote from a Dukljan perspective , was outraged by the murder of Jovan Vladimir , and wrote that after the Tsar died , he was " forever connected with the angels of Satan " . Many modern Bulgarian historians , including Vasil Zlatarski , also criticize the emperor , claiming that his actions hastened the fall of Bulgaria and that instead of raising the morale of the nation he turned into a murderer and was unable to cope with the intrigues and the corruption in court . Steven Runciman is also critical of the emperor , noting that his assassination of Gavril Radomir unleashed a general confusion where each noble started looking out for his own personal interests , but nevertheless credits him with " a considerable ruthless energy " . Jordan Andreev is more favourable to Ivan Vladislav , noting that he had reasons for his acts — he had to revenge the murder of his family according to the old Bulgarian pagan beliefs , but he only killed Gavril Radomir and his wife without harming the rest of Gavril Radomir 's family . He had to cope with Jovan Vladimir who , as a husband of one of Samuel 's daughters , was a threat to his position , and had also attempted a compromise with the Byzantines . According to Andreev , Ivan Vladislav 's struggle to defend the Bulgarian state and his heroic death serve to mitigate his ill deeds . He cites a Byzantine historian who claimed that during Ivan Vladislav 's reign the Byzantine state " hanged in the balance , because that barbarian like Goliath resisted the Romans and they were all despaired by that invincible foe . " The Polish historian Kazimierz Zakrzewski also writes with sympathy for the last ruler of the First Empire , in light of the fact that Ivan Vladislav managed to sustain a guerilla war which he skilfully run until his death . 
 Ivan Vladislav Point on Rugged Island in the South Shetland Islands , Antarctica is named after Ivan Vladislav of Bulgaria . 
 = = Family = = 
 Ivan Vladislav married Maria , possibly the daughter of Tsar Boris II of Bulgaria and a Byzantine noblewoman , by whom he left progeny . Maria was named <unk> <unk> by Basil II , and the descendants of Ivan Vladislav entered Byzantine service , becoming part of the Byzantine nobility and forming close ties with the Komnenos clan in particular . Both his daughter Catherine and an unnamed ( possibly Anna ) granddaughter married ( future ) Byzantine emperors . His second son <unk> took part in the Uprising of Petar Delyan against Byzantine rule but eventually betrayed the Bulgarian cause . 
 Maria and Ivan Vladislav had several children , including : 
 Presian , who briefly succeeded as emperor of Bulgaria 1018 , later Byzantine magistros 
 Aron , Byzantine general 
 <unk> , Byzantine patrikios in 1019 , strategos of Theodosiopolis in Anatolia , briefly emperor of Bulgaria in 1041 
 <unk> / <unk> , father of Maria of Bulgaria , who married Andronikos Doukas . 
 Catherine ( Ekaterina ) , who married the future Byzantine Emperor Isaac I Komnenos 
 = Bill Masterton = 
 William John " Bill " Masterton ( August 13 , 1938 – January 15 , 1968 ) was a Canadian – American professional ice hockey centre who played in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the Minnesota North Stars in 1967 – 68 . He is the only player in NHL history to die as a direct result of injuries suffered during a game , the result of massive head injuries suffered following a hit during a January 13 , 1968 , contest against the Oakland Seals . 
 A college standout with the Denver Pioneers , Masterton was a member of National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) championship teams in 1960 and 1961 , was twice an NCAA All @-@ Star and was the most valuable player of the 1961 NCAA Division I Men 's Ice Hockey Tournament . He briefly played in the Montreal Canadiens organization before settling in Minnesota where he played senior hockey . The NHL 's 1967 expansion offered an opportunity to play for the newly founded North Stars , for whom he scored the first goal in the franchise 's history . 
 Masterton 's death sparked a long @-@ running debate in hockey about the merits of wearing helmets , as few NHL players did so in that time . Despite several efforts to mandate their use , it was 11 years before the NHL made them compulsory for all new players beginning in the 1979 – 80 season . In his memory , the NHL created the Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy which it has awarded since 1968 to a player who demonstrates perseverance and dedication to hockey . The North Stars retired his jersey number 19 , an honour that followed the franchise when it later relocated to Dallas , Texas . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 A native of Winnipeg , Manitoba , Masterton played two seasons of junior hockey with the St. Boniface Canadiens in the Manitoba Junior Hockey League ( <unk> ) . He averaged a goal per game and finished with 49 points in 22 games in 1955 – 56 as the Canadiens won the Turnbull Cup . He added eight points in six games during the Memorial Cup playdowns , however St. Boniface failed to reach the national championship final . Following a second season in which he recorded 53 points in 30 games , Masterton chose to attend the University of Denver where he was offered a scholarship to play with the Denver Pioneers hockey program . 
 Masterton played three seasons in Denver between 1958 and 1961 , appearing in a total of 89 games , scoring 66 goals and 196 points in that time . At the time of his graduation , he was the Pioneers ' all @-@ time leading point scorer , a record he held for 25 years . He was a two @-@ time NCAA All @-@ American and was twice named to the Western Collegiate Hockey Association ( WCHA ) All @-@ Star team , earning both awards in 1960 and 1961 . Masterton led the WCHA in scoring in 1959 – 60 with 44 points in conference play , and led Denver to the 1960 NCAA national championship . Masterton served as team captain for 1960 – 61 , and was named the most valuable player of the 1961 national championship as he led Denver to a second consecutive title . The Pioneers finished the season with a 30 – 1 – 1 record and were hailed as " the greatest hockey team to ever represent an American college or university . " 
 Turning to professional hockey after graduating with an engineering degree , Masterton signed a contract with the Montreal Canadiens in 1961 . Led by Jean Béliveau and Henri Richard , the Canadiens were extremely deep at centre , so Masterton was assigned to the Hull @-@ Ottawa Canadiens of the Eastern Professional Hockey League . He had 31 goals and 65 points for Hull @-@ Ottawa , placing him in the top ten in both categories . Masterton was promoted to the Cleveland Barons of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) for the 1962 – 63 season , where he led the team with 82 points . He finished as the runner up to Doug Robinson for the Dudley " Red " Garrett Memorial Award as the AHL 's top rookie . 
 Faced with little opportunity to make the Montreal roster , Masterton left the professional game to complete his master 's degree at the University of Denver . He settled in Minneapolis , Minnesota , where he took a job in contracts administration . He joined the Honeywell Corporation where he worked on the Apollo program . He and his wife Carol adopted two children , Scott and Sally . 
 After taking a year off hockey in 1964 , Masterton regained his amateur status so that he could play senior hockey in the United States Hockey League . He played two seasons with the St. Paul Steers between 1964 and 1966 . Masterton became a naturalized American citizen , allowing him to join the United States National Team in 1966 – 67 . He served as captain on that team and was considered its most valuable player . 
 = = = Minnesota North Stars = = = 
 The NHL expanded in 1967 , doubling from 6 teams to 12 . Among the new entries was the Minnesota North Stars . The new team 's coach and general manager , Wren Blair , had scouted Masterton while he played with the US Nationals and purchased his NHL playing rights from the Canadiens . Masterton was the first player to sign with Minnesota , agreeing to a two @-@ year contract . He said prior to the start of the 1967 – 68 season that being able to play in Minnesota was key as he would have been unlikely to consider an offer with any other team . 
 At the age of 29 , Masterton made his NHL debut in the North Stars ' inaugural game , played October 11 , 1967 , against the St. Louis Blues . In that game , a 2 – 2 tie , Masterton scored the first goal in Minnesota franchise history . His wife Carol later recalled that it was a " dream come true " for her husband : " He always wanted a shot at the NHL , and expansion was a wonderful thing for him and guys like him . " By mid @-@ season , Masterton had scored 4 goals and 12 points in 38 games . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Masterton suffered a severe internal brain injury during the first period of Minnesota 's January 13 , 1968 , game against the Oakland Seals at the Met Center . He carried the puck up the ice at full speed , passing it off as two Seals defenders , Larry Cahan and Ron Harris , converged on him . Masterton was knocked backward in the resulting collision and landed on his head . Like most players of his era , he wasn 't wearing a helmet . Referee Wally Harris compared the hit to an explosion , adding " he was checked hard , but I 'm sure it wasn 't a dirty play . " The force of the impact caused Masterton to bleed from his nose , ears and mouth . The impact of the hit caused him to lose consciousness before he hit the ice ; according to some accounts , he briefly came to and muttered , " Never again , never again " before passing back out . He received treatment on the ice and in the dressing room before being rushed to Fairview @-@ Southdale Hospital . 
 Carol , who was watching the game from the stands , and Masterton 's parents , who were listening to the game from their home in Winnipeg , rushed to his bed side at the hospital . He was attended to by two neurosurgeons and three other doctors . They soon concluded that the injury was too severe for surgery to be a viable option . Some 30 hours after his fall , on January 15 , Masterton died without ever regaining consciousness . His parents , brother , wife and two children were at his side . Masterton 's Minnesota teammates , who were playing a game in Boston on the 14th , were informed that he had been removed from life support in the dressing room in what was ultimately a 9 – 2 loss to the Bruins . He is the only player in NHL history to die as a direct result of an injury suffered on the ice . To date , he is the last player to die as a direct result of an in @-@ game injury in one of the major North American professional sports . 
 Ron Harris was haunted for many years by his role in Masterton 's death : " It bothers you the rest of your life . It wasn 't dirty and it wasn 't meant to happen that way . Still , it 's very hard because I made the play . It 's always in the back of my mind . " But Masterton 's family held no animosity towards the players involved or the game . Carol referred to the incident as a fluke , saying that it could have happened to anyone . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Few NHL players wore helmets in 1968 , and Masterton 's death sparked an immediate debate on whether their use should be compulsory . Legislators in New York considered a law to make their use mandatory , and the NHL voted on and rejected a rule requiring players wear helmets three times by 1971 . 
 Some players began to wear helmets following Masterton 's death , but adoption was slow . Three years later , only six Minnesota players wore them , the most of any of the NHL 's teams . The " macho " attitude of the game , including fear of being called a coward , was an often cited reason for reluctance . It was 11 years before the NHL finally mandated the use of helmets by all players entering the league beginning in the 1979 – 80 season . 
 A later analysis by the Toronto Star in 2011 suggested that the " macho " attitude of the NHL in that era , as well as his aggressive playing style , played a significant role in Masterton 's death . Coach Wren Blair believed that Masterton was playing despite a pre @-@ existing brain hemorrhage , and was concerned enough that he wanted to have Masterton checked out by a doctor . However , Masterton brushed it off . Longtime NHL coach John Muckler , who was then the coach of the Stars ' second @-@ tier farm team , the Memphis South Stars , believed that Masterton may have suffered a brain injury as early as training camp . During the season , several players and coaches recalled seeing Masterton black out during rushes in practice . Goaltender Cesare Maniago recalled that the night before the fatal hit , Masterton had been complaining of severe migraines that he 'd had for over a week . They felt it caused what was otherwise viewed as a routine , albeit hard , bodycheck to turn fatal . Toronto neurosurgeon and concussion expert Charles <unk> reviewed Masterton 's autopsy and opined that Masterton had suffered second @-@ impact syndrome , which occurs when a person suffers a second concussion on top of an earlier , untreated concussion . When this happens , it can cause rapid and often fatal brain swelling . 
 Several awards were named in Masterton 's memory . The Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy was created in 1968 under the trusteeship of the Professional Hockey Writers ' Association and is presented annually to the " National Hockey League player who best exemplifies the qualities of perseverance , sportsmanship and dedication to hockey " . The University of Denver Pioneers hockey team named its most valuable player award after him , and his Winnipeg high school , Miles MacDonnell Collegiate , presents a scholarship in his name . High schools in Bloomington , where the North Stars played their games , also award scholarships in Masterton 's name . The Minnesota North Stars pulled his jersey number 19 out of circulation following his death and formally retired it in 1987 . That honour followed the franchise when it relocated south to become the Dallas Stars . 
 Masterton was inducted into the Colorado Sports Hall of Fame in 1985 , and named to the NCAA 's 50th anniversary team in 1997 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception ( Moscow ) = 
 The Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception of the Holy Virgin Mary is a neo @-@ Gothic church that serves as the cathedral of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Moscow . Located in the Central Administrative Okrug , it is one of only two Catholic churches in Moscow and the largest in Russia . 
 The construction of the cathedral was proposed by the Tsarist government in 1894 . Groundbreaking was in 1899 ; construction work began in 1901 and was completed ten years later . Three @-@ aisled and built from red brick , the cathedral is based on a design by architect Tomasz <unk> @-@ <unk> . The style was influenced by Westminster Abbey and Milan Cathedral . With the help of funds from Catholic parishes in Russia and its neighbouring states , the church was consecrated as a chapel for Moscow 's Polish parish in 1911 . In the aftermath of the Russian Revolution in 1917 , the Provisional Government was overthrown by the Bolsheviks and Russia became part of the newly formed Soviet Union . Because the promotion of state atheism was a part of Marxist – Leninist ideology , the government ordered many churches closed ; the cathedral was closed in 1938 . During World War II , it was threatened with demolition , and was used after the war for civil purposes , as a warehouse and then a hostel . Following the fall of communism in 1991 , it returned to being a church in 1996 . In 2002 it was elevated to the status of cathedral . Following an extensive and costly <unk> of reconstruction and refurbishment , the cathedral was reconsecrated in 2005 . 
 In the 21st century , after 58 years of non @-@ religious use , the cathedral is once again the setting for regular liturgical celebrations in multiple languages — Russian , Polish , Korean , English , French , Spanish , Armenian and Latin — as well as benefit concerts featuring organ and church music . Its organ , the third since the cathedral 's construction , was donated by the Basel Münster . The cathedral is listed as a heritage building in the Russian Federation , and is a protected monument . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First construction period = = = 
 At the end of the 19th century , only two Catholic churches existed in Moscow : the Saint Louis des Français church for the French population and the St. Peter and Paul church for the Polish parishioners . As the congregation for the Polish church had increased to around 30 @,@ 000 members , the existing buildings were too small . Following the submission of a petition to the Governor @-@ General of Moscow , the local council voted for a new church in 1894 . Construction of a new church was permitted with several conditions , including two pertinent to the building site : the structure was to be built away from the old city centre , and was not to be located in the vicinity of any Orthodox sacred sites . 
 Bearing in mind the council 's requirements , on 16 May 1895 the parish purchased a 10 hectare ( 22 acre ) site on Malaya <unk> Street , then located on the city outskirts and surrounded by fields and vegetable gardens . Today , the site is in the Central Administrative Okrug , outside of the Garden Ring road defining the old walled city , just beyond the Moscow Metro 's <unk> Line , and is surrounded by 20th century urban development . The purchase of the land was funded by donations , and cost 10 @,@ 000 rubles in gold ( roughly US $ 7 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 as of 2012 ) . The purchase agreement and a full list of donations are today kept in the city archives of Moscow and St. Petersburg . 
 A further condition imposed by the city read as follows : " In the light of the two existing Roman Catholic churches , the future church shall be larger , with a cross on the gable , but without spires and exterior sculpture " . The plans for the building were produced by a Russian architect of Polish descent , Tomasz <unk> @-@ <unk> . Although his plan did not follow the council 's latter condition , it was accepted . The plan provided seating for up to 5 @,@ 000 worshippers . Groundbreaking was in 1899 , and construction took place from 1901 to 1911 . The construction cost was 290 @,@ 000 roubles in gold ( roughly US $ 207 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 as of 2012 ) , much of which was donated by members of the Polish parish of Moscow . More funding came from Catholic parishes throughout Russia , Poland and Byelorussia . 
 The church was consecrated on 21 December 1911 as the " Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception of the Holy Virgin Mary " . It soon obtained the status of a chapel in the Peter and Paul parish . The consecration received extensive coverage in the Russian and Polish press . The Moscow newspaper , <unk> Slovo , wrote : 
 In the filthy , wretched Malaya <unk> ( Little Georgian ) Street , forsaken by God and the city , there rose the wonderful , highly artistic solidity of the new Roman Catholic church , dedicated to the Immaculate Conception of Holy Virgin Mary . Tremendous in magnitude and height , ... with a plenty of conning turrets and towers with crosses . The new cathedral makes a deep impression ... [ Every detail ] looks impressive and eminent : Not the slightest stylistic flaw could be seen or detected . 
 From 1911 to 1917 , money was collected for interior furnishings , which were relatively sparse apart from the impressive main altar . ( These original furnishings remained until the 1930s . ) Parts of the draft plan were abandoned : the floor was not constructed from marble as intended , but poured from plain concrete ; outside there were no pinnacles on the façade . Writings vary on when the pinnacles were built : some claim they were built in 1923 , but others argue that they were not completed until the renovation of the cathedral in 1999 . Observers that argue for an earlier construction date state that they were damaged during World War II and left dismantled for some time . 
 = = = Closure and conversions = = = 
 In the aftermath of the Russian Revolution in 1917 , the Provisional Government was overthrown by the Bolsheviks , and Russia became part of the new Soviet Union . As the promotion of state atheism was a part of Marxist – Leninist ideology , the Soviet government ordered many churches closed . The Peter and Paul parish was formally dissolved by the communist government in 1929 , and celebrating Mass was forbidden . The church lost much of its surrounding gardens in 1935 — a school was built there the following year — and the church was finally closed on 30 July 1938 ( the St. Peter and Paul church had met the same fate nine days earlier ) . The church was plundered after its closure , and many items , including the main altar and the organ , were irretrievably lost . The church was used for several months as a vegetable store , and was then reconstructed as a hostel and its interior divided into four floors . 
 The main tower 's spire was removed during the Battle of Moscow to prevent the Luftwaffe from using it as a landmark . Shortly after the war ended in 1945 , sections of the gardens were annexed for the building of an apartment block . A fire in 1956 caused the collapse of the lantern over the principal tower 's dome . Existing tenants were slowly rehoused , and members of the Mosspetspromproyekt ( Russian : <unk> ) research institute took possession of the former church . The research institute dealt primarily with project drawings for industrial facilities , but also designed the Olympic cauldron used at Lenin Stadium for the 1980 Summer Games . 
 During the 1960s and 1970s , the building 's exterior became increasingly dilapidated ; among those concerned about the church 's deterioration was Russian bard Vladimir Vysotsky , who lived in a house across the street . In the late 1970s the city considered renovating the building , possibly to use as a concert hall for organ recitals , or as a general cultural administration centre . These projects were never carried out due to resistance from the research institute . 
 = = = Return to religious use = = = 
 The glasnost ( openness ) policy , introduced during the rule of Mikhail Gorbachev , played a major role in developing religious freedom in the Soviet Union . Consequently , in 1989 , a group of Moscow Catholics and the cultural association " The Polish House " ( Russian : <unk> <unk> ) , suggested that the building should again be used for religious purposes . Following the city 's assent , the first Mass at the site in 60 years was celebrated on the church stairs during the feast of the Immaculate Conception on 8 December 1990 . The Mass was celebrated by the Polish priest Tadeusz Pikus , who later became an auxiliary bishop for the Archdiocese of Warsaw . 
 In January 1990 , a group of Catholics in Moscow formally founded the parish of the Immaculate Conception of the Holy Virgin Mary . On 13 April 1991 Pope John Paul II promulgated the encyclical <unk> quae , establishing the " Apostolic administration for European Russia " . Its apostolic administrator , Tadeusz Kondrusiewicz , issued a decree for the reconstruction of the church on 21 April 1991 . With the city 's permission , on the Polish National Day ( 3 May ) a second Mass was held , again on the stairs . The constitution of the parish was officially acknowledged on 31 May by the department of justice of the city council . Meanwhile , parts of the church were subleased by Mosspetspromproyekt to various companies . 
 From 7 June 1991 , Masses were celebrated each Sunday in the churchyard — the institute still occupied the building . On 15 July 1991 , Father Josef <unk> , a member of the Salesians of Don Bosco , was appointed the new parish priest . Religious education had been given regularly under the direction of the Salesian Sisters since 29 November 1991 . At the same time , the first charities were founded for nursing and aid to the poor . The vice @-@ mayor of Moscow , Yury Luzhkov , signed a decree in favour of the Church on 1 February 1992 ordering the institute to vacate the property by 1994 . Parish members entered the building on 2 July 1992 , and occupied the institute 's workshop . Moscow City Council agreed to allow the church to occupy the space , which was subsequently walled off from the remainder of the building . There , in the former workshop , Mass was celebrated regularly . 
 The dividing wall was removed by parish members on 7 March 1995 , while others started clearing the truss . The institute called the police , OMON , for help . The following day , more conflict with the police occurred and several parish members , among them a nun , were injured . Others were arrested , including a priest and a seminarian , but were released the next day . After these events , the Apostolic Administrator , Tadeusz Kondrusiewicz , wrote an open letter to the Russian President , Boris Yeltsin , on 9 March 1995 , requesting his intervention : " It seems that persecution of the church was history . Is that the case ? I can 't remember seeing a priest arrested , and I can 't remember seeing a nun beaten up . " 
 As a result , Senior Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov , a Yeltsin appointee , signed a decision for the removal of the institute . The decision , dated 7 March 1995 , ordered the institute 's departure by 1996 . Simultaneously , the institute wrote to Luzhkov describing the earlier events from their perspective , and requested compensation for loss of the building . In a meeting with the Polish Ambassador , Stanisław <unk> , on 15 March 1995 , the acting mayor of Moscow , Alexander <unk> , assured him that the return of the church would be complete by the end of the year . 
 On 19 March 1995 , a Mass was celebrated in the reclaimed part of the church under the direction of Papal Nuncio John Bukowski , who delivered Pope John Paul II 's blessing to the parish . In a new decision dated 2 November 1995 , Luzhkov ordered Mosspetspromproyekt to leave the building by the end of the year at the latest . When the order was still not implemented , parish members entered the institute on 2 January 1996 and began the removal . Institute director Evgeny Afanasyev called the police once again , but on this occasion , they declined to intervene . Subsequently , the institute director asked the parish priest for a final extension of the removal date by two weeks — Mosspetspromproyekt vacated the building on 13 January 1996 . On 2 February 1996 , the Archdiocese of Mother of God at Moscow obtained official permission to use the church indefinitely . 
 = = = Restoration and <unk> = = = 
 In the early 1990s , plans were made by the Office for Monument Protection to restore the church by 1997 , the 850th anniversary of Moscow 's foundation . This proposal was not implemented because of the dispute over occupancy . However , in 1995 , the city determined that the parish would be responsible for restoration costs . A commission was founded for the planned restoration , chaired by parish priest Josef <unk> , Russian historian Stanislav <unk> , and Polish building contractor and politician Grzegorz <unk> . 
 From 1996 to 1999 , the church was restored with the help of sponsors <unk> , a Polish company , and <unk> , a German association for Roman Catholic churches . The Russian government provided funds towards the conclusion of the project . Reconstruction took place initially under the direction of Polish companies PKZ and <unk> , who completely restored the façade and roof . From September 1998 , Father <unk> <unk> and Jan <unk> , architect and restorer from Toruń , Poland , jointly oversaw the work ; they had previously headed the restoration of the Catholic Assumption Cathedral in St. Petersburg . ( <unk> later rose to become vicar general of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Moscow . ) The interior fittings and the new altar were built by Ukrainian , Belarusian and Russian experts . Companies in Moscow carried out all the internal and external marble work . The church furnishings were produced , under the direction of Vladimir <unk> , by students from the St. Petersburg renovating school . Stained glass for the façade 's rose window were made in Toruń , other windows were produced by <unk> , a Belarusian company from Hrodna . The Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception was ceremonially reopened on 12 December 1999 and was reconsecrated by the Secretary of State of the Roman Curia , Angelo Cardinal <unk> . The cathedral incorporates a library , the editorial office of the Russian Catholic magazine The Catholic Messenger — The Light of the Gospel ( Russian : <unk> <unk> — <unk> <unk> ) as well as the local office for the Caritas charity . 
 = = Architecture and facilities = = 
 The cathedral , built in a neo @-@ Gothic style , is a three @-@ aisled cross @-@ shaped pseudo @-@ basilica , which has three naves and an apse . It was constructed entirely from red brick , and was not rendered externally . The five @-@ bay main aisle extends for 65 metres ( 213 ft ) , each with lateral arms 13 metres ( 43 ft ) long . The octagonal lantern tower above the crossing is 30 metres ( 98 ft ) high . The façade is based on the design of Westminster Abbey , and the tower loosely on that of Milan Cathedral . Typically for old @-@ style church buildings , each side aisle is strengthened by five buttresses , the ten together symbolising the Ten Commandments . Crosses were erected , as part of the renovation , surmounting each principal tower ; the central façade pinnacle and two other façade pinnacles feature the crests of John Paul II and archbishop Tadeusz Kondrusiewicz . 
 The first ten steps to the portal symbolise the Commandments , the eleventh symbolises Jesus Christ . The portal symbolises Heaven 's gate , reached by obeying the Commandments and the teachings of Jesus . The portal is surrounded by columns and crowned by a wimperg , the gable spire of which is formed as a finial . The wimperg is decorated with a relief ornament , in the centre of which is a golden monogram " <unk> " ( Virgo Maria Immaculata <unk> , Latin for " Virgin Mary , conceived unblemished " ) . The original architectural design provided a Star of David instead of the monogram , a reference to the Jewish faith of the Virgin Mary . Above the wimperg is a 3 @-@ metre ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) tall rose window , built from a light @-@ coloured , translucent stone . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 On each side on the entry of the cathedral is a stone crucifix and a holy water font . High on the left side there is a brick from the Lateran Basilica , and on the right side a jubilee 2000 medal . The crypt is accessed through the door in the right wall of the vestibule , then up to the organ <unk> and finally down through the door on the left wall . In the crypt , there is an oratory , as well as Catechism rooms and the office of the Caritas charity . 
 There are benches in the main aisle and confessionals in the side aisles . The confessionals contained benches until the closure of the church in 1938 . After its reconstruction , the left side was reserved for women , and the right for men . Both side aisles are separated from the main aisle by pillar files , consisting of four columns and two half columns . The columns and the roof are painted in white , and the walls in cream . The floor is constructed from light and dark grey marble slabs in a chequered pattern . 
 Most of the 8 @.@ 5 @-@ metre ( 28 ft ) high stained glass windows have abstract designs . Those in front feature crests of Apostolic <unk> John Cardinal <unk> and Francesco Cardinal <unk> . The windows in the transept are slightly larger and have a more complex design . The window in the right lateral arm depicts Saint Peter and Saint Andrew , who symbolise the Western and Eastern branches of the Catholic Church . On the window on the opposite side of the left lateral arm is depicted Pope John Paul II , who is gazing at the Marian apparition of Fátima . In the nave , under the windows , are fourteen reliefs depicting the Stations of the Cross . 
 The entry to the vestry is located at the end of the right side aisle next to the choir ; at the end of the left side aisle is the Chapel for Mercy of God . The tabernacle is situated on the chapel 's altar . The church 's main altar is faced with a dark green marble , and houses relics of Saints Andrew , Zenon of Verona , Gregory of Nyssa , Gregory of Nazianzus , Cosmas , Damian and Anastasia , as well as the Virgin Mary 's scarf and a donation from the Diocese of Verona . The <unk> — a projection coming out from the <unk> — is on the right side of the altar , and is faced with the same marble . Behind the altar , on the wall of the apse , there is a nine @-@ metre high stone crucifix with a three @-@ metre high figure of Christ . Plaster figures depicting the Virgin Mary and John the Baptist by architect Svyatoslav <unk> are located on the left and the right sides ( respectively ) of the corbels . On the opposite side of the altar and above the cathedral 's vestibule is the organ loft , which had originally room for 50 choristers ; a large part of it is now occupied by the organ . 
 = = = Organ and bells = = = 
 The present pipe organ is one of the largest in Russia and the third since the church 's foundation . The first organ was taken by the state in 1938 and the second , an electronic organ with 60 stops , was installed as part of the renovations in 1999 . It was donated by the American charity " Aid to the Church in Russia " , headed by priest Marcel <unk> , who received consecration as a deacon during the renovation in 1997 . The electronic organ was replaced by a pipe organ during 2002 – 2005 . 
 The cathedral 's pipe organ was built in 1955 by Orgelbau Kuhn AG of <unk> , Switzerland , for the Reformed Evangelical Basel Münster Cathedral in Basel , Switzerland . The Swiss cathedral donated the organ , dismantled it in 2002 , and all pipes but without the largest — Nr. 65 principal bass 32 ' , 10 m ( 32 ft ) long — were transferred to Moscow . The pipes were transported wrapped in new garments donated by the people of Basel , which were later distributed to Moscow 's poor . The installation of the pipe organ in Moscow was performed by the Orgelbau Schmid company from <unk> , Germany , headed by Gerhard Schmid , who refused payment for his work . During the work , Schmid was killed in a fall from a scaffold on 9 September 2004 ; his son Gunnar finished the work . 
 The original 10 @-@ metre , 32 ' pipe stayed in Switzerland and was built into a new organ in the Münster Cathedral , which belongs to the Swiss Inventory of Cultural Property of National and Regional Significance . This pipe , capable of reproducing a tone of 16 @.@ 35 Hz , the bass note C0 four octaves below middle C , was recreated in Moscow and added to the cathedral 's organ in 2009 . 
 The five church bells are located on the cathedral 's roof behind a tripartite screen of lancet arches on the left side of the façade . They were poured by the <unk> bell foundry in Przemyśl , Poland and donated by bishop Wiktor <unk> The bells are electronically activated . The largest weighs 900 kilograms ( 2 @,@ 000 lb ) and bears the name " Our Lady of Fátima " . The other bells are named , from the smallest to the largest : " John Paul II " ; " St. Jude " , named after the patron saint of archbishop Tadeusz Kondrusiewicz ; " Anniversary @-@ 2000 " ; and " St. Victor " , named after the patron saint of Bishop Wiktor <unk> . 
 = = 21st century = = 
 On 11 February 2002 , Pope John Paul II created the administration for the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Moscow and named Apostolic Administrator Tadeusz Kondrusiewicz as archbishop and metropolitan . However , this decision was criticised by Patriarch <unk> II , who called it " unfriendly " , as he believed the Roman Catholic Church saw Russia as a field for missionary activity . At the same time , the Church of the Immaculate Conception acquired the status of cathedral of the archdiocese . In March 2002 , members of the cathedral and Catholics from other European cities participated in a rosary led by the Pope via video conference . Since the reopening , many services take place daily in the cathedral . The main liturgical language for Masses is Russian , but services are also held in Polish , English , French , Spanish , Korean , Latin and Armenian ( based on an Armenian Rite ) . 
 The re @-@ installed organ — with 74 stops , 4 manuals and 5 @,@ 563 pipes — was consecrated by Archbishop Tadeusz Kondrusiewicz of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Moscow on 16 January 2005 . The mass was followed by the opening concert for the First International Festival for Organ Music . The month @-@ long festival saw several organ concerts in the cathedral . The closing concert was performed by chief organist James Edward <unk> from St. Peter 's Basilica . Organ and church music concerts take place regularly in the cathedral ; entry is normally free , except for selected concerts , for which admission is by ticket . A service in remembrance of those killed in the 2010 Polish Air Force Tu @-@ 154 crash was held on 12 April 2010 . 
 = Haane Manahi = 
 Haane Te Rauawa Manahi DCM ( 28 September 1913 – 29 March 1986 ) was a New Zealand soldier of Te Arawa and Ngāti <unk> descent who served in the Second World War as a member of the Māori Battalion . 
 Born in Ohinemutu , New Zealand in 1913 , Manahi worked as a laborer before he volunteered for service in the newly raised Māori Battalion of the New Zealand Military Forces following the outbreak of the Second World War . He participated in the Battle of Greece and fought in the Battle of Crete during which he was wounded . After recovering from his wounds he returned to the Māori Battalion , and fought through the Western Desert and Tunisian Campaigns during which he was nominated for a Victoria Cross ( VC ) for his actions at Takrouna . Despite the support of four generals , his VC nomination was downgraded to an award of a Distinguished Conduct Medal . 
 In June 1943 , he returned to New Zealand on a three @-@ month furlough but when this was completed , was not required to return to active duty . After his discharge from the New Zealand Military Forces , he was employed as a traffic inspector . He was killed in a car crash in 1986 . After his death , representations by his Te Arawa iwi ( tribe ) were made to Buckingham Palace for a posthumous award of the VC . These representations were ultimately unsuccessful due to the period of time that had elapsed since the war . In 2007 , he eventually received a special citation for bravery from the Queen . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Haane Te Rauawa Manahi , the youngest son of a farm labourer , was born on 28 September 1913 in Ohinemutu , a village on the shores of Lake Rotorua in the North Island of New Zealand . Of Te Arawa and Ngāti <unk> descent ( and a little Scottish from his mother ) , he attended local schools in the area up to secondary school level . After leaving school , he worked in road construction and undertook farm work . He also spent time in the timber and building industries alongside his uncle , Matiu , who had served in the first contingent of New Zealand Māori to be raised for military duty during the First World War . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Following the outbreak of the Second World War , Manahi was one of the first men to enlist in November 1939 in the newly formed Māori Battalion . The battalion was composed of a headquarters company and four rifle companies , which were organised along tribal lines . Manahi was assigned to B Company , made up largely of other men from Te Arawa . In May 1940 , after a period of training at Trentham Military Camp , the battalion embarked for the Middle East as part of the second echelon of the New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( NZEF ) . En route , the convoy carrying the second echelon was diverted to England , where it would remain until January 1941 engaged in further training and defensive duties . 
 = = = Greece and Crete = = = 
 On 27 March 1941 , Manahi 's battalion , having spent two months in Egypt , arrived in Greece to assist in its defence against an anticipated German invasion . It initially took up defensive positions around Olympus Pass , and in the days following the beginning of the invasion on 6 April , rebuffed initial contact by the advancing Germans . The battalion had to withdraw as the flanks of the Allied positions were threatened . B Company was the last of the battalion 's units to abandon its positions , and together with the rest of the Allies , withdrew over the following days to Porto Rafti , where it boarded a transport ship for Crete . 
 On Crete , the Allies dug in for the expected airborne attack by German paratroopers . The Māori Battalion was positioned near the town of <unk> , as a reserve for 5th Infantry Brigade which was tasked with the defence of Maleme Airfield . On 20 May , the attack commenced . Manahi was returning to his trench , having just had breakfast , as planes and gliders flew overhead , discharging paratroopers . During fighting for the airfield , Manahi was wounded in the chest . Despite his wounds , he would remain with his company as it was forced to withdraw to the southwest in the following days and was eventually evacuated from Crete on 31 May . 
 = = = North Africa = = = 
 After a period of recuperation , Manahi returned to the normal routine of training for desert warfare and constructing defensive positions around the Baggush Box . In November he , along with rest of the 2nd Division , participated in Operation Crusader . This involved near constant fighting across Libya for well over a month , during which Manahi , with two others , captured and commandeered a German tank which had been stuck in B Company 's trenches . In early 1942 , the New Zealanders were withdrawn to Syria for a period of rest and garrison duty . 
 However , in late May 1942 Rommel and the Afrika Korps attacked into Libya . The 2nd Division was rushed back from Syria and dug in at Minqar Qaim . <unk> by the Germans , the division was forced to breakout on 26 June and withdrew to positions around El Alamein . Here , suffering regular artillery barrages , it dug in to await an expected attack . In late August , no attack had been launched and it was decided a raid for prisoners would be undertaken by two companies , one of them being Manahi 's B Company . This was successfully executed on 26 August . The next month , the battalion was taken out of the line for a brief period of rest before returning for the Second Battle of El Alamein . During the fourth stage of the battle , in what was codenamed Operation Supercharge , Manahi and his company was involved in a bayonet charge against well dug in Germans that had resisted a previous attack by another battalion . 
 By now , it was clear that the Germans were in retreat and the Allies pursued them into Libya and Tunisia . After a battle at Tebaga Gap , during which Moana @-@ Nui @-@ a @-@ Kiwa Ngarimu of the battalion 's C Company won the Victoria Cross ( VC ) , planning began for a push into Tunisia 's capital city Tunis . Before this could be achieved , a defensive line around Enfidaville needed to be broken . 
 = = = Takrouna = = = 
 By April 1943 , the 2nd Division had advanced into mountainous country overlooking Enfidaville . Takrouna was a hill , 300 metres high , held by soldiers of the Italian Trieste Division 's I / 66 ° Battalion as well as a German platoon . A village was situated on the summit of the hill with a prominent ledge to one side . The Māori Battalion was tasked by Major General Howard Kippenberger , commander of 2nd Division , with the capture of Takrouna , and B Company would make the main assault on 19 April , with C and D companies on the flanks . The initial attack petered out due to heavy gunfire from the enemy . Bennett ordered Manahi , now a lance sergeant , to take his platoon of 12 men to make a feint attack while the remainder of B Company linked up with C Company . The platoon split into two sections , with one under the command of Manahi . At dawn , they began their attack up a steep and at times near sheer slope and were successfully able to overwhelm the Italians defending the ledge , capturing 60 prisoners . The New Zealanders then dug in and prepared for a counterattack . Artillery and mortar fire killed half of the platoon , including its commander . This left Manahi in command . 
 With two attempts to contact the battalion having failed , Manahi made his way down Takrouna to locate reinforcements and supplies . Ignoring an officer 's advice that he abandon the ledge , he returned with a section from C Company as well as ammunition and stretcher bearers . A further platoon arrived to further consolidate his position . The expected counterattack then commenced , and this was successfully beaten off . It was only then , after having been on Takrouna for 16 hours that Manahi and what was left of his section withdrew , leaving the platoon to hold the position . 
 Despite reinforcements , a further counterattack launched by Italian soldiers of the Trieste Division on 21 April dislodged the New Zealanders and control of the ledge was lost . Kippenberger ordered the Māori Battalion to send reinforcements to rectify the situation . Manahi returned with a platoon to recapture the lost position , and with artillery support the attack was successful and by midday the ledge was reoccupied by the New Zealanders . However , the village on the summit remained in the hands of the Italians . Later in the afternoon of 21 April , Manahi led an attacking party which , working with another party , captured the village and took 300 prisoners . After the battle , he assisted with the recovery of the bodies of his dead comrades . 
 Manahi 's exploits quickly became known throughout the division , and within a few days of his actions a nomination for the VC had been prepared by the commander of his battalion . Brigadier Harding , commander of 5th Infantry Brigade , endorsed the nomination as did four generals ( Kippenberger , Freyberg , Montgomery and Alexander ) . General Henry Maitland Wilson , commander @-@ in @-@ chief , Middle East Forces , likewise endorsed the award after considering the evidence . However , when the nomination reached the Army Council in London , the award was downgraded , most likely by Lord Alanbrooke , to an immediate Distinguished Conduct Medal ( DCM ) which was duly gazetted on 22 July 1943 . 
 The decision was a disappointment to many in the 2nd Division . Reports that Manahi 's men had killed Italians attempting to surrender were thought by some historians to be a factor in the downgrading of his award . The official New Zealand history of the Māori Battalion stated that the surrendering soldiers were " shot , bayonetted or thrown over a cliff " but only after an Italian grenade had been thrown into a building in which wounded New Zealanders were sheltering . However , these reports may not have emerged until after the downgrading , and at the time the killings were alleged to have occurred , Manahi himself was reportedly dealing with an advance by Italian soldiers against the ledge . Another factor in the downgrading may have been the recent VC nomination for Ngarimu , just three weeks earlier . The subsequent nomination of Manahi , a Māori like Ngarimu and from the same battalion , may have led to a perception that VCs were being too easily awarded . 
 = = = Return to New Zealand = = = 
 The surrender of the Axis forces in Tunisia in May left the Allies in control of North Africa . The 2nd Division withdrew to its base in Egypt and it was announced that 6 @,@ 000 of its personnel would return to New Zealand for a three @-@ month furlough . Manahi , as one of the original members of the Māori Battalion , was among those selected and shipped out on 15 June 1943 . However , Manahi was not to return to the war for it was later decided that the Māori soldiers on furlough would be exempt from active duty . 
 On returning to Rotorua , Manahi entered a carpentry course and then began working at the Rotorua Hospital as a carpenter . Once the war was over , he was selected for the New Zealand Victory Contingent , destined for England to celebrate the Commonwealth 's role in the war . As part of the contingent , he participated in the Victory Parade in London on 8 June 1946 . This fulfilled his last military obligations , and he was discharged in August 1946 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Following his discharge , Manahi returned to the work force . Employed by the Ministry of Works , he became a traffic inspector which involved traveling around the Bay of Plenty . A keen sportsman , he became involved in swimming coaching as well golf and fishing . When his wife died in 1976 , he moved away from Rotorua to nearby <unk> , on the coast . He still commuted to <unk> to spend time at the local branch of the New Zealand Returned Servicemen 's Association ( RSA ) . On the evening of 29 March 1986 , on the way home from the RSA , he was involved in a car crash . He received severe chest and abdominal injuries and was rushed to Tauranga Hospital where he died later in the evening . His tangi ( funeral ) was held at the marae ( tribal meeting area ) in his home village of Ohinemutu , and was attended by members of the Maori Battalion . Survived by two sons , he was buried at <unk> cemetery . 
 = = The Manahi VC Committee = = 
 The situation regarding Manahi 's VC recommendation during the Battle of Takrouna still rankled with many members of the Māori Battalion but while he was alive , Manahi 's modesty and unwillingness to bring any attention to himself meant that he was not interested in changing the situation . Following his death , the Manahi VC Committee was established by his former comrades and iwi to lobby for an upgrade to his award . 
 The committee lobbied the New Zealand government to make representations to Buckingham Palace regarding the posthumous grant of the VC to Manahi . The Queen 's father , King George VI , had ruled in 1949 that no further awards from the Second World War ought to be made . The New Zealand government was reluctant to make a formal approach and it took until 1997 for Prime Minister , Jenny Shipley to formally broach the subject with Buckingham Palace . The feedback indicated the elapsed time since the events of Takrouna was likely to be a barrier to awarding Manahi a VC . 
 Finally , in 2000 , Manahi 's iwi , Te Arawa , lodged a claim with the Waitangi Tribunal , and was supported in doing so by the New Zealand RSA . Te Arawa alleged the failure of the New Zealand government to give full consideration of the award of a VC to Manahi constituted a breach of the Treaty of Waitangi , which required the government to act in good faith regarding grievances of Māori . In December 2005 the tribunal reported that there was no breach of the treaty . While not making any formal conclusions or recommendations , the tribunal suggested that the Manahi VC Committee work with the New Zealand government in making an approach to Buckingham Palace . In October 2006 , after further dialogue with Buckingham Palace , the New Zealand Minister of Defence , Phil Goff , announced that Manahi would be recognised by the presentation of an altar cloth , a personal letter from the Queen acknowledging his gallantry and a sword . The award was presented by Prince Andrew to Manahi 's sons , Rauawa and Geoffrey , at a ceremony in Rotorua on 17 March 2007 . The sword was later presented to the Chief of the New Zealand Defence Force , Lieutenant General Jerry <unk> , along with a <unk> ( war club ) in memory of Haane Manahi . 
 = Marianos Argyros = 
 Marianos Argyros ( Greek : <unk> <unk> , fl . 944 – 963 ) was a Byzantine aristocrat and member of the Argyros family . A monk , in 944 he supported the assumption of sole rule by Constantine VII , and was allowed to leave the monastery and enter imperial service . He held a succession of senior military commands , fighting in southern Italy against local rebels and the Fatimids , and in the Balkans against the Magyars . In 963 , he tried to oppose the takeover of the imperial throne by the general Nikephoros Phokas by assuming control over Constantinople and arresting his father , Bardas Phokas the Elder . During the ensuing clashes , he was hit on the head by a platter , and died on the next day , 16 August 963 . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Origin and the palace coups of 944 = = = 
 Marianos was the eldest son of the general Leo Argyros , active in the first decades of the 10th century . He had a brother , Romanos Argyros , who in 921 married Agathe , a daughter of Emperor Romanos I Lekapenos ( r . 920 – 944 ) . The <unk> therefore were counted among the <unk> supporters of the Lekapenos regime . Romanos Lekapenos had risen to power in 919 as regent over the young Constantine VII Porphyrogennetos ( r . 913 – 959 ) , whom he married to his daughter Helena . By December 920 , his position had become so unassailable that he was crowned senior emperor . To consolidate his hold on power , and possibly aiming to supplant the ruling Macedonian dynasty with his own family , Romanos raised his eldest son Christopher to co @-@ emperor in 921 , while the younger sons Stephen and Constantine were proclaimed co @-@ emperors in 924 . Christopher died in 931 , and as Constantine VII remained sidelined , Stephen and Constantine assumed an increased prominence , although formally they still ranked after their brother @-@ in @-@ law in the college of emperors . However , in 943 , the elderly Romanos drafted a will which would leave Constantine VII as the senior emperor following his death . This greatly upset his two sons , who started planning to seize power through a coup d 'état , with Stephen apparently the ringleader and Constantine a rather reluctant partner . 
 It is in this context that Marianos Argyros is first mentioned in December 944 . At the time , he was a monk , and a confidant of Stephen Lekapenos . According to the 11th @-@ century historian John Skylitzes , he had earlier been honoured and trusted by Romanos , but Marianos nevertheless supported the coup of the Lekapenoi brothers on 20 December , which successfully deposed their father and exiled him to a monastery on the island of Prote . A few weeks later , however , with the support of the populace , Constantine VII managed to sideline the Lekapenoi , who joined their father in exile . It appears that Marianos had changed sides in time , for he participated in the arrest of the Lekapenoi . As a reward , Constantine VII , now sole ruler , freed him of his monastic vows and raised him to the rank of patrikios and the post of Count of the Stable . His abandonment of the monastic habit earned him the nickname " <unk> " or " <unk> " ( <unk> / <unk> ) , whose etymology is unclear . 
 = = = Command in southern Italy = = = 
 Marianos then disappears from the scene until he was sent at the head of troops from the themes of Macedonia and Thrace in an expedition to southern Italy , dated by modern scholars to 955 . A rebellion that had broken out in the local Byzantine themes of <unk> and Calabria , involving also the imperial vassal city @-@ state of Naples . The Byzantine expeditionary force encircled and besieged Naples , until the city surrendered . Marianos then took over the governance of the Byzantine provinces of Italy : in 956 , he is attested as strategos ( governor ) of Calabria and <unk> in a charter of privilege for the monastery of Monte Cassino . At about the same time , following a Fatimid raid on Almeria , war had broken out between the Fatimids and the Umayyad Caliphate of Cordoba . Fatimid sources report that the Umayyads proposed joint action with Byzantium , but Marianos appears to have been focused on suppressing the rebellion rather than engaging in war with the Fatimids . Byzantine envoys even went to the Fatimid caliph , al @-@ Mu 'izz , and offered to renew and extend the existing truce . Al @-@ Mu 'izz however , determined to expose the Umayyads ' collaboration with the infidel enemy and emulate the achievements of his father , refused . 
 The Caliph dispatched new forces to Sicily under Ammar ibn Ali al @-@ Kalbi and his brother al @-@ Hasan ibn Ali al @-@ Kalbi . In spring / summer 956 , the Fatimid fleet clashed with and defeated the Byzantine fleet in two battles in the Straits of Messina , followed by Fatimid raids on the Calabrian coast . In the aftermath of these raids , Marianos travelled to the Fatimid court in person , and sought a truce in exchange for the resumption of a payment of tribute and the annual release of prisoners of war taken in the East . Al @-@ Mu 'izz agreed to these terms , but warfare resumed soon after , when the Byzantine admiral Basil destroyed the mosque built by the Fatimids at Rhegion and raided Termini . Marianos therefore returned to the Fatimid court in a second embassy in 957 , going first through Sicily , where he apparently delivered to the local Fatimid governor , Ahmad ibn al @-@ Hasan al @-@ Kalbi , the agreed tribute . During the reception by al @-@ Mu 'izz , Marianos presented a letter by Constantine VII confirming the terms agreed during the first embassy , but this time al @-@ Mu 'izz rejected the terms . As a result of the breakdown in these negotiations , Constantine VII sent a massive expedition to Italy under admirals <unk> and <unk> , while Marianos commanded the land troops . The Fatimids under the <unk> brothers al @-@ Hasan and Ammar were victorious over Marianos , but following the arrival of the Byzantine reinforcements the Fatimid fleet left Calabria , only to suffer a shipwreck on its return to Sicily . Marianos is no longer mentioned in Italy after that , although he may have led a third embassy to al @-@ Mu 'izz in September 958 , which led to the conclusion of a five @-@ year truce between the two powers . 
 = = = Command in the Balkans and death = = = 
 In ca . 959 / 961 , he defeated a raid by the Magyars into Thrace , taking many of them prisoner . In connection with this operation , Theophanes Continuatus refers to him as " monostrategos of the theme of Macedonia and <unk> of the West " , a position equivalent to that of the Domestic of the Schools of the West , in command of all the " western " ( European ) troops . It is unclear , however , whether this means a permanent appointment or was an ad hoc position , i.e. as strategos of Macedonia and temporary overall commander of detachments from the other European themes . The latter is more likely , as it is documented that Leo Phokas the Younger held the post of Domestic of the West , but was fighting against the Arabs in the east at the time . 
 On 15 March 963 , Emperor Romanos II ( r . 959 – 963 ) unexpectedly died , leaving his young sons Basil II and Constantine VIII as emperors . The powerful general Nikephoros Phokas ( the brother of Leo ) decided to seize the throne for himself , but was opposed by the parakoimomenos and guardian of the young emperors , Joseph Bringas . Seeking support , Bringas offered Marianos the high command in the east and potentially even the throne if he would aid him . Marianos first suggested trying to win over Nikephoros Phokas ' popular nephew and lieutenant , the strategos of the Anatolics John Tzimiskes . The latter not only refused , however , but took his letter straight to his uncle , who summoned his armies to Caesarea and had them proclaim him emperor in early summer . As Phokas ' army advanced across Asia Minor on Constantinople , Marianos then tried to stage a coup in Constantinople with men of the Macedonian regiments and armed prisoners of war . This move was opposed by the populace , however , resulting in clashes in the streets . The populace became especially enraged when Marianos tried to forcibly remove the <unk> ' elderly father , Bardas , from the Hagia Sophia where he had sought sanctuary , on 15 August . Marianos was reportedly hit on the head by a platter , thrown by a woman from a nearby house roof . Mortally wounded , he died on the next day . Phokas ' supporters rapidly prevailed thereafter . Bringas was forced to flee himself to the Hagia Sophia , and on 16 August Nikephoros Phokas was crowned senior emperor as guardian of Basil and Constantine . 
 = 1815 North Carolina hurricane = 
 The 1815 North Carolina hurricane caused the most severe flooding in New Bern , North Carolina since 1795 . First detected east of the Lesser Antilles on 26 August , the disturbance drifted toward the northwestern Leeward Islands , arriving by 29 August . The hurricane soon approached Charleston , South Carolina , on 1 September , and subsequently made landfall near Cape Lookout in North Carolina on 3 September . The gale reached New England by 5 September , departing the region on 6 September . The hurricane caused significant impact even before coming ashore : many vessels were damaged , grounded , capsized , or destroyed offshore throughout the course of the storm . Extensive damage to corn , cotton , and rice crops was also noted . Flood waters brought rivers as much as 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) above normal , inundating streets and structures . Overall , the hurricane inflicted at least 15 deaths throughout its existence , and more than $ 60 @,@ 000 ( 1815 USD ) in property damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The 1815 North Carolina hurricane was first detected far east of the Lesser Antilles on 26 August . The disturbance was next sighted at Saint Barthélemy on 29 August , where it produced severe winds . Eventually , it approached Charleston , South Carolina by 1 September , before making landfall near Cape Lookout , North Carolina on 3 September , where the hurricane 's effects lasted for three days . The storm then swept inland , curving east of Wilmington and nearing New Bern soon thereafter . The hurricane subsequently veered northeastward at Edenton , its deviation in track coinciding with a shift in winds toward the northeast west of the system 's trajectory . Tracking northeast , the system entered the Chesapeake Bay and passed into the open waters of the Atlantic Ocean after transiting over Norfolk , Virginia on 5 September , and continued to parallel the East Coast of the United States . Gales were observed on Long Island and in portions of New England , with heavy rain and strong winds noted . The disturbance remained offshore , however , and the system eventually departed the region on the morning of 6 September . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Maritime losses as a result of the hurricane were considerable . On the evening of 31 August , the 140 @-@ ton British vessel Spring , which originated from Liverpool , was beached near Cape Romain within the vicinity of the Raccoon Keys . Massive waves caused the boat to disintegrate , and the crew fled on a longboat toward Charleston , South Carolina , surviving but losing the ship 's cargo . The craft Brutus , meanwhile , overturned while en route toward Charleston from New York City , suffering the loss of its rigging and main boom . Despite experiencing damage to its cargo of cheese and potatoes , the ship arrived in Charleston safely . Meanwhile , off of Savannah , Georgia , the storm dismasted the clipper Richmond Packet which was delivering Spanish wine . Along the coast of Charleston , high waves prevented ships from docking at port , and boats did not remain with their moorings , with one breaking free and washing aground at James Island . Moving up the coast , the storm leveled fields of cotton , pushed salt water upstream , and destroyed dams protecting rice fields on the Cooper River , destroying the year 's harvest . An editor of the newspaper Savannah Republican composed a poem reflecting upon and lamenting the plight of seamen who died in the storm . At Sullivan 's Island near Charleston , the hurricane beached several vessels , and from Charleston to Georgetown , intense gusts and copious rainfall ruined cotton and rice fields in low @-@ lying regions . 
 The hurricane destroyed ships from Cape Fear to Currituck , North Carolina , ruined crops , uprooted forests , displaced gristmills , and demolished roads inland . At Wilmington , the storm inflicted damage to numerous buildings , among them the Cape Fear Bank , which suffered the loss of its chimneys . The city 's wharves also experienced moderate damage , with a sloop from Bermuda capsizing and a brig separating from port , drifting toward a nearby plantation . A saltworks at <unk> Island and several other offshore barrier islands endured severe damage , with the hurricane producing a 14 ft ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) -high storm surge in some regions , driving thousands of pounds of salt to sea . In all , the <unk> at <unk> Island suffered approximately $ 60 @,@ 000 ( 1815 USD ) in losses . Damage was similarly severe near Bear Island and locations along the White Oak River . At <unk> , meanwhile , two schooners struck a sand bar and another two were grounded nearby , and three other vessels later washed into a nearby forest . A second saltworks was completely obliterated , and on a nearby beach , a residence was destroyed , with five family members drowned . A second house was also swept away , with four individuals inside killed . Majestic shade trees throughout the state were uprooted , and doors of houses near Cape Lookout burst open despite being firmly locked shut . At Edenton , the hurricane was believed to have been worse than the 1806 Great Coastal hurricane . Winds uprooted numerous trees at Fayetteville , obstructing roads , with similar impacts at Raleigh . Significant crop damage was also noted at Winston @-@ Salem , where fences were toppled , and fields of corn , orchards , and forests ruined . 
 The remnants of a small unidentified vessel were discovered , abandoned , near the origin of the New River , likely delivering cheese from New England . At Beaufort on the Outer Banks , several structures along the shoreline experienced damage , and several under construction ships were wrecked . Nearby at the Shackleford and Bogue Banks , several watercraft were destroyed . On the eastern sector of the latter , Fort Hampton was nearly washed away by the high storm surge generated by the hurricane . The barracks of the fort were lifted afloat for some time , with survivors clinging to its roof . To the north , another 30 boats were found destroyed near Ocracoke . Six men were killed after being knocked overboard upon the Julia , which was washed aground between Hatteras and Ocracoke . Additionally , a number of vessels were grounded near Cape Hatteras . Inland , thousands of trees and many structures were toppled , and fields of crops were flooded , disrupting the impending harvests . New Bern suffered especially acutely , with the waters of the Neuse River breaking their banks and inundating the town with 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) of water ; there , the flood was considered to be the worst since 1795 . Buildings disintegrated under the force of high winds and flood waters , and many people attempted to escape their residences . Meanwhile , at Washington , the storm caused the neighboring Pamlico River to rise at a speed of 15 in ( 38 cm ) per hour before peaking at a height 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) above normal . Massive amounts of lumber and naval goods were swept away by the high waters , and numerous ships broke free of their moorings , of which two were beached . 
 Four British ships were forced to dock at Norfolk , Virginia after experiencing damage on 5 September , and at Long Island , similarly severe gales were endured by ships at Long Island . Heavy rain occurred in sections of New England on 5 and 6 September , though no significant damage occurred . 
 = Ersatz Monarch @-@ class battleship = 
 The Ersatz Monarch @-@ class ( Replacement Monarch @-@ class ) battleship was a projected new class of four battleships which were to be constructed for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy in 1914 – 19 . Designed to replace the Monarch @-@ class battleships ( which later became coastal defense ships ) , each of the new battleships were to carry ten 35 cm ( 14 in ) L / 45 guns as their primary armament , a slight improvement over her predecessors , the Tegetthoff class . The ships were 175 @.@ 2 metres ( 575 ft ) and were designed to displace 24 @,@ 560 tonnes ( 24 @,@ 170 long tons ; 27 @,@ 070 short tons ) . 
 The Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy intended to lay down the first vessel in July 1914 , but the outbreak of World War I that month caused the Navy to postpone construction until September . Ultimately , none of the vessels were laid down and they were formally cancelled in late 1917 . However , four of the 35 cm guns had been built and were transferred to the Austro @-@ Hungarian Army for use on the Italian Front . 
 = = History = = 
 The Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ordered the construction of four new battleships to replace the aging Monarch class in May 1914 . As a result , the new class was known by the contract name for the first vessel , Ersatz Monarch . The ships were to cost 82 – 83 million <unk> each . The class was to be built in two separate shipyards : two battleships were to be built by Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino and two by Ganz & Co – Danubius . 
 = = = Proposals = = = 
 The construction of the Tegetthoff @-@ class battleships had already begun in 1910 when <unk> <unk> made the first of many attempts to obtain the approval for a new generation of " super " dreadnoughts to replace the aging Monarch @-@ class ships . The original proposal laid forth on 18 April 1911 consisted of 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 34 cm ) 45 @-@ caliber guns with three guns in each of the two superimposed turrets . 
 The Austro @-@ Hungarian Naval Technical Committee later submitted three proposals by Austrian chief naval architect Franz <unk> on the general characteristics of the new class in December 1911 . The first of the three proposals called for a 22 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 22 @,@ 000 t ; 25 @,@ 000 @-@ short @-@ ton ) battleship with 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) guns . A later proposal had the new class weighing 23 @,@ 000 long tons ( 23 @,@ 000 t ; 26 @,@ 000 short tons ) and equipped with 13 @.@ 6 @-@ inch ( 350 mm ) guns . The last proposal had the battleship weighing as much as 24 @,@ 100 long tons ( 24 @,@ 500 t ; 27 @,@ 000 short tons ) . Despite the first two proposals on the main guns ' caliber , the final decision for the caliber was to be a modified and slightly larger version of the original proposal by <unk> <unk> , with the main turrets to be equipped with 13 @.@ 78 @-@ inch ( 350 @.@ 0 mm ) to 13 @.@ 8 @-@ inch ( 350 @.@ 5 mm ) guns . The final design for the main turrets ' caliber was influenced by the Imperial German Navy , which had incorporated this caliber on its new Mackensen @-@ class battlecruisers . 
 By January 1913 , the Naval Technical Committee delivered its first official proposal for the new Ersatz Monarch @-@ class battleships . The committee decided to choose the largest of the three initial proposals for the ship 's tonnage , with each ship weighing roughly 24 @,@ 100 tons . The battleships were to be equipped with a total of ten 13 @.@ 8 @-@ inch ( 350 mm ) 45 @-@ caliber guns , eighteen 5 @.@ 9 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) 50 @-@ caliber guns , and twenty @-@ two 3 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 90 mm ) 45 @-@ caliber guns . The main guns were to be between 13 @.@ 78 inches ( 350 @.@ 0 mm ) and 13 @.@ 8 inches ( 350 @.@ 5 mm ) . It took another year and a half for this final design to be formally approved in July 1914 . During this time , a further 12 designs were put forth . 
 = = Layout = = 
 = = = Armament and propulsion = = = 
 The standard weight for the class was to be 24 @,@ 100 long tons ( 24 @,@ 500 t ; 27 @,@ 000 short tons ) per ship . The ships ' length would have been 574 feet ( 175 m ) and the beam 93 @.@ 5 ft ( 28 @.@ 5 m ) while the draft would have been 27 @.@ 6 ft ( 8 @.@ 41 m ) . The four battleships of the Ersatz Monarch class would have been equipped with four @-@ shaft steam turbines that produced 31 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 23 @,@ 000 kW ) and contained 15 Yarrow water @-@ tube boilers ( nine coal @-@ fired and six oil @-@ fired ) . These engines would have enabled the four battleships to travel at 21 knots ( 38 @.@ 9 km / h ) . Their total range would have been 5 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 000 km ) while traveling at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ) . Each battleship was to be manned by a crew of 1 @,@ 050 to 1 @,@ 100 officers and men . According to the approved gun designs from January 1913 , the members of the Ersatz Monarch class would have had 10 13 @.@ 8 @-@ inch ( 350 mm ) guns , 14 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) guns , 20 3 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 90 mm ) guns , two 1 @.@ 85 @-@ inch ( 47 mm ) guns and six 21 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 550 mm ) torpedo tubes . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The armor plating on the ships would have been 12 in ( 300 mm ) thick around the belt , barbettes , turrets and the conning tower , while the deck would have had 2 @.@ 85 @-@ inch ( 72 mm ) thick armor . The underwater defenses of the battleships were a drastic change from previous Austro @-@ Hungarian battleship designs . The new design was similar to recent French and Russian designs . A horizontal armor deck was built into the vessel inwards from the bottom edge of the armor belt , as far as the last vertical bulkheads . The new guns that were approved for the final design were modified to increase the effect of a broadside . However , in order to keep a stable balance between the ships ' protection , stability , and firepower , the battleships were to only be equipped with 10 guns . This new layout was unusual , having two turrets with three guns mounted on each of them being superimposed over two twin guns . 
 = = Construction and cancellation = = 
 With the final design in place , four ships from the class were ordered by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy in July 1914 . The Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy followed the traditional German custom of not naming the new ships until they were formally launched . As a result , the Navy only referred to them as " replacements " for the old Monarch @-@ class ships , hence the name " Ersatz " ( replacement ) . The four battleships themselves were simply referred to as " Battleships VIII @-@ XI " . Because several design sketches that all had slight differences were put forth , the exact final appearance of the ships are not known . However , they all would have been built with raised forecastles in order to give them better seaworthiness than their predecessors of the Tegetthoff class . The battleships would have been equipped with lattice towers that would hold searchlight platforms . 
 Each battleship would have cost about 83 million <unk> . The first battleship would have been laid down in July 1914 , but this date was later pushed back to September due to the outbreak of World War I at the end of July . The first battleship , " Battleship VIII , " was scheduled to have been completed on 30 June 1917 . The second battleship , referred to as " Battleship IX , " would have been laid down on 1 January 1915 and launched on 31 December 1917 . The third and fourth battleships , " Battleship X " and " Battleship XI , " were scheduled to be laid down on 1 June 1916 and completed on 31 May 1919 . 
 The main guns were to be built by Skoda , and while the battleships themselves were never laid down , the guns for one battleship had been ordered prior to the beginning of World War I. These were the only orders that the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy had placed for any part of the four battleships . It was assumed that following a victorious conclusion to the war in just two months , work on the battleships would resume . As the war continued , four of the main guns that were ordered from the Skoda works were handed over to the Austro @-@ Hungarian Army for use on the Italian Front . The rest of the completed main guns were later taken by the French as a war prize following the end of the war . In late 1917 , the construction on all four vessels was canceled . 
 = Widener Library = 
 The Harry Elkins Widener Memorial Library , housing some 3 @.@ 5 million books in its " vast and cavernous " ‍ stacks , is the center ­ piece of the Harvard College Libraries ( the libraries of Harvard 's Faculty of Arts and Sciences ) and , more broadly , of the entire Harvard Library system . It honors 1907 Harvard College graduate and book collector Harry Elkins Widener , and was constructed by his mother Eleanor Elkins Widener after his death in the sinking of the RMS Titanic in 1912 . 
 The library 's holdings , which include works in more than one hundred languages , comprise " one of the world 's most <unk> ­ sive research collec ­ tions in the humanities and social sciences . " ‍ Its 57 miles ( 92 km ) of shelves , along five miles ( 8 km ) of aisles on ten levels , comprise a " labyrinth " which one student " could not enter without feeling that she ought to carry a compass , a sandwich , and a whistle . " ‍ 
 At the building 's heart are the Widener Memorial Rooms , displaying papers and mementos recalling the life and death of Harry Widener , as well as the Harry Elkins Widener <unk> ­ tion , " the precious group of rare and wonder ­ fully interesting books brought together by Mr. Widener " , to which was later added one of the few perfect Gutenberg Bibles — ​ ​ the object of a 1969 burglary attempt conjectured by Harvard 's police chief to have been inspired by the heist film Topkapi . 
 Campus legends holding that Harry Widener 's fate led to <unk> ­ tion of an undergrad ­ <unk> swimming @-@ proficiency requirement , and that an additional donation from his mother subsidizes ice cream at Harvard meals , are without foundation . 
 = = Background , conception and gift = = 
 = = = Predecessor = = = 
 By the opening of the twentieth century alarms had been issuing for many years about Harvard 's " disgrace ­ fully inadequate " ‍ : 276 library , Gore Hall , completed 1841 ( when Harvard owned some 44 @,@ 000 books ) ‍ : 5 and declared full in 1863 . : 5 Librarian Justin Winsor concluded his 1892 Annual Report by pleading , " I have in earlier reports exhausted the language of warning and anxiety , in represent ­ ing the totally inadequate <unk> ­ da ­ tions for books and readers which Gore Hall affords . Each twelve months brings us nearer to a chaotic condition " ; : 15 his successor Archibald Cary Coolidge asserted that the Boston Public Library was a better place to write an undergraduate thesis . : 29 Despite substantial additions in 1876 and 1907 , in 1910 a committee of architects termed Gore 
 unsafe [ and ] unsuitable for its object ... no amount of tinkering can make it really good ... hopelessly over ­ crowded ... leaks when there is a heavy rain ... intolerably hot in summer ... books are put in double rows and are not infrequently left lying on top of one another , or actually on the floor ... : 51 – 2 
 With dormitory basements pressed into service as overflow storage for Harvard 's 543 @,@ 000 books , : 50 the committee drew up a proposal for replacement of Gore in stages . Andrew Carnegie was approached for financing without success . 
 = = = Death of Harry Widener = = = 
 In 1912 , Harry Elkins Widener — ​ ​ scion of two of the wealthiest families in America , a 1907 graduate of Harvard College , and an accomplished bibliophile despite his youth — ​ ​ died in the sinking of the RMS Titanic . His father George Dunton Widener perished as well , but his mother Eleanor Elkins Widener survived . 
 Harry Widener 's will instructed that his mother , when " in her judgment Harvard University shall make arrange ­ <unk> for properly caring for my collec ­ tion of books ... shall give them to said University to be known as the Harry Elkins Widener Collection " , and he had told a friend , not long before he died , " I want to be remembered in connection with a great library , [ but ] I do not see how it is going to be brought about . " ‍ 
 To enable the fulfillment of her son 's wish Eleanor Widener briefly <unk> ­ <unk> funding an addition to Gore Hall , but soon determined to build instead a completely new and far larger library building — ​ ​ " a perpetual memorial " ‍ : 90 to Harry Widener , housing not only his personal book collection but Harvard 's general library as well . As Biel has written , " The [ Harvard architects ] committee 's Beaux Arts design [ for Gore Hall 's projected replacement ] , with its massiveness and symmetry , offered <unk> ­ tal ­ <unk> with nothing more particular to <unk> ­ tal ­ <unk> than the <unk> ­ tions of the modern university " — ​ ​ until the Titanic sank and " through delicate <unk> ­ tion , [ Harvard ] convinced Eleanor Widener that the most eloquent tribute to Harry would be an entire library rather than a rare book wing . " ‍ : 88 – 9 
 = = = Terms and cost of gift = = = 
 To her gift Eleanor Widener attached a number of stipulations , : 43 including that the building 's architects be the firm of Horace Trumbauer & Associates , which had built several mansions for both the Elkins and the Widener families . : 27 " Mrs. Widener does not give the University the money to build a new library , but has offered to build a library satisfactory in external appearance to herself , " Harvard President Abbott Lawrence Lowell wrote privately . " The exterior was her own choice , and she has decided <unk> ­ tur ­ al opinions . " ‍ : 167 Harvard historian William Bentinck @-@ Smith has written that 
 To [ Harvard officials ] Mrs. Widener was a lovely and generous lady whose wealth , power , and remoteness made her a somewhat terrifying figure who must not be roused to annoyance or outrage . Once [ construction ] began , all financial transactions were the donor 's private business , and no one at Harvard ever knew the exact cost . Mrs. Widener was counting on $ 2 million , [ but ] it is probable the cost exceeded $ 3 @.@ 5 million . 
 Though Harvard awarded Trumbauer an honorary degree on the day of the new library 's dedication , it was Trumbauer associate Julian F. Abele who had overall <unk> ­ <unk> for the building 's design , which largely followed the committee 's outline ( though with the committee 's central <unk> ­ tion room shifted from center to the northeast corner , yielding pride of place to the Memorial Rooms ) . 
 After Gore Hall was turned into a " pile of stones and rubbish " to make way , : 13 ground was broken on February 12 , 1913 , and the corner ­ stone laid on June 16 . By later that year some 50 @,@ 000 bricks were being laid each day . 
 = = Building = = 
 At Harvard 's " geographical and <unk> ­ <unk> heart " ‍ directly across <unk> ­ ary Theatre from Memorial Church , Widener Library is a hollow rectangle of " Harvard brick with Indiana limestone <unk> " , 250 by 200 by 80 feet high ( 76 by 61 by 24 m ) ‍ : 167 and enclosing 320 @,@ 000 square feet ( 30 @,@ 000 m2 ) ‍ , " colon ­ <unk> on its front by immense pillars with elaborate [ Corinthian capitals ] , : 362 all of which stand at the head of a flight of stairs that would not disgrace the capitol in Washing ­ ton . " ‍ Sources describe the building 's style as ( variously ) Beaux @-@ Arts , : 88 Georgian , : 57 : 457 Hellenistic , : 281 or " the austere , formalistic Imperial [ or ' Imperial and Classical ' ] style displayed in the Law School 's Langdell Hall and the Medical School Quadrangle " . : 361 
 The east , south , and west wings house the stacks , while the north contains administrative offices and various reading rooms , including the Main Reading Room ( now the Loker Reading Room ) — ​ ​ which , spanning the entire front of the building and some 42 feet ( 13 m ) in both depth and height , was termed by <unk> ­ tur ­ al historian Bainbridge Bunting " the most <unk> ­ <unk> interior space at Harvard . " ‍ : 154 A topmost floor , supported by the stacks framework itself , contains thirty @-@ two rooms for special collections , studies , offices , and seminars . : 327 @-@ 8 
 The Memorial Rooms ( see § Widener Memorial Rooms ) are in the building 's center , between what were originally two light courts ( 28 by 110 ft or 8 @.@ 5 by 33 m ) ‍ now enclosed as additional reading rooms . 
 = = = Dedication = = = 
 The building was dedicated immediately after Com ­ <unk> ­ ment Day exercises on June 24 , 1915 . Lowell and Coolidge mounted the steps to the main door , where Eleanor Widener presented them with the building 's keys . The first book formally brought into the new library was the 1634 edition of John <unk> 's The Christian Warfare Against the Devil , World , and Flesh , : 18 believed ( at the time ) to be the only volume , of those bequeathed to the school by John Harvard in 1636 , to have survived the 1754 burning of Harvard Hall . 
 In the Memorial Rooms , after a benediction by Bishop William Lawrence , a portrait of Harry Widener was unveiled , then remarks delivered by Senator Henry Cabot Lodge ( speaking on " The Meaning of a Great Library " ‍ on behalf of Eleanor Widener ) and Lowell ( " For years we have longed for a library that would serve our purpose , but we never hoped to see such a library as this " ) . Afterward ( said the Boston Evening Transcript ‍ ) " the doors were thrown open , and both graduates and under ­ graduates had an <unk> ­ ni ­ ty to see the beauties and utilities of this important univer ­ sity acquisition . " ‍ 
 " I hope it will become the heart of the University , " Eleanor Widener said afterward , " a centre for all the interests that make Harvard a great university . " ‍ 
 = = = Widener Memorial Rooms = = = 
 The central Memorial Rooms — ​ ​ an outer Rotunda housing memorabilia of the life and death of Harry Widener , and an inner Library displaying the 3300 rare books collected by him — ​ ​ were described by the Boston Sunday Herald soon after the dedication : 
 The [ Rotunda ] is of Alabama marble except the domed ceiling , with fluted columns and Ionic capitals [ while the Library ] is finished in carved English oak , the carving having been done in England ; the high bookcases are fitted with glass shelves and bronze sashes , the windows are hung with heavy curtains [ and ] upon the desks are vases filled with flowers . 
 The big marble fireplace and the portrait of Harry Widener occupy a large portion of the south wall . Standing front of the fireplace one may look through the vista made by the doorways , the staircases within and the stairs without and get a glimpse of the green campus . 
 Conversely , " even from the very entrance [ of the building ] one will catch a glimpse in the distance of the portrait of young Harry Widener on the further wall [ of the Memorial Rooms ] , if the intervening doors happen to be open . " ‍ : 325 
 For many years Eleanor Widener hosted Commencement Day luncheons in the Memorial Rooms . : 20 The family underwrites their upkeep , including weekly renewal of the flowers — ​ ​ originally roses but now carnations . 
 = = = Amenities and deficiencies = = = 
 <unk> as " the last word in library construction " , the new building 's amenities included telephones , pneumatic tubes , book lifts and conveyors , elevators , and a dining @-@ room and kitchenette " for the ladies of the staff " . : 676 Advertisements for the manufacturer of the building 's shelving highlighted its " dark brown enamel finish , harmonizing with oak trim " , and special interchangeable regular and oversize shelves meant that books on a given subject could be shelved together regardless of size . 
 The Library Journal found " especially interesting not so much the spacious and lofty reading rooms " ‍ as the innovation : 255 of placing student carrels and private faculty studies directly in the stack , reflecting Lowell 's desire to put " the massive resources of the stack close to the scholar 's hand , reuniting books and readers in an intimacy that nineteenth @-@ century [ " closed @-@ stack " library designs ] had long precluded " . : 45 @-@ 6 ( Competition for the seventy : 327 coveted faculty studies has been a longstanding administrative headache . ) ‍ 
 Nonetheless certain <unk> ­ <unk> were soon noted . : 107 : 89 A primitive form of air conditioning was <unk> ­ <unk> within a few months . : 97 " The need of better toilet facilities [ in the stacks ] has been pressed upon us during the past year by several rather distressing experiences , " Widener Superintendent Frank Carney wrote <unk> in 1918 . And Coolidge wrote to J. P. Morgan , Jr . , " There is something rather humiliating in having to proclaim to the world that we have 300 [ carrels in the stacks ] which furnish unequalled opportunity to the scholar and investigator who wishes to come here , but that in order to use these <unk> ­ ni ­ ties he must bring his own chair , table and electric lamp . " ( A week later Coolidge wrote again : " Your very generous gift [ has helped ] pull me out of a most desperate situation . " ) ‍ : 102 
 Later @-@ built tunnels , from the stacks level furthest underground , connect to nearby Pusey Library , Lamont Library , and Houghton Library . An enclosed bridge connecting to Houghton via a Widener window — ​ ​ built after Eleanor Widener 's heirs agreed to waive : 75 her gift 's proscription of exterior additions or alterations : 79 — ​ ​ was removed in 2004 . ( Houghton and Lamont were built in the 1940s to relieve Widener , which had become simultaneously too small — ​ ​ its shelves were full — ​ ​ and too large — ​ ​ its immense size and complex catalog made books difficult to locate . ‍ But with Harvard 's collections doubling every 17 years , by 1965 Widener was again close to full , prompting construction of Pusey . ) ‍ 
 = = Collections and stacks = = 
 The ninety @-@ unit Harvard Library system , : 361 of which Widener is the anchor , is the only academic library among the world 's five " <unk> " — ​ ​ Widener , the New York Public Library , the Library of Congress , France 's Bibliothèque Nationale , and the British Library : 352 — ​ ​ making it " <unk> ­ <unk> the greatest univer ­ sity library in the world , " in the words of a Harvard official . 
 According to the Harvard College Library 's own description , Widener 's humanities and social sciences collections include 
 holdings in the history , literature , public affairs , and cultures of five continents . Of particular note are the collec ­ tions of Africana , Americana , European local history , Judaica , Latin American studies , Middle Eastern studies , Slavic studies , and rich collec ­ tions of materials for the study of Asia , the United Kingdom and Commonwealth , France , Germany , Italy , Scandinavia , and Greek and Latin antiquity . These collec ­ tions include significant holdings in linguistics , ancient and modern languages , folklore , economics , history of science and technology , philosophy , psychology , and sociology . 
 The collection 's 3 @.@ 5 million volumes occupy 57 miles ( 92 km ) of shelves : 4 along five miles ( 8 km ) of aisles , on ten levels divided into three wings each . : 4 
 Again alone among the " <unk> " , only Harvard allows patrons the " long @-@ treasured privilege " of entering the general @-@ collections stacks to browse as they please , instead of requesting books through library staff . Until a recent renovation the stacks had little signage — ​ ​ " There was the <unk> ­ tion that if you were good enough to qualify to get into the stacks you certainly didn 't need any help " ( as one official put it ) ‍ so that " learning to [ find books in ] Widener was like a rite of passage , a test of manhood " , and a 1979 monograph on library design complained , " After one goes through the main doors of Harvard 's Widener Library , the only visible sign says merely <unk> . " ‍ At times color @-@ coded lines and <unk> have been applied to the floors to help patrons keep their bearings . 
 As of 1997 the library <unk> some 600 @,@ 000 volumes each year . Another 3 million Widener items reside offsite ( along with many millions of items from other Harvard libraries ) at the Harvard Depository in <unk> ­ ough , Massachu ­ setts , from which they are retrieved overnight on request . : 170 @-@ 1 A project to insert barcodes into each book , begun in the late 1970s , has some 1 million volumes yet to reach . 
 = = = Harry Elkins Widener Collection = = = 
 The works displayed in the Memorial Rooms comprise Harry Widener 's collec ­ tion at the time of his death , " major monuments of English letters , many remarkable for their bindings and illustrations or unusual provenance " : : 9 Shakespeare first folios ; : 362 a copy of Poems written by Wil . Shake @-@ speare , gent . ( 1640 ) in its original sheepskin binding ; an inscribed copy of Boswell 's Life of Samuel Johnson ; Johnson 's own Bible ( " used so much by its owner that several pages were worn out and Johnson copied them over in his own writing " ) ; and first editions , <unk> ­ tion copies , and similarly valuable volumes of Robert Louis Stevenson , Thackeray , Charlotte Brontë , Blake , George Cruikshank , Isaac Cruikshank , Robert Cruikshank and Dickens — ​ ​ including the petty cash book kept by Dickens while a young law clerk . Book collector George Sidney Hellman , writing soon after Harry Widener 's death , observed that he was " not satisfied alone in having a rare book or a rare book inscribed by the author ; it was with him a prerequisite that the volume should be in immaculate condition . " ‍ 
 Harry Widener " died suddenly , just as he was beginning to be one of the world 's great collectors , " ‍ said the Collection 's first curator . : 6 " They formed a young man 's library , and are to be preserved as he left it " ‍ — ​ ​ except that the Widener family has the exclusive privilege of adding to it . Harvard 's " greatest typographical treasure " ‍ : 17 is one of the only thirty @-@ eight perfect copies extant of the Gutenberg Bible , purchased while Harry was abroad by his grandfather Peter A. B. Widener ( who had intended to surprise Harry with it once the Titanic docked in New York ) ‍ and added to the Collection by the Widener family in 1944 . 
 Like all Harvard 's valuable books , works in the Widener <unk> ­ tion may be consulted by researchers demonstrating a genuine research need . ‍ 
 = = = Parallel classification systems and dual catalogs = = = 
 Like many large libraries , Widener originally classified its holdings according to its own idiosyncratic system — ​ ​ the " Widener " or " Harvard " system — ​ ​ which ( writes Battles ) follows " the division of knowledge in its [ early twentieth @-@ century ] formulation . The Aus class contains books on the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire ; the Ott class serves the purpose for the Ottoman Empire . Dante , Molière , and Montaigne each gets a class of his own . " ‍ : 15 
 In the 1970s new arrivals began to be classified according to a modified version of the Library of Congress system . : 256 : 159 The two systems ' differences reflect " competing theories of <unk> ­ edge ... In a sense , the Widener system was Aristotelian ; its <unk> ­ <unk> were empirical , describing and reflecting the languages and cultural origins of books and highlighting their relations to one another in language , place , and time ; [ the Library of Congress system ] , by contrast , was Platonic , looking past the surface of language and nation to reflect the idealized , essential discipline in which each [ item ] might be said to belong . " ‍ : 158 @-@ 9 
 Because of the impracticality of reclassifying millions of books , those received before the changeover remain under their original " Widener " classifications . Thus among works on a given subject , older books will be found at one shelf location ( under a " Widener " classification ) and newer ones at another ( under the corresponding Library of Congress classification ) . 
 In addition , an accident of the building 's layout led to the development of two separate card catalogs — ​ ​ the " Union " catalog and the " Public " catalog — ​ ​ housed on different floors and having a complex interrelationship " which perplexed students and faculty alike . " It was not until the 1990s that the electronic Harvard On @-@ Line Library Information System was able to completely supplant both physical catalogs . : 137 @,@ 192 
 = = = Departmental and special libraries = = = 
 The building also houses a number of special libraries in dedicated spaces outside the stacks , includ ­ ing : 
 There are also special collections in the history of science , <unk> ­ tics , Near Eastern <unk> ­ es and <unk> ­ tions , <unk> ­ <unk> , and Sanskrit . 
 The contents of the Treasure Room , holding Harvard 's most precious rare books and manuscripts ( other than the Harry Elkins Widener Collection itself ) were transferred to newly built Houghton Library in 1942 . : 15 
 = = In literature and legend = = 
 = = = Swim @-@ requirement , ice @-@ cream , and other legends = = = 
 Legend holds that to spare future Harvard men her son 's fate , Eleanor Widener insisted , as a condition of her gift , that learning to swim be made a requirement for graduation . ( This requirement , the Harvard Crimson once elaborated erroneously , was " dropped in the late 1970s because it was deemed discriminatory against physically disabled students " . ) " Among the many myths relating to Harry Elkins Widener , this is the most prevalent " , says Harvard 's " Ask a Librarian " service . Though Harvard has had swimming requirements at various times ( e.g. for rowers on the Charles River , or as part of a now @-@ defunct freshmen training regimen ) ‍ Bentinck @-@ Smith writes that " There is absolutely no evidence in the President 's papers , or the faculty 's , to indicate that [ Eleanor Widener ] was , as a result of the Titanic disaster , in any way <unk> ­ ble for [ any ] compulsory swimming test . " ‍ 
 Another story , holding that Eleanor Widener donated a further sum to underwrite perpetual availability of ice cream ( purportedly Harry Widener 's favorite dessert ) in Harvard dining halls , is also without foundation . A Widener curator 's compilation of " fanciful oral history " recited by student tour guides includes " Flowers mysteriously appear every morning outside the Widener Room " and " Harry used to have carnations dyed crimson to remind him of Harvard , and so his mother kept up the tradition " in the flowers displayed in the Memorial Rooms . 
 = = = Literary references = = = 
 In H. P. Lovecraft 's fictional universe Cthulhu Mythos , a 17th @-@ century edition of the Necro ­ nom ­ i ­ con is hidden somewhere in the Widener stacks . 
 Thomas Wolfe , who earned a Harvard master 's degree in 1922 wrote of " [ wandering ] through the stacks of that great library like some damned soul , never at rest — ​ ​ ever leaping ahead from the pages I read to thoughts of those I want to read " ; his alter ego Eugene Gant read with a watch in his hand , " laying waste of the shelves . " ‍ 
 Historian Barbara Tuchman considered " the single most formative experience " of her career the writing of her undergrad ­ <unk> thesis , for which she was " allowed to have as my own one of those little cubicles with a table under a window " in the Widener stacks , which were " my <unk> ' bathtub , my burning bush , my dish of mold where I found my personal penicillin . " ‍ 
 = = Burglary and other incidents = = 
 Over the years , Widener has been the scene of various criminal exploits " infamous for their fecklessness and <unk> . " ‍ : 59 
 = = = Joel C. Williams = = = 
 In 1931 former graduate student Joel C. Williams was arrested after attempting to sell two books bearing Harvard College Library stamps to a Harvard Square book dealer , after which ( the Harvard Crimson reported ) " C. R. Apted , <unk> ­ tend ­ ent of Caretakers , together with officials of the Library , made a trip to Williams ' home " , where ( posing as " book buyers " to spare the feelings of Williams ' family ) ‍ : 88 they found thousands of books stolen over the prior eight to ten years , : D many badly damaged , in barrels and <unk> . The " absolutely crazy " Williams would " go to students studying in Widener and ask them what course they were taking . He would then borrow all the books for that course in the library . Then no one could get any to study , " library official John E. Shea later recalled . 
 Despite the misleading implication of bookplates placed in the <unk> : D recovered books , Harvard 's charges against Williams were dropped after he was indicted on book @-@ theft charges in another <unk> ­ tion , which imposed a sentence of hard labor . After the unrelated arrest of a book @-@ theft ring operating at Harvard , there was a " noticeable increase in the number of missing books secretly returned to the library " , the Transcript reported in 1932 . : 89 
 = = = Gutenberg Bible theft = = = 
 On the night of August 19 , 1969 an attempt was made to steal the library 's Gutenberg Bible , valued at $ 1 million . The 20 @-@ year @-@ old would @-@ be thief hid in a lavatory until after closing , then made his way to the roof , from which he descended via a knotted rope to break through a Memorial Room window . But after smashing the bible 's display case and placing its two volumes in a knapsack , he found it impossible to <unk> the rope carrying his 70 @-@ pound ( 32 kg ) booty . : D 
 Eventually he fell some 50 feet ( 15 m ) : 45 to the pavement of one of the light courts , where ( despite landing on the knapsack ) ‍ : D he lay <unk> ­ <unk> until his moans were heard by a janitor . : 45 He was found about 1 a.m. , " <unk> ­ er ­ a ­ <unk> the worse for his adventure " , ‍ : D with injuries including a fractured skull . " It looks like a <unk> ­ sion ­ al job all right , in the fact that he came down the rope , " commented Harvard Police Chief Robert <unk> . " But it doesn 't look very <unk> ­ sion ­ al that he fell off . " ‍ <unk> <unk> ­ <unk> that the attempt may have been modeled on a similar caper depicted in the 1964 film Topkapi , though a retired Harvard librarian later commented that the thief ( who was later judged insane ) " evidently knew nothing about books — ​ ​ or , at least , about selling them ... There was no explanation of what he expected to do with the Bible . " ‍ : 72 
 Only the books ' bindings ( which are not original ) were damaged . Since the incident only one or the other Bible volume is on display at any given time : E and a replica has been substituted at times of heightened security concern . 
 = = = " The Slasher " = = = 
 Around 1990 , empty bindings stripped of their pages began to appear in the Widener stacks . Eventually some 600 mutilated books were discovered , the vandal preferring works on early Christianity in Greek , Latin , or languages such as Icelandic . Notes left at Widener , and later at Northeastern University , threatened graphically described mutilations of library workers , cyanide gas attacks , and bombings of libraries and a local bank . Other notes instructed that $ 500 @,@ 000 be left in a Northeastern library , demanded that Northeastern " terminate all Jew personnel " , and directed that $ 1 million be left in the Widener stacks : " <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> THE <unk> on D WEST in THE <unk> <unk> <unk> 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 @.@ 00 <unk> IN rare <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> . " These " ransom drops " were staked out by the FBI , and surveillance cameras installed in ersatz books , without result . 
 In 1994 police connected an incident at Northeastern , in which a library worker there ( a former Widener employee ) was caught stealing chemistry books , with the fact that chemistry texts had been among the works mutilated at Widener . Officials found " a kind of renegade reference room " in the worker 's basement , includ ­ ing library books , piles of ripped @-@ out pages , a microfilm camera , and hundreds of unusable microfilms he had <unk> ­ <unk> made of the books ( worth $ 180 @,@ 000 ) he had destroyed . At trial " The Slasher " said he had acted in revenge for the eighteen months he had been detained in a state psychiatric hospital after expiration of a six @-@ month jail term he had received for a minor offense . 
 = = Artwork = = 
 In the 1920s the university commissioned John Singer Sargent to paint , within the fourteen @-@ foot @-@ high arched panels flanking the entrance to the Memorial Rotunda , two murals giving tribute to the univer ­ sity 's World War I dead . The accompanying inscription , by Lowell , reads : " Happy those who with a glowing faith / In one embrace clasped Death and Victory " . With Memorial Church , which directly faces Widener , these constitute what the Boston Public Library calls " the most elaborate World War I memorial in the Boston area . " ‍ 
 Above the Rotunda entrance is inscribed : 
 To the memory of Eleanor Elkins Rice • whose noble and endearing spirit inspired the conception and completion of this Memorial Library • 1938 . 
 ( Eleanor Elkins Widener became Eleanor Elkins Rice when , in October 1915 , she married Harvard professor and surgeon Alexander Hamilton Rice , Jr . , a noted South American explorer whom she had met at the library 's dedication four months earlier . She died in 1937 . ) 
 On the second floor is a bronze bust , by Albin Polasek , of sculptor and muralist Frank Millet , who had also died on the Titanic . In the main reading room is a sculpture of George Washington ; on the stairs to the third floor a sculpture of John Elbridge Hudson ; and on the ground floor a sculpture of Henry Ware Wales , as well as vaulted hallways — ​ ​ " just like the Oyster Bar at Grand Central ... astounding " , according to historian Thomas <unk> — ​ ​ by Rafael <unk> , who ( with his son ) also designed and built domes and vaults in buildings such as Carnegie Hall , the Cathedral of St. John the Divine , and the Boston Public Library . 
 Three dioramas — ​ ​ depicting the grounds , buildings , and vicinity of Harvard Yard in 1667 , 1775 and 1936 — ​ ​ were installed behind the main stairs in 1947 , but removed during renovation in 2004 . A six @-@ foot @-@ square bronze tablet , featuring a bas relief of Gore Hall , is at the exterior northwest corner . Its inscription reads in part : 
 On this spot stood Gore Hall • Architect Richard Bond , Supervisor • Daniel Treadwell • Built in the Year 1838 • In honor of Christopher Gore Class of 1776 . • Fellow of the College , Overseer , Benefactor • Governor of the Commonwealth . • Senator of the United States . • The first use of modern book @-@ stacks was in this library . ... 
 Two of Gore Hall 's granite pinnacles were preserved , and flank Widener 's rear ( Massachusetts Avenue ) entrance . : 151 
 = = Restrictions on women = = 
 The building originally included a separate Radcliffe Reading Room behind the card catalogs — ​ ​ " barely large enough for a single table " — ​ ​ to which female students were restricted " for fear their presence would distract the studious Harvard men " in the Main Reading Room . In 1923 a sequence of communications between Librarian William Coolidge Lane and another Harvard official dealt with " the incident of Miss Alexander 's intrusion into the reading room " , : 37 @,@ 86 and Keyes Metcalf , Director of University Libraries from 1937 to 1955 , wrote that early in his tenure a Classics professor " rushed into my office , looking as if he were about to have an apoplectic stroke , and gasped , ' I 've just been in the reading room , and there is a Radcliffe girl in there ! ' " By then female graduate students were permitted to enter the stacks , but only until 5 p.m. , " after which time it was thought they would not be safe there . " ‍ 
 " Even the ever @-@ present problem of inadequate lavatories worked to deny functional access to women " , wrote Battles . " Patrons requesting directions to a women 's restroom were routinely misled , denied access , or simply told that such things did not exist at a college for men such as Harvard . " ‍ : 115 
 By World War II ( Elizabeth Colson recalled years later ) " we could go into the [ Main Reading Room ] and use the encyclopedias and things like that there , if we stood up , but we couldn 't sit down " ; : 56 @-@ 7 but only by special permission ( which even female faculty members had to request in writing ) could a woman work in the building in the evening . : 112 @-@ 4 
 = = Renovation = = 
 A five @-@ year , $ 97 million renovation completed in 2004 ( the first since the building opened ) added fire suppression and <unk> ­ men ­ tal control systems , upgraded wiring and <unk> ­ tions , remodeled various public spaces , and enclosed the light courts to create additional reading rooms ( beneath which several levels of new offices and mechanical equipment were hidden ) . " <unk> ­ <unk> ­ <unk> @-@ inducing " elevators were replaced , the bottom shelves on the lowest stacks level were removed in recognition of chronic seepage problems , Widener 's " olfactory <unk> ­ gia ... actually the smell of decaying books " was addressed , and unrestricted light and air — ​ ​ seen as desirable when Widener was built but now considered " public enemies one and two for the long @-@ term safety of old books " — ​ ​ were brought under control . 
 Some changes required that the Widener family grant relief from the terms of Eleanor Widener 's gift , which forbade that " structures of any kind [ be ] erected in the courts around which the [ Library ] is constructed , but that the same shall be kept open for light and air " . : 79 : 42 The need to relocate each of the building 's 3 @.@ 5 million volumes twice — ​ ​ first to temporary locations , then back , as work proceeded aisle by aisle — ​ ​ was turned to advantage , so that by the end of the <unk> ­ tion related materials in the library 's two classifica ­ tion systems ( see § Parallel classifica ­ tion systems ) were physically adjacent for the first time ; the chart showing the floor and wing location , within the stacks , of each subject classifica ­ tion was revised sixty @-@ five times during construction . The project received the 2005 Library Building Award from the American Library <unk> ­ tion and the American Institute of Architects . 
 = Eusèbe Jaojoby = 
 Eusèbe Jaojoby ( born 29 July 1955 ) , commonly known by his surname Jaojoby [ <unk> ] , is a Malagasy composer and singer of salegy , a musical style of northwestern Madagascar . Critics consider him to be one of the originators of the modern salegy style that emerged in the 1970s , and credit him with transforming the genre from an obscure regional musical tradition into one of national and international popularity . Jaojoby also contributed to the creation of two salegy subgenres , <unk> and <unk> . Jaojoby has been called the most popular singer in Madagascar and the Indian Ocean islands , and is widely referred to as the " King of Salegy " . His success has earned him such honors as Artist of the Year in Madagascar for two consecutive years ( 1998 – 1999 ) and the role of Goodwill Ambassador for the United Nations Population Fund in 1999 . 
 In 1970 Jaojoby began singing in the northern coastal town of Diego @-@ Suarez . He performed with bands that were experimentally blending American soul and funk with the Malagasy musical traditions of the region . The artist gained popularity and toured regionally , producing four singles with The Players before the band broke up in 1979 . After a short break in the 1980s to pursue a career in journalism , Jaojoby resumed his musical career and rose to national prominence with his 1988 hit " Samy <unk> Samy <unk> " . He then reoriented his career toward music , recording his first full @-@ length album in 1992 and becoming a full @-@ time professional musician the following year . He has since released eight full @-@ length albums and has toured extensively in Madagascar and abroad accompanied by his wife and adult children , who perform in the band with him . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Eusèbe Jaojoby was born on 29 July 1955 , in the village of <unk> , near Sambava in the northeastern coastal Sava Region of Madagascar . Jaojoby and his twelve younger brothers and sisters were raised Catholic ; early experiences singing hymns in the local church choir and traditional folk songs at local Betsimisaraka moonlight village festivals made him realize he possessed vocal talent . At the age of 15 , Jaojoby 's father sent him to continue his studies in Diego @-@ Suarez , one of the six regional capitals at the time . The town was home to a large contingent of French soldiers and expatriates , and contemporary Western genres were commonly heard on the radio and in the town 's many nightclubs . Jaojoby was inspired by these styles and particularly by Freddy <unk> , who in the 1960s became the first Malagasy musician to use an electric guitar to perform coastal musical styles . 
 One month after moving to Diego @-@ Suarez , Jaojoby entered a local talent competition and managed to win despite singing unaccompanied and without a microphone . He began to perform in nightclubs whenever the opportunity presented itself . The uncle with whom he was lodging sent word of Jaojoby 's activities to the young singer 's parents , who consulted a priest before giving their son permission to continue exploring his musical talents on the condition that he continue to perform well at school . Jaojoby agreed to this provision , studying during the day and performing at night for several years . In 1972 he began singing with Los Matadores , the well @-@ established house band of the <unk> nightclub in Diego @-@ Suarez . This group catered to the club 's primarily Western clientele by performing cover songs and rhythm and blues compositions in French and English , occasionally incorporating traditional instruments like kabosy and drums , or experimenting with local musical styles using electric guitar , bass , and drum kit , accompanied by traditional Malagasy language vocal performance . 
 Experimental blending of Western and Malagasy musical elements was occurring simultaneously among a number of northwestern bands and musicians of Jaojoby 's generation . Although no single individual can be credited with creating the modern salegy genre , Jaojoby ranks among the earliest originators of the nascent musical style . A desire for greater freedom to write songs and further develop the syncretic modern salegy style led Jaojoby to leave Los Matadores in 1975 for The Players , another regional band that was less well @-@ established but more willing to take risks . The band was managed by a Chinese shopkeeper who provided them with a sound system and generator . The band toured northwestern Madagascar for the next four years with increasing success , recording two 45rpm singles and performing in Mahajanga , Diego @-@ Suarez , and other towns and villages throughout the region before disbanding in 1979 . 
 After briefly performing with a band named <unk> , Jaojoby moved to Antananarivo where he studied sociology for two years at the University of Antananarivo before accepting an offer to work for the national radio station as a journalist at the end of 1980 . The following year , Jaojoby met the manager of the local Hilton hotel by chance while the two were waiting together at a bus stop . Accepting the manager 's invitation to audition at the hotel 's Papillon bar that same night , Jaojoby performed a cover of James Brown 's " Sex Machine " . The manager interrupted him mid @-@ song to offer Jaojoby a contract to give regular evening performances there with the <unk> family , a popular jazz act . For the next three years Jaojoby spent his days at the national radio and his evenings singing at the Papillon with the exception of a short interlude in 1982 when he was sent to East Berlin to complete an advanced course at the International Institute of Journalism . Jaojoby was promoted to Director of the Regional Information Service in Diego @-@ Suarez in 1984 , necessitating his relocation back to the northwest coast and bringing his cabaret performances to an end . 
 = = King of Salegy = = 
 After several years having focused entirely on his career with the Regional Information Service , Jaojoby was approached in 1987 by Frenchman Pierre Henri Donat to contribute several recordings to Madagascar 's first salegy compilation album , Les Grands <unk> du Salegy ( " Grand Masters of Salegy " ) . The runaway success of one of the tracks he composed and performed , " Samy <unk> Samy <unk> " , elevated salegy from a regional genre to one of nationwide popularity , leading a newspaper to declare him the " King of Salegy " . High demand for live performances led the singer to return to Antananarivo in 1988 to form a band named " Jaojoby " that included former bandmates from Los Matadores and The Players . Jaojoby begin touring regularly at home and abroad , performing his first international concerts in Paris in 1989 . In the meantime , he worked as a press attaché for the Ministry of Transport , Meteorology and Tourism from 1990 until 1993 , at which point he left his job to become a full @-@ time musician . 
 The 1992 release of Jaojoby 's first full @-@ length album , titled Salegy ! , was facilitated by <unk> magazine editor Ian Anderson , who had worked with Jaojoby to record several of his tracks for a radio broadcast two years previously . Jaojoby 's second album , <unk> , was the first salegy album to be recorded in France , as well as the first of his albums to be produced in a professional @-@ quality recording studio . Following the 1994 release of <unk> , Jaojoby became a regular on the international music festival circuit and has performed at such events as WOMAD in Reading , the Festival du Bout du Monde in Brittany , <unk> in Spain , the Festival des Musiques Métisses in Angoulême , the <unk> Festival in Abidjan , and similar events in Germany , the Netherlands , and Portugal . Jaojoby 's excitement over his rise to international celebrity was attenuated by the 1995 death of the band 's original drummer , Jean @-@ Claude <unk> , who had first performed with Jaojoby as a member of Los Matadores . 
 Jaojoby 's success and popularity attained new heights in 1998 with the release of E ! Tiako . He was named " Artist of the Year " in Madagascar for two consecutive years ( 1998 – 1999 ) , and the single " <unk> " received regular airplay across the island more than a year after the album was released . In July 1999 , Jaojoby was named Goodwill Ambassador to the United Nations Population Fund and supported the United Nations ' activities in Madagascar related to raising awareness of sexually transmitted diseases , unintended pregnancy , and other concerns relevant to the Malagasy youth population . The lyrics of his songs commonly address social issues , typified by a track on E ! Tiako that encourages the use of condoms to avoid contracting HIV / AIDS . 
 <unk> <unk> was recorded over five days in the summer of 2000 and released the following year . In the wake of its success , Jaojoby performed at a political rally to an audience of 50 @,@ 000 partisans of candidate Marc Ravalomanana less than a month before the divisive 2001 presidential elections that nearly resulted in the secession of the island 's coastal provinces . Jaojoby 's 2004 follow @-@ up album Malagasy , which was recorded in semi @-@ live conditions on the island of Réunion in a small venue before an audience of the artist 's friends , featured lyrics that sought to promote optimism and national reconciliation ; the artist announced that he would not involve himself in national politics in the future . The same year he toured extensively in France , the United States and Canada . 
 The March 2008 release of <unk> @-@ <unk> celebrated Jaojoby 's roots as a cabaret performer of soul , funk , and other Western popular genres . The track listing included previously unreleased pop songs written by the artist in the 1970s and 1980s in French , Malagasy , Creole , and English . Later that year , in September , he became the second Malagasy musical act ( after supergroup Mahaleo , in 2007 ) to perform at the prestigious and historic Olympia music hall in Paris . Seating was specially removed at his request to provide space for dancing . The live album Live au Bato Fou : Jaojoby was released in 2010 and features a diverse sampling of Jaojoby 's greatest hits . A selection of new salegy tracks written and performed by Jaojoby was released in 2012 under the album title Mila <unk> , which was ranked by NPR as one of the ten best international albums of the year . 
 = = Style and legacy = = 
 The roots of Jaojoby 's musical style began with his childhood exposure to the Western @-@ Malagasy syncretism of local church hymns , and the rhythm , harmonies , and form of the traditional antsa style of northern Madagascar . The antsa is a choral style common across northern Madagascar characterized by large group performance of minor <unk> over a highly syncopated multi @-@ rhythmic hand @-@ clap or other percussive accompaniment . Upon relocating to Diego @-@ Suarez , Jaojoby was exposed to Western artists and musical genres , as well as the music of Freddy <unk> , the first local artist to popularize the adaptation of traditional Malagasy styles to the electric guitar . Singing with Los Matadores provided Jaojoby with the opportunity to cover the hits of his idols , including Otis Redding , Percy Sledge , and James Brown . During his years performing with this band and his subsequent group , Les Players , Jaojoby adeptly covered hits from a vast range of regional and international genres ranging from the jerk , tango and , cha @-@ cha @-@ cha to the sega and slow romantic ballads . Together , these musical influences formed the basis of Jaojoby 's style . 
 In the 1960s bands such as Orchestra Liberty began performing the antsa rhythm on modern drum kits with accompanying guitar or accordion replacing the traditional vocals . It was not until the 1970s that bands like Los Matadores and Les Players adapted the traditional vocal style to the newly electrified antsa . Guitar solos were inspired by the performance style of traditional Malagasy instruments like the valiha and marovany , combined with that of guitar solo work popularized in the Congo and Côte d 'Ivoire . As a singer with Los Matadores , Jaojoby occasionally filled the instrumental breaks of rhythm and blues covers with improvised vocals inspired by the salegy tradition , to the jubilation of the young Malagasy listeners gathered outside the club 's doors . Later , with The Players , Jaojoby and a handful of peers in northern urban areas experimented with incorporating vocals into the early instrumental salegy . Jaojoby described the adaptation of the traditional antsa style to modern instruments in the following terms : " The singing is that of the cattle herders moving their herds . The guitar imitates the great masters of the valiha . The keyboards provide the feeling of the traditional accordions , and the bass draws from the sound of the five traditional tuned drums . As far as the drum kit , well , it reproduces the ambiance of a Malagasy crowd on a day of celebration with all the hand clapping , shakers , and feet stomping the earth . " The salegy rhythm was adapted to the modern drum kit by Jean Claude <unk> , drummer of Los Matadores , who later rejoined Jaojoby 's band from 1988 until his death in 1995 . 
 French world music magazine <unk> has called Jaojoby the most popular singer in Madagascar and the Indian Ocean islands . He is widely referred to as the " King of Salegy " by his fans and the press . He composes all of his own music and writes the lyrics to his songs himself . According to <unk> magazine , the quality of Jaojoby 's " supple tenor " voice , the creativity of his compositions and the singer 's willingness to experiment have helped to distinguish him from his peers . Radio France Internationale described his vocal performance as " clear , powerful and energetic ... his trademark , which makes him stand out in the Madagascan musical panorama " . Critics have credited Jaojoby with popularizing the salegy genre both within Madagascar and on the international music scene , and have identified him as an originator of two derivative versions of salegy , <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = Family and personal life = = 
 Since the mid @-@ 1990s , Jaojoby 's wife and children have formed part of the standard lineup of his band . His wife , Claudine Robert <unk> , provides backing and occasional lead vocals . The couple 's son , Elie Lucas , plays lead guitar while their daughters , <unk> and <unk> , provide backing vocals and stage dancing . His children also formed a band called Jaojoby Jr. that performs covers of their father 's music as well as some of their own original salegy compositions . <unk> , a group created by Claudine in 2005 , performs the traditional form of salegy using only accordion , percussion , and vocals . 
 While traveling to Antananarivo after a performance at the 2006 <unk> Festival in Nosy Be , Jaojoby and his family were involved in a road accident . The singer suffered four broken ribs , lung damage and a fractured pelvis that necessitated emergency surgery in Réunion , three weeks of hospitalization , and prolonged physical therapy to enable Jaojoby to regain the ability to walk . Fans of the singer used mail and the Internet to successfully raise the funds required to cover medical expenses related to the accident . After several weeks of bed rest following the surgery , <unk> went on to make a full recovery . 
 On 3 June 2011 , Jaojoby opened a new cabaret venue called " Jao 's Pub " in the <unk> neighborhood of Antananarivo , where the singer and his family reside . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = The Ghost Ship = 
 The Ghost Ship ( 1943 ) is an American black @-@ and @-@ white psychological thriller film , with elements of mystery and horror , directed by Mark Robson , starring Richard Dix and featuring Russell Wade , Edith Barrett , Ben Bard and Edmund Glover , along with Skelton Knaggs . It was produced by Val Lewton for RKO Radio Pictures as part of a series of low @-@ budget horror films . The film can be seen as a " low @-@ key psychological thriller " , a " suspense drama " , and a " waterlogged melodrama " . 
 The film is about a young merchant marine officer who begins to suspect that his ship 's captain is mentally unbalanced and endangering the lives of the ship 's crew . The ship 's crew , however , believes the vessel to be haunted and cursed and several mysterious deaths occur . 
 Upon its theatrical release on Christmas Eve , 1943 , the film was a box office success but received a mixed critical reception . However , in February 1944 , Lewton was sued for plagiarism by playwrights Samuel R. Golding and Norbert Faulkner , who claimed that the script was based on a play that was submitted to Lewton for a possible film . Because of the suit , The Ghost Ship was withdrawn from theatrical release and not shown for nearly 50 years . It was not until the film 's copyright was not renewed and it entered the public domain in the 1990s , that it began to be available again , and was released as part of the Val Lewton Horror Collection DVD set in 2005 . The film , with its predominantly male cast , has been argued by several film critics to have homosexual undertones . 
 It is in sharp contrast to the majority of patriotic wartime films , especially among the plethora of those that take place primarily on a ship , which usually feature themes such a brotherhood , respect for higher @-@ ranking officers , and able , hard working seamen . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Tom Merriam ( Russell Wade ) , a young merchant marine officer , joins the crew of the ship Altair . At first , all seems well and Merriam bonds with the captain , Will Stone ( Richard Dix ) . The ship , already shorthanded due to the death of a crew member before it left port , loses another ( " the Greek " ) when he develops appendicitis . ( Taking direction over the ship 's radio , the captain is to perform the appendectomy , but he is unable to make the incision . Instead , Merriam successfully removes the sailor 's appendix , but – feeling he should be loyal to the captain and spare him embarrassment – swears the radio operator to secrecy . Afterward , the captain has a self @-@ serving explanation for his failure . ) 
 One of the crew , Louie ( an uncredited Lawrence Tierney ) , tells the captain he should pull in to port and take on new crew . The captain says " You know , there are captains who might hold this against you , Louie . " Shortly after , the captain closes the hatch to the chain locker with Louie inside , and Louie is crushed to death by the chain . Merriam believes that Captain Stone , who is obsessed with authority , did it intentionally . When they dock at the fictional Caribbean island of " San Sebastian " ( which had appeared in RKO 's I Walked with a Zombie — another Lewton production — and later in RKO 's Zombies on Broadway ) , Merriam attempts to expose the Captain 's madness at a board of inquiry . The crew all speak favorably of the captain , including the Greek , who credits the captain with saving his life . Merriam states his intention to leave the Altair . 
 After the inquiry , the captain admits to a female friend ( Edith Barrett , who had appeared in I Walked with a Zombie ) that he fears he is losing his mind . Soon after , Merriam is involved in a fight in port and knocked unconscious . One of his former shipmates – unaware that he has left the Altair – brings the unconscious man back aboard ship before the vessel departs . Merriam wakes up on the ship and fears that the pathologically insane Captain Stone may now attempt to kill him , a fear that is only reinforced when the captain , referring to the young officer 's accusations , says " You know , Mr. Merriam , there are some captains who would hold this against you . " 
 Merriam , scorned by the crew , finds that he can no longer lock the door to his cabin . Fearing for his life , he tries to steal a gun from the ship 's weapons locker , but is confronted by Captain Stone . Stone dares Merriam to try to get the support of the crew , but Merriam is rebuffed in this effort . This changes when Radioman Winslow ( Edmund Glover ) receives a radiogram asking if Merriam is on board , and Captain Stone orders Winslow to lie , replying that Merriam is not aboard . The radioman shows Merriam the captain 's reply radiogram and says that he now mistrusts the captain and will send a message to the company expressing his concerns about Stone 's mental health . However , as he leaves Merriam 's cabin , Winslow encounters the captain . As the two walk side @-@ by @-@ side , Winslow drops the captain 's radiogram to the deck , and it is picked up by an illiterate crewman , Finn the Mute ( Skelton Knaggs ) , whose internal monologues serve as a sort of one @-@ man Greek chorus throughout the film . 
 Captain Stone now orders Merriam to send a radio message to the corporate office advising them that Winslow has been washed overboard . Merriam accuses the captain of murdering Winslow , and the two fight . Crew members intervene , and the captain has the crew tie up Merriam and put him in his bunk . The captain then has First Officer Bowns ( Ben Bard ) administer a sedative to Merriam . Finn finally delivers the captain 's radiogram to Bowns , who can read . Bowns becomes deeply alarmed . The first officer talks to several other crew members , all of whom now begin questioning the captain 's sanity . 
 Captain Stone overhears Bowns ' conversation with the crew , and goes insane . He takes a knife and enters Merriam 's cabin to kill the young officer , but Finn arrives to try to stop him . While the crew is up on deck singing , Finn and the captain engage in a desperate struggle in the dark , during which Finn kills the captain . After the captain 's death , Merriam is reinstated and the ship returns to its home port of San Pedro . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 RKO had scored a major financial success with Cat People ( 1942 ) . The film , which cost $ 141 @,@ 659 , brought in almost $ 4 million in its first two years and saved the studio from financial disaster . RKO wanted to move quickly on a sequel to build on the success of Cat People , but producer Val Lewton wished to make the fantasy @-@ comedy story " The Amorous Ghost " instead . As Lewton and studio wrangled , Lewton commenced production on The Seventh Victim , a horror @-@ murder mystery film , and on May 12 , 1943 , RKO announced it was delaying production on the sequel The Curse of the Cat People due to the unavailability of key performers . RKO production chief Charles Koerner did not want Lewton to be idle once filming on The Seventh Victim ended nor did he favor the idea of Lewton working on comedy , so Koerner suggested that Lewton direct a horror film set at sea , utilizing the studio 's existing ship set , built for Pacific Liner ( 1939 ) . According to Robert Wise , a longtime collaborator with Lewton , it was this set that gave Lewton the idea for the film . " He would find what we call a ' standing set , ' and then tailor his script to the set , whatever it was . That 's how he made The Ghost Ship . He walked onto a set and saw a tanker , then cooked up the idea for this ship with a murderous captain . " One scholar has suggested that Lewton accepted the assignment in part because , as an amateur sailor himself , the ship captain 's behavior mirrored Lewton 's own views on how to manage a ship , but also because Lewton saw the plot as a way of criticizing his micro @-@ managing superiors at RKO . The budget , as with all of Lewton 's films , was set at $ 150 @,@ 000 . 
 At the time screenwriting began , Lewton claimed that the idea for the film was an original one attributable to himself . Leo <unk> did the treatment and Donald Henderson Clarke wrote the script , although Lewton significantly revised the screenplay and wrote many lines of dialogue himself . 
 Mark Robson was assigned to direct in June 1943 . Robson was the RKO director " most in tune with [ Lewton 's ] idea of psychological terror " . Robson had just finished editing Orson Welles ' Journey Into Fear , and there are distinct stylistic similarities between the two films . Robson and Lewton chose to use single @-@ source lighting throughout the film in order to make the sets and performances more interesting , and sets were designed to utilize this type of lighting . The two men also agreed to continue Lewton 's emphasis on unseen and implied terror . Cinematographer Nicholas Musuraca , art directors Albert S. D 'Agostino and Walter E. Keller , and composer Roy Webb all regularly worked with Lewton , and did so on The Ghost Ship as well . Richard Dix was cast because he was already on contract with RKO to do several " quickie " pictures at a set fee per film , and doing The Ghost Ship would help fulfill his contract without much effort . Russell Wade had provided a disembodied voice in The Leopard Man , and this was his first starring role in a Lewton production . His performance here led him to be cast in Lewton 's later The Body Snatcher ( 1945 ) . Edith Barrett , Ben Bard , Dewey Robinson , and Charles Lung all had worked with Lewton before . Skelton Knaggs , Edmund Glover , and future film noir star Lawrence Tierney , whom Lewton had seen modeling clothing in a Sears , Roebuck catalog , all made their motion picture debuts in the movie . Sir Lancelot , a well @-@ known calypso singer , who later influenced the career of Harry Belafonte ) , had already appeared in singing roles in three prior films ( including I Walked with a Zombie ) . Atmosphere is created in the film by the contrast between murder and the joviality of the calypso songs sung on board . 
 Production began on 3 August 1943 . Many details about the performances , lighting , camera angles , action , and effects were worked out ahead of time in order to not only keep the film under budget but also help achieve suspense on such a low budget . Dr. Jared Criswell , former pastor of the Fifth Avenue Spiritualist Church of New York City , served as a technical consultant on the film regarding psychic phenomena . The picture 's final fight scene between the Finn , Pollo , and the mad Captain was shot on a dimly lit set to heighten the suspense and keep the audience from guessing who the victor might be , similar to the way Jacques Tourneur and Lewton had shot a similar scene in Cat People . 
 = = Release and lawsuit = = 
 The film was released in theaters on Christmas Eve , 1943 . The poster art was most likely painted by William Rose . The film did well at the box office until Lewton was sued for plagiarism in February 1944 by playwrights Samuel R. Golding and Norbert Faulkner , who claimed that the script was based on a play that was submitted to Lewton for a possible film . Because of the suit , The Ghost Ship was withdrawn from theatrical release . Lewton disputed the claim , but the court ruled against him . RKO paid the authors $ 25 @,@ 000 in damages and attorney fees of $ 5 @,@ 000 , and lost all future booking residuals and the right to sell the film for airing on television . Elliot Lavine , a film historian , says that losing the lawsuit deeply disturbed Lewton , leaving him depressed for a significant period of time . 
 The film did not see release for nearly another 50 years due to the suit . The Ghost Ship did make it into a package of RKO films sold by " C & C Television Films " to local TV stations , but it was quickly withdrawn . It was not until the film 's copyright was not renewed and it entered the public domain in the 1990s , that it began to be available again . The film was released as part of the Val Lewton Horror Collection DVD set in 2005 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 At the time of its initial release , the film had a mixed reception , with both positive and negative reviews . Bosley Crowther of the New York Times enjoyed the film , calling it " ... a nice little package of morbidity , all wrapped around in gloom . " Paul Meehan calls it " a tepid potboiler of malfeasance and murder on the high seas . " John Brosnan described The Ghost Ship as " a more conventional mystery @-@ thriller involving a number of deaths on board a ship , but was produced with Lewton 's customary attention to atmosphere . " The script has come in for significant praise , with Captain Stone being compared to Captain <unk> in The Caine Mutiny , Captain Ahab in Moby @-@ Dick , and Captain Wolf Larsen in The Sea @-@ Wolf . Other critics have pointed out that Stone and Merriam seem to have a father @-@ son relationship , but that the <unk> of the script is that the father @-@ figure becomes so enraged at his " son 's " failings that he seeks to murder him . 
 Modern film critics have also praised the picture 's acting , cinematography , and lighting , as well as its ability to scare . Actor Richard Dix is almost uniformly praised for bringing a depth of character , moodiness , and pathos to the role of Captain Stone . The film 's direction , cinematography and lighting , too , display a depth of artistry not usually seen in cinema . Cinematographer Nicholas Musuraca won high praise for his chiaroscuro lighting design . Film historian Edmund <unk> has written one scene in particular which is highly effective : 
 An excellent set @-@ piece early in the film showcases Robson 's underrated directorial skill . Robson creates a dynamic sense of menace from a physical object : a massive giant hook hanging from upon an enormous chain , <unk> , inches above the deck . ... [ The ] hook remains unattended and unsecured . ... In a tightly directed , genuinely exciting scene , the monstrous hook sways back and forth in a direct path toward the camera , making one wonder how cinematographer , Nicholas Musuraca , kept his camera ( and head ) intact during the shooting . ... The lighting is also used to great advantage , the shadows and fog accenting the terror . Half the time the swinging hook is so hidden in the darkness that aside from the creak of its sway , there is no telling which direction it will take . 
 The set design , too , has been praised for being " suitably claustrophobic . " Robson 's direction has earned kudos for heightening the suspense by leaving certain actions and motives vague . In the scene in which Seaman Parker ( Lawrence Tierney ) dies , crushed by the anchor chain , Robson left it unclear whether Captain Stone committed murder by trapping Parker in the anchor chain locker or whether he merely shut the door . The vagueness leaves the audience unsure whether to believe Merriam 's accusations against the Captain , and builds an atmosphere of paranoia and doubt which is critical to the picture 's success . Contemporary critic Gary Giddins has pointed out that the film incorporates classic Lewton scare tactics but in new ways . " His trademark scare tactic , a high point in practically all of his films , is a long , dark , nightmarish walk , where every sound is magnified and every object threatening . In The Ghost Ship , that " walk " is transferred to the cabin of the victimized third officer ... " Others have pointed out another Lewton device , the gradual stalking of a main character by a murderer , as another deft touch in the film . 
 Modern critics have also pointed out that the film , unlike so many motion pictures of the 1940s , has an almost exclusively male cast and avoids the trope of a man " redeemed by the love of a good woman . " The picture is " entirely concerned with male conflict " , one critic noted , and at the end of the film a woman appears only in shadow and fog " as the possibility of salvation " rather than bringing emotional closure . Other film critics have made sustained arguments that the film is a lengthy if coded study of repressed homosexuality , similar to that in Herman Melville 's novel , Billy Budd . Indeed , the focus on men and men 's problems has led one modern critic to declare the film " one of the most homoerotic films Hollywood ever made . " 
 Contemporary film programmers seem to have a high opinion of the film as well . A 1993 Film Forum series , " Val Lewton : Horror Most Noir " , screened The Ghost Ship 42 times , while I Walked With A Zombie screened only 10 times and Cat People a mere eight . Film director Alison Maclean chose The Ghost Ship for a retrospective of classic RKO films , arguing that the film was " genuinely eccentric " and a cinematic revelation . When The Ghost Ship was shown on French cable television in the late 1990s , it was introduced as a prime example of Val Lewton 's genius at presenting " unseen horror . " 
 = Beyond the Sea ( film ) = 
 Beyond the Sea is a 2004 American biographical film based on the life of singer / actor Bobby Darin . Starring in the lead role and using his own singing voice for the musical numbers , Kevin Spacey co @-@ wrote , directed , and co @-@ produced the film , which takes its title from Darin 's hit version of the song of the same name . 
 Beyond the Sea depicts Darin 's rise to success in both the music and film industry during the 1950s and 1960s , as well as his marriage to Sandra Dee , portrayed by Kate Bosworth . 
 As early as 1986 , Barry Levinson intended to direct a film based on the life of Darin , and he began pre @-@ production on the project in early 1997 . When he eventually vacated the director 's position , Spacey , along with Darin 's son Dodd , acquired the film rights . 
 Beyond the Sea was released in December 2004 to mixed reviews from critics and bombed at the box office . Dodd Darin , Sandra Dee and former Darin manager Steve Blauner responded with enthusiastic feedback to Spacey 's work on the film . Despite a number of negative reviews , some critics praised Spacey 's performance , largely due to his decision to use his own singing voice . He received a Golden Globe nomination . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Rather than providing a straightforward biography , the film weaves fantasy sequences with scenes containing somewhat fictionalized accounts of events in Darin 's life , and throughout it , the adult singer interacts with his younger self . It chronicles his determination to rise from his working class roots as Walden Robert Cassotto , a frail Bronx boy plagued by multiple bouts of rheumatic fever , and become a singer more famous than Frank Sinatra . To achieve that goal , he forms a band and struggles to find gigs at any nightclub that will hire him . 
 His agent gets Darin a recording contract with Atlantic Records , where the singer enjoys teen idol success with " Splish Splash " . Not wanting to limit his appeal to rock and roll audiences , he changes his niche to big band singing and records major hits , such as " Mack the Knife . " To capitalize on his popularity with teenage and young adult audiences , Darin is cast in Come September opposite Sandra Dee . He falls in love with the eighteen @-@ year @-@ old actress and , determined to marry her , he romantically seduces and enchants her with songs like " Beyond the Sea " and " Dream Lover . " The two elope , angering her mother . Darin finally realizes his own mother 's dream when he is signed to appear at the famed Copacabana nightclub in Manhattan . 
 As success takes him on the road and away from home , Dee begins to drink heavily , and the couple fights frequently . Eventually they separate , then reconcile . She gives birth to a son , Dodd . To his actress wife 's chagrin , Darin is nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance as a shell shocked soldier in Captain Newman , M.D .. 
 In the late 1960s , Darin becomes involved in the campaign to elect Robert F. Kennedy for President and contemplates a political career of his own . His sister Nina , knowing his past will be investigated closely if Bobby opts to enter the political arena , shocks him with the news his beloved mother actually was his grandmother and he is Nina 's illegitimate child , the son of a father she cannot identify . 
 Devastated , Darin becomes a recluse living in a trailer on the Big Sur coast in California . He finds himself out of step with changing music trends , and when he tries to adapt by incorporating folk music and protest songs into his repertoire , he finds himself rejected by the audience that once embraced him . Undaunted , he stages a show , complete with a gospel choir , at the Flamingo Hotel in Las Vegas , and against all odds it is a huge success . 
 But his triumph is short @-@ lived . Suffering from blood poisoning following surgery to repair his mechanical heart valve , Darin is rushed to the hospital , where he dies at the age of thirty @-@ seven . Following his death , he meets the younger counterpart of himself once again , and the two duet with " As Long As I 'm Singing . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Kevin Spacey as Bobby Darin , who rises from his lower class roots to become one of the most popular rock and roll and big band performers of all time . 
 Kate Bosworth as Sandra Dee , the popular actress who marries Bobby . Although they divorced in 1967 , Sandra said she has always truly and deeply loved him , and that she always will , and thus never remarried . 
 Bob Hoskins as Charlie Maffia , who serves as a father figure and considers Bobby to be his son . 
 John Goodman as Stephen Blauner , Bobby 's dedicated talent manager . Blauner later becomes a successful film producer with movies such as The King of Marvin Gardens ( 1972 ) and Drive , He Said ( 1971 ) . 
 Brenda Blethyn as Polly Cassotto , Bobby 's biological maternal grandmother , who teaches him the art of music as a child . 
 Caroline Aaron as Nina Cassotto Maffia , Bobby 's biological mother , whom he believed to be his older sister . Nina tells him the shocking truth when he is thirty @-@ three years old . 
 Greta Scacchi as Mary <unk> , Sandra 's overprotective mother . 
 Peter <unk> as Dick <unk> , Bobby 's arranger and pianist . 
 Matt Rippy as David <unk> , Bobby 's publicist . 
 William Ullrich as young Bobby . 
 Cathy Moriarty @-@ Gentile and Vanessa Redgrave were originally cast in Beyond the Sea , but both actresses dropped out for unspecified reasons . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Barry Levinson = = = 
 Beginning in 1986 , Barry Levinson intended to produce and direct a biopic based on the life of Bobby Darin with funding from his own production company , Baltimore Pictures . With writer Lewis Colick , Levinson pitched the idea to Warner Bros. Pictures , who agreed to co @-@ finance The Bobby Darin Story and cover distribution duties . Producer Arthur Friedman , a fan of Darin 's work , began to laboriously negotiate for crucial music licensing rights with Darin 's ex @-@ wife , Sandra Dee ; his son , Dodd ; and former manager Steve Blauner . Colick wrote the first draft in 1987 before Warner Bros. and Levinson commissioned rewrites from Paul Attanasio and Paul Schrader . Their scripts , which kept The Bobby Darin Story title , concentrated on Sandra Dee 's alcoholism and childhood molestation by her stepfather . David <unk> , Darin 's longtime friend , publicist and manager , joined the project as a historical consultant . Tom Cruise was reportedly under consideration to portray Darin . 
 Meanwhile , in May 1994 , Warner Bros. optioned Dodd Darin 's book , Dream Lovers ( ISBN 0 @-@ 446 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 ) . James Toback and Lorenzo Carcaterra were hired to rewrite Attanasio 's The Bobby Darin Story , which they re @-@ titled Dreamer , in an attempt to incorporate the information present in Dodd Darin 's Dream Lovers . Toback 's script heavily focused on Darin 's childhood rheumatic fever and lifelong struggle with heart disease . It also followed the previous Attanasio and Schrader scripts . Carcaterra 's detailed research included Darin 's music records , home videos , early television clips , authorized and unauthorized biographies , newspaper articles and magazine interviews . " I decided to meet with a lot of real @-@ life people associated with Bobby Darin until [ Levinson ] said it was taking the focus off of Bobby , " Carcaterra explained . As a result , some of the writer 's favorite scenes , including a Las Vegas confrontation with Elvis Presley , were omitted from his third and final draft , which came in at a lengthy 164 pages . 
 Beginning in 1994 , Kevin Spacey first offered his services to portray Bobby Darin , but the filmmakers believed the actor was too old . Around this time , Spacey coincidentally performed the cover version of Darin 's " That Old Black Magic " for the soundtrack of Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil . The actor explained that after 1994 , " at least three times a year , my manager would call over to Warner Bros. and say , ' Hey , what 's happening with that Bobby Darin movie ? You guys ever going to make it ? ' " 
 With filming to originally begin in late @-@ 1997 , pre @-@ production for Dreamer was commencing , and Levinson began to discuss the film with various actors . This included Johnny Depp as Bobby Darin , Drew Barrymore as Sandra Dee , Bette Midler as Darin 's birth mother Nina and Bruno Kirby as Nina 's husband / Darin 's right @-@ hand man , Charlie Mafia . Levinson eventually vacated the director 's position in favor of Liberty Heights ( 1999 ) ; because he was unable to get Dreamer into production , Warner Bros. lost the music licensing rights , which reverted to the Darin estate . 
 = = = Kevin Spacey = = = 
 In March 1999 , Dick Clark Productions announced their teaming with Dodd Darin on a biopic , with collaboration from producer Arthur Friedman , who had been developing both The Bobby Darin Story and Dreamer with Levinson at Warner Bros. since 1986 . Shortly afterwards , Spacey was in discussions with Dodd Darin to star in the lead role . Spacey was able to acquire the film rights from Warner Bros. in early @-@ 2000 . With the help of Dodd Darin , the actor also received exclusive music rights for no charge . With his Academy Award @-@ winning performance in American Beauty ( 1999 ) , Paramount Pictures became interested in distributing / financing Beyond the Sea . The deal fell apart when Paramount told Spacey was that he was too old for the role and instead wanted Leonardo DiCaprio . Beginning in October 2000 , Spacey took vocal training lessons from Darin collaborator Roger Kellaway to give an accurate portrayal of the singer . 
 Spacey also kept close relations with the Darin family as a means to know he would treat the film " with respect " . He sent letters to that effect to Sandra Dee and son Dodd . Steve Blauner ( who is portrayed by John Goodman in the film ) also served as a historical consultant . Dodd originally considered Spacey 's plan to sing his father 's material a sacrilege , but eventually fell into sync with Spacey 's deeply empathetic approach to Darin 's life . 
 Tom Epperson , who had struck up a friendship with Spacey while writing an early screenplay draft of The Shipping News , was hired to write a new draft for Beyond the Sea . Epperson 's script included Darin 's penchant for orgies after his divorce with Sandra Dee . Spacey , finding the Epperson script to be overtly dark and morbid , began to rewrite Beyond the Sea , incorporating info from the 1987 Lewis Colick script . Spacey acknowledged he portrayed Darin in an exaggeratedly sympathetic way , and decided not to centrally depict the darker side of Darin 's life . " The other scripts made Bobby [ Darin ] a rather unlikable figure , " he explained . " I was not interested in making a conventional biopic , as you can see from the results . I was interested in making an exuberant celebration of an entertainer in a way that would be uplifting for an audience . " 
 By making the biopic , Dodd Darin and Spacey acknowledged the similar career experiences between Darin and Spacey . " A lot of people doubted my dad 's abilities , and Kevin 's had doubters and naysayers , " Dodd commented . " But both [ men ] were willing to take risks , and both were very resilient . My dad would always try new things . You could never pin him down . Kevin 's career is similar . " David Evanier , author of Roman Candle : The Life of Bobby Darin ( ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 010 @-@ 2 ) , said " You can put Kevin 's obsessiveness about getting the film made right up there with Bobby 's obsessiveness . He 's also the ideal person to play Bobby . He has an uncanny physical resemblance to him , and he also has Bobby 's intensity and dark side . Also , there 's the connection with his mother . Bobby 's mother 's belief in him sent him soaring . Kevin 's mother wanted him to make this film . Kevin sees the film as an act of devotion to his mother . " 
 " I think the movie is about mothers and sons , " Spacey said , referring to Darin 's relationship with his mother Polly and sister Nina . Spacey 's mother , Kathleen Fowler , died of brain cancer just before production started . " I made the movie for all mothers , but especially for my mother . She introduced me to Bobby Darin . When she got very ill in 2002 , I stopped everything and took care of her . We constantly played Bobby Darin records , and I 'd let her listen to the tracks I was recording . I 'm glad she passed knowing this was the movie I was going to make . " After his award @-@ winning performances in The Usual Suspects and American Beauty , Spacey " chose to move away from dark , sarcastic characters , and instead play damaged but good @-@ hearted men " in films like Pay It Forward , K @-@ PAX and The Shipping News . The actor was criticized for his career move ; Spacey acknowledged the similarities when Darin integrated into folk music and protest songs . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 In February 2003 , it was announced that production for Beyond the Sea was becoming fast tracked with Spacey as lead actor , co @-@ writer , producer and director , and Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( MGM ) agreed to cover distribution duties in North America . The following August , with principal photography to begin in just weeks , MGM dropped out as distributor and main financier over scheduling conflicts . To accumulate financing of the film 's $ 25 million budget , which came from foreign production companies , Spacey performed six songs at the November 2003 American Film Market . Lions Gate Entertainment quickly picked up the distribution duties and Spacey found enough investors from England and Germany to continue to move forward on production . 
 In addition , Spacey declined to be paid for his work as actor , director , co @-@ writer and producer on Beyond the Sea . A portion of the $ 25 million budget came from his own Trigger Street Productions . Producer Arthur Friedman , who had shepherded the biopic since 1987 , commented that he and Spacey experienced creative differences during pre @-@ production . Friedman remarked that he was not involved with Beyond the Sea once production began in Germany . Filming was originally set to begin in June 2003 before it was pushed to November 7 , 2003 , lasting until late @-@ January 2004 . 80 % of Beyond the Sea was shot using sound stages at Babelsberg Studios in Germany and Pinewood Studios in England . Lulworth Cove , Dorset , South West England doubled for Darin 's setting of reclusiveness in Big Sur , California . In an attempt to convincingly portray Darin , particularly during the early stages of the singer 's life depicted in the film , Spacey hired prosthetic makeup designer Peter King from The Lord of the Rings film trilogy . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 To promote Beyond the Sea , Spacey and Phil Ramone devised a 12 @-@ city United States concert tour titled An Evening Celebrating the Music of Bobby Darin , which consisted of Spacey performing with a 19 @-@ piece band . " It 's me singing Bobby and talking about Bobby and talking a little bit about the movie , " Spacey explained in June 2004 . Spacey dressed in costumes from the movie for the tour , which started in San Francisco and traveled through Los Angeles , New York City , Boston , Chicago , Miami and Atlantic City before ending in the Wayne Newton Theatre at the Stardust Hotel in Las Vegas . Spacey 's performance at the Waldorf @-@ Astoria Hotel on December 11 , 2004 received a standing ovation . Dodd Darin commented , " It was said about my dad that he had some big brass ones . To do a film about my dad is one thing , but it 's another thing to go out and attempt to work a nightclub . Kevin 's got a lot of courage . I think he sounds good . " The film was shown and promoted at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 11 , 2004 . 
 = = = WGA arbitration = = = 
 Beginning in October 2004 , the Writers Guild of America , west conducted arbitration through the scripts that had been written since Barry Levinson developed the film at Warner Bros. in 1987 . Lewis Colick , James Toback and Tom Epperson disassociated themselves for credit by the WGA . The Guild justified credit to Lewis Colick , who wrote the first draft of The Bobby Darin Story in 1987 , and Kevin Spacey . Actor @-@ writer Jeffrey Meek believed he should have deserved credit ; he was paid $ 85 @,@ 000 of a promised $ 125 @,@ 000 to settle his claim to have performed writing services . 
 Spacey said Meek was " not a hired writer " on Beyond the Sea . " He turned in a draft , but it was a draft based on earlier material based on my own screenplays , " Spacey commented . Meek said he was hired by producer Harvey Friedman , a friend who stood up at his wedding and helped connect him with Spacey , with whom he claims to have produced 12 drafts , including one that was reported by Variety to have received a greenlight from MGM in early 2003 . " He bought my material and then acted like I didn 't exist , " Meek explained . " I 'm not saying I 'm Rembrandt , but it 's like someone buying a painting and then scratching the name off of it and putting their own there . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Beyond the Sea received mixed reviews from critics . Based on 147 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , 42 % of the critics gave the film a positive review , with an average score of 5 @.@ 2 / 10 . Metacritic calculated a weighted average score of 46 / 100 , based on 35 reviews . 
 Sandra Dee , Dodd Darin , Jimmy Scalia and Steve Blauner responded enthusiastically to Spacey 's work on the film . Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle felt Spacey looked too old to portray Darin convincingly and called the film " one of the most embarrassing spectacles of 2004 " and " jaw @-@ droppingly awful , a misbegotten and ill @-@ conceived vanity project . " Desson Thomson from The Washington Post praised the actor 's work , but also felt Spacey did not convincingly portray Darin in his early music career . Internet reviewer James Berardinelli found the storyline to be overtly clichéd , but added , " Despite the choppy narrative and inappropriate casting of Spacey , Beyond the Sea managed to keep me entertained . " 
 Roger Ebert gave a largely positive review , stating that , " Kevin Spacey believes he was born to play Bobby Darin . I believe he was born to play more interesting characters ... In his own best work , Spacey has achieved genius ; he is better as an actor than Darin ever was as a singer . " Stephen Holden of The New York Times felt that " with Beyond the Sea , Spacey crawls back from his doomed quest to be a Tom Hanks @-@ like everyman to his niche on the underbelly of Hollywood 's pantheon . The movie 's a mess , and at 45 , Spacey is far too old to play Darin . Yet the star captures his desperation , his braggadocio , and yes , his magnetism . " Peter Travers , writing in Rolling Stone magazine , believed Spacey could not prevent " the movie from groaning under the weight of biopic clichés . But the actor forges a bond with his subject that rights all wrongs . Doing his own singing ( an uncanny imitation ) , Spacey is a marvel . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film opened in limited release in the United States on December 17 , 2004 and went into wider release on December 29 . It grossed $ 6 @,@ 318 @,@ 709 in the US and $ 2 @,@ 128 @,@ 906 in international markets for a total worldwide box office of $ 8 @,@ 447 @,@ 615 . It was declared a box office bomb because it did not make back its $ 25 million budget . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Spacey was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Musical or Comedy but lost to Jamie Foxx for Ray . He and Phil Ramone were also nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Compilation Soundtrack Album for a Motion Picture , Television or Other Visual Media , but lost to the producers of Ray . 
 = = Home media = = 
 On June 7 , 2005 , the film was released on DVD in widescreen anamorphic format for Region 1 markets . It features two Dolby Digital English audio tracks ( one in 2 @.@ 0 Stereo and the other in 5 @.@ 1 Surround Sound ) , director 's commentary by Spacey , and a making @-@ of featurette . 
 = Reign in Blood = 
 Reign in Blood is the third studio album and major label debut by American thrash metal band Slayer . It was released on October 7 , 1986 , on Def Jam Recordings . The album was the band 's first collaboration with record producer Rick Rubin , whose input helped the band 's sound evolve . Reign in Blood was well received by both critics and fans , and was responsible for bringing Slayer to the attention of a mainstream metal audience . Kerrang ! magazine described the record as " the heaviest album of all " . Alongside Anthrax 's Among the Living , Megadeth 's Peace Sells ... but Who 's Buying ? and Metallica 's Master of Puppets , Reign in Blood helped define the sound of the emerging US thrash metal scene in the mid @-@ 1980s , and has remained influential subsequently . 
 Reign in Blood 's release was delayed because of concerns regarding its graphic artwork and lyrical subject matter . The opening track , " Angel of Death " , which refers to Josef Mengele and describes acts , such as human experimentation , that Mengele committed at the Auschwitz concentration camp , provoked allegations of Nazism . However , the band stated numerous times that it does not condone Nazism , and are merely interested in the subject . The album was Slayer 's first to enter the Billboard 200 ; the release peaked at # 94 , and was certified Gold on November 20 , 1992 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the positive reception Slayer 's previous release , Hell Awaits , had received , the band 's producer and manager Brian Slagel realized the band were in a position to hit the " big time " with their next album . Slagel negotiated with several record labels , among them Rick Rubin and Russell Simmons 's Def Jam Recordings . However , Slagel was reluctant to have the band signed to what was at the time primarily a hip hop label . Slayer drummer Dave Lombardo was made aware of Rubin 's interest , and initiated contact with the producer . However , Slayer 's remaining members were apprehensive at leaving Metal Blade Records , with which they were already under contract . 
 Lombardo contacted Columbia Records , which was Def Jam 's distributor , and managed to get in touch with Rubin , who along with photographer Glen E. Friedman agreed to attend one of the band 's concerts . Friedman had produced Suicidal Tendencies 's self @-@ titled debut album , in which Slayer vocalist Tom Araya made a guest appearance in the music video for the album 's single " Institutionalized " , pushing Suicidal Tendencies 's vocalist Mike Muir . Around this time , Rubin asked Friedman if he knew Slayer . 
 Guitarist Jeff Hanneman was surprised by Rubin 's interest in the band , and was impressed by his work with the hip hop acts Run DMC and LL Cool J. During a visit by Slagel to a European music convention , Rubin spoke with the band directly , and persuaded them to sign with Def Jam . Slagel paid a personal tribute to Rubin , and said that Rubin was the most passionate of all the label representatives the band were in negotiations with . Following the agreement , Friedman brought the band members to Seattle for two days of publicity shots , possible record shots , and photos for a tour book ; Rubin felt no good photos of the band had been taken before that point . One of the photos was used on the back cover of the band 's 1988 release South of Heaven . The album became an American Recordings album after Rubin ended his partnership with Russell Simmons . It was one of only two Def Jam titles to be distributed by Geffen Records through Warner Bros. Records because of the original distributor 's refusal to release work by the band . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Reign in Blood was recorded and produced in Los Angeles with Rubin . The album was the label boss ' first professional experience with heavy metal , and his fresh perspective led to a drastic makeover of Slayer 's sound . Steve Huey of AllMusic believed Rubin drew tighter and faster songs from the band , and delivered a cleanly produced sound that contrasted sharply with their previous recordings . This resulted in drastic changes to Slayer 's sound , and changed audiences ' perception of the band . Araya has since stated their two previous releases were not up to par production @-@ wise . Guitarist Kerry King later remarked that " [ i ] t was like , ' Wow — you can hear everything , and those guys aren 't just playing fast ; those notes are on time . ' " 
 Hanneman later admitted that while the band was listening to Metallica and Megadeth at the time , they were finding the repetition of guitar riffs tiring . He said , " If we do a verse two or three times , we 're already bored with it . So we weren 't trying to make the songs shorter — that 's just what we were into , " which resulted in the album 's short duration of 29 minutes . King had stated that while hour @-@ long records seem to be the trend , " [ y ] ou could lose this part ; you could cut this song completely , and make a much more intense record , which is what we 're all about . " When the record was completed , the band met with Rubin , who asked : " Do you realize how short this is ? " Slayer members looked at each other , and replied : " So what ? " The entire album was on one side of a cassette ; King stated it was " neat , " as " You could listen to it , flip it over , and play it again . " The music is abrasive and faster than previous releases , helping to narrow the gap between thrash metal and its predecessor hardcore punk , and is played at an average of 220 beats per minute . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Although the album received no radio airplay , it was the band 's first release to enter the Billboard 200 , where it debuted at # 127 , and attained its peak position of 94 in its sixth week . The album also reached # 47 on the UK Album Chart , and on November 20 , 1992 , it was certified gold in the US . 
 Reign in Blood was well received by the underground and mainstream music press . Reviewing for AllMusic , which was established in 1991 , Steve Huey awarded the album five out of five , describing it a " stone @-@ cold classic . " Stylus Magazine critic Clay Jarvis awarded the album an A + grade , calling it a " genre @-@ <unk> , " as well as " the greatest metal album of all time . " Jarvis further remarked the song " Angel of Death " " smokes the asses of any band playing fast and / or heavy today . Lyrically outlining the horrors to come , while musically laying the groundwork for the rest of the record : fast , lean and filthy . " Kerrang ! magazine described it as the " heaviest album of all time , " and listed the album at # 27 among the " 100 Greatest Heavy Metal Albums of All Time " . Metal Hammer magazine named it " the best metal album of the last 20 years " in 2006 . Q Magazine ranked Reign in Blood among their list of the " 50 Heaviest Albums of All Time " , and Spin Magazine ranked the album # 67 on their list of the " 100 Greatest Albums , 1985 – 2005 " . Critic Chad Bowar stated : " 1986 's Reign in Blood is probably the best thrash album ever recorded . " In August 2014 , Revolver placed the album on its " 14 Thrash Albums You Need to Own " list . 
 Adrien Begrand of PopMatters observed that " [ t ] here 's no better song to kick things off than the masterful ' Angel of Death ' , one of the most monumental songs in metal history , where guitarists Kerry King and Jeff Hanneman deliver their intricate riffs , drummer Dave Lombardo performs some of the most powerful drumming ever recorded , and bassist / vocalist Tom Araya screams and snarls his tale of Nazi war criminal Josef Mengele . " When asked why Reign in Blood has retained its popularity , King replied : " If you released Reign in Blood today , no one would give a shit . It was timing ; it was a change in sound . In thrash metal at that time , no one had ever heard good production on a record like that . It was just a bunch of things that came together at once . " 
 = = Lombardo 's departure = = 
 Slayer embarked on the Reign in Pain tour with the bands Overkill in the United States and Malice in Europe ; they also served as the opening act for W.A.S.P. ' s U.S. tour in 1987 . In late November 1986 , drummer Lombardo quit the band ; he said : " I wasn 't making any money . I think I had just gotten married , and I figured if we were gonna be doing this professionally — on a major label — I wanted my rent and utilities paid . " To continue the tour Slayer enlisted Whiplash drummer Tony Scaglione . 
 Rubin called Lombardo daily to insist he return , telling him : " Dude , you gotta come back in the band . " Rubin offered Lombardo a salary , but he was still hesitant about returning ; at this point Lombardo had been out of the band for several months . Lombardo 's wife convinced him to return in 1987 ; Rubin came to his house and picked him up in his Porsche , taking him to a Slayer rehearsal . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Reign in Blood is regarded by critics as one of the most influential and extreme thrash metal albums ever produced . In its " Greatest Metal Bands Of All Time " poll , MTV praised Slayer 's " downtuned rhythms , infectious guitar licks , graphically violent lyrics and grisly artwork , " which they stated " set the standard for dozens of emerging thrash bands , " while " Slayer 's music was directly responsible for the rise of death metal . " MTV described Reign in Blood as essential listening , and the album was ranked number 7 on IGN 's " Top 25 Most Influential Metal Albums " . 
 When asked during a press tour for 1994 's Divine Intervention about the pressure of having to live up to Reign in Blood , King replied that the band did not try to better it , but rather just wanted to make music . In 2006 , Blabbermouth 's Don Kaye drew a comparison to the band 's 2006 album Christ Illusion , and concluded that " Slayer may never make an album as incendiary as Reign in Blood again . " 
 Rapper Necro was heavily influenced by the album , and has remarked that it takes him back to the 1980s , " when shit was pure " . <unk> vocalist Zoltán Farkas describes the album as one of his primary influences . Paul Mazurkiewicz of Cannibal Corpse stated Lombardo 's performance on the album helped him play faster throughout his career . Kelly Shaefer of Atheist said : " When Reign in Blood came out it changed everything ! That is easily the best extreme metal record ever ! " 
 Hanneman said that the album was his personal favorite , reasoning it was " so short and quick and to the point " . Araya has remarked that Slayer 's 2006 album Christ Illusion " comes close " , but that " nothing can surpass Reign in Blood for intensity and impact . No one had heard anything like it before . In the twenty years since then , people have got more desensitized . What was over the top then might not be now . " Drummer Paul Bostaph who was a Slayer member from 1992 to 2001 ( and 2013 – present ) first heard the record when he was a member of Forbidden . During a party Bostaph walked towards music he heard from another room , and approached Forbidden guitarist Craig Locicero . When asked what music was playing , Locicero shouted " the new Slayer record " . After listening closely to the record , he looked at Locicero , and concluded that his band was " fucked " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The tracks " Raining Blood " and " Angel of Death " have become almost permanent additions to Slayer 's live set , and were Hanneman 's favorite tracks to play live . The band played Reign in Blood in its entirety throughout the fall of 2004 , under the tour banner " Still Reigning " . In 2004 , a live DVD of the same name was released , which included a finale with the band covered in fake blood during the performance of " Raining Blood " . 
 King later said that while the idea of playing Reign in Blood in its entirety was suggested before by their booking agency , it was met with little support . The band ultimately decided they needed to add more excitement to their live shows , and to avoid repetition incorporated the ideas of raining blood . When asked about using fake blood in future performances , King remarked : " It 's time to move on , but never say never . I know Japan never saw it , South America and Australia never saw it . So you never know . " In 2008 the band performed Reign in Blood in its entirety once again , this time in Paris , France , during the third European Unholy Alliance Tour . 
 Although it was omitted from a number of concerts because of short time allotments , Slayer have often said that they enjoy playing the album in its entirety . According to Hanneman : " We still enjoy playing these songs live . We play these songs over and over and over , but they 're good songs , intense songs ! If it were melodic songs or some kind of boring ' clap your hands ' song , you 'd be going crazy playing those every night . But our songs are just bam @-@ bam @-@ bam @-@ bam , they 're intense . " The band was on stage for 70 minutes , which only allowed seven or eight additional songs to be played following the album 's play . King stated this arrangement " alienates too many people " . In the Unholy Alliance Tour of 2004 , however , the album was played in its entirety during Slayer 's set as the last ten songs to end the show . The album was performed live at the I 'll Be Your Mirror London festival in May 2012 . In May 2014 , it was announced that Slayer would perform the album in its entirety at Riot Fest in Chicago and Denver . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 = = = Artwork = = = 
 Def Jam 's distributor , Columbia Records , refused to release the album due to its controversial lyrical themes and cover art . Reign in Blood was eventually distributed by Geffen Records ; however , due to the controversy it did not appear on Geffen 's release schedule . 
 The artwork was designed by Larry Carroll , who at the time was creating political illustrations for The Progressive , Village Voice , and The New York Times . The cover art was featured in Blender Magazine 's 2006 " top ten heavy metal album covers of all time . " 
 = = = Lyrical themes = = = 
 For the album , Slayer decided to abandon much of the earlier Satanic themes explored on their previous album Hell Awaits , and write about issues that were more on a street level . Reign in Blood 's lyrics include meditations on death , anti @-@ religion , insanity , and murderers , while the lead track " Angel of Death " details human experiments conducted at the Auschwitz concentration camp by Josef Mengele , who was dubbed " the Angel of death " by inmates . The song led to accusations of Nazi sympathizing and racism , which have followed the band throughout their career . 
 Hanneman was inspired to write " Angel of Death " after he read a number of books on Mengele during a Slayer tour . Hanneman has complained people usually misinterpret the lyrics , and clarified : " Nothing I put in the lyrics that says necessarily he was a bad man , because to me — well , isn 't that obvious ? I shouldn 't have to tell you that . " The band utilized the controversy to attract publicity , incorporating the Reichsadler into their logo ( also the S in the band 's name resembles the Sig runes used by the SS ) , and writing a song in Divine Intervention titled " SS @-@ 3 " , which mentions Reinhard Heydrich , the second in command in the Schutzstaffel . 
 = = Song covers = = 
 " Raining Blood " was covered by Tori Amos on her 2001 album Strange Little Girls . King has admitted that he thought the cover was odd : " It took me a minute and a half to find a spot in the song where I knew where she was . It 's so weird . If she had never told us , we would have never known . You could have played it for us and we 'd have been like , ' What 's that ? ' Like a minute and a half through I heard a line and was like , ' I know where she 's at ! ' " The band , however , liked the cover enough to send Slayer T @-@ shirts to Tori Amos . The song was also covered by Malevolent Creation , Chimaira , Vader , <unk> , Reggie and the Full Effect and <unk> Erik Hinds , who covered the entire album on a H <unk> . 
 In 2005 , the Slayer tribute band Dead Skin Mask released an album with eight Slayer tracks , including " Angel of Death " . The death metal band Monstrosity covered the song in 1999 , while the track was featured on the classical band Apocalyptica 's 2006 album Amplified / A Decade of Reinventing the Cello . A Slayer tribute album titled Al Sur del Abismo ( Tributo Argentino a Slayer ) , compiled by Hurling Metal Records , featured sixteen tracks covered by Argentina metal bands , including <unk> 's version of " Angel of Death " . " Raining Blood " was also covered by the New Zealand drum and bass band Concord Dawn on their 2003 album Uprising , and by Nashville , Tennessee band <unk> on their 7 " " <unk> " . 
 Bulgarian alternative rock band <unk> covered the intro of " Raining Blood " as " <unk> v <unk> " ( Reagan in Blood ) on their debut album <unk> delirium in 1993 . 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 " Raining Blood " was featured in the 127th South Park episode , Die Hippie , Die , aired on 16 March 2005 . The plot centers on the town of South Park , which has been overrun by hippies . Eric Cartman states " Hippies can 't stand death metal " and proceeds to drill through a hippie concert onto the main stage to change the audio to " Raining Blood " , making the hippies run away . King found the episode humorous and expressed his interest in the show ending the interview with " It was good to see the song being put to good use , if we can horrify some hippies we 've done our job . " " Angel of Death " also appears in several movies , including Gremlins 2 , at the point when the character Mohawk turns into a spider , Jackass : The Movie , where it is played during a car stunt scene , and in the 2005 Iraq War documentary Soundtrack to War . 
 " Angel of Death " was featured in the multi – platform video game Tony Hawk 's Project 8 . Nolan Nelson , who selected the soundtrack for the game , asserts : " one of the greatest heavy metal songs ever recorded . Don 't know who Slayer is ? I feel sorry for you . " " Raining Blood " was included in the Grand Theft Auto : Vice City in – game radio station V @-@ Rock . " Raining Blood " is also one of the songs featured in Guitar Hero 3 : Legends of Rock , and is considered one of the most difficult songs in the game , if not the hardest of the career song list . " Angel of Death " and " Raining Blood " are both available as DLC for Rocksmith 2014 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 1 " Aggressive Perfector " was shorter and had clearer production than the previous version featured on the reissue of the EP Haunting the Chapel . The reissue also fixed a problem with some CD pressings which incorrectly set the beginning of " Raining Blood " into the blank pause in " Postmortem " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Tom Araya – bass , vocals 
 Jeff Hanneman – lead and rhythm guitar 
 Kerry King – lead and rhythm guitar 
 Dave Lombardo – drums 
 Production 
 Rick Rubin – production 
 Larry Carroll – artwork 
 Howie Weinberg – mastering 
 Andy Wallace – engineering 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = The Video Collection 93 : 99 = 
 The Video Collection 93 : 99 is the second music video compilation by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna . Released by Warner Music Vision , Warner Reprise Video and Warner Bros. Records on November 2 , 1999 , it contained the music video of Madonna 's singles released between 1993 to 1999 . Originally , the collection was titled The Video Collection 92 – 99 , and had included the 1992 hit " Erotica " , but was omitted due to the explicit sexual content in the video ; instead the 1998 song " The Power of Good @-@ Bye " was added . The videos in the collection were selected personally by Madonna , who felt the 14 videos to be her best work . 
 After its release , the collection was critically appreciated , with one group of reviewers noting the artistic capabilities of Madonna while the others noting her ability to re @-@ invent her image from one video to another . It reached a peak of eight on Billboard 's Top Music Video sales chart . In 2008 , was certified platinum in the United States by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of 100 @,@ 000 copies across United States . A box set titled The Ultimate Collection was released in 2000 , which contained The Video Collection 93 : 99 and The Immaculate Collection compilations . 
 = = Background = = 
 On September 2 , 1999 , Warner Bros. Records announced the release of the video album , then titled as The Video Collection 92 – 99 . Released in VHS and DVD , the collection featured 14 videos , including " Drowned World / Substitute for Love " , which was not released in the United States as a single , hence was not commercially available prior to the release of Video Collection . The videos in the collection was selected personally by Madonna , who felt the 14 videos to be her best work . The collection had included the 1992 song " Erotica " , but it was later omitted due to the sexual content present in the music video ; instead the song " The Power of Good @-@ Bye " was added and the collection was renamed as The Video Collection 93 : 99 . 
 The video release was supposed to be in mid @-@ October , but was pushed to November 2 , 1999 . The DVD release was to also include an accompanying compact disc with the audio to the videos as a dual @-@ disc Greatest hits album , but was cancelled and the release only included a DVD . The original plan was to have the release coincide with the 1999 world tour which Madonna mentioned in an interview with Larry King the same year . This was also cancelled and postponed until 2001 , Madonna instead releasing an audio greatest hits collection GHV2 and embarked on the Drowned World Tour that same year . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Heather Phares from Allmusic gave it five out of five stars and said : " Madonna 's Video Collection : 1993 @-@ 1999 adds to her status as one of the best represented artists on DVD . [ ... ] Though it doesn 't offer much in the way of DVD @-@ specific features , the artistry of directors like Mark Romanek , Stephane <unk> , David Fincher , Jean @-@ Baptiste Mondino , as well as Madonna herself , is on full display with videos like ' Take a Bow ' , ' Bedtime Story ' , ' Human Nature ' , ' Frozen ' , and ' Ray of Light ' . All in all , it 's a worthwhile collection of memorable videos from one of pop 's <unk> . " Bryan Chin from University Wire commented " Some people really dislike the Madonna of the ' 90s . ' Oh , she got so slutty ! , they quibble . ' She doesn 't have the same kind of cultural impact that she had in the ' 80s , ' they whine . Obviously , these people haven 't been paying much attention . With the recent release of The Video Collection 93 : 99 , however , those naysayers are certain to realize what they 've been missing . These videos have always been the perfect outlet to chronicle Madonna 's smorgasbord of personas . " Francis Dass from New Straits Times commented : " Madonna , the pop icon of the 20th century , remains at the forefront of self @-@ promotion and marketing with the release of her music video compilation on VCD format . The collection shows that she is still able to maintain her relevance to the nasty world of music and she is still the queen of re @-@ invention . " Jay Webb from The Dallas Morning News felt that the videos on the collection showed " Madonna 's true artistic self " but added that such artistic phase was incompletely catalogued in the collection . Jeremy <unk> from The Advocate gave the collection a positive review , complimenting " the showcase of such classic and artistic videos " . He listed " Ray of Light " , " Bad Girl " and " Take a Bow " as the high @-@ points of the collection , while the inclusion of " Fever " and " Human Nature " was criticized . Jose Promis from Allmovie felt that " [ t ] he decision to include virtual non @-@ hits such as ' Love Don 't Live Here Anymore ' over smashes such as ' You 'll See ' or ' I 'll Remember ' is bewildering , making this collection a decidedly mixed bag . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 The collection debuted at 36 on Billboard 's Top Music Videos chart on December 4 , 1999 and the second week it moved 23 places to 13 . The next week it reached a peak of eight on the chart , remaining at the position for three additional weeks . Video Collection reached the peak of eight again on the Billboard issue dated February 5 , 2000 . It was present on the Music Video chart for a total of 32 weeks . On November 13 , 2008 , the DVD was certified platinum in the United States by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of 100 @,@ 000 copies . It was also certified platinum in Argentina by the Argentine Chamber of Phonograms and Videograms Producers ( CAPIF ) for shipment of 15 @,@ 000 copies , as well as gold in Brazil by the Associação Brasileira dos Produtores de Discos ( ABPD ) for shipment of 25 @,@ 000 copies . After ten weeks of staying at the top of the Danish Top 10 DVD chart , Video Collection made a re @-@ entry on the chart at five , on February 14 , 2001 . 
 = = The Ultimate Collection = = 
 On September 18 , 2000 , a box set titled The Ultimate Collection was released , which contained The Video Collection 93 : 99 and The Immaculate Collection . R.S. Murthy from New Straits Times said that " this boxed set offers Madonna fans and the Madonna initiates a very good collection of her videos , and helps them understand the wonder that Madonna is . " Jeremy Jennings from the St. Paul Pioneer Press listed the box set as one of the most promising collection in his list of " Best Fall CDs " for 2000 . Robin Givhan from The Washington Post called the collection " A veritable homage to the many faces of Madonna , from her current ghetto cowboy incarnation to her old boy @-@ toy persona , the collection featured <unk> @-@ up music videos and many pictures — a reminder of Madonna as the queen of re @-@ invention . " 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 The collection was released on VHS , LaserDisc , VCD ( Asia only ) and DVD . A special limited edition karaoke VCD was also released with the same track list . This VCD showed the lyrics of the song on the video , and the user was able to mute the right audio channel , which contained the full vocal version of the song , or the left audio channel , which contained the instrumental version of the song . 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Bockscar = 
 Bockscar , sometimes called Bock 's Car , is the name of the United States Army Air Forces B @-@ 29 bomber that dropped a Fat Man nuclear weapon over the Japanese city of Nagasaki during World War II in the second – and last – nuclear attack in history . One of 15 Silverplate B @-@ 29s used by the 509th , Bockscar was built at the Glenn L. Martin Aircraft Plant at Bellevue , Nebraska , at what is now Offutt Air Force Base , and delivered to the United States Army Air Forces on 19 March 1945 . It was assigned to the 393d Bombardment Squadron , 509th Composite Group to Wendover Army Air Field , Utah in April . 
 Bockscar was used in 13 training and practice missions from Tinian , and three combat missions in which it dropped pumpkin bombs on industrial targets in Japan . On 9 August 1945 , Bockscar , piloted by the 393d Bombardment Squadron 's commander , Major Charles W. Sweeney , dropped a Fat Man nuclear bomb with a blast yield equivalent to 21 kilotons of TNT over the city of Nagasaki . About 44 % of the city was destroyed ; 35 @,@ 000 people were killed and 60 @,@ 000 injured . 
 After the war , Bockscar returned to the United States in November 1945 . In September 1946 it was given to the National Museum of the United States Air Force at Wright @-@ Patterson Air Force Base , Ohio . The aircraft was flown to the Museum on 26 September 1961 , and its original markings were restored . Bockscar is now on permanent display at the National Museum of the United States Air Force , Dayton , Ohio , next to a replica of a Fat Man . 
 = = Airplane history = = 
 Bockscar , B @-@ 29A @-@ 40 @-@ MO 44 @-@ <unk> , Victor number 77 , was assigned to the 393d Bombardment Squadron of the 509th Composite Group . One of 15 Silverplate B @-@ 29s used by the 509th , Bockscar was built at the Glenn L. Martin Aircraft Plant at Bellevue , Nebraska , at what is now Offutt Air Force Base , as a Block 35 aircraft . It was one of 10 modified as a Silverplate and re @-@ designated " Block 36 " . 
 Silverplate involved extensive modifications to the B @-@ 29 to carry nuclear weapons . The bomb bay doors and the fuselage section between the bomb bays were removed to create a single 33 @-@ foot ( 10 m ) bomb bay . British suspensions and bracing were attached for both shape types , with the gun @-@ type suspension anchored in the aft bomb bay and the implosion type mounted in the forward bay . Weight reduction was also accomplished by removal of gun turrets and armor plating . These B @-@ 29s also had an improved engine , the R @-@ 3350 @-@ 41 . The Silverplate aircraft represented a significant increase in performance over the standard variants . 
 Delivered to the United States Army Air Forces on 19 March 1945 , Bockscar was assigned to Captain Frederick C. Bock and crew C @-@ 13 , and flown to Wendover Army Air Field , Utah in April . The name chosen for the aircraft , and painted on it after the mission , was a pun on the name of the aircraft commander . It left Wendover on 11 June 1945 for Tinian , where it arrived 16 June . It was originally given the Victor ( unit @-@ assigned identification ) number 7 but on 1 August was given the triangle N tail markings of the 444th Bombardment Group as a security measure , and had its Victor changed to 77 to avoid misidentification with an actual 444th aircraft . 
 Bockscar was used in 13 training and practice missions from Tinian , and three combat missions in which it dropped pumpkin bombs on industrial targets in Japan , in which Bock 's crew bombed <unk> and Musashino , and First Lieutenant Charles Donald Albury and crew C @-@ 15 bombed <unk> . 
 = = Atomic bomb mission = = 
 = = = Mission and crew = = = 
 Bockscar was flown on 9 August 1945 , by the crew of another B @-@ 29 , The Great Artiste , and piloted by Major Charles W. Sweeney , commander of the 393d Bombardment Squadron . The plane was co @-@ piloted by First Lieutenant Charles Donald Albury , the normal aircraft commander of Crew C @-@ 15 . The Great Artiste was designated as the observation , instrumentation support plane for the second mission , and another B @-@ 29 , The Big Stink , flown by Group Operations Officer Major James I. Hopkins , Jr . , as the photographic aircraft . The mission had as its primary target the city of Kokura , where the Kokura Arsenal was located . Its secondary target was Nagasaki , where two large Mitsubishi armament plants were located . 
 Bockscar had been flown by Sweeney and crew C @-@ 15 in three test drop rehearsals of inert Fat Man assemblies in the eight days leading up to the second mission , including the final rehearsal the day before . The Great Artiste , which was the assigned aircraft of the crew with whom Sweeney most often flew , had been designated in preliminary planning to drop the second bomb , but the aircraft had been fitted with observation instruments for the Hiroshima mission . Moving the instrumentation from The Great Artiste to Bockscar would have been a complex and time @-@ consuming process , and when the second atomic bomb mission was moved up from 11 August to 9 August because of adverse weather forecasts , the crews of The Great Artiste and Bockscar instead exchanged aircraft . The result was that the bomb was carried by Bockscar , but flown by the crew C @-@ 15 of The Great Artiste . 
 = = = Kokura and Nagasaki = = = 
 During pre @-@ flight inspection of Bockscar , the flight engineer notified Sweeney that an inoperative fuel transfer pump made it impossible to use 640 US gallons ( 2 @,@ 400 l ; 530 imp gal ) of fuel carried in a reserve tank . This fuel would still have to be carried all the way to Japan and back , consuming still more fuel . Replacing the pump would take hours ; moving the Fat Man to another aircraft might take just as long and was dangerous as well , as the bomb was live . Group Commander Colonel Paul Tibbets and Sweeney therefore elected to have Bockscar continue the mission . 
 Bockscar took off from Tinian 's North Field at 03 : 49 . The mission profile directed the B @-@ 29s to fly individually to the rendezvous point , changed because of bad weather from Iwo Jima to Yakushima Island , and at 17 @,@ 000 feet ( 5 @,@ 200 m ) cruising altitude instead of the customary 9 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) , increasing fuel consumption . Bockscar began its climb to the 30 @,@ 000 feet ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) bombing altitude a half hour before rendezvous . Before the mission , Tibbets had warned Sweeney to take no more than fifteen minutes at the rendezvous before proceeding to the target . Bockscar reached the rendezvous point and assembled with The Great Artiste , but after circling for some time , The Big Stink failed to appear . As they orbited Yakushima , the weather planes Enola Gay and Laggin ' Dragon reported both Kokura and Nagasaki within the accepted parameters for the required visual attack . 
 Though ordered not to circle longer than fifteen minutes , Sweeney continued to wait for The Big Stink , at the urging of Commander Frederick Ashworth , the plane 's weaponeer , who was in command of the mission . After exceeding the original departure time limit by a half hour , Bockscar , accompanied by The Great Artiste , proceeded to Kokura , thirty minutes away . The delay at the rendezvous had resulted in clouds and drifting smoke from fires started by a major firebombing raid by 224 B @-@ 29s on nearby Yawata the previous day covering 70 % of the area over Kokura , obscuring the aiming point . Three bomb runs were made over the next 50 minutes , burning fuel and exposing the aircraft repeatedly to the heavy defenses of Yawata , but the bombardier was unable to drop visually . By the time of the third bomb run , Japanese anti @-@ aircraft fire was getting close , and Second Lieutenant Jacob Beser , who was monitoring Japanese communications , reported activity on the Japanese fighter direction radio bands . 
 The increasingly critical fuel shortage resulted in the decision by Sweeney and Ashworth to reduce power to conserve fuel and divert to the secondary target , Nagasaki . The approach to Nagasaki twenty minutes later indicated that the heart of the city 's downtown was also covered by dense cloud . Ashworth decided to bomb Nagasaki using radar , but , according to Bockscar 's bombardier , Captain Kermit Beahan , a small opening in the clouds at the end of the three @-@ minute bomb run permitted him to identify target features . Bockscar visually dropped the Fat Man at 10 : 58 local time . It exploded 43 seconds later with a blast yield equivalent to 21 kilotons of TNT at an altitude of 1 @,@ 650 feet ( 500 m ) , approximately 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) northwest of the planned aiming point , resulting in the destruction of 44 % of the city . 
 The failure to drop the Fat Man at the precise bomb aim point caused the atomic blast to be confined to the Urakami Valley . As a consequence , a major portion of the city was protected by the intervening hills , but even so , the bomb was dropped over the city 's industrial valley midway between the Mitsubishi Steel and Arms Works in the south and the Mitsubishi @-@ Urakami Ordnance Works in the north . An estimated 35 @,@ 000 people were killed and 60 @,@ 000 injured during the bombing at Nagasaki . Of those killed , 23 @,@ 200 @-@ 28 @,@ 200 were Japanese munitions workers , 2 @,@ 000 were Korean slave laborers , and 150 were Japanese soldiers . 
 = = = Landing and debriefing = = = 
 Because of the delays in the mission and the inoperative fuel transfer pump , the B @-@ 29 did not have sufficient fuel to reach the emergency landing field at Iwo Jima , so Sweeney flew the aircraft to Okinawa . Arriving there , he circled for 20 minutes trying to contact the control tower for landing clearance , finally concluding that his radio was faulty . Critically low on fuel , Bockscar barely made it to the runway at Yontan Airfield on Okinawa . With only enough fuel for one landing attempt , Sweeney and Albury brought Bockscar in at 150 miles per hour ( 240 km / h ) instead of the normal 120 miles per hour ( 190 km / h ) , firing distress flares to alert the field of the uncleared landing . The number two engine died from fuel starvation as Bockscar began its final approach . Touching the runway hard , the heavy B @-@ 29 slewed left and towards a row of parked B @-@ 24 bombers before the pilots managed to regain control . The B @-@ 29 's reversible propellers were insufficient to slow the aircraft adequately , and with both pilots standing on the brakes , Bockscar made a swerving 90 @-@ degree turn at the end of the runway to avoid running off the runway . A second engine died from fuel exhaustion by the time the plane came to a stop . The flight engineer later measured fuel in the tanks and concluded that less than five minutes total remained . 
 Following the mission , there was confusion over the identification of the plane . The first eyewitness account by war correspondent William L. Laurence of the New York Times , who accompanied the mission aboard the aircraft piloted by Bock , reported that Sweeney was leading the mission in The Great Artiste . However , he also noted its " Victor " number as 77 , which was that of Bockscar , writing that several personnel commented that 77 was also the jersey number of the football player Red Grange . Laurence had interviewed Sweeney and his crew in depth and was aware that they referred to their airplane as The Great Artiste . Except for Enola Gay , none of the 393d 's B @-@ 29s had yet had names painted on the noses , a fact which Laurence himself noted in his account , and unaware of the switch in aircraft , Laurence assumed Victor 77 was The Great Artiste . In fact , The Great Artiste was Victor 89 . 
 = = Current status = = 
 After the war , Bockscar returned to the United States in November 1945 and served with the 509th at Roswell Army Air Field , New Mexico . It was nominally assigned to the Operation Crossroads task force , but there are no records indicating that it deployed for the tests . In August 1946 , it was assigned to the <unk> Army Air Force Unit at Davis @-@ Monthan Army Air Field , Arizona , for storage . 
 At Davis @-@ Monthan it was placed on display as the aircraft that bombed Nagasaki , but in the markings of The Great Artiste . In September 1946 , title was passed to the Air Force Museum ( now the National Museum of the United States Air Force ) at Wright @-@ Patterson Air Force Base , Ohio . The aircraft was flown to the Museum on 26 September 1961 , and its original markings were restored . Bockscar is now on permanent display at the National Museum of the United States Air Force , Dayton , Ohio . This display , a primary exhibit in the Museum 's Air Power gallery , includes a replica of a Fat Man bomb and signage that states that it was " The aircraft that ended WWII " . 
 In 2005 , a short documentary was made about Charles Sweeney 's recollections of the Nagasaki mission aboard Bockscar , including details of the mission preparation , titled " Nagasaki : The Commander 's Voice . " 
 = = Crew members = = 
 = = = Regularly assigned crew = = = 
 Crew C @-@ 13 ( manned The Great Artiste on the Nagasaki mission ) : 
 Captain Frederick C. Bock , Aircraft Commander , Greenville , MI 
 First Lieutenant Hugh Cardwell Ferguson , Sr. , Co @-@ pilot , Highland Park , MI 
 First Lieutenant Leonard A. Godfrey , Jr . , Navigator , Greenfield , MA 
 First Lieutenant Charles Levy , Bombardier , Philadelphia , PA 
 Master Sergeant Roderick F. Arnold , Flight Engineer , Rochester , MI 
 Sergeant Ralph D. Belanger , Assistant Flight Engineer , <unk> , NY 
 Sergeant Ralph D. Curry , Radio Operator , <unk> , IL 
 Sergeant William C. Barney , Radar Operator , Columbia City , IN 
 Sergeant Robert J. Stock , Tail Gunner , Fort Wayne , IN 
 = = = Nagasaki mission crew = = = 
 Crew C @-@ 15 ( normally assigned to The Great Artiste ) : 
 Major Charles W. Sweeney , Aircraft Commander , North Quincy , MA 
 Captain Charles Donald " Don " Albury , Co @-@ pilot ( pilot of Crew C @-@ 15 ) , Miami , FL 
 Second Lieutenant Frederick " Fred " J. <unk> , Regular Co @-@ pilot 
 Captain James F. Van Pelt , Jr . , Navigator , Oak Hill , WV 
 Captain Kermit K. Beahan , Bombardier , Houston , TX 
 Master Sergeant John D. <unk> , Flight Engineer , Columbus , NE 
 Staff Sergeant Raymond C. Gallagher , Gunner , assistant flight engineer , Chicago , IL 
 Staff Sergeant Edward K. Buckley , Radar Operator , Lisbon , OH 
 Sergeant Abe M. Spitzer , Radio Operator , Bronx , NY 
 Sergeant Albert T. " Pappy " DeHart , Tail Gunner , Plainview , TX 
 Also on board were the following additional mission personnel : 
 Commander Frederick Ashworth , USN , <unk> 
 Lieutenant Philip M. Barnes , USN , Assistant <unk> 
 Second Lieutenant Jacob Beser , Radar Countermeasures , Baltimore , MD ( Lt. Beser flew on both atomic missions , serving as the radar countermeasures crewman on the Enola Gay , August 6 , 1945 , and Bockscar , August 9 , 1945 ) . 
 = = National Museum of the United States Air Force display = = 
 = Hard rock = 
 Hard rock or heavy rock is a loosely defined subgenre of rock music that began in the mid @-@ 1960s , with the garage , psychedelic and blues rock movements . It is typified by a heavy use of aggressive vocals , distorted electric guitars , bass guitar , drums , and often accompanied with pianos and keyboards . 
 Hard rock developed into a major form of popular music in the 1970s , with bands such as Led Zeppelin , The Who , Deep Purple , Aerosmith , AC / DC and Van Halen . During the 1980s , some hard rock bands moved away from their hard rock roots and more towards pop rock , while others began to return to a hard rock sound . Established bands made a comeback in the mid @-@ 1980s and it reached a commercial peak in the 1980s , with glam metal bands like Bon Jovi and Def Leppard and the rawer sounds of Guns N ' Roses , which followed up with great success in the later part of that decade . Hard rock began losing popularity with the commercial success of grunge and later Britpop in the 1990s . 
 Despite this , many post @-@ grunge bands adopted a hard rock sound and in the 2000s there came a renewed interest in established bands , attempts at a revival , and new hard rock bands that emerged from the garage rock and post @-@ punk revival scenes . In the 2000s , only a few hard rock bands from the 1970s and 1980s managed to sustain highly successful recording careers . 
 = = Definitions = = 
 Hard rock is a form of loud , aggressive rock music . The electric guitar is often emphasised , used with distortion and other effects , both as a rhythm instrument using repetitive riffs with a varying degree of complexity , and as a solo lead instrument . Drumming characteristically focuses on driving rhythms , strong bass drum and a backbeat on snare , sometimes using cymbals for emphasis . The bass guitar works in conjunction with the drums , occasionally playing riffs , but usually providing a backing for the rhythm and lead guitars . Vocals are often growling , raspy , or involve screaming or wailing , sometimes in a high range , or even falsetto voice . 
 Hard rock has sometimes been labelled cock rock for its emphasis on overt masculinity and sexuality and because it has historically been predominantly performed and consumed by men : in the case of its audience , particularly white , working @-@ class adolescents . 
 In the late 1960s , the term heavy metal was used interchangeably with hard rock , but gradually began to be used to describe music played with even more volume and intensity . While hard rock maintained a bluesy rock and roll identity , including some swing in the back beat and riffs that tended to outline chord progressions in their hooks , heavy metal 's riffs often functioned as stand @-@ alone melodies and had no swing in them . Heavy metal took on " darker " characteristics after Black Sabbath 's breakthrough at the beginning of the 1970s . In the 1980s it developed a number of subgenres , often termed extreme metal , some of which were influenced by hardcore punk , and which further differentiated the two styles . Despite this differentiation , hard rock and heavy metal have existed side by side , with bands frequently standing on the boundary of , or crossing between , the genres . 
 = = History = = 
 The roots of hard rock can be traced back to the 1950s , particularly electric blues , which laid the foundations for key elements such as a rough declamatory vocal style , heavy guitar riffs , string @-@ bending blues @-@ scale guitar solos , strong beat , thick riff @-@ laden texture , and posturing performances . Electric blues guitarists began experimenting with hard rock elements such as driving rhythms , distorted guitar solos and power chords in the 1950s , evident in the work of Memphis blues guitarists such as Joe Hill Louis , Willie Johnson , and particularly Pat Hare , who captured a " grittier , nastier , more ferocious electric guitar sound " on records such as James Cotton 's " Cotton Crop Blues " ( 1954 ) . Other antecedents include Link Wray 's instrumental " Rumble " in 1958 , and the surf rock instrumentals of Dick Dale , such as " Let 's Go Trippin ' " ( 1961 ) and " Misirlou " ( 1962 ) . 
 = = = Origins ( 1960s ) = = = 
 In the 1960s , American and British blues and rock bands began to modify rock and roll by adding harder sounds , heavier guitar riffs , bombastic drumming , and louder vocals , from electric blues . Early forms of hard rock can be heard in the work of Chicago blues musicians Elmore James , Muddy Waters , and Howlin ' Wolf , The Kingsmen 's version of " Louie Louie " ( 1963 ) which made it a garage rock standard , and the songs of rhythm and blues influenced British Invasion acts , including " You Really Got Me " by The Kinks ( 1964 ) , " My Generation " by The Who ( 1965 ) , " Shapes of Things " ( 1966 ) by The Yardbirds , " Inside Looking Out " ( 1966 ) by The Animals and " ( I Can 't Get No ) Satisfaction " ( 1965 ) by The Rolling Stones . From the late 1960s , it became common to divide mainstream rock music that emerged from psychedelia into soft and hard rock . Soft rock was often derived from folk rock , using acoustic instruments and putting more emphasis on melody and harmonies . In contrast , hard rock was most often derived from blues rock and was played louder and with more intensity . 
 Blues rock acts that pioneered the sound included Cream , The Jimi Hendrix Experience , and The Jeff Beck Group . Cream , in songs like " I Feel Free " ( 1966 ) combined blues rock with pop and psychedelia , particularly in the riffs and guitar solos of Eric Clapton . Jimi Hendrix produced a form of blues @-@ influenced psychedelic rock , which combined elements of jazz , blues and rock and roll . From 1967 Jeff Beck brought lead guitar to new heights of technical virtuosity and moved blues rock in the direction of heavy rock with his band , The Jeff Beck Group . Dave Davies of The Kinks , Keith Richards of The Rolling Stones , Pete Townshend of The Who , Hendrix , Clapton and Beck all pioneered the use of new guitar effects like phasing , feedback and distortion . The Beatles began producing songs in the new hard rock style beginning with the White Album in 1968 and , with the track " Helter Skelter " , attempted to create a greater level of noise than the Who . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic has described the " proto @-@ metal roar " of " Helter Skelter , " while Ian MacDonald argued that " their attempts at emulating the heavy style were without exception embarrassing . " 
 Groups that emerged from the American psychedelic scene about the same time included Iron Butterfly , MC5 , Blue Cheer and Vanilla Fudge . San Francisco band Blue Cheer released a crude and distorted cover of Eddie Cochran 's classic " Summertime Blues " , from their 1968 debut album <unk> <unk> , that outlined much of the later hard rock and heavy metal sound . The same month , Steppenwolf released its self @-@ titled debut album , including " Born to Be Wild " , which contained the first lyrical reference to heavy metal and helped popularise the style when it was used in the film Easy Rider ( 1969 ) . Iron Butterfly 's In @-@ A @-@ Gadda @-@ Da @-@ Vida ( 1968 ) , with its 17 @-@ minute @-@ long title track , using organs and with a lengthy drum solo , also prefigured later elements of the sound . 
 By the end of the decade a distinct genre of hard rock was emerging with bands like Led Zeppelin , who mixed the music of early rock bands with a more hard @-@ edged form of blues rock and acid rock on their first two albums Led Zeppelin ( 1969 ) and Led Zeppelin II ( 1969 ) , and Deep Purple , who began as a progressive rock group but achieved their commercial breakthrough with their fourth and distinctively heavier album , In Rock ( 1970 ) . Also significant was Black Sabbath 's Paranoid ( 1970 ) , which combined guitar riffs with dissonance and more explicit references to the occult and elements of Gothic horror . All three of these bands have been seen as pivotal in the development of heavy metal , but where metal further accentuated the intensity of the music , with bands like Judas Priest following Sabbath 's lead into territory that was often " darker and more menacing " , hard rock tended to continue to remain the more exuberant , good @-@ time music . 
 = = = Expansion ( 1970s ) = = = 
 In the early 1970s the Rolling Stones developed their hard rock sound with Exile on Main St. ( 1972 ) . Initially receiving mixed reviews , according to critic Steve Erlewine it is now " generally regarded as the Rolling Stones ' finest album " . They continued to pursue the riff @-@ heavy sound on albums including It 's Only Rock ' n ' Roll ( 1974 ) and Black and Blue ( 1976 ) . Led Zeppelin began to mix elements of world and folk music into their hard rock from Led Zeppelin III ( 1970 ) and Led Zeppelin IV ( 1971 ) . The latter included the track " Stairway to Heaven " , which would become the most played song in the history of album @-@ oriented radio . Deep Purple continued to define hard rock , particularly with their album Machine Head ( 1972 ) , which included the tracks " Highway Star " and " Smoke on the Water " . In 1975 guitarist Ritchie Blackmore left , going on to form Rainbow and after the break @-@ up of the band the next year , vocalist David Coverdale formed Whitesnake . 1970 saw The Who release Live at Leeds , often seen as the archetypal hard rock live album , and the following year they released their highly acclaimed album Who 's Next , which mixed heavy rock with extensive use of synthesizers . Subsequent albums , including Quadrophenia ( 1973 ) , built on this sound before Who Are You ( 1978 ) , their last album before the death of pioneering rock drummer Keith Moon later that year . 
 Emerging British acts included Free , who released their signature song " All Right Now " ( 1970 ) , which has received extensive radio airplay in both the UK and US . After the breakup of the band in 1973 , vocalist Paul Rodgers joined supergroup Bad Company , whose eponymous first album ( 1974 ) was an international hit . The mixture of hard rock and progressive rock , evident in the works of Deep Purple , was pursued more directly by bands like Uriah Heep and Argent . Scottish band Nazareth released their self @-@ titled début album in 1971 , producing a blend of hard rock and pop that would culminate in their best selling , Hair of the Dog ( 1975 ) , which contained the proto @-@ power ballad " Love Hurts " . Having enjoyed some national success in the early 1970s , Queen , after the release of Sheer Heart Attack ( 1974 ) and A Night at the Opera ( 1975 ) , gained international recognition with a sound that used layered vocals and guitars and mixed hard rock with heavy metal , progressive rock , and even opera . The latter featured the single " Bohemian Rhapsody " , which stayed at number one in the UK charts for nine weeks . 
 In the United States , macabre @-@ rock pioneer Alice Cooper achieved mainstream success with the top ten album School 's Out ( 1972 ) . In the following year blues rockers ZZ Top released their classic album Tres Hombres and Aerosmith produced their eponymous début , as did Southern rockers Lynyrd Skynyrd and proto @-@ punk outfit New York Dolls , demonstrating the diverse directions being pursued in the genre . Montrose , including the instrumental talent of Ronnie Montrose and vocals of Sammy Hagar and arguably the first all American hard rock band to challenge the British dominance of the genre , released their first album in 1973 . Kiss built on the theatrics of Alice Cooper and the look of the New York Dolls to produce a unique band persona , achieving their commercial breakthrough with the double live album Alive ! in 1975 and helping to take hard rock into the stadium rock era . In the mid @-@ 1970s Aerosmith achieved their commercial and artistic breakthrough with Toys in the Attic ( 1975 ) , which reached number 11 in the American album chart , and Rocks ( 1976 ) , which peaked at number three . Blue Öyster Cult , formed in the late 60s , picked up on some of the elements introduced by Black Sabbath with their breakthrough live gold album On Your Feet or on Your Knees ( 1975 ) , followed by their first platinum album , Agents of Fortune ( 1976 ) , containing the hit single " ( Don 't Fear ) The Reaper " , which reached number 12 on the Billboard charts . Journey released their eponymous debut in 1975 and the next year Boston released their highly successful début album . In the same year , hard rock bands featuring women saw commercial success as Heart released <unk> Annie and The Runaways débuted with their self @-@ titled album . While Heart had a more folk @-@ oriented hard rock sound , the Runaways leaned more towards a mix of punk @-@ influenced music and hard rock . The Amboy Dukes , having emerged from the Detroit garage rock scene and most famous for their Top 20 psychedelic hit " Journey to the Center of the Mind " ( 1968 ) , were dissolved by their guitarist Ted Nugent , who embarked on a solo career that resulted in four successive multi @-@ platinum albums between Ted Nugent ( 1975 ) and his best selling Double Live Gonzo ( 1978 ) . 
 From outside the United Kingdom and the United States , the Canadian trio Rush released three distinctively hard rock albums in 1974 – 75 ( Rush , Fly by Night and Caress of Steel ) before moving toward a more progressive sound with the 1976 album 2112 . The Irish band Thin Lizzy , which had formed in the late 1960s , made their most substantial commercial breakthrough in 1976 with the hard rock album Jailbreak and their worldwide hit " The Boys Are Back in Town " , which reached number 8 in the UK and number 12 in the US . Their style , consisting of two duelling guitarists often playing leads in harmony , proved itself to be a large influence on later bands . They reached their commercial , and arguably their artistic peak with Black Rose : A Rock Legend ( 1979 ) . The arrival of Scorpions from Germany marked the geographical expansion of the subgenre . Australian @-@ formed AC / DC , with a stripped back , riff heavy and abrasive style that also appealed to the punk generation , began to gain international attention from 1976 , culminating in the release of their multi @-@ platinum albums Let There Be Rock ( 1977 ) and Highway to Hell ( 1979 ) . Also influenced by a punk ethos were heavy metal bands like Motörhead , while Judas Priest abandoned the remaining elements of the blues in their music , further differentiating the hard rock and heavy metal styles and helping to create the new wave of British heavy metal which was pursued by bands like Iron Maiden , Saxon and Venom . 
 With the rise of disco in the US and punk rock in the UK , hard rock 's mainstream dominance was rivalled toward the later part of the decade . Disco appealed to a more diverse group of people and punk seemed to take over the rebellious role that hard rock once held . Early punk bands like The Ramones explicitly rebelled against the drum solos and extended guitar solos that characterised stadium rock , with almost all of their songs clocking in around two minutes with no guitar solos . However , new rock acts continued to emerge and record sales remained high into the 1980s . 1977 saw the début and rise to stardom of Foreigner , who went on to release several platinum albums through to the mid @-@ 1980s . Midwestern groups like Kansas , REO Speedwagon and Styx helped further cement heavy rock in the Midwest as a form of stadium rock . In 1978 , Van Halen emerged from the Los Angeles music scene with a sound based around the skills of lead guitarist Eddie Van Halen . He popularised a guitar @-@ playing technique of two @-@ handed hammer @-@ ons and pull @-@ offs called tapping , showcased on the song " Eruption " from the album Van Halen , which was highly influential in re @-@ establishing hard rock as a popular genre after the punk and disco explosion , while also redefining and elevating the role of electric guitar . 
 = = = Glam metal era ( 1980s ) = = = 
 The opening years of the 1980s saw a number of changes in personnel and direction of established hard rock acts , including the deaths of Bon Scott , the lead singer of AC / DC , and John Bonham , drummer with Led Zeppelin . Whereas Zeppelin broke up almost immediately afterwards , AC / DC pressed on , recording the album Back in Black ( 1980 ) with their new lead singer , Brian Johnson . It became the fifth @-@ highest @-@ selling album of all time in the US and the second @-@ highest @-@ selling album in the world . Black Sabbath had split with original singer Ozzy Osbourne in 1979 and replaced him with Ronnie James Dio , formerly of Rainbow , giving the band a new sound and a period of creativity and popularity beginning with Heaven and Hell ( 1980 ) . Osbourne embarked on a solo career with Blizzard of <unk> ( 1980 ) , featuring American guitarist Randy Rhoads . Some bands , such as Queen , moved away from their hard rock roots and more towards pop rock , while others , including Rush with Moving Pictures ( 1981 ) , began to return to a hard rock sound . The creation of thrash metal , which mixed heavy metal with elements of hardcore punk from about 1982 , particularly by Metallica , Anthrax , Megadeth and Slayer , helped to create extreme metal and further remove the style from hard rock , although a number of these bands or their members would continue to record some songs closer to a hard rock sound . Kiss moved away from their hard rock roots toward pop metal : firstly removing their makeup in 1983 for their Lick It Up album , and then adopting the visual and sound of glam metal for their 1984 release , <unk> , both of which marked a return to commercial success . Pat Benatar was one of the first women to achieve commercial success in hard rock , with three successive Top 5 albums between 1980 and 1982 . 
 Often categorised with the new wave of British heavy metal , in 1981 Def Leppard released their second album High ' n ' Dry , mixing glam @-@ rock with heavy metal , and helping to define the sound of hard rock for the decade . The follow @-@ up Pyromania ( 1983 ) , reached number two on the American charts and the singles " Photograph " , " Rock of Ages " and " Foolin ' " , helped by the emergence of MTV , all reached the Top 40 . It was widely emulated , particularly by the emerging Californian glam metal scene . This was followed by US acts like Mötley Crüe , with their albums Too Fast for Love ( 1981 ) and Shout at the Devil ( 1983 ) and , as the style grew , the arrival of bands such as Ratt , White Lion , Twisted Sister and Quiet Riot . Quiet Riot 's album Metal Health ( 1983 ) was the first glam metal album , and arguably the first heavy metal album of any kind , to reach number one in the Billboard music charts and helped open the doors for mainstream success by subsequent bands . 
 Established bands made something of a comeback in the mid @-@ 1980s . After an 8 @-@ year separation , Deep Purple returned with the classic Machine Head line @-@ up to produce Perfect Strangers ( 1984 ) , which reached number five in the UK , hit the top five in five other countries , and was a platinum @-@ seller in the US . After somewhat slower sales of its fourth album , Fair Warning , Van Halen rebounded with the Top 3 album Diver Down in 1982 , then reached their commercial pinnacle with 1984 . It reached number two on the Billboard album chart and provided the track " Jump " , which reached number one on the singles chart and remained there for several weeks . Heart , after floundering during the first half of the decade , made a comeback with their eponymous ninth studio album which hit number one and contained four Top 10 singles including their first number one hit . The new medium of video channels was used with considerable success by bands formed in previous decades . Among the first were ZZ Top , who mixed hard blues rock with new wave music to produce a series of highly successful singles , beginning with " Gimme All Your Lovin ' " ( 1983 ) , which helped their albums Eliminator ( 1983 ) and <unk> ( 1985 ) achieve diamond and multi @-@ platinum status respectively . Others found renewed success in the singles charts with power ballads , including REO Speedwagon with " Keep on Loving You " ( 1980 ) and " Can 't Fight This Feeling " ( 1984 ) , Journey with " Don 't Stop Believin ' " ( 1981 ) and " Open Arms " ( 1982 ) , Foreigner 's " I Want to Know What Love Is " , Scorpions ' " Still Loving You " ( both from 1984 ) , Heart ’ s " What About Love " ( 1985 ) and " These Dreams " ( 1986 ) , and Boston 's " Amanda " ( 1986 ) . 
 Bon Jovi 's third album , Slippery When Wet ( 1986 ) , mixed hard rock with a pop sensitivity and spent a total of 8 weeks at the top of the Billboard 200 album chart , selling 12 million copies in the US while becoming the first hard rock album to spawn three top 10 singles — two of which reached number one . The album has been credited with widening the audiences for the genre , particularly by appealing to women as well as the traditional male dominated audience , and opening the door to MTV and commercial success for other bands at the end of the decade . The anthemic The Final Countdown ( 1986 ) by Swedish group Europe was an international hit , reaching number eight on the US charts while hitting the top 10 in nine other countries . This era also saw more glam @-@ infused American hard rock bands come to the forefront , with both Poison and Cinderella releasing their multi @-@ platinum début albums in 1986 . Van Halen released 5150 ( 1986 ) , their first album with Sammy Hagar on lead vocals , which was number one in the US for three weeks and sold over 6 million copies . By the second half of the decade , hard rock had become the most reliable form of commercial popular music in the United States . 
 Established acts benefited from the new commercial climate , with Whitesnake 's self @-@ titled album ( 1987 ) selling over 17 million copies , outperforming anything in Coverdale 's or Deep Purple 's catalogue before or since . It featured the rock anthem " Here I Go Again ' 87 " as one of 4 UK top 20 singles . The follow @-@ up Slip of the Tongue ( 1989 ) went platinum , but according to critics Steve <unk> and Greg Prato , " it was a considerable disappointment after the across @-@ the @-@ board success of Whitesnake " . Aerosmith 's comeback album Permanent Vacation ( 1987 ) would begin a decade long revival of their popularity . Crazy Nights ( 1987 ) by Kiss was the band 's highest charting release in the US since 1979 and the highest of their career in the UK . Mötley Crüe with Girls , Girls , Girls ( 1987 ) continued their commercial success and Def Leppard with Hysteria ( 1987 ) hit their commercial peak , the latter producing seven hit singles ( a record for a hard rock act ) . Guns N ' Roses released the best @-@ selling début of all time , Appetite for Destruction ( 1987 ) . With a " grittier " and " rawer " sound than most glam metal , it produced three top 10 hits , including the number one " Sweet Child O ' Mine " . Some of the glam rock bands that formed in the mid @-@ 1980s , such as White Lion and Cinderella experienced their biggest success during this period with their respective albums Pride ( 1987 ) and Long Cold Winter ( 1988 ) both going multi @-@ platinum and launching a series of hit singles . In the last years of the decade , the most notable successes were New Jersey ( 1988 ) by Bon Jovi , OU812 ( 1988 ) by Van Halen , Open Up and Say ... Ahh ! ( 1988 ) by Poison , Pump ( 1989 ) by Aerosmith , and Mötley Crüe 's most commercially successful album Dr. Feelgood ( 1989 ) . New Jersey spawned five Top 10 singles , a record for a hard rock act . In 1988 from 25 June to 5 November , the number one spot on the Billboard 200 album chart was held by a hard rock album for 18 out of 20 consecutive weeks ; the albums were OU812 , Hysteria , Appetite for Destruction , and New Jersey . A final wave of glam rock bands arrived in the late 1980s , and experienced success with multi @-@ platinum albums and hit singles from 1989 until the early 1990s , among them Extreme , Warrant Slaughter and FireHouse . Skid Row also released their eponymous début ( 1989 ) , reaching number six on the Billboard 200 , but they were to be one of the last major bands that emerged in the glam rock era . 
 = = = Grunge and Britpop ( 1990s ) = = = 
 Hard rock entered the 1990s as one of the dominant forms of commercial music . The multi @-@ platinum releases of AC / DC 's The Razors Edge ( 1990 ) , Guns N ' Roses ' Use Your Illusion I and Use Your Illusion II ( both in 1991 ) , Ozzy Osbourne 's No More Tears ( 1991 ) , and Van Halen 's For Unlawful Carnal Knowledge ( 1991 ) showcased this popularity . Additionally , The Black Crowes released their debut album , Shake Your Money Maker ( 1990 ) , which contained a bluesy classic rock sound and sold five million copies . In 1992 , Def Leppard followed up 1987 's Hysteria with <unk> , which went multi @-@ platinum , spawned four Top 40 singles and held the number one spot on the US album chart for five weeks . 
 While these few hard rock bands managed to maintain success and popularity in the early part of the decade , alternative forms of hard rock achieved mainstream success in the form of grunge in the US and Britpop in the UK . This was particularly evident after the success of Nirvana 's Nevermind ( 1991 ) , which combined elements of hardcore punk and heavy metal into a " dirty " sound that made use of heavy guitar distortion , fuzz and feedback , along with darker lyrical themes than their " hair band " predecessors . Although most grunge bands had a sound that sharply contrasted mainstream hard rock , several , including Pearl Jam , Alice in Chains , Mother Love Bone and Soundgarden , were more strongly influenced by 1970s and 1980s rock and metal , while Stone Temple Pilots managed to turn alternative rock into a form of stadium rock . However , all grunge bands shunned the macho , anthemic and fashion @-@ focused aesthetics particularly associated with glam metal . In the UK , Oasis were unusual among the Britpop bands of the mid @-@ 1990s in incorporating a hard rock sound . 
 In the new commercial climate glam metal bands like Europe , Ratt , White Lion and Cinderella broke up , Whitesnake went on hiatus in 1991 , and while many of these bands would re @-@ unite again in the late 1990s or early 2000s , they never reached the commercial success they saw in the 1980s or early 1990s . Other bands such as Mötley Crüe and Poison saw personnel changes which impacted those bands ' commercial viability during the decade . In 1995 Van Halen released Balance , a multi @-@ platinum seller that would be the band 's last with Sammy Hagar on vocals . In 1996 David Lee Roth returned briefly and his replacement , former Extreme singer Gary Cherone , was fired soon after the release of the commercially unsuccessful 1998 album Van Halen III and Van Halen would not tour or record again until 2004 . Guns N ' Roses ' original lineup was whittled away throughout the decade . Drummer Steven Adler was fired in 1990 , guitarist Izzy Stradlin left in late 1991 after recording Use Your Illusion I and II with the band . Tensions between the other band members and lead singer Axl Rose continued after the release of the 1993 covers album The Spaghetti Incident ? Guitarist Slash left in 1996 , followed by bassist Duff McKagan in 1997 . Axl Rose , the only original member , worked with a constantly changing lineup in recording an album that would take over fifteen years to complete . 
 Some established acts continued to enjoy commercial success , such as Aerosmith , with their number one multi @-@ platinum albums : Get a Grip ( 1993 ) , which produced four Top 40 singles and became the band 's best @-@ selling album worldwide ( going on to sell over 10 million copies ) , and Nine Lives ( 1997 ) . In 1998 , Aerosmith released the number one hit " I Don 't Want to Miss a Thing " , which remains the only single by a hard rock band to debut at number one . AC / DC produced the double platinum Ballbreaker ( 1995 ) . Bon Jovi appealed to their hard rock audience with songs such as " Keep the Faith " ( 1992 ) , but also achieved success in adult contemporary radio , with the Top 10 ballads " Bed of Roses " ( 1993 ) and " Always " ( 1994 ) . Bon Jovi 's 1995 album These Days was a bigger hit in Europe than it was in the United States , spawning four Top 10 singles on the UK Singles Chart . Metallica 's Load ( 1996 ) and ReLoad ( 1997 ) each sold in excess of 4 million copies in the US and saw the band develop a more melodic and blues rock sound . As the initial impetus of grunge bands faltered in the middle years of the decade , post @-@ grunge bands emerged . They emulated the attitudes and music of grunge , particularly thick , distorted guitars , but with a more radio @-@ friendly commercially oriented sound that drew more directly on traditional hard rock . Among the most successful acts were the Foo Fighters , Candlebox , Live , Collective Soul , Australia 's Silverchair and England 's Bush , who all cemented post @-@ grunge as one of the most commercially viable subgenres by the late 1990s . Similarly , some post @-@ Britpop bands that followed in the wake of Oasis , including Feeder and Stereophonics , adopted a hard rock or " pop @-@ metal " sound . 
 = = = Survivals and revivals ( 2000s ) = = = 
 A few hard rock bands from the 1970s and 1980s managed to sustain highly successful recording careers . Bon Jovi were still able to achieve a commercial hit with " It 's My Life " from their double platinum @-@ certified album Crush ( 2000 ) . and AC / DC released the platinum @-@ certified Stiff Upper Lip ( 2000 ) Aerosmith released a number two platinum album , Just Push Play ( 2001 ) , which saw the band foray further into pop with the Top 10 hit " Jaded " , and a blues cover album , Honkin ' on Bobo , which reached number five in 2004 . Heart achieved their first Top 10 album since the early 90s with Red Velvet Car in 2010 , becoming the first female @-@ led hard rock band to earn Top 10 albums spanning five decades . There were reunions and subsequent tours from Van Halen ( with Hagar in 2004 and then Roth in 2007 ) , The Who ( delayed in 2002 by the death of bassist John Entwistle until 2006 ) and Black Sabbath ( with Osbourne 1997 – 2006 and Dio 2006 – 2010 ) and even a one off performance by Led Zeppelin ( 2007 ) , renewing the interest in previous eras . Additionally , hard rock supergroups , such as Audioslave ( with former members of Rage Against the Machine and Soundgarden ) and Velvet Revolver ( with former members of Guns N ' Roses , punk band Wasted Youth and Stone Temple Pilots singer Scott Weiland ) , emerged and experienced some success . However , these bands were short @-@ lived , ending in 2007 and 2008 , respectively . The long awaited Guns N ' Roses album Chinese Democracy was finally released in 2008 , but only went platinum and failed to come close to the success of the band 's late 1980s and early 1990s material . More successfully , AC / DC released the double platinum @-@ certified Black Ice ( 2008 ) . Bon Jovi continued to enjoy success , branching into country music with " Who Says You Can 't Go Home " , which reached number one on the Hot Country Singles chart in 2006 , and the rock / country album Lost Highway , which reached number one in 2007 . In 2009 , Bon Jovi released another number one album , The Circle , which marked a return to their hard rock sound . 
 The term " retro @-@ metal " has been applied to such bands as Texas based The Sword , California 's High on Fire , Sweden 's Witchcraft and Australia 's Wolfmother . Wolfmother 's self @-@ titled 2005 debut album combined elements of the sounds of Deep Purple and Led Zeppelin . Fellow Australians Airbourne 's début album Runnin ' Wild ( 2007 ) followed in the hard riffing tradition of AC / DC . England 's The Darkness ' Permission to Land ( 2003 ) , described as an " eerily realistic simulation of ' 80s metal and ' 70s glam " , topped the UK charts , going quintuple platinum . The follow @-@ up , One Way Ticket to Hell ... and Back ( 2005 ) , reached number 11 , before the band broke up in 2006 . Los Angeles band Steel Panther managed to gain a following by sending up 80s glam metal . A more serious attempt to revive glam metal was made by bands of the sleaze metal movement in Sweden , including <unk> of Jenna , Hardcore Superstar and <unk> . 
 Although Foo Fighters continued to be one of the most successful rock acts , with albums like In Your Honor ( 2005 ) reaching number two in the US and UK , many of the first wave of post @-@ grunge bands began to fade in popularity . Acts like Creed , Staind , Puddle of Mudd and Nickelback took the genre into the 2000s with considerable commercial success , abandoning most of the angst and anger of the original movement for more conventional anthems , narratives and romantic songs . They were followed in this vein by new acts including Shinedown and Seether . Acts with more conventional hard rock sounds included Andrew W.K. , Beautiful Creatures and Buckcherry , whose breakthrough album 15 ( 2006 ) went platinum and spawned the single " Sorry " ( 2007 ) , which made the Top 10 of the Billboard 100 . These were joined by bands with hard rock leanings that emerged in the mid @-@ 2000s from the garage rock or post punk revival , including Black Rebel Motorcycle Club and Kings of Leon , and Queens of the Stone Age from the US , Three Days Grace from Canada , Jet from Australia and The Datsuns from New Zealand . In 2009 Them Crooked Vultures , a supergroup that brought together Foo Fighters ' Dave Grohl , Queens of the Stone Age 's Josh Homme and Led Zeppelin bass player John Paul Jones attracted attention as a live act and released a self @-@ titled debut album that reached the top 20 in the US and UK and the top ten in several other countries . 
 = Rock ' n ' Roll ( John Lennon album ) = 
 Rock ' n ' Roll is the sixth studio album by John Lennon . Released in 1975 , it is an album of late 1950s and early 1960s songs as covered by Lennon . Recording the album was problematic and spanned an entire year : Phil Spector produced sessions in October 1973 at A & M Studios , and Lennon produced sessions in October 1974 at Record Plant Studios ( East ) . Lennon was being sued by Morris Levy over copyright infringement of one line in his song " Come Together " . As part of an agreement , Lennon had to include three Levy @-@ owned songs on Rock ' n ' Roll . Spector ran away with the session recordings , later being involved in a motor accident , which left the album 's tracks unrecoverable until the beginning of the Walls and Bridges sessions . With Walls and Bridges coming out first , featuring one Levy @-@ owned song , Levy sued Lennon expecting to see Lennon 's Rock ' n ' Roll album . 
 The album was released in February 1975 , reaching number 6 in both the United Kingdom and the United States , later being certified gold in both countries . It was supported by the single " Stand by Me " , which peaked at number 20 in the US , and 30 in the UK . The cover was taken by Jürgen Vollmer during the Beatles ' stay in Hamburg . It was Lennon 's last album until 1980 : With no recording contract obligation , he took a hiatus from recording to raise his son Sean . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1969 , Lennon composed the song " Come Together " for the Beatles ' album Abbey Road . Inspired by the Chuck Berry tune " You Can 't Catch Me " , it bore too much of a melodic resemblance to the original — and Lennon took the third line of the second verse ( " Here come old flat @-@ top " ) for the new lyric . Publisher Morris Levy brought a lawsuit for infringement , and the case was due to be heard in a New York court in December 1973 . It was later settled out of court , with the agreement that , according to an announcement by Levy , Lennon had to " record three songs by Big Seven publishers on his next album . The songs [ he ] intends to record at this time are " You Can 't Catch Me " , " Angel Baby " and " Ya Ya " . " Lennon had the right to change the last two songs to any other songs that were published by Big Seven . In the meanwhile , Lennon had split with Yoko Ono and was living in Los Angeles with his personal assistant , May Pang . Nostalgia was a popular trend on film with American Graffiti , and television was readying the series Happy Days ( Lennon and Pang had even visited the set ) . Lennon , rather than writing his own songs , and partly inspired by his arrangement to include at least three songs from Levy 's publishing company catalogue , Big Seven Music , decided to record an album of oldies as his next release , following on from Mind Games . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Lennon initially teamed up with producer Phil Spector to record the album , letting Spector have full control . Spector chose some of the songs , booked the studio , and the musicians . When news got around that Lennon was in Hollywood making a record , every musician there wanted to be part of the sessions . In mid @-@ October 1973 , sessions were booked at A & M Studios , with many of them having over 30 musicians , but the sessions quickly fell into disarray — fuelled by alcohol . Spector once showed up dressed in a surgeon 's outfit and shot a gun in the ceiling of the studio , hurting Lennon 's ears . On another occasion , a bottle of whiskey had spilled on the A & M Studio 's mixing console causing future sessions to be banned from the facility . Unknown to Lennon , each night Spector would remove the master tapes from the studio , and move them to his house . Spector then disappeared with the session tapes and would not be heard from for several months . Spector made one cryptic call to Lennon , claiming to have the " John Dean tapes " from the recent Watergate scandal ; Lennon deduced that Spector meant he had the album 's master tapes . When a car accident on 31 March 1974 left Spector in a coma , the project was put on indefinite hold . In mid @-@ 1974 , Lennon returned to New York with Pang and began writing and recording a new album of original material , Walls and Bridges . Shortly before these sessions began , Al Coury , then @-@ head of A & R / promotion for Capitol Records retrieved the Spector tapes . Not wanting to break stride , Lennon shelved the tapes and completed work on Walls and Bridges . 
 With Walls and Bridges coming out first , Lennon had reneged on his deal with Levy and he threatened to refile his lawsuit , but Lennon explained to Levy what had happened , and assured him that the covers album was indeed in the works . Levy gave Lennon use of his farm in upstate New York to rehearse material . Lennon then recalled the session musicians from Walls and Bridges to complete the oldies tracks . Several tracks never made it past the rehearsal stage : " C 'mon Everybody " , " Thirty Days " , " That 'll Be the Day " – the band also played a few impromptu jams . On 21 October , Lennon went into Record Plant East , completing the oldies tracks in a few days . Lennon wanted the musicians to stay close to the original arrangements of the songs , apart from " Do You Wanna Dance ? " . Mixing and editing lasted until mid @-@ November . To assure him progress was being made , Lennon gave Levy a rough tape of the sessions to review . Levy took the tapes and pressed his own version of the album called Roots : John Lennon Sings the Great Rock & Roll Hits on his record label , Adam VIII , then proceeded to sue Lennon , EMI and Capitol for $ 42 million for breach of contract . Capitol / EMI quickly sought an injunction . After two trials , in which Lennon had to convince the court of the difference between a rough version and a final take , Levy won $ 6 @,@ 795 in damages , and Lennon won $ 144 @,@ 700 , in February 1976 . The album was originally scheduled for release in April 1975 , however , in February 1975 , Capitol Records rush @-@ released the official Rock ' n ' Roll as a Capitol " budget " album ( prefix code SK — one dollar cheaper than the usual releases ) to counteract sales of the Levy album . 
 = = Reception and aftermath = = 
 Although some critics derided the album as " a step backward " , The Rolling Stone Album Guide wrote that " John lends dignity to these classics ; his singing is tender , convincing , and fond . " AllMusic described the album " as a peak in [ Lennon 's ] post @-@ Imagine catalog : an album that catches him with nothing to prove and no need to try " . 
 The album was released on 17 February 1975 in the US , and a few days later in the UK , on 21 February 1975 . It reached number 6 in both the United Kingdom and the United States . On 10 March and 18 April 1975 , in the US and UK respectively , " Stand by Me " was released as a single , backed with " Move Over Ms. L " , a song that was meant to appear on Walls and Bridges but cut from the final line @-@ up . Peaking at 20 number in the US and number 30 in the UK . Lennon promoted the song by appearing on the BBC TV show Old Grey Whistle Test , which also featured an interview by Bob Harris . The show had Lennon singing live over the backing tracks of " Stand by Me " and " Slippin ' and Slidin ' " . Lennon also appeared on Salute to Sir Lew – The Master Showman singing live again over backing tracks , this time for three songs : " Stand by Me " , " Slippin ' and Slidin ' " and " Imagine " . A second single , " Slippin N Slidin " / " Ain 't That a Shame " ( Apple 1883 ) , was announced , promotional copies were pressed , but was never released . " Ya Ya " , backed with " Be @-@ Bop @-@ A @-@ Lula " , was released as a single only in Germany , peaking at number 47 on the Media Control Charts . Lennon said the following about Rock ' n ' Roll : " It started in ' 73 with Phil and fell apart . I ended up as part of mad , drunk scenes in Los Angeles and I finally finished it off on me own . And there was still problems with it up to the minute it came out . I can 't begin to say , it 's just barmy , there 's a jinx on that album . " 
 Not long after the album appeared , Lennon reconciled with Ono , and she soon became pregnant . Determined not to lose another baby after three consecutive miscarriages , Lennon decided to halt his musical career for his family . Sean Lennon was born that October ( on his father 's 35th birthday ) ; following the release of the compilation Shaved Fish , Lennon would not return with a new release until 1980 . " Stand by Me " was reissued in the US , with " Woman Is the Nigger of the World " , on 4 April 1977 . The album re @-@ charted in the UK on 17 January 1981 , at number 64 . In the US , it was reissued in October 1980 , also at budget price , and it was briefly reissued in the UK by the budget label Music for Pleasure with an alternative cover on 25 November 1981 . After Lennon 's death , the album , along with seven other Lennon albums , was reissued by EMI as part of a box set , which was released in the UK on 15 June 1981 . In 1981 , Belgium and France issued the album , along with the Beatles ' Rock ' n ' Roll Music , as part of a box set . The album was first issued on CD on 26 May 1987 . In 2004 , Yoko Ono supervised the remixing of Rock ' n ' Roll for its reissue , including four bonus tracks from the ill @-@ fated Spector sessions . These leftovers from the sessions had already appeared , as part of 1986 's Menlove Ave . ( a collection of outtakes ) or the John Lennon Anthology box set . ( The Lennon / Spector co @-@ composition " Here We Go Again " was not included on the remastered Rock ' n ' Roll , and can be found on Menlove Ave. as well as the soundtrack album for " The U.S. Vs John Lennon " and the 2010 " Gimme Some Truth " 4 @-@ CD set under the 4th CD entitled " Roots " featuring the " Rock ' N ' Roll " tracks ) . In 2010 , the original album mixes were remastered , the album was available separately or as part of the John Lennon Signature Box . 
 = = Cover art = = 
 Lennon planned to use some of his childhood drawings for the cover of his oldies album , and production had already begun when Lennon switched gears , so the artwork was used instead for Walls and Bridges . In September 1974 , May Pang attended the first <unk> convention at Lennon 's behest , and met Jürgen Vollmer , an old friend of the Beatles from Hamburg , Germany , who had photographed the band from their Hamburg days . He was selling some striking portraits , and Pang immediately phoned Lennon to tell him of her find . Reuniting with Vollmer in New York , Lennon chose one of his photos for the album 's cover . 
 The photo depicts Lennon in a doorway with three blurry figures walking past him in the foreground . The album 's working title had been Oldies But <unk> ; no official title had been chosen until Lennon saw the neon sign prepared as cover art by John Uomoto , with Lennon 's name and the words " ROCK ' N ' <unk> " beneath . This struck Lennon in a positive way , and it became the album title . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks produced and arranged by John Lennon , except * produced by Phil Spector , and arranged by Spector and Lennon . 
 Side One 
 " Be @-@ Bop @-@ A @-@ Lula " ( Tex Davis , Gene Vincent ) – 2 : 39 
 " Stand by Me " ( Jerry Leiber , Mike Stoller , Ben E. King ) – 3 : 26 
 " Medley : Rip It Up / Ready Teddy " ( Robert ' Bumps ' Blackwell , John <unk> ) – 1 : 33 
 " You Can 't Catch Me " * ( Chuck Berry ) – 4 : 51 
 " Ain 't That a Shame " ( Fats Domino , Dave Bartholomew ) – 2 : 38 
 " Do You Wanna Dance ? " ( Bobby Freeman ) – 3 : 15 
 " Sweet Little Sixteen " * ( Chuck Berry ) – 3 : 01 
 Side Two 
 " Slippin ' and Slidin ' " ( Eddie Bocage , Al Collins , Richard Wayne Penniman , James H. Smith ) – 2 : 16 
 " Peggy Sue " ( Jerry Allison , Norman Petty , Buddy Holly ) – 2 : 06 
 " Medley : Bring It On Home to Me / Send Me Some Lovin ' " ( Sam Cooke , John <unk> , Leo Price ) – 3 : 41 
 " Bony <unk> " * ( Larry Williams ) – 3 : 47 
 " Ya Ya " ( Lee Dorsey , Clarence Lewis , Morgan Robinson , Morris Levy ) – 2 : 17 
 " Just Because " * ( Lloyd Price ) – 4 : 25 
 2004 reissue bonus tracks 
 " Angel Baby " * ( Rosie Hamlin ) – 3 : 44 
 " To Know Her Is to Love Her " * ( Phil Spector ) – 4 : 31 
 " Since My Baby Left Me " * ( Arthur Crudup ) – 4 : 40 
 " Just Because ( Reprise ) " * – 1 : 25 
 = = Personnel = = 
 John Lennon : Guitars , vocals 
 Jesse Ed Davis : Guitar 
 Jim Calvert : Guitar 
 Eddie <unk> : Acoustic guitar 
 José Feliciano : Acoustic guitar 
 Michael Hazelwood : Acoustic Guitar 
 Steve Cropper : Guitar 
 Klaus Voormann : Bass guitar , answer vocal on " Bring It On Home to Me " 
 Leon Russell : Keyboards 
 Ken Ascher : Keyboards 
 Jim Keltner : Drums 
 Hal Blaine : Drums 
 Gary Mallaber : Drums 
 Arthur Jenkins : Percussion 
 Nino Tempo : Saxophone 
 Jeff Barry : Horn 
 Barry Mann : Horn 
 Bobby Keys : Horn 
 Peter Jameson : Horn 
 Joseph Temperley : Horn 
 Dennis <unk> : Horn 
 Frank <unk> : Horn 
 = = Charts = = 
 = 9 @.@ 0 : Live = 
 9 @.@ 0 : Live is the first live album by American heavy metal band Slipknot . The band recorded the two @-@ disc album during a 2004 – 2005 world tour that promoted their third studio album Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) . Released by Roadrunner Records on November 1 , 2005 , 9 @.@ 0 Live features tracks from Slipknot 's first three studio albums : Slipknot , Iowa , and Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) . Many of the included tracks are rarely played live ; " Skin Ticket " from the album Iowa was its first live performance . 9 @.@ 0 : Live peaked in the top twenty in album sales for Austria and the United States , and was certified gold in the United States . Critical reception was generally positive , with Adrien Begrand of PopMatters calling it a " very worthy live album " . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 While producing their second DVD Disasterpieces in 2002 , the band members of Slipknot were inspired to produce a live album after noticing how well they performed when they knew they were being recorded . Two years later , in 2004 , Slipknot promoted Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) during a world tour which included 233 concerts across 34 countries in 28 months ; music for the live album was recorded during the tour . The tracks on 9 @.@ 0 : Live were compiled from performances in Singapore , Tokyo , Osaka , Las Vegas , Phoenix , New York City , and Dallas . 
 Percussionist Shawn Crahan said the band made an effort to pay more attention to detail than usual during the tour , noting , " when you 've got a microphone hanging onto your every note , you tend to give maybe 115 percent instead of 110 percent . " The album begins with a staged vocal introduction which was recorded before a concert , informing the audience that the band would not be performing , in an effort to incite anger in the crowd . 9 @.@ 0 : Live includes tracks from the band 's first three studio albums , and the banned track " Purity " which was removed from the band 's debut album , Slipknot , due to copyright issues . It also contains tracks that are rarely played live , such as " Iowa " and " Get This " , as well as the only live performance of " Skin Ticket " . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Before the album 's release , a sample from the live recording of " The Nameless " was made available on the Internet through the band 's record label . Slipknot attended a signing session at a Best Buy store in New York City the day of 9 @.@ 0 : Live 's release , on November 1 , 2005 . A music video featuring the live recording of " The Nameless " was created to promote the album . Head of marketing at Roadrunner Records , Bob Johnsen , stated that the price of 9 @.@ 0 : Live was reduced in an effort to give " added value " , resulting in the double @-@ disc album being " two hours of music for the price of one " . Johnsen continued , stating that as with most live albums , 9 @.@ 0 : Live targeted the " band 's most hard @-@ core fans . It 's a complete immersion in the band . " The album booklet includes 24 pages , most with pictures of band members . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception of 9 @.@ 0 : Live was generally positive . Reviewing for Allmusic , Johnny Loftus commented that the fans ' relationship with Slipknot is " what unifies the performances " on the live album . He said that throughout the band 's history , they have never compromised , and they had become " metal stars the real way , through relentless touring , embracing fan support , and penning some truly brutal songs " . Rolling Stone 's reviewer Christian Hoard wrote that the music featured on the album resembled a " new @-@ school Motörhead " , with its " scary @-@ clown rap @-@ metal bullshit getting steamrolled by big riffs and speed @-@ punk beats " . However , he noted the songs sounded similar to their recorded performances ; Hoard called it the " songs ' samey @-@ ness " . Adrien Begrand of PopMatters called 9 @.@ 0 : Live a " very worthy live album " , and complimented the band for gaining success the " old @-@ fashioned way , building a strong reputation as an extremely potent live act " . Begrand noted the band 's relationship with their " extremely devoted fans " as a strong point , and that the band 's fans are " arguably the most fervently loyal bunch since the early days of Metallica two decades ago " . However , he complained that it was distracting to have the band perform in a variety of undisclosed locations , rather than the one set throughout . Tom Day of MusicOMH wrote that the song " Before I Forget " is a " true gem and grinds out with a level of devastation that will make you green with envy if you weren 't at these shows " , and that drummer Joey Jordison took " centre stage " throughout the performance . Blair Fischer of the Chicago Tribune gave the album " three volume levels " , writing , " The most amazing feat is that nine genetic defectives can congeal for such synchronous brain @-@ damaged fury . " Billboard reviewer Christa Titus wrote that Slipknot was " relentless in its delivery " of their live performances , calling the album " an overwhelming frenzy of sound and fury " . Titus predicted the album would chart highly . 
 Some critics commented that the album is not as appealing to audiences who are unfamiliar with the band . Saul Austerlitz from The Boston Globe wrote that the album was " intended to cater primarily to rabid fans " , commenting that those who are not fans of Slipknot will probably " find the experience of listening to both discs of 9 @.@ 0 : Live roughly comparable to being hit in the head repeatedly with a two @-@ by @-@ four two hours of sludgy , indistinguishable songs , punctuated by profane outbursts about how the idiot media [ ... ] has ignored and abused them " . 
 9 @.@ 0 : Live debuted at the 17th position on the Billboard 200 charts in the United States , selling 42 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The album also premiered in the top 50 in five other countries . On December 9 , 2005 , the Recording Industry Association of America certified 9 @.@ 0 : Live gold in the United States . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs credited to Slipknot and , as noted , were recorded live . 
 Disc 1 
 " The Blister Exists – 6 : 24 
 " ( sic ) " – 3 : 52 
 " Disasterpiece " – 6 : 47 
 " Before I Forget " – 4 : 24 
 " Left Behind " – 3 : 44 
 " Liberate " – 3 : 48 
 " Vermilion " – 5 : 56 
 " Pulse of the Maggots " – 5 : 06 
 " Purity " – 5 : 12 
 " Eyeless " – 4 : 19 
 " Drum Solo " – 3 : 58 
 " Eeyore " – 2 : 16 
 Disc 2 
 " Three Nil " – 5 : 03 
 " The Nameless " – 5 : 28 
 " Skin Ticket " – 6 : 03 
 " Everything Ends " – 5 : 03 
 " The Heretic Anthem " – 4 : 08 
