 " Iowa " – 6 : 37 
 " Duality " – 6 : 07 
 " Spit It Out " – 5 : 29 
 " People = Shit " – 5 : 53 
 " Get This " – 2 : 44 
 " Wait and Bleed " – 3 : 44 
 " Surfacing " – 5 : 50 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Aside from their real names , members of the band are referred to by numbers zero through eight . 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Birthday ( Selena Gomez song ) = 
 " Birthday " is a song by American recording artist Selena Gomez for her solo debut album Stars Dance ( 2013 ) . It was written and produced by Mike Del Rio , with additional writing by Crista Russo and Jacob Kasher Hindlin . Matt Beckley also provided additional vocal production for the song . Musically , " Birthday " combines deep electronic dance beats and police sirens with elements of trap music . The song 's instrumentation is created by blending purring , synthesized bass , snappy beats , handclaps , " oxygen @-@ sucking " sub @-@ bass , and trap snares with sexual moans and elements of hip hop music . Sparse drum beats and vocal chants are woven throughout the song 's composition , which has been described by critics as a mixture of electropunk and EDM , with trap and dubstep elements . The song was originally announced as a single , but was never officially released from the album . 
 Thematically , " Birthday " is a party song which discusses topics such as sexual appeal , self @-@ entitlement , and girl power , while its risqué lyrics speak of a night of hard partying . The song has received comparisons to the music of several artists , including Dev , M.I.A. , and Icona Pop . Upon release , " Birthday " received favorable reviews from music critics , who praised the song for its unique sound and production . Upon the release of Stars Dance , the song charted at number 12 on the US Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles . " Birthday " has charted at number 191 on the South Korea Gaon International Chart due to high digital downloads . An accompanying music video for the song was released on July 22 , 2013 , to coincide with Gomez 's 21st birthday , and features Gomez and her friends partying and singing the song in different locations , including an underground nightclub and a dark room . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 " Birthday " was written by Crista Russo , with additional writing by Mike Del Rio and Jacob Kasher Hindlin , under his stage name " J. Kash " . Production of the song was handled by Del Rio and Matt Beckley , who provided the song 's vocal production . It was recorded at Conway Studios in Los Angeles , California , and was engineered by Jonathan Sher . Additional background vocals were done by Russo and Del Rio , while Serban Ghenea mixed the song at MixStar Studios in Virginia Beach , Virginia . John Hanes served as the engineer for mix , and Del Rio provided the song 's programming and sequencing . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Birthday " was written and produced by Mike Del Rio , with additional writing by Crista Russo and Jacob Kasher Hindlin . Additional vocal production was handled by Matt Beckley . The three @-@ minute and twenty @-@ second track is an electropunk and EDM song , which draws influence from dubstep and trap music genres . The beat is composed of deep electronic dance beats , and is built around the sound of police sirens and sexual moans , while containing purring , synthesized bass , snappy beats , handclaps , " oxygen @-@ sucking " sub @-@ bass and trap snares . Sparse drum beats and vocal chants are woven throughout the song 's composition , which according to Christina Drill of Popdust , is reminiscent of Gwen Stefani 's debut solo album , Love . Angel . Music . Baby . ( 2004 ) . 
 Thematically , " Birthday " has been described as a " party anthem " , with the song exploring topics such as self @-@ entitlement , partying , girl power , and sex appeal . Lyrically , the song has been described as risqué , with lyrics such as " blow your dreams , blow your dreams , blow your dreams away " . According to Gomez , the song has a vibe similar to that of the Gwen Stefani song " Hollaback Girl " . " Birthday " has received comparisons to several artists for its unique genre , most notably Dev , M.I.A. , and Icona Pop . Julia Rubin of Headlines and Global News described the song as a " candy @-@ coated , clap @-@ happy club anthem with plenty of girl power and sex appeal , much like a bubblegum version of Rihanna 's " Cockiness ( Love It ) " , while Jim Farber of New York Daily News said that " Birthday " " has the bratty sense of entitlement , flagrant delivery and braying hook of Icona Pop ’ s smash “ I Love It . ” 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon its release , " Birthday " received favorable reviews from music critics . Natalie Palmer of Entertainment Wise said Gomez should be praised for trying something new , saying that the song " isn ’ t what you would expect from Selena but the genre suits her well . " In a positive review , August Brown of The Los Angeles Times jokingly said the song was " almost as good as having shorts in every color . " Kia Makarechi of The Huffington Post was critical of " Birthday " , criticizing the song 's lyrics , as well as calling the song 's panting and moaning " overwrought " and " excessive " . Christina Drill of Popdust gave the song a highly positive 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 review , declaring it " super fun " and catchy , while later going on to say " Birthday " is " the weirdest and greatest thing Selena 's ever done " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 On July 22 , 2013 , Gomez unexpectedly uploaded a music video for " Birthday " to her official YouTube channel to coincide with her 21st birthday . Gomez left a short message , saying " I wanted to celebrate my 21st Birthday with all of you , so we made this video for us all to celebrate together . Thank You for all the love and support you have shown and continue to show me . I love you all so much ! ! " In the video , a " smiley " Gomez is seen in a black crop top and shorts with a flannel shirt around her waist , and is shown singing the song with her friends in a dark room . The video is also interspersed with clips of a party in an underground night club , as glitter falls from the ceiling . The video ends with Gomez 's friends singing " Happy Birthday " to her . Within the first 24 hours of being released , the video had garnered over a million views . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Birthday " – 3 : 20 
 = Special Troops Battalion , 173rd Airborne Brigade Combat Team ( United States ) = 
 The Special Troops Battalion , 173rd Airborne Brigade Combat Team is a special troops battalion of the United States Army headquartered at Caserma Del Din in Vicenza , Italy . It is the organization for the command elements of the 173rd Airborne Brigade Combat Team . 
 The battalion contains the brigade 's senior command structure , including its Headquarters and Headquarters Company , as well as communication and support elements . Activated in 2000 from inactivating support units , the Special Troops Battalion deployed with the 173rd Airborne Brigade Combat Team to Afghanistan in 2007 until 2008 and again in early 2010 . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The Special Troops Battalion is subordinate to the 173rd Airborne Brigade Combat Team and is a permanent formation of the brigade , as the 173rd 's command elements are all contained in the STB . 
 The battalion consists of three companies and the brigade 's Headquarters and Headquarters Company . Company A is a Combat Engineer company , Company B is a Military Intelligence company , and Company C is a Signal company . These companies provide services for the other battalions of the 173rd Airborne Brigade Combat Team , and as such , all of the companies are Airborne qualified . 
 = = History = = 
 The Special Troops Battalion was formed as part of a reorganization of the 173rd Airborne Brigade into a modular brigade . The battalion was designed to be the self @-@ contained command component of the brigade , allowing it to function independently of any higher command . The battalion was activated on 8 June 2006 . Most of its components were drawn from the 82nd Engineer Battalion , which inactivated on 30 March 2006 . On 21 April 2006 , a coat of arms and a distinctive unit insignia were approved for the battalion . 
 On 11 October 2006 , the 173rd Airborne Brigade was redesignated as the 173rd Airborne Brigade Combat Team ( ABCT ) , as part of the Army 's " Unit of Action " modularized unit force restructuring that General Eric Shinseki had originally envisioned . This was a significant change as it signified the ability for the brigade to deploy its forces and sustain itself with its newly integrated support teams . By integrating these support elements , the unit became able to maintain its fighting forces with all that is required to keep the ground soldiers supplied and moving . While most of the brigade remained in Vicenza , Italy through the transition , four of the battalions had to relocate to Bamberg and Schweinfurt , Germany until additional facilities were constructed in the Vicenza area . The 1st Battalion , 508th Infantry was reflagged as 1st Battalion , 503rd Infantry to resume the Vietnam @-@ era lineage of the 503rd Infantry battalions under the 173rd Airborne Brigade . The 1st Battalion , 508th Infantry colors were moved to Ft . Bragg , North Carolina to serve under the 82nd Airborne Division . Immediately after its transformation , the brigade began intensive training in both Germany and Italy to prepare itself for future deployments . 
 In 2006 , the brigade was notified for a second tour of duty in Iraq during 2007 – 2008 , but its deployment plan was changed to Afghanistan in February 2007 when the Pentagon announced that it would relieve the 3rd Brigade Combat Team , 10th Mountain Division along with the 4th Brigade Combat Team , 82nd Airborne Division . In the spring of 2007 , the 173rd ABCT again deployed to Afghanistan , as Task Force Bayonet , in support of Operation Enduring Freedom ( OEF 07 – 09 ) , their first deployment as a fully transformed brigade combat team . The brigade was dispersed throughout the east of the country , with units operating in <unk> , Nuristan , Kunar , and <unk> Provinces . The 173rd ABCT officially relieved the 3rd Brigade Combat Team , 10th Mountain Division on 6 June 2007 . 
 The 173rd participated in various operations with the objective of ensuring security and subduing Taliban insurgents in the mountainous regions along Afghanistan 's border with Pakistan , one of these being Operation Rock Avalanche near the Hindu Kush . Throughout their 15 @-@ month deployment , the brigade participated in more than 9 @,@ 000 patrols throughout the region . Only two weeks before the brigade was to return to Italy , a platoon of 45 soldiers from the brigade stationed in the Dara @-@ I @-@ Pech district was caught in an ambush by 100 – 200 insurgents , the Battle of Wanat . Though the platoon was able to drive the insurgents back with air support , the fight resulted in 9 soldiers killed and 16 wounded ; the deadliest attack on troops in the country since 2005 . The brigade repositioned the base three days later . The 173rd 's tour ended in July 2008 , and the entire brigade returned to Italy by the end of that month . 
 The brigade began its fourth deployment to Afghanistan in early 2010 . 
 = = Honors = = 
 = = = Unit decorations = = = 
 The Special Troops Battalion , 173rd Airborne Brigade Combat Team has never received a unit decoration from the United States military . 
 = = = Campaign streamers = = = 
 = Miracle Science and Fantasy Stories = 
 Miracle Science and Fantasy Stories was a pulp science fiction magazine which published two issues in 1931 . The fiction was unremarkable , but the cover art and illustrations , by Elliott Dold , were high quality , and have made the magazine a collector 's item . The magazine ceased publication when Dold became ill and was unable to continue his duties both as editor and artist . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 In 1931 , Harold Hersey , who had been working in the pulp magazine field for over a decade , decided to launch a new science fiction ( sf ) and fantasy magazine . Hersey had been the editor for the first half of The Thrill Book 's run of 16 issues in 1919 , and had also worked for Clayton Magazines , where in 1928 he had proposed a sf magazine to William Clayton . Clayton turned down the idea , but the following year changed his mind and launched Astounding Stories of Super Science , with Harry Bates as editor . After Hersey left Clayton and started his own publishing company , he returned to the idea , probably with the encouragement of Elliott Dold , an artist who was providing artwork to Astounding . 
 Hersey launched Miracle Science and Fantasy Stories in 1931 , with Dold as editor . Dold also provided the cover artwork for the first issue . Dold 's brother , Douglas Dold , also worked on the magazine ; some sources credit Douglas as editor instead but sf historian Howard <unk> argues this stems from a misreading of Hershey 's autobiography . Only one more issue appeared : Elliott Dold fell ill and was unable to continue working on the magazine . Miracle included stories by Victor Rousseau and John Miller Gregory . The lead novel in the first issue is credited to Douglas Dold and the lead novel in the second issue to Elliott , but sf historian Richard Bleiler suggests both stories were collaborations by the two brothers . The quality of the fiction was generally very poor , but Elliott Dold 's artwork in both issues was of much higher quality , and is the reason that the magazine remains a collectors ' item to this day . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 The editor for both issues was Elliott Dold ; the publisher was Good Story Magazine Co , based in Springfield , Massachusetts . The two issues were dated April − May and June − July 1931 ; both were printed in pulp format , priced at 20 cents , and 144 pages long . 
 = Welles Declaration = 
 The Welles Declaration was a diplomatic statement issued on July 23 , 1940 by Sumner Welles , the United States ' acting Secretary of State , condemning the June 1940 occupation by the Soviet Union of the three Baltic states of Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania , and refusing to recognize their annexation as Soviet Republics . It was an application of the 1932 Stimson Doctrine of non @-@ recognition of international territorial changes that were executed by force . It was consistent with U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt ’ s attitude towards territorial expansion . 
 The Soviet invasion was an implementation of its 1939 Molotov @-@ Ribbentrop Pact with Nazi Germany , which contained a secret protocol by which the two powers agreed to partition and annex the independent states between them . After the pact , the Soviets engaged in a series of ultimatums and actions ending in the annexation of the Baltic states during the summer of 1940 . While the area held little strategic importance to the United States , several legations of the U.S. State Department established diplomatic relationships there . The United States and Britain anticipated future involvement in the war , but U.S. isolationism and a foreseeable British @-@ Soviet alliance deterred open confrontation over the Baltics . Welles , concerned with postwar border planning , had been authorized by Roosevelt to issue stronger public statements gauging a move towards more intervention . Loy Henderson and other State Department officials familiar with the area kept the administration informed of developments there , and Henderson , Welles , and Roosevelt worked together to compose the declaration . 
 The Welles Declaration established a five @-@ decade non @-@ recognition of the Baltic states ' annexation . The document had major significance for overall U.S. policy toward Europe in the critical year of 1940 . While the U.S. did not engage the Soviet Union militarily in the region , the Declaration enabled the Baltic states to maintain independent diplomatic missions , and Executive Order <unk> protected Baltic financial assets . Its essence was supported by all subsequent U.S. presidents and Congressional resolutions . The Baltic states re @-@ established their independence in 1990 – 91 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = 19th and early 20th century status = = = 
 In the late 18th into the early 20th Century , the Russian Empire annexed the regions that now comprise the three Baltic States as well as Finland . Their national awareness movements began to gain strength , and each declared itself independent in the wake of World War I. All of the States were recognized by the League of Nations during the early 1920s . The Estonian Age of Awakening , the Latvian National Awakening , and the Lithuanian National Revival expressed the peoples ' wishes to create independent states . After World War I the three states declared their independence – Lithuania re @-@ established its independence on February 16 , 1918 , Estonia on February 24 , 1918 and Latvia on November 18 , 1918 . The Baltic countries often were seen as a unified group , despite dissimilarities in their languages and histories . Lithuania was recognized as a state in 1253 , Estonia and Latvia emerged from territories held by the Livonian Confederation ( established 1243 ) . All three states were admitted into the League of Nations in 1921 . 
 The U.S. had granted full de jure recognition to all three Baltic states by July 1922 . The recognitions were granted during the shift from the Democratic administration of Woodrow Wilson to the Republican administration of Warren Harding . While the U.S. did not sponsor any meaningful political or economic initiatives in the region during the interwar period , and its administrations did not consider the states strategically important , it maintained normal diplomatic relations with the states . 
 The U.S. had suffered over 100 @,@ 000 deaths during World War I and pursued an isolationist policy , determined to avoid involvement in any further European conflicts . In 1932 , however , Secretary of State Henry L. Stimson formally criticised the 1931 Japanese invasion of Manchuria , and the resulting Stimson Doctrine would go on to serve as a basis for the Welles declaration . 
 = = = Outbreak of World War II = = = 
 The situation changed after the outbreak of World War II . Poland was invaded in September 1939 . Great Britain became involved , and a series of German victories in Denmark , Norway , and the Netherlands during spring 1940 were alarming . Britain was clearly threatened and its leadership discussed the possibility of an alliance with the Soviet Union . Under the circumstances , direct British confrontation over the Baltic issue was difficult . 
 Roosevelt did not wish to lead the U.S. into the war ; his 1937 Quarantine Speech denouncing aggression by Italy and Japan had met mixed responses . Welles felt freer in this regard , looking towards postwar border issues and the establishment of a U.S.-led international body that could intervene in such disputes . Roosevelt saw Welles 's stronger public statements as experiments that would test the public mood in regard to U.S. foreign policy . 
 The secret protocol contained in the 1939 Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact between Germany and the Soviet Union had relegated Estonia , Latvia , and Lithuania to the Soviet sphere of influence . During the course of late 1939 and early 1940 , the Soviet Union issued a series of ultimatums to the Baltic governments that eventually led to the illegal annexation of the states . ( At about the same time , the Soviet Union was exerting similar pressure on Finland . ) About 30 @,@ 000 Soviet troops entered the Baltic states during June 1940 , followed by arrests of their leaders and citizens . 
 Elections to " People 's Assemblies " were held in all three states in mid @-@ July ; the Soviet @-@ sponsored slates received between 92 @.@ 2 % and 99 @.@ 2 % of the vote . During June , John Cooper Wiley of the State Department sent coded telegrams to Washington reporting developments in the Baltics , and these reports influenced Welles . The U.S. responded with a July 15 amendment to Executive Order <unk> that froze the assets of the Baltic states , thereby grouping them with German @-@ occupied countries , and by issuing the condemnatory Welles declaration . 
 = = Formulation = = 
 The Welles Declaration was written by Loy W. Henderson in consultation with Welles and Roosevelt . Welles would go on to participate in the creation of the Atlantic Charter , which stated that territorial adjustments should be made in accordance with the wishes of the peoples concerned . He increasingly served as acting Secretary of State during Cordell Hull 's illnesses . Henderson , then the State Department 's Director of the Office of European Affairs , was married to a Latvian woman . He had opened an American Red Cross office in Kaunas , Lithuania after World War I and served in the Eastern European Division of the State Department for 18 years . 
 In a conversation on the morning of July 23 , Welles asked Henderson to prepare a press release " expressing sympathy for the people of the Baltic States and condemnation of the Soviet action . " After reviewing the statement 's initial draft , Welles emphatically expressed his opinion that it was not strong enough . In the presence of Henderson , Welles called Roosevelt and read the draft to him . Roosevelt and Welles agreed that it needed strengthening . Welles then reformulated several sentences and added others which apparently had been suggested by the President . According to Henderson , " President Roosevelt was indignant at the manner in which the Soviet Union annexed the Baltic States and personally approved the condemnatory statement issued by Under Secretary Welles on the subject . " The declaration was made public , and telegraphed to the American Embassy in Moscow , later in the day . 
 = = Text of declaration = = 
 The statement read : 
 During these past few days the devious processes <unk> the political independence and territorial integrity of the three small Baltic Republics – Estonia , Latvia , and Lithuania – were to be deliberately annihilated by one of their more powerful neighbors , have been rapidly drawing to their conclusion . 
 From the day when the peoples of those Republics first gained their independent and democratic form of government the people of the United States have watched their admirable progress in self @-@ government with deep and sympathetic interest . 
 The policy of this Government is universally known . The people of the United States are opposed to predatory activities no matter whether they are carried on by the use of force or by the threat of force . They are likewise opposed to any form of intervention on the part of one state , however powerful , in the domestic concerns of any other sovereign state , however weak . 
 These principles constitute the very foundations upon which the existing relationship between the twenty @-@ one sovereign republics of the New World rests . 
 The United States will continue to stand by these principles , because of the conviction of the American people that unless the doctrine in which these principles are inherent once again governs the relations between nations , the rule of reason , of justice and of law – in other words , the basis of modern civilization itself – cannot be preserved . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Impact during World War II = = = 
 Welles also announced that the U.S. government would continue to recognize the foreign ministers of the Baltic countries as the envoys of sovereign governments . At the same time , the Department of State instructed U.S. representatives to withdraw from the Baltic states for " consultations " . In 1940 The New York Times described the Welles Declaration as " one of the most exceptional diplomatic documents issued by the Department of State in many years . " 
 The Declaration was a source of contention during the subsequent alliance between the U.S. , Great Britain , and the USSR , but Welles persistently defended it . In a discussion with the media he asserted that the USSR had maneuvered to give " an odor of legality to acts of aggression for purposes of the record " . In a memorandum describing his conversations with British Ambassador Lord Halifax in 1942 , Welles stated that he would have preferred to characterize the plebiscites supporting the annexations as " faked " . In April 1942 he wrote that the annexation was " ... not only indefensible from every moral standpoint , but likewise extraordinarily stupid , " interpreting any concession in the Baltic issue as a precedent that would lead to further border struggles in eastern Poland and elsewhere . 
 As the war intensified , Roosevelt accepted the need for Soviet assistance and was reluctant to address postwar territorial conflicts . During the 1943 Tehran Conference , he " jokingly " assured Stalin that when Soviet forces reoccupied Baltic countries , " he did not intend to go to war with the Soviet Union on this point . " But , he explained , " the question of referendum and the right of self @-@ determination " would constitute a matter of great importance for the U.S. Despite his work with Soviet representatives in the early 1940s to forward the alliance , Welles saw Roosevelt 's and Churchill 's lack of commitment as dangerous . 
 = = = Postwar impact = = = 
 The Welles Declaration linked U.S. policy towards the Baltic states with the Stimson Doctrine , which did not recognize Japanese , German and Italian occupations during the 1930s . It broke with Wilsonian policies that had supported a strong Russian presence as a counterweight to German power . During the Cold War , the U.S. used the Baltic issue as a point of leverage in U.S.-Soviet relations . 
 Sir Hersch Lauterpacht , a judge of international law , described the basis of the non @-@ recognition doctrine as being founded on the principles of ex injuria jus non <unk> : 
 This construction of non @-@ recognition is based on the view that acts contrary to international law are invalid and cannot become a source of legal rights for the wrongdoer . That view applies to international law one of ' the general principles of law recognized by civilized nation . ' The principle ex injuria jus non <unk> is one of the fundamental maxims of jurisprudence . An illegality cannot , as a rule , become a source of legal right to the wrongdoer . 
 Like the Stimson Doctrine , Welles ' declaration was largely symbolic in nature , although it offered some material benefits in conjunction with Executive Order <unk> . It enabled the diplomatic representatives of the Baltic states in various other countries to fund their operations and protected the ownership of ships flying Baltic flags . By establishing a non @-@ recognition policy , it allowed some 120 @,@ 000 postwar displaced persons from the Baltic states to avoid repatriation to the Soviet Union and advocate independence from abroad . 
 The U.S. position that the Baltic states had been forcibly annexed would remain its official stance for the following 51 years . Subsequent U.S. presidents and Congressional resolutions reaffirmed the substance of the Declaration . President Dwight D. Eisenhower asserted the right of the Baltic states to independence in an address to the United States Congress on January 6 , 1957 . After confirming the Helsinki Final Act in July 1975 , the United States House of Representatives passed a resolution that the Final Act would not affect the continuity of U.S. recognition of the sovereignty of Baltic states . 
 On July 26 , 1983 , on the 61st anniversary of de jure recognition of the three Baltic countries by the U.S. in 1922 , President Ronald Reagan re @-@ declared the United States ' recognition of the independence of Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania . The declaration was read in the United Nations as well . Throughout the 51 years that followed the events of 1940 , all U.S. official maps and publications that mentioned the Baltic states included a statement of U.S. non @-@ recognition of Soviet occupation . 
 The independence movements in the states during the 1980s and 1990 succeeded and the United Nations recognized all three in 1991 . The states went on to become members of the European Union and NATO . Their development since independence is generally regarded as one of the most successful post @-@ Soviet stories . 
 When commenting on the Declaration 's seventieth anniversary , U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton described it as " a tribute to each of our countries ’ commitment to the ideals of freedom and democracy . " On July 23 , 2010 a commemorative plaque inscribed with its text in English and Lithuanian was formally dedicated in Vilnius , the capital of Lithuania . 
 = Mycena sanguinolenta = 
 Mycena sanguinolenta , commonly known as the bleeding bonnet , the smaller bleeding Mycena , or the terrestrial bleeding Mycena , is a species of mushroom in the Mycenaceae family . It is a common and widely distributed species , and has been found in North America , Europe , Australia , and Asia . The fungus produces reddish @-@ brown to reddish @-@ purple fruit bodies with conic to bell @-@ shaped caps up to 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) wide held by slender stipes up to 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) high . When fresh , the fruit bodies will " bleed " a dark reddish @-@ purple sap . The similar Mycena haematopus is larger , and grows on decaying wood , usually in clumps . M. sanguinolenta contains alkaloid pigments that are unique to the species , may produce an antifungal compound , and is bioluminescent . The edibility of the mushroom has not been determined . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 First called Agaricus sanguinolentus by Johannes Baptista von Albertini , the species was transferred to the genus Mycena in 1871 by German Paul Kummer , when he raised many of Fries ' " tribes " to the rank of genus . The specific epithet is derived from the Latin word sanguinolentus and means " bloody " . It is commonly known as the " bleeding bonnet " the " smaller bleeding Mycena " , or the " terrestrial bleeding Mycena " . 
 The fungus is classified in the section Lactipedes along with other latex @-@ producing species . A molecular phylogenetic analysis of several dozen European Mycena species suggests that M. sanguinolenta is closely related to M. galopus . Other <unk> related species include M. galericulata and M. haematopus . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of M. sanguinolenta is either convex or conic when young , with its margin pressed against the stipe . As it expands , it becomes broadly convex or bell @-@ shaped , ultimately reaching a diameter of 3 – 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 6 in ) . The surface is initially covered with a dense whitish @-@ grayish coating or powder that is produced by delicate microscopic cells , but these cells soon collapse and disappear , leaving the surface naked and smooth . The surface is moist with an opaque margin that soon developing furrows . The cap color is variable but always some shade of bright or dull reddish @-@ brown with a dull grayish @-@ brown margin . The flesh is thin , not very fragile , sordid reddish , and exudes a reddish latex when cut . The odor and taste are not distinctive . 
 The gills are adnate or slightly toothed , and well @-@ spaced . They are narrow to moderately broad , sordid reddish to grayish , with even edges that are dark reddish @-@ brown . The stipe is 2 – 6 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) long , 1 – 1 @.@ 5 mm thick , equal in width throughout , and fragile . The base of the stipe is covered with coarse , stiff white hairs , while the remainder is covered with a drab powder that soon sloughs off to leave the stipe polished , and more or less the same color as the cap . It also exudes a bright or dull @-@ red juice when cut or broken . The edibility of the mushroom is unknown — but it is considered too insubstantial to be of culinary interest . 
 The spores are 8 – 10 by 4 – 5 μm , roughly ellipsoid , and only weakly amyloid . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) four @-@ spored ( occasionally two- or three @-@ spored ) . The pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the face of a gill ) are rare to scattered or sometimes quite abundant , narrowly to broadly ventricose , measuring 36 – 54 by 8 – 13 μm . They are filled with a sordid @-@ reddish substance . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) are similar to the pleurocystidia or shorter and more obese , and very abundant . The flesh if the gill is made of broad hyphae the cells of which are often <unk> ( covered with vesicles ) in age , and stain pale reddish @-@ brown in iodine . The flesh of the cap is covered with a thin pellicle , and the hypoderm ( the layer of cells immediately underneath the pellicle ) is moderately well @-@ differentiated . The remainder of the cap flesh is floccose and filamentous , and all except the pellicle stain pale vinaceous @-@ brown in iodine . <unk> ( latex @-@ producing ) hyphae are abundant . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The other " bleeding Mycena " ( M. haematopus ) is readily distinguished from M. sanguinolenta by its larger size , different color , growth on rotting wood , and presence of a sterile band of tissue on the margin of the cap . Further , M. sanguinolenta consistently has red @-@ edged gills , while the gill edges of M. haematopus are more variable . The similarly named M. <unk> has red to orange juice , is slightly yellower , and does not have pleurocystidia . M. <unk> has a similar furrowed cap , but also has a tough stipe and does not ooze liquid when injured . Mycena specialist Alexander H. Smith has noted a " striking " resemblance to M. <unk> , but this species has different colors ( pale vinaceous brown or sordid brown when faded ) , produces <unk> latex , and does not have differently @-@ colored gill edges . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Mycena sanguinolenta is common and widely distributed . It has been found from Maine to Washington and south to North Carolina and California in the United States , and from Nova Scotia to British Columbia in Canada . In Jamaica , it has been collected at an elevation of 1 @,@ 800 m ( 5 @,@ 900 ft ) . The distribution includes Europe ( Britain , Germany , The Netherlands , Norway , Romania and Sweden ) and Australia . In Asia , it has been collected from the alpine zone of the Changbai Mountains in Jilin Province , China , and from the provinces of Ōmi and Yamashiro in Japan . 
 The fruit bodies grow in groups on leaf mold , moss beds , or needle carpets during the spring and fall . It is common in forests of fir and beech , and prefers to grow in soil of high acidity . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 The fruit bodies of Mycena sanguinolenta contain the blue alkaloid pigments , sanguinones A and B , unique to this species . It also has the red @-@ colored alkaloid <unk> . The sanguinones are structurally related to <unk> A , made by M. rosea , and the <unk> , a series of compounds produced by marine sponges . Although the function of the sanguinones is not known , it has been suggested that they may have " an ecological role ... beyond their contribution to the color of the fruiting bodies , ... since predators rarely feed on fruiting bodies " . When grown in pure culture in the laboratory , the fungus produces the antifungal compound <unk> @-@ D. M. sanguinolenta is one of over 30 Mycena species that is bioluminous . 
 = Eugene Kaspersky = 
 Eugene Kaspersky ( born Yevgeny <unk> Kaspersky ) is a Russian cybersecurity expert and the CEO of Kaspersky Lab , an IT security company with 3 @,@ 000 employees . He cofounded Kaspersky Lab in 1997 and helped identify instances of government @-@ sponsored cyberwarfare as the head of research . He has been an advocate for an international treaty prohibiting cyberwarfare . There is a debate about whether Kaspersky 's views and security research show favoritism towards Russian political interests . 
 Kaspersky was born in 1965 in Novorossiysk , Russia . He graduated from the Institute of Cryptography , Telecommunications and Computer Science in 1987 with a degree in mathematical engineering and computer technology . His interest in IT security began when his work computer was infected with the Cascade virus in 1989 and he developed a program to remove it . Kaspersky helped grow Kaspersky Lab through security research and salesmanship . He became the CEO in 2007 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Eugene Kaspersky was born on 4 October 1965 in Novorossiysk , Russia . He grew up near Moscow , where he moved at age nine . His father was an engineer and his mother a historical archivist . As a child he developed an early interest in math and technology . He spent his free time reading math books and won second place in a math competition at age 14 . When he was fourteen , Eugene began attending A.N. Kolmogorov boarding school , which is run by Moscow University and specializes in math . He was also a member of the youth division of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union . 
 At the age of 16 , Kaspersky entered a five @-@ year program with the Institute of Cryptography , Telecommunications and Computer Science , which was sponsored by the Russian military and KGB . At @-@ the @-@ time , the most prestigious schools in Russia for mathematicians were KGB sponsored . He graduated in 1987 with a degree in mathematical engineering and computer technology . After graduating college , Kaspersky served the Russian military as a software engineer . He met his first wife Natalya Kaspersky at <unk> , a KGB vacation resort , in 1987 . 
 = = Kaspersky Lab = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Eugene Kaspersky 's interest in IT security began in 1989 , when his PC was infected by the Cascade virus , while working for the Ministry of Defense . He studied how the virus worked and developed a program to remove it . Afterwards he continually found new viruses and developed software to remove them , as a hobby . Early on Kaspersky 's anti @-@ virus software had just 40 virus definitions and was distributed mostly to friends . 
 In 1991 , Kaspersky was granted an early release from his military service and left the defense ministry to take a job at the Information Technology Center of a private company KAMI , in order to work on his antivirus product full @-@ time . There , he and his colleagues improved the software and released it as a product called Antiviral Toolkit Pro in 1992 . At first the software was purchased by about ten clients per month . It earned about $ 100 per month , mostly from companies in Ukraine and Russia . Kaspersky 's then @-@ future wife Natalya Kaspersky became his coworker at KAMI . 
 In 1994 , Hamburg University in Germany gave Kaspersky 's software first place in a competitive analysis of antivirus software . This led to more business for Kaspersky from European and American companies . Kaspersky Lab was founded three years later by Kaspersky , his wife and Kaspersky 's friend . Natalya , who pushed Eugene to start the company , was the CEO , while Eugene was the head of research . The following year , the <unk> virus ( AKA the Chernobyl virus ) created a boon for Kaspersky 's anti @-@ virus products , which Kaspersky said was the only software at @-@ the @-@ time that could cleanse the virus . According to Wired , " their software was advanced for the time . " For example , it was the first software to monitor viruses in an isolated quarantine . 
 Kaspersky 's company grew quickly in the late 1990s . From 1998 to 2000 , its annual revenue grew 280 percent and by 2000 almost sixty percent of revenues were international . By 2000 , it had a staff of 65 people , up from 13 shortly after its foundation . The antivirus product was renamed to Kaspersky <unk> in 2000 , after an American company started using the product 's original name , which wasn 't trademarked . 
 = = = Threat discoveries = = = 
 As the head of research , Kaspersky authored papers on viruses and went to conferences to promote the software . He was often quoted in the technology press as an antivirus expert . He helped establish the company 's Global Research and Expert Analysis Team ( <unk> ) , which helps corporations and governments investigate IT security threats . Initially he told his team not to discuss cyber @-@ terrorism publicly , to avoid giving governments ideas on how to sabotage their political opponents . After Die Hard 4 was released , he said the idea was now public . He hired the researcher that identified the Stuxnet worm , which is believed to be the first instance of state @-@ sponsored <unk> . Afterwards , the company exposed the Flame virus at the request of the International Telecommunication Union . The virus was believed to have been used for cyber @-@ espionage in Middle @-@ Eastern countries . 
 Kaspersky Lab developed a reputation for discovering cybersecurity threats . In 2015 Kaspersky and Kaspersky Lab discovered a group of hackers known as <unk> that were stealing money from banks . They also exposed Equation Group , which developed advanced spyware for monitoring desktop activity and was believed to be affiliated with National Security Agency in the U.S. According to The Economist , it was these discoveries , Kaspersky 's " relentless salesmanship " and the company 's anti @-@ virus product that made Kaspersky Lab uncommon as an internationally recognized Russian company . 
 = = = CEO = = = 
 Kaspersky became CEO of Kaspersky Lab in 2007 . According to a 2008 article in USA Today , he traveled to 20 to 30 countries per year promoting Kaspersky Lab products . In early 2009 , <unk> said his personality contributed to the company 's growth from " relative obscurity to now nipping at the heels of its larger , better @-@ known rivals . " At the time , Kaspersky Lab was the fourth largest endpoint security company . It introduced new products for the enterprise market and expanded its channel programs . 
 In 2011 , Kaspersky made a decision against taking the company public , saying it would make decision @-@ making slow and prevent long @-@ term R & D investments . This led to a series of high @-@ level departures from the company , including his ex @-@ wife and co @-@ founder . Another series of departures occurred in 2014 due to disagreements over how to run the company . 
 Kaspersky Lab has defended itself against allegedly frivolous patent claims more aggressively than most IT companies . In 2012 , it was the only one of 35 firms named in a suit by patent troll Information Protection and Authentication ( <unk> ) to take the case to court , rather than pay a fee . The case was ruled in Kaspersky 's favor . Also in 2012 , another company , <unk> , sued Kaspersky and 54 other companies for patent infringement , and that case also resulted in the claimant dropping the case against Kaspersky . According to an article in <unk> , the company 's aversion to settling these claims is most likely because Eugene " just hates " patent trolls . In his blog he called them " parasites " and " IT racketeers . " Kaspersky himself is the co @-@ author of several patents , including one for a constraint @-@ and @-@ attribute @-@ based security system for controlling software component interaction . 
 As of 2015 , Kaspersky Lab now employs more than 2 @,@ 800 people . As of 2012 , Kaspersky has been working on developing software to protect critical infrastructure , like power plants , from cyberwarfare . He throws a New Years party each year with about 1 @,@ 500 guests and hosts Kaspersky conferences in exotic locations . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = Alleged affiliations with Russia = = = 
 Eugene Kaspersky 's prior work for the Russian military and his education at a KGB @-@ sponsored technical college has led to controversy about whether he uses his position to advance Russian government interests and intelligence efforts . According to Kaspersky , allegations of dubious connections with Russian agencies began after he got his first clients in America . He spends much of his working life trying to get governments and organizations to trust him and his software in spite of the allegations . 
 Wired said Kaspersky 's critics accuse him of using the company to spy on users for Russian intelligence . Russian telecommunications companies for example are required by federal law in Russia to cooperate with the government 's military and spy operations if asked . Kaspersky said his company has never been asked to tamper with its software for espionage and called the accusations " cold war paranoia . " According to Wired , Kaspersky staffers argue " not unconvincingly " that spying on users would hurt its business and its relationship with the Russian FSB is limited . According to Gartner , " There 's no evidence that they have any back doors in their software or any ties to the Russian mafia or state ... but there is still a concern that you can ’ t operate in Russia without being controlled by the ruling party . ” Computing mocked some of the more extreme accusations of espionage , but said it would be unlikely for a Russian business to grow to the size of Kaspersky Lab without relationships within the Russian government . NPR journalists also said it was unlikely Kaspersky was using its software for espionage , because it would be risky for the company 's business , but said Kaspersky showed an unusual disinterest in Russia @-@ based cybercrime . 
 Bloomberg and The New York Times also said Kaspersky was less aggressive about identifying cyberattacks originating from Russia than from other countries , allegations Kaspersky refutes . For example , he allegedly ignored or downplayed a series of denial @-@ of @-@ service attacks in December 2011 that were made to disrupt online discussion criticizing Russian politicians . Kaspersky also allegedly ignored a Russian @-@ based spyware called <unk> , which is believed to have been used by Russia against NATO and Eastern Europe . On the other hand , Kaspersky also published information on the Russia @-@ based Crouching Yeti cyberattacks two days before Bloomberg accused him of ignoring Russia @-@ based cyberattacks . At the time , the company had published eleven reports on malicious Russian programs . Competitor FireEye said it is awkward even in the U.S. to investigate <unk> performed by your own government . 
 A March 2015 article in Bloomberg said an increasing number of executive staff at Kaspersky Lab previously worked for Russian military and intelligence agencies . According to News & Observer , Kaspersky " published a mammoth response , tearing down Bloomberg 's accusations and accusing them of throwing facts out the window for the sake of a juicy anti @-@ Russian narrative . " Competitor FireEye said many U.S. IT companies also have executives that formerly worked for government military and intelligence agencies . NPR reported that Kaspersky has been doing an increasing amount of business with Russian cybersecurity agencies to catch cybercriminals . Kaspersky confirms that Russian agencies are among its government customers . 
 = = = Alleged anti @-@ virus spoofing = = = 
 In August 2015 , two former Kaspersky employees alleged that the company introduced modified files into the <unk> community anti @-@ virus database to trick its rivals ' programs into triggering false positives . The result of the false positives was that important uninfected files would be disabled or deleted . The allegations also claimed that Kaspersky himself had ordered some of the actions , specifically targeting competitors , including Chinese companies he felt were copying his software . Emails dated 2009 , two years after Kaspersky became CEO , were allegedly leaked to Reuters , one of which allegedly had Kaspersky threatening to go after competitors by " rubbing them out in the outhouse , " using a phrase popularized by Vladimir Putin . The company denied the allegations . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Eugene Kaspersky lives in Moscow , Russia with his wife and kids . He and his first wife were divorced in 1998 . On 21 April 2011 , his son , Ivan , then 20 , was kidnapped for a $ 4 @.@ 4 million ransom . Kaspersky worked with a friend at the FSB and Russian police to trace the <unk> 's phone call . They set up a trap for the <unk> , where they rescued his son and arrested many of the kidnappers . The incident had an influence on Kaspersky 's sense of personal security . He now travels with a bodyguard and security detail . 
 Kaspersky is one of the richest people in Russia . His net worth is about $ 1 billion . According to Wired , he has " cultivated the image of a wild man with cash to burn . " He has an interest in racing and drives his sports cars on race tracks as a hobby . He sponsors various " quirky or scientific projects " such as Ferrari Formula One racing team . Kaspersky himself owns a BMW M3 . Kaspersky describes himself as an " adrenaline junky . " He has gone hiking on volcanoes in Russia and reserved a trip to space on the Virgin Galactic . He travels often and writes about his experiences in his personal blog . He also enjoys photography as a hobby . 
 Kaspersky is known for shunning formal attire , typically dressing in jeans and a shirt . He supports university projects and competitions in the IT security field . 
 = = Views = = 
 Eugene Kaspersky is influential among politicians and security experts . He has been active in promoting warnings about the possibility of cyberwarfare that targets critical infrastructure . He regularly speaks at conferences advocating for an international cyberwarfare treaty , that would ban government @-@ sponsored cyberattacks . 
 After the Stuxnet attack , Kaspersky proposed that the internet needed more regulation and policing . One idea was to have some parts of the internet anonymous , while more secure areas require user identification . He argued that anonymity mostly benefited cybercriminals and hackers . For example , accessing a network operated by a nuclear power plant could require a verified identity through a digital passport . 
 Kaspersky said anonymity on the internet could be protected by using a proxy , whereby a responsible international body maintains a record of which online identities correspond to which real @-@ world ones . For example , a browser 's identity would be revealed in cases of malicious activity . Some security experts believe that a centralized database of the real @-@ world identities of internet users would be " a privacy disaster and a highly attractive target for thieves . " The Age said it " sounds a little too close for comfort to a Big Brother scenario " and Wired said Kaspersky 's views were highly aligned with the Russian government 's agenda . 
 Many organizations have been considering reducing privacy to improve security as a result of Kaspersky 's arguments . In a more recent Slashdot interview Kaspersky said the internet should be divided into three zones : a red zone for voting , online banking , and other " critical transactions " that would require an internet ID ; a grey zone that may only require verification of age to access the site , but not identity ; and a green zone for blogs , news , and " everything related to your freedom of speech . " He proposes " special proxies " for red zone websites that allow disclosure of the user 's identity only in the case of suspected malfeasance . 
 = Babrak Karmal = 
 Babrak Karmal ( Persian : <unk> <unk> , born Sultan Hussein ; 6 January 1929 – 1 or 3 December 1996 ) was an Afghan politician who was installed as president of Afghanistan by the USSR when they invaded in 1979 . Karmal was born in <unk> and educated at Kabul University . When the People 's Democratic Party of Afghanistan ( PDPA ) was formed , Karmal became one of its leading members , having been introduced to Marxism by Mir Akbar Khyber during his imprisonment for activities deemed too radical by the government . He eventually became the leader of the Parcham faction . When the PDPA split in 1967 , the Parcham @-@ faction established a Parcham PDPA , while their ideological nemesis , the <unk> , established a Khalqist PDPA . Under Karmal 's leadership , the Parchamite PDPA participated in Mohammad Daoud Khan 's rise to power , and his subsequent regime . While relations were good at the beginning , Daoud began a major purge of leftist influence in the mid @-@ 1970s . This in turn led to the reformation of the PDPA in 1977 . The PDPA took power in the 1978 Saur Revolution . 
 Karmal was appointed Deputy Chairman of the Revolutionary Council , synonymous with vice head of state , in the communist government . The Parchamite faction found itself under significant pressure by the Khalqists soon after taking power . In June 1978 , a PDPA Central Committee meeting voted in favor of giving the Khalqist faction exclusive control over PDPA policy . This decision was followed by a failed Parchamite coup , after which Hafizullah Amin , a Khalqist , initiated a purge against the Parchamites . Karmal survived this purge but was exiled to Prague . Karmal remained in exile until December 1979 , when the Soviet Union intervened in Afghanistan ( with the consent of the Afghan government ) to stabilize the country . 
 Karmal was promoted to Chairman of the Revolutionary Council and Chairman of the Council of Ministers on 27 December 1979 . He remained in office until 1981 , when he was succeeded by Sultan Ali Keshtmand . Throughout his term , Karmal worked to establish a support base for the PDPA by introducing several reforms . Among these were the Fundamental Principles of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan , introducing a general amnesty for those people imprisoned during Nur Mohammad Taraki 's and Amin 's rule . He also replaced the Khalqist flag with a more traditional one . These policies failed to increase the PDPA 's legitimacy in the eyes of the Afghan people . 
 These policy failures , and the stalemate that ensued after the Soviet intervention , led the Soviet leadership to become highly critical of Karmal 's leadership . Under Mikhail Gorbachev , the Soviet Union deposed Karmal and replaced him with Mohammad Najibullah . Following his loss of power , he was again exiled , this time to Moscow . He was allowed to return to Afghanistan in 1991 by the Najibullah government . Back in Afghanistan he became an associate of Abdul Rashid Dostum , and helped remove the Najibullah government from power . Not long after , in 1996 , Karmal died from liver cancer . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Karmal was born Sultan Hussein on 6 January 1929 , was the son of Muhammad Hussein Hashem , a Major General in the Afghan Army and former governor of the province of Paktia , and was the second of five siblings . His family was one of the wealthier families in Kabul . His ethnic background is disputed , some claim that he was Tajik who represented himself as a Ghilzai Pashtun but others claim that he descended from Hindu ancestors of Kashmir . In 1986 , Karmal announced that he , and his brother Mahmud <unk> , were Pashtun because their mother came from the <unk> branch of the Pashtuns . However , this was controversial , considering that lineage in Afghanistan is supposed to be traced through the father , not the mother . The accusation that he was of Indian Muslim ancestry comes from the fact that his birthname , Sultan Hussein , is a common Indian Muslim name . In addition , Karmal 's own father denied his own ethnicity ; Karmal 's father was a Tajik . To further confuse the matter , Karmal spoke Dari ( Persian ) and not Pashto . 
 Karmal was born in <unk> , a village close to Kabul . He attended <unk> High School , a German @-@ speaking school , and graduated from it in 1948 , and applied to enter the Faculty of Law and Political Science of Kabul University . Karmal 's application was turned down because of his student union activities . He studied at the College of Law and Political Science at Kabul University from 1951 to 1953 . In 1953 Karmal was arrested because of his student union activities , but was released three years later in 1956 in an amnesty by Muhammad Daoud Khan . Shortly after , in 1957 , Karmal found work as an English and German translator , before quitting and leaving for military training . Karmal graduated from the College of Law and Political Science in 1960 , and in 1961 , he found work as an employee in the Compilation and Translation Department of the Ministry of Education . From 1961 to 1963 he worked in the Ministry of Planning . When his mother died , Karmal left with his maternal aunt to live somewhere else . His father disowned him because of his leftist views . Karmal was involved in much debauchery , which was controversial in the mostly conservative Afghan society . 
 = = = Communist politics = = = 
 Imprisoned from 1953 to 1956 , Karmal befriended fellow inmate Mir Akbar Khyber , who introduced Karmal to Marxism . Karmal changed his name from Sultan Hussein to Babrak Karmal , which means " Comrade of the Workers ' " in Pashtun , to disassociate himself from his bourgeoisie background . When he was released from prison , he continued his activities in the student union , and began to promote Marxism . Karmal spent the rest of the 1950s and the early 1960s becoming involved with Marxist organizations , of which there were at least four in Afghanistan at the time ; two of the four were established by Karmal . When the 1964 Afghan Provisional Constitution , which legalised the establishment of new political entities , was introduced several prominent Marxists agreed to establish a communist political party . The People 's Democratic Party of Afghanistan ( PDPA , the Communist Party ) was established in January 1965 in Nur Muhammad Taraki 's home . Factionalism within the PDPA quickly became a problem ; the party split into the Khalq led by Taraki alongside Hafizullah Amin , and the Parcham led by Karmal . 
 During the 1965 parliamentary election Karmal was one of four PDPA members elected to the lower house of parliament ; the three others were Anahita Ratebzad , Nur Ahmed Nur and <unk> Haq <unk> . No Khalqists were elected ; however , Amin was 50 votes short of being elected . The Parchamite victory may be explained by the simple fact that Karmal could contribute financially to the PDPA electoral campaign . Karmal became a leading figure within the student movement in the 1960s , electing Mohammad Hashim <unk> as Prime Minister after a student demonstration ( called for by Karmal ) concluded with three deaths under the former leadership . 
 In 1967 , the PDPA unofficially split into two formal parties , one Khalqist and one <unk> . The dissolution of the PDPA was initiated by the closing down of the Khalqist newspaper , Khalq . Karmal criticised the Khalq for being too communist , and believed that its leadership should have hidden its Marxist orientation instead of promoting it . According to the official version of events , the majority of the PDPA Central Committee rejected Karmal 's criticism . The vote was a close one , and it is reported that Taraki expanded the Central Committee to win the vote ; this plan resulted in eight of the new members becoming politically unaligned with and one switching to the Parchamite side . Karmal and half the PDPA Central Committee left the PDPA to establish a Parchamite @-@ led PDPA . Officially the split was caused by ideological differences , but the party may have divided between the different leadership styles and plans of Taraki versus Karmal . Taraki wanted to model the party after Leninist norms while Karmal wanted to establish a democratic front . Other differences were socioeconomic . The majority of Khalqists came from rural areas ; hence they were poorer , and were of Pashtun origin . The Parchamites were urban , richer , and spoke Dari more often than not . The Khalqists accused the Parchamites of having a connection with the monarchy , and because of it , referred to the Parchamite PDPA as the " Royal Communist Party " . Both Karmal and Amin retained their seats in the lower house of parliament in the 1969 parliamentary election . 
 = = = The Daoud era = = = 
 Mohammed Daoud Khan , in collaboration with the Parchamite PDPA and radical military officers , overthrew the monarchy and instituted the Afghan Republic in 1973 . After Daoud 's seizure of power , an American embassy cable stated that the new government had established a Soviet @-@ style Central Committee , in which Karmal and Mir Akbar Khyber were given leading positions . Most ministries were given to Parchamites ; Hassan Sharq became Deputy Prime Minister , Major Faiz Mohammad became Minister of Internal Affairs and <unk> <unk> became Minister of Education . The Parchamites took control over the ministries of finance , agriculture , communications and border affairs . The new government quickly suppressed the opposition , and secured their power base . At first , the National Front government between Daoud and the Parchamites seemed to work . By 1975 , Daoud had strengthened his position by enhancing the executive , legislative and judicial powers of the Presidency . To the dismay of the Parchamites , all parties other than the National Revolutionary Party ( NRP , established by Daoud ) were made illegal . 
 Shortly after the ban on opposition to the NRP , Daoud began a massive purge of Parchamites in government . Mohammad lost his position as interior minister , Abdul Qadir was demoted , and Karmal was put under government surveillance . To mitigate Daoud 's suddenly anti @-@ communist directives , the Soviet Union reestablished the PDPA ; Taraki was elected its General Secretary and Karmal , Second Secretary . While the Saur Revolution ( literally the April Revolution ) was planned for August , the assassination of Khyber led to a chain of events which ended with the communists seizing power . Karmal , when taking power in 1979 , accused Amin of ordering the assassination of Khyber . 
 = = = Taraki – Amin rule = = = 
 Taraki was appointed Chairman of the Presidium of the Revolutionary Council and Chairman of the Council of Ministers , retaining his post as PDPA general secretary . Taraki initially formed a government which consisted of both Khalqists and Parchamites ; Karmal became Deputy Chairman of the Revolutionary Council , while Amin became Minister of Foreign Affairs and Deputy Chairman of the Council of <unk> Aslam Watanjar became Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers . The two Parchamites Abdul Qadir and Mohammad Rafi , became Minister of Defence and Minister of Public Works , respectively . The appointment of Amin , Karmal and Watanjar led to splits within the Council of Ministers : the Khalqists answered to Amin ; Karmal led the civilian Parchamites ; and the military officers ( who were Parchamites ) were answerable to Watanjar ( a Khalqist ) . The first conflict arose when the Khalqists wanted to give PDPA Central Committee membership to military officers who had participated in the Saur Revolution ; Karmal opposed such a move but was overruled . A PDPA Politburo meeting voted in favour of giving Central Committee membership to the officers . 
 On 27 June , three months after the Saur Revolution , Amin outmaneuvered the Parchamites at a Central Committee meeting , giving the Khalqists exclusive right over formulating and deciding policy . A purge against the Parchamites was initiated by Amin and supported by Taraki on 1 July 1979 . Karmal , fearing for his safety , went into hiding in one of his Soviet friends ' homes . Karmal tried to contact Alexander Puzanov , the Soviet ambassador to Afghanistan , to talk about the situation . Puzanov refused , and revealed Karmal 's location to Amin . It should be noted that the Soviets probably saved Karmal 's life by sending him to the Socialist Republic of Czechoslovakia . In exile , Karmal established a network with the remaining Parchamites in government . A coup to overthrow Amin was planned for 4 September 1979 . Its leading members in Afghanistan were Qadir and the Army Chief of Staff General Shahpur <unk> . The coup was planned for the Festival of Eid , in anticipation of relaxed military vigilance . The conspiracy failed when the Afghan ambassador to India told the Afghan leadership about the plan . Another purge was initiated , and Parchamite ambassadors were recalled . Few returned to Afghanistan ; Karmal and Mohammad Najibullah stayed in their respective countries . 
 Amin was informed of the Soviet decision to intervene in Afghanistan and was initially supportive , but was assassinated . Under the command of the Soviets , Karmal ascended to power . On 27 December 1979 Radio Kabul broadcast Karmal 's pre @-@ recorded speech to the Afghan people , saying : " Today the torture machine of Amin has been smashed , his accomplices – the primitive executioners , usurpers and murderers of tens of thousand of our fellow countrymen – fathers , mothers , sisters , brothers , sons and daughters , children and old people ... " Karmal was not in Kabul when the speech was broadcast ; he was in Bagram , protected by the KGB . 
 That evening Yuri Andropov , the Chairman of the KGB , congratulated Karmal on his rise to the Chairmanship of the Presidium of the Revolutionary Council , some time before Karmal received an official appointment . Karmal returned to Kabul on 28 December . He travelled alongside a Soviet military column . For the next few days Karmal lived in a villa on the outskirts of Kabul under the protection of the KGB . On 1 January 1980 Leonid Brezhnev , the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union , and Alexei Kosygin , the Soviet Chairman of the Council of Ministers , congratulated Karmal on his " election " as leader . 
 = = Presidency = = 
 = = = Domestic policies = = = 
 = = = = The " Fundamental Principles " and amnesty = = = = 
 When he came to power , Karmal promised an end to executions , the establishment of democratic institutions and free elections , the creation of a constitution , and legalization of alternative political parties . Prisoners incarcerated under the two previous governments would be freed in a general amnesty . He promised the creation of a coalition government which would not espouse socialism . At the same time , he told the Afghan people that he had negotiated with the Soviet Union to give economic , military and political assistance . The mistrust most Afghans felt towards the government was a problem for Karmal . Many still remembered he had said he would protect private capital in 1978 — a promise later proven to be a lie . 
 Karmal 's three most important promises were the general amnesty of prisoners , the promulgation of the Fundamental Principles of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan and the adoption of a new flag containing the traditional black , red and green ( the flag of Taraki and Amin was red ) . His government granted concessions to religious leaders and the restoration of confiscated property . Some property , which was confiscated during earlier land reforms , was also partially restored . All these measures , with the exception of the general amnesty of prisoners , were introduced gradually . Of 2 @,@ 700 prisoners , 2 @,@ 600 were released from prison ; 600 of these were Parchamites . The general amnesty was greatly publicized by the government . While the event was hailed with enthusiasm by some , many others greeted the event with disdain , since their loved ones or associates had died during earlier purges . Amin had planned to introduce a general amnesty on 1 January 1980 , to coincide with the PDPA 's sixteenth anniversary . 
 Work on the Fundamental Principles had started under Amin : it guaranteed democratic rights such as freedom of speech , the right to security and life , the right to peaceful association , the right to demonstrate and the right that " no one would be accused of crime but in accord with the provisions of law " and that the accused had the right to a fair trial . The Fundamental Principles envisaged a democratic state led by the PDPA , the only party then permitted by law . The Revolutionary Council , the organ of supreme power , would convene twice every year . The Revolutionary Council in turn elected a Presidium which would take decisions on behalf of the Revolutionary Council when it was not in session . The Presidium consisted mostly of PDPA Politburo members . The state would safeguard three kinds of property : state , cooperative and private property . The Fundamental Principles said that the state had the right to change the Afghan economy from an economy where man was exploited to an economy were man was free . Another clause stated that the state had the right to take " families , both parents and children , under its supervision . " While it looked democratic at the outset , the Fundamental Principles was based on contradictions . 
 The Fundamental Principles led to the establishment of two important state organs : the Special Revolutionary Court , a specialized court for crimes against national security and territorial integrity , and the Institute for Legal and Scientific Research and Legislative Affairs , the supreme legislative organ of state , This body could amend and draft laws , and introduce regulations and decrees on behalf of the government . The introduction of more Soviet @-@ style institutions led the Afghan people to distrust the communist government even more . 
 = = = = Separation of power : Khalq – Parcham = = = = 
 With Karmal 's ascension to power , Parchamites began to " settle old scores " . Revolutionary <unk> were created to arrest , sentence and execute people . Amin 's guard were the first victims of the terror which ensued . Those commanders who had stayed loyal to Amin were arrested , filling the prisons . The Soviets protested , and Karmal replied , " As long as you keep my hands bound and do not let me deal with the Khalq faction there will be no unity in the PDPA and the government cannot become strong ... They tortured and killed us . They still hate us ! They are the enemies of the party ... " Amin 's daughter , along with her baby , was imprisoned for twelve years , until Mohammad Najibullah , then leader of the PDPA , released her . When Karmal took power , leading posts in the Party and Government bureaucracy were taken over by Parchamites . The Khalq faction was removed from power , and only technocrats , opportunists and individuals which the Soviets trusted would be appointed to the higher echelons of government . Khalqists remained in control of the Ministry of Interior , but Parchamites were given control over KHAD and the secret police . The Parchamites and the Khalqists controlled an equal share of the military . Two out of Karmal 's three Council of Ministers deputy chairmen were Khalqists . Khalqists controlled the Ministry of Communications and the interior ministry . Parchamites , on the other hand , controlled the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Defence . In addition to the changes in government , the Parchamites held clear majority in the PDPA Central Committee . Only one <unk> , Saleh Mohammad <unk> , was a member of the PDPA Secretariat during Karmal 's rule . 
 Over 14 and 15 March 1982 the PDPA held a party conference at the Kabul Polytechnic Institute instead of a party congress , since a party congress would have given the Khalq faction a majority and could have led to a Khalqist takeover of the PDPA . The rules of holding a party conference were different , and the Parchamites had a three @-@ fifths majority . This infuriated several Khalqists ; the threat of expulsion did not lessen their anger . The conference was not successful , but it was portrayed as such by the official media . The conference broke up after one and a half days of a 3 @-@ day long program , because of the inter @-@ party struggle for power between the Khalqists and the Parchamites . A " program of action " was introduced , and party rules were given minor changes . As an explanation of the low party membership , the official media also made it seem hard to become a member of the party . 
 = = = = PDPA base = = = = 
 When Karmal took power , he began expanding the support base of the PDPA . Karmal tried to persuade certain groups , which had been referred to class enemies of the revolution during Taraki and Amin 's rule , to support the PDPA . Karmal appointed several non @-@ communists to top positions . Between March and May 1980 , 78 out of the 191 people appointed to government posts were not members of the PDPA . Karmal reintroduced the old Afghan custom of having an Islamic invocation every time the government issued a proclamation . In his first live speech to the Afghan people , Karmal called for the establishment of the National Fatherland Front ( NFF ) ; the NFF 's founding congress was held in June 1981 . Unfortunately for Karmal , his policies did not lead to a notable increase in support for his regime , and it did not help Karmal that most Afghans saw the Soviet intervention as an invasion . 
 By 1981 , the government gave up on political solutions to the conflict . At the fifth PDPA Central Committee plenum in June , Karmal resigned from his Council of Ministers chairmanship and was replaced by Sultan Ali Keshtmand , while Nur Ahmad Nur was given a bigger role in the Revolutionary Council . This was seen as " base broadening " . The previous weight given to non @-@ PDPA members in top positions ceased to be an important matter in the media by June 1981 . This was significant , considering that up to five members of the Revolutionary Council were non @-@ PDPA members . By the end of 1981 , the previous contenders , who had been heavily presented in the media , were all gone ; two were given ambassadorships , two ceased to be active in politics , and one continued as an advisor to the government . The other three changed sides , and began to work for the opposition . 
 The national policy of reconciliation continued : in January 1984 the land reform introduced by Taraki and Amin was drastically modified , the limits of landholdings were increased to win the support of middle class peasants , the literacy programme was continued , and concessions to women were made . In 1985 the Loya Jirga was reconvened . The 1985 Loya Jirga was followed by a tribal jirga in September . In 1986 Abdul Rahim <unk> , a non @-@ PDPA member , was elected to the NFF chairmanship . During the 1985 – 86 elections it was said that 60 percent of the elected officials were non @-@ PDPA members . By the end of Karmal 's rule , several non @-@ PDPA members had high @-@ level government positions . 
 = = = = Civil war and military = = = = 
 In March 1979 , the military budget was 6 @.@ 4 million US $ , which was 8 @.@ 3 percent of the government budget , but only 2 @.@ 2 of gross national product . After the Soviet intervention , the defence budget increased to 208 million US $ in 1980 , and 325 million US $ by 1981 . In 1982 it was reported that the government spent around 22 percent of total expenditure . 
 When the political solution failed ( see " PDPA base " section ) , the Afghan government and the Soviet military decided to solve the conflict militarily . The change from a political to a military solution did not come suddenly . It began in January 1981 , as Karmal doubled wages for military personnel , issued several promotions , and decorated one general and thirteen colonels . The draft age was lowered , the obligatory length of arms duty was extended and the age for reservists was increased to thirty @-@ five years of age . In June 1981 , Assadullah Sarwari lost his seat in the PDPA Politburo , replaced by Mohammad Aslam Watanjar , a former tank commander and Minister of Communications , Major General Mohammad Rafi was <unk> of Defence and Mohammad Najibullah appointed KHAD Chairman . 
 These measures were introduced due to the collapse of the army during the Soviet intervention . Before the invasion the army could field 100 @,@ 000 troops , after the invasion only 25 @,@ 000 . Desertions were pandemic , and the recruitment campaigns for young people often drove them to the opposition . To better organize the military , seven military zones were established , each with its own Defence Council . The Defence Councils were established at the national , provincial and district level to empower the local PDPA . It is estimated that the Afghan government spent as much as 40 percent of government revenue on defense . 
 = = = = Economy = = = = 
 During the civil war and the ensuing Soviet war in Afghanistan , most of the country 's infrastructure was destroyed . Normal patterns of economic activity were disrupted . The Gross national product ( GNP ) fell substantially during Karmal 's rule because of the conflict ; trade and transport was disrupted with loss of labor and capital . In 1981 the Afghan GDP stood at 154 @.@ 3 billion Afghan <unk> , a drop from 159 @.@ 7 billion in 1978 . GNP per capita decreased from 7 @,@ 370 in 1978 to 6 @,@ 852 in 1981 . The dominant form of economic activity was in the agricultural sector . Agriculture accounted for 63 percent of gross domestic product ( GDP ) in 1981 ; 56 percent of the labor force was working in agriculture in 1982 . Industry accounted for 21 percent of GDP in 1982 , and employed 10 percent of the labor force . All industrial enterprises were government @-@ owned . The service sector , the smallest of the three , accounted for 10 percent of GDP in 1981 , and employed an estimated one @-@ third of the labour force . The balance of payments , which had grown in the pre @-@ communist administration of Muhammad Daoud Khan , decreased , turning negative by 1982 at 70 @.@ 3 million $ US . The only economic activity which grew substantially during Karmal 's rule was export and import . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 Karmal observed in the spring of 1983 that without Soviet intervention , " It is unknown what the destiny of the Afghan Revolution would be ... We are realists and we clearly realize that in store for us yet lie trials and deprivations , losses and difficulties . " Two weeks before this statement Sultan Ali Keshtmand , the Chairman of the Council of Ministers , lamented the fact that half the schools and three @-@ quarters of communications had been destroyed since 1979 . The Soviet Union rejected several Western @-@ made peace plans , such as the Carrington Plan , since they did not take into consideration the PDPA government . Most Western peace plans had been made in collaboration with the Afghan opposition forces . At the 26th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union ( CPSU ) Leonid Brezhnev , the General Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee , stated ; 
 " We do not object to the questions connected with Afghanistan being discussed in conjunction with the question of security in the Persian Gulf . Naturally here on only the international aspects of the Afghan problem can be discussed , not internal Afghan affairs . The sovereignty of Afghanistan must be fully protected , as must its nonaligned status . " 
 The stance of the Pakistani government was clear , demanding complete Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan and the establishment of a non @-@ PDPA government . Karmal , summarizing his discussions with Iran and Pakistan , said " Iran and Pakistan have so far not opted for concrete and constructive positions . " During Karmal 's rule Afghan – Pakistani relations remained hostile ; the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan was the catalyst for the hostile relationship . The increasing numbers of Afghan refugees in Pakistan challenged the PDPA 's legitimacy to rule . 
 The Soviet Union threatened in 1985 that it would support the Baloch separatist movement in Pakistan if the Pakistani government continued to aid the mujahideen in Afghanistan . Karmal , problematically for the Soviets , did not want a Soviet withdrawal , and he hampered attempts to improve relations with Pakistan since the Pakistani government had refused to recognise the PDPA government . 
 = = = Fall from power and succession = = = 
 Mikhail Gorbachev , then General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union , said , " The main reason that there has been no national consolidation so far is that Comrade Karmal is hoping to continue sitting in Kabul with our help . " Karmal 's position became less secure when the Soviet leadership began blaming him for the failures in Afghanistan . Gorbachev , worried over the situation , told the Soviet Politburo " If we don 't change approaches [ to evacuate Afghanistan ] , we will be fighting there for another 20 or 30 years . " It is not clear when the Soviet leadership began to campaign for Karmal 's dismissal , but Andrei Gromyko discussed the possibility of Karmal 's resignation with Javier Pérez de Cuéllar , the Secretary @-@ General of the United Nations in 1982 . While it was Gorbachev who would dismiss Karmal , there may have been a consensus within the Soviet leadership in 1983 that Karmal should resign . Gorbachev 's own plan was to replace Karmal with Mohammad Najibullah , who had joined the PDPA at its creation . Najibullah was thought highly of by Yuri Andropov , Boris Ponomarev and Dmitriy Ustinov , and negotiations for his succession may have started in 1983 . Najibullah was not the Soviet leadership 's only choice for Karmal 's succession ; a GRU report noted that the majority of the PDPA leadership would support Assadullah Sarwari 's ascension to leadership . According to the GRU , Sarwari was a better candidate as he could balance between the Pashtuns , Tajiks and Uzbeks ; Najibullah was a Pashtun nationalist . Another viable candidate was Abdul Qadir , who had been a participant in the Saur Revolution . 
 Najibullah was appointed to the PDPA Secretariat in November 1985 . During Karmal 's March 1986 visit to the Soviet Union , the Soviets tried to persuade Karmal that he was too ill to govern , and that he should resign . This backfired , as a Soviet doctor attending to Karmal told him he was in good health . Karmal asked to return home to Kabul , and said that he understood and would listen to the Soviet recommendations . Before leaving , Karmal promised he would step down as PDPA General Secretary . The Soviets did not trust him and sent Vladimir Kryuchkov , the head of intelligence in the KGB , into Afghanistan . At a meeting in Kabul , Karmal confessed his undying love for the Soviet Union , comparing his ardor to his Muslim faith . Kryuchkov , concluding that he could not persuade Karmal to resign , left the meeting . After Kryuchkov left the room , the Afghan defence minister and the state security minister visited Karmal 's office , telling him that he had to resign from one of his posts . Understanding that his Soviet support had been eliminated , Karmal resigned from the office of the General Secretary at the 18th PDPA Central Committee plenum . He was succeeded in his post by Najibullah . 
 Karmal still had support within the party , and used his base to curb Najibullah 's powers . He began spreading rumors that he would be reappointed General Secretary . Najibullah 's power base was in the KHAD , the Afghan equivalent to the KGB , and not the party . Considering the fact that the Soviet Union had supported Karmal for over six years , the Soviet leadership wanted to ease him out of power gradually . Yuli Vorontsov , the Soviet ambassador to Afghanistan , told Najibullah to begin undermining Karmal 's power slowly . Najibullah complained to the Soviet leadership that Karmal used most of his spare time looking for errors and " speaking against the National Reconciliation [ programme ] " . At a meeting of the Soviet Politburo on 13 November 1986 it was decided that Najibullah should remove Karmal ; this motion was supported by Gromyko , Vorontsov , Eduard Shevardnadze , Anatoly Dobrynin and Viktor Chebrikov . A PDPA meeting in November relieved Karmal of his Revolutionary Council chairmanship , and exiled him to Moscow where he was given a state @-@ owned apartment and a dacha . Karmal was succeeded as Revolutionary Council chairman by Haji Mohammad <unk> , who was not a member of the PDPA . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 For unknown reasons , Karmal was invited back to Kabul by Najibullah , and " for equally obscure reasons Karmal accepted . " If Najibullah 's plan was to strengthen his position within the Homeland Watan Party ( the renamed PDPA ) by appeasing the pro @-@ Karmal Parchamites , he failed . Karmal 's apartment became a center for opposition to Najibullah 's government . When Najibullah was toppled in 1992 , Karmal became the most powerful politician in Kabul through leadership of the Parcham . However , his negotiations with the rebels collapsed quickly , and on 16 April 1992 the rebels , led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar , took Kabul . After the fall of Najibullah 's government , Karmal was based in <unk> . There , it is alleged , Karmal used most of his time either trying to establish a new party , or advising people to join the National Islamic Movement ( <unk> ) . Abdul Rashid Dostum , the leader of <unk> , was a supporter of Karmal during his rule . It is unknown how much control Karmal had over Dostum , but there is little evidence that Karmal was in any commanding position . Karmal 's influence over Dostum appeared indirect – some of his former associates supported Dostum . Those who spoke with Karmal during this period noted his lack of interest in politics . In June 1992 it was reported that he had died in a plane crash along with Dostum , although these reports later proved to be false . In early December 1996 , Karmal died in Moscow 's Central Clinical Hospital from liver cancer . The date of his death was reported by some sources as 1 December and by others as 3 December . The Taliban summed up his rule as follows : 
 " [ he ] committed all kinds of crimes during his illegitimate rule ... God inflicted on him various kinds of hardship and pain . Eventually he died of cancer in a hospital belonging to his <unk> , the Russians . " 
 = Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan = 
 Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan , <unk> ( Urdu : <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> ad @-@ Dīn <unk> <unk> , 17 January 1933 – 12 May 2003 ) served as United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees from 1966 to 1978 , during which he reoriented the agency 's focus beyond Europe and prepared it for an explosion of complex refugee issues . He was also a proponent of greater collaboration between non @-@ governmental organizations ( NGOs ) and UN agencies . The Prince 's interest in ecological issues led him to establish the Bellerive Foundation in the late 1970s , and he was a knowledgeable and respected collector of Islamic art . 
 Born in Paris , France , he was the son of Sir Sultan Mahomed Shah Aga Khan and Princess Andrée Aga Khan . He married twice , but had no children of his own . Prince Sadruddin died of cancer at the age of 70 , and was buried in Switzerland . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Childhood and education = = = 
 Born in Neuilly @-@ sur @-@ Seine , France , he was the only child of Sir Sultan Mahomed Shah Aga Khan III and his French @-@ born second wife , the former Andrée Joséphine Carron . He received his early education in Lausanne , Switzerland , before graduating Phi Beta Kappa in 1954 from Harvard College . At Harvard , he lived in Eliot House with Paul Matisse , grandson of French artist Henri Matisse , with future Paris Review founders George Plimpton and John Train , and with Stephen Joyce , grandson of Irish writer James Joyce . Along with Plimpton , he was an editor for the Harvard Lampoon . After three years of post @-@ graduate research at the Harvard Center for Middle Eastern Studies , Prince Sadruddin began a lifelong career of international service . 
 Although he was raised in Europe by his French mother , his father , who was the 48th hereditary Imam of the <unk> Ismaili Muslims , had a strong influence on him . He recalled that his father " insisted that I learnt the Koran and encouraged me to understand the basic traditions and beliefs of Islam but without imposing any particular views . He was an overwhelming personality but open @-@ minded and liberal . " 
 Together with his father Prince Sadruddin traveled widely in Muslim countries , coming into contact with his Islamic roots from a young age . He described Iran as the cradle of his family , though he never lived there . When he was a child , his paternal grandmother used to recite to him the great epic poems of Persian history . He held French , Iranian , and Swiss citizenship , and was fluent in French , English , German and Italian , while also speaking some Persian and Arabic . 
 = = = UNESCO = = = 
 Prince Sadruddin joined the United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organization ( UNESCO ) in 1958 , and became the Executive Secretary to its International Action Committee for the Preservation of Nubia in 1961 . This initiative brought together archaeologists from Eastern Europe and the West at the height of the Cold War . The construction of the Aswan Dam threatened ancient Egyptian treasures including Abu Simbel , the temples of Philae and <unk> , and the Christian churches of Nubia . He would later describe it as " one of UNESCO 's great achievements " because of the challenging historical context in which it took place — in particular the ongoing tensions in the Middle East and the Cold War . 
 = = = UN High Commissioner for Refugees = = = 
 Prince Sadruddin began as a Special Envoy to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ( UNHCR ) in 1959 with a focus on World Refugee Year ( 1959 – 1960 ) . The initiative became known for its Stamp Plan , a philatelic programme that raised funds through United Nations member countries , as well as the support of the Universal Postal Union . At the time , the UNHCR 's resources were primarily focused on supporting refugees crossing from Eastern Europe . 
 In January 1966 , Prince Sadruddin was appointed United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees after serving for three years as Deputy High Commissioner . At the age of 33 he became the youngest person ever to lead the UNHCR . For the next twelve years he directed the UN refugee agency through one of its most difficult periods , coordinating the international response to the 1971 Bangladesh crisis that uprooted 10 million people , the 1972 exodus of hundreds of thousands of Hutus from Burundi to Tanzania , and the Vietnamese boat people tragedy of the mid @-@ 1970s . In 1972 , Prince Sadruddin played a key role in finding new homes for tens of thousands of South Asians expelled from Uganda by Idi Amin . 
 Prince Sadruddin 's determination not to discriminate between European and Third World refugees helped prepare the UNHCR for a change in the landscape of internationally displaced persons . During the 1950s , between 200 @,@ 000 and 300 @,@ 000 refugees of European origin required assistance . By the 1970s the European refugee problems were mostly solved , but had been replaced by millions of displaced persons in the Third World . He had widened the UNHCR mandate well beyond its original focus on Eastern Europe , extending the organisation 's reach to refugees from Palestine , Vietnam , Angola and Algeria . As the scale and complexity of refugee issues continued to increase , the UNHCR and the international community at large was better positioned to adapt . By the end of 1977 when he chose to step down from the position , he had become the longest @-@ serving UN High Commissioner for Refugees . He continued to serve in various capacities dealing with humanitarian situations on behalf of the UN . 
 = = = United Nations diplomatic career = = = 
 Prince Sadruddin had , since 1978 , been variously : Special Consultant and Chargé de Mission to the Secretary @-@ General of the United Nations , Special Rapporteur of the UN Human Rights Commission and Convenor and Co @-@ Chairman of the Independent Commission on International Humanitarian Issues and of the Independent Working Group on the UN Financial Emergency . He was later Coordinator for United Nations Humanitarian and Economic Assistance Programmes Relating to the People of Afghanistan and Executive Delegate of the Secretary @-@ General for a United Nations Inter @-@ Agency Humanitarian Programme , which dealt with problems of Iraq 's border areas . 
 His appointment in September 1990 as Personal Representative of the UN Secretary @-@ General for Humanitarian Assistance Relating to the Crisis between Iraq and Kuwait required diplomatic finesse . Iraq 's President Saddam Hussein was deeply suspicious of the UN , and was loath to do anything that would benefit the country 's Shia Muslims . Despite this , Prince Sadruddin was able to successfully negotiate with Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz for the establishment of a UN relief program for tens of thousands of Shia Muslims trapped in worsening conditions in the marshlands of southern Iraq . 
 Prince Sadruddin was nominated and passed over twice for the post of UN Secretary @-@ General . Although he won the 1981 vote , the Soviet Union considered him too Western and vetoed his election . When he was nominated again in 1991 , the United States and Britain expressed their disagreement with his belief in a policy of boosting aid to Iraq . 
 = = = Environmental protection and advocacy = = = 
 In 1977 , Prince Sadruddin , together with Denis de <unk> and a few other friends , established a Geneva @-@ based think @-@ tank , Groupe de Bellerive ( named after Bellerive , the municipality where he lived in Geneva ) , and a non @-@ profit organisation , the Bellerive Foundation . The foundation collaborated with international institutions , British and Scandinavian bilateral aid organizations , and other NGOs such as the World Wide Fund for Nature ( WWF ) . It became a leading grassroots action group promoting environmental protection , natural resource conservation and the safeguarding of life in all its forms . 
 Initially , Bellerive worked with UNICEF and the United Nations Children 's Fund in the struggle against deforestation . Prince Sadruddin was motivated in part by what he called " ecological refugees " , who were forced to leave regions that could no longer sustain them due to desertification and other environmental changes . The foundation worked with Swiss specialists to develop low @-@ cost , energy @-@ efficient cooking stoves that relied on renewable energy sources such as methane and biogas . It distributed these among needy rural populations , primarily in Africa . Other areas of concern for Bellerive included the proliferation of nuclear weapons , and the protection of threatened species . 
 As a resident of Switzerland , Prince Sadruddin was concerned about the impact of insensitive tourist development and deforestation on the European Alps . At the World Economic Forum in 1990 , he launched Alp Action to protect the mountain ecosystem and preserve the Alps ' cultural diversity and vitality . The Bellerive Foundation program encouraged eco @-@ tourism , aiming to reduce the impact of outdoor adventure sports on the fragile alpine habitat . During its years of operation , Alp Action successfully launched over 140 projects in seven countries . It found inspiration in the system of national parks of the Canadian Rockies . 
 A long @-@ standing trustee and former Vice @-@ President of the World Wide Fund for Nature International , Prince Sadruddin led Bellerive 's support for threatened species . Bellerive was also amongst the first organisations to warn of the potential human health hazards of modern intensive farming methods . 
 In May 2006 , the activities of the Bellerive Foundation were merged into the Geneva @-@ based Aga Khan Foundation ( founded in 1967 by Prince Sadruddin 's nephew Karim Aga Khan IV ) to form the Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan Fund for the Environment . The US $ 10 million fund is dedicated to finding practical solutions to environmental problems . The fund concentrates its activities in six areas that were important to Prince Sadruddin : environmental education ; natural resource management in fragile zones ; nature parks and wildlife reserves ; environmentally and culturally appropriate tourism infrastructure ; environmental health ; and research . 
 = = = Death and remembrance = = = 
 Prince Sadruddin died of cancer in Boston , Massachusetts , on 12 May 2003 , coincidentally , the same day as his elder half @-@ brother Prince Aly Khan had died 43 years earlier . His body was conveyed to Switzerland , where members of the diplomatic corps , government officials and close friends were invited to pay their last respects at the Château de Bellerive , and sign books of condolence at various locations around the world . Ruud Lubbers , then UNHCR High Commissioner , expressed the sadness of the UNHCR and the entire humanitarian community , commenting that " he left an indelible print on UNHCR 's history — leading the agency through some of the most challenging moments . Sadruddin 's name became synonymous with UNHCR . " 
 In accordance with his wishes , Prince Sadruddin 's burial took place at a private ceremony attended by members of his family . Traditional Muslim ceremonies were led by Sheikh Ahmed Ahmed Ibrahim , who leads the prayers at the mausoleum of the Prince 's father , Aga Khan III , in Aswan , Egypt . Last respects were paid beneath the arches of the Château de Bellerive , before the bier was carried to the local cemetery of <unk> @-@ Bellerive . A tribute from the Canton of Geneva read : " The destiny of this family of high Persian nobility , descended from the Prophet Muhammad , is inextricably linked to that of this small European town and to an ambitious project to improve the human condition . " 
 The United Nations community celebrated Prince Sadruddin 's life at a memorial ceremony held in his honour at its headquarters in New York on 28 October 2003 . He was remembered for representing the moral and compassionate side of the international community . Then United Nations Secretary @-@ General Kofi Annan commented that " he combined respect for humankind with concern for our environment . He worked on behalf of the poor and dispossessed , while celebrating humanity through culture and art . " He concluded his tribute by praising Prince Sadruddin as " a role model to many of us ... his example will continue to inspire new world citizens for several generations to come . " 
 He was survived by his wife of 31 years , Princess Catherine ; his three stepsons Alexandre , Marc and Nicolas ; as well as his nephews and niece Prince Karim , Prince <unk> and Princess Yasmin ; and his cousin Mme. Francoise Carron . It was Prince Sadruddin 's and Princess Catherine 's wish that their remains be buried in Muslim soil in Egypt . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Prince Sadruddin 's life was deeply influenced by his family roots and cultural heritage . It is claimed that his paternal lineage goes back to Muhammad , the Prophet of Islam , through the Prophet 's daughter Fatima and cousin Ali . Prince Sadruddin 's grandmother was the granddaughter of the Qajar Emperor Fath <unk> Shah . 
 International service was a family tradition , and throughout his life Prince Sadruddin was surrounded by it . His father held influential roles in British India . He also served two terms as President of the League of Nations . Prince Sadruddin 's older half @-@ brother , Prince Aly Khan , was Pakistan 's Ambassador to the United Nations . Prince Karim Aga Khan IV , the 49th Imam of the Ismaili Muslims and present Aga Khan , was a nephew to Prince Sadruddin , and is the founder and Chairman of the Aga Khan Development Network . His brother , Prince <unk> , had previously worked with the United Nations before joining the Aga Khan 's secretariat . Meanwhile , Prince Sadruddin 's niece Princess Yasmin , has devoted herself to the fight against Alzheimer 's disease . 
 Prince Sadruddin had a taste for culture , including music , art and literature . He was a familiar figure at music festivals and other cultural events , both in Europe and overseas . His concern for the environment was complemented by his enjoyment of the outdoors ; he was a keen skier and an accomplished sailor . While still at Harvard in 1953 , Prince Sadruddin became the founding publisher of the Paris Review , which was established with the aim of bringing original creative work to the fore . Every year the Review awards the Aga Khan Prize for Fiction ( established by his father ) for the best short story that it published in the past year . 
 = = = Marriages = = = 
 On 27 August 1957 , in Bellerive , Switzerland , Prince Sadruddin married Nina Dyer ( 1930 – 1965 ) . An Anglo @-@ Indian fashion model , she was the former wife of Baron Hans Heinrich Thyssen @-@ Bornemisza . She converted to Islam , taking the name " Shirin " ( lit . " sweetness " ) . They had no children and divorced in 1962 . 
 His second marriage took place in November 1972 , in the British West Indies . He married Catherine <unk> <unk> Sursock who was born in Alexandria , Egypt in 1938 . She was formerly the wife of Lebanese aristocrat Cyril Sursock ( son of Nicolas Sursock and Donna Vittoria Serra of the Dukes di Cassano ) . She and Prince Sadruddin had no children , but from this marriage he gained three stepchildren : Alexandre Sursock ( married to Thai Princess Mom <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , Marc Sursock and Nicolas Sursock . 
 = = = Art collection = = = 
 During his lifetime Prince Sadruddin assembled one of the finest private collections of Islamic art in the world . He became a knowledgeable and respected collector , accumulating a priceless collection of paintings , drawings , manuscripts and miniatures over 50 years . He had also gathered a collection of primitive and African art which he sold sometime prior to 1985 . 
 Prince Sadruddin 's interest in Islamic art was sparked in his youth by his paternal grandmother 's library of Persian books , mystical texts and astrological treatises . While at Harvard in the 1950s , he would make purchases in New York , and eventually began to acquire from dealers in Paris , Geneva and London . He would bid regularly at Sotheby 's and Christie 's auctions in Europe and North America . For advice , he looked to his friend Stuart Cary Welch , a noted historian of Islamic art at Harvard University . 
 His collection is vast and diverse , and includes Arabic , Persian , Turkish , and Indian pieces dating from the 10th century . One example is a Quranic page of North African origin written with gold lettering in the Kufic script – it is more than 1 @,@ 000 years old . Prince Sadruddin 's Persian roots are well represented in calligraphic as well as pictoral specimens reflecting a range of periods and dynastic patrons . Also included are several examples of Ottoman <unk> , manuscripts and paintings . 
 Over the years , parts of his collection were exhibited in New York , London , and Zurich , including a touring show , " Princes , Poets and Paladins " , which was organized by the British Museum in 1998 . The full collection has been housed at the new museum established by Prince Sadruddin 's nephew , the present Aga Khan , in Toronto . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 Prince Sadruddin received several honorary doctorates and national decorations from states as diverse as Pakistan , Poland and the Vatican , as well as the United Nations Human Rights Award . He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1991 . He was awarded the Bourgeois d 'Honneur de <unk> , made a Commandeur of the Légion d 'honneur of France and a Knight Commander of the Order of St. Sylvester ( <unk> ) of the Holy See , and was a recipient of the Order of the Nile of Egypt . Furthermore , he was made a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( KBE ) , this for his services to humanitarian causes and the arts . He was an honorary citizen of Patmos , Greece , where he owned a house . 
 = James McAvoy = 
 James McAvoy ( / <unk> / ; born 21 April 1979 ) is a Scottish actor . He made his acting début as a teen in 1995 's The Near Room and continued to make mostly television appearances until 2003 , when his feature film career began and he continued to work in both areas from then on . His notable television work includes the drama show State of Play , the adult comedy @-@ drama Shameless , and the science fiction show Frank Herbert 's Children of Dune . Besides screen acting , McAvoy has performed in several West End productions , receiving three nominations for the Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actor . He has also done voice work for animated films including Gnomeo & Juliet and Arthur Christmas ( both 2011 ) . 
 In 2003 , McAvoy appeared in a lead role in Bollywood Queen , a British Indian take on the Shakespeare play Romeo and Juliet , directed by Jeremy Wooding . This was followed by a supporting role , the faun Mr. Tumnus , in The Chronicles of Narnia : The Lion , the Witch and the Wardrobe ( 2005 ) . His performance in Kevin Macdonald 's drama The Last King of Scotland ( 2006 ) garnered him several award nominations . The critically acclaimed romantic drama war film Atonement ( 2007 ) earned him a Golden Globe Award nomination and his second BAFTA nomination . He appeared opposite Angelina Jolie as a newly trained assassin in the action thriller Wanted ( 2008 ) . 
 Since then , he is notable for playing the young Professor Charles Xavier in the 2011 superhero film X @-@ Men : First Class , a role he reprised in X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past ( 2014 ) and X @-@ Men : Apocalypse ( 2016 ) . McAvoy starred in the 2013 crime comedy @-@ drama film Filth for which he won Best Actor in the British Independent Film Awards . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 McAvoy was born in Glasgow , Scotland , the son of Elizabeth ( née Johnstone ) , a psychiatric nurse , and James McAvoy , Sr. , a builder . He was brought up as a Roman Catholic . His parents divorced when he was seven . McAvoy 's mother suffered from poor health and subsequently decided it was best that he live with his maternal grandparents , Mary and James Johnstone , a butcher who lived in a terraced council house in the nearby Drumchapel area of Glasgow . His mother lived with them intermittently . The actor has a sister , Joy , and a younger half @-@ brother , Donald . McAvoy has not been in contact with his father since childhood . He attended St. Thomas Aquinas Secondary in Jordanhill , Glasgow , a Catholic school , and briefly considered joining the Catholic priesthood . In a 2006 interview , McAvoy said that he considered becoming a priest as a child because it seemed to be a way to explore the world via missionary work . During his education , he worked at a local bakery . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 McAvoy 's acting debut came at the age of 15 in The Near Room ( 1995 ) . He later admitted that he was not very interested in acting when joining the movie , but was inspired to study the craft after developing feelings for his co @-@ star , Alana Brady . He continued to act while still a member of PACE Youth Theatre . McAvoy eventually graduated from the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama in 2000 . Throughout the early 2000s , he made guest appearances in television shows and began working on movies . In 2001 , McAvoy 's performance as a gay hustler in the play Out in the Open impressed director Joe Wright so much that Wright began offering McAvoy parts in his films . McAvoy kept declining them , however , and it wasn 't until six years later that the two actually worked together . 
 He also starred in Privates on Parade in the Donmar Warehouse , this time catching Sam Mendes ' attention . Also in 2001 , the actor appeared as Private James W. Miller in Band of Brothers , an eleven @-@ hour World War II miniseries by executive producers Steven Spielberg and Tom Hanks . This is the same miniseries in which his future coworker , Michael Fassbender , played the role of Burton " Pat " Christenson . It was shown on the HBO network . He gained the attention of critics in 2002 's White Teeth , a four @-@ part television drama miniseries adaption based on the novel of the same name by <unk> Smith . 
 In 2003 , McAvoy appeared in the Sci Fi Channel miniseries Frank Herbert 's Children of Dune , adapted from Frank Herbert 's novels . It is one of the highest @-@ rated programmes ever to be aired on the channel . More cable work came for him when he accepted the role of an unprincipled reporter in 2003 's State of Play . The well @-@ received six @-@ part British drama serial tells the story of a newspaper 's investigation into the death of a young woman and was broadcast on BBC One . Calling the programme a " must @-@ see " , the Chicago Tribune recommended State of Play for its cast 's performance . In 2002 , McAvoy shot scenes for Bollywood Queen , described as West Side Story meets Romeo and Juliet with bindis , the movie deals with star @-@ crossed lovers caught in the middle of clashing cultures ; it was shown as a special presentation at the 2003 Sundance Film Festival and opened in UK theatres on 17 October . In 2004 , he acted in a supporting role in the romantic comedy Wimbledon , also featuring Kirsten Dunst as a co @-@ lead . His next project was voicing a character named Hal in the 2004 English version of Strings , a mythic fantasy film . Another 2004 release for him was Inside I 'm Dancing , an Irish production helmed by Damien O 'Donnell starring alongside fellow Scotsman Steven Robertson . In it , the actor was cast as the principal character : a maverick with <unk> muscular dystrophy . 
 = = = Critical success = = = 
 McAvoy ended 2004 by appearing in the first two seasons of Shameless as Steve McBride , the moral hero of the BAFTA @-@ winning Channel 4 programme . His public profile was raised in 2005 with the release of Walt Disney Pictures 's The Chronicles of Narnia : The Lion , the Witch and the Wardrobe . McAvoy starred in the fantasy adventure film made by Andrew Adamson and based on C. S. Lewis 's children 's novel as Mr. Tumnus , a faun who befriends Lucy Pevensie ( played by Georgie Henley ) and joins Aslan ( Liam Neeson ) ' s forces . It was given a UK release of 9 December . At the UK box office , this movie opened at number one , earning around £ 8 @.@ 7 million at 498 cinemas over the weekend . Worldwide , Narnia grossed £ 463 million , making it the 41st highest @-@ grossing film of all @-@ time worldwide . That succeeding year he also accepted the principal role of Brian Jackson , a nerdy university student who wins a place on a University Challenge quiz team in the mid @-@ 1980s , in Starter for 10 . He was directed by David Nicholls , who adapted the film 's screenplay from his own book . The British / American production was given distribution in the UK on 10 November . 10 scored a rating of 89 % on review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes based on a sample of 75 reviews . In spite of the positive buzz , the movie flopped at the box office , unable to recover its production costs of £ 5 @.@ 7 million . 
 Forest Whitaker had suggested McAvoy to director Kevin Macdonald for the role of Nicholas Garrigan in 2006 's Academy Award @-@ winning low @-@ budgeted The Last King of Scotland . McAvoy portrayed a Scottish doctor who becomes the personal physician to dictator Idi Amin ( played by Whittaker ) while in Uganda . While the movie is based on factual events of Amin 's rule , the details of the story are fictional and adapted from Giles Foden 's acclaimed 1998 novel . McAvoy assessed his character to be a " completely selfish prick " . An overwhelmed McAvoy fainted during his first take of what would be the hardest scene for him to shoot , Nicolas 's torture . McAvoy was named Best Actor of the year by Scotland 's own BAFTA Awards , where the film swept the major categories , and received a nomination for the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role . The movie itself walked away with three wins , including the honour for Outstanding British Film of the Year . This was accompanied by praise for McAvoy 's performance . 
 Following that , he played Irish attorney Tom Lefroy and love @-@ interest to Jane Austen in Becoming Jane , a 2007 historical movie inspired by the author 's early life . Next up was Penelope , which premiered at the 2006 Toronto International Film Festival . Also starring co @-@ producer Reese Witherspoon , it generated polarised reviews . The breakthrough role in McAvoy 's career came in Atonement , Joe Wright 's 2007 adaption of Ian McEwan 's novel of the same title . A romantic war film , it focuses on lovers Cecilia and Robbie 's ( Keira Knightley and McAvoy ) lives being torn apart after her jealous younger sister , Briony ( Saoirse Ronan ) falsely accuses him of rape . Upon reading the script , McAvoy said he thought " If I don 't get the part I 'm not reading the book because it 'll be devastating . It 's an amazing role and I really wanted it . " McAvoy has called the movie " incredibly sad " but considers it an uplifting experience . He also shared that he hoped viewers will be left " absolutely devastated and harrowed . " Screenings of Atonement were held at the 2007 Toronto International Film Festival , where it was one of the most acclaimed films present , and Venice Film Festival . Atonement was a big awards contender ; it was nominated for fourteen BAFTAs and seven Academy Awards . Both McAvoy and Knightley were nominated for their performances at the 65th Golden Globe Awards , respectively . Additionally , the film was lauded by critics , with Metacritic reporting it to have an approval rating of 85 . The Hollywood Reporter writer Ray Bennett said the duo gave " compelling and charismatic performances " . 
 = = = Wanted , X @-@ Men and subsequent work = = = 
 One of the biggest highlights of McAvoy 's career was starring with Angelina Jolie and Morgan Freeman in Wanted , an action film where he portrayed Wesley Gibson , a young American slacker who learns he is heir to a legacy of assassins . When McAvoy screen @-@ tested for the role , he was initially rejected because the studio was seeking an actor with conventional Hollywood leading @-@ man looks and physique . He later recalled being considered the " runt of the litter " of those who tested , but ultimately got the role in late 2006 since the studio " wanted someone geeky " . While shooting action scenes for Wanted , he suffered several injuries , including a twisted ankle and an injured knee . Nonetheless the actor said he had a " good time " doing the movie . McAvoy had never done this type of genre before and thought of Wanted as a chance to be more versatile . Loosely based on the comic book miniseries of the same name by Mark Millar , it saw a June 2008 release worldwide . It received favourable reviews from the press , who generally liked that it was fast @-@ paced . At the box office , Wanted was a success , grossing $ 341 million against a $ 75 million production budget . Next was The Last Station ( 2009 ) , a biopic that details the final months of celebrated writer Leo Tolstoy and also stars Anne @-@ Marie Duff , McAvoy 's wife at the time . It was shown at a limited number of screens in the US . Although most critics ' awards paid attention to co @-@ stars Helen Mirren and Christopher Plummer , the Satellite Awards nominated McAvoy for Best Supporting Actor . In 2009 , McAvoy voiced Angelina 's father , Maurice <unk> , in the television series , Angelina Ballerina : The Next Steps . 
 He also appeared onstage in 2009 at Apollo Theater 's Three Days of Rain . He voiced the male titular character in Gnomeo and Juliet ( 2011 ) , an animated movie based on William Shakespeare 's play Romeo and Juliet . In Robert Redford 's historical American drama The Conspirator , McAvoy played the role of an idealistic war hero who reluctantly defends a co @-@ conspirator charged in the Abraham Lincoln assassination . It premiered at the 2010 Toronto International Film Festival . While this movie garnered mixed reception , critics lauded the actor for his work . In Owen Gleiberman 's assessment of The Conspirator , he found it " stiff @-@ jointed " and tedious , but regarded McAvoy as " an avid presence " . 
 In mid @-@ 2010 , McAvoy was cast as telepathic superhero Professor X , leader and founder of the X @-@ Men , in X @-@ Men : First Class . He joined an ensemble that included Michael Fassbender , Jennifer Lawrence and Kevin Bacon . Based on the Marvel Comics and a prequel to the film series , it is set primarily during the build @-@ up to the Cuban Missile Crisis and focuses on the relationship between Professor X and Magneto and the origin of their groups . McAvoy did not read comics as a child , and thus was unfamiliar with the Stan Lee originals which began publication in the 1960s , but was a fan of the X @-@ Men animated cartoon series . Released to the UK on 1 June , First Class topped its box office with ticket sales of around £ 5 million in its opening weekend . First Class was also reviewed favourably . In 2011 , McAvoy began filming the role of Max Lewinsky in the British thriller Welcome to the Punch . He played the lead role in the Danny Boyle film Trance . 
 In 2012 , McAvoy was cast as Bruce Robertson in Filth , an adaptation of an Irvine Welsh novel of the same name . The film 's ensemble cast includes Jamie Bell , Jim Broadbent , Eddie Marsan , and Imogen Poots . For his role , McAvoy won Best Actor at the British Independent Film Awards in December 2013 . It was also announced that he would co @-@ star with Jessica Chastain in a double @-@ feature film project , The Disappearance of Eleanor Rigby . He performed the male lead in radio play adaptation of Neverwhere written by Neil Gaiman . 
 McAvoy starred in Shakespeare 's Macbeth on London 's West End in early 2013 . Macbeth was the first performance at the Trafalgar Transformed , running from 9 February until 27 April . The production was directed by Jamie Lloyd who also directed McAvoy in his last stint on the stage in 2009 's Three Days of Rain . In 2015 , McAvoy won the Best Actor award at London 's Evening Standard Theater Awards for his portrayal of Jack Gurney in The Ruling Class , a revival of the Peter Barnes play directed once again by Jamie Lloyd . It ran at Trafalgar Studios from 16 January to 11 April 2015 . 
 McAvoy reprised his role as Professor X in X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past ( 2014 ) , which grossed $ 747 @.@ 9 million worldwide , making it the sixth highest grossing film of the year 2014 , and the second highest grossing film in the X @-@ Men franchise and in 2016 's X @-@ Men : Apocalypse . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 While working on Shameless , McAvoy started a relationship with his character 's love interest , Anne @-@ Marie Duff , and they married in October 2006 in a quiet ceremony . They have one child together , a son named Brendan ( b . 2010 ) . On 13 May 2016 , McAvoy and Duff jointly announced their decision to divorce . 
 After McAvoy won the " Rising Star " award from the BAFTAs , his estranged father spoke to the Sunday Mirror , stating that he would love to get in touch with his son , but did not know how to reach him . Though the actor did not read the piece , he heard about it and was unmoved . He enjoys fantasy themes which he said started from the age of 11 with The Lord of the Rings . His big interest outside acting and science fiction is football ; he is a huge fan of Celtic Football Club , stating that his dream role would be to play Celtic legend Jimmy Johnstone . McAvoy considers himself a spiritual person who no longer practices Catholicism . Speaking to Sky News , McAvoy said he believed that British filmmakers belittle and dumb down their productions to please American audiences . " It 's like we 're patronising them and short changing ourselves , " the actor commented . He had previously called 3 @-@ D films a " waste of money " , accusing film studios of using the effect to get more money out of their theatre audiences . 
 = = Charity = = 
 At one point , McAvoy did a " terrifying " BASE jump from the world 's tallest hospital building in a bid to help raise money for Ugandan children 's charity <unk> , an organisation which assists children on the streets . Additionally , McAvoy is a celebrity supporter of the British Red Cross with whom he travelled to Uganda to raise awareness of the projects there . He had become involved with the charity after shooting The Last King of Scotland there for several months and was shocked by what he saw . In February 2007 , he visited northern Uganda and spent four days seeing projects supported by the British Red Cross . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Stage = = = 
 = Covered Bridges Today = 
 Covered Bridges Today is a non @-@ fiction book on the architecture of covered bridges in the United States . The book was written by Brenda Krekeler and published by Daring Books in 1989 . Covered Bridges Today is a frequently cited source on the topic of covered bridges and serves as a record of numerous covered bridges that have since been dismantled or demolished since the book 's publication . Krekeler 's text includes 412 covered bridges in fourteen states with a complete record of all 142 covered bridges in Ohio during its writing in 1986 and 1987 . The work has been utilized in numerous citations by later publications including Historic American Engineering Record surveys and New England 's Covered Bridges : A Complete Guide , Indiana Covered Bridges and Covered Bridges in Virginia . 
 = = Background = = 
 Covered bridges are timber @-@ truss bridges with a roof and siding which , in most covered bridges , create an almost complete enclosure . The purpose of the covering is to protect the wooden structural members from the weather . Uncovered wooden bridges have a life span of only 10 to 15 years because of the effects of rain and sun . As of 2014 , the United States has more than 800 extant covered bridges with more than 10 @,@ 000 lost and historical bridges recorded by the National Society for the Preservation of Covered Bridges . Krekeler became interested in studying covered bridges , their lore and their history , while in college . Krekeler obtained her master 's degree in Historical Geography from the University of Cincinnati . 
 = = Contents = = 
 Covered Bridges Today provides information on 412 bridges in the states of Connecticut , Indiana , Kentucky , Maine , Maryland , Massachusetts , Michigan , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Vermont , Virginia and West Virginia . The book is geographically focused on Krekeler 's home state of Ohio and includes all 142 remaining covered bridges in the state at the time of writing . However , the book is not a complete inventory of each state 's extant bridges . When it was written , 76 of an estimated 228 Pennsylvania 's bridges were included , 68 of Indiana 's 98 covered bridges , and 43 of Vermont 's estimated 100 bridges were also featured . Krekeler 's use of estimations stems from the facts that covered bridges are lost periodically and that the bridges detailed include those restored or in immediate danger of collapse . Within a year of the publication of the book , 30 bridges were lost . Known bridges in states that are not in the listing are not named or cited . For example , West Virginia had 17 remaining bridges at time of publication , but the book only covers 10 of them . 
 Krekeler 's text uses the National Society for the Preservation of Covered Bridges ' numerical system for recording covered bridges . The system is a collection of three sets of two digits used to represent the state , the county and the designated bridge respectively . The book includes detailed information on each state 's historic bridges before providing an individual listing of surveyed bridges . A typical page includes two entries on a single page . Each entry includes a description of the bridge , its history , a black and white photograph , and a local street map with directions . Interspersed throughout the book is a collection of color photographs ranging from a full page to a quarter page in size . Krekeler states that construction dates prior to 1850 are often questionable because of an absence of records and that these early sources would often contradict one another . Krekeler 's bibliography cites an extensive collection of state maps , numerous local newspaper sources and works like World Guide to Covered Bridges by Richard Donovan . The information and sources used are cited at the end of each entry listing in the book , directly following the directions to the bridge . The book does not contain a typical index and instead favors a listing of bridges after the introduction of the state . The book was published in 1989 by Daring Books . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Larry Hart 's review of the work focused on Krekeler 's basic explanation of the various types of covered bridges from the early 1800s to the 1920s and the historical facts and trivia contained within about the distribution and surviving covered bridges . Hart recounts the claim that it is the " only complete pictorial study of covered bridges in the United States " . Though Hart 's review incorporates much of the book 's text , Hart shares an affinity for covered bridges and relates to the destroyed <unk> Bridge . Krekeler writes that she wished the <unk> Bridge had been preserved instead of being torched . Dr. Roger A. McCain notes that Krekeler 's book " includes a number of states with pictorial coverage , including some really exquisite color photographs . It is not comprehensive in most cases [ , ] but is especially strong for Ohio and Indiana . Pennsylvania bridges are pretty extensively documented in [ . ] " Paul <unk> refers to the book as an " encyclopedic , definitive work " in an article in the Times Union . Historic American Engineering Record surveys have cited Krekeler 's work numerous times , ranging from the estimations of the surviving truss types of covered bridges to more general and unspecific references . Covered Bridges Today has been cited by later books on the subject of covered bridges including New England 's Covered Bridges : A Complete Guide , Indiana Covered Bridges and Covered Bridges in Virginia . 
 = William T. Anderson = 
 William T. Anderson ( 1840 – October 26 , 1864 ) , better known as Bloody Bill , was one of the deadliest and most brutal pro @-@ Confederate guerrilla leaders in the American Civil War . Anderson led a band that targeted Union loyalists and Federal soldiers in Missouri and Kansas . 
 Raised by a family of Southerners in Kansas , Anderson began supporting himself by stealing and selling horses in 1862 . After his father was killed by a Union @-@ loyalist judge , Anderson fled Kansas for Missouri . There , he robbed travelers and killed several Union soldiers . In early 1863 , Anderson joined Quantrill 's Raiders , a pro @-@ Confederate group of guerrillas that operated in Missouri . He became a skilled <unk> , earning the trust of the group 's leaders , William Quantrill and George M. Todd . Anderson 's acts as a guerrilla led the Union to imprison his sisters ; after one of them died in custody , Anderson devoted himself to revenge . He took a leading role in the Lawrence Massacre , and later participated in the Battle of Baxter Springs . 
 In late 1863 , while Quantrill 's Raiders spent the winter in Texas , animosity developed between Anderson and Quantrill . Anderson , perhaps falsely , implicated Quantrill in a murder , leading to the latter 's arrest by Confederate authorities . Anderson subsequently returned to Missouri as the leader of a group of raiders and became the most feared guerrilla in the state , killing and robbing dozens of Union soldiers and civilian sympathizers throughout central Missouri . Although Union supporters viewed him as <unk> evil , Confederate sympathizers in Missouri saw his actions as justified , possibly owing to their mistreatment by Union forces . In September 1864 , he led a raid on Centralia , Missouri . Unexpectedly , they were able to capture a passenger train , the first time Confederate guerrillas had done so . In what became known as the Centralia Massacre , possibly the war 's deadliest and most brutal guerrilla action , his men killed 24 Union soldiers on the train and set an ambush later that day that killed more than 100 Union militiamen . A month later , Anderson was killed in battle . Historians have made disparate appraisals of Anderson : some see him as a sadistic , psychopathic killer , but for others , his actions cannot be separated from the general lawlessness of the time . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William T. Anderson was born in 1840 in Hopkins County , Kentucky , to William C. and Martha Anderson . His siblings were Jim , Ellis , Mary Ellen , Josephine and Janie . His schoolmates recalled him as a well @-@ behaved , reserved child . During his childhood , Anderson 's family moved to Huntsville , Missouri where his father found employment on a farm and the family became well respected . In 1857 , the family relocated to Kansas , traveling southwest on the Santa Fe Trail and settling 13 miles ( 21 km ) east of Council Grove , Kansas . The Anderson family supported slavery , although they did not own slaves ; however , their move to Kansas was likely for economic rather than political reasons . At that time , there was significant debate about slavery in Kansas , and many residents of the northern United States had moved there to ensure that it would not become a slave state . Animosity soon developed between these immigrants and Confederate sympathizers , but there was little unrest in the Council Grove area . After settling near Council Grove , the family became friends with A. I. Baker , a local judge who was a Confederate sympathizer . By 1860 , William T. Anderson was a joint owner of a 320 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 3 km2 ) property that was worth $ 500 and his family had a net worth of around $ 1 @,@ 000 . On June 28 , 1860 , Martha Anderson died after being struck by lightning . 
 In the late 1850s , Ellis Anderson fled to Iowa after killing an Indian . Around the same time , William T. Anderson fatally shot a member of the Kaw tribe outside of Council Grove ; he related that the man had tried to rob him . He joined the freight shipping operation that his father worked for and was given a position known as " second boss " for a wagon trip to New Mexico . The trip was not successful : he returned to Missouri without the shipment , and stated that his horses had disappeared with the cargo . After he returned to Council Grove , he began horse trading , taking horses from towns in Kansas , transporting them to Missouri , and returning with more horses . 
 = = Horse trading and outlawry = = 
 After the Civil War began in 1861 , the demand for horses increased , and Anderson transitioned from trading horses to stealing horses , reselling them as far away as New Mexico . He worked with his brother Jim , their friend Lee Griffith , and several accomplices strung along the Santa Fe Trail . In late 1861 , Anderson traveled south with brother Jim and Judge Baker , in an apparent attempt to join the Confederate Army . Anderson had stated to a neighbor that he sought to fight for financial reasons , rather than loyalty to the Confederacy . However , the group was attacked by the Union 's 6th Regiment Kansas Volunteer Cavalry in Vernon County , Missouri ; the cavalry likely assumed they were Confederate guerrillas . The Anderson brothers escaped , but Baker was captured and spent four months in prison before returning to Kansas , professing loyalty to the Union . One way that he sought to prove his loyalty to the Union was by severing his ties with Anderson 's sister Mary , his former lover . 
 Upon his return to Kansas , Anderson continued horse trafficking , but ranchers in the area soon became aware of his operations . In May 1862 , Baker issued an arrest warrant for Griffith , whom Anderson helped hide . Some local citizens suspected that the Anderson family was assisting Griffith and traveled to their house to confront William C. Anderson . After hearing their accusations against his sons , he was incensed — he found Baker 's involvement particularly infuriating . The next day , he traveled to the Council Grove courthouse with a gun , intending to force Baker to withdraw the warrant . As he entered the building , he was restrained by a constable and fatally shot by Baker . William Anderson buried his father , and was subsequently arrested for assisting Griffith . However , he was quickly released owing to a problem with the warrant , and fled to Agnes City , fearing that he would be lynched . There he met Baker , who temporarily placated him by providing a lawyer . Anderson remained in Agnes City until he learned that Baker would not be charged , as the judge 's claim of self @-@ defense had been accepted by legal authorities . Anderson was outraged and went to Missouri with his siblings . William and Jim Anderson then traveled southwest of Kansas City , robbing travelers to support themselves . 
 On July 2 , 1862 , William and Jim Anderson returned to Council Grove and sent an accomplice to Baker 's house claiming to be a traveler seeking supplies . Baker and his brother @-@ in @-@ law brought the man to a store , where they were ambushed by the Anderson brothers . After a brief gunfight , Baker and his brother @-@ in @-@ law fled into the store 's basement . The Andersons barricaded the door to the basement and lit the store on fire , killing Baker and his brother @-@ in @-@ law . They also burnt Baker 's home and stole two of his horses before returning to Missouri on the Santa Fe Trail . 
 William and Jim Anderson soon formed a gang with a man named Bill Reed ; in February 1863 , the Lexington Weekly Union recorded that Reed was the leader of the gang . In his 2003 history of Civil War Missouri , Bruce Nichols stated that Reed led the gang until mid @-@ July of that year . William Quantrill , a Confederate guerrilla leader , later claimed to have encountered them in July and rebuked them for robbing Confederate sympathizers ; in their biography of Anderson , Albert Castel and Tom Goodrich speculate that this rebuke may have resulted in a deep resentment of Quantrill by Anderson . Anderson and his gang subsequently traveled east of Jackson County , Missouri , avoiding territory where Quantrill operated and continuing to support themselves by robbery . They also attacked Union soldiers , killing seven by early 1863 . 
 = = Quantrill 's Raiders = = 
 Missouri had a large Union presence throughout the Civil War , but also many civilians whose sympathies lay with the Confederacy . From July 1861 until the end of the war , the state suffered up to 25 @,@ 000 deaths from guerrilla warfare , more than any other state . Confederate General Sterling Price failed to gain control of Missouri in his 1861 offensive and retreated into Arkansas , leaving only the guerrillas to challenge Union dominance . Quantrill was at the time the most prominent guerrilla in the Kansas – Missouri area . In early 1863 , William and Jim Anderson traveled to Jackson County , Missouri , to join him . William Anderson was initially given a chilly reception from other raiders , who perceived him to be brash and overconfident . 
 In May 1863 , Anderson joined members of Quantrill 's Raiders on a foray near Council Grove , in which they robbed a store 15 miles ( 24 km ) west of the town . After the robbery , the group was intercepted by a United States Marshal accompanied by a large posse , about 150 miles ( 240 km ) from the Kansas – Missouri border . In the resulting skirmish , several raiders were captured or killed and the rest of the guerrillas , including Anderson , split into small groups to return to Missouri . Castel and Goodrich speculated that this raid may have given Quantrill the idea of a launching an attack deep in Kansas , as it demonstrated that the state 's border was poorly defended and that guerrillas could travel deep within the state before Union forces were alerted . 
 In early summer 1863 , Anderson was made a lieutenant , serving in a unit led by George M. Todd . In June and July , Anderson took part in several raids that killed Union soldiers , in Westport , Kansas City , and Lafayette County , Missouri . The first reference to Anderson in Official Records of the American Civil War concerns his activities at this time , describing him as the captain of a band of guerrillas . He commanded 30 – 40 men , one of whom was Archie Clement , an 18 @-@ year @-@ old with a predilection for torture and mutilation who was loyal only to Anderson . By late July , Anderson led groups of guerrillas on raids , and was often pursued by Union volunteer cavalry . Anderson was under Quantrill 's command , but independently organized some attacks . 
 Quantrill 's Raiders had a support network in Missouri , that provided them with numerous hiding places . Anderson 's sisters aided the guerrillas by gathering information inside Union territory . In August 1863 , however , Union General Thomas Ewing , Jr . , attempted to thwart the guerrillas by arresting their female relatives , and Anderson 's sisters were confined in a three @-@ story building on Grand Avenue in Kansas City with a number of other girls . While they were confined , the building collapsed , killing one of Anderson 's sisters . In the aftermath , rumors that the building had been intentionally sabotaged by Union soldiers spread quickly ; Anderson was convinced that it had been a deliberate act . Biographer Larry Wood wrote that Anderson 's motivation shifted after the death of his sister , arguing that killing then became his focus — and an enjoyable act . Castel and Goodrich maintain that killing became more than a means to an end at that point for Anderson : it became an end in itself . 
 = = = Lawrence Massacre = = = 
 Although Quantrill had considered the idea of a raid on Lawrence , Kansas , before the building collapsed in Kansas City , the deaths convinced the guerrillas to make a bold strike . Quantrill attained near @-@ unanimous consent to travel 40 miles ( 64 km ) into Union territory to strike Lawrence . The guerrillas gathered at the Blackwater River in Johnson County , Missouri . Anderson was placed in charge of 40 men , of which he was perhaps the angriest and most motivated — his fellow guerrillas considered him one of the deadliest fighters there . On August 19 , the group , which proved to be the most guerrillas under one commander in the war , began the trip to Lawrence . En route , some guerrillas robbed a Union supporter , but Anderson knew the man and reimbursed him . 
 After reaching Lawrence , the guerrillas immediately killed a number of Union Army recruits and one of Anderson 's men took their flag . The Provost Marshal of Kansas , a Union captain who commanded military police , surrendered to the guerrillas and Anderson took his uniform . ( Guerrillas often wore uniforms stolen from Union soldiers . ) They proceeded to pillage and burn many buildings , killing almost every man they found , but taking care not to shoot women . Anderson personally killed 14 people . Although some men begged him to spare them , he persisted , but he relented when a woman pleaded with him not to torch her house . The guerrillas under Anderson 's command , notably including Archie Clement and Frank James , killed more than any of the other group . They left town at 9 a.m. , after a company of Union soldiers approached the town . The raiding party was pursued by Union forces , but eventually managed to break contact with the soldiers and scatter into the Missouri woods . After a dead raider was scalped by a Union @-@ allied Lenape Indian during the pursuit , one guerrilla leader pledged to adopt the practice of scalping . 
 = = Texas = = 
 On August 25 , 1863 , General Ewing retaliated against the Confederate guerrillas by issuing General Order No. 11 , an evacuation order that evicted almost 20 @,@ 000 people from four Missouri counties and burned many of their homes . The order was intended to rob the guerrillas of their support network in Missouri . On October 2 , a group of 450 guerrillas under Quantrill 's leadership met at Blackwater River in Jackson County and left for Texas . 
 They departed earlier in the year than they had planned , owing to increased Union pressure . En route , they entered Baxter Springs , Kansas , the site of Fort Blair . They attacked the fort on October 6 , but the 90 Union troops there quickly took refuge inside , suffering minimal losses . Shortly after the initial assault , a larger group of Union troops approached Fort Blair , unaware that the fort had been attacked and that the men they saw outside the fort dressed in Union uniforms were actually disguised guerrillas . The guerrillas charged the Union forces , killing about 100 . Anderson and his men were in the rear of the charge , but gathered a large amount of plunder from the dead soldiers , irritating some guerrillas from the front line of the charge . Not satisfied with the number killed , Anderson and Todd wished to attack the fort again , but Quantrill considered another attack too risky . He angered Anderson by ordering his forces to withdraw . 
 On October 12 , Quantrill and his men met General Samuel Cooper at the Canadian River and proceeded to Mineral Springs , Texas , to rest for the winter . Anderson married Bush Smith , a woman from Sherman , Texas . Anderson ignored Quantrill 's request to wait until after the war and then separated his men from Quantrill 's band . The tension between the two groups markedly increased — some feared that open warfare would result — but by the wedding , relations had improved . In March , at the behest of General Price , Quantrill reassembled his men , sending most of them into active duty with the Confederate Army . He retained 84 men and reunited with Anderson . Quantrill appointed him a first lieutenant , subordinate only to himself and to Todd . 
 A short time later , one of Anderson 's men was accused of stealing from one of Quantrill 's men . Quantrill expelled him and warned him not to come back , and the man was fatally shot by some of Quantrill 's men when he attempted to return . It is likely that this incident angered Anderson , and he took 20 men to visit the town of Sherman . They told General Cooper that Quantrill was responsible for the death of a Confederate officer ; the general then had Quantrill arrested . Sutherland described Anderson 's betrayal of Quantrill as a " Judas " turn . Quantrill was taken into custody , but soon escaped . Anderson was told to recapture him and gave chase , but he was unable to locate his former commander and stopped at a creek . There , his men briefly engaged a group of guerrillas loyal to Quantrill , but no one was injured in the confrontation . Upon returning to the Confederate leadership , Anderson was commissioned as a captain by General Price . 
 = = Return to Missouri = = 
 Anderson and his men rested in Texas for several months before returning to Missouri . Although he learned that Union General Egbert B. Brown had devoted significant attention to the border area , Anderson led raids in Cooper and Johnson County , Missouri , robbing local residents . On June 12 , Anderson and 50 of his men engaged 15 members of the Missouri State Militia , killing and robbing 12 . After the attack , one of Anderson 's guerrillas scalped a dead militiaman . The next day , in Southeast Jackson County , Anderson 's group ambushed a wagon train carrying members of the Union 1st Northeast Missouri Cavalry , killing nine . The attacks prompted the Kansas City Daily Journal of Commerce to declare that rebels had taken over the area . Anderson and his men dressed as Union soldiers , wearing uniforms taken from those they killed . In response , Union militias developed hand signals to verify that approaching men in Union uniforms were not guerrillas . The guerrillas , however , quickly learned the signals , and local citizens became wary of Union troops , fearing that they were disguised guerrillas . 
 On July 6 , a Confederate sympathizer brought Anderson newspapers containing articles about him . Anderson was upset by the critical tone of the coverage and sent letters to the publications . In the letters , Anderson took an arrogant and threatening , yet playful , tone , boasting of his attacks . He protested the execution of guerrillas and their sympathizers , and threatened to attack Lexington , Missouri . He concluded the letters by describing himself as the commander of " Kansas First Guerrillas " and requesting that local newspapers publish his replies . The letters were given to Union generals and were not published for 20 years . 
 In early July , Anderson 's group robbed and killed several Union sympathizers in Carroll and Randolph counties . On July 15 , Anderson and his men entered Huntsville , Missouri , and occupied the town 's business district . Anderson killed one hotel guest whom he suspected was a U.S. Marshall , but spoke amicably with an acquaintance he found there . Anderson 's men robbed the town 's depository , gaining about $ 40 @,@ 000 in the robbery , although Anderson returned some money to the friend he had met at the hotel . 
 = = = Growing infamy = = = 
 In June 1864 , Todd usurped Quantrill 's leadership of their group , and forced him to leave the area . Todd rested his men in July to allow them to prepare for a Confederate invasion of Missouri . As Quantrill and Todd became less active , Anderson emerged as the best known , and most feared , Confederate guerrilla in Missouri . By August , the St. Joseph Herald , a Missouri newspaper , was describing him as " the Devil " . As Anderson 's profile increased , he was able to recruit more guerillas . Anderson was selective , turning away all but the fiercest applicants as he sought fighters similar to himself . His fearsome reputation gave a fillip to his recruiting efforts . Jesse James enlisted , joining his brother Frank ; they later became famous outlaws . General Clinton B. Fisk ordered his men to find and kill Anderson , but they were thwarted by Anderson 's support network and his forces ' superior training and arms . Many militia members had been conscripted and lacked the guerillas ' boldness and resolve . In 1863 , most Union troops left Missouri and only four regiments remained there . These regiments were composed of troops from out of state , who sometimes mistreated local residents — further motivating the guerrillas and their supporters . The Union militias sometimes rode slower horses and may have been intimidated by Anderson 's reputation . 
 On July 23 , 1864 , Anderson led 65 men to Renick , Missouri , robbing stores and tearing down telegraph wires on the way . They had hoped to attack a train , but its conductor learned of their presence and turned back before reaching the town . The guerrillas then attacked Allen , Missouri . At least 40 members of the 17th Illinois Cavalry and the Missouri State Militia were in town but took shelter in a fort . The guerrillas were only able to shoot their horses before reinforcements arrived , killing three of Anderson 's men . In late July , the Union military sent a force of 100 well @-@ equipped soldiers , and 650 other men , after Anderson . On July 30 , Anderson and his men kidnapped the elderly father of the local Union militia 's commanding officer . They tortured him until he was near death and sent word to the man 's son in an unsuccessful attempt to lure him into an ambush , before releasing the father with instructions to spread word of his mistreatment . On August 1 , while searching for militia members , Anderson and some of his men stopped at a house full of women and requested food . While they rested at the house , a group of local men attacked . The guerrillas quickly forced the attackers to flee , and Anderson shot and injured one woman as she fled the house . This action angered his men , who saw themselves as the protectors of women , but Anderson dismissed their concerns , stating that such things were inevitable . They chased the men who had attacked them , killing one and mutilating his body . By August 1864 , they were regularly scalping the men that they killed . 
 In early August , Anderson and his men traveled to Clay County . Around that time , he received further media coverage : the St. Joseph Morning Herald deemed him a " heartless scoundrel " , publishing an account of his torture of a captured Union soldier . On August 10 , while traveling through Clay County , Anderson and his men engaged 25 militia members , killing five of them and forcing the rest to flee . After hearing of the engagement , General Fisk commanded a colonel to lead a party with the sole aim of killing Anderson . 
 = = = Missouri River and Fayette = = = 
 On August 13 , Anderson and his men traveled through Ray County , Missouri , to the Missouri River , where they engaged Union militia . Although they forced the Union forces to flee , Anderson and Jesse James were injured in the encounter and the guerrillas retired to Boone County , to rest . On August 27 , Union soldiers killed at least three of Anderson 's men in an engagement near Rocheport . The next day , the 4th Missouri Volunteer Cavalry pursued them , but Anderson launched an ambush that killed seven Union soldiers . Anderson 's men mutilated the bodies , earning the guerrillas the description of " incarnate fiends " from the Columbia Missouri Statesman . On August 30 , Anderson and his men attacked a steamboat on the Missouri River , killing the captain and gaining control of the boat . They used it to attack other boats , bringing river traffic to a virtual halt . In mid @-@ September , while traveling through Howard County , Union soldiers ambushed two of Anderson 's parties , killing five men in one day . They found the guerrillas ' horses decorated with the scalps of Union soldiers . A short time later , another six of Anderson 's men were ambushed and killed by Union troops ; after learning of these events , Anderson was outraged and left the area to seek revenge . 
 Anderson met Todd and Quantrill on September 24 , 1864 ; although they had clashed in the past , they agreed to work together . Anderson suggested that they attack Fayette , Missouri , targeting the 9th Missouri cavalry , which was based at the town . Quantrill disliked the idea because the town was fortified , but Anderson and Todd prevailed . Clad in Union uniforms , the guerrillas generated little suspicion as they approached the town , even though it had received warning of nearby guerrillas . However , a guerrilla fired his weapon before they reached the town , and the cavalry quickly withdrew into their fort while civilians hid . Anderson and Todd launched an unsuccessful attack against the fort , leading charge after futile charge without injury . The defeat resulted in the deaths of five guerrillas but only two Union soldiers , further maddening Anderson . 
 On September 26 , Anderson and his men reached Monroe County , Missouri , and traveled towards Paris , but learned of other nearby guerrillas and rendezvoused with them near Audrain County . Anderson and his men camped with at least 300 men , including Todd . Although a large group of guerrillas was assembled , their leaders felt that there were no promising targets to attack , because all of the large towns nearby were heavily guarded . 
 = = Raid on Centralia = = 
 On the morning of September 27 , Anderson left his camp with about 75 men to scout for Union forces . They soon arrived at the small town of Centralia and proceeded to loot it , robbing people and searching the town for valuables . They found a large supply of whiskey and all began drinking . Anderson retreated into the lobby of the town hotel to drink and rest . A stagecoach soon arrived , and Anderson 's men robbed the passengers , including Congressman James S. Rollins and a plainclothes sheriff . The two were prominent Unionists , and hid their identities from the guerrillas . As the guerrillas robbed the stagecoach passengers , a train arrived . The guerrillas blocked the railroad , forcing the train to stop . Anderson 's men quickly took control of the train , which included 23 off @-@ duty Union soldiers as passengers . This was the first capture of a Union passenger train in the war . 
 Anderson ordered his men not to harass the women on the train , but the guerrillas robbed all of the men , finding over $ 9 @,@ 000 and taking the soldiers ' uniforms . Anderson forced the captured Union soldiers to form a line and announced that he would keep one for a prisoner exchange , but would execute the rest . He addressed the prisoners , castigating them for the treatment of guerrillas by Union troops . After selecting a sergeant for a potential prisoner swap , Anderson 's men shot the rest . Anderson gave the civilian hostages permission to leave but warned them not to put out fires or move bodies . Although he was alerted of the congressman 's presence in the town , he opted not to search for him . The guerrillas set the passenger train on fire and derailed an approaching freight train . Anderson 's band then rode back to their camp , taking a large amount of looted goods . 
 = = = Battle with Union soldiers = = = 
 Anderson arrived at the guerrilla camp and described the day 's events , the brutality of which unsettled Todd . By mid @-@ afternoon , the 39th Missouri Volunteer Infantry had arrived in Centralia . From the town , they saw a group of about 120 guerrillas and pursued them . The guerrillas heard that the cavalry was approaching , and Anderson sent a party to set an ambush . They drew the Union troops to the top of a hill ; a group of guerrillas led by Anderson had been stationed at the bottom and other guerrillas hid nearby . Anderson then led a charge up the hill . Although five guerrillas were killed by the first volley of Union fire , the Union soldiers were quickly overwhelmed by the well @-@ armed guerrillas , and those who fled were pursued . One Union officer reached Centralia and gave word of the ambush , allowing a few Union soldiers who had remained there to escape . However , most were hunted down and killed ; Anderson 's men mutilated the bodies of the dead soldiers and tortured some survivors . 
 At Centralia , Anderson 's men killed 125 soldiers in the battle and 22 from the train in one of the most decisive guerrilla victories of the Civil War . It was Anderson 's greatest victory , surpassing Lawrence and Baxter Springs in brutality and the number of casualties . The attack led to a near halt in rail traffic in the area and a dramatic increase in Union rail security . Anderson achieved the same notoriety that Quantrill had previously enjoyed , and he began to refer to himself as " Colonel Anderson " , partly in an effort to supplant Quantrill . Sutherland saw the massacre as the last battle in the worst phase of the war in Missouri , and Castel and Goodrich described the slaughter as the Civil War 's " epitome of savagery " . However , Frank James , who participated in the attack , later defended the guerrillas ' actions , arguing that the federal troops were marching under a black flag , indicating that they intended to show no mercy . 
 = = Aftermath of Centralia = = 
 Anderson left the Centralia area on September 27 , pursued for the first time by Union forces equipped with artillery . Anderson evaded the pursuit , leading his men into ravines that the Union troops would not enter for fear of ambush . In the aftermath of the attacks , Union soldiers committed several revenge killings of Confederate @-@ sympathizing civilians . They burned Rocheport to the ground on October 2 ; the town was under close scrutiny by Union forces , owing to the number of Confederate sympathizers there , but General Fisk maintained that the fire was accidental . Anderson watched the fire from nearby bluffs . 
 Anderson visited Confederate sympathizers as he traveled , some of whom viewed him as a hero for fighting the Union , whom they deeply hated . Many of Anderson 's men also despised the Union , and he was adept at tapping into this emotion . The Union soldier held captured at Centralia was impressed with the control that Anderson exercised over his men . Although many of them wished to execute this Union hostage , Anderson refused to allow it . On October 6 , Anderson and his men traveled to meet General Price in Boonville , Missouri . Price was disgusted that Anderson used scalps to decorate his horse , and would not speak with him until he removed them . He was , however , impressed by the effectiveness of Anderson 's attacks . Anderson presented him with a gift of fine Union pistols , likely captured at Centralia . Price instructed Anderson to travel to the Missouri railroad and disrupt rail traffic , making Anderson a de facto Confederate captain . 
 Anderson traveled 70 miles ( 110 km ) east with 80 men to New Florence , Missouri . The group then traveled west , disregarding the mission assigned by General Price in favor of looting . Anderson reached a Confederate Army camp ; although he hoped to kill some injured Union prisoners there , he was prevented from doing so by camp doctors . After Confederate forces under General Joseph O. Shelby conquered Glasgow , Anderson traveled to the city to loot . He visited the house of a well @-@ known Union sympathizer , the wealthiest resident of the town , brutally beat him , and raped his 12- or 13 @-@ year @-@ old black servant . Anderson indicated that he was particularly angry that the man had freed his slaves and trampled him with a specially trained horse . Local residents gathered $ 5 @,@ 000 , which they gave to Anderson ; he then released the man , who died of his injuries in 1866 . Anderson killed several other Union loyalists and some of his men returned to the wealthy resident 's house to rape more of his female servants . He left the area with 150 men . 
 = = Death = = 
 Union military leaders assigned Lieutenant Colonel Samuel P. Cox to kill Anderson , providing him with a group of experienced soldiers . Soon after Anderson left Glasgow , a local woman saw him and told Cox of his presence . On October 26 , 1864 , he pursued Anderson 's group with 150 men and engaged them in battle . Anderson and his men charged the Union forces , killing five or six of them , but turned back under heavy fire . Only Anderson and one other man , the son of a Confederate general , continued to charge after the others retreated . Anderson was hit by a bullet behind an ear , likely killing him instantly . Four other guerrillas were killed in the attack . The victory made a hero of Cox and led to his promotion . 
 Union soldiers identified Anderson by a letter found in his pocket and paraded his body through the streets of Richmond , Missouri . The corpse was photographed and displayed at a local courthouse for public viewing , along with Anderson 's possessions . Union soldiers claimed that Anderson was found with a string that had 53 knots , symbolizing each person he had killed . Union soldiers buried Anderson 's body in a field near Richmond in a fairly well @-@ built coffin . Some of them cut off one of his fingers to steal a ring . Flowers were placed at his grave , to the chagrin of Union soldiers . In 1908 , Cole Younger , a former guerrilla who served under Quantrill , reburied Anderson 's body in the Old Pioneer Cemetery ( Mormon ) in Richmond , Missouri . In 1967 , a memorial stone was placed at the grave . 
 Archie Clement led the guerrillas after Anderson 's death , but the group splintered by mid @-@ November . Most Confederate guerrillas lost heart around that time , owing to a cold winter and the failure of General Price 's 1864 Missouri campaign , which ensured that the state would remain under Union control . As the Confederacy collapsed , most of Anderson 's men joined Quantrill 's forces or traveled to Texas . Jim Anderson moved to Sherman , Texas , with his two sisters . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After the war , information about Anderson initially spread through memoirs of Civil War combatants and works by amateur historians . He was later discussed in biographies of Quantrill , which typically cast him as an inveterate murderer . Three biographies of Anderson were written after 1975 . Asa Earl Carter 's novel The Rebel Outlaw : Josey Wales features Anderson as a main character . In 1976 , the book was adapted into a film , The Outlaw Josey Wales , which portrays a man who joins Anderson 's gang after his wife is killed by Union @-@ backed raiders . James Carlos Blake 's novel Wildwood Boys is a fictional biography of Anderson . He also appears as a character in several films about Jesse James . 
 Historians have been mixed in their appraisal of Anderson . Wood describes him as the " bloodiest man in America 's deadliest war " and characterizes him as the clearest example of the war 's " dehumanizing influence " . Castel and Goodrich view Anderson as one of the war 's most savage and bitter combatants , but they also argue that the war made savages of many others . According to journalist T. J. Stiles , Anderson was not necessarily a " sadistic fiend " , but illustrated how young men became part of a " culture of atrocity " during the war . He maintains that Anderson 's acts were seen as particularly shocking in part because his cruelty was directed towards white Americans of equivalent social standing , rather than targets deemed acceptable by American society , such as Native Americans or foreigners . 
 In a study of 19th @-@ century warfare , historian James Reid posits that Anderson suffered from delusional paranoia , which exacerbated his aggressive , sadistic personality . He sees Anderson as obsessed with , and greatly enjoying , the ability to inflict fear and suffering in his victims , and suggests he suffered from the most severe type of sadistic personality disorder . Reid draws a parallel between the bashi @-@ <unk> and Anderson 's group , arguing that they behaved similarly . 
 = Bolli Bollason = 
 Bolli Bollason ( also Bolli <unk> ) was a key historical character in the Medieval Icelandic Laxdæla saga , born around 1000 . He grew up in <unk> , at Helgafell on the <unk> Peninsula in Iceland . He divided his time between Helgafell and Tunga , the home of Snorri the Goði . [ Note 1 ] He was held in the highest regard among the contemporary Scandinavian rulers , and also in the Byzantine Empire , where he became the first known West Norseman in the Varangian Guard . [ Note 2 ] It is believed that he had reached the rank of manglabites in the Byzantine army , and on his return to Iceland , his finery and recognition earned him the name " Bolli the Elegant " . 
 His importance in the literary context of the saga is his prominence as the son of Bolli Þorleiksson and Guðrún <unk> , the two central characters of the work . He is mentioned at the end of the <unk> @-@ Hall þáttur ( The Tale of Sarcastic Halli ) , and is also the subject of his own tale , the <unk> , which was later appended to the end of the manuscripts in the early 14th century . 
 = = Laxdæla saga = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Laxdæla saga or Saga of the People of <unk> is an Icelandic family saga written sometime between 1250 and 1270 , possibly by a woman author . " Vast in conception " , the grand sweep of the saga 's action spans well over a century from AD 890 to 1030 . Alongside Njál 's saga and Egil 's saga , the Laxdæla saga makes the strongest claim of any Icelandic saga for literary greatness . Shaped by continental literary traditions and several types of saga , the characterisation " highlights nobility , splendour and physical appearance " , although : 
 … in their actions the male characters tend not to live up to the grandeur and hyperbole with which they are presented . At foreign courts their stature is aristocratic , but at home in Iceland they are farmers with few outlets other than words and smart clothes for their aspirations to nobility . This is a saga in which even slaves are high @-@ born , descended from the kings of Ireland . 
 The saga is also a feud saga , in which " feuds escalate from trivial local squabbles into unstoppable vendettas . The male protagonists are splendid figures who die heroic deaths , while the women are strong characters who engineer much of the action " . 
 Many manuscripts of the Laxdæla saga have survived , although all printed versions have been based upon the <unk> ( dated 1330 @-@ 1370 ) , the only intact vellum manuscript . <unk> , the distinction between narrative and history did not exist at the time when the sagas were written . However , the sagas develop a " dense and plausible " historical context , with the authenticating details and precision necessary for the narrative . The world within which the local and detailed stories of the individual sagas exist can be confirmed by archaeology and comparison with histories in other languages . 
 = = = Account = = = 
 = = = = Family and early life = = = = 
 Bolli Bollason was one of the People of <unk> , in the Western Quarter of Iceland . He was born in 1006 to Guðrún <unk> , the winter after the killing of his father , Bolli Þorleiksson . Guðrún had been courted by Bolli Þorleiksson and his foster @-@ brother Kjartan Ólafsson , but although she preferred Kjartan , she gave herself to Bolli Þorleiksson on the basis of a false rumour that Kjartan was engaged . The consequent hostilities between the two foster @-@ brothers ended with Bolli Þorleiksson killing Kjartan , and then he in turn being killed by Kjartan 's kinsmen . Bolli Bollason grew up with his brother Thorleik , who was four years his senior , and his mother Guðrún in Helgafell , after she exchanged homes with the renowned Snorri the Goði . 
 Guðrún remarried , this time to Thorkell <unk> , who became a great chieftain in his own countryside and took over the running of the household at Helgafell . This left Bolli able to spend his time both at Helgafell and with Snorri in Tunga , and Snorri became very fond of him . Thorkell was fond of both his stepsons , but Bolli was regarded as " being the foremost in all things " . Thorleik journeyed abroad to Norway , and stayed with King Olaf II for several months . 
 When Bolli was eighteen years old he asked for his father 's portion , as he intended to woo Thordis <unk> , the daughter of Snorri Goði . He set out with his stepfather and a good many followers to Tunga . Snorri welcomed them , and the wedding feast took place that summer . Bolli abode at Tunga , and love grew between him and Thordis . The next summer , Thorleik returned in a goods @-@ laden ship to White @-@ river , " and the brothers greeted each other joyfully " . 
 The two brothers made peace with the sons of <unk> , Kjartan 's kinsmen , at the <unk> Thing ; it is not known how much money was exchanged in compensation as part of the agreement , but Bolli received a good sword , and after the assembly " both sides were thought to have gained in esteem from these affairs " . 
 = = = = Travels abroad = = = = 
 Bolli 's later travels abroad with his brother Thorleik are well documented and notable for his role in the Varangian Guard . They departed Iceland , taking " a great deal of money abroad with him " , and reached Norway in the autumn . They stayed in <unk> for the winter , while King Olaf II was wintering in the east in Sarpsborg . Bolli soon became highly thought of in Norway , and his arrivals at the guild meeting @-@ places were noted for being better arrayed as to raiment and weapons than other townsfolk . Early in the spring the brothers prepared their ship and went east to meet the king . The king thought Bolli " a man of high mettle , " " even peerless among men " , and " the man of greatest mark that has ever come from Iceland . " 
 Bolli boarded a trade @-@ ship bound for Denmark , departing King Olaf in great friendship and with fine parting gifts . [ Note 2 ] Thorleik remained behind , but Bolli wintered in Denmark and became as well regarded as he had been in Norway . Travelling next to Constantinople , he spent many years in the Varangian Guard ; " and was thought to be the most valiant in all deeds that try a man , and always went next to those in the forefront . " The saga also records the finery his followers received from the Byzantine Emperor ( most likely Romanos III ) , and the influence he held after his return to Iceland , some time after the death of King Olaf II : 
 Bolli rode from the ship with twelve men , and all his followers were dressed in scarlet , and rode on gilt saddles , and all were they a trusty band , though Bolli was peerless among them . He had on the clothes of fur which the Garth @-@ king had given him , he had over all a scarlet cape ; and he had <unk> girt on him , the hilt of which was <unk> with gold , and the grip woven with gold , he had a gilded helmet on his head , and a red shield on his flank , with a knight painted on it in gold . He had a dagger in his hand , as is the custom in foreign lands ; and whenever they took quarters the women paid heed to nothing but gazing at Bolli and his grandeur , and that of his followers . 
 The right to bear a gold @-@ hilted sword was one of the privileges of the court rank of manglabites , and is taken as an indicator that Bolli held this rank . In Iceland , his finery and recognition earned him the name " Bolli the Elegant " . His return to Thordis was joyful , and he took over the manor of Tunga when Snorri died at 67 years of age . Bolli had two children with Thordis : <unk> <unk> and Ospak Bollason . 
 = = Tales = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In Norse literature , a tale or þáttur referred to a short narrative often included as an episode in a larger whole , such as part of a saga . The Bolla þáttur <unk> , or Bolli Bollason 's Tale , is such a narrative about an episode in the life of Bolli Bollason , taken from the 14th century <unk> which contains the Laxdæla saga . 
 According to the tale , a man called Thorolf Stuck @-@ up had a bull which wounded his neighbours ' farm animals , damaged haystacks and caused " a great deal of trouble " . When an upstanding local farmer named Thord saw the bull damaging the stacks of peat on his farm at <unk> , he lunged at the animal with a spear and struck it dead . In revenge , Thorolf killed Thord 's seven- or eight @-@ year @-@ old son Olaf , to the disgust of Thorolf 's wife and kinsmen . Thorolf fled and eventually secured the protection of Thorvald <unk> , a prominent leader who lived at <unk> . After Christmas , Thorvald secured for him the safekeeping and support of <unk> of <unk> , who often sheltered outlaws . 
 Thord 's wife Gudrun , a first cousin of Bolli , asked him to take over the prosecution of the case . Accompanied by Arnor Crone 's @-@ nose and a large company of men , Bolli attended the <unk> Assembly . Thorvald and <unk> intended to block the prosecution " by force of arms and numbers " , but when they realised they were outnumbered , they withdrew and Bolli successfully had Thorolf outlawed . Passage out of Iceland was obtained for Thorolf aboard a merchant vessel at <unk> . However , Bolli believed it would have been improper if the outlawed Thorolf were to escape , and having ridden north to <unk> , he drew his sword Leg @-@ biter and " struck a blow right through " Thorolf , killing him . 
 He earned himself a great deal of honour by this , as men thought it quite an accomplishment to have the man outlawed in another district and then venture alone into the hands of his enemies and kill him there . 
 = = = <unk> @-@ Halla þáttr = = = 
 Bolli died during the reign of Harald III of Norway , as is recorded at the end of The Tale of Sarcastic Halli . The tale makes reference to Bolli 's military prowess , in ironic contrast to the tale 's protagonist : 
 Harald learned of the deaths of two of his men from Iceland , Bolli the Elegant and Sarcastic Halli . 
 He said of Boli , " The warrior must have fallen victim to spears . " 
 But of Halli he said , " The poor devil must have burst eating porridge " 
 = Sphecomyrma = 
 Sphecomyrma is an extinct genus of ants which existed in the Cretaceous approximately 79 to 92 million years ago . The first specimens were collected in 1966 , found embedded in amber which had been exposed in the cliffs of Cliffwood , New Jersey , by Edmund Frey and his wife . In 1967 , zoologists E. O. Wilson , Frank Carpenter and William L. Brown , Jr. published a paper describing and naming Sphecomyrma freyi . They described an ant with a mosaic of features , a mix of characteristics from modern ants and aculeate wasps . It possessed a metapleural gland , a feature unique to ants , it was wingless and possessed a petiole which was ant @-@ like in form . The mandibles were short and wasp @-@ like with only two teeth , the gaster constricted and the middle and hind legs had double tibial spurs . The antennae were , in form , midway between the wasps and ants , having a short first segment but a long flexible funiculus . Two additional species , S. canadensis and S. mesaki , were described in 1985 and 2005 respectively . 
 The genus is among the earliest known ants to roam the earth and at the time was considered to be the evolutionary link between ants and wasps . It was suggested that ants diverged from <unk> wasp ancestors , but later studies show that they originate from a different clade . It shows resemblance to extant primitive ants such as Nothomyrmecia and members of the tribe Aneuretini . Some scientists , however , doubted the nature of these ants and believed they were wasps , due to the possible absence of the metapleural gland in Sphecomyrma and short scapes which are key diagnostic traits for ants . Additional specimens collected proved Sphecomyrma was an ant as the metapleural gland was identified . Further fossil evidence and the slender body and large compound eyes suggest that they were <unk> , foraging socially above ground and out in open areas . The sphecomyrmines , including these ants , most likely vanished by the end of the Mesozoic . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Before the discovery of the first Sphecomyrma fossils , there were no fossil records of any ants from Cretaceous amber and the oldest social insects at the time extended back to the Eocene epoch ; the earliest known ant at the time was described from a forewing found in the Claiborne Formation in Tennessee . The great diversity of ant fossils found in the Baltic amber and Florissant shales of the Oligocene and in the Sicilian amber of the Miocene have prompted entomologists to search for ants of Cretaceous age that may link ants and non @-@ social wasps together . Such a link may shed light on the early origins of ants , but no fossils of any social insect existed before S. freyi was discovered , thus the early evolution of ants remained a mystery . Only a single hymenopterous Upper Cretaceous fossil has been the subject of possible significance to the evolution of aculeate wasps and ants . A single forewing was discovered in Siberia and described in 1957 as <unk> sibiricus , with the author noting that the wing <unk> closely resembles those of <unk> or scoliid wasps , of which these families of wasps have close connections with the origin of ants . However , there were several problems : as the fossil was only a single wing , scientists could not explain or answer whether or not the insect had key diagnostic body traits that would even place it within the subclade <unk> . 
 In 1966 , the first fossils of S. freyi were collected by Edmund Frey and his wife during a trip collecting mineralogical specimens in the Magothy exposure near Cliffwood Beach in Raritan Bay , New Jersey . They found a large deep red piece of amber embedded in clay containing a number of insects , including some Diptera flies . The approximate age of the fossils dates back to the Cretaceous , 92 million years ago . Donald Baird of Princeton University first notified Carpenter about the recent discovery , and David <unk> of the Newark Museum arranged to transfer the specimens to be studied and examined . At the time , the existence of ants of Cretaceous age was significant , but the ants were most likely not detected as much of the amber around the site was previously collected . The discovery of the ants confirmed the existence of Cretaceous ants , and the appearance of the workers closely matched the speculations of what Mesozoic ants looked like . As a result of these finds , E. O. Wilson and colleagues erected the new subfamily Sphecomyrminae and designated the genus Sphecomyrma ( meaning " wasp ant " ) as the type genus in an article they published in 1967 in the journal Science . The published paper included the first description of S. freyi , which was named after Edmund Frey and his wife . A holotype and a paratype of the species were collected and moved to the Museum of Comparative Zoology , but the holotype was accidentally destroyed . However , a neotype specimen numbered AMNH @-@ NJ @-@ 112 was collected from the Sunrise Landing site near Brunswick in 1994 , and was subsequently donated to the museum . The holotype was destroyed because the amber was accidentally cracked in half , separating the two workers from each other and later stored in a wooden cabinet in an uncovered draw with other fossil insects for 30 years ; the piece eventually deteriorated , appearing more dark and fractured . 
 Although the hypothesised description of what Mesozoic ants looked like was somewhat accurate when compared to actual specimens , some characteristics were inaccurate . They believed that ant @-@ like mandibles first appeared before the development of an ant @-@ like petiole , but such case was proven false when it was opposite on S. freyi specimens ( ant @-@ like petiole first appeared before the development of ant @-@ like mandibles ) . Based on drawings , it was suggested that Mesozoic ants had long mandibles with multiple teeth , toothed tarsal claws and a broadly jointed petiole . Examination of collected specimens , however , shows that these ants had very short mandibles , toothless tarsal claws and a separated petiole . 
 S. freyi remained as the sole member of Sphecomyrma until a fossil closely resembling the species was collected in Canadian amber deposits in 1985 . Wilson provided the first description of the fossil , naming it S. canadensis . He notes that the close resemblance of the fossils to S. freyi in key characteristics strongly support its inclusion in Sphecomyrminae . He further notes that the specimens are the first ants recorded in Canadian amber , but a vast diversity of insects have been found in the amber prior to the discovery , stretching as far back as the 19th century . The discovery of the specimens from Canada indicates that the subfamily was widespread through much of the northern hemisphere during the late Cretaceous . In 2005 , new fossils of an undescribed Sphecomyrma ant and S. freyi were collected in the White Oaks outcrop in Sayreville , New Jersey . The specimens were later donated to the American Museum of Natural History and studied by palaeoentomologists Michael Engel and David Grimaldi , who both provided the first description of the undescribed ant in an American Museum Novitates journal article , naming it Sphecomyrma mesaki . The age of these fossils are estimated at 79 to 92 million years . 
 In 1987 , Russian palaeoentomologist Gennady M. Dlussky elevated the subfamily at family level , renaming it as <unk> to accommodate Sphecomyrma and other fossil insects he studied throughout the Soviet Union . This placement was only short @-@ lived as Wilson , with new morphological evidence , elevated the family back to subfamily level and all studied Cretaceous ants were put into Sphecomyrma or <unk> . However , Dlussky and Russian palaeoentomologist Elena B. <unk> retained their classification and Sphecomyrma remained under <unk> . Their reasons were that the first segments of the antenna were too short to be elbowed and the structure of the mandibles . As elbowed antennae allow brood and food manipulation , or even sociality , it is impossible to classify Sphecomyrma and relatives as ants . Despite the authors ' notes , they did not cite any study as to how ants manipulate items and such with their antennae , but he may have implied that the apices , a feature found on the antenna , may have been too far away from the mandibles . The close distance of the apices from the mandibles would allow manipulation of food or antennation with other nestmates . Another issue was whether or not a metapleural gland was present , a unique feature only found in ants . Despite this and previous claims made by Dlussky saying that sphecomyrmines including Sphecomyrma were most likely solitary or semi @-@ communal , the confirmed existence of the metapleural gland through newly collected fossils confirms that Sphecomyrma and relatives were definitely social . The evidence against Dlussky eventually reinstated Sphecomyrma and the subfamily as members of Formicidae in 1997 , although some sources published before 1997 did not formally recognise Sphecomyrminae at family level . Additional doubts surrounding the nature of Sphecomyrma and relatives emerged when a 1999 paper concluded that the fossil ants found in Cretaceous amber in New Jersey were closer to wasps than they were to ants . This was quickly dismissed due to overwhelming evidence supporting their placement within the Formicidae , and the fact the authors cited unpublished cladograms and disregarded the key diagnostic traits ( synapomorphies ) found in the ants . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 Ants of this genus are considered to be the most primitive within the family Formicidae . The body presents a wasp @-@ like structure but with several ant @-@ like characteristics . These ant @-@ like characteristics , however , are primitive compared to more modern ants , and thus it is intermediate with other primitive ants and aculeate wasps . The presence of the metapleural gland , the <unk> ( a structure resembling a node , which is a segment found between the mesosoma and gaster , the bulbous posterior portion of the metasoma ) , the structure of the petiole and its general physical appearance of an ant concludes Sphecomyrma species are ants rather than wasps ; the absence of the metapleural gland would mean that it is most likely a wasp instead of an ant . It is not exactly known which group of wasps are the descendants of Sphecomyrma , but members of the family Tiphiidae , particularly those in the genus <unk> are strikingly similar with Sphecomyrma . Wilson placed the genus closest to the Tiphiidae among extant wasps , but a later study published in 1975 derives the ants from a later clade and not to the Tiphiidae . 
 Sphecomyrma may hold a close relationship with extant primitive ants . The Australian dinosaur ant ( Nothomyrmecia macrops ) is recognised as the most primitive living ant today , and both ants closely resemble each other . The Eocene genera of Aneuretini also resemble Sphecomyrma ants , which are believed to be the ancestors of Dolichoderinae . The subfamily Myrmeciinae was thought to be the ancestor of Aneuretini because the elongated mandibles ( a well @-@ known feature in Myrmeciinae ants ) , were considered primitive and short mandibles were derived . This theory was proven false after Sphecomyrma specimens had small mandibles . Currently , phylogenetic analyses recognise Sphecomyrma as a sister group to modern living ants , meaning that is a stem @-@ group <unk> . This means that it is more closely related to the ants in contrast to any other organism , but the crown @-@ group formicids ( as in the most recent common ancestor of modern ants and their descendants ) are more closely related to each other and distantly related to Sphecomyrma . By the end of the Mesozoic , the sphecomyrmines including these ants vanished . 
 = = Description = = 
 Sphecomyrma ants can be distinguished from other ants by their extremely primitive body structure , small , narrow wasp @-@ like mandibles , short scapes ( the basal segment of the antenna ) and the exceptionally long funiculus , which is four times longer than the scape . The suture ( a pattern of shallow grooves on the head ) is well developed and the <unk> ( the proximal end of the femur ) is absent . The node ( a segment between the mesosoma , the middle part of the body , and gaster ) of the petiole is noticeably dome @-@ shaped and is separated from the propodeum , the first abdominal segment , and parts of the metasoma , the posterior part of the body , by several constrictions . The cuticle ( outer exoskeleton of the body ) is not sculptured and is covered with either scattered or spare setae , which are different types of bristle or hair @-@ like structures . The body structure shows that Sphecomyrma ants were medium @-@ sized formicids . Workers are known to have stingers . 
 = = = S. canadensis = = = 
 S. canadensis was described from a holotype and paratype specimen , one of which is from Canadian amber and the other , the paratype , is poorly preserved and was collected from Medicine Hat amber . The holotype and paratype specimens , numbered CAS 330 and CAS 205 respectively , are currently preserved in the <unk> Research Institute in Ottawa , Canada . Its body is similar to S. freyi , but it has a narrower head than S. canadensis ( the head of S. freyi is 1 @.@ 00 millimetre ( 0 @.@ 039 in ) wide ) . The mesosoma is more robust and the third funicular segment is extremely short and as long as the second segment , while it is twice as long in S. freyi . The width and length of the head are the same at 0 @.@ 66 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 026 in ) and the scapes measure 0 @.@ 50 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 020 in ) The length of the mesosoma varies in the holotype and paratype , ranging from 1 @.@ 32 to 1 @.@ 57 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 052 to 0 @.@ 062 in ) . 
 = = = S. freyi = = = 
 S. freyi ants are small , measuring 4 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 16 in ) . The mandibles are wasp @-@ like , its 12 @-@ segmented antennae are far apart from each other and the second funicular segment is longer than all the other segments . This is unusual for ants , but such case occurs in Nothomyrmecia macrops . The scapes are very short at 0 @.@ 57 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 022 in ) . The compound eyes are very long and convex , situated on the middle side of the head . The clypeus ( one of the sclerites that make up the " face " of an arthropod or insect ) is broad and convex and the ocelli ( photoreceptors ) are well developed . The mesosoma is slender and closely resembles those of <unk> <unk> , measuring 1 @.@ 48 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 058 in ) . The mesonotum is also long and slender with a distinct <unk> scutum and scutellum , but these two features are separated from each other by an axillary region . Spiracles are present on the metathorax , but they are situated just below the scutellum . The petiole has a raised node and separated from the propodeum and the gaster . The gaster measures 1 @.@ 51 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 059 in ) , and an acute protruding stinger , measuring 0 @.@ 33 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 013 in ) is present . The legs are long and slender with two tibial spurs present at each tibia , and the tarsal claws have a median tooth . The two worker specimens have little morphological differences , but they range in size . The head and segments of the antenna tend to be smaller in the holotype specimen while in the paratype they are slightly larger . The pubescence is short but scattered throughout the body , measuring 0 @.@ 001 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 × 10 − 5 in ) . The colour of the specimens appears to be light @-@ brown . The metapleural gland exhibits a notably wide and oval @-@ shaped orifice , ( openings into the body ) . The separation between the orifice and the posterior portion of the propodeum is twice the diameter than the orifice itself . The cuticle situated in the anterior portion ( referring to what is in front ) of the orifice is thinner in contrast to the cuticle surrounding the mesosoma , where it is notably transparent . An oddly shaped chamber can be seen beneath the cuticle , but this is most likely the atrium ( chamber with a hardened , thickened wall ) . The gland itself is covered in a whitish mass and is located in the anterodorsal region ( meaning in front and toward the back ) of the <unk> chamber . The gland is said to be shrunken from its original size . 
 = = = S. mesaki = = = 
 S. mesaki was found in a small piece of amber barely larger than the ant itself . The incomplete specimen numbered AMNH NJ @-@ 1023 is currently preserved at the American Museum of Natural History in New York City . The appendages breach the surface of the amber while the petiole and gaster are completely absent . Engel and Grimaldi coined the specific epithet after Bob <unk> , the original collector who donated the specimen to the museum . The species is discernible from the other species by a portion of the clypeus having an elongated ventral lobe . The broad but shallow scrobes of the antennae , the size of the head and oval @-@ shaped eyes can further distinguish S. mesaki from other Sphecomyrma ants . The only body parts of the ant that are preserved are the legs , mesosoma and head . The head is notably large , but it is shorter than its mesosoma . The head is 2 @.@ 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 087 in ) long and 1 @.@ 95 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 077 in ) wide , with the eyes alone measuring 0 @.@ 66 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 026 in ) . The vertex is covered in sparse pilosity with 0 @.@ 2 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 0079 in ) setae . Ocelli are present on top of the ants ' head , precisely located just above the dorsal tangent . The base of the antennae emerges from the scrobes , which are equally as long as the scape . The eyes are well developed and located above the bottom of the antennae . The clypeus is setose , meaning that it bears bristles or setae , except on the middle part . The mandibles are small and only contain two teeth . The antennae are moderately long , the scapes are very short but the pedicel is even shorter . The mesosoma measures 2 @.@ 66 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 105 in ) and is setose . Several setae are seen around the metanotum ( the dorsal sclerite ) and propodeum . The coxae , the proximal segment and functional base of the leg , are setose ( bearing bristle or setae ) , inflated and large . The metapleural gland opening is small and noticeable , located away from the propodeum and above the <unk> ( the hind of the coxa ) . The legs are moderately long . The forelegs first tarsomere ( <unk> of the tarsus ) is longer than the combined length of other <unk> more distant than the first <unk> . The number of stiff setae varies on each tarsomere : for example , the first tarsomere has seven pairs while the fourth tarsomere has only two pairs . The <unk> claw has a single subapical tooth and the metasoma is absent . 
 = = = Unplaced specimens = = = 
 An additional specimen was described as a possible Sphecomyrma male , but it was never assigned to a specific species . The specimen numbered AMNH NJ @-@ 242 was collected from the White Oaks outcrop in 1995 and is currently preserved in the American Museum of Natural History . The entire body of the male specimen is completely preserved . As most ant genera are based on the morphology of workers , assigning males to a species or a genus is rarely done unless they are taken from a colony . However , its size , petiole structure , the absence of the <unk> and basal antennal structure are similar to that of a Sphecomyrma worker . It is a small ant , measuring 3 @.@ 13 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 123 in ) with three ocelli present on the vertex . Stiff hairs can be found on its frons and vertex . It has large eyes and the face has two pairs of long setae along with smaller setae . The scape is short and is around the same length as the flagellomere ( one of the three main segments of the antenna ) ; the pedicel is only slightly longer than the flagellomere by 0 @.@ 3 times , and the total length of the antenna is 2 @.@ 6 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 10 in ) . Most of its mouthparts are covered in bubbles from the amber , but two <unk> ( a pair of appendages found near the mouth ) are seen protruding . The mesosoma is 1 @.@ 25 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 049 in ) in length and the petiole is 0 @.@ 35 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 014 in ) , which has pairs of long setae on the apex of the nodus . Both <unk> have a pair of setose and the apical spurs on the hind tibia is pectinate . The forewings measure 2 @.@ 25 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 089 in ) and the hindwings are 0 @.@ 7 times the length of the forewings . The shape of the wings is consistent with other formicids . The hindwings have seven hamuli but none is found around the anterior portions . The gaster is 1 @.@ 22 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 048 in ) long and the first and second segments are equally as long as each other ( these two segments alone cover two @-@ thirds of the gaster ) . The <unk> ( the last segments of the abdomen ) is difficult to examine due to a layer of froth covering the area , but there are two pairs of setose lobes . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 As some scientists such as Dlussky believed Sphecomyrma was not an ant , they thought it was solitary and semi @-@ communal . Further statements include that the morphology of sphecomyrmines would prevent workers from transporting larvae or engaging in trophallaxis ( transfer of food between two <unk> ) with them . However , wasps with antennal proportions similar to sphecomyrmines are able to feed their own larvae . The presence of the metapleural gland also shows that Sphecomyrma was a eusocial ( the highest level of organisation of animal sociality ) insect and lived in colonies , as this gland possibly acts as a disinfectant in order to nest in soil and leaf litter without infecting the colony 's nestmates and brood . The large eyes , long appendages and thin exoskeleton suggests that workers were <unk> , where they foraged above ground and out in the open . Fossil evidence further suggests that they foraged socially with other worker ants . 
 = Ni no Kuni : Wrath of the White Witch = 
 Ni no Kuni : Wrath of the White Witch is a role @-@ playing video game , developed by Level @-@ 5 . It was released for the PlayStation 3 in Japan on November 17 , 2011 , and published in Western regions by Namco Bandai Games in January 2013 . The game is a significantly enhanced version of Ni no Kuni : Dominion of the Dark Djinn , released for the Nintendo DS in Japan in December 2010 , featuring similar gameplay and story elements . 
 Players control Oliver , a young boy who sets out on a journey to save his mother . The game is played from a third @-@ person perspective and its world is navigated on foot , by boat , or on a dragon . While players navigate Oliver throughout the game 's world , other characters can be controlled during battles against enemies ; during these battles , players use magic abilities and creatures known as " familiars " , which can be captured and tamed . 
 Development began in 2008 , simultaneous to Dominion of the Dark Djinn . The game 's animated sequences were produced by Studio Ghibli , while the original score was co @-@ composed by Joe Hisaishi . The art style was also inspired by Studio Ghibli 's other productions . The character development of Oliver was a large focus of the game , intending to make children empathize with the character and for adults to relive their adolescence . The developers used the power of the PlayStation 3 to its full potential to render the world with great detail not possible in Dominion of the Dark Djinn . 
 Following its announcement , Ni no Kuni was widely anticipated . It was acclaimed by many reviewers , with praise particularly directed at its story , graphic design and gameplay . Wrath of the White Witch became one of the best @-@ selling PlayStation 3 games , selling over 170 @,@ 000 units within a week of its Japanese release , and over one million units within fourteen months of its Western release . The game won year @-@ end accolades , including Best RPG awards from several gaming publications . A sequel , Ni no Kuni II : Revenant Kingdom , was announced in December 2015 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Ni no Kuni : Wrath of the White Witch is a role @-@ playing game that uses a third @-@ person perspective . Players complete quests — linear scenarios with set objectives — to progress through the story . Outside of quests , players can freely roam the overworld . Players explore towns , villages , dungeons and dangerous places scattered throughout the world , and possess the ability to travel between the world and Oliver 's hometown of Motorville . Upon leaving a location , players enter the World Map , which can be used to select a destination . The world may be fully explored from the beginning of the game without restrictions , although story progress unlocks more gameplay content and forms of transport to navigate the world : players initially run to navigate the world , though later gain the ability to travel by boat , or on the back of a dragon . 
 When players encounter enemies , they enter a battle system . Battles take place on an open battlefield , allowing players to freely roam around the area . During battles , players command a single human ally , or one of the familiars accompanying them ; all characters and familiars are manually moved around the battlefield . To fight enemies , players use magical abilities and " familiars " . Familiars are creatures that can be tamed , in order to be suitable to send out in battle to fight for players . Familiars level up and evolve alongside the human characters ; each familiar has unique statistics and capabilities , and can be upgraded through the use of treats , and equipped with items . When all enemies in a battle are defeated , players may receive experience points , currency and items . When a specific amount of experience is earned , characters ' levels will increase , and their abilities will improve . Health is lost when players are attacked by enemies , while mana points are depleted through the use of magic . Should a party member lose health or mana points , they can be restored by using provisions . Health and mana can also be restored by picking up orbs , known as " <unk> " ; a golden <unk> restores all health , and enables the powerful " Miracle Move " , which may deal significant damage to enemies or provide assistance to allies . 
 The errands that can be undertaken at the request of townspeople and the bounty hunts available from the Taskmaster are collectively known as " tasks " . When tasks are completed , players will earn a number of stamps for their current merit stamp card , which can be exchanged for upgrades . The in @-@ game Wizard 's Companion book includes pages featuring Oliver 's spells , as well as a bestiary , short stories , alchemy recipes and maps . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ni no Kuni follows the journey of Oliver , a resident of Motorville . While trying out a new vehicle designed by his friend Philip , Oliver almost drowns , but is saved by his mother Allie ; however , she immediately dies from heart problems after saving him . As Oliver cries , his tears cause his doll , a gift from his mother , to come to life and reveal itself as a fairy named Drippy , who tells Oliver that he is from another world where an evil wizard named Shadar took control . He also tells Oliver that each person from his world has a " soulmate " , a person that shares a link with someone in Oliver 's world , and that his mother looks very much like a great sage , Alicia , who was captured by Shadar . Realizing that Alicia must have been Allie 's soulmate , Oliver sets out with Drippy to travel to the other world and rescue Alicia in the hope that doing so will bring Allie back in his world . 
 In the other world , Oliver finds a multitude of broken @-@ hearted people affected by Shadar , and uses his new @-@ found magic abilities to restore those pieces of heart which they lack , and travels the world to seek out the four great sages who may be able to help . Along the way , he meets Esther , daughter of one of the great sages , and Swaine , a thief who initially steals a crucial item from them , but who ultimately decides to help . As they enlist the sages ' help , they learn of a wand known as <unk> that could be used to defeat Shadar , but are at a loss as to how to retrieve it , as it was recently destroyed by Shadar . Soon after , they find themselves many years in the past by the actions of a stranger , and are able to retrieve the wand there . 
 After returning to the present and retrieving three magical stones to complete the wand , Oliver learns that his mother Allie was in fact the great sage , Alicia . Realizing she could not defeat Shadar , and that he had destroyed his soulmate in the other world to avoid the possibility of being defeated through them , she chose to travel into both the future and into Oliver 's world in the hopes of finding his next soulmate ; after settling in to this new world , she eventually gave birth to her son , Oliver , who unknowingly became Shadar 's soulmate . After he is defeated , Shadar 's past is shown . He was once a soldier who helped a young girl against orders , and whose hometown was destroyed to set an example ; a being known as the White Witch called to him to embrace his despair and become the Dark Djinn , Shadar . The spirit of Alicia talks to the dying Shadar , who realises that the girl he saved was the young Alicia herself . Shadar then uses his power to sever the link between himself and Oliver , in order to save Oliver from dying as well . 
 With Shadar defeated , Oliver prepares to return home , but the White Witch appears and casts a spell known as " manna " , an ash @-@ like substance that turns all living beings in the three major cities into undead @-@ like creatures . A girl named Pea , who has been appearing to Oliver on occasion , travels with the group and uses her magic to clear the cities of manna and restore the people to normal ; the group then travel to defeat the White Witch herself . They discover that she was a young queen called Cassiopeia from thousands of years ago who had noble intentions , but was manipulated by her " council of twelve " , calling themselves the <unk> , who desired to run the country . Feeling powerless , she found and used the manna spell , believing it would bring peace and prosperity to her people . When the horrific effects of manna were revealed , she gradually witnessed the death of all of her subjects , including the council , and found herself on her own ; she was gradually driven to despair and became the White Witch , believing that all life must be destroyed in an attempt to " start over " . Her power created an illusory version of the council to oversee the destruction of the world , but the remains of her kind intentions also created the council member that helped the group by sending them back in time , as well as Pea , the incarnation of her as a child . Having been defeated , Cassiopeia fuses together with Pea and is restored to her former , kind self . After assisting the group in destroying the <unk> , the last manifestations of the council , Cassiopeia declares that she will dedicate her life to making amends for her actions and Oliver bids farewell to his friends before returning to his old life in Motorville . 
 = = Development = = 
 Conceived as a project for Level @-@ 5 's tenth anniversary in 2008 , Ni no Kuni : The Another World was announced in the September 2008 issue of Famitsu , as a title for the Nintendo DS . In June 2010 , Level @-@ 5 announced that the game would also be released for the PlayStation 3 , with significant differences ; the DS version was renamed Ni no Kuni : Dominion of the Dark Djinn , while the PlayStation 3 version was given the title Ni no Kuni : Wrath of the White Witch . Both versions were revealed to be in development separately , only retaining the same " story axle " , while features such as artwork , graphics and specifications all received significant changes . Journalists noted that the game 's announcement ignited widespread anticipation within the gaming industry . 
 To spur pre @-@ order game sales , Namco Bandai collaborated with several retail outlets to provide a special edition version of the game , with extra features and content . The " Wizard 's Edition " includes a unique case packaging , the Wizard 's Companion book , a Drippy plush doll , as well as exclusive downloadable content . The game was originally released in Japan on November 17 , 2011 , and in Western regions in early 2013 : on January 22 in North America , January 31 in Australia , and February 1 in Europe . 
 = = = Story and setting = = = 
 The team wanted the theme of the game to resonate with children ; they initially considered the idea of expressing adventure and dreams . They later explored the concept of a child 's greatest influence , their mother , and the possibility of losing them . Although the framework of the story was completed prior to Studio Ghibli 's involvement with the game , they still took part in many discussions regarding some ideas , including the game 's final scenes . 
 The majority of the game takes place in a magical world , referred to as the " other world " . To avoid making the world map feel outdated , the team modernized the design by arranging the terrain in " fun and fascinating ways " . The game 's open world was designed to remind players of a " miniature diorama " , intending to invoke reminiscence to an older time , as well as the feeling of freshness . Other segments of the game are set in Oliver 's fictional hometown of Motorville . The town is modelled after an American town in the peak of the automotive industry during the 1950s and 1960s ; this decision was made due to Oliver 's interest in cars and machines . Motorville is geographically based near the city of Detroit , Michigan ; the Japanese version of the town was named " Hotroit " . 
 = = = Art design = = = 
 Level @-@ 5 collaborated with Studio Ghibli to produce the game 's animated sequences , and the game features graphics and visuals replicating the traditional animation style of Studio Ghibli films . The collaboration began when musician Naoya Fujimaki , who had previously worked with both companies , introduced Level @-@ 5 president Akihiro Hino to Studio Ghibli president Toshio Suzuki . At the time , Studio Ghibli had completed work on Ponyo ( 2008 ) , and the animation team had no ongoing projects , which influenced Suzuki 's decision to collaborate with Level @-@ 5 . Another influencing factor of the collaboration was witnessing Hino 's passion for the project . Studio Ghibli approached the production process in the same way that they would create an animated film . Work on the animation began in July 2008 , and took much longer than the predicted three months . 
 Studio Ghibli 's Yoshiyuki Momose served as the game 's director of animation , staging the scenes and directing actors during the motion capture sessions . He was also assigned to drawing character designs and storyboards . Hino wished the game to have a heartwarming feel ; the artwork and character movements was greatly inspired by Studio Ghibli 's work , particularly due to their attention to detail , as well as their talent in creating storyboards and utilizing camera control . The development team constantly watched Studio Ghibli 's films during development . Game director Ken <unk> regularly worked with Studio Ghibli , swapping and reviewing assets , while Hino worked with the studio in regards to the game 's dialogue and animated sequences . To make Studio Ghibli 's hand @-@ drawn cutscenes and the game engine 's real @-@ time cutscenes transition seamlessly , Level @-@ 5 adjusted the latter 's color tones , shadows and character movements . For the backgrounds , the team used deep colors , unifying them so they would not look like " a mass of polygons " . The team found particular difficulty in animating the game 's cel shaded appearance , and spent time researching Studio Ghibli animation to recreate their traditional animation . 
 When designing the familiars , Level @-@ 5 accounted for the characteristics of their surrounding area , which inspired the later design . Some of the initial familiar designs were deemed either creepy or " overly @-@ cute " , and adapted accordingly to match the style of Studio Ghibli 's artwork . 
 = = = Character development = = = 
 For the game 's characters , the team wished to explore the concept of opposites , mainly represented by the White Witch 's goal to destroy the world , and Oliver 's attempts to save it . The character performances were mostly recorded using motion capture technology , followed by manual adjustment by the team to make a " more anime @-@ like movement " . The game 's characters were particularly inspired by Level @-@ 5 's previous work on the Professor Layton series ( 2007 – present ) . During development , Momose suggested that the team design the clothes in a modern fashion , in order for players to gain a " stronger sense that you have stepped out of the familiar and into a different world " . 
 The game 's main playable character , Oliver , is a 13 @-@ year @-@ old boy . The team decided to make him a child as they wished to showcase a coming of age story . They wanted children to empathize with Oliver 's development , and adults to relive the excitement of their adolescence . A major part of the story is Oliver 's personal development , which Hino describes as " the process of how a child grows into an adult " . In regards to Oliver 's physical appearance , Momose made his outfit represent a young boy in 1950s America , which was the inspiration for his hometown . 
 For the localization of the game , the team decided to give the character of Drippy a Welsh accent , citing comedian Rhod Gilbert as a reference point . Steffan Rhodri was ultimately cast as Drippy ; the team immediately felt that he fit the role , during his first audition . The Fairy Godmother character was initially conceived as an " older lady with a perm " , which evolved into the concept of a " mountain @-@ like woman " . The method that she uses to give birth , in which the offspring burst forth , was inspired by the process that sea anemones lay eggs . The character of Cassiopeia was conceived in a quick meeting , after which the background information and story documents were handed to Momose , who drew the character based on the information . Cassiopeia underwent various changes throughout development . In particular , Momose suggested possible alterations to her physical appearance , such as the size of her head , and changing colors to reflect her emotions . The character Pea was named as a reference to the fairy tale The Princess and the Pea , while her Japanese name of <unk> is a reference to the word " kokoro " ( 心 , heart ) . 
 = = = Technical and gameplay development = = = 
 Ni no Kuni : Wrath of the White Witch was developed for the PlayStation 3 . The team planned to bring the game to the console from the beginning of development , but opted to work on the DS version of the game beforehand due to the larger number of DS users in Japan at the time . The team found the PlayStation 3 allowed them to render the game world with great detail , using the hardware to its full potential to present the animation , world and music . Hino felt that the PlayStation 3 version allowed the game 's music to accompany the imagery , which was not possible on the DS version . The team found particular technical difficulty in animating Oliver 's cape , which was overcome by a combination of mathematical calculations and hand @-@ drawn motions by the programmers and graphic artists , respectively . 
 The team considered utilizing the PlayStation Move controller for casting spells in the game , in a similar fashion to the use of the touchscreen in the DS version , though ultimately decided against it as it would limit the potential sales . The battle system was revised over ten times , in order to achieve something new and unique . For about a year of development , the battle system used a turn @-@ based system , though this was ultimately changed when the team felt that it was not fun for players . The team eventually merged turn @-@ based combat and action elements , popular in Japanese and Western regions , respectively , in order to appeal to both regions . 
 Level @-@ 5 worked with localization company <unk> to translate the game ; the two studios collaborated for many weeks . The team found great difficulty when localizing the game for Western regions , particularly due to the large amounts of text and audio that required translation . Other minor changes to the artwork and animation also occurred , such as making Oliver bow in a Western manner . By December 12 , 2012 , development on the localized version of Wrath of the White Witch was completed and the game was submitted for manufacturing . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Ni no Kuni : Wrath of the White Witch received critical acclaim . Metacritic calculated an average score of 85 out of 100 , indicating " generally favorable reviews " , based on 89 reviews . GameRankings assigned it an average review score of 86 % based on 64 reviews . Reviewers praised the visual design , characters and story , soundtrack , and combat system . Colin Moriarty of IGN named Ni no Kuni " one of the best RPGs " , and among the best PlayStation 3 exclusives , and Kevin VanOrd of GameSpot wrote that it joins the " hallmark of the greatest RPGs " . 
 The game 's artistic design received acclaim , being favorably compared to Studio Ghibli 's previous work . Eurogamer 's Oli Welsh wrote that the artists of Level @-@ 5 and Studio Ghibli have collaborated to make a game that belongs to both studios . Moriarty of IGN called the game " unquestionably gorgeous " , surpassing the visuals of most other games . Destructoid 's Jim Sterling echoed these remarks , stating that " few titles can hope to come as close " . GameSpot 's VanOrd felt that the " cartoonish visuals are heightened by extraordinary visual details " , contributing to the " sense of wonder " created by the game . Stephanie Bendixsen of Good Game called the art " vibrant and exciting " , noting that it " brings the game to life in the most beautiful way " . 
 Brittany Vincent of GamesRadar found the story poignant , and IGN 's Moriarty named it one of the game 's standout features . GameSpot 's VanOrd felt that the game 's themes and dialogue positively contributed to the story , appreciating the use of humor , and GameTrailers called the writing " top notch " . Conversely , Joystiq 's Sinan Kubba wrote that the story lacked the charm that the art style possessed , while Polygon 's Philip Kollar felt that the game 's art style was the only motive to complete the story , which he felt was predictable . Some reviewers commented on the pacing of the story ; Eurogamer 's Welsh found that it was " too slow to surprise or to develop its mysteries " , while GamesRadar 's Vincent found the pace believable . The game 's side quests also received praise ; GameTrailers felt that they provide insight into the world and Eurogamer 's Welsh commended their variety , while Polygon 's Kollar conversely found them uninteresting and " single @-@ minded " . 
 The world and environments of the game drew acclaim from many reviewers . Electronic Gaming Monthly 's Andrew Fitch named the world one of the game 's standout features , praising the diversity of the locales . Jason Schreier of Kotaku praised the " care and precision " with which the world was crafted . Kimberley Wallace of Game Informer called the world " breathtaking " , and Destructoid 's Sterling felt that the world was " adorable " , praising the design and use of the familiars . 
 The game 's characters polarized reviewers . Some felt that the characters were inventive and interesting , while others noted that they lacked personality . Bendixsen of Good Game called the characters " imaginative and wacky " , while IGN 's Moriarty felt that Oliver 's uniqueness was one of the standout points of the game , and found that it made him care about the character . Destructoid 's Sterling disliked Oliver , but found that the supporting characters compensate . Wallace of Game Informer felt that the characters lack personality , and only exist to assist Oliver 's journey . Joystiq 's Kubba echoed similar remarks , stating that the characters have " the depth of a toothbrush " . Similarly , the voice acting received mixed reactions ; IGN 's Moriarty felt that the English voice for Oliver was the most disappointing , but praised the other voice acting , and Ian Dransfield of VideoGamer.com wrote that the English dub is " worth hearing " . 
 Many reviewers found the battle system a refreshing mix from other role @-@ playing games . Fitch of Electronic Gaming Monthly commented that " it keeps getting better the longer you play " . Joystiq 's Kubba called the game 's combat a " triumph " , praising its ability to blend different styles , and GameTrailers found it " immensely satisfying " . Kotaku 's Schreier felt that the combat never feels unfair , although criticized the use of the artificial intelligence during the battle . Phil <unk> of Official PlayStation Magazine found the game 's consistent battle encounters irritating , but that combat is " otherwise a pleasure " . Polygon 's Kollar felt that the game 's artificial intelligence resulted in a " sloppy " and " frustrating " combat system . 
 Reviewers praised the use of music in the game . IGN 's Moriarty felt that it was appropriate in every situation , praising its ability to create emotion and involve players in the experience . GameTrailers found the soundtrack " powerful " , commenting on its appropriate use during gameplay , and GamesRadar 's Vincent named it " breathtaking " . Sterling of Destructoid favorably compared the soundtrack to Dragon Quest VIII , praising the orchestral qualities and " sense of fun " . Chris Scullion of Computer and Video Games wrote that the music ensures the game " sounds as good as it looks " . Eurogamer 's Welsh called the music " a lush and romantic treat " , though criticized the repetitiveness of the battle music . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Within seven days of its original release in Japan , Ni no Kuni : Wrath of the White Witch sold over 170 @,@ 000 units . Following its release in the United Kingdom , the game topped the charts , and sold out in many stores across the region . By March 2014 , the game had shipped over 1 @.@ 1 million copies worldwide , making it one of the best @-@ selling PlayStation 3 games . Many pre @-@ orders of the game 's special edition , the " Wizard 's Edition " , were cancelled due to overselling as a result of a glitch in the order system . All canceled orders were compensated with a voucher and the game 's strategy guide . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Ni no Kuni : Wrath of the White Witch received multiple nominations and awards from gaming publications . Prior to its release , it won Best RPG Game from Computer and Video Games . The game appeared on several year @-@ end lists of the best role @-@ playing games of 2013 , receiving wins from Destructoid , Game Revolution , GameTrailers , IGN , the 18th Satellite Awards and the Spike VGX 2013 Awards . It also received Best Game from The Huffington Post . The game also won Best Sound from Cheat Code Central , and Excellence in Animation at the SXSW Gaming Awards . At the 13th National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers Awards , it received multiple wins , including awards for Animation , Art Direction , Original Light Mix Score , Original Family Game , as well as Original / Adapted Song for " Kokoro no Kakera " . 
 = Edzell Castle = 
 Edzell Castle is a ruined 16th @-@ century castle , with an early @-@ 17th @-@ century walled garden . It is located close to Edzell , and is around 5 miles ( 8 km ) north of Brechin , in Angus , Scotland . Edzell Castle was begun around 1520 by David Lindsay , 9th Earl of Crawford , and expanded by his son , Sir David Lindsay , Lord Edzell , who also laid out the garden in 1604 . The castle saw little military action , and was , in its design , construction and use , more of a country house than a defensive structure . It was briefly occupied by English troops during Oliver Cromwell 's invasion of Scotland in 1651 . In 1715 it was sold by the Lindsay family , and eventually came into the ownership of the Earl of Dalhousie . It was given into state care in the 1930s , and is now a visitor attraction run by Historic Scotland ( open all year ; entrance charge ) . The castle consists of the original tower house and building ranges around a courtyard . The adjacent Renaissance walled garden , incorporating intricate relief carvings , is unique in Scotland . It was replanted in the 1930s , and is considered to have links to esoteric traditions , including Rosicrucianism and Freemasonry . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The first castle at Edzell was a timber motte and bailey structure , built to guard the mouth of Glenesk , a strategic pass leading north into the Highlands . The motte , or mound , is still visible 300 metres ( 980 ft ) south @-@ west of the present castle , and dates from the 12th century . It was the seat of the Abbott , or Abbe , family , and was the centre of the now vanished original village of Edzell . The Abbotts were succeeded as lords of Edzell by the Stirlings of Glenesk , and the Stirlings in turn by the <unk> . In 1358 , Sir Alexander de Lindsay , third son of David Lindsay of Crawford , married the Stirling heiress , Katherine Stirling . Alexander 's son , David , was created Earl of Crawford in 1398 . 
 Edzell became the property of a junior branch of the Lindsay family descended from the 3rd Earl , and in 1513 it was inherited by David Lindsay ( d . 1558 ) . Around 1520 , David Lindsay decided to abandon the original castle , and built a tower house and <unk> , or courtyard , in a more sheltered location nearby . The selection of a site overlooked by higher ground to the north suggests that defence was not the primary concern . David became the Earl of Crawford in 1542 , on the death of his cousin the 8th Earl , who had disinherited his own son Alexander , the " Wicked Master " . He proceeded to extend the simple tower house , in around 1550 , by the addition of a large west range , incorporating a new entrance gate and hall . Lord Crawford also built <unk> Castle , 12 miles ( 19 km ) north of Edzell , possibly as a hunting lodge , at around the same time . 
 = = = Sir David Lindsay , Lord Edzell = = = 
 David Lindsay , the 9th Earl 's son , was educated in Paris and Cambridge , and travelled in continental Europe . His father had nominated the son of Alexander , the Wicked Master , as heir to the earldom , returning the title to the senior line of the family , and thus Lindsay did not succeed to the earldom on his father 's death . However , he was knighted in 1581 , became a Lord of Session ( a senior judge ) , taking the title Lord Edzell , in 1593 , and in 1598 was appointed to the Privy Council . A Renaissance Man , he undertook improvements to his estates , including mining and woodland planting . Two German prospectors from Nuremberg , Bernard <unk> and Hans Ziegler , were invited to search for precious metals around Edzell . 
 In August 1562 , David Lindsay received Mary , Queen of Scots , at Edzell . The Queen was on a Royal progress , with the aim of subduing the rebellious Earl of Huntly , and spent two nights at Edzell . During her stay she convened a meeting of the Privy Council , attended by the nobility of Scotland . Her son , King James VI , visited Edzell twice ; on 28 June 1580 , and in August 1589 . 
 Sir David further extended the castle in the late 16th century , with the addition of a large north range with round corner towers . He laid out the garden in 1604 , with symbols of England , Scotland and Ireland , to celebrate the Union of the Crowns of the previous year , when James VI <unk> to the English throne on the death of his cousin , Elizabeth I. Sir David died in 1610 , heavily in debt as a result of fines handed down for the unruly conduct of his son , and with both the garden and the north range incomplete . 
 = = = Damage and decline = = = 
 Edzell was not affected by the campaigns of the Royalist Marquess of Montrose in the 1640s , although other properties of the Covenanting Presbyterian David Lindsay ( son of Sir David ) , were attacked . During the Third English Civil War , Oliver Cromwell invaded Scotland and , in September 1651 , his troops took Edzell , and were stationed there for one month . By the time of the Presbyterian settlement of 1689 , the Lord of Edzell , David 's son John Lindsay , had switched allegiances from Presbyterianism to Episcopalianism . Along with the parish minister , he was barred from the parish church , and Episcopal services were held in the great hall at Edzell . 
 The castle began to decline around the time of the 1715 Jacobite Rising . The last Lindsay lord of Edzell , another David , was a Jacobite , a supporter of the exiled James Stuart , the " Old Pretender " . Faced with mounting family debts , David sold the castle to the 4th Earl of Panmure , a fellow Jacobite , for £ 192 @,@ 502 Scots , equivalent to £ 16 @,@ 042 sterling . Lord Panmure , however , forfeited his lands and property for taking part in the failed rebellion . Edzell was sold , by the Crown , to the York Buildings Company , a London waterworks company which had branched into the buying and selling of forfeited property . They proceeded to " asset strip " the property . 
 The castle saw its last military event in 1746 , when a unit of government troops , of the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders , occupied the building , causing further damage . By 1764 , the York Buildings Company was bankrupt , and the remaining contents of the castle , including the roofs , were removed and sold to pay the company 's creditors . The avenue of beech trees , which linked the castle and the village , was felled , and the property was sold to William Maule , Earl Panmure , nephew of the attainted Earl of Panmure . He died in 1782 , and the property passed to his nephew , George Ramsay , 8th Earl of Dalhousie . 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 The castle remained the property of the earls of Dalhousie , who appointed a caretaker from the 1870s , and built a cottage for him in 1901 , which is now in use as a visitor centre . In 1932 , the walled garden passed into state care , followed by the rest of the castle in 1935 . The castle and garden are currently maintained by Historic Scotland and are open to the public year round . The motte and castle are protected as Scheduled Ancient Monuments , while the castle is also a Category A listed building , the highest level of protection for an historic building , and the garden is included in the Inventory of Historic Gardens and Designed Landscapes , the national listing of significant gardens . The caretaker 's house is a Category B listed building . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = The motte = = = 
 The motte , still known as <unk> , is the only remainder of the first Edzell Castle . It lies 300m south @-@ west of the later castle , by a bend in the West Water , and comprises a low , partially natural mound . The motte is aligned north @-@ west to south @-@ east , and is around 36 metres ( 118 ft ) long by 16 metres ( 52 ft ) across at its broadest point , and around 4 metres ( 13 ft ) high . An outer bailey , or courtyard , up to 61 metres ( 200 ft ) across formerly surrounded the motte , and was bordered by a deep ditch . 
 = = = The castle = = = 
 The castle comprises the early 16th @-@ century tower house , the slightly later west range , and the late 16th @-@ century north range . Other buildings to the east and south have now vanished . The red sandstone walls were originally harled . 
 The four @-@ storey tower house was named the Stirling Tower after the original lords of Edzell , the Stirlings of Glenesk , although it is not old enough to have been built by them . It is 16 metres ( 52 ft ) high , and measures 13 metres ( 43 ft ) by 10 metres ( 33 ft ) on plan . The walls are over 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) thick at the basement , narrowing to 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) on the first floor . The tower house is entered from the north , via a door protected by " inverted keyhole " shaped gun holes . A slot adjacent to the door would have held a draw @-@ bar , to reinforce the entry , and several mason 's marks remain around the door . The hall occupies the first floor , above two vaulted cellars . Marks in the wall show the position of a minstrels ' gallery and a timber screen , which concealed a serving area accessed via a narrow stair from the cellar . The broad main spiral stair led up to three further storeys of private chambers , before reaching a <unk> , a small rooftop chamber giving access to a parapet walk . The four corners of the tower have bartizans , or open turrets , and similar projections occur halfway along each wall . The parapet is supported on projecting stones , or corbels , arranged in a pattern of two tiers which alternate , rendering the lower tier purely decorative . Edzell represents an early occurrence of this style , known as chequered corbelling , which became more widespread later in the 16th century . 
 The two @-@ storey west range contains the main entrance , which enters the courtyard via an arched passage . Above the outside gate are spaces where armorial panels were once displayed . The windows on this front , larger than the original ones in the tower house , had iron grilles , and small gun holes beneath them . Beside the entrance was a kitchen , and above , a larger hall and drawing room . Only the western part of the three @-@ storey north range was completed , although the <unk> planned to complete the courtyard . This range had another kitchen , as well as private chambers within the round tower at the north @-@ west corner . It was entered via a stair turret in the courtyard , fragments of which remain , including parts of an intricately carved door surround . Only the foundations of the east and south buildings remain , which probably contained a bakehouse and stables . 
 = = The walled garden = = 
 In addition to extending the castle , Sir David Lindsay also created Edzell 's most unusual feature , the walled garden , or " <unk> " . Similar gardens were probably relatively common in Scotland during the Renaissance , but Edzell is a rare survivor . The garden would have provided a retreat from the castle , and was intended to delight , entertain , and instruct Sir David 's distinguished guests . It was started around 1604 , and shows signs of being hastily completed at his death in 1610 . 
 It is a rectangular enclosure some 52 metres ( 171 ft ) north to south , and 43 @.@ 5 metres ( 143 ft ) east to west , surrounded by a 3 @.@ 6 metres ( 12 ft ) high wall . The north wall is part of the castle courtyard , but the remaining three are intricately decorated . The walls are divided by pilasters ( now removed ) into regular sections , or compartments , each 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) across . Each compartment has a niche above , possibly once containing statues . Those on the east wall have semi @-@ circular pediments carved with scrolls , and with the national symbols of thistle , fleur @-@ de @-@ lis , shamrock and rose , recalling the Union of the Crowns of England and Scotland , under James VI in 1603 . The pediments on the south wall are square , while there are no niches on the west wall , indicating that work may have prematurely come to a halt on Sir David 's death . Below the niches , the compartments are of alternating design . Three sets of seven carved panels occupy every other compartment . Between them , the walls are decorated with a representation of the Lindsay coat of arms , with eleven recesses in the form of a fess chequy , or chequered band , surmounted by three seven @-@ pointed stars , taken from the Stirling of Glenesk arms . Several spaces within the walls , including inside the stars , may have been intended as nesting holes for birds . 
 = = = The carved panels = = = 
 The sets of carved panels depict the seven Cardinal Virtues on the west wall , the seven Liberal Arts to the south , and the seven Planetary Deities on the east wall . Each panel is approximately 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) high by 60 – 75 cm ( 2 @-@ 2 ½ ft ) wide . The deities are depicted in vesica @-@ shaped ( elliptical ) frames , the arts under arches , and the virtues in plain rectangles . W. Douglas Simpson describes the arts panels as the weakest set of carvings , again suggesting money was short for the west wall . He declared the arts panels to be the finest work , and compares the style of the deities to contemporary carvings found in Aberdeenshire , suggesting that the mason responsible may have come from there . 
 The carvings are all based on popular series of engravings , which were often published in pattern books . Nuremberg was the origin of numerous such books , and one may have been brought to Edzell by the miner Hans Ziegler . Specifically , the images of the deities are derived from engravings of 1528 – 29 by the German artist Georg <unk> ( or <unk> Bentz , c . 1500 – 1550 ) , a pupil of Albrecht Dürer ; the initials I. B. appear on the carving of Mars . The arts and virtues are both based on engravings derived from paintings by the Flemish artist Marten de Vos . The engravings , by Jan <unk> and <unk> de Passe , were widely distributed in Scotland , along with those of the deities . Indeed , the image of Prudence is identical to that used by the King 's Master of Works William Schaw , in the spectacular display to welcome Queen Anne to Scotland , following her marriage to James VI in 1589 . 
 = = = Buildings and planting = = = 
 To complement the garden , a bath house and summer house were constructed at the corners of the garden furthest from the castle . The bath house is ruined , but the two @-@ storey summer house survives intact . It comprises a groin @-@ vaulted lower room , with an upper chamber , containing the only surviving example of the castle ’ s carved @-@ oak wall panelling . Charles McKean attributes the design and construction of the garden buildings to Thomas <unk> , an Aberdeenshire stonemason , based on the elaborately decorated gun holes in the summer house . 
 The planting was recreated in the 1930s . No original plan of the renaissance garden survives , although records show fruit was grown in the 17th century . The garden has decorative hedges , trimmed into the shapes of the Scottish thistle , English rose , and French fleur @-@ de @-@ lis . Further planting is clipped into letters , spelling out the two Lindsay family mottoes , Dum Spiro Spero ( while I breathe I hope ) , and <unk> Forte ( endure firmly ) . 
 = = = Interpretations = = = 
 The symbolism of the garden , particularly of the carvings , as well as the repetition of sevens and threes , has inspired many interpretations . The engravings upon which the carvings are based were commonplace in Scotland at the time , and were frequently used in the art of memory , a mnemonic memory technique associated with Freemasonry . The art of memory had become a feature throughout Scottish culture , from the court of Queen Anne , Danish consort of James VI , to the lodges of operative stonemasons . The potential influence of Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe 's symbolic garden at Uraniborg , which was visited by James IV of Scotland in 1590 , has also been noted . 
 Sir David Lindsay would have been well aware of the symbolic allusions of the carvings . In correspondence with his brother , Lord <unk> , he discusses the relationship of the planets to the metals , which he had employed Hans Ziegler to search for on his land . Sir David 's nephew , David Lindsay , 1st Lord Balcarres , was noted for his interest in alchemy and the Rosicrucians . 
 Historian Adam McLean has suggested that the garden is associated with the Rosicrucians , and " should be seen as an early 17th @-@ century Mystery Temple " . McLean describes the garden as a place of instruction , and remarks that the whole structure is reminiscent of " Eliphas Levi 's description of the ancient Tarot of the Egyptians carved into the walls of their initiation temples , to which the candidate was taken to contemplate the sequence of the symbols " . He backs up this suggestion with the observation that the Mantegna <unk> , a set of 15th @-@ century engravings formerly thought to be a <unk> or tarot deck , includes all these images amongst its symbols . 
 = Pawnee Zoo = 
 " Pawnee Zoo " is the second season premiere of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the seventh overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on September 17 , 2009 . In the episode , Leslie accidentally takes a stand in favor of same @-@ sex marriage when she holds a marriage for two male penguins during a publicity stunt for the zoo . 
 The episode was written by Norm Hiscock and directed by Paul Feig . The writing staff sought to address more topical issues during the second season , and the same @-@ sex marriage plot was inspired by the real @-@ life pairing of Harry and Pepper , a pair of romantically involved male penguins at the San Francisco Zoo . However , Hiscock said he was focused more strongly on comedy than making a political or social statement . 
 " Pawnee Zoo " received generally positive reviews , with several commentators claiming it showed improvement and growth compared to the show 's first season , which received lukewarm reviews . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Pawnee Zoo " was watched by 5 million households . Among viewers aged between 18 and 49 , the episode was seen by 30 percent fewer viewers than the first season pilot episode . In March 2010 , " Pawnee Zoo " won the GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding Individual Episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens with Ron ( Nick Offerman ) saying to Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) , " Here 's the situation ... " , prompting her to go into a full rendition of the rap " Parents Just Don 't Understand " . Afterward , he tells her someone is on fire at a park and needs immediate assistance . Later , Leslie holds a marriage for two recently acquired penguins to help promote the Pawnee Zoo . Immediately after the marriage , the two penguins begin having sex in front of a crowd of children , who are informed by an adult in the audience that both penguins are actually males . The Bulge , a gay bar in Pawnee , later sends Leslie a wedding cake with two penguins on top to thank her for supporting the gay community . April ( Aubrey Plaza ) introduces Leslie to her boyfriend Derek ( Blake Lee ) , who himself also has a boyfriend named Ben ( Josh Duvendeck ) , much to Leslie 's confusion . They declare her their " hero " for holding the gay penguin wedding , but Leslie insists it was simply a publicity stunt , not a political statement . Nevertheless , Marcia Langman ( Darlene Hunt ) , a member of the Society for Family Stability Foundation , demands she annul the penguin wedding or resign from the parks department . 
 Ann ( Rashida Jones ) , who has been nursing Mark ( Paul Schneider ) at the hospital since he fell into the pit , says he has acted much nicer since the incident . Ann also reveals she has broken up with Andy ( Chris Pratt ) . Mark and Leslie kissed before he fell , but both insist they are just friends . Mark tries to ask Ann out , but she declines out of respect for Leslie 's friendship . Meanwhile , the Bulge holds a party in Leslie 's honor , which she attends along with Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) to announce she has not taken a political stand . However , she accepts the free drinks they offer her and ends up getting drunk and having a great time . The next day , she is invited to go on the Pawnee Today talk show to discuss her supposed stance on same @-@ sex marriage with Marcia Langman and television host Joan Callamezzo ( Mo Collins ) . 
 Meanwhile , Andy shows up at Ann 's house wearing a fancy suit . He tells her he has matured , gotten an office job and would like to get back together , but Ann declines . The camera follows Andy as he leaves , revealing he is actually living in a tent inside the pit . During the Pawnee Today show , Leslie and Marcia argue fiercely . Leslie insists she has not taken a political position , even after Marcia brings up the recent party at the Bulge . They take several callers , all of whom agree that Leslie should resign . Fed up , Leslie adamantly insists she will not resign , nor will she annul the penguin wedding . Later , she visits Ann and insists that Ann go on a date with Mark . The episode ends with Leslie driving the penguins from the Pawnee Zoo to a zoo in Iowa , where same @-@ sex marriage is legal . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Pawnee Zoo " was written by Norm Hiscock and directed by Paul Feig . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on September 17 , 2009 . It is the first episode to feature Chris Pratt in the title credits as a regular cast member rather than a guest star . The episode addressed the issue of same @-@ sex marriage , typically a controversial social topic for government officials . The staff of Parks and Recreation sought to address more topical issues with the second season episodes , and the writers discussed with series co @-@ creator Michael Schur possible topics for the season debut . They settled on same @-@ sex marriage , which was an issue of particularly high debate at the time , especially in the Los Angeles area . During that discussion , one of the writers brought up the real @-@ life pairing of Harry and Pepper , a pair of romantically involved male penguins at the San Francisco Zoo . The real @-@ life penguins had separated from each other shortly before the episode aired , which resulted in press coverage that the pair " broke up " . 
 Hiscock felt a gay penguin marriage was a good way to connect Leslie 's character and profession to the issue , since a zoo would be part of the parks department . He said , " It seemed like a funny starting place : a cute zoo promotion that spins out of control . " Although the storyline is comedic through its use of penguins in the same @-@ sex marriage , commentators inferred the episode nevertheless takes a position in favor of same @-@ sex marriage . Hiscock said in writing the script , he did not intend to make a strong political or social message , and that the staff was more focused on comedy and developing the Leslie Knope character . However , Hiscock said , " What I like is that Leslie doesn 't back down from her zoo promotion idea and refuses to annul the wedding . In a weird way she takes a stance . " 
 Within a week of the episode 's original broadcast , two deleted scenes from " Pawnee Zoo " were made available on the official Parks and Recreation website . In the first two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ minute clip , Tom talks at the penguin wedding about the " penguin bachelor party " he threw for the birds . Later , Tom and April help prepare Leslie for the Pawnee Today show by impersonating the other guests and berating Leslie without giving her a chance to speak . In the second two @-@ minute clip , Andy gives a tour of his home in the pit , and Leslie changes around Ann 's apartment to change the feng shui after her breakup with Andy . Ann also gives Mark brownies to bring to Leslie , which he promptly starts to eat himself . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 During the episode 's cold open , Leslie Performs the third verse of " Parents Just Don 't Understand " , a rap song by DJ Jazzy Jeff & The Fresh Prince , while Ron tries to tell her about an emergency by saying the song 's starting line , " Here 's the situation " . April presents a stylized stencil poster of Leslie designed in a similar way to the Barack Obama " Hope " poster designed by artist Shepard Fairey , with the word " Knope " instead of " Hope " . While introducing Leslie at a gay bar , April says Leslie is " here to recruit you " , quoting a line from gay rights activist Harvey Milk . At the bar , Leslie sings a karaoke cover of the 2008 Lady Gaga song , " Poker Face " . When Leslie insults Tom 's shirt , he defends it by claiming it was featured in the monthly men 's magazine , Details . When sarcastically asking if Langman wants her to commit <unk> , Leslie accidentally says " <unk> , " a common mispronunciation of the traditional Japanese cultural term . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on September 17 , 2009 , " Pawnee Zoo " was seen by 5 million households , according to Nielsen Media Research . The episode received a 2 @.@ 1 rating among viewers aged between 18 and 49 , a 30 percent drop in viewership compared to the first season pilot episode . 
 " Pawnee Zoo " received generally positive reviews . Time magazine writer James Poniewozik felt the episode " beautifully " merged the political and personal and improved upon previous episodes by using and balancing its supporting characters . Poniewozik added , " ' Pawnee Zoo ' was spot @-@ on , and had me cracking up beginning to end . " Henning Fog of Entertainment Weekly said with " Pawnee Zoo " , the series appeared to be finding its rhythm and starting to distinguish itself from its conceptual spinoff , The Office , which was also created by Parks and Recreation co @-@ creator Greg Daniels . Fog also felt bringing real social issues into the show was a positive direction for the series . Emily Christianson of the Los Angeles Times said " Pawnee Zoo " improves upon the first season by giving more attention to plot points outside the pit . Christianson particularly enjoyed the scenes with Leslie drunk in the bar , and liked the introduction of the Ann and Mark romance . Los Angeles Times writer Jon Caramanica said the same @-@ sex marriage subplot only alters the show 's dynamic " a smidge " , and mainly serves as " another opportunity for misadventure for Leslie Knope " . Caramanica added Poehler is talented , but ill @-@ suited for the goofy Leslie character . 
 Maureen Ryan of the Chicago Tribune said the episode appeared to be heading in a better direction than the first season and , regarding Leslie , added " You start to root for her this season , instead of wishing she would go away . " She also praised the " Parent 's Just Don 't Understand " rap , comparing it to Poehler 's acclaimed rap about the @-@ vice presidential candidate Sarah Palin during a Saturday Night Live sketch . Matt Fowler of IGN said " Pawnee Zoo " was " more solidly entertaining " than the entire first season , and made a stronger effort to build up the supporting cast , particularly by establishing a romance between Jones and Schneider . Fowler particularly praised Pratt and voiced excitement for his new subplot . San Francisco Chronicle writer Tim Goodman , who was very critical of the Parks and Recreation first season , said " Pawnee Zoo " brought new life to the series . Goodman felt the Leslie character was less clueless and ditzy , and that same @-@ sex marriage was " perfect fodder " for the show . Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club commented the " Pawnee Zoo " plot was strong , the supporting cast performed well and that Poehler feels " a lot more comfortable in Knope 's skin . " But Heisler said it " isn 't the best thing on tonight . " Not all reviews were positive . Verne Gay of Newsday voiced admiration for Parks and Recreation , but found " Pawnee Zoo " to be " flat , forced and <unk> " , and did not make proper use of the supporting cast . He gave the premiere episode a C + grade . Johnny Firecloud of CraveOnline praised Poehler and the " Parents Just Don 't Understand " opening , but felt cast members like Jones are wasted . He also said there is little chemistry between Jones and Schneider . 
 In March 2010 , " Pawnee Zoo " won the GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding Individual Episode ( in a series without a regular LGBT character ) . It was nominated alongside the ABC drama series Private Practice , the NBC supernatural drama The Listener and the CW drama / horror series Supernatural in the category . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " Pawnee Zoo " , along with the other 23 second season episodes of Parks and Recreation , was released on a four @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on November 30 , 2010 . The DVD included deleted scenes for each episode . 
 = 2nd Parachute Brigade ( United Kingdom ) = 
 The 2nd Parachute Brigade was an airborne forces brigade formed by the British Army during the Second World War . 
 The 2nd Parachute Brigade was the second parachute infantry brigade to be formed by the British Army in 1942 ; it was initially part of the 1st Airborne Division but in 1943 , after the invasion of Italy , became an independent formation . As an independent brigade it was variously assigned at different times , and served under the command of the 2nd New Zealand Division , the 8th Indian Infantry Division , and the 1st Airborne Task Force . 
 Before the end of the Second World War in Europe the brigade saw active service in Italy , the South of France and Greece . At the end of the European war the brigade returned to the United Kingdom and was intended to join the 44th Indian Airborne Division in the Far East , for service against the Japanese Empire , but the war ended before they sailed . Instead the brigade was assigned to the 6th Airborne Division , which had been named the Imperial Strategic Reserve , and sent to serve in the Mandate of Palestine . 
 Defence cuts in the British armed forces after the war forced a reduction in the number of parachute brigades . By 1948 the 2nd Parachute Brigade was the last surviving parachute formation dating from the Second World War , all other parachute divisions and brigades having been disbanded . The last three battalions of the Regular Army comprised in the brigade returned to the United Kingdom ; later in the same year the unit was posted to the British Army of the Rhine and redesignated the 16th Parachute Brigade . 
 = = Background = = 
 Impressed by the success of German airborne operations during the Battle of France in May 1940 , the British Prime Minister , Winston Churchill , directed the War Office to investigate the possibility of creating a corps of 5 @,@ 000 parachute troops . On 22 June 1940 No. 2 Commando was turned over to parachute duties and on 21 November re @-@ designated the 11th Special Air Service Battalion , with a parachute and glider wing and was later redesignated the 1st Parachute Battalion . It was these men who took part in the first British airborne operation , Operation Colossus , on 10 February 1941 . The success of the raid prompted the War Office to expand the existing airborne force , setting up the Airborne Forces Depot and Battle School in Derbyshire in April 1942 and creating the Parachute Regiment , as well as converting several infantry battalions into airborne battalions in August 1942 . The result was the formation of the 1st Airborne Division with the 1st Parachute Brigade and the 1st Airlanding Brigade . Its commander , Major @-@ General Frederick Arthur Montague Browning , expressed his opinion that the fledgling force must not be sacrificed in " penny packets " and urged the formation of a third brigade . 
 Permission was granted to form another parachute brigade in July 1942 , numbered the 2nd Parachute Brigade , and Brigadier Ernest E. Down was selected to become its first commander . The brigade was assigned the existing 4th Parachute Battalion , transferred from the 1st Parachute Brigade , and two new battalions converted from normal line infantry units to parachute duties : the 5th ( Scottish ) Parachute Battalion , converted from the 7th Battalion , Queen 's Own Cameron Highlanders in May 1942 ; and the 6th ( Royal Welch ) Parachute Battalion , converted from the 10th Battalion , Royal Welch Fusiliers in August 1942 . 
 = = Operations = = 
 The 2nd Parachute Brigade trained in the United Kingdom until June 1943 , when they left for North Africa with the 1st Airlanding Brigade . On arrival the two brigades were joined by the 1st Parachute Brigade , which had already been carrying out independent operations in the area during the Tunisia Campaign , and by the 4th Parachute Brigade , which had been forming in the Middle East . The 1st Airborne Division , now with one air @-@ landing and three parachute brigades , was based at Oran , preparing for the Allied invasion of Sicily under command of the British Eighth Army , commanded by General Sir Bernard Montgomery . During the invasion the division was to conduct three brigade @-@ scale airborne operations : the Ponte Grande road bridge south of Syracuse was to be captured by the 1st Airlanding Brigade , the port of Augusta was to be seized by 2nd Parachute Brigade , and finally the Primasole Bridge over the River Simeto was to be taken and secured by 1st Parachute Brigade . A lack of transport aircraft reduced the number of men that could be deployed , and the 2nd Para Brigade remained in Tunisia in a reserve role . 
 Fighting ended in Sicily on 17 August without use of the brigade ; they were , however , selected to take part in Operation Slapstick , an amphibious landing at the port of Taranto on mainland Italy . The brigade left Bizerta on the 8th of September , the day before the Italian surrender , and landed unopposed . Their only casualties were 58 men from the 6th Parachute Battalion who drowned after their transport ship , HMS Abdiel , hit a mine in the harbour . While the 4th Parachute Brigade pushed inland , the 2nd Brigade assumed responsibility for securing the port and surrounding area . During fierce fighting around the town and airfield of Gioia del Colle the divisional commander , Major @-@ General George F. Hopkinson , was killed and replaced by Brigadier Down . Command of the 2nd Parachute Brigade was given to Brigadier Charles Hilary Vaughan Pritchard . The 1st Airborne Division was withdrawn to England soon after , leaving the 2nd Parachute Brigade in Italy as an independent parachute brigade formation that came under command of the 2nd New Zealand Division . To support an independent role the brigade was assigned its own artillery with nine 6 @-@ pounder anti @-@ tank guns and eight 75mm pack howitzers . They also had their own engineers and other support units were attached , including a pathfinder platoon and a glider squadron . 
 = = = Independent Parachute Brigade = = = 
 On 2 December 1943 the 2nd Parachute Brigade formed the left flank of the 2nd New Zealand Division during the advance towards Orsogna . The New Zealanders were relieved by the 8th Indian Infantry Division , and the brigade continued the advance under their command . The brigade temporarily returned to the 2nd New Zealand Division on 16 January , then fought to the Sangro with the 8th Indian Division again , before going into the reserve at Guardia , from the end of March . The brigade returned to the front line and took part in the Battle of Monte Cassino on 4 April , once again coming under command of the 2nd New Zealand Division . 
 The 2nd Brigade 's next parachute operation was Operation Hasty in June 1944 . This was a small diversionary raid carried out by sixty men from the 6th ( Welch ) Parachute Battalion . They were dropped into the area between Sora and Avezzano , their objective being to harass the Germans withdrawing to the Gothic Line . The mission was a success : a German brigade was diverted to hunt the small force , and a German division was retained on rear @-@ area security duties instead of going into the front line . In June 1944 , the brigade was released from the Eighth Army and joined the 1st Airborne Task Force for airborne operations in the south of France . 
 = = = France = = = 
 The 2nd Independent Parachute Brigade carried out a brigade @-@ sized parachute landing during Operation Dragoon . On 15 August 1944 the brigade 's pathfinders landed in the south of France and set up Eureka beacons to guide the main brigade force to their drop zones . Despite the pathfinders ' success at marking the drop zones , only seventy @-@ three planes placed their parachutists in the correct location . The brigade commanding officer and eighty men were landed near <unk> , as were the 5th ( Scottish ) Battalion 's commanding officer , with half of battalion headquarters , ' C ' Company , and ' D ' Company . Other men were landed as far away as Cannes . The dispersed landings resulted in only about forty percent of the 4th Battalion making it to the brigade forming @-@ up point . Only seventy percent of the 6th ( Welch ) Battalion and only a single company of the 5th ( Scottish ) Battalion had arrived . The brigade headquarters was established at Le <unk> with the 5th ( Scottish ) Battalion company by 04 : 00 , and by 07 : 30 the 4th Battalion had occupied the heights at Le Muy . The 6th ( Welch ) Battalion occupied La Motte and , when the Germans at <unk> surrendered , moved a company into the village . Le Serres was captured by ' C ' Company , 4th Battalion , as was the bridge over the River Naturby on the road to Le Muy . 
 At the drop zone the pathfinders and Royal Engineers were removing anti @-@ glider poles so that the brigade 's glider force could land . The gliders , except for those carrying the anti @-@ tank battery , which were unable to locate the site in the heavy mist and had returned to Italy , landed successfully at 09 : 20 . The other gliders and towing aircraft had circled until the mist cleared . It was the sight of the gliders landing that persuaded the Germans at <unk> to surrender . By 10 : 15 the brigade had achieved all its objectives apart from capturing Le Muy , which had been allocated to the 5th ( Scottish ) Battalion . Units of the brigade fought off several counter @-@ attacks supported by the 64th Airlanding Battery 's guns . The missing men continued to come into the brigade 's area during the morning , and contact was made with American units who had dropped west and south of them . 
 Men continued to arrive in the brigade area , and by 16 : 00 the 4th Battalion could muster over two companies while the 6th ( Welch ) Battalion had over 300 men . Patrols were sent out to ambush German convoys retreating from Le Muy and to reconnoitre the town . At 18 : 00 the brigade anti @-@ tank battery arrived by glider with two American battalions and other supporting units . Patrolling continued over the night of 15 / 16 August , and Le Muy was captured by an American battalion at 15 : 30 . At the same time 115 men of the 5th ( Scottish ) Battalion arrived in the brigade area . On the morning of 18 August units of the American 36th Infantry Division , advancing from the coast , reached Le Muy . The 2nd Brigade then moved to the Frejus area , on 20 August ; Cannes was liberated on the 25 August . The next day the brigade sailed for Naples arriving on 28 August . 
 = = = Greece = = = 
 On its return to Italy the 2nd Parachute Brigade was sent to Rome on 3 September , and moved again on 8 September to a camp near Taranto to prepare for a possible mission in Greece , Operation Manna . The Russian advance in the east had forced the Germans to withdraw from Greece or be cut off from support and reinforcements . Over the night of 12 / 13 October 1944 ' C ' Company , 4th Parachute Battalion , were parachuted onto Megara airfield near Athens to prepare a landing strip for the follow @-@ up waves from the rest of the brigade . The company sustained several casualties while landing in adverse weather conditions that forced the remainder of the brigade to delay their arrival for another two days . 
 Once the brigade had deployed it advanced towards Athens , entering the city on 15 October , just behind the 2nd Special Service Brigade . They fought the retreating Germans for the next three months , advancing from Athens to Salonika , where units of the 2nd Parachute Brigade arrived by landing craft on 8 November . While in Greece the brigade also participated in the occupation of Athens , maintaining order and providing supplies to the population . Having been moved to Italy , the brigade had to return to Greece immediately after the outbreak of the Greek Civil War in December , becoming involved in several fights , suffering heavy casualties . They were joined in Greece by the British 23rd Armoured Brigade . During the civil war the brigade was involved in street fighting in Athens until the communist Greek People 's Liberation Army fighters were forced out of the capital in January 1945 ; they also provided food and other supplies to around 20 @,@ 000 people in Athens every day . 
 = = = Post war = = = 
 In January 1945 the 2nd Parachute Brigade was withdrawn from further operations and relocated to Italy . After the war ended in Europe , the brigade returned to the United Kingdom and reformed as a conventional brigade , losing its additional supporting arms . It had been planned for the brigade to go to the Far East and join the 44th Indian Airborne Division , fighting in Burma against the Japanese . However , the war ended before they departed , and instead the brigade was assigned to the 6th Airborne Division , which had been sent to Palestine . Leaving the United Kingdom the brigade arrived in Palestine on 22 October , and were based around Gaza . 
 The 6th Airborne Division had been named the Imperial Strategic Reserve and served in Egypt until September 1945 , when it moved to Palestine in an internal @-@ security role , to counter the activities of the Jewish paramilitary movements <unk> , Palmach , Irgun and the Stern Gang . When the 1st Airborne Division was disbanded in November 1945 , the 6th became the only airborne division in the British Army . While in Palestine in December 1947 , the 4th Parachute Battalion was amalgamated with the 6th ( Royal Welch ) Battalion and renamed the 4th / 6th Parachute Battalion . To fill the vacancy created by this amalgamation , the 7th ( Light Infantry ) Parachute Battalion was assigned to the 2nd Parachute Brigade . 
 = = = 16th Parachute Brigade = = = 
 In February 1948 the 2nd Parachute Brigade left the 6th Airborne Division and moved to Germany , becoming part of the British Army of the Rhine . The 6th Airborne Division was disbanded soon afterwards , leaving the 2nd Parachute Brigade as the only brigade @-@ sized airborne formation in the British Army . 
 Being the only surviving parachute formation , in June its battalions were renumbered : the 5th ( Scottish ) Parachute Battalion became the 2nd Battalion , Parachute Regiment , while the 4th / 6th Parachute Battalion became the 1st Battalion , Parachute Regiment , and the 7th ( Light Infantry ) Parachute Battalion became the 3rd Battalion , Parachute Regiment . Finally , in July 1948 , the brigade was renumbered the 16th Parachute Brigade , taking the numbers " 1 " and " 6 " from the two wartime airborne divisions . Finally , in July 1948 , the brigade was renumbered the 16th Parachute Brigade Group . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 = = = Commanders = = = 
 Brigadier Ernest Down 
 Brigadier Charles Pritchard 
 = = = 2nd Parachute Brigade = = = 
 4th Parachute Battalion 
 5th ( Scottish ) Parachute Battalion 
 6th ( Royal Welch ) Parachute Battalion 
 = = = 2nd Independent Parachute Brigade = = = 
 4th Parachute Battalion 
 5th ( Scottish ) Parachute Battalion 
 6th ( Royal Welch ) Parachute Battalion 
 127th ( Parachute ) Field Ambulance 
 300th Airlanding Anti @-@ tank Battery Royal Artillery 
 64th Airlanding Battery Royal Artillery 
 2nd Parachute Squadron Royal Engineers 
 2nd Independent Parachute Brigade Group Signal Company Royal Signals 
 1st Independent Glider Squadron Army Air Corps 
 23rd Independent Platoon Army Air Corps ( Pathfinders ) 
 2nd Independent Parachute Brigade Group Company Royal Army Service Corps 
 <unk> Parachute Brigade Company Royal Army Service Corps 
 T Company Royal Army Service Corps 
 2nd Independent Parachute Brigade Group Workshop Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers 
 2nd Independent Parachute Brigade Group Provost Section Royal Military Police 
 = = = 2nd Parachute Brigade 1948 = = = 
 4th / 6th Parachute Battalion 
 5th ( Scottish ) Parachute Battalion 
 7th ( Light Infantry ) Parachute Battalion 
 = = = <unk> 16th Parachute Brigade = = = 
 1st Parachute Battalion 
 2nd Parachute Battalion 
 3rd Parachute Battalion 
 = Peter Till = 
 Peter Till ( born 7 September 1985 ) is an English semi @-@ professional footballer who plays as a winger for Northern Premier League Division One South club Stafford Rangers . 
 Till started his career with the Birmingham City youth system before making his first team debut in 2005 . He was loaned to Scunthorpe United , Boston United , Leyton Orient and Grimsby Town , whom he joined permanently in 2007 . Till made an appearance at Wembley Stadium in the 2008 Football League Trophy Final and was loaned to Chesterfield in 2009 . He was released after making over 80 appearances for Grimsby and subsequently joined hometown club Walsall . Being released after one season with the club , he joined York City of the Conference Premier in 2010 . Till signed for Fleetwood Town a year later and won the Conference Premier title in his one season with the club . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Birmingham City = = = 
 Born in Walsall , West Midlands , Till came through the Birmingham City youth system after joining the club as a schoolboy and he signed a two @-@ year professional contract on 4 July 2005 . He was included in the matchday first team squad on a few occasions during the 2004 – 05 season , with Academy manager Stewart Hall commenting " When he has trained and worked with the first team he has looked very good and he has had an excellent season in the reserves and looked a real threat " . He made his debut as an 85th minute substitute in a 2 – 0 victory over League One team Scunthorpe United in the League Cup on 20 September 2005 . Till was loaned to Scunthorpe United for a month on 5 October 2005 after being brought to their attention in the game weeks earlier , with manager Brian Laws commenting " I 've watched him twice more since our game and I 've liked what I 've seen " . His debut came two days later in a 2 – 0 victory over Tranmere Rovers . The loan deal was extended until January 2006 after Till impressed Laws . He returned to Birmingham on 9 January 2006 , having made only 10 appearances for Scunthorpe due to injury and illness . 
 Till was loaned out again on 13 January 2006 , joining League Two team Boston United . He made his debut a day later in a 1 – 0 victory at Chester City and his only goal came in a 3 – 1 victory over Bury on 21 January 2006 . On 31 January 2006 , the loan was extended until the end of the 2005 – 06 season and he finished his spell at the club with 16 appearances and one goal . Till joined League One team Leyton Orient on a one @-@ month loan on 6 October 2006 . His debut came the following day , making the starting line @-@ up in a 0 – 0 draw with Chesterfield and he picked up an injury on his final appearance , a 3 – 1 defeat to Bristol City in the Football League Trophy on 1 November 2006 . Orient opted not to extend Till 's loan and his period at the club ended on 4 November 2006 with five appearances to his name . 
 = = = Grimsby Town = = = 
 Having failed to establish himself at Birmingham , Till joined Grimsby Town of League Two on an initial one @-@ month loan on 23 November 2006 . Tony Butcher of Cod Almighty described him as an " instant hit with wonderful <unk> " on his debut in a 2 – 0 victory over Accrington Stanley on 25 November 2006 . After impressing manager Alan Buckley during his loan at Blundell Park , Grimsby agreed a deal with Birmingham and offered Till a permanent contract . He eventually joined Grimsby on a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year contract on 5 January 2007 , having already made seven appearances for the team during the 2006 – 07 season . His first appearance following his permanent transfer was a 2 – 0 defeat to Chester on 9 January 2007 . Till received the first yellow card of his career in a 1 – 0 defeat to Swindon Town on 17 March 2007 and he finished the season with 22 appearances . 
 His first appearance of the 2007 – 08 season came in a 1 – 1 draw with Notts County on 11 August 2007 and his first goal came in a 4 – 1 victory over Huddersfield Town in the Football League Trophy on 4 September 2007 . He played six games and scored two goals in Grimsby 's Football League Trophy run in the 2007 – 08 season , which saw Grimsby reach the final . Till started the game as Grimsby were beaten 2 – 0 by Milton Keynes Dons ( MK Dons ) at Wembley Stadium on 30 March 2008 . He finished the season with 44 appearances and four goals . 
 Till started the 2008 – 09 season by playing in a 0 – 0 draw with Rochdale on 9 August 2008 and he scored in the local derby against League Two rivals Lincoln City at Sincil Bank in a 1 – 1 draw on 30 August . Till joined fellow League Two team Chesterfield on a one @-@ month loan on 15 January 2009 , having made 21 appearances and scored two goals for Grimsby up to that point during the season . He made his debut in a 3 – 1 victory at Chester on 17 January 2009 and in February the loan was extended until the end of the season after impressing manager Lee Richardson . Grimsby released him on 30 April 2009 and in retrospect he commented " It has been a wake @-@ up call if I am honest . I have realised that I can ’ t coast if I want to get to where I want to be . I have to give 110 per cent every day , not just in games " . Till finished the loan at Chesterfield with 16 appearances . 
 = = = Walsall = = = 
 Till signed for League One side Walsall on a free transfer on a one @-@ year contract on 23 July 2009 following a successful trial with the club . He commented " To be at my hometown club gives me an extra incentive to do well " . His debut came in a 1 – 0 victory at Brighton & Hove Albion on 8 August 2009 , in which he was substituted in the 88th minute . Till suffered a hamstring injury in September 2009 , which allowed midfielder Mark Bradley to get a run in the team . After returning to fitness he made his comeback as a 74th @-@ minute substitute in a 1 – 0 defeat at MK Dons on 10 October 2009 and started on his next appearance , which was a 2 – 1 defeat at Colchester United on 24 October . He picked up a minor injury in a 1 – 1 draw with Charlton Athletic on 2 February 2010 and he was able to feature in the next game , a 0 – 0 draw with Bristol Rovers . During Walsall 's 2 – 1 victory at Leeds United on 16 February 2010 he picked up a hamstring injury and he returned to the team after entering a 2 – 0 defeat at Leyton Orient on 13 March as a 77th @-@ minute substitute . He finished an injury @-@ hit 2009 – 10 season with 30 appearances for Walsall before the club released him on 10 May 2010 . 
 = = = York City = = = 
 Till signed a one @-@ year contract with Conference Premier club York City on 29 June 2010 and following the move he said " I spoke to a number of clubs but this felt right . The gaffer made me feel really wanted so that was a key decision in coming " . He made his debut in the opening game of the 2010 – 11 season as a 38th @-@ minute substitute for Levi Mackin in a 2 – 1 defeat to Kidderminster Harriers on 14 August 2010 . His first goal for York came in his next appearance after he scored the equaliser in a 2 – 2 draw at Bath City on 21 August 2010 after entering the game as a 74th @-@ minute substitute . Till made his first start in a 3 – 0 victory against Altrincham on 28 August 2010 and he was substituted in the 82nd minute . He scored his first home goal with the opener as York beat Rushden & Diamonds 2 – 0 on 4 September 2010 . He finished the season with 45 appearances and four goals . 
 = = = Fleetwood Town = = = 
 Till agreed on 25 May 2011 to sign for Conference Premier rivals Fleetwood Town on a two @-@ year contract after the expiration of his York contract . Due to a knee injury , he had to wait until 12 November 2011 to make his Fleetwood debut , when he entered their 2 – 0 FA Cup first round victory over League One team Wycombe Wanderers as a substitute in stoppage time . Till finished the season with 22 appearances and one goal as Fleetwood won the Conference Premier title and thus promotion to League Two , before being released by the club after having his contract cancelled by mutual consent on 3 July 2012 . 
 = = = Tamworth = = = 
 Till signed for Conference Premier side Tamworth on 19 July 2012 . He made a scoring debut for Tamworth in the opening game of the 2012 – 13 season with the first goal of a 3 – 2 victory away at Hyde on 11 August 2012 . He finished the season with 34 appearances and one goal . 
 = = = Solihull Moors = = = 
 Till signed for Solihull Moors of the Conference North on 6 June 2013 . 
 = = = Leamington = = = 
 He signed for Solihull 's Conference North rivals Leamington on 22 January 2014 . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Till joined newly promoted Northern Premier League Premier Division club Halesowen Town on 12 June 2014 . He made five appearances before signing for Halesowen 's divisional rivals Stourbridge on 8 September 2014 . He stepped down a division when signing for Northern Premier League Division One South team Stafford Rangers during January 2015 . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Till plays as winger on the left or right sides and his play has been described as " tricky " . He has described himself as an old @-@ fashioned winger , saying " I am very quick , very fit . I like to get at the full @-@ back – an old @-@ fashioned winger type , if you like . I like to cause the full @-@ back problems and get my crosses in and link up with our full @-@ back as well " . Walsall manager Chris Hutchings described him as " an attacking wide @-@ man with pace who is not afraid to take people on " in 2009 . Till is also able to play as a striker . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 His father Peter , Sr. is a former professional boxer . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of match played 26 August 2015 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Fleetwood Town 
 Conference Premier : 2011 – 12 
 = Jesus = 
 Jesus ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ <unk> Greek : Ἰησοῦς , translit . <unk> ; Hebrew : <unk> , translit . <unk> ́ <unk> , lit . ' Yeshua ; " He saves " ' ; c . 4 BC – c . AD 30 ) , also referred to as Jesus of Nazareth or Jesus Christ , was a Jewish preacher who became the central figure of Christianity . Christians believe him to be the Son of God and the awaited Jewish Messiah ( Christ , the Anointed One ) of the Old Testament . 
 Virtually all modern scholars of antiquity agree that Jesus existed historically , and they consider the Synoptic Gospels ( Matthew , Mark , and Luke ) to be the best sources for investigating the historical Jesus . Most scholars agree that Jesus was a Galilean Jewish rabbi who preached his message orally , was baptized by John the Baptist , and was crucified by the order of the Roman Prefect Pontius Pilate . In the current mainstream view , Jesus was an apocalyptic preacher and the founder of a renewal movement within Judaism , although some prominent scholars argue that he was not apocalyptic . Jesus debated with Jewish authorities on the subject of God , performed some healings , taught in parables and gathered followers . After Jesus ' death , his followers believed he was resurrected , and the community they formed eventually became the Christian Church . His birth is celebrated annually on December 25 ( or various dates in January for some eastern churches ) as a holiday known as Christmas , and his resurrection is likewise celebrated as a holiday known as Easter . The widely used calendar era " AD " , from the Latin " Anno Domini " ( " in the year of our Lord " ) , and the alternative " CE " , are based on the birth of Jesus . 
 Christians believe that Jesus has a " unique significance " in the world . Christian doctrines include the beliefs that Jesus was conceived by the Holy Spirit , was born of a virgin named Mary , performed miracles , founded the Church , died by crucifixion as a sacrifice to achieve atonement , rose from the dead , and ascended into Heaven , whence he will return . Most Christians believe Jesus enables humans to be reconciled to God . The Nicene Creed asserts that Jesus will judge the dead either before or after their bodily resurrection , an event tied to the Second Coming of Jesus in Christian eschatology ; though some believe Jesus 's role as savior has more existential or societal concerns than the afterlife , and a few notable theologians have suggested that Jesus will bring about a universal reconciliation . The great majority of Christians worship Jesus as the incarnation of God the Son , the second of three persons of a Divine Trinity . A minority of Christian denominations reject Trinitarianism , wholly or partly , as non @-@ scriptural . 
 In Islam , Jesus ( commonly transliterated as Isa ) is considered one of God 's important prophets and the Messiah . According to the Quran , Jesus was a bringer of scripture and was born of a virgin but was not the Son of God . The Quran says that Jesus himself never claimed divinity , and predicts that at the Last Judgment , Jesus will deny having ever made such a claim ( Quran 5 : 116 ) . To most Muslims , Jesus was not crucified but was physically raised into Heaven by God . Judaism rejects the belief that Jesus was the awaited Messiah , arguing that his death on the cross signifies that he was rejected by God and that his resurrection is a Christian legend . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 A typical Jew in Jesus ' time had only one name , sometimes supplemented with the father 's name or the individual 's hometown . Thus , in the New Testament , Jesus is commonly referred to as " Jesus of Nazareth " ( e.g. , Mark 10 : 47 ) . Jesus ' neighbors in Nazareth refer to him as " the carpenter , the son of Mary and brother of James and <unk> and Judas and Simon " ( Mark 6 : 3 ) , " the carpenter 's son " ( Matthew 13 : 55 ) , or " Joseph 's son " ( Luke 4 : 22 ) . In John , the disciple Philip refers to him as " Jesus son of Joseph from Nazareth " ( John 1 : 45 ) . 
 The name Jesus is derived from the Latin Iesus , a transliteration of the Greek Ἰησοῦς ( <unk> ) . The Greek form is a rendering of the Hebrew <unk> ( Yeshua ) , a variant of the earlier name <unk> ( Yehoshua ) , in English " Joshua " . The name Yeshua appears to have been in use in Judea at the time of the birth of Jesus . The first century works of historian Flavius Josephus , who wrote in Koine Greek , the same language as that of the New Testament , refer to at least twenty different people with the name Jesus ( i.e. Ἰησοῦς ) . The etymology of Jesus ' name in the context of the New Testament is generally given as " Yahweh is salvation " . 
 Since early Christianity , Christians have commonly referred to Jesus as " Jesus Christ " . The word Christ is derived from the Greek <unk> ( Christos ) , which is a translation of the Hebrew <unk> ( <unk> ) , meaning the " anointed " and usually transliterated into English as " Messiah " . Christians designate Jesus as Christ because they believe he is the awaited Messiah prophesied in the Hebrew Bible and Old Testament . In <unk> usage , Christ became viewed as a name — one part of " Jesus Christ " — but originally it was a title . The term " Christian " ( meaning " one who owes allegiance to the person Christ " or simply " follower of Christ " ) has been in use since the first century . 
 = = Canonical gospel accounts = = 
 The four canonical gospels ( Mark , Matthew , Luke , and John ) are the only substantial sources for the life and message of Jesus . Other parts of the New Testament , such as the Pauline epistles , which were probably written decades before the gospels , also include references to key episodes in his life , such as the Last Supper in 1 Corinthians 11 : 23 – 26 . Acts of the Apostles ( 10 : 37 – 38 and 19 : 4 ) refers to the early ministry of Jesus and its anticipation by John the Baptist . Acts 1 : 1 – 11 says more about the Ascension of Jesus ( also mentioned in 1 Timothy 3 : 16 ) than the canonical gospels do . 
 Some early Christian and Gnostic groups had separate descriptions of the life and teachings of Jesus that are not included in the New Testament . These include the Gospel of Thomas , the Gospel of Peter , and the Apocryphon of James , among many other apocryphal writings . Most scholars consider these much later and less reliable accounts than the canonical gospels . 
 = = = Canonical gospels = = = 
 The canonical gospels are four accounts , each written by a different author . According to the Marcan priority , the first to be written was the Gospel of Mark ( written AD 60 – 75 ) , followed by the Gospel of Matthew ( AD 65 – 85 ) , the Gospel of Luke ( AD 65 – 95 ) , and the Gospel of John ( AD 75 – 100 ) . They often differ in content and in the ordering of events . 
 Traditionally , the writing of the gospels has been attributed to four evangelists with close ties to Jesus : Mark was written by John Mark , an associate of Peter ; Matthew was written by one of Jesus ' disciples ; Luke was written by a companion of Paul , someone mentioned in a few epistles ; and John was written by another of Jesus ' disciples , in fact part of an inner group of disciples , along with Peter and John 's brother James . 
 Three of them , Matthew , Mark , and Luke , are known as the Synoptic Gospels , from the Greek <unk> ( syn " together " ) and <unk> ( opsis " view " ) . They are similar in content , narrative arrangement , language and paragraph structure . Scholars generally agree that it is impossible to find any direct literary relationship between the Synoptic Gospels and the Gospel of John . While the flow of some events ( such as Jesus ' baptism , transfiguration , crucifixion and interactions with the apostles ) are shared among the Synoptic Gospels , incidents such as the transfiguration do not appear in John , which also differs on other matters , such as the Cleansing of the Temple . 
 Most scholars agree , following what is known as the " Marcan hypothesis " , that the authors of Matthew and Luke used Mark as a source when writing their gospels . Matthew and Luke also share some content not found in Mark . To explain this , many scholars believe that in addition to Mark , another source ( commonly called the " Q source " ) was used by the two authors . 
 According to a broad scholarly consensus , the Synoptic Gospels , and not John , are the primary sources of historical information about Jesus . However , not everything contained in the New Testament gospels is considered to be historically reliable . Elements whose historical authenticity is disputed include the Nativity , the Massacre of the Innocents , the Resurrection , the Ascension , Jesus ' miracles , and the Sanhedrin trial , among others . Historians , according to Gerd Theissen , are right to be skeptical of miracles such as walking on water , but exorcisms and healings are well @-@ documented in many cultures and should be considered possible . Views on the gospels range from their being <unk> descriptions of the life of Jesus to their providing little historical information about his life beyond the basics . 
 The Synoptics emphasize different aspects of Jesus . In Mark , Jesus is the Son of God whose mighty works demonstrate the presence of God 's Kingdom . He is a tireless wonder worker , the servant of both God and man . This short gospel records few of Jesus ' words or teachings . The Gospel of Matthew emphasizes that Jesus is the fulfillment of God 's will as revealed in the Old Testament , and he is the Lord of the Church . He is the kingly Messiah , referred to repeatedly as " king " and " Son of David . " A noteworthy feature of this gospel are the five discourses , collections of teachings on particular themes , including the Sermon on the Mount . Luke presents Jesus as the divine @-@ human savior who shows compassion to the needy . He is the friend of sinners and outcasts , come to seek and save the lost . This gospel includes Jesus ' most beloved parables , such as the Good Samaritan and the Prodigal Son . 
 The Synoptics and John agree on the main outline of Jesus ' life . John the Baptist precedes Jesus , their ministries overlap , and John witnesses to Jesus ' identity . Jesus teaches and performs miracles , at least partly in Galilee . He then visits Jerusalem , where the leaders have him crucified , and he is buried . After his tomb is found empty on Sunday , the risen Jesus presents himself to his followers . 
 The prologue to the Gospel of John identifies Jesus as an incarnation of the divine Word ( Logos ) . As the Word , Jesus was eternally present with God , active in all creation , and the source of humanity 's moral and spiritual nature . With this prologue , the evangelist establishes that Jesus is not only greater than any past human prophet but greater than any prophet could be . He not only speaks God 's Word ; he is God 's Word . In the Gospel of John , Jesus reveals his divine role publicly . Here he is the Bread of Life , the Light of the World , the True Vine and more . 
 In general , the authors of the New Testament showed little interest in an absolute chronology of Jesus or in synchronizing the episodes of his life with the secular history of the age . As stated in John 21 : 25 , the gospels do not claim to provide an exhaustive list of the events in the life of Jesus . The accounts were primarily written as theological documents in the context of early Christianity , with timelines as a secondary consideration . One manifestation of the gospels as theological documents rather than historical chronicles is that they devote about one third of their text to just seven days , namely the last week of the life of Jesus in Jerusalem , referred to as the Passion . Although the gospels do not provide enough details to satisfy the demands of modern historians regarding exact dates , it is possible to draw from them a general picture of the life story of Jesus . 
 = = = Genealogy and nativity = = = 
 Matthew and Luke each offer a genealogy of Jesus . Matthew traces Jesus ' ancestry to Abraham through David . Luke traces Jesus ' ancestry through Adam to God . The lists are identical between Abraham and David , but differ radically from that point . Traditional Christian scholars ( starting with the historian Eusebius ) have put forward various theories that seek to explain why the lineages are so different , such as that Matthew 's account follows the lineage of Joseph , while Luke 's follows the lineage of Mary . Modern biblical scholars such as Marcus J. Borg and John Dominic Crossan see both genealogies as inventions , conforming to Jewish literary convention . 
 Matthew and Luke each describe Jesus ' nativity ( or birth ) , especially that Jesus was born of a virgin in Bethlehem in fulfillment of prophecy . Luke 's account emphasizes events before the birth of Jesus and centers on Mary , while Matthew 's mostly covers those after the birth and centers on Joseph . Both accounts state that Jesus was born to Joseph and Mary , his betrothed , in Bethlehem , and both support the doctrine of the virgin birth , according to which Jesus was miraculously conceived by the Holy Spirit in Mary 's womb when she was still a virgin . The virgin birth has been a consistent tenet of orthodox Christian belief , although a number of liberal theologians have questioned it in the last 150 years . Matthew repeatedly cites the Old Testament to support the belief that Jesus is the Jews ' promised Messiah . 
 In Matthew , Joseph is troubled because Mary , his betrothed , is pregnant ( Matthew 1 : 19 – 20 ) , but in the first of Joseph 's three dreams an angel assures him not to be afraid to take Mary as his wife , because her child was conceived by the Holy Spirit . In Matthew 2 : 1 – 12 , wise men or Magi from the East bring gifts to the young Jesus as the King of the Jews . Herod hears of Jesus ' birth and , wanting him killed , orders the murders of male infants in Bethlehem . But an angel warns Joseph in his second dream , and the family flees to Egypt — later to return and settle in Nazareth . 
 In Luke 1 : 31 – 38 Mary learns from the angel Gabriel that she will conceive and bear a child called Jesus through the action of the Holy Spirit . When Mary is due to give birth , she and Joseph travel from Nazareth to Joseph 's ancestral home in Bethlehem to register in the census ordered by Caesar Augustus . While there Mary gives birth to Jesus , and as they have found no room in the inn , she places the newborn in a manger ( Luke 2 : 1 – 7 ) . An angel announces the birth to some shepherds , who go to Bethlehem to see Jesus , and subsequently spread the news abroad ( Luke 2 : 8 – 20 ) . After the presentation of Jesus at the Temple , Joseph , Mary and Jesus return to Nazareth . 
 = = = Early life , family , and profession = = = 
