 Jesus ' childhood home is identified in the gospels of Luke and Matthew as the town of Nazareth in Galilee where he lived with his family . Although Joseph appears in descriptions of Jesus ' childhood , no mention is made of him thereafter . His other family members — his mother , Mary , his brothers James , <unk> ( or Joseph ) , Judas and Simon and his unnamed sisters — are mentioned in the gospels and other sources . 
 According to Stephen L. Harris , Gospel of Mark says that Jesus comes into conflict with his neighbors and family . Jesus ' mother and brothers come to get him ( 3 : 31 – 35 ) because people are saying that he is crazy ( 3 : 21 ) . Jesus responds that his followers are his true family . In John , Mary follows Jesus to his crucifixion , and he expresses concern over her well @-@ being ( 19 : 25 – 27 ) . 
 Jesus is called a <unk> ( <unk> ) in Mark 6 : 3 , traditionally understood as carpenter but could cover makers of objects in various materials , including builders . The gospels indicate that Jesus could read , paraphrase , and debate scripture , but this does not necessarily mean that he received formal scribal training . When Jesus is presented in the temple per Jewish Law , a man named Simeon says to Mary and Joseph that Jesus " shall stand as a sign of contradiction , while a sword will pierce your own soul . Then the secret thoughts of many will come to light . " ( Luke 2 : 28 @-@ 35 ) When Jesus goes missing , they find him in the temple sitting among the teachers , listening to them and asking questions , and the people are amazed at his understanding and answers ; Mary scolds Jesus for going missing , to which Jesus replies that he must " be in his father 's house . " ( Luke 2 : 41 @-@ 52 ) 
 = = = Baptism and temptation = = = 
 The Synoptic accounts of Jesus ' baptism are all preceded by information about John the Baptist . They show John preaching penance and repentance for the remission of sins and encouraging the giving of alms to the poor ( Luke 3 : 11 ) as he baptizes people in the area of the River Jordan around Perea and foretells ( Luke 3 : 16 ) the arrival of someone " more powerful " than he . Later , Jesus identifies John as " the Elijah who was to come " ( Matthew 11 : 14 , Mark 9 : 13 @-@ 14 ) , the prophet who was expected to arrive before the " great and terrible day of the Lord " ( Malachi 4 : 5 ) . Likewise , Luke says that John had the spirit and power of Elijah ( Luke 1 : 17 ) . 
 In Mark , John baptizes Jesus , and as he comes out of the water he see the Holy Spirit descending to him like a dove and he hears a voice from heaven declaring him to be God 's son ( Mark 1 : 9 – 11 ) . This is one of two events described in the gospels where a voice from Heaven calls Jesus " Son " , the other being the Transfiguration . The spirit then drives him into the wilderness where he is tempted by Satan ( Mark 1 : 12 – 13 ) . Jesus then begins his ministry after John 's arrest ( Mark 1 : 14 ) . Jesus ' baptism in Matthew is similar . Here , before Jesus ' baptism , John protests , saying , " I need to be baptized by you " ( Matthew 3 : 14 ) . Jesus instructs him to carry on with the baptism " to fulfill all righteousness " ( Matthew 3 : 15 ) . Matthew also details the three temptations that Satan offers Jesus in the wilderness ( Matthew 4 : 3 – 11 ) . In Luke , the Holy Spirit descends as a dove after everyone has been baptized and Jesus is praying ( Luke 3 : 21 @-@ 22 ) . John implicitly recognizes Jesus from prison after sending his followers to ask about him ( Luke 7 : 18 – 23 ) . Jesus ' baptism and temptation serve as preparation for his public ministry . 
 The Gospel of John leaves out Jesus ' baptism and temptation . Here , John the Baptist testifies that he saw the Spirit descend on Jesus ( John 1 : 32 ) . John publicly proclaims Jesus as the sacrificial Lamb of God , and some of John 's followers become disciples of Jesus . In this Gospel , John denies that he is Elijah ( John 1 : 21 ) . Before John is imprisoned , Jesus leads his followers to baptize disciples as well ( John 3 : 22 @-@ 24 ) , and they baptize more people than John ( John 4 : 1 ) . 
 = = = Public ministry = = = 
 The Synoptics depict two distinct geographical settings in Jesus ' ministry . The first takes place north of Judea in Galilee , where Jesus conducts a successful ministry ; and the second shows Jesus rejected and killed when he travels to Jerusalem . Notably , Jesus forbids those who recognize his identity to speak of it , including people he heals and demons he exorcises ( see Messianic Secret ) . 
 John depicts Jesus ' ministry as largely taking place in and around Jerusalem rather than in Galilee . In this Gospel , Jesus ' divine identity is publicly proclaimed and immediately recognized . 
 Scholars divide the ministry of Jesus into several stages . The Galilean ministry begins when Jesus returns to Galilee from the Judaean Desert after rebuffing the temptation of Satan . Jesus preaches around Galilee , and in Matthew 4 : 18 – 20 , his first disciples , who will eventually form the core of the early Church , encounter him and begin to travel with him . This period includes the Sermon on the Mount , one of Jesus ' major discourses , as well as the calming of the storm , the feeding of the 5 @,@ 000 , walking on water and a number of other miracles and parables . It ends with the Confession of Peter and the Transfiguration . 
 As Jesus travels towards Jerusalem , in the <unk> ministry , he returns to the area where he was baptized , about a third of the way down from the Sea of Galilee along the Jordan ( John 10 : 40 – 42 ) . The final ministry in Jerusalem begins with Jesus ' triumphal entry into the city on Palm Sunday . In the Synoptic Gospels , during that week Jesus drives the money changers from the Temple and Judas bargains to betray him . This period culminates in the Last Supper and the Farewell Discourse . 
 = = = = Disciples and followers = = = = 
 Near the beginning of his ministry , Jesus appoints twelve apostles . In Matthew and Mark , despite Jesus only briefly requesting that they join him , Jesus ' first four apostles , who were fishermen , are described as immediately consenting , and abandoning their nets and boats to do so ( Matthew 4 : 18 – 22 , Mark 1 : 16 – 20 ) . In John , Jesus ' first two apostles were disciples of John the Baptist . The Baptist sees Jesus and calls him the Lamb of God ; the two hear this and follow Jesus . In addition to the Twelve Apostles , the opening of the passage of the Sermon on the Plain identifies a much larger group of people as disciples ( Luke 6 : 17 ) . Also , in Luke 10 : 1 – 16 Jesus sends seventy or seventy @-@ two of his followers in pairs to prepare towns for his prospective visit . They are instructed to accept hospitality , heal the sick and spread the word that the Kingdom of God is coming . 
 In Mark , the disciples are notably obtuse . They fail to understand Jesus ' miracles ( Mark 4 : 35 – 41 , 6 : 52 ) , his parables ( Mark 4 : 13 ) , or what " rising from the dead " would mean ( Mark 9 : 9 – 10 ) . When Jesus is later arrested , they desert him ( see below ) . 
 = = = = Teaching , preaching , and miracles = = = = 
 In the Synoptics , Jesus teaches extensively , often in parables , about the Kingdom of God ( or , in Matthew , the Kingdom of Heaven ) . The Kingdom is described as both imminent ( Mark 1 : 15 ) and already present in the ministry of Jesus ( Luke 17 : 21 ) . Jesus promises inclusion in the Kingdom for those who accept his message ( Mark 10 : 13 – 27 ) . Jesus talks of the " Son of Man , " an apocalyptic figure who would come to gather the chosen . 
 Jesus calls people to repent their sins and to devote themselves completely to God . Jesus tells his followers to adhere to Jewish law , although he is perceived by some to have broken the law himself , for example regarding the Sabbath . When asked what the greatest commandment is , Jesus replies : " You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart , and with all your soul , and with all your mind ... And a second is like it : ‘ You shall love your neighbor as yourself " ( Matthew 22 : 37 – 39 ) . Other ethical teachings of Jesus include loving one 's enemies , refraining from hatred and lust , and turning the other cheek ( Matthew 5 : 21 – 44 ) . In the Gospel of John , when an adulteress is about to be stoned to death in accordance with Moses ' Law , the Pharisees ask Jesus what he will say in this situation , to which Jesus replied " Let anyone among you who has no sin be the first to throw a stone at her " , causing the accusers to go away , and Jesus says to the woman that he does not condemn her for no one has , and tells her to not sin again ( John 8 : 1 @-@ 11 ) . 
 John 's Gospel presents the teachings of Jesus not merely as his own preaching , but as divine revelation . John the Baptist , for example , states in John 3 : 34 : " He whom God has sent speaks the words of God , for he gives the Spirit without measure . " In John 7 : 16 Jesus says , " My teaching is not mine but his who sent me . " He asserts the same thing in John 14 : 10 : " Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me ? The words that I say to you I do not speak on my own ; but the Father who dwells in me does his works . " 
 In the gospels , the approximately thirty parables form about one third of Jesus ' recorded teachings . The parables appear within longer sermons and at other places in the narrative . They often contain symbolism , and usually relate the physical world to the spiritual . Common themes in these tales include the kindness and generosity of God and the perils of transgression . Some of his parables , such as the Prodigal Son ( Luke 15 : 11 – 32 ) , are relatively simple , while others , such as the Growing Seed ( Mark 4 : 26 – 29 ) , are sophisticated , profound and abstruse . When asked by his disciples about why he speaks in parables to the people , Jesus replies that the chosen disciples have been given to " know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven " , unlike the rest of their people , " For the one who has will be given more and he will have in abundance . But the one who does not have will be deprived even more . " , going on to say that the majority of their generation have grown " dull hearts " and thus are unable to understand ( Matthew 13 : 10 @-@ 17 ) . 
 In the gospel accounts , Jesus devotes a large portion of his ministry performing miracles , especially healings . The miracles can be classified into two main categories : healing miracles and nature miracles . The healing miracles include cures for physical ailments , exorcisms , and resurrections of the dead . The nature miracles show Jesus ' power over nature , and include turning water into wine , walking on water , and calming a storm , among others . Jesus states that his miracles are from a divine source . When Jesus ' opponents suddenly accuse him of performing exorcisms by the power of <unk> , the prince of demons , Jesus counters that he performs them by the " Spirit of God " ( Matthew 12 : 28 ) or " finger of God " , arguing that all logic suggests that Satan would not let his demons assist the Children of God because it would divide Satan 's house and bring his kingdom to desolation ; furthermore , he asks his opponents that if he exorcises by <unk> <unk> , " by whom do your sons cast them out ? " ( Luke 11 : 20 ) . In Matthew 12 : 31 @-@ 32 , he goes on to say that while all manner of sin , " even insults against God " or " insults against the son of man " , shall be forgiven , whoever insults goodness ( or " The Holy Spirit " ) shall never be forgiven ; he / she carries the guilt of his / her sin forever . 
 In John , Jesus ' miracles are described as " signs " , performed to prove his mission and divinity . However , in the Synoptics , when asked by some teachers of the Law and some Pharisees to give miraculous signs to prove his authority , Jesus refuses , saying that no sign shall come to corrupt and evil people except the sign of the prophet Jonah . Also , in the Synoptic Gospels , the crowds regularly respond to Jesus ' miracles with awe and press on him to heal their sick . In John 's Gospel , Jesus is presented as <unk> by the crowds , who often respond to his miracles with trust and faith . One characteristic shared among all miracles of Jesus in the gospel accounts is that he performed them freely and never requested or accepted any form of payment . The gospel episodes that include descriptions of the miracles of Jesus also often include teachings , and the miracles themselves involve an element of teaching . Many of the miracles teach the importance of faith . In the cleansing of ten lepers and the raising of Jairus ' daughter , for instance , the beneficiaries are told that their healing was due to their faith . 
 = = = = Proclamation as Christ and Transfiguration = = = = 
 At about the middle of each of the three Synoptic Gospels , two related episodes mark a turning point in the narrative : the Confession of Peter and the Transfiguration of Jesus . These events mark the beginnings of the gradual disclosure of the identity of Jesus to his disciples and his prediction of his own suffering and death . These two events are omitted in the Gospel of John . 
 In his Confession , Peter tells Jesus , " You are the Messiah , the Son of the living God . " Jesus affirms that Peter 's confession is divinely revealed truth . 
 In the Transfiguration ( Matthew 17 : 1 – 9 , Mark 9 : 2 – 8 , and Luke 9 : 28 – 36 ) , Jesus takes Peter and two other apostles up an unnamed mountain , where " he was transfigured before them , and his face shone like the sun , and his clothes became dazzling white . " A bright cloud appears around them , and a voice from the cloud says , " This is my Son , the Beloved ; with him I am well pleased ; listen to him " ( Matthew 17 : 1 – 9 ) . In 2 Peter 1 : 16 @-@ 18 , Peter himself affirms that he witnessed Jesus ' Transfiguration , stating that the apostolic tradition is based on eyewitness testimony . 
 = = = Passion Week = = = 
 The description of the last week of the life of Jesus ( often called Passion Week ) occupies about one third of the narrative in the canonical gospels , starting with Jesus ' triumphal entry into Jerusalem and ending with his Crucifixion . 
 = = = = Activities in Jerusalem = = = = 
 In the Synoptics , the last week in Jerusalem is the conclusion of the journey through Perea and Judea that Jesus began in Galilee . Jesus rides a young donkey into Jerusalem , reflecting an oracle from the Book of Zechariah in which the Jews ' humble king enters Jerusalem this way ( Zechariah 9 : 9 ) . People along the way lay cloaks and small branches of trees ( known as palm fronds ) in front of him and sing part of Psalm 118 : 25 – 26 . 
 Jesus next expels the money changers from the Temple , accusing them of turning it into a den of thieves through their commercial activities . Jesus then prophesies about the coming destruction , including false prophets , wars , earthquakes , celestial disorders , persecution of the faithful , the appearance of an " abomination of desolation , " and unendurable tribulations ( Mark 13 : 1 – 23 ) . The mysterious " Son of Man , " he says , will dispatch angels to gather the faithful from all parts of the earth ( Mark 13 : 24 – 27 ) . According to Stephen L. Harris , Jesus warns that these wonders will occur in the lifetimes of the hearers ( Mark 13 : 28 – 32 ) . In John , the Cleansing of the Temple occurs at the beginning of Jesus ' ministry instead of the end John 2 : 13 – 16 . 
 Also in the Synoptics , Jesus comes into conflict with the Jewish elders , such as when they question his authority and when he criticizes them and calls them hypocrites . Judas Iscariot , one of the twelve apostles , secretly strikes a bargain with the Jewish elder , agreeing to betray Jesus to them for 30 silver coins . 
 The Gospel of John recounts of two other feasts in which Jesus taught in Jerusalem before the Passion Week ( John 7 : 1 – 10 : 42 ) . He returns near Jerusalem , in Bethany , when he raises Lazarus from the dead , which increases the tension between him and the authorities . The authorities then conspire to kill him ( John 11 ) . Raising Lazarus is Jesus ' most potent sign yet . In Bethany , Mary of Bethany anoints Jesus ' feet , foreshadowing his entombment . Jesus then makes his Messianic entry into Jerusalem . The cheering crowds greeting Jesus as he enters Jerusalem add to the animosity between him and the establishment . In John , Jesus has already cleansed the Temple during an earlier Passover visit to Jerusalem . John next recounts Jesus ' Last Supper with his disciples . 
 = = = = Last Supper = = = = 
 The Last Supper is the final meal that Jesus shares with his 12 apostles in Jerusalem before his crucifixion . The Last Supper is mentioned in all four canonical gospels ; Paul 's First Epistle to the Corinthians ( 11 : 23 – 26 ) also refers to it . During the meal , Jesus predicts that one of his apostles will betray him . Despite each Apostle 's assertion that he would not betray him , Jesus reiterates that the betrayer would be one of those present . Matthew 26 : 23 – 25 and John 13 : 26 – 27 specifically identify Judas as the traitor . 
 In the Synoptics , Jesus takes bread , breaks it , and gives it to the disciples , saying , " This is my body , which is given for you " . He then has them all drink from a cup , saying , " This cup that is poured out for you is the new covenant in my blood " ( Luke 22 : 19 – 20 ) . The Christian sacrament or ordinance of the Eucharist is based on these events . Although the Gospel of John does not include a description of the bread @-@ and @-@ wine ritual during the Last Supper , most scholars agree that John 6 : 22 – 59 ( the Bread of Life Discourse ) has a eucharistic character and resonates with the institution narratives in the Synoptic Gospels and in the Pauline writings on the Last Supper . 
 In all four gospels , Jesus predicts that Peter will deny knowledge of him three times before the rooster crows the next morning . In Luke and John , the prediction is made during the Supper ( Luke 22 : 34 , John 22 : 34 ) . In Matthew and Mark , the prediction is made after the Supper ; Jesus also predicts that all his disciples will desert him ( Matthew 26 : 31 – 34 , Mark 14 : 27 – 30 ) . The Gospel of John provides the only account of Jesus washing his disciples ' feet after the meal . John also includes a long sermon by Jesus , preparing his disciples ( now without Judas ) for his departure . Chapters 14 – 17 of the Gospel of John are known as the Farewell Discourse and are a significant source of Christological content . 
 = = = = Agony in the Garden , betrayal , and arrest = = = = 
 After the Last Supper , Jesus takes a walk to pray , and then Judas and the authorities come and arrest him . 
 In Mark , they go to the garden of Gethsemane , where Jesus prays to be spared his coming ordeal . His disciples fall asleep while they should be watching ( Mark 37 – 41 ) . Then Judas comes with an armed mob , sent by the chief priests , scribes and elders . He kisses Jesus to identify him to the crowd , which then arrests Jesus . In an attempt to stop them , one of Jesus ' disciples uses a sword to cut off the ear of a man in the crowd . After Jesus ' arrest , his disciples go into hiding , and Peter , when questioned , thrice denies knowing Jesus . After the third denial , he hears the rooster crow and recalls the prediction as Jesus turns to look at him . Peter then weeps bitterly . 
 In Matthew , Jesus criticizes the disciple 's attack with the sword , enjoining his disciples not to resist his arrest . He says , " All who take the sword will perish by the sword " ( Matthew 26 : 52 ) . 
 In Luke , Jesus goes to the Mount of Olives to pray , and Jesus miraculously heals the ear that a disciple severed ( Luke 22 : 51 ) . 
 In John , Jesus does not pray to be spared his crucifixion , as the gospel portrays him as scarcely touched by such human weakness . The people who arrest him are soldiers and Jewish officers ( John 18 : 3 ) . Instead of being betrayed by a kiss , Jesus proclaims his identity , and when he does , the soldiers and officers fall to the ground ( John 18 : 4 – 7 ) . The gospel identifies Peter as the disciple who used the sword , and Jesus rebukes him for it ( John 18 : 10 – 11 ) . 
 = = = = Trials by the Sanhedrin , Herod , and Pilate = = = = 
 After his arrest , Jesus is taken to the Sanhedrin , a Jewish judicial body . The gospel accounts differ on the details of the trials . In Matthew 26 : 57 , Mark 14 : 53 and Luke 22 : 54 , Jesus is taken to the house of the high priest , Caiaphas , where he is mocked and beaten that night . Early the next morning , the chief priests and scribes lead Jesus away into their council . John 18 : 12 – 14 states that Jesus is first taken to Annas , Caiaphas ' father @-@ in @-@ law , and then to the high priest . 
 During the trials Jesus speaks very little , mounts no defense , and gives very infrequent and indirect answers to the priests ' questions , prompting an officer to slap him . In Matthew 26 : 62 Jesus ' unresponsiveness leads Caiaphas to ask him , " Have you no answer ? " In Mark 14 : 61 the high priest then asks Jesus , " Are you the Messiah , the Son of the Blessed One ? " Jesus replies , " I am " , and then predicts the coming of the Son of Man . This provokes Caiaphas to tear his own robe in anger and to accuse Jesus of blasphemy . In Matthew and Luke , Jesus ' answer is more ambiguous : in Matthew 26 : 64 he responds , " You have said so " , and in Luke 22 : 70 he says , " You say that I am " . 
 They take Jesus to Pilate 's Court , but Pilate proves extremely reluctant to condemn Jesus ; according to Robert W. Funk , it is the Jewish elders who are to blame for Jesus ' crucifixion . Augustine of Hippo says that Pilate was not free from blame , since he exercised his power to execute Jesus . The Jewish elders ask the Roman governor Pontius Pilate to judge and condemn Jesus , accusing him of claiming to be the King of the Jews . The use of the word " king " is central to the discussion between Jesus and Pilate . In John 18 : 36 Jesus states , " My kingdom is not from this world " , but he does not unequivocally deny being the King of the Jews . In Luke 23 : 7 – 15 Pilate realizes that Jesus is a Galilean , and thus comes under the jurisdiction of Herod Antipas . Pilate sends Jesus to Herod to be tried , but Jesus says almost nothing in response to Herod 's questions . Herod and his soldiers mock Jesus , put an expensive robe on him to make him look like a king , and return him to Pilate , who then calls together the Jewish elders and announces that he has " not found this man guilty " . 
 Observing a Passover custom of the time , Pilate allows one prisoner chosen by the crowd to be released . He gives the people a choice between Jesus and a murderer called Barabbas . Persuaded by the elders ( Matthew 27 : 20 ) , the mob chooses to release Barabbas and crucify Jesus . Pilate writes a sign in Hebrew , Latin , and Greek that reads " Jesus of Nazareth , the King of the Jews " ( abbreviated as <unk> in depictions ) to be affixed to Jesus ' cross ( John 19 : 19 – 20 ) , then scourges Jesus and sends him to be crucified . The soldiers place a Crown of Thorns on Jesus ' head and ridicule him as the King of the Jews . They beat and taunt him before taking him to Calvary , also called Golgotha , for crucifixion . 
 = = = = Crucifixion and entombment = = = = 
 Jesus ' crucifixion is described in all four canonical gospels . After the trials , Jesus is led to Calvary carrying his cross ; the route traditionally thought to have been taken is known as the Via Dolorosa . The three Synoptic Gospels indicate that Simon of Cyrene assists him , having been compelled by the Romans to do so . In Luke 23 : 27 – 28 Jesus tells the women in the multitude of people following him not to weep for him but for themselves and their children . At Calvary , Jesus is offered a concoction usually offered as a painkiller . According to Matthew and Mark , he refuses it . 
 The soldiers then crucify Jesus and cast lots for his clothes . Above Jesus ' head on the cross is Pilate 's inscription , " Jesus of Nazareth , the King of the Jews " ; soldiers and passersby mock him about it . Jesus is crucified between two convicted thieves , one of whom rebukes Jesus , while the other defends him . The Roman soldiers break the two thieves ' legs ( a procedure designed to hasten death in a crucifixion ) , but they do not break those of Jesus , as he is already dead . In John 19 : 34 , one soldier pierces Jesus ' side with a lance , and blood and water flow out . In Matthew 27 : 51 – 54 , when Jesus dies , the heavy curtain at the Temple is torn and an earthquake breaks open tombs . Terrified by the events , a Roman centurion states that Jesus was the Son of God . 
 On the same day , Joseph of Arimathea , with Pilate 's permission and with Nicodemus ' help , removes Jesus ' body from the cross , wraps him in a clean cloth , and buries him in his new rock @-@ hewn tomb . In Matthew 27 : 62 – 66 , on the following day the chief Jewish priests ask Pilate for the tomb to be secured , and with Pilate 's permission the priests place seals on the large stone covering the entrance and post a guard . 
 = = = Resurrection and Ascension = = = 
 In all four gospels , Mary Magdalene goes to Jesus ' tomb on Sunday morning and is surprised to find it empty . Jesus , she learns , has risen from the dead . Despite Jesus ' teaching , the disciples had not understood that Jesus would rise again . After the discovery of the empty tomb , Jesus makes a series of appearances to the disciples . 
 In Mark , Salome and a second Mary are with her ( Mark 16 : 1 ) . A young man in a white robe ( an angel ) tells them that Jesus will meet his disciples in Galilee , as he had told them ( referring to Mark 14 : 28 ) . The gospel then ends abruptly . 
 In Matthew , there 's an earthquake when the women discover the tomb , and an angel of the Lord descends from heaven , terrifying the guards . Jesus appears to the eleven remaining disciples in Galilee and commissions them to baptize all nations in the name of the Father , Son and Holy Spirit . 
 In Luke , Mary and the other women meet two angels , and the eleven disciples do not believe their story ( Luke 25 : 1 – 12 ) . Jesus appears that same day to his disciples in Jerusalem ( Luke 24 : 13 – 43 ) . Although he appears and vanishes mysteriously , he also eats and lets them touch him to prove that he is not a spirit . He repeats his command to bring his teaching to all nations ( Luke 24 : 51 ) . 
 In John , Mary is alone at first , but Peter and the beloved disciple come and see the tomb as well . Jesus then appears to Mary at the empty tomb . He later appears to the disciples , breathes on them , and gives them the power to forgive and retain sins . In a second visit , he proves to a doubting disciple ( " Doubting Thomas " ) that he is flesh and blood . The catch of 153 fish is a miracle by the Sea of Galilee , after which Jesus encourages Peter to serve his followers . 
 Jesus ' Ascension into Heaven is described in Luke 24 : 50 @-@ 53 , Acts 1 : 1 – 11 and mentioned in 1 Timothy 3 : 16 . In Acts , forty days after the Resurrection , as the disciples look on , " he was lifted up , and a cloud took him out of their sight " . 1 Peter 3 : 22 states that Jesus has " gone into heaven and is at the right hand of God " . 
 The Acts of the Apostles describes several appearances of Jesus in visions after his Ascension . Acts 7 : 55 describes a vision experienced by Stephen just before his death . On the road to Damascus , the Apostle Paul is converted to Christianity after seeing a blinding light and hearing a voice saying , " I am Jesus , whom you are persecuting " ( Acts 9 : 5 ) . In Acts 9 : 10 – 18 , Jesus instructs Ananias of Damascus to heal Paul . It is the last conversation with Jesus reported in the Bible until the Book of Revelation , in which a man named John receives a revelation from Jesus concerning the last days , when Jesus is predicted to return victoriously ( Revelation 19 : 11 – 21 ) . In the closing lines of the New Testament , Jesus promises that he is coming soon ( Revelation 22 : 12 @-@ 21 ) . 
 = = Historical views = = 
 Prior to the Enlightenment , the gospels were usually regarded as accurate historical accounts , but since then scholars have emerged who question the reliability of the gospels and draw a distinction between the Jesus described in the gospels and the Jesus of history . Since the 18th century , three separate scholarly quests for the historical Jesus have taken place , each with distinct characteristics and based on different research criteria , which were often developed during the quest that applied them . While there is widespread scholarly agreement on the existence of Jesus , and a basic consensus on the general outline of his life , the portraits of Jesus constructed in the quests have often differed from each other , and from the image portrayed in the gospel accounts . 
 Approaches to the historical reconstruction of the life of Jesus have varied from the " maximalist " approaches of the 19th century , in which the gospel accounts were accepted as reliable evidence wherever it is possible , to the " minimalist " approaches of the early 20th century , where hardly anything about Jesus was accepted as historical . In the 1950s , as the second quest for the historical Jesus gathered pace , the minimalist approaches faded away , and in the 21st century , minimalists such as Price are a very small minority . Although a belief in the inerrancy of the gospels cannot be supported historically , many scholars since the 1980s have held that , beyond the few facts considered to be historically certain , certain other elements of Jesus ' life are " historically probable " . Modern scholarly research on the historical Jesus thus focuses on identifying the most probable elements . 
 = = = Judea and Galilee in the 1st century = = = 
 In AD 6 , Judea , Idumea , and Samaria were transformed from a client kingdom of the Roman Empire into an imperial province . A Roman prefect , rather than a client king , ruled the land . The prefect ruled from Caesarea , leaving Jerusalem to be run by the high priest . As an exception , the prefect came to Jerusalem during religious festivals , when religious and patriotic enthusiasm sometimes inspired unrest or uprisings . Gentile lands surrounded the Jewish territories of Judea and Galilee , but Roman law and practice allowed Jews to remain separate legally and culturally . Galilee was evidently prosperous , and poverty was limited enough that it did not threaten the social order . Jewish religion was unusual in that Jews acknowledged only one God , they considered themselves chosen by him , and they wanted Gentiles to accept their God as the only God . Jews based their faith and religious practice on the Torah , five books said to have been given by God to Moses . The three prominent religious parties were Pharisees , Essenes , and Sadducees . Together these parties represented only a small fraction of the population . Most Jews looked forward to a time that God would deliver them from their pagan rulers , possibly through war against the Romans . 
 = = = Chronology = = = 
 Most scholars agree that Jesus was a Galilean Jew , born around the beginning of the first century , who died between 30 and 33 AD in Judea . The general scholarly consensus is that Jesus was a contemporary of John the Baptist and was crucified by the Roman governor Pontius Pilate , who held office from 26 to 36 AD . 
 The gospels offer several clues concerning the year of Jesus ' birth . Matthew 2 : 1 associates the birth of Jesus with the reign of Herod the Great , who died around 4 BC , and Luke 1 : 5 mentions that Herod was on the throne shortly before the birth of Jesus , although this gospel also associates the birth with the Census of Quirinius which took place ten years later . Luke 3 : 23 states that Jesus was " about thirty years old " at the start of his ministry , which according to Acts 10 : 37 – 38 was preceded by John 's ministry , itself recorded in Luke 3 : 1 – 2 to have begun in the 15th year of Tiberius ' reign ( 28 or 29 AD ) . By collating the gospel accounts with historical data and using various other methods , most scholars arrive at a date of birth between 6 and 4 BC for Jesus , but some propose estimates that lie in a wider range . 
 The years of Jesus ' ministry have been estimated using several different approaches . One of these applies the reference in Luke 3 : 1 – 2 , Acts 10 : 37 – 38 and the dates of Tiberius ' reign , which are well known , to give a date of around 28 – 29 AD for the start of Jesus ' ministry . Another approach uses the statement about the temple in John 2 : 13 – 20 , which asserts that the temple in Jerusalem was in its 46th year of construction at the start of Jesus ' ministry , together with Josephus ' statement that the temple 's reconstruction was started by Herod in the 18th year of his reign , to estimate a date around 27 – 29 AD . A further method uses the date of the death of John the Baptist and the marriage of Herod Antipas to Herodias , based on the writings of Josephus , and correlates it with Matthew 14 : 4 and Mark 6 : 18 . Given that most scholars date the marriage of Herod and Herodias as AD 28 – 35 , this yields a date about 28 – 29 AD . 
 A number of approaches have been used to estimate the year of the crucifixion of Jesus . Most scholars agree that he died between 30 and 33 AD . The gospels state that the event occurred during the prefecture of Pilate , the Roman governor of Judea from 26 to 36 AD . The date for the conversion of Paul ( estimated to be 33 – 36 AD ) acts as an upper bound for the date of Crucifixion . The dates for Paul 's conversion and ministry can be determined by analyzing Paul 's epistles and the Book of Acts . Astronomers since Isaac Newton have tried to estimate the precise date of the Crucifixion by analyzing lunar motion and calculating historic dates of Passover , a festival based on the lunisolar Hebrew calendar . The most widely accepted dates derived from this method are April 7 , 30 AD , and April 3 , 33 AD ( both Julian ) . 
 = = = Historicity of events = = = 
 Historians have reached a limited consensus on the basics of Jesus ' life . 
 = = = = Family = = = = 
 Jesus was Jewish and born to Mary and Joseph . He grew up in Nazareth in Galilee . Leading scholars such as Bart Ehrman , E. P. Sanders , and Géza Vermes generally consider Joseph to be Jesus ' father . Jesus also had brothers and sisters . The natural assumption is these offspring resulted from Joseph and Mary having sex , contrary to Catholic tradition . It is unusual that in Mark 6 : 3 , Jesus ' neighbors refer to Jesus as Mary 's son , because sons were identified by their fathers . This reference has led some scholars to suggest that Jesus was illegitimate and that Joseph is a fictional character . Mary 's identity as a historical figure , however , is certain . Joseph may well have died by the time Jesus ' career began , but several of the earliest sources report that Mary outlived Jesus . 
 It is common for extraordinary charismatic leaders , such as Jesus , to come into conflict with their ordinary families . In Mark , Jesus ' family comes to get him , fearing that he is mad ( Mark 3 : 20 – 34 ) , and this account is likely historical because early Christians wouldn 't have invented it . John also reports that Jesus ' brothers did not believe him ( John 7 : 5 ) . After Jesus ' death , many members of his family joined the Christian movement and enjoyed positions of respect within it . His brother James served as a leader in the Jerusalem . James may have had a change of heart after having a vision of the resurrected Jesus ( 1 Corinthians 15 : 7 ) . 
 Stories of Jesus ' birth , along with other key events , have so many mythic elements that some scholars have suggested that Jesus himself was a myth . Historians say that the doctrine of Jesus ' virgin birth arose from theological development rather than from historical events . Michael Coogan says that Paul considered Jesus to have been conceived by Joseph . Other scholars take it as significant that the virgin birth is attested by two separate gospels , Matthew and Luke , ( see the criterion of multiple attestation ) . 
 The two different genealogies in Matthew and Luke each show Jesus as a direct descendant of King David , one of Jesus ' main predecessors in salvation history . According to E. P. Sanders , both genealogies are based not on historical information but on the authors ' desire to show that Jesus was the universal Jewish savior . Jesus ' family may have considered themselves to be descended from the House of David , but it is impossible to say . In any event , once the doctrine of Jesus ' virgin birth became established , that tradition superseded the earlier tradition that he was descended from David through Joseph . 
 Luke reports that Jesus was related to John the Baptist , but scholars general consider this connection to be invented . 
 = = = = Baptism and John the Baptist = = = = 
 Most modern scholars consider Jesus ' baptism to be a definite historical fact , along with his crucifixion . James D.G. Dunn states that they " command almost universal assent " and " rank so high on the ' almost impossible to doubt or deny ' scale of historical facts " that they are often the starting points for the study of the historical Jesus . Scholars adduce the criterion of embarrassment , saying that early Christians would not have invented a baptism that might imply that Jesus committed sins and wanted to repent . 
 John 's ministry was one of many renewal movements that sought to strengthen Judaism against the pressure of Hellenistic influence . His movement was unusual in that it opposed the Jewish leadership rather than the Roman occupiers . He was the first of many 1st @-@ century prophets who raised hopes for divine intervention . Jesus was inspired by John and took over from him many elements of his teaching . Jesus ' teaching , however , emphasized grace and forgiveness over judgment . 
 = = = = Ministry in Galilee = = = = 
 Most scholars hold that Jesus lived in Galilee and Judea and did not preach or study elsewhere . They agree that Jesus debated with Jewish authorities on the subject of God , performed some healings , taught in parables and gathered followers . According to E. P. Sanders , Jesus may well have debated other Jews about how to interpret the Law and the Sabbath , as recorded in the Synoptics . Sanders , however , concludes that it is not plausible that these disagreements would have led Jewish authorities to want Jesus killed , as the Synoptics report . 
 Jesus ' parables about the Kingdom of God used striking and original imagery , such as likening it to a tiny mustard seed or to leaven . Jesus ' Jewish critics considered his ministry to be scandalous because he feasted with sinners , fraternized with women , and allowed his followers to pluck grain on the Sabbath . 
 Jesus was an exorcist , as demonstrated by Graham H. <unk> . The stories of Jesus exorcising demons occur only in the earliest traditions and were not added by later writers . While Jesus ' miracles fit within the social context of antiquity , he defined them differently . First , he attributed them to the faith of those healed . Second , he connected them to end times prophecy . Jesus ' healings were long considered literally true and sometimes dismissed as fraudulent , but today an understanding of psychosomatic therapy leads more people to believe that faith healing could be possible . 
 Historians say Jesus called disciples as part of his ministry . Jesus chose twelve disciples ( the " Twelve " ) , evidently as an apocalyptic message . All three Synoptics mention the Twelve , although the names on Luke 's list vary from those in Mark and Matthew , suggesting that Christians weren 't sure who all the disciples were . E. P. Sanders says that 12 may have been a symbolic number , and that the number of actual disciples might have varied . The twelve disciples represented the twelve original tribes of Israel , which would be restored once God 's rule was instituted . The disciples were reportedly meant to be the rulers of the tribes in the coming Kingdom ( Matthew 19 : 28 , Luke 22 : 30 ) . According to Bart Ehrman , Jesus ' promise that the Twelve would rule is historical because the Twelve included Judas , and no Christians would have invented a line from Jesus promising rulership to the disciple who betrayed him . In Mark , the disciples play hardly any role other than a negative one . While other sometimes respond to Jesus with complete faith , his disciples are puzzled and doubtful . They serve as a foil to Jesus and to other characters . The failings of the disciples are probably exaggerated in Mark , and the disciples make a better showing in Matthew and Luke . 
 = = = = Role = = = = 
 Jesus taught that an apocalyptic figure , the " Son of Man , " would soon come on clouds of glory to gather the elect , or chosen ones ( Mark 13 : 24 @-@ 27 , Matthew 24 : 29 @-@ 31 , Luke 21 : 25 @-@ 28 ) . He referred to himself as a " son of man " in the colloquial sense of " a person , " but historians don 't know whether he also meant himself when he referred to the heavenly " Son of Man . " Paul and other early Christians interpreted the " Son of Man " as the risen Jesus . 
 The title Christ , or Messiah , indicates that Jesus ' followers believed him to be the anointed heir of King David , whom some Jews expected to save Israel . The Gospels refer to him not only as a Messiah but in the absolute form as " the Messiah " or , equivalently , " the Christ . " In early Judaism , this absolute form of the title is not found , but only phrases such as " his Messiah " . The tradition is ambiguous enough to leave room for debate as to whether Jesus defined his eschatological role as that of the Messiah . The Jewish messianic tradition included many different forms , some of them focused on a Messiah figure and others not . Based on the Christian tradition , Gerd Theissen advances the hypothesis that Jesus saw himself in messianic terms but did not claim the title " Messiah . " Bart Ehrman argues that Jesus did consider himself to be the Messiah , albeit in the sense that he would be the king of the new political order that God would usher in , not in the sense that most people today think of the term . 
 = = = = Crucifixion in Jerusalem = = = = 
 Around AD 30 , Jesus and his followers traveled from Galilee to Jerusalem to observe Passover .. While in Jerusalem , Jesus caused a disturbance in the Temple , which was the center of Jewish religious and civil authority . He evidently had a last meal with his disciples , and then he was arrested and tried by the Jewish authorities .. Jesus was executed on the orders of Pontius Pilate , the Roman prefect .. 
 Most scholars consider Jesus ' crucifixion to be factual because early Christians would not have invented the painful death of their leader . It is more likely that the <unk> high @-@ priestly leaders of the Temple had Jesus executed for political reasons than for his teaching . They may have regarded him as a threat to stability , especially after he caused a disturbance at the Temple . Other factors , such as Jesus ' triumphal entry into Jerusalem , may have contributed to this decision . Pilate most likely saw Jesus ' reference to the Kingdom of God as a threat to Roman authority and worked with the Temple elites to have Jesus executed . 
 = = = = Post @-@ crucifixion = = = = 
 After Jesus ' death , his followers said he rose from the dead , although exact details of their experiences are unclear . Some of those who claimed to have witnessed Jesus ' resurrection later died for their belief , which indicates that their beliefs were likely genuine . According to E. P. Sanders , the Gospel reports contradict each other , which , according to him , suggests competition among those claiming to have seen him first rather than deliberate fraud . On the other hand , L. Michael White suggests that inconsistencies in the Gospels reflect differences in the agendas of their unknown authors . The followers of Jesus formed a community to wait for his return and the founding of his kingdom . 
 = = = Portraits of Jesus = = = 
 Modern research on the historical Jesus has not led to a unified picture of the historical figure , partly because of the variety of academic traditions represented by the scholars . Given the scarcity of historical sources , it is generally difficult for any scholar to construct a portrait of Jesus that can be considered historically valid beyond the basic elements of his life . The portraits of Jesus constructed in these quests often differ from each other , and from the image portrayed in the gospels . 
 Contemporary scholarship , representing the " third quest , " places Jesus firmly in the Jewish tradition . Leading scholars in the " third quest " include E. P. Sanders , Geza Vermes , Gerd Theissen , Christoph Burchard , and John Dominic Crossan . Jesus is seen as the founder of , in the words of E. P. Sanders , a ' " renewal movement within Judaism . " This scholarship suggests a continuity between Jesus ' life as a wandering charismatic and the same lifestyle carried forward by followers after his death . The main criterion used to discern historical details in the " third quest " is the criterion of plausibility , relative to Jesus ' Jewish context and to his influence on Christianity . The main disagreement in contemporary research is whether Jesus was apocalyptic . Most scholars conclude that he was an apocalyptic preacher , like John the Baptist and the apostle Paul . In contrast , certain prominent North American scholars , such as Burton Mack and John Dominic Crossan , advocate for a non @-@ eschatological Jesus , one who is more of a Cynic sage than an apocalyptic preacher . In addition to portraying Jesus as an apocalyptic prophet , a charismatic healer or a cynic philosopher , some scholars portray him as the true Messiah or an egalitarian prophet of social change . However , the attributes described in the portraits sometimes overlap , and scholars who differ on some attributes sometimes agree on others . 
 Since the 18th century , scholars have occasionally put forth that Jesus was a political national messiah , but the evidence for this portrait is negligible . Likewise , the proposal that Jesus was a Zealot does not fit with the earliest strata of the Synoptic tradition . 
 = = = Language , ethnicity , and appearance = = = 
 Jesus grew up in Galilee and much of his ministry took place there . The languages spoken in Galilee and Judea during the first century AD include Jewish Palestinian Aramaic , Hebrew , and Greek , with Aramaic being predominant . There is substantial consensus that Jesus gave most of his teachings in Aramaic . 
 Modern scholars agree that Jesus was a Jew of first @-@ century Palestine . <unk> in New Testament Greek is a term which in the contemporary context may refer to religion ( Second Temple Judaism ) , ethnicity ( of Judea ) , or both . In a review of the state of modern scholarship , Amy @-@ Jill Levine writes that the entire question of ethnicity is " fraught with difficulty , " and that " beyond recognizing that ' Jesus was Jewish ' , rarely does the scholarship address what being ' Jewish ' means " . 
 The New Testament gives no description of the physical appearance of Jesus before his death — it is generally indifferent to racial appearances and does not refer to the features of the people it mentions . Jesus probably looked like a typical Jew of his time and according to some scholars was likely to have had a sinewy appearance due to his ascetic and itinerant lifestyle . 
 = = = Christ myth theory = = = 
 The Christ myth theory is the hypothesis that Jesus of Nazareth never existed ; or if he did , that he had virtually nothing to do with the founding of Christianity and the accounts in the gospels . Bruno Bauer ( 1809 – 1882 ) taught that the first Gospel was a work of literature that produced history rather than described it . According to Albert <unk> ( 1850 – 1906 ) a social movement produced Jesus when it encountered Jewish messianic expectations . Arthur <unk> ( 1865 – 1935 ) saw Jesus as the concrete form of a myth that predated Christianity . Despite arguments put forward by authors who have questioned the existence of a historical Jesus , there remains a strong consensus in historical @-@ critical biblical scholarship that a historical Jesus did live in that area and in that time period . 
 = = Perspectives = = 
 Apart from his own disciples and followers , the Jews of Jesus ' day generally rejected him as the Messiah , as do the great majority of Jews today . Christian theologians , ecumenical councils , reformers and others have written extensively about Jesus over the centuries . Christian sects and schisms have often been defined or characterized by their descriptions of Jesus . Meanwhile , Manichaeans , Gnostics , Muslims , Baha 'is , and others have found prominent places for Jesus in their religions . Jesus has also had detractors , both past and present . 
 = = = Christian = = = 
 Jesus is the central figure of Christianity . Although Christian views of Jesus vary , it is possible to summarize the key beliefs shared among major denominations , as stated in their catechetical or confessional texts . Christian views of Jesus are derived from various sources , including the canonical gospels and New Testament letters such as the Pauline epistles and the Johannine writings . These documents outline the key beliefs held by Christians about Jesus , including his divinity , humanity , and earthly life , and that he is the Christ and the Son of God . Despite their many shared beliefs , not all Christian denominations agree on all doctrines , and both major and minor differences on teachings and beliefs have persisted throughout Christianity for centuries . 
 The New Testament states that the resurrection of Jesus is the foundation of the Christian faith ( 1 Corinthians 15 : 12 – 20 ) . Christians believe that through his sacrificial death and resurrection , humans can be reconciled with God and are thereby offered salvation and the promise of eternal life . Recalling the words of John the Baptist on the day after Jesus ' baptism , these doctrines sometimes refer to Jesus as the Lamb of God , who was crucified to fulfill his role as the servant of God . Jesus is thus seen as the new and last Adam , whose obedience contrasts with Adam 's disobedience . Christians view Jesus as a role model , whose God @-@ focused life believers are encouraged to imitate . 
 Most Christians believe that Jesus was both human and the Son of God . While there has been theological debate over his nature , Some early Christians viewed Jesus as subordinate to the Father , and others considered him an aspect of the Father rather than a separate person . The Church resolved the issues in ancient councils , which established the Holy Trinity , with Jesus both fully human and fully God . Trinitarian Christians generally believe that Jesus is the Logos , God 's incarnation and God the Son , both fully divine and fully human . However , the doctrine of the Trinity is not universally accepted among Christians . With the Protestant Reformation , Christians such as Michael Servetus and the <unk> started questioning the ancient creeds that had established Jesus ' two natures . <unk> Christian groups include The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints , Unitarians and Jehovah 's Witnesses . 
 Christians revere not only Jesus himself , but also his name . Devotions to the Holy Name of Jesus go back to the earliest days of Christianity . These devotions and feasts exist in both Eastern and Western Christianity . 
 In the 20th century , Protestant groups became sharply divided in terms of how much they support historical and critical inquiry into the person of Jesus . Protestant denominations allow some such investigation but differ in how far the investigation may go . The Roman Catholic Church drew definite limits , and Catholic scholars have engaged in considerable critical study within those limits . Some liberal theologians have come to doubt miracles such as the virgin birth . 
 = = = Jewish = = = 
 Judaism rejects the idea of Jesus being God , or a mediator to God , or part of a Trinity . It holds that Jesus is not the Messiah , arguing that he neither fulfilled the Messianic prophecies in the Tanakh nor embodied the personal qualifications of the Messiah . According to Jewish tradition , there were no prophets after Malachi , who delivered his prophesies in the fifth century BC . Although currently disputed , David Flusser offers the Pharisee , Joshua b . <unk> , as a possible rabbi of Jesus , but likens his social outlook to that of the Essenes and his prophetic stance to that of John the Baptist . 
 Judaic criticism of Jesus is long @-@ standing . The Talmud , written and compiled from the third to the fifth century AD , includes stories that since medieval times have been considered to be defamatory accounts of Jesus . In one such story , <unk> ha @-@ <unk> ( " Jesus the Christian " ) , a lewd apostate , is executed by the Jewish high court for spreading idolatry and practicing magic . The majority of contemporary historians consider that this material provides no information on the historical Jesus . The <unk> Torah , a late 12th @-@ century work of Jewish law written by Moses Maimonides , states that Jesus is a " stumbling block " who makes " the majority of the world to err and serve a god other than the Lord " . 
 = = = Islamic = = = 
 A major figure in Islam , Jesus ( commonly transliterated as <unk> ) is considered to be a messenger of God ( Allah ) and the Messiah ( al @-@ Masih ) who was sent to guide the Children of Israel ( Bani Isra 'il ) with a new scripture , the Gospel ( referred to in Islam as <unk> ) . Muslims regard the gospels of the New Testament as inauthentic , and believe that Jesus ' original message was lost or altered and that Muhammad came later to restore it . Belief in Jesus ( and all other messengers of God ) is a requirement for being a Muslim . The Quran mentions Jesus by name 25 times — more often than Muhammad — and emphasizes that Jesus was a mortal human who , like all other prophets , had been divinely chosen to spread God 's message . While the Qur 'an acknowledges the Virgin birth of Jesus , He is considered to be neither the incarnation nor the son of God . Islamic texts emphasize a strict notion of monotheism ( tawhid ) and forbid the association of partners with God , which would be idolatry . Like all prophets in Islam , Jesus is considered a Muslim . 
 The Quran describes the annunciation to Mary ( Maryam ) by an angel that she is to give birth to Jesus while remaining a virgin . It calls the virgin birth a miracle that occurred by the will of God . The Quran ( 21 : 91 and 66 : 12 ) states that God breathed his spirit into Mary while she was chaste . Jesus is called the " Spirit of God " because he was born through the action of the Spirit , but that belief does not imply his pre @-@ existence . 
 To aid in his ministry to the Jewish people , Jesus was given the ability to perform miracles , by permission of God rather than by his own power . Through his ministry , Jesus is seen as a precursor to Muhammad . According to the Quran , Jesus was not crucified but was merely made to appear that way to unbelievers by Allah , who physically raised Jesus into the heavens . To Muslims , it is the ascension rather than the crucifixion that constitutes a major event in the life of Jesus . Most Muslims believe that Jesus will return to earth at the end of time and defeat the Antichrist ( ad @-@ <unk> ) by killing him in Lud . 
 The Ahmadiyya Muslim Community has several distinct teachings about Jesus . Ahmadis believe that he was a mortal man who survived his crucifixion and died a natural death at the age of 120 in Kashmir , India . 
 = = = Bahá 'í = = = 
 Bahá 'í teachings consider Jesus to be a manifestation of God , a Bahá 'í concept for prophets — intermediaries between God and humanity , serving as messengers and reflecting God 's qualities and attributes . The Bahá 'í concept emphasizes the simultaneous qualities of humanity and divinity ; thus , it is similar to the Christian concept of incarnation . Bahá 'í thought accepts Jesus as the Son of God . In Bahá 'í thought , Jesus was a perfect incarnation of God 's attributes , but Bahá 'í teachings reject the idea that " ineffable essence " of the Divinity was contained within a single human body because of their beliefs regarding " omnipresence and transcendence of the essence of God " . 
 Bahá 'u'lláh , the founder of the Bahá 'í Faith , wrote that since each manifestation of God has the same divine attributes , they can be seen as the spiritual " return " of all previous manifestations of God , and the appearance of each new manifestation of God inaugurates a religion that supersedes the former ones , a concept known as progressive revelation . Bahá 'ís believe that God 's plan unfolds gradually through this process as mankind matures , and that some of the manifestations arrive in specific fulfillment of the missions of previous ones . Thus , Bahá 'ís believe that Bahá 'u'lláh is the promised return of Christ . Bahá 'í teachings confirm many , but not all , aspects of Jesus as portrayed in the gospels . Bahá 'ís believe in the virgin birth and in the Crucifixion , but see the Resurrection and the miracles of Jesus as symbolic . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 In Christian Gnosticism ( now a largely extinct religious movement ) , Jesus was sent from the divine realm and provided the secret knowledge ( gnosis ) necessary for salvation . Most Gnostics believed that Jesus was a human who became possessed by the spirit of " the Christ " at his baptism . This spirit left Jesus ' body during the crucifixion , but was rejoined to him when he was raised from the dead . Some Gnostics , however , were <unk> , believed that Jesus did not have a physical body , but only appeared to possess one . Manichaeism , a Gnostic sect , accepted Jesus as a prophet , in addition to revering Gautama Buddha and Zoroaster . 
 Some Hindus consider Jesus to be an avatar or a sadhu and point out similarities between Krishna and Jesus ' teachings . Paramahansa Yogananda , an Indian guru , taught that Jesus was the reincarnation of Elisha and a student of John the Baptist , the reincarnation of Elijah . Some Buddhists , including Tenzin Gyatso , the 14th Dalai Lama , regard Jesus as a bodhisattva who dedicated his life to the welfare of people . Disciples of the Cao Đài religion worship Jesus Christ as a major religious teacher . He is revealed during communication with Divine Beings as the spirit of their Supreme Being ( God the Father ) together with other major religious teachers and founders like the Gautama Buddha , Laozi , and Confucius . The New Age movement entertains a wide variety of views on Jesus . Theosophists , from whom many New Age teachings originated , refer to Jesus as the Master Jesus and believe that Christ , after various incarnations , occupied the body of Jesus . Scientologists recognize Jesus ( along with other religious figures such as Zoroaster , Muhammad , and Buddha ) as part of their " religious heritage " . Atheists reject Jesus ' divinity , but not all hold a negative estimation of him ; Richard Dawkins , for instance , refers to Jesus as " a great moral teacher " , while stating in his book The God Delusion that Jesus is praiseworthy because he did not derive his ethics from biblical scripture . 
 Jesus had detractors , both past and present , as well . Early critics of Jesus and Christianity included Celsus in the second century and Porphyry in the third . In the 19th century , Nietzsche was highly critical of Jesus , whose teachings he considered to be " anti @-@ nature " in their treatment of topics such as sexuality . Other notable modern critics of Jesus include Sita Ram Goel , Christopher Hitchens , Bertrand Russell , and Dayananda Saraswati . In the 20th century , Russell wrote in Why I Am Not a Christian that Jesus was " not so wise as some other people have been , and He was certainly not superlatively wise " . Russell called Jesus ’ vindictive nature a defect in his moral character in that Jesus in the Gospels believed in the everlasting punishment of hell , which Russell felt that no one who is " really profoundly humane can believe in " . Russell also notes a repeated " vindictive fury against those people who would not listen to His preaching " which he felt " detract [ s ] from superlative excellence " . 
 = = Depictions = = 
 Some of the earliest depictions of Jesus at the Dura @-@ Europos church are firmly dated to before 256 . Thereafter , despite the lack of biblical references or historical records , a wide range of depictions of Jesus appeared during the last two millennia , often influenced by cultural settings , political circumstances and theological contexts . As in other Early Christian art , the earliest depictions date to the late second or early third century , and surviving images are found especially in the Catacombs of Rome . 
 The depiction of Christ in pictorial form was highly controversial in the early church . From the 5th century onward , flat painted icons became popular in the Eastern Church . The Byzantine Iconoclasm acted as a barrier to developments in the East , but by the ninth century , art was permitted again . The Transfiguration was a major theme in Eastern Christian art , and every Eastern Orthodox monk who had trained in icon painting had to prove his craft by painting an icon depicting it . Icons receive the external marks of veneration , such as kisses and prostration , and they are thought to be powerful channels of divine grace . 
 Before the Protestant Reformation , the crucifix was common in Western Christianity . It is a model of the cross with Jesus crucified on it . The crucifix became the central ornament of the altar in the 13th century , a use that has been nearly universal in Roman Catholic churches until recent times . 
 Jesus appears as an infant in a manger ( feed trough ) in Christmas <unk> , which depict the Nativity scene . He is typically joined by Mary , Joseph , animals , shepherds , angels , and the Magi . Francis of Assisi ( 1181 / 82 – 1226 ) is credited with popularizing the creche , although he probably did not initiate it . The creche reached its height of popularity in the 17th and 18th centuries in southern Europe . 
 The Renaissance brought forth a number of artists who focused on depictions of Jesus ; Fra Angelico and others followed Giotto in the systematic development of uncluttered images . 
 The Protestant Reformation brought renewed resistance to imagery , but total prohibition was atypical , and Protestant objections to images have tended to reduce since the 16th century . Although large images are generally avoided , few Protestants now object to book illustrations depicting Jesus . The use of depictions of Jesus is advocated by the leaders of denominations such as Anglicans and Catholics and is a key element of the Eastern Orthodox tradition . 
 = = Associated relics = = 
 The total destruction that ensued with the siege of Jerusalem by the Romans in AD 70 made the survival of items from first century Judea very rare and almost no direct records survive about the history of Judaism from the last part of the first century through the second century . Margaret M. Mitchell writes that although Eusebius reports ( Ecclesiastical History III 5 @.@ 3 ) that the early Christians left Jerusalem for Pella just before Jerusalem was subjected to the final lock down , we must accept that no first hand Christian items from the early Jerusalem Church have reached us . However , throughout the history of Christianity a number of relics attributed to Jesus have been claimed , although doubt has been cast on them . The 16th @-@ century Catholic theologian Erasmus wrote sarcastically about the proliferation of relics and the number of buildings that could have been constructed from the wood claimed to be from the cross used in the Crucifixion . Similarly , while experts debate whether Jesus was crucified with three nails or with four , at least thirty holy nails continue to be venerated as relics across Europe . 
 Some relics , such as purported remnants of the Crown of Thorns , receive only a modest number of pilgrims , while the Shroud of Turin ( which is associated with an approved Catholic devotion to the Holy Face of Jesus ) , have received millions , including popes John Paul II and Benedict XVI . There is no scholarly consensus in favor for the authenticity of any relic attributed to Jesus . 
 = = = Explanatory = = = 
 = Simpsoncalifragilisticexpiala ( Annoyed Grunt ) cious = 
 " Simpsoncalifragilisticexpiala ( Annoyed Grunt ) cious " , is the thirteenth episode of The Simpsons ' eighth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 7 , 1997 . After Marge becomes stressed , the Simpsons hire a new nanny , a Mary Poppins parody , Shary Bobbins ( voiced by Maggie Roswell ) , who tries to help them become better people . It was directed by Chuck Sheetz and was written and executive produced by Al Jean and Mike Reiss . It would also prove to be the last episode for which Mike Reiss received a writing credit . In 2014 , Al Jean selected it as one of five essential episodes in the show 's history . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After discovering that she is losing hair at an alarming rate , Marge visits Dr. Hibbert , who informs her that stress is the cause . The Simpson family decides to hire a nanny who can help clean the house and take care of the children . They start interviewing candidates , but none of them are right for the job ( as Homer believes every candidate is a man in drag , à la Mrs. Doubtfire ) . Bart and Lisa sing a song about what they would consider to be the perfect nanny , and their wishes are answered when a woman with an umbrella glides down from the sky and introduces herself as Shary Bobbins , an obvious parody of Mary Poppins , which she vehemently denies . She seems perfect and is immediately hired . 
 Shary Bobbins proves to be very helpful for the Simpson family , helping the kids clean their rooms , singing them to sleep , and even making Mr. Burns happy . Marge recovers from her stress , and her hair returns to normal . The next day , as the reformed Simpsons sit down to a perfect dinner , Shary Bobbins declares that her work is finished and leaves the house . Just as she is starting to miss the Simpson family , she sees Homer strangling Bart as they are smashed through the living room window , Maggie attempting to put out a fire , and Marge losing her hair again ; the family has instantly reverted to its previous state of dysfunction . Shary realizes that she must stay . 
 The family now starts to treat her rudely and lose interest in her songs and zest for life . Declaring that the Simpsons would be the death of her , she becomes depressed and starts drinking ( while singing " Margaritaville " ) with Barney . The family realizes that they have " crushed her gentle spirit " , and Marge admits to Shary that nothing can be done to change the Simpsons ; through song , the family state that they are happy just the way they are . Shary accepts this , and leaves using her magical umbrella . As Shary glides away , Lisa asks whether they will see her again , and Homer is positive that they will ; both unaware that behind them , Shary is sucked into a jet engine . 
 = = Production = = 
 Although the majority of the season eight episodes were executive produced by Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein , former executive producers Al Jean and Mike Reiss had signed a deal with Disney that allowed them to produce four episodes of The Simpsons . The idea for this episode originated several years before its airdate when Jean and Reiss were the regular showrunners . The idea was pitched at a writers ' retreat by Al Jean , but nobody had wanted to flesh it out . After being allowed to come back to produce some Simpsons episodes , Jean and Reiss decided to write this episode . At first , Mike Reiss was against the episode and had felt that it was a bad idea . He felt that the plot was slightly ridiculous and that the show should not feature any magic ; except for a few moments , he largely kept magic out of the episode . He now considers it one of the best liked episodes that he co @-@ wrote . 
 At the time , " Simpsoncalifragilisticexpiala ( Annoyed Grunt ) cious " had more music in it than any other episode . While writing , Jean thought that the songs would stretch out and make the episode the proper length , but it was considerably shorter than required . Several additional scenes , such as the Itchy & Scratchy segment , were added to pad out the episode . There was originally a sequence where Bart , Lisa and Shary Bobbins visit Patty and Selma who sing " We Love to Smoke " , a parody of " I Love to Laugh " . The song was cut because it wasn 't getting any laughs , but the full version was included on the album Go Simpsonic with The Simpsons and a brief animated version was included as a deleted scene on the Season 8 DVD . During the end song , Homer can be seen dancing along but not singing ; this was because the producers forgot to record Dan Castellaneta . 
 Many of the scenes were animated by Eric Stefani , a former member of No Doubt , who specialized in animation for musical numbers . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Julie Andrews ( who portrayed the titular role in Mary Poppins ) was originally slated to appear in the episode as Shary Bobbins , but in the end , the producers went with series regular Maggie Roswell after hearing Roswell 's reading for the part . 
 Quentin Tarantino was also asked to guest star , but he did not want to deliver the lines required , believing them to be insulting . Instead , regular Dan Castellaneta did the voice . Tarantino now regularly wears a " bootleg Itchy & Scratchy T @-@ shirt , " which was made by a Simpsons / Tarantino fan , Lisa S. <unk> and given to him in 2001 at the Egyptian Theatre in Hollywood during a screening of Pulp Fiction . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The plot of the episode is a reference to Mary Poppins ; Shary Bobbins is based on the character Mary Poppins and the episode title is a spoof of the word " <unk> . " Several songs are also direct parodies of songs from the film , including " The Perfect Nanny " , " The Life I Lead " , " A Spoonful of Sugar " , " Feed the Birds " and a deleted scene featured Patty and Selma singing their version of " I Love to Laugh " . The montage of Marge losing her hair features the song " Hair " from the musical Hair ( though the version heard is The Cowsills version ) . Homer says he has seen Mrs. Doubtfire and believes that some of the candidates for the role of nanny are men in drag . Homer 's imagination is a parody of the dancing characters in Steamboat Willie and features the song " Turkey in the Straw " . While walking in the park , Groundskeeper Willie ( dressed like Bert in Mary Poppins ) is seen singing a cover version of " Maniac " by Michael <unk> . The scene where Principal Skinner attempts to sell Jimbo is a reference to a similar scene in the story Oliver Twist . The Itchy & Scratchy short " Reservoir Cats " is a parody of the scene in Reservoir Dogs where Mr. Blonde cuts off the ear of the police officer . The sequence features the same setting , camera angles and same music — " Stuck in the Middle With You " by Stealers Wheel . At the end , Itchy and Scratchy dance in a manner similar to that seen in the film Pulp Fiction . Shary Bobbins and Barney Gumble sing a drunken rendition of Jimmy Buffett 's " Margaritaville " , with Barney wearing an <unk> shirt and shaking salt in his mouth after finding the " lost shaker of salt " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Simpsoncalifragilisticexpiala ( Annoyed Grunt ) cious " finished 38th in ratings for the week of February 3 – 9 , 1997 , with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 8 , equivalent to approximately 8 @.@ 5 million viewing households . It was the third @-@ highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ files and King of the Hill . 
 Alf Clausen received an Emmy Award nomination for " Outstanding Music Direction " for this episode . 
 In 2014 , The Simpsons writers picked " Reservoir Cats " from this episode as one of their nine favorite " Itchy & Stratchy " episodes of all time . 
 = Alberto Henschel = 
 Alberto Henschel ( 13 June 1827 – 30 June 1882 ) was a German @-@ Brazilian photographer born in Berlin . Considered the hardest @-@ working photographer and businessman in 19th @-@ century Brazil , with offices in Pernambuco , Bahia , Rio de Janeiro , and São Paulo , Henschel was also responsible for the presence of other professional photographers in the country , including his compatriot Karl Ernst Papf — with whom he later worked . 
 Henschel became known for making pictorial representations of Rio de Janeiro as a landscaper photographer and for being an excellent portraitist . He earned the title of Photographo da Casa Imperial ( Photographer of the Royal House ) , allowing him to photograph the everyday life of the Brazilian monarchy during the Reign of Pedro II , even photographing the emperor Dom Pedro II and his family . This title would give his photographs increased recognition and raise their price . 
 But his principal contribution to the history of Brazilian photography is his photographic record of the different social classes in Brazil in the 19th century : portraits , usually in the carte de visite format , taken of the nobility , of rich tradesmen , of the middle @-@ class , and of black people , either slaves or free , in a period before the Lei Áurea . 
 = = Antecedents = = 
 As soon as the first world maps showing Brazil were printed in the Renaissance era of Albrecht Dürer , the recently discovered country aroused the interest of the German public . Among the first attractions were the enthusiastic descriptions and illustrations of the Indians , the exotic landscapes , the abundance of wild animals and the new species of plants first conveyed in the works of Hans Staden . This was followed by the writings of adventurers and scientists such as Johann Baptist Emanuel Pohl , author of <unk> no Interior do Brasil , <unk> nos <unk> de 1817 a 1821 e <unk> por Ordem de Sua <unk> o <unk> da <unk> Francisco Primeiro ( Voyage in the Interior of Brazil . Launched in the Years of 1817 to 1821 and Published by the Order of His Majesty the Emperor of Austria <unk> First ) , in which he describes his journey through the country with wonder and enthusiasm , his words accompanied by luxuriant illustrations . About Rio de Janeiro , Pohl wrote : 
 If some place in the New World deserves , for its location and natural conditions , to become one day a theater of big events , a center of civilization and culture , an emporium of worldwide commerce , it is , in my opinion , Rio de Janeiro . I cannot , here , repress this observation . Willingly hovers the fantasy on the future of such charming country , that is at present little developed and , so to speak , does not have a past . 
 — Johann Emmanuel Pohl 
 Certainly these narrations and illustrations were the principal attractions for those German photographers of the 19th century that moved to Brazil , such as <unk> Henrique <unk> , Augusto Stahl , Karl Ernst Papf , and Alberto Henschel . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = In Germany = = = 
 Alberto Henschel was born 13 June 1827 in Berlin to Moritz and Helene Henschel . Moritz and his brothers August , Friedrich , and Wilhelm , of Jewish origin , had arrived in Berlin around 1806 . They were recognized as engravers and signed their works as the Henschel Brothers . There are no records of Alberto Henschel 's person or professional life in Germany or his reasons for emigrating to Brazil . 
 It has been assumed that Alberto Henschel also met the photographer Francisco Benque while still in Germany , with whom he had a successful , but short @-@ lived , relationship in Brazil . 
 = = = In Brazil = = = 
 = = = = 1860s = = = = 
 Henschel and his associate Karl Heinrich <unk> disembarked in Recife in May 1866 , intending to create a photographic studio on <unk> street , number 38 . Initially named Alberto Henschel & Cia , the studio became Photographia <unk> ( German Photography ) , next changing to a new address on the Matriz de Santo Antônio square , number 2 . Because he was able to build up his business quickly when he came , it is assumed that Henschel was already an experienced photographer and intended to build a promising business in photography in this new market that was still so little explored . 
 In 1867 , Henschel separated from <unk> and returned to Germany where he updated his technique and acquired new equipment for his atelier of photography . He returned to Brazil in the same year , opening another establishment with the same company name in the city of Salvador , on <unk> street , number 16 . By opening three establishments in only two years , Henschel was thought of as the most audacious and sagacious photographic businessman in 19th century Brazil . 
 By the end of the 1860s , Henschel 's houses of Recife and Salvador were already making portraits of people of African origin , slaves and free , differing from other photographers by portraying them freely and with dignity as people and not as objects . 
 = = = = 1870s = = = = 
 In 1870 , Henschel opened another subsidiary of his atelier , this time in Rio de Janeiro , on <unk> street ( nowadays Miguel Couto street , number 40 ) . It was in Rio , capital of the Empire , where he started his prosperous partnership with Francisco Benque . With the name of Henschel & Benque , it specialized in the production and marketing of portraits , landscapes , and the <unk> made by Karl Ernst Papf , whose presence in Brazil was due to Henschel . There are no records dating when the relationship with Benque crumbled ; it is probable that their association remained until 1880 . 
 Because of the quality of his work and his success in the Court , Henschel received the title of Photographo da Casa Imperial ( Photographer of the Royal House ) on 7 September 1874 , together with Benque , which would give his photographs increased recognition and raise their price . The historian photographer Gilberto <unk> describes the quality and importance of Henschel as follows : 
 Henschel photographed Rio and its surroundings [ ... ] . He made landscapes , but above all he was a distinguished portraitist . There is almost no family album where no portraits of grandparents were done by Alberto Henschel . 
 Henschel participated in many exhibitions of photographs , standing out in the exposition of the Imperial Academy of Fine Arts in 1872 and 1875 , for which he received the Gold Medal in the first edition . He also participated in the IV National Exposition and the Universal Exposition of Vienna , in Austria , where he received the Merit Medal . 
 = = = = 1880s = = = = 
 On 1 February 1882 , Henschel inaugurated another establishment , this time in the capital of the province of São Paulo . He gave it the name Photographia Imperial ( Imperial Photography ) because the name Photographia <unk> had already been used since 1875 by the atelier of the photographer Carlos <unk> . His arrival in São Paulo was considered important because , besides being holder of the prestigious title of Photographo da Casa Imperial , he came directly from the Court . The newspaper A Província de São Paulo ( currently O Estado de S. Paulo ) , while describing with minimal details the new atelier in its inaugural day edition , related the enthusiasm with which Henschel was received by the residents of São Paulo . 
 Henschel died in Rio de Janeiro that same year , only some months after establishing himself in São Paulo . However , his companies , under the command of other businessmen , continued to strategically use his name for many years , taking advantage of the great prestige that the mark " Henschel " had acquired . 
 = = Technique = = 
 Henschel was considered the hardest @-@ working photographer and businessman in 19th @-@ century Brazil . He always remained up @-@ to @-@ date with the latest techniques on the photography market . By the time the aesthetic format of photography carte de visite became popular , Henschel was already dominating this technique which he used frequently in his establishments . 
 His studios possessed the latest equipment appropriate for the instantaneous portraits of children who , never still , were the headaches of the photographers . In his announcement in the Novo <unk> de São Paulo para o Anno de 1883 ( New Almanac of São Paulo for the Year of 1883 ) , Henschel advertised : 
 This establishment just received from Europe the negatives for the new process of instantaneous <unk> that have so much success there . Through these <unk> one can obtain a more perfect portrait of a moving child , of nervous people ... The public is invited to come examine in the establishment some portraits obtained by the new process . 
 The new process referred to in the announcement was the use of dry slabs of transparent gelatin , used as an adhesive layer for the fixation of the silver salts over the paper . 
 He photographed all the different social classes of Brazil in the 19th century . Besides the Brazilian monarchy and black people , he also photographed the nobility , the rich tradesmen and their families , and the white middle @-@ class . 
 = Trachylepis tschudii = 
 Trachylepis tschudii is an enigmatic skink , purportedly from Peru . First described in 1845 on the basis of a single specimen , it may be the same as the Noronha skink ( T. atlantica ) from Fernando de Noronha , off northeastern Brazil . T. tschudii represents one of two doubtful records of the otherwise African genus Trachylepis on mainland South America ; the other is T. maculata from Guyana . 
 The only specimen , the holotype , is mostly brownish above , with dark and light spots , and white below . The snout @-@ to @-@ vent length is 83 mm ( 3 @.@ 3 in ) . Several features of the scales align it with Trachylepis over the related American genus Mabuya . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 In 1845 , Swiss zoologist Johann Jakob von Tschudi described the new species Trachylepis ( Xystrolepis ) punctata among other species he had collected in Peru . The species was recorded as being from the " forest region " ( Amazonia ) of Peru and was known from a single specimen , the holotype . In 1887 , G.A. Boulenger placed it at an uncertain position within the genus Mabuia , which included Tschudi 's Trachylepis . In a 1907 reappraisal of some of Tschudi 's reptiles and amphibians , J. Roux redescribed punctata under the name " Mabuia punctata " , but did not comment on its affinities . In 1935 , E.R. Dunn reviewed some American Mabuya and commented that he was unable to tell the identity of punctata , but that it probably was not a true Mabuya . 
 Writing in 1946 , H. <unk> considered Tschudi 's punctata to be identical to the Noronha skink ( then known as Mabuya punctata ) , a species otherwise known only from Fernando de Noronha , a small archipelago off northeastern Brazil . On the basis of its geographic origin , J. Peters and R. Donoso @-@ Barros preferred to place it with one of the Mabuya species of Amazonia and classified it as a junior synonym of Mabuya <unk> . In reviewing the nomenclature of the Noronha skink , P. Mausfeld and D. Vrcibradic noted in 2002 that Tschudi 's name was preoccupied within Mabuya , making it unavailable for use as a valid name . They were unable to examine the holotype and therefore did not comment on its affinities . In the same year , Mausfeld and others split the genus Mabuya , retaining most American species in Mabuya but placing the African species and the Noronha skink in a separate genus Euprepis ; the latter name was later corrected to Trachylepis . 
 In 2009 , A. Miralles and others reviewed Tschudi 's species and re @-@ examined the holotype . Like Mausfeld and Vrcibradic , they noted that the name punctata is preoccupied ; earlier uses of the name in Trachylepis include Lacerta punctata Linnaeus , 1758 , which they consider a synonym of Trachylepis homalocephala from South Africa , and Tiliqua punctata J.E. Gray , 1839 , an earlier name for the Noronha skink . ( The former was assigned to <unk> punctatum , a member of another skink genus , by Bauer in 2003 . ) Miralles and coworkers proposed a new name , Trachylepis tschudii , to replace Tschudi 's name punctata ; the new name honors Tschudi , who first described the animal . They assigned it to the genus Trachylepis , rather than Mabuya , on the basis of several characters of the external anatomy which it shares with the former , but were unable to resolve its placement within Trachylepis . It is distinct from T. maculata , a species recorded from Guyana that represents another doubtful mainland South American record of Trachylepis . They considered three hypotheses : ( 1 ) T. tschudii is a real , but very rare species from Amazonia ; ( 2 ) T. tschudii is actually from somewhere in the Old World , but its origin was wrongly recorded ; and ( 3 ) T. tschudii represents the same species as the Noronha skink , and it either represents an otherwise unknown Amazonian population of that species or actually comes from Fernando de Noronha and was mislabeled . Considering the close similarity between T. tschudii and the Noronha skink , they considered the third hypothesis to be most likely . 
 = = Description = = 
 The holotype and only known specimen , which is in very poor condition , is preserved in the Museum d 'Histoire Naturel de Neuchâtel as specimen <unk> 91 @.@ <unk> . It has five auricular lobules in front of the ears on each side of the head , 39 rows of scales around the midbody , keels on its dorsal scales , and the third supraocular scale in contact with the frontal scale , all characters which align it with Trachylepis rather than Mabuya . The other putative mainland South American Trachylepis , T. maculata , has five instead of three keels , 32 to 34 midbody scales , and separated parietal scales . T. tschudii agrees with the Noronha skink in size , coloration , numbers of scales , and discrete characters , such as having the <unk> , parietal , and prefrontal scales all in contact . 
 The muzzle is narrow and long . The lower eyelid contains a large , transparent disk . The head is olive @-@ brown . There are black scales with a white border between the eyes and the ears . The body is somewhat darker than the head and covered with irregular black and white spots above and is bluish white below . The limbs are yellowish white below . The tail is light brown above , but has two rows of darker spots , and yellowish white below . Snout @-@ to @-@ vent length is 83 mm ( 3 @.@ 3 in ) , head length 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) , head width 6 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 26 in ) , length of the body 33 mm ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) , length of the forelimb 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) , length of the hindlimb 23 mm ( 0 @.@ 91 in ) , and length of the ( incomplete ) tail 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) . 
 = Operation Coburg = 
 Operation Coburg ( 24 January − 1 March 1968 ) was an Australian and New Zealand military action during the Vietnam War . The operation saw heavy fighting between the 1st Australian Task Force ( 1 ATF ) and North Vietnamese Army and Viet Cong during the wider fighting around Long Binh and Bien Hoa . American and South Vietnamese intelligence reports had indicated that an imminent communist offensive during the Tet New Year festival was likely , and in response the Australians and New Zealanders were deployed away from their base in Phuoc Tuy Province to bolster American and South Vietnamese forces defending the Long Binh – Bien Hoa complex north @-@ east of Saigon . 1 ATF deliberately established fire support bases astride the communist lines of communication in the vicinity of the village of Trang Bom , expecting that they would attempt to destroy them . The Australians subsequently clashed with the Viet Cong during early patrols in Area of Operations ( AO ) Columbus , while later Fire Support Base ( FSB ) Andersen was repeatedly subjected to major ground assaults . 
 Although the operation was mounted too late to prevent the attacks on Saigon , the Australians and New Zealanders successfully disrupted the communist lines of communication , limiting their freedom of manoeuvre to attack the Long Binh – Bien Hoa complex , while they were also able to successfully interdict their withdrawal , causing heavy casualties . The operation was also significant as it was the first deployment of 1 ATF outside its Tactical Area of Responsibility ( TAOR ) in Phuoc Tuy , and in this it set a precedent for later operations outside the province . Meanwhile , the remaining Australian forces in Phuoc Tuy Province also successfully repelled repeated Viet Cong attacks against Ba Ria and Long Dien , as part of the Tet Offensive that had engulfed population centres across South Vietnam . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Military situation = = = 
 At 18 : 00 on 29 January 1968 , South Vietnamese forces began a 36 @-@ hour ceasefire in celebration of the arrival of the Year of the Monkey . Earlier , the communists had declared a seven @-@ day ceasefire as part of the Tet festival , that was normally a period of truce and for community gatherings and family reunions in Vietnamese society . However , unbeknown to the South Vietnamese and their allies , the North Vietnamese leadership had decided to use the cease @-@ fire to launch a large offensive in the south in order to break the deadlock that had developed in the conflict — despite the reluctance of Democratic Republic of Vietnam President Ho Chi Minh and Defence Minister General Vo Nguyen Giap . 
 Primarily the brainchild of General Nguyen Chi Thanh , the upcoming offensive would be timed to provoke a popular general uprising among the South Vietnamese people against the government and its American supporters . Yet prudence required that the South Vietnamese maintain 50 per cent of their forces on standby , while American and allied forces under General William Westmoreland — the Free World Military Forces — remained on full alert . However , despite such measures the fighting at Khe Sanh had largely succeeded in diverting American resources and attention away from Saigon and towards the demilitarized zone , affording the communists the element of surprise . 
 Meanwhile , after a number of Viet Cong units mistakenly began the planned offensive against South Vietnam a day early — attacking several towns in I and II Corps on the morning of 30 January — the President of the Republic of Vietnam , Nguyen Van Thieu , subsequently cancelled the ceasefire . Regardless , the offensive proper began in the early hours of 31 January when 85 @,@ 000 to 100 @,@ 000 North Vietnamese and Viet Cong troops simultaneously assaulted population centres and allied installations across South Vietnam . US and South Vietnamese intelligence reports of the impending attacks had afforded some forewarning , and although failures had caught some allied units unprepared , they did not come as a complete surprise . Indeed , the growing threat had earlier prompted Lieutenant General Frederick Weyand , commander of III Corps Tactical Zone , to request the use of the 1st Australian Task Force ( 1 ATF ) — now at full strength with three infantry battalions and support arms — outside of their usual base in Phuoc Tuy Province in order to defend the vital bases in the Long Binh – Bien Hoa complex north @-@ east of Saigon . The request was subsequently approved , although the Australians only agreed on the basis that one of their battalions — 3rd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 3 RAR ) — would remain at Nui Dat to secure it in case of attack . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 On 24 January 1968 , 1 ATF headquarters under the command of Brigadier Ron Hughes inserted by air into their new area of operations , between Bien Hoa and Long Khanh provinces east of Bien Hoa , approximately 55 kilometres ( 34 mi ) from Nui Dat . Initially the force would consist of two battalions — 2 RAR / NZ ( ANZAC ) and 7 RAR — with armour from A Squadron , 3rd Cavalry Regiment , 105 @-@ millimetre ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) M2A2 Howitzers from 106th Battery and 108th Battery , 4th Field Regiment , Royal Australian Artillery , as well as aviation assets in support ; while later elements of 3 RAR would also be committed . Coincidentally they would be operating in the same area that 1 RAR had fought in as part of the US 173rd Airborne Brigade in November 1965 . On that occasion 1 RAR had encountered heavy resistance in a series of bunker systems protecting key communist supply lines at Gang Toi . This time 1 ATF would establish itself astride the communist 's lines of communication in the expectation of provoking an aggressive response from the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong . Within days the Australians would establish a fire support base in order to deny the communists access to suitable sites for launching 122 @-@ millimetre ( 4 @.@ 8 in ) rocket attacks on the important allied bases and installations in the Long Binh – Bien Hoa complex , including the airbase at Bien Hoa and the large Long Binh Logistics Depot . 
 As part of the plan to protect these bases a combined US @-@ Australian force would establish a screen to interdict movement along the northern approaches to Long Binh – Bien Hoa . 1 ATF was subsequently allocated the north @-@ eastern sector , into a new area of operations named AO Columbus . Only sparsely inhabited , AO Columbus was situated east of Long Binh between Highway 1 to the south , and the Song Dong Nai river to the north . Rectangular in shape , it measured 26 kilometres ( 16 mi ) from east to west and 17 kilometres ( 11 mi ) from north to south . The west of the AO was mainly covered in jungle , whilst grassland predominated in the east . Meanwhile , Bien Hoa airbase itself would be defended by US 199th Light Infantry Brigade , occupying AO Uniontown to the west . Across the Song Dong Nai the US 101st Airborne Division occupied AO Manchester , while the South Vietnamese 18th Infantry Division defended its TAOR to the north @-@ west . 
 The concept of operations for Operation Coburg called for two infantry companies from 7 RAR to move by road with the rear echelon units in order to secure FSB Andersen , that had been established 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) north of Trang Bom for easy access to Route 1 . The remainder of the battalion was deployed by helicopter along with 2 RAR / NZ , while the 4th Field Regiment , RAA was inserted by road . The Task Force Maintenance Area was subsequently located at Andersen , with 1 ATF re @-@ supplied throughout the operation by elements of 1st Australian Logistic Support Group deployed forward in Long Binh . FSB Harrison was located 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) to the west of Andersen with both bases positioned so that each could support the other in the event of attack . A small number of SASR patrols would be used to provide reconnaissance for the task force . 
 People 's Army of Vietnam ( PAVN ) forces identified in AO Columbus included North Vietnamese Army and Viet Cong units and <unk> of a battalion group from the 274th Regiment from the Viet Cong 5th Division , a battalion of 84A Artillery ( Rocket ) Regiment ( NVA ) equipped with 122 @-@ millimetre ( 4 @.@ 8 in ) rocket launchers and 82 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 2 in ) mortars and a small element of the Dong Nai Regiment , as well as other Main Force elements of the 273rd Regiment from the Viet Cong 9th Division . Local force elements included a number of company and platoon strength units in addition to various district and village guerrilla forces . These forces were believed to be lying in wait to attack the nearby American bases as part of the planned offensive . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Patrolling in AO Columbus , 24 January − 16 February 1968 = = = 
 The Australians began an intensive patrol program in AO Columbus and were soon fighting up to platoon @-@ sized Viet Cong units in a series of bunker complexes . Between 25 − 29 January the Australians conducted reconnaissance @-@ in @-@ force operations and a series of minor patrol clashes followed up to the end of January . On 26 January B Company , 2 RAR / NZ fought a two @-@ hour action against about 25 Viet Cong entrenched in a bunker system . While on the same day 9 Platoon , C Company , 2 RAR / NZ also assaulted and occupied a camp initially believed to be of similar strength and held it for 19 hours after repeated attacks from a Viet Cong force estimated to be of company strength . Meanwhile , whilst providing flank security the New Zealanders in V Company , 2 RAR / NZ engaged in a series of skirmishes which resulted in 12 Viet Cong dead and many weapons captured with two New Zealanders wounded . On 27 January there were heavier contacts still , resulting in 14 Australians wounded and one Viet Cong killed . 
 Although 1 ATF was well placed to deny the communists the use of its AO , it was increasingly obvious that there was little role for the SAS . Indeed , the heavy presence of Viet Cong prevented them from operating normally , and the first attempt to insert a patrol was called off due to the presence of hostile forces in the vicinity of the landing zone ; two Viet Cong were subsequently killed and the patrol was extracted after only 30 minutes . A second attempt lasted only fifteen minutes longer , and they were also extracted following a brief contact . Finally , two patrols were joined together in an effort to provide more protection , and on 29 January they patrolled out from 7 RAR battalion headquarters . After only 30 minutes the Australians encountered a small party of Viet Cong ; however , they tried again two hours later but were detected . The following day they tried for a third time and were contacted . Unable to operate effectively , the SAS patrols were withdrawn and returned to Nui Dat on 1 February . 
 Meanwhile , on 29 January D Company , 7 RAR contacted a battalion concentrating in bunkers during a two and half hour battle that saw nine Australian casualties , including one killed , while seven Viet Cong were also killed . On 31 January Viet Cong overran the village of Trang Bom , just 1 @,@ 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 yd ) south @-@ west of FSB Andersen . The Australians reclaimed it that afternoon only for the communists to attack again the next day . Once again the Australians recaptured it , this time in savage house @-@ to @-@ house fighting involving D Company , 2 RAR / NZ and A Squadron , 3 CAV . C Company , 3 RAR was subsequently inserted to assist with the protection of FSB Harrison . In response to the attack on Trang Bom , D Company , 7 RAR was dispatched forward to search the area . The lead platoon advanced on a Viet Cong camp — later found to be battalion @-@ size — and was almost destroyed in the ensuing fire @-@ fight . With half the platoon soon becoming casualties , another platoon was moved forward to aid their extraction . Close support from artillery protected the Australians from further casualties however , and the Viet Cong was eventually forced to withdraw . Six Australians had been killed and 36 wounded in the engagements up to that point , while one New Zealander had also died and one wounded . More than 40 Viet Cong had been killed and nine wounded . 
 In the early hours of 31 January key installations in the Long Binh – Bien Hoa complex in AO Uniontown had come under heavy attack by the Viet Cong 5th Division , as part of the second prong of the communist attacks against Saigon . With the Tet offensive erupting across South Vietnam , Bien Hoa airbase received heavy rocket fire that caused extensive damage to buildings , aircraft , and facilities , while the Long Binh Logistics Depot and the prisoner of war camp were also hit . Over the next three days the US 199th Light Infantry Brigade — later reinforced by the US 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment and an infantry battalion from the US 101st Airborne Division — were forced into heavy combat fending off communist indirect fire and ground attacks . By 1 February the Americans had gained the upper hand however , <unk> out the last remaining Viet Cong following a sweep of Bien Hoa that cleared the town . 
 The attacks on Bien Hoa forced a change in tactics for the Australians , and 1 ATF 's mission was quickly changed from reconnaissance @-@ in @-@ force to a blocking operation designed to intercept withdrawing communist forces . Between 31 January and 1 February , the Australian battalions moved into company blocking positions and a number of minor contacts occurred , resulting in some Viet Cong casualties and the capture of more weapons and equipment . Once in position , the intensity of these clashes increased as the Australians sprung platoon ambushes . Indeed , during early February , the nature of contacts in AO Columbus began to change , with the Australians increasingly faced by larger company @-@ sized Main Force units located in static defensive positions . During the first week of February the Viet Cong began streaming through the AO , retreating from Saigon in the wake of heavy losses during Tet . Although the Viet Cong managed to avoid becoming decisively engaged , around 90 were killed and five captured , as the Australians maintained their blocking positions . 
 C Company , 7 RAR had been detached in order to protect the task force headquarters as well as to act as a reserve , and was particularly heavily engaged during this phase . The force had been gradually patrolling , when 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) north of Trang Bom on the morning of 5 February , it contacted a large Viet Cong force consisting of a regimental headquarters and three companies in a well constructed defensive position defended by several heavy machine @-@ guns . The Australians assaulted the position on three occasions over the next three days in vicious fighting supported by airstrikes , artillery and helicopter gunships . During one such attack on 7 February , Lieutenant Mark Moloney — one the company 's platoon commanders — charged forward with six <unk> rocket launchers to attack a series of bunkers single handed . Moloney succeeded in destroying several before he fell badly wounded ; he survived , and for his actions was recommended for a Victoria Cross . Moloney 's award was never made however , although Gunner Michael Williams and Corporal Graham Griffith were both awarded the Military Medal for their actions under fire . The battle continued for seven hours , with the Australians eventually routing the bunker system in a battle later hailed as " probably one of the most brilliant actions ever fought by an Australian rifle company . " However , amidst the confusion of Tet such efforts went largely unnoticed . 
 Early the same morning the night harbour occupied by the New Zealanders from V Company , 2 RAR / NZ had been attacked by a Viet Cong force consisting of elements of three companies from the 274th Regiment , shortly after stand @-@ to at 06 : 15 . The incident proved to be the most intense fighting involving New Zealand forces in Vietnam to that point , and over the course of an hour the attack was successfully repelled with the assistance of highly accurate artillery support from the 108th Battery , RAA operating in direct support , as well as from mortar fire . The Viet Cong withdrew following the arrival of a light fire team of gunships , leaving behind 13 dead and a number of other blood trails . Nine New Zealanders were wounded in the engagement , six of whom subsequently required evacuation by helicopter . 
 Elsewhere , Tet had also engulfed Phuoc Tuy province and although stretched thin the remaining Australian forces there were soon drawn into heavy combat as Viet Cong units simultaneously attacked the main provincial towns . Dunstan was forced to dispatch the Task Force reaction force from Nui Dat , with A Company , 3 RAR under the command of Major Brian Howard moving to reinforce South Vietnamese government forces following an attack by a 600 @-@ strong force from D445 VC Battalion on Ba Ria , the provincial capital , before first light on 1 February . Fighting from street to street in a series of firefights at close quarters the Australians successfully repelled the attack , killing 40 Viet Cong . Later , on 3 February , D Company , 3 RAR spoiled a harassing attack on Long Dien , and conducted a sweep of Hoa Long . Overall , the fighting in Phuoc Tuy between 1 − 9 February resulted in 50 Viet Cong killed , 25 wounded and one prisoner . Five Australians were killed and 24 wounded . 
 While the Australians in AO Columbus had successfully interrupted the pre @-@ positioning of communist forces on one of the main approaches to Saigon , in hindsight they had been deployed too late to interfere seriously with the offensive . Over the period 9 − 12 February 1 ATF redeployed , moving south back towards the fire support bases . The remaining companies of 3 RAR subsequently relieved 7 RAR and moved north on 11 February , while 2 RAR / NZ returned to Nui Dat on 13 February . FSB Harrison was abandoned and all command and support elements concentrated at FSB Andersen . Contact was minimal during this period , with just three Viet Cong killed . 
 = = = Fighting at FSB Andersen , 17 − 28 February 1968 = = = 
 The Australian defence of FSB Andersen was left to 3 RAR , M113 armoured personnel carriers from 1 Troop A Squadron , 3rd Cavalry Regiment , and a troop of engineers from 1st Field Squadron . Artillery support was provided by 161st Field Battery , Royal New Zealand Artillery and the American 155 @-@ millimetre ( 6 @.@ 1 in ) M109 self @-@ propelled medium guns of B Battery , 2 / 35th Artillery Regiment . A radar detachment from 131st Divisional Locating Battery was also attached as were elements of 161st Reconnaissance Flight . A Company , 3 RAR together with the supporting arms was left to defend the base , while the other three rifle companies continued reconnaissance @-@ in @-@ force operations throughout the AO . Airstrikes and artillery also targeted known Viet Cong base areas , however the number of ground contacts was limited . 
 Late on the evening of 17 / 18 February the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese Army launched an assault on FSB Andersen . The first attack was preceded by a heavy rocket and mortar barrage in the early hours of the morning , followed by two waves of infantry each of company size . The attack focused on the south @-@ west of the perimeter manned by 3 RAR 's echelon and mortar platoon , as well as an American medium artillery battery . The perimeter wire was subsequently breached , but the attack was repulsed by mortar counter @-@ battery fire , Claymore mines and the heavy weight of machine @-@ gun fire from armoured personnel carriers and the American gunners . The communist barrage had had a devastating effect , falling among the American and New Zealand gun positions , the mortar lines and the battalion echelon , as well as scoring a direct hit on an Australian engineer standing patrol . A second attack shortly after , this time from the north , was repelled by small @-@ arms fire from the forward Australian pits . Total Viet Cong casualties were unknown , although four bodies were found on the wire at dawn , while numerous bloodstains and bandages were found during a later sweep of the perimeter and a suspected mortar base @-@ plate location . Seven Australians and one American were killed , while 22 Australians and three Americans were wounded . 
 As a result of the growing threat to the Australian base , the decision was made to reinforce FSB Andersen , with C Company , 3 RAR flown in by the time of the second attack two nights later . The APCs had also been redeployed to cover the south @-@ east ridge and the southern approach from Trang Bom . The communist assault commenced just before midnight on 19 February , this time focussing on the south @-@ east , and was preceded by heavy machine @-@ gun fire . The attack was stopped short of the wire , regardless the forward pits were hit by rifle grenades , while the Assault Pioneer positions were attacked with satchel charges . The only casualties were four Viet Cong killed . 
 The final attack on 28 February also began with a mortar attack , but the communist assault wave was broken up by mortar fire , and was forced to withdraw to the east . Three Americans were wounded . A clearing patrol later revealed that the Viet Cong had inserted a mortar team to the edge of the rubber trees by night in a <unk> and a cart and had then manhandled the tubes into position . 3 RAR 's defence of FSB Andersen was the first occasion in the history of their operations in Vietnam that an Australian fire support base had been subjected to a ground assault while during all three attacks the cavalry and artillery in support had played a key role in the defence . Throughout the later part of the operation the patrolling rifle companies had systematically searched the AO and although contact was infrequent the patrols had been effective in denying the subsequent use of the area to launch rocket attacks against the bases in Long Binh and Bien Hoa . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 Operation Coburg ended on 1 March 1968 with 3 RAR redeploying to Nui Dat by air . The fighting had cost the Australians 17 killed and 61 wounded , while allied casualties included two New Zealanders and one American killed , and eight New Zealanders and six Americans wounded . Communist casualties included at least 145 killed , 110 wounded and 5 captured , with many more removed from the battlefield . Large quantities of weapons and equipment were also captured by the Australians . Overall , Coburg was considered a success by the Australians and Americans . Although they had been inserted too late to prevent the attacks during Tet , 1 ATF had successfully disrupted the communist lines of communication , limiting their freedom of manoeuvre to attack the Long Binh – Bien Hoa complex , while the Australians had also successfully interdicting the Viet Cong withdrawal , causing heavy casualties . The operation was also significant because it had also been the first deployment of 1 ATF outside Phuoc Tuy , and in this it set a precedent for later operations outside the province . The Royal Australian Regiment and the 3rd Cavalry Regiment were subsequently awarded the battle honour " Bien Hoa " , one of only five presented to Australian units during the war . 
 = = = Assessment = = = 
 At the strategic level the general uprising never eventuated , and in late February the communist offensive collapsed . Suffering more than 45 @,@ 000 killed — against South Vietnamese and allied losses of only 6 @,@ 000 men — it had been a tactical disaster for the communists . Regardless , the offensive was a turning point in the war . Prior to Tet American commanders and politicians had talked confidently about winning the war , arguing that Westmoreland 's strategy of attrition had reached the point where the communists were losing soldiers and equipment faster than they could be replaced . Yet the scale of the fighting , and the surprise and violence with which the offensive was launched , had shocked the public , contradicting such predictions of imminent victory . Confidence in the military and political leadership collapsed , as did public support for the war in America . Ultimately , Tet was a publicity and media triumph for the communists , and Hanoi emerged with a significant political victory . In its wake President Lyndon Johnson announced that he would not seek a second term in office . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 Tet had a similar effect on Australian public opinion , and caused growing uncertainty in the government about the determination of the United States to remain militarily involved in Southeast Asia . Amid the initial shock , Prime Minister John Gorton unexpectedly declared that Australia would not increase its military commitment in Vietnam beyond the current level of 8 @,@ 000 personnel . The war continued without respite however , and between May and June 1968 1 ATF was again deployed away from Phuoc Tuy in response to intelligence reports of another impending offensive . The Australians subsequently took up positions north @-@ east of Saigon during Operation Toan Thang I to interdict communist lines of communication , fighting a series of significant actions over a 26 @-@ day period that became known as the Battle of Coral – Balmoral . 
 = Rupert D 'Oyly Carte = 
 Rupert D 'Oyly Carte ( 3 November 1876 – 12 September 1948 ) was an English hotelier , theatre owner and impresario , best known as proprietor of the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company and Savoy Hotel from 1913 to 1948 . 
 Son of the impresario and hotelier Richard D 'Oyly Carte , Rupert inherited the family businesses from his stepmother Helen . After serving in World War I , he took steps to revitalise the opera company , which had not appeared in Central London since 1909 , hiring new designers and conductors to present fresh productions of the Gilbert and Sullivan operas in seasons in the West End . The new productions generally retained the original text and music of the operas . Carte launched international and provincial tours , as well as the London seasons , and he released the first complete recordings of the operas . He also rebuilt the half @-@ century @-@ old Savoy Theatre in 1929 , opening the house with a season of Gilbert and Sullivan . 
 As an hotelier , Carte built on his father 's legacy , expanding the Savoy Hotel , refreshing the other hotels and restaurants in the Savoy group , including Claridge 's and the Berkeley Hotel , and introducing cabaret and dance bands that became internationally famous . He also increased marketing activities , including foreign marketing , of the hotels . 
 P. G. Wodehouse based a character in his novels , Psmith , on a Wykehamist schoolboy whom he identified as Rupert D 'Oyly Carte . At his death , Carte passed the opera company and hotels to his only surviving child , Bridget D 'Oyly Carte . The Gilbert and Sullivan operas , nurtured by Carte and his family for over a century , continue to be produced frequently today throughout the English @-@ speaking world and beyond . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Rupert D 'Oyly Carte was born in Hampstead , London , the younger son of the impresario Richard D 'Oyly Carte and his first wife Blanche ( née Prowse ) , who died in 1885 . Like his brother , Lucas ( 1872 – 1907 ) , he was given his father 's middle name . He was educated at Winchester College , noted as among the most intellectually rigorous of English public schools . He then worked for a firm of accountants before joining his father as an assistant in 1894 . 
 In a newspaper interview given in the year of his death , Rupert recalled that as a young man he was entrusted , during his father 's illness , with helping W. S. Gilbert with the first revival of The Yeomen of the Guard at the Savoy Theatre . He was elected a director of the Savoy Hotel Limited in 1898 , joining his father and Sir Arthur Sullivan , who had served on the board since the Savoy Hotel was built . By 1899 he was assistant managing director . Richard D 'Oyly Carte died in 1901 , and Rupert 's stepmother , the former Helen Lenoir , who had married Richard in 1888 , assumed full control of most of the family businesses , which she had increasingly controlled during her husband 's decline . Rupert 's elder brother , Lucas , a barrister , was not involved in the family businesses and died of tuberculosis , aged 34 . 
 = = = Taking over the family businesses = = = 
 In 1903 , at the age of 27 , Rupert took over his late father 's role as chairman of the Savoy group , which included the Savoy Hotel , Claridge 's , The Berkeley Hotel , Simpson 's @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Strand and the Grand Hotel in Rome . At this time , the whole group was officially valued at £ 2 @,@ 221 @,@ 708 . He immediately issued £ 300 @,@ 000 of debentures to raise capital for a large extension to the Savoy ( the " East Block " ) . Like his father , Carte was willing to go to great lengths to secure the best employees for his hotels . When Claridge 's needed a new chef in 1904 , he secured the services of François Bonnaure , formerly chef at the Élysée Palace in Paris . The press speculated on how much Carte must have paid to persuade Bonnaure to join him , and compared the younger Carte 's audacity with his father 's coup in securing Paris 's most famous maître d 'hôtel , M. Joseph , a few years earlier . 
 Between 1906 and 1909 , Helen Carte , Rupert 's stepmother , staged two repertory seasons at the Savoy Theatre . Directed by Gilbert and received with much success , they revitalised the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company , which had been in decline after Richard D 'Oyly Carte 's death . In 1912 , when theatre censorship was under discussion in Britain , Carte was strongly in favour of retaining censorship , because it gave managements complete certainty about what they could or could not stage without fear of interference by the police or others . He joined with other London theatre managers , including Herbert Beerbohm Tree , George Edwardes and Arthur Bourchier in signing a petition for the retention of censorship . In the same year , together with Herbert Sullivan and theatre managers including Beerbohm Tree and Squire Bancroft , Carte was an instigator of a memorial to W. S. Gilbert at Charing Cross . In 1913 , Rupert 's stepmother Helen Carte died . She left all her holdings in the Savoy Hotel group , the Savoy Theatre and the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company to her stepson . 
 = = = <unk> the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company = = = 
 After London seasons in 1906 – 07 and 1908 – 09 , the opera company did not perform in the West End again until 1919 , although it continued to tour in Great Britain . According to the theatre writer H. M. Walbrook , " Through the years of the Great War they continued to be on tour through the country , drawing large and grateful audiences everywhere . They helped to sustain the spirits of the people during that stern period , and by so doing they helped to win the victory . " Nevertheless , Carte later recalled , " I went and watched the Company playing at a rather dreary theatre down in the suburbs of London . I thought the dresses looked dowdy .... I formed the view that new productions should be prepared , with scenery and dresses to the design of first class artists who understood the operas but who would produce a décor attractive to the new generation . " In a 1922 memoir , Henry Lytton , having admired Richard D 'Oyly Carte 's keen eye for stagecraft , added , " That ' eye ' for stagecraft ... has been inherited in a quite remarkable degree by his son , Mr. Rupert D 'Oyly Carte . He , too , has the gift of taking in the details of a scene at a glance , and knowing instinctively just what must be corrected " . In 1911 , the company hired J. M. Gordon as stage manager , and Carte later promoted him to director . Gordon , under Carte 's supervision , preserved the company 's traditions in exacting detail for 28 years . 
 During World War I Carte served in the Royal Navy , and no renovation work could be undertaken . On his return , he put his aims into effect . In an interview in The Observer in August 1919 he set out his policy for staging the operas : " They will be played precisely in their original form , without any alteration to the words , or any attempt to bring them up to date . " This uncompromising declaration was modified in a later interview in which he said , " the plays are all being restaged ... Gilbert 's words will be unaltered , though there will be some freshness in the method of rendering them . Artists must have scope for their individuality , and new singers cannot be tied down to imitate slavishly those who made successes in the old days . " 
 Carte 's first London season , at the Prince 's Theatre , 1919 – 20 , featured ten of the thirteen extant Gilbert and Sullivan operas . These included Princess Ida , which had its first London performances since the original production . The new productions retained the text and music of the original 1870s and 1880s productions , and director J. M. Gordon preserved much of Gilbert 's original direction . As his parents had done , Carte licensed the operas to the J. C. Williamson company and to amateur companies , but he required all licensees to present them in approved productions that closely followed the libretto , score and D 'Oyly Carte production stagings . In an interview with The Times in 1922 , Carte said that the Savoy " tradition " was an expression that was frequently misunderstood : " It did not by any means imply any hidebound stage ' business ' or an attempt to standardize the performances of artists so as to check their individual method of expression . All that it implied , in his view , was the highest possible standard of production – with especial attention to clear enunciation .... Many people seemed to think that Gilbert believed in absolutely set methods but this was not by any means the case . He did not hesitate to alter productions when they were revived . " 
 Although he had told the press that the original words and music would not be altered , Carte was willing to make changes in certain cases . In 1919 – 20 , he authorised significant cuts and alterations in both Princess Ida and Ruddigore . In 1921 Cox and Box was produced in a drastically cut @-@ down version , to allow it to be played as a companion piece with the shorter Savoy operas . He also authorised changes to Gilbert 's text : he wrote to The Times in 1948 , " We found recently in America that much objection was taken by coloured persons to a word used twice in The Mikado . " The word in question was Gilbert 's reference to " nigger " ( blackface ) minstrels , and Carte asked A. P. Herbert to suggest an acceptable revision . " He made several alternative suggestions , one of which we adopted in America , and it seems well to go on doing so in the British Empire . " 
 Carte commissioned new costumes and scenery throughout his tenure with the company . For his <unk> , Carte hired Charles Ricketts to redesign The Gondoliers and The Mikado , the costumes for the latter , created in 1926 , being retained by all the company 's subsequent designers . Other redesigns were by Percy Anderson , George Sheringham , Hugo Rumbold and Peter Goffin , a protégé of Carte 's daughter , Bridget D 'Oyly Carte . 
 For London seasons , Carte often engaged guest conductors , first Geoffrey Toye , then Malcolm Sargent , who examined Sullivan 's manuscript scores and purged the orchestral parts of accretions . So striking was the orchestral sound produced by Sargent that the press thought he had retouched the scores , and Carte had the pleasant duty of correcting their error . In a letter to The Times , he noted that " the details of the orchestration sounded so fresh that some of the critics thought them actually new ... the opera was played last night exactly as written by Sullivan . " Carte also hired Harry Norris , who started with the touring company , then was Toye 's assistant before becoming musical director . Isidore Godfrey joined the company as assistant musical director in 1925 and became musical director in 1929 , remaining in that post until 1968 . 
 The possibilities of the gramophone appealed to Carte . After World War I , he supervised a series of complete recordings of the scores of the operas on the HMV label , beginning with The Mikado in 1918 . The first nine sets , made between 1918 and 1925 , were recorded by the early acoustic process . At first , guest singers were chosen who were known for their ability to record well on this technology . Later in this series , more of the regular members of the company were featured . With the introduction of electrical recording and its greatly improved recording process and sound , a new round of recordings began in 1927 . For the electrical series , Carte 's own singers were mostly used . Carte also recognised the potential of radio and worked with the BBC to relay live broadcasts of D 'Oyly Carte productions . A 1926 relay of part of a Savoy Theatre performance of The Mikado was heard by up to eight million people . The London Evening Standard noted that this was " probably the largest audience that has ever heard anything at one time in the history of the world . " Under Carte , the company continued to make broadcasts during the interwar years . In 1932 , The Yeomen of the Guard became the first Gilbert and Sullivan opera to be broadcast in its entirety . 
 = = = Rebuilding the Savoy Theatre and later years = = = 
 In 1929 Carte had the 48 @-@ year @-@ old Savoy Theatre rebuilt and modernised . It closed on 3 June 1929 and was gutted and completely rebuilt to designs by Frank A. Tugwell with décor by Basil Ionides . The old house had three tiers ; the new one had two . The seating capacity ( which had decreased to 986 from its original 1 @,@ 292 ) was restored nearly completely , to 1 @,@ 200 . The theatre reopened 135 days later on 21 October 1929 , with The Gondoliers , designed by Ricketts and conducted by Sargent . The critic Ernest Newman wrote , " I can imagine no gayer or more exhilarating frame for the Gilbert and Sullivan operas than the Savoy as it is now . " 
 Despite its historical connection with Gilbert and Sullivan , most of Carte 's London seasons were staged not at the Savoy but at two larger houses : the Prince 's ( now the Shaftesbury ) Theatre ( 1919 – 20 , 1921 – 22 , 1924 , 1926 , 1942 and Sadler 's Wells ( 1935 , 1936 , 1937 , 1939 , 1947 and 1948 ) . His three Savoy Theatre seasons were in 1929 – 30 , 1932 – 33 , and 1941 . In addition to year @-@ round UK tours , Carte mounted tours of North America in 1927 , 1928 – 29 , 1934 – 35 , 1936 – 37 , 1939 and 1947 – 48 ) . During the 1936 tour an American critic wrote , " If there were only some way of keeping them on this side permanently . I humbly suggest to the New Deal that it cancel England 's war debt in exchange for the D 'Oyly <unk> . We should be much the gainer . " 
 Carte was deeply affected by the death of his son Michael in 1932 , discussed below . The actor Martyn Green said , " The heart dropped right out of him . His interest in both the operas and the hotel seemed to fade away . " Nevertheless , in 1934 the company made a highly successful eight @-@ month North American tour with Green as its new principal comedian , replacing Henry Lytton . Carte gave approval for , and was closely consulted about , a 1938 film version of The Mikado produced and conducted by Geoffrey Toye , starring Green and released by Universal Pictures , but his only new stage production after 1932 was of The Yeomen of the Guard designed in 1939 by Peter Goffin . The re @-@ staging was regarded as radical , but when Goffin took fright at the storm of controversy , Carte told him , " I don 't care what they say about the production . I should care if they said nothing . " 
 On 3 September 1939 , at the outbreak of World War II , the British government ordered the immediate and indefinite closure of all theatres . Carte cancelled the autumn tour and disbanded the company . Theatres were permitted to reopen from 9 September , but it took some weeks to re @-@ form the company . The company resumed touring in Edinburgh on Christmas Day 1939 . It continued to perform throughout the war , but German bombing destroyed the sets and costumes for five of its productions : Cox and Box , The Sorcerer , H.M.S. Pinafore , Princess Ida and Ruddigore . The old productions of Pinafore and Cox and Box were recreated shortly after the war , but the other two operas took longer to rejoin the company 's repertory . On the other hand , for the first wartime season , Peter Goffin designed and directed a new production of The Yeomen of the Guard first seen in January 1940 , and his new Ruddigore debuted in 1948 , shortly after Carte 's death . A return of the Company to the U.S. in 1947 was very successful . 
 = = = Savoy Hotel group = = = 
 From the beginning of his career , Carte maintained the Savoy group in London , disposing in 1919 of the Grand Hotel , Rome , which his father had acquired in 1896 . In the 1920s , he ensured that the Savoy continued to attract a fashionable clientele by a continuous programme of modernisation and the introduction of dancing in the large restaurants . The Savoy Orpheans and the Savoy Havana Band were described by The Times as " probably the best @-@ known bands in Europe " . In 1927 Carte appointed his opera company 's general manager , Richard Collet , to run the cabaret at the Savoy , which began in April 1929 . 
 Until the 1930s , the Savoy group had not thought it necessary to advertise , but Carte and his manager George Reeves @-@ Smith changed their approach . Reeves @-@ Smith told The Times , " We are endeavouring by intensive propaganda work to get more customers ; this work is going on in the U.S.A. , in Canada , in the Argentine and in Europe . " Towards the end of World War II , Carte added to the Savoy group the bombed @-@ out site near Leicester Square of Stone 's Chop House , the freehold of which he purchased with a view to reopening the restaurant there on the lines of the group 's Simpson 's @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Strand . The revived Stone 's reopened after Carte 's death . 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 In 1907 , Carte married Lady Dorothy Milner Gathorne @-@ Hardy ( 1889 – 1977 ) , the third and youngest daughter of the 2nd Earl of Cranbrook , with whom he had a daughter , Bridget , and a son , Michael ( 1911 – 1932 ) . Michael was killed at the age of 21 in a motor accident in Switzerland . In 1925 , Carte and his wife had a country house built for them in Devon between Paignton and Kingswear , named Coleton Fishacre . The house is still known for its design features and garden with exotic tropical plants . After her parents ' divorce , Bridget D 'Oyly Carte took over the house , which her father , who lived in London , would visit for long weekends . She sold the house after his death , and it is now owned by the National Trust . 
 Carte 's private pastimes included gardening , notably at Coleton Fishacre , driving and yachting . He was an early devotee of the motor car and incurred the displeasure of the courts more than once . He was fined £ 3 for driving at 19 miles an hour in 1902 , and the following year he was subject to criminal prosecution for knocking down and injuring a child when driving at the speed of 24 miles an hour . He made " every provision for the comfort of the child " , who recovered from the accident . In the years after World War I , he was a frequent competitor in yachting races . From 1919 he raced his yacht " Kali " in the Hamble River class . Later , he owned and raced a 19 @-@ ton cutter , " Content " . 
 In 1941 , Carte divorced his wife for adultery . The suit was undefended . Lady Dorothy moved to the Bahamas and married St Yves de Verteuil , who had been the co @-@ respondent in the divorce case . De Verteuil died in 1963 , and Lady Dorothy de Verteuil died in February 1977 . 
 P. G. Wodehouse based the character Psmith , seen in several of his comic novels , on either Rupert D 'Oyly Carte or his brother Lucas . In the introduction to his novel Something Fresh , Wodehouse says that Psmith ( originally named Rupert , then Ronald ) was " based more or less faithfully on Rupert D 'Oyly Carte , son of the Savoy theatre man . He was at school with a cousin of mine , and my cousin happened to tell me about his monocle , his immaculate clothes and his habit , when asked by a master how he was , of replying , ' Sir , I grow thinnah and thinnah ' . " Bridget D 'Oyly Carte , however , believed that the Wykehamist schoolboy described to Wodehouse was not her father but his elder brother Lucas , who was also at Winchester College . Rupert D 'Oyly Carte was " shy , reserved and at times distinctly taciturn . " Psmith , by contrast , is outgoing and garrulous . 
 = = = Death and legacy = = = 
 Carte died at the Savoy Hotel , after a brief illness , at the age of 71 . A memorial service was held for him at the Savoy Chapel on 23 September 1948 . His ashes were scattered on the headland at Coleton Fishacre . He left an estate valued at £ 228 @,@ 436 . At his death , the family businesses passed to his daughter , Bridget D 'Oyly Carte . The Savoy hotel group remained under the control of the Carte family and its associates until 1994 . Carte 's hotels have remained among the most prestigious in London , with the London Evening Standard calling the Savoy " London 's most famous hotel " in 2009 . The year after Carte 's death , the opera company , which had been the personal possession of Richard and Rupert D 'Oyly Carte , became a private company , of which Bridget retained a controlling interest and was chairman and managing director . She inherited a company in strong condition , but the rising costs of mounting professional light opera without any government support eventually became unsustainable , and the company closed in 1982 . 
 The Gilbert and Sullivan operas , nurtured by Carte and his family for over a century , continue to be produced frequently today throughout the English @-@ speaking world and beyond . By keeping the Savoy operas popular throughout the mid @-@ 20th century , Carte continued to influence the course of the development of modern musical theatre . 
 = Fandi Ahmad = 
 Fandi bin Ahmad , PBM ( born 29 May 1962 ) is a retired Singaporean footballer who was the head coach of the former LionsXII in the Malaysian Super League . He mainly played as a striker , but could also play as a midfielder . He played for Malaysia Cup state sides Singapore FA , Kuala Lumpur FA and Pahang FA , and won titles with all three , including two Doubles in 1992 and 1994 , and the Golden Boot in 1988 . Fandi also played for Niac Mitra ( Indonesia ) , Groningen ( Netherlands ) , Geylang United ( Singapore ) and SAFFC ( Singapore ) . With the Singapore national football team , Fandi won 101 caps , scored 55 goals , won three Southeast Asian Games ( SEA Games ) silver medals and was captain from 1993 to 1997 . He managed SAFFC , Pelita Raya ( Indonesia ) and Johor Darul <unk> ( Malaysia ) , served as assistant national coach and runs the Fandi Ahmad Academy . As a 1994 winner of the Pingat Bakti Masyarakat ( state medal ) , the first Singaporean footballer to play in Europe , the first Singaporean millionaire sportsperson and first Singaporean sportsperson to have a published biography , Fandi has been called a national legend . He has five children with his wife , South African model Wendy Jacobs , and his father is Ahmad <unk> , a former national goalkeeper . Fandi was ranked sixth in a list of Singapore 's 50 Greatest Athletes of the Century by The Straits Times in 1999 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 As a young child , Fandi was obsessed with football and spent much of his time kicking a ball . His family lived in two rooms in Woodbridge Hospital , and he had to sell nasi <unk> to help support them . Fandi 's father , Ahmad <unk> was then a goalkeeper for the national team . Fandi started playing as a goalkeeper , but was advised by a teacher to switch to midfield . When he was 12 , his parents divorced , after which he lived with his father and paternal grandparents . At Serangoon Gardens Secondary School , Fandi played for the school football team , but neglected his studies and was retained . He then transferred to the Singapore Vocational Institute and obtained a National Trade Certificate 3 . He played for Kaki Bukit Football Club in the amateur National Football League , where he was spotted by Singapore FA coach Sebastian Yap . 
 = = Club career = = 
 Fandi joined Singapore FA in 1979 and became a regular midfield player , scoring four goals in his first Malaysia Cup season . The retirement of Arshad Khamis and <unk> Kassim prompted <unk> Singh , the new Singapore FA coach , to play Fandi as a striker . During the 1980 Malaysia Cup season , Fandi scored eight goals , including the winning goal in the final against Selangor FA . He enlisted for National Service in September 1980 and was given light duties , such as collecting the camp garbage , so he could continue playing for Singapore FA . In 1981 , Fandi won the FAS Footballer of the Year award for helping Singapore FA reach the Malaysia Cup final . The following year , Singapore FA did not play in the Malaysia Cup for political reasons , and Fandi underwent a shoulder operation ; he could not play football for six weeks and was discharged early from National Service . 
 Selangor FA invited Fandi to play for them against Argentine club Boca Juniors in a friendly game , in which Fandi scored the only goal for Selangor FA ; the score was 2 – 1 . Fandi received offers from several Malaysia Cup teams , Indonesian side Niac Mitra , Swiss club Young Boys and Dutch side Ajax . After a three @-@ week trial , Ajax offered Fandi a three @-@ year contract , but Fandi instead signed a one @-@ year contract with Niac Mitra , where he spent one season , helped them successfully defend their Galatama League title and was the third @-@ highest scorer with 13 goals . In a friendly match between Niac Mitra and Arsenal , Fandi scored a goal in a 2 – 0 victory ; however , he left Niac Mitra due to a sudden Galatama League ban on foreign players . 
 In 1983 , Fandi moved to the Netherlands and signed a two @-@ year contract with FC Groningen . A thigh injury acquired in a friendly match kept him off the field for ten weeks , but in his first Eredivisie game he scored twice in a 2 – 0 victory over Go Ahead Eagles . Three days later , he played in the first leg of a UEFA Cup second @-@ round match against Italian side Internazionale , and scored the second goal in a 2 – 0 win , though in the second leg Groningen were defeated 1 – 5 . The Groningen fans voted Fandi the most popular player and the most skilful player that season ; he scored 10 goals in 29 games to help the Dutch club rise from ninth to fifth place in the Eredivisie . As an April Fools ' Day joke , The Straits Times published a front @-@ page story claiming that Manchester United had signed Fandi . However , his second season was marred by a recurrence of the thigh injury and a dispute with the coach . He played only two full games that season and Groningen did not offer him a new contract . During his time in the Netherlands , Fandi scored 11 league goals in 36 league games for Groningen . 
 The next club that Fandi played for was Malaysia Cup side Kuala Lumpur FA , which in 1987 won its first Malaysia Cup title . It was Malaysia Cup champions again the following season ; Fandi won the Golden Boot , having scored 21 goals . After a third season at Kuala Lumpur FA , in which it won a third consecutive Malaysia Cup , Fandi signed a two @-@ year contract with Greek club OFI Crete in 1990 . However , problems with his International Transfer Certificate prevented him from playing for Crete , so he left Greece after two months . Fandi then joined Pahang FA , where he reverted to playing mainly in midfield due to his advancing age . Fandi missed several months of games because of heel and thigh injuries , and scored three goals to help Pahang FA win the Malaysia Cup and Malaysian League Double in 1992 . That year , he also became the first Singaporean sportsperson to have career earnings exceeding a million Singapore dollars ( not adjusted for inflation ) . 
 Fandi rejoined Singapore FA after it was relegated to the second tier of the Malaysian League . Singapore FA was promoted and reached the Malaysia Cup final in 1993 , and finished the 1994 season as Malaysia Cup and Malaysian League champions . Captain Fandi played in 39 of Singapore FA 's 41 games in the double @-@ winning season , was the top scorer with 26 goals and was voted Player of the Season ; he was also awarded a state medal , the Pingat Bakti Masyarakat ( Public Service Medal ) . The following season , Singapore FA withdrew from the Malaysia Cup and a fully professional Singaporean league , the S.League , was formed . In its inaugural season in 1996 , Fandi captained Geylang United and was the joint top scorer with 11 goals , including the equaliser that confirmed Geylang as league champions . The Asian Football Confederation declared him the Player of the Month of June 1996 . Geylang was given special dispensation to pay Fandi thrice the S.League salary cap . His playing career concluded with three seasons at SAFFC , during which they won two S.League titles and two Singapore Cups . Because of injuries , Fandi was limited to mainly short substitute appearances , but he continued to score crucial goals , notably two against Cambodian side Royal Dolphins in the Asian Club Championship , until his retirement in 1999 . 
 = = International career = = 
 From 1979 to 1997 , Fandi made 101 appearances for the Singapore national football team , scored 55 goals and earned a place in the Asian Football Confederation Hall of Fame . He started as captain of the national youth team that won the Lion City Cup in 1976 and 1977 , then joined the senior national team on a tour of Russia , where he played in two friendly games and scored two goals in the second . His first senior cap came at 17 years , 3 months and 23 days , making him Singapore 's youngest @-@ ever full international , until his record was broken by <unk> Harun in 2007 . However , in his first international competition , the 1979 SEA Games , Fandi did not score in four matches . He scored against India and North Korea in the Olympic Games qualifiers , but did not score in three FIFA World Cup qualifying matches . In the 1981 Ovaltine Cup , Fandi scored all Singapore goals in the 3 – 2 aggregate victory over Malaysia . Fandi scored a goal in a 1 – 2 loss to Thailand in the 1981 King 's Cup and a hat @-@ trick against the Philippines at the 1981 SEA Games . In 1992 , Fandi scored twice against Nepal and once against Thailand in the King 's Cup , then scored when Singapore beat Malaysia 3 – 1 in the Ovaltine Cup . 
 The following year , Fandi helped Singapore win the first of three SEA Games silver medals , with two goals in a 3 – 0 group stage win over Brunei and two against Malaysia in the semi @-@ final . Despite suffering an ankle injury in the 1 – 2 final defeat by Thailand , he played in the 1983 Merlion Cup , and scored in a 1 – 0 semi @-@ final win against of China . The second SEA Games silver medal came in 1985 , when Fandi scored against Malaysia and the Philippines in the group stage , then two goals against Brunei in the semi @-@ final . At the 1989 SEA Games , Fandi scored in the 4 – 0 victory over Myanmar that took Singapore past the group stages , the last @-@ minute winner in the semi @-@ final against defending champions Indonesia and Singapore 's single goal in the 1 – 3 final defeat by Malaysia . This completed the hat @-@ trick of silver medals , though in 2007 , he said that " not winning the SEA Games gold medal " was among " his biggest regrets " . Fandi also played at the 1990 Asian Games and scored in the 6 – 1 win against Pakistan . 
 During the 1991 SEA Games , Fandi scored both Singapore goals against Myanmar in the group stage , but was substituted in the semi @-@ final match , after Indonesian fullback <unk> <unk> elbowed him in the eye . That match ended goalless and the Lions lost on penalties . Fandi also missed Singapore 's failed attempt to qualify for the 1992 Asian Cup , having sustained a heel injury . At the 1993 SEA Games , captain Fandi scored a hat @-@ trick in the 7 – 0 defeat of the Philippines , followed by the second Singapore goal in the 3 – 3 semi @-@ final draw with Myanmar and scored once in the 3 – 1 win over Indonesia that secured a bronze medal for Singapore . Fandi also played in the inaugural Tiger Cup , and scored an equaliser against Malaysia , a goal against Brunei and two against the Philippines . 1997 was a disappointing year for Fandi , who failed to score in the Dunhill Cup and the World Cup qualifiers . After the 1997 SEA Games , where his goal in the semi @-@ final could not prevent a 1 – 2 defeat to Indonesia , Fandi retired from international football . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 After his retirement from playing , Fandi worked as a coach . He started as the assistant to Singapore 's national coach , Vincent Subramaniam , for the 1999 SEA Games , where Singapore finished fourth . In 2000 , Fandi became coach of SAFFC and guided them to the S.League title , and he won the S.League Coach of the Year Award . Under Fandi , SAFFC ended the 2001 season without winning a trophy and were 2002 S.League champions by a 20 @-@ point margin . Fandi then simultaneously served as assistant national coach , helping Singapore win the Tiger Cup in 2005 , and coach of the Young Lions , which rose from the bottom of the S.League in 2003 to two third @-@ place finishes in 2004 and 2006 . 
 From November 2006 to March 2010 , Fandi managed Indonesian side Pelita Raya , where he adopted a youth policy that helped them win promotion from the second division , then guided the club to two mid @-@ table finishes in the Indonesia Super League . Since then , he has been a scout for Italian club Vicenza Calcio , a regional project manager for the Genova International Soccer School and manager of Malaysian Super League side Johor Darul <unk> . In 2011 , he founded the Fandi Ahmad Academy , which organises training programmes and overseas opportunities for talented young Singaporean footballers . Fandi is one of seven Singaporean coaches with a professional AFC coaching diploma and is widely considered a future coach of the Singapore national football team ; in December 2013 , he became head coach of the Singapore LionsXII , with <unk> Nasir as his assistant . In May 2015 , he led LionsXII to clinch the Malaysia FA Cup , their first trophy of the season . 
 = = Beyond football = = 
 Fandi is a devout Muslim , avoids scandals , does not smoke or drink , and is often described as humble , filial and compassionate . He married South African model Wendy Jacobs in 1996 and the couple have five children ; the eldest two are youth footballers who impressed at trials at Arsenal , Chelsea and Milan . They are currently playing for Home United in the <unk> He is the first Singaporean sportsperson to be the subject of a biography , which was released in 1993 and called The Fandi Ahmad Story . It sold 17 @,@ 000 copies in two months and was translated into Malay . 
 Products Fandi has endorsed include Lotto sportswear , Royal Sporting House sportswear , Uncle <unk> cereal , Carnation milk and energy drink <unk> . In 1996 , he released an album of English and Malay songs and produced <unk> Pelangi , a television programme about disadvantaged Malay Singaporeans . Three years later , he opened a restaurant and a car dealership , but both closed down within two years . He has also served as an ambassador for national anti @-@ smoking and anti @-@ drug campaigns , raised funds for victims of the 2004 Indonesian tsunami and participated in a Northeast Community Development Council initiative to organise community service programmes . 
 In October 2014 , the Madame Tussauds Singapore museum unveiled a wax figure of Fandi , the first of any Singapore athlete . The wax figure depicts a younger Fandi in 1994 , back when he captained the Singapore Lions and led them to victory in the Malaysia Cup . 
 In 2015 , Fandi also became the star of the first of three videos filmed specially to promote the 2015 Southeast Asian Games , hosted in Singapore . Titled " Ordinary " , the video depicts Fandi 's rise from a simple boy playing soccer in his backyard to one of Asia 's most talented footballers . It was directed by local filmmaker , Nicole Woodford . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Player = = = 
 Niac Mitra 
 Galatama : 1982 – 83 
 Kuala Lumpur 
 M @-@ League : 1988 
 Malaysia Cup : 1987 , 1988 
 Pahang 
 M @-@ League : 1992 
 Malaysia Cup : 1992 
 Singapore FA 
 M @-@ League : 1994 
 Malaysia Cup : 1980 , 1994 
 Geylang United 
 S.League : 1996 
 Singapore Armed Forces 
 S.League : 1997 , 1998 
 Singapore FA Cup : 1997 
 Singapore Cup : 1999 
 League Cup : 1997 
 Singapore 
 Southeast Asian Games : 
 Silver medal – 1983 , 1985 , 1989 
 Bronze medal – 1991 , 1993 , 1995 
 = = = Head coach = = = 
 Singapore Armed Forces 
 S.League : 2000 , 2002 
 LionsXII 
 Malaysia FA Cup ; 2015 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 S.League Coach of the Year : 2000 
 = Planet Relief = 
 Planet Relief was a proposed BBC television special dealing with the issue of global warming , originally scheduled for broadcast in January 2008 . The programme , which had been in development for 18 months , was meant to be similar to previous BBC programmes such as Comic Relief and Sport Relief . However , it was cancelled before it was broadcast , allegedly because the BBC was concerned that it would be " biased " towards promoting responses based on acceptance of mainstream climate change science . 
 = = Concept = = 
 The original idea for Planet Relief was to increase awareness of climate change . The show , unlike previous BBC specials such as Comic Relief , was not planned to be a charity event , but to increase awareness , similar to Live Earth . It was mainly inspired by Live 8 , with Planet Relief seen as its climate change counterpart . The programme would have involved an electric power station being shut down for one night , for which the BBC had spent over a year negotiating , urging viewers " to turn off all unnecessary lights and electric gadgets for the evening . " People reported to have been involved with the show included comedians Ricky Gervais and Graham Norton , entertainment personality Jonathan Ross , the head of BBC comedy Jon Plowman and environmental expert Matt Prescott . Dr Matt Prescott 's years of experience within ecology and planet conservation helped him to become the professional guidance to spearhead the campaign 's concept . 
 = = Cancellation = = 
 The BBC scrapped the idea for Planet Relief on 5 September 2007 . Peter Barron , editor of Newsnight said , " It is absolutely not the BBC 's job to save the planet . " Peter Horrocks , head of BBC television news said , " It is not the BBC 's job to lead opinion or proselytise on this or any other subject . " There were also concerns that the power station shutdown " might overload parts of the [ electricity distribution ] network . " The BBC did not , however , say that the show was cancelled due to bias , stating rather that , " The BBC is committed to programmes about climate change but after Live Earth what audiences say is they are looking for programmes of a documentary or factual nature to explain the complex subject . " 
 Right wing commentators opposed the idea of Planet Relief , including Keith Waterhouse who said in the Daily Mail before the show was cancelled that , " If the idea is still developing , we can only hope it gets lost in the darkroom . Heaven knows Comic Relief is puerile and patronising enough . Can you imagine what Cosmic Relief — in fact , they 're toying with calling it Planet Relief , on which note I can only warn readers of a nervous disposition to avoid any enterprise containing the word Planet — is going to be like ? " 
 Complaints about the programme also came from climate sceptics such as Martin Durkin , who said , " The thing that disturbs me most is that the BBC has such a leviathan position … that if it decides that it is going to adopt climate change as a moral purpose , I have got a lot of trouble with that . I don 't think it is the role of the BBC to spend my money on a moral purpose . " 
 For their part , climate change activists attacked the BBC for cancelling the programme . Author Mark Lynas said , " This decision shows a real poverty of understanding among senior BBC executives about the gravity of the situation we face . The only reason why this became an issue is that there is a small but vociferous group of climate ' sceptics ' lobbying against taking action , so the BBC is behaving like a coward and refusing to take a more consistent stance . " 
 Another critic , Friends of the Earth executive director Tony Juniper , said , " This is a very disappointing decision considering the huge potential for the BBC in helping us more quickly make the shift toward a low @-@ carbon society . The science of climate change is very clear and if approached in the right way taking up this very serious issue would not compromise the BBC ' impartiality . " 
 = Marsh shrew = 
 The marsh shrew ( Sorex bendirii ) , also known as the Pacific water shrew , Bendire 's water shrew , Bendire 's shrew and Jesus shrew is the largest North American member of the genus Sorex ( long @-@ tailed shrews ) . Primarily covered in dark @-@ brown fur , it is found near aquatic habitats along the Pacific coast from southern British Columbia to northern California . With air trapped in its fur for buoyancy , marsh shrews can run for three to five seconds on top of the water . It measures about 16 cm ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) in length , including a 7 @-@ centimetre ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) -long tail , and weighs an average of 14 @.@ 5 – 16 g ( 0 @.@ 51 – 0 @.@ 56 oz ) . The marsh shrew 's diet consists mainly of invertebrates , which it hunts on land and in the water . They are rare ; their populations are thought to be in decline , and they are considered endangered in parts of their range . 
 = = Description = = 
 The marsh shrew is the largest member of the genus Sorex in North America , and mammalogist David <unk> described it as " an attractive mammal " . Its fur is primarily dark brown , and it has a long tail . Although the marsh shrew 's fur is usually uniformly dark on its back and abdomen , the abdominal fur of populations ( S. b. albiventer ) on the Olympic Peninsula may be white . The marsh shrew is about 16 cm ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) in length , including a 7 @-@ centimetre ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) -long tail , and weighs about 14 @.@ 5 – 16 g ( 0 @.@ 51 – 0 @.@ 56 oz ) . Its hind feet , slightly fringed with coarse hairs on the toes , measure about 19 @.@ 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 76 in ) . 
 Although in some areas the marsh shrew is sympatric with other members of the genus Sorex , no other large , velvety , gray @-@ black shrew shares this geographic range . Its size distinguishes it from all but the American water shrew ( Sorex palustris ) . Although the marsh shrew and the American water shrew ( the two largest shrews in North America ) share some features , the American water shrew has more dark @-@ grey @-@ to @-@ black fur on its back , a silver @-@ grey belly and a bi @-@ colored tail and the marsh shrew 's fringed hairs are more distinct . The American water shrew has a smaller skull , without the marsh shrew 's characteristic curvature , and its upper incisors have less @-@ distinct medial tines . The marsh shrew typically has a longer snout than that of the American water shrew , which is more streamlined when viewed from the side . 
 The marsh shrew 's skull is relatively large , and its condylobasal skull length is usually greater than 19 @.@ 3 mm ( 0 @.@ 76 in ) . There is a distinctive , downward @-@ sloping curve along the snout ( rostrum ) . Its dental formula is incisors : 1 / 1 ; <unk> : 5 / 1 ; premolars : 1 / 1 ; molars : 3 / 3 . Of the five upper <unk> the third is distinctly smaller than the fourth , and they have a pigmented ridge extending to the cingulum . There is a large medial tine on the large upper incisor , in the anterior pigmented region . The reddish pigmentation of the enamel , the result of iron deposits , is thought to be an adaptation strengthening the enamel . 
 There are no known fossil remains . The marsh shrew 's karyotype somatic number is 2n 
 = 54 , and its fundamental number = 
 70 . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 It was first described in the scientific literature in 1884 by Clinton Hart Merriam with its original name , Atophyrax bendirii ( a monotypic taxon at the time ) . The first specimen was obtained 18 mi ( 29 km ) southeast of Fort Klamath in Klamath County , Oregon , at a location 1 mi ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the Williamson River . Merriam obtained the specimen from Charles Bendire , an ornithologist and army captain stationed at Fort Klamath . The shrew was caught in late July or early August by one of the dogs in the camp , and a soldier gave it to Bendire . Merriam named it Bendire 's shrew ( Atophyrax bendirii ) in appreciation of Bendire 's contribution . Merriam reported that the animal represented a new genus , Atophyrax , deriving from the Greek and meaning " anomalous <unk> " . The marsh shrew was later reclassified in the genus Sorex . 
 The marsh shrew and the American water shrew ( Sorex <unk> ) share many physical characteristics . The former is found in a narrower area from the northwest coast to the lower slopes of the inland mountains . The American water shrew is more widely distributed across the western mountains and through the subarctic regions of Canada and the eastern U.S. The species ' ranges are primarily allopatric ; although they may overlap ( sympatry ) in coastal regions of the Pacific Northwest , differences in elevation tend to separate them . Early taxonomists placed these mammals into separate subgenera ; Merriam assigned the marsh shrew to Atophyrax , and Jackson ( 1928 ) assigned the Pacific water shrew to <unk> . A closer , dentition @-@ based relationship was assigned by Findley ( 1955 ) , with both species assigned to the subgenus <unk> . Findley hypothesized that in the early Pleistocene , the ancestors of masked and vagrant shrews ( Sorex cinereus and Sorex <unk> , respectively ) diverged ; during the Yarmouth interglacial , the American water shrew and marsh shrew diverged from their vagrant @-@ shrew ancestors . Three other Sorex species evolved during the Sangamonian : the dwarf shrew ( S. nanus ) , the southeastern shrew ( Sorex longirostris ) and the ornate shrew ( Sorex ornatus ) . Findley 's assignment of the marsh shrew and the American water shrew to <unk> was later reinforced by biochemical and genetic studies . In 2005 , findings were published ( based on mitochondrial DNA analysis ) which better defined the nature of the relationships between marsh shrews , Pacific water shrews and their respective subspecies . Variations in the sequencing of cytochrome b mitochondrial DNA were assessed , and the results of the 2005 phylogeny for the marsh shrew are shown below in detail . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 The marsh shrew has three subspecies : 
 S. bendirii albiventer ( Merriam , 1895 ) 
 S. bendirii bendirii ( Merriam , 1884 ) 
 S. bendirii palmeri ( Merriam , 1895 ) 
 S. b. albiventer is found on the Olympic Peninsula of Washington , S . b . bendirii in the Cascades and southwestern British Columbia and S. b. palmeri in coastal Oregon . These specifications have historically been based on fur markings , skull shape and dental details of unclear significance , and their validity is uncertain . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The geographic range of the marsh shrew extends from southwest British Columbia , along the western regions of the U.S. states of Washington and Oregon and through northwestern California to the area north of San Francisco . The subspecies S. b. albiventer is found on the Olympic Peninsula . S. b. palmeri is found from western Oregon ( south of the Columbia River ) to extrema northwestern California . S. b. bendirii is found from the northern parts of the range ( except for the Olympic Peninsula ) south along the eastern range to the remaining range in California . In British Columbia the eastern limits are the Chilliwack River and Agassiz , and the northern limits are the low elevations on the north shore of Burrard Inlet . 
 Marsh shrews typically live in wetlands ( such as marshes ) , and their habitat includes extensive forest canopy and ground cover from shrubs , logs , and debris ; they may also be found in riparian environments . During cold , rainy seasons , they may travel as much as a kilometer from wet areas to more sheltered habitats ; these generally include mixed deciduous or coniferous forest with downed logs and surface cover . Marsh shrews have been collected from near sea level to as high as 4 @,@ 356 ft ( 1 @,@ 328 m ) in the Cascades . They may inhabit forests of red alder , bigleaf maple , western hemlock or redcedar , often near marshes with western skunk cabbage . In British Columbia the marsh shrew is generally found below 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) , but it has been collected at 850 metres ( 2 @,@ 790 ft ) in Mount Seymour Provincial Park . Environmental officials in British Columbia believe that marsh shrews are one of the rarest small mammals in the province . In 1992 , Carlos Galindo @-@ Leal and Gustavo Zuleta trapped 1 @,@ 000 small mammals at 55 locations in a large area of southwestern British Columbia ; only three were Pacific water shrews . 
 During spring and summer 1983 , biologists in western Oregon studied small @-@ mammal distribution ( including marsh shrews ) near streams and along the riparian fringes of coniferous forests . " Riparian fringe " was defined as at least 15 – 20 m from a stream . The North American deermouse was caught in greater numbers than any other mammal , representing around 80 % of all captures . Sixteen species were trapped , with the marsh shrew representing less than two percent of mammals captured in this study . All the marsh shrews were trapped at <unk> , and were found in all three ages of coniferous forests : old @-@ growth , mature and young growth . 
 = = Behavior and ecology = = 
 The marsh shrew eats invertebrates , including spiders , earthworms , <unk> , centipedes , termites and other terrestrial and aquatic arthropods . It was observed in captivity pursuing and killing a goldfish , but not eating it . In contrast , the American water shrew has been observed killing and eating fish . A study of the gastric contents of marsh shrews in Oregon indicated that at least 25 % of their diet is aquatic , including insect larvae , slugs and snails , mayfly naiads and other , unidentified invertebrates . Other researchers have reported that their diet may also include aquatic insects ( water beetles and stonefly nymphs ) , <unk> , ground beetles , spiders , harvestmen , centipedes , earthworms , slugs and small terrestrial snails . The marsh shrew swims , making short dives in search of food ; its mobile snout , whiskers and lips are used to find and capture underwater prey . Before eating , it returns to land . Air trapped in its fur provides buoyancy , and marsh shrews can run for as long as 3 to 5 seconds along the top of the water . According to mammalogist Donald Pattie , they can " scull on the surface like <unk> beetles " . The air trapped in its fur gives it a silvery sheen . On land , its foreleg and opposite hind leg move at the same time . 
 It is active throughout the year , primarily at night . Gestation is about three weeks , and the female has a litter of three or four young . Nests in the wild , built from shredded bark , are in a tunnel or under a log . Marsh shrews typically live about 18 months , and males are not thought to reach sexual maturity during their first summer . Since their lifespan is short , they apparently breed for only one season . Although no breeding data exist for British Columbia , the breeding season elsewhere is from late January to late August ; most young are born in March . The number of litters a female rears is unknown . 
 The strong odor associated with marsh shrews ( in common with other long @-@ tailed shrews ) may be a means of communication . Similar to other shrews , they have poor eyesight . If a marsh shrew is placed in a foreign environment ( such as along an edge of a raised surface ) , it will run off the edge and continue to run after landing on the surface below . Landing in water , it dives beneath the surface . Marsh shrews are easily trapped in sunken cans , possibly due to their inability to see where the edges of surfaces drop . In captivity they vocalize when they are displaced or scuffle with other animals in their cage , twittering shrilly if disturbed while eating or in a confrontation over food ( such as a worm ) . Although it is uncertain whether marsh shrews cache ( or hoard ) food in the wild , in captivity they set aside <unk> in a corner of the cage for later consumption ; no other food items were set aside in this fashion . 
 <unk> parasites include the <unk> ( <unk> <unk> and <unk> soricis ) ; the <unk> ( Androlaelaps fahrenholzi , Echinonyssus <unk> , <unk> occidentalis and <unk> <unk> ) ; the <unk> ( <unk> mexicanus ) ; the <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> soricis , <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> ) , and the <unk> ( <unk> horridus and <unk> <unk> ) . Probable predators include owls , fish and the Pacific giant salamander . 
 = = Human interaction = = 
 Before Donald Pattie 's research during the late 1960s , when his team studied marsh shrews in captivity , little was known about their behavior . Before then , most information about the marsh shrew was from notes about the mammal 's habitat and information about trapping it . Its descriptions in the literature were largely derived from the examination of museum specimens . 
 = = = Conservation status = = = 
 Marsh shrews are listed as " Endangered " by the Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada ( COSEWIC ) , their habitat in British Columbia limited to the lower Fraser Valley . Their available habitat continues to degrade as a result of economic activity in the area ; with little chance of the trend reversing , they are rare in that part of Canada . COSEWIC designated the marsh shrew as " Threatened " from April 1994 until May 2000 , updating its status in April 2006 to " Endangered . " According to the IUCN , marsh shrews are of " Least Concern " in terms of conservation . Although the shrew is considered a rare mammal and its numbers are thought to be in decline , no population estimates are currently provided and its rate of decline is not considered fast enough to warrant placing it in a more @-@ threatened category . Suitable wetland habitat is declining , due primarily to urbanization and the conversion of habitat to agriculture , and areas of protected habitat are expected to be provided in the shrew 's broad geographic range . 
 = Batman in film = 
 The fictional character Batman , a comic book superhero featured in DC Comics publications and created by Bob Kane and Bill Finger , has appeared in various films since his inception . The character first starred in two serial films in the 1940s , Batman and Batman and Robin . The character also appeared in the 1966 film Batman , which was a feature film adaptation of the 1960s Batman TV series starring Adam West and Burt Ward , who also starred in the film . Toward the end of the 1980s , the Warner Bros. studio began producing a series of feature films starring Batman , beginning with the 1989 film Batman , directed by Tim Burton and starring Michael Keaton . Burton and Keaton returned for the 1992 sequel Batman Returns , and in 1995 , Joel Schumacher directed Batman Forever with Val Kilmer as Batman . Schumacher also directed the 1997 sequel Batman & Robin , which starred George Clooney . Batman & Robin was poorly received by both critics and fans , leading to the cancellation of Batman Unchained . 
 Over the course of seven years , Warner Bros. commissioned Darren Aronofsky for an adaptation of Batman : Year One and Wolfgang Petersen for Batman vs. Superman before deciding to reboot the film franchise in 2005 with Batman Begins , directed by Christopher Nolan and starring Christian Bale . Nolan returned to direct two further installments in the trilogy , The Dark Knight in 2008 and The Dark Knight Rises in 2012 with Bale reprising his role in both films . The two sequels both earned over $ 1 billion worldwide , making Batman the second film franchise ( and to date one of only five , the others being Pirates of the Caribbean , the Marvel Cinematic Universe , Transformers and Jurassic Park ) to have two of its films earn more than $ 1 billion worldwide . Ben Affleck became the newest actor to portray Batman in 2016 with Batman v Superman : Dawn of Justice , which had put into motion a new DC Extended Universe , including a much larger crossover Justice League film in 2017 and a stand @-@ alone film that is currently in development . 
 Batman has also appeared in multiple animated films , both as a starring character and as an ensemble character . While most animated films were released direct @-@ to @-@ video , the 1993 animated feature Batman : Mask of the Phantasm , based on the 1990s Batman : The Animated Series , was released theatrically . Having earned a total of U.S. $ 1 @,@ 900 @,@ 844 @,@ 295 , the Batman series is the fifth @-@ highest @-@ grossing film series in North America . 
 = = Films = = 
 = = Early films and serials = = 
 = = = Batman ( 1943 ) = = = 
 Batman was a 15 @-@ chapter serial film released in 1943 by Columbia Pictures . The serial starred Lewis Wilson as Batman and Douglas Croft as Robin . J. Carrol Naish played the villain , an original character named Dr. <unk> . Rounding out the cast were Shirley Patterson as Linda Page ( Bruce Wayne 's love interest ) , and William Austin as Alfred . The plot is based on Batman , a US government agent , attempting to defeat the Japanese agent Dr. <unk> , at the height of World War II . 
 The film is notable for being the first filmed appearance of Batman and for providing two core elements of the Batman mythos . The film introduced " The Bat 's Cave " and the Grandfather clock entrance . The name was altered to the Batcave for the comic . William Austin , who played Alfred , had a trim physique and sported a thin mustache , while the contemporary comic book version of Alfred was overweight and clean @-@ shaven prior to the serial 's release . The comics version of Alfred was altered to match that of Austin 's , and has stayed that way . 
 = = = Batman and Robin ( 1949 ) = = = 
 Batman and Robin was another 15 @-@ chapter serial film released in 1949 by Columbia Pictures . Robert Lowery played Batman , while Johnny Duncan played Robin . Supporting players included Jane Adams as Vicki Vale and veteran character actor Lyle Talbot as Commissioner Gordon . The plot dealt with the Dynamic Duo facing off against the Wizard , a hooded villain whose identity remains a mystery throughout the serial until the end . 
 = = = Batman ( 1966 ) = = = 
 Batman ( also known as Batman : The Movie ) is a 1966 film adaptation of the popular Batman television series , and was the first full @-@ length theatrical adaptation of the DC Comics character . The 20th Century Fox release starred Adam West as Batman and Burt Ward as Robin , as well as Cesar Romero as the Joker , Burgess Meredith as the Penguin , Lee Meriwether as Catwoman , and Frank <unk> as the Riddler . 
 The film was directed by Leslie H. Martinson , who also directed a pair of Batman episodes : " The Penguin Goes Straight " and " Not Yet , He Ain 't , " both from season one . 
 = = 1970s and 80s = = 
 In the late 1970s , Batman 's popularity was waning . CBS was interested in producing a Batman in Outer Space film . Producers Michael Uslan and Benjamin Melniker purchased the film rights of Batman from DC Comics on October 3 , 1979 . It was Uslan 's wish " to make the definitive , dark , serious version of Batman , the way Bob Kane and Bill Finger had envisioned him in 1939 . A creature of the night ; stalking criminals in the shadows . " Richard Maibaum was approached to write a script with Guy Hamilton to direct , but the two turned down the offer . Uslan was unsuccessful with pitching Batman to various movie studios because they wanted the film to be similar to the campy 1960s TV series . Columbia Pictures and United Artists were among those to turn down the film . 
 A disappointed Uslan then wrote a script titled Return of the Batman to give the film industry a better idea of his vision for the film . Uslan later compared its dark tone to that of The Dark Knight Returns , which his script pre @-@ dated by six years . In November 1979 , producer Jon Peters and Casablanca FilmWorks , headed by Peter Guber , joined the project . The four producers felt it was best to pattern the film 's development after that of Superman ( 1978 ) . Uslan , Melniker and Guber pitched Batman to Universal Pictures , but the studio turned it down . The project was publicly announced with a budget of $ 15 million in July 1980 at the Comic Art Convention in New York . Casablanca FilmWorks was absorbed into PolyGram Pictures in 1980 . Guber and Peters left PolyGram Pictures in 1982 and took the Batman film rights with them , although PolyGram would retain at least 7 @.@ 5 % of the profits of said rights due to a contractual agreement . Guber and Peters immediately set up shop at Warner Bros. , which finally decided to accept Batman . 
 Tom Mankiewicz completed a script titled The Batman in June 1983 , focusing on Batman and Dick Grayson 's origins , with the Joker and Rupert Thorne as villains , and Silver St. Cloud as the romantic interest . Mankiewicz took inspiration from the limited series Batman : Strange Apparitions ( ISBN 1 @-@ 56389 @-@ 500 @-@ 5 ) , written by Steve Englehart . Comic book artist Marshall Rogers , who worked with Englehart on Strange Apparitions , was hired for concept art . The Batman was then announced in late 1983 for a mid @-@ 1985 release date on a budget of $ 20 million . Originally , Mankiewicz had wanted an unknown actor for Batman , William Holden for James Gordon , David Niven as Alfred Pennyworth and Peter O 'Toole as the Penguin who Mankiewicz wanted to portray as a mobster with low body temperature . Holden died in 1981 and Niven in 1983 , so this would never come to pass . A number of filmmakers were attached to Mankiewicz ' script , including Ivan Reitman and Joe Dante . Reitman wanted to cast Bill Murray as Batman . For the role of Robin , Eddie Murphy and Michael J. Fox were candidates . Nine rewrites were performed by nine separate writers . Most of them were based on Strange Apparitions . However , it was Mankiewicz 's script that was still being used to guide the project . 
 = = Tim Burton / Joel Schumacher = = 
 = = = Batman ( 1989 ) = = = 
 Tim Burton took over as director of the first Batman film in 1986 . Steve Englehart and Julie Hickson wrote film treatments before Sam Hamm wrote the first screenplay . Numerous A @-@ list actors were considered for the role of Batman before Michael Keaton was cast . Keaton was a controversial choice for the role since , by 1988 , he had become typecast as a comedic actor and many observers doubted he could portray a serious role . Jack Nicholson accepted the role of the Joker under strict conditions that dictated a high salary , a portion of the box office profits and his shooting schedule . Nicholson 's final salary is reported to be as high as $ 50 million . Principal photography took place at Pinewood Studios from October 1988 to January 1989 . The budget escalated from $ 30 million to $ 48 million , while the 1988 Writers Guild of America strike forced Hamm to drop out . Rewrites were performed by Warren Skaaren , Charles McKeown and Jonathan Gems . Batman received positive reviews , broke numerous box office records , and won the Academy Award for Best Art Direction . The film grossed over $ 400 million , and left a legacy over the modern perception of the superhero film genre . 
 = = = Batman Returns ( 1992 ) = = = 
 Burton originally did not want to direct a sequel because of his mixed emotions over the previous film . Sam Hamm 's first script had Penguin and Catwoman searching for hidden treasure . Daniel Waters delivered a script that satisfied Burton , which convinced him to direct the film . Wesley Strick did an uncredited rewrite , deleting characterizations of Harvey Dent and Robin and rewriting the climax . Various A @-@ list actresses lobbied hard for the role of Catwoman before Michelle Pfeiffer was cast , while Danny DeVito signed on to portray the Penguin . Filming started at Warner Bros. in Burbank , California in June 1991 . Batman Returns was released with financial success , but Warner Bros. was disappointed with the film 's box office run because it earned less than its predecessor . However , Batman Returns was released to generally positive reviews , although a " parental backlash " criticized the film for containing violence and sexual innuendos that were thought to be unsuitable for children . McDonald 's shut down its Happy Meal tie @-@ in for Batman Returns . 
 = = = Batman Forever ( 1995 ) = = = 
 Although Batman Returns was a financial success , Warner Bros. felt the film should have made more money . The studio decided to change the direction of the Batman film series to be more mainstream . Joel Schumacher replaced Tim Burton as director , while Burton decided to stay on as producer . However , Michael Keaton did not like the new direction the film series was heading in , and was replaced by Val Kilmer as Batman . Chris O 'Donnell was introduced as Robin , Jim Carrey starred as The Riddler , while Tommy Lee Jones starred as Two @-@ Face . Filming started in September 1994 , and Schumacher encountered problems communicating with Kilmer and Jones . Batman Forever was released on June 16 , 1995 with financial success , earning over $ 350 million worldwide and three Academy Award nominations , but the film was met with mixed reviews from critics . 
 = = = Batman & Robin ( 1997 ) = = = 
 After the release of Batman Forever , Warner Bros. started development on Batman & Robin , commissioning it on fast track for an adamant June 1997 release . Val Kilmer did not return , because of scheduling conflicts with The Saint , and was replaced by George Clooney . Arnold Schwarzenegger starred as Mr. Freeze , while Uma Thurman starred as Poison Ivy and Alicia Silverstone starred as Batgirl . Chris O 'Donnell reprised his role as Robin . Principal photography began in September 1996 and finished in January 1997 , two weeks ahead of the shooting schedule . Batman & Robin was released on June 20 , 1997 , and received primarily negative reviews . Observers criticized the film for its toyetic and campy approach , and for homosexual innuendos added by Schumacher . Still , the film was a financial success , but remains to be the least commercially successful live @-@ action Batman film ever . Batman & Robin received numerous nominations at the Razzie Awards and ranks among the worst rated superhero films of all time . 
 = = = Proposals for fifth film = = = 
 = = = = Batman Unchained = = = = 
 During the filming of Batman & Robin , Warner Bros. was impressed with the dailies , prompting them to immediately hire Joel Schumacher to reprise his directing duties for a third film . Writer Akiva Goldsman , who worked on Batman Forever and Batman & Robin , turned down the chance to write the script . In late 1996 , Warner Bros. and Schumacher hired Mark Protosevich to write the script for a fifth Batman film . A projected mid @-@ 1999 release date was announced . Titled Batman Unchained but often incorrectly referred to as Batman Triumphant , Protosevich 's script had the Scarecrow as the main villain and the Joker would return as a hallucination in Batman 's mind caused by the Scarecrow 's fear toxin . Harley Quinn appeared as a supporting character , written as the Joker 's daughter trying to kill Batman to avenge her father 's death . George Clooney , Chris O 'Donnell and Alicia Silverstone were set to reprise the roles of Batman , Robin , and Batgirl . Schumacher had also approached Nicolas Cage for the role of Scarecrow . However , when Batman & Robin received negative reviews and failed to outgross any of its predecessors , Warner Bros. was unsure of their plans for Batman Unchained . The studio decided it was best to consider a live @-@ action Batman Beyond film and an adaptation of Frank Miller 's Batman : Year One . Warner Bros. would then greenlight whichever idea suited them the most . Schumacher felt he " owe [ d ] the Batman culture a real Batman movie . I would go back to the basics and make a dark portrayal of the Dark Knight . " He approached Warner Bros. to do Batman : Year One in mid @-@ 1998 . 
 = = = = Batman : DarKnight = = = = 
 Despite Warner Bros. and Schumacher 's interest with Year One , Lee Shapiro , a comic book fan , and Stephen Wise pitched the studio with a script titled Batman : DarKnight in mid @-@ 1998 . DarKnight had Bruce Wayne giving up his crime fighting career , and Dick Grayson attending Gotham University . Dr. Jonathan Crane uses his position as professor of psychology at Gotham University and as head psychiatrist at Arkham Asylum to conduct his experiments into fear ( this element would later appear in Batman Begins ) . During a vengeful confrontation with a colleague , Dr. Kirk <unk> , Crane unknowingly initiates Kirk 's transformation into the creature known as Man @-@ Bat . Citizens of Gotham believe Man @-@ Bat 's nightly activities to be Batman 's " bloodthirsty " return . Bruce becomes Batman " to clear his name , " and solve the mystery of Man @-@ Bat . Kirk struggles with his " man @-@ <unk> " syndrome , as he longs to both reunite with his wife and get revenge on Crane , while Crane exacts revenge on those responsible for his dismissal from both Arkham and the university while encountering truths about his past . Warner Bros. decided not to move forward with the project , and passed on Batman : DarKnight in favor of Year One and Batman Beyond . 
 = = = = Robin spin @-@ off = = = = 
 Chris O 'Donnell revealed in a 2012 interview with Access Hollywood that a Robin spin @-@ off was planned but was scrapped after Batman & Robin . 
 = = = Other proposals = = = 
 = = = = Batman : Year One and Batman Beyond = = = = 
 By September 2000 Warner Bros. was developing a live action screen adaptation of Batman Beyond , written by Paul Dini , Neal Stephenson and Boaz Yakin , with the possibility of Yakin directing , as well as an adaptation of Frank Miller 's 1987 comic book story arc Batman : Year One . Despite interest from Schumacher , Darren Aronofsky was hired to direct and co @-@ write with Miller , whom he previously collaborated with on an unproduced script for Ronin . Yakin developed one draft of the Batman Beyond screenplay with the writers but soon lost interest , and Warner Bros. abandoned Batman Beyond almost instantly in favor of Batman : Year One . Aronofsky and Miller intended to reboot the Batman franchise , " it 's somewhat based on the comic book , " Aronofsky said . " Toss out everything you can imagine about Batman ! Everything ! We 're starting completely anew . " Regular Aronofsky collaborator , Matthew Libatique , was set as cinematographer , and Christian Bale had been approached for the role of Batman . Coincidentally , Bale would be cast in the role for Batman Begins . At the same time , Warner Bros. was moving forward on a Catwoman spin @-@ off . However , by June 2002 , the studio decided to move forward on Batman vs. Superman and abandon Year One . 
 = = = = Batman vs. Superman = = = = 
 Warner Bros. abandoned J. J. Abrams ' script for Superman : Flyby , which had been greenlighted with McG to direct . When McG dropped out in favor of Charlie 's Angels : Full Throttle , Warner Bros. approached Wolfgang Petersen to direct Superman : Flyby , however , in August 2001 , Andrew Kevin Walker pitched Warner Bros. an idea titled Batman vs Superman , attaching Petersen as director . Superman : Flyby was put on hold , and Akiva Goldsman was hired to rewrite Walker 's Batman vs. Superman . 
 Goldsman 's draft , dated June 21 , 2002 , had Bruce Wayne going through a mental breakdown after his five @-@ year retirement from crime fighting . Dick Grayson , Alfred Pennyworth and Commissioner Gordon are all dead , but Bruce finds some solace in his fiancée , Elizabeth Miller . Meanwhile , Clark Kent is struggling because of a recent divorce from Lois Lane . Clark and Bruce are close friends , and Clark is Bruce 's best man . After the Joker kills Elizabeth on their honeymoon , Bruce swears revenge , while Clark tries to hold him back . Bruce blames Clark for her death , and the two go against one another . Ultimately , Lex Luthor is revealed to have masterminded the entire plot to get Batman and Superman to destroy each other . The two decide to team up and stop Luthor . Christian Bale , who would play the character in Christopher Nolan 's Batman film trilogy , was simultaneously approached to portray Batman for Darren Aronofsky 's Batman : Year One , while Josh Hartnett was offered the role of Superman . 
 Filming was to start in early 2003 , with plans for a five- to six @-@ month shoot . The release date was set for the summer of 2004 . However , Warner Bros. canceled development to focus on individual Superman and Batman projects after Abrams submitted another draft for Superman : Flyby . According to Petersen " [ Warner Bros. ' chief ] Alan Horn was so torn , because it 's such a fascinating concept to do a Batman versus Superman film . " In the opening scene of I Am Legend , a billboard displays the Superman symbol within the Batman symbol in Times Square . It is meant as an in @-@ joke by the film 's writer , Akiva Goldsman , who also wrote the script for Batman vs. Superman . 
 = = = OnStar commercials = = = 
 The Batman OnStar commercials were a series of six television commercials featuring Batman , created by ad @-@ agency Campbell @-@ Ewald and aired from 2000 to the beginning of 2002 . 
 The ads were based on the film series and was basically an amalgamation of both directors visuals . For example , The Batmobile was the one used in Batman and Batman Returns , while the Batsuit was a combination of what was worn by Val Kilmer in Batman Forever and George Clooney in Batman & Robin . The commercials also featured the Danny Elfman Batman theme from Tim Burton 's two films . 
 Actor Bruce Thomas portrayed Batman in these ads , while Michael Gough reprised the role of Alfred Pennyworth from the four films in Batman : The Motion Picture Anthology in one of the ads . Baywatch actress Brooke Burns played Vicki Vale in an ad as well . Actor Brian <unk> played the Riddler in an ad and Curtis Armstrong played the Joker in another . 
 = = Christopher Nolan = = 
 = = = Batman Begins ( 2005 ) = = = 
 Following a rejected Batman origin story reboot Joss Whedon pitched in December 2002 , Warner Bros. hired Christopher Nolan and David S. Goyer to script Batman Begins . The duo aimed for a darker and more realistic tone , with humanity and realism being the basis of the film . The film was primarily shot in the United Kingdom and Chicago , and relied on traditional stunts and scale models with minimal use of computer @-@ generated imagery . Christian Bale starred as Batman , Liam Neeson starred as Ra 's al Ghul , and Cillian Murphy as The Scarecrow . Katie Holmes also starred in the movie as Bruce 's love interest , Rachel Dawes , a role created for the film . Alfred was played by Michael Caine and Jim Gordon was portrayed by Gary Oldman . A new Batmobile ( called the Tumbler ) and a more mobile Batsuit were both created specifically for the film . 
 Batman Begins was both critically and commercially successful . The film opened on June 15 , 2005 , in the United States and Canada in 3 @,@ 858 theaters . It grossed $ 48 million in its opening weekend , eventually grossing over $ 372 million worldwide . The film received an 85 % overall approval rating from Rotten Tomatoes . Critics noted that fear was a common motif throughout the film , and remarked that it had a darker tone compared with previous Batman films . The film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Cinematography and for three BAFTA awards . It was also listed at No. 81 on Empire 's " 500 Greatest Movies of All Time " and has maintained a standing on IMDb.com 's " Top 250 " . 
 = = = The Dark Knight ( 2008 ) = = = 
 Christopher Nolan reprised his duties as director , and brought his brother , Jonathan , to co @-@ write the script for the second installment . The Dark Knight featured Christian Bale reprising his role as Batman / Bruce Wayne , Heath Ledger as The Joker , and Aaron Eckhart as Harvey Dent / Two @-@ Face . Principal photography began in April 2007 in Chicago and concluded in November . Other locations included Pinewood Studios , Ministry of Sound in London and Hong Kong . On January 22 , 2008 , after he had completed filming The Dark Knight , Ledger died from a bad combination of prescription medication . Warner Bros. had created a viral marketing campaign for The Dark Knight , developing promotional websites and trailers highlighting screen shots of Ledger as the Joker , but after Ledger 's death , the studio refocused its promotional campaign . 
 The film received broad critical acclaim , and set numerous records during its theatrical run . With just over $ 1 billion in revenue worldwide , it is the 21st @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of all time , unadjusted for inflation . The film received eight Academy Award nominations ; it won the award for Best Sound Editing and Ledger was posthumously awarded Best Supporting Actor . 
 = = = The Dark Knight Rises ( 2012 ) = = = 
 Nolan wanted the story for the third and final installment to keep him emotionally invested . " On a more superficial level , I have to ask the question , " he reasoned , " how many good third movies in a franchise can people name ? " He returned out of finding a necessary way to continue the story , but feared midway through filming he would find a sequel redundant . The Dark Knight Rises is intended to complete Nolan 's Batman trilogy . By December 2008 , Nolan completed a rough story outline , before he committed himself to Inception . In February 2010 , work on the screenplay was commencing with David S. Goyer and Jonathan Nolan . When Goyer left to work on the Superman reboot , Jonathan was writing the script based on the story by his brother and Goyer . Tom Hardy was cast as Bane and Anne Hathaway plays Selina Kyle . Joseph Gordon @-@ Levitt was cast as John Blake , and Marion Cotillard was cast as Miranda Tate . Filming began in May 2011 and concluded in November . Nolan chose not to film in 3 @-@ D but , by focusing on improving image quality and scale using the IMAX format , hoped to push technological boundaries while nevertheless making the style of the film consistent with the previous two . Nolan had several meetings with IMAX Vice @-@ President David Keighley to work on the logistics of projecting films in digital IMAX venues . The Dark Knight Rises featured more scenes shot in IMAX than The Dark Knight . Cinematographer Wally Pfister expressed interest in shooting the film entirely in IMAX . 
 Upon release , The Dark Knight Rises received a positive critical response and was successful at the box office , going on to outgross its predecessor and become the tenth @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of all time grossing over $ 1 @.@ 08 billion . However , unlike its predecessors , the film was not nominated for any Oscars during its year of eligibility at the 85th Academy Awards , much to the surprise of film industry insiders . 
 = = = Proposed Justice League film = = = 
 = = = = Justice League : Mortal = = = = 
 In February 2007 , during pre @-@ production for The Dark Knight , Warner Bros. hired husband and wife screenwriting duo Michelle and Kieran Mulroney to script a Justice League film featuring a younger Batman in a separate franchise . George Miller was hired to direct the following September , with Armie Hammer cast as Batman a month later and Teresa Palmer as Talia al Ghul . Filming had nearly commenced for at Fox Studios Australia in Sydney , but was pushed back over the Writer 's Guild of America strike , and once more when the Australian Film Commission denied Warner Bros. a 45 percent tax rebate over lack of Australian actors in the film . Production offices were moved to Vancouver Film Studios in Canada for an expected July 2008 start and a planned summer 2009 theatrical release date , but Warner Bros. ultimately canceled Justice League following the success of The Dark Knight . Hammer 's option on his contract lapsed and the studio was more willing to proceed with Christopher Nolan to finish his trilogy separately with The Dark Knight Rises . 
 = = DC Extended Universe = = 
 = = = Batman v Superman : Dawn of Justice ( 2016 ) = = = 
 On June 13 , 2013 , a source from Warner Bros. told The Wrap that they were discussing more Man of Steel films , as well as a Superman / Batman film , Wonder Woman , and Aquaman . Warner Bros. announced that Superman and Batman would unite in a new film , a follow @-@ up to Man of Steel ( 2013 ) , taking its inspiration from the comic The Dark Knight Returns and set for release in 2015 . Goyer stated at the Superman 75th Anniversary Panel at Comic @-@ Con , that Batman and Superman would face off , and titles under consideration were Superman vs Batman or Batman vs Superman . 
 On August 22 , 2013 , The Hollywood Reporter announced the casting of Ben Affleck as Bruce Wayne / Batman . On January 17 , 2014 , it was announced that the film had been delayed from its original July 17 , 2015 release date to May 6 , 2016 , in order to give the filmmakers " time to realize fully their vision , given the complex visual nature of the story " . The film 's release was moved again to March 25 , 2016 , " avoiding a high @-@ profile showdown with Captain America : Civil War on May 6 , 2016 " . 
 = = = Suicide Squad ( 2016 ) = = = 
 In February 2009 , Warner Bros. was developing a Suicide Squad film , with Dan Lin producing , and Justin Marks writing the script . In September 2014 , David Ayer signed on to direct and write the screenplay for the film . Charles Roven is also set to produce the film . In November 2014 and March 2015 , it was announced that Deadshot , Harley Quinn , Killer Croc and the Joker will appear in the film portrayed respectively by Will Smith , Margot Robbie , Adewale Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje and Jared Leto . 
 = = = Justice League ( 2017 ) = = = 
 Shortly after filming had finished for Man of Steel , Warner Bros hired Will Beall to script a new Justice League film in June 2012 . With the release of Man of Steel in June 2013 , Goyer was hired to write a new Justice League script , with the Beall draft being scrapped . In April 2014 , it was announced that Zack Snyder would also be directing Goyer 's Justice League script . Warner Bros. was reportedly courting Chris Terrio to rewrite Justice League the following July , after having been impressed with his rewrite of Batman v Superman . 
 = = = Untitled Justice League Sequel ( 2019 ) = = = 
 In March 2016 , it was revealed that Affleck signed on a three @-@ picture deal that carries him through 2019 's sequel , while also have a minor appearance in Suicide Squad . 
 = = = The Batman ( TBA ) = = = 
 In July 2015 , it was revealed that Ben Affleck was in talks to direct , star and co @-@ write with Geoff Johns a screenplay for a stand @-@ alone Batman film . In January 2016 , Affleck hinted that he was inspired by his Batman v Superman : Dawn of Justice director Zack Snyder to possibly take on helming the film . In March 2016 , Johns claimed that the appearance of Robin 's suit covered in graffiti from Dawn of Justice would be explored later and the identity of the deceased character was intentionally unspecified . Following the release of Dawn of Justice , William Morris Endeavor 's co @-@ CEO Patrick Whitesell confirmed that Affleck had written a screenplay for a standalone Batman film that he hoped would be optioned by Warner Bros as well to direct . Warner Bros. CEO Kevin <unk> confirmed in April 2016 that the studio was moving ahead with Affleck 's stand @-@ alone Batman film , which the actor would star in and direct . In May 2016 , Jeremy Irons confirmed that he was " tied into The Batman " , while Affleck stated that his solo Batman film would borrow from the comics , but mainly be an " original story " . Affleck was confirmed as the film 's director at Comic @-@ Con 2016 . 
 = = Animated films = = 
 = = = Batman solo = = = 
 1993 : Mask of the Phantasm , set in the continuity of Batman : The Animated Series with Kevin Conroy voicing Batman 
 1998 : <unk> , set in the continuity of Batman : The Animated Series with Kevin Conroy voicing Batman 
 2000 : Return of the Joker , set in the continuity of Batman Beyond with Will Friedle voicing Batman 
 2003 : Mystery of the Batwoman , set in the continuity of The New Batman Adventures with Kevin Conroy voicing Batman 
 2005 : The Batman vs. Dracula , set in the continuity of The Batman with Rino Romano voicing Batman 
 2010 : Under the Red Hood , an adaptation of Batman : Under the Hood with Bruce Greenwood voicing Batman 
 2011 : Year One , an adaptation of Batman : Year One with Benjamin McKenzie voicing Batman 
 2012 : The Dark Knight Returns - Part 1 , an adaptation of the first half of The Dark Knight Returns with Peter Weller voicing Batman 
 2013 : The Dark Knight Returns - Part 2 , an adaptation of the second half of The Dark Knight Returns with Peter Weller voicing Batman 
 2013 : DC Super Heroes Unite , an adaptation of Lego Batman 2 : DC Super Heroes with Troy Baker voicing Batman 
 2014 : Son of Batman , a loose adaptation of Batman and Son with Jason O 'Mara voicing Batman 
 2014 : Assault on Arkham , set in the continuity of Batman : Arkham with Kevin Conroy voicing Batman 
 2015 : Batman vs. Robin 
 2015 : Batman Unlimited : Animal Instincts 
 2016 : Batman : Bad Blood , an animated film also featuring Batwoman and Batwing with Jason O 'Mara voicing Batman 
 2016 : Batman : The Killing Joke , an adaptation of Batman : The Killing Joke with Kevin Conroy voicing Batman 
 2017 : The Lego Batman Movie , a spin @-@ off of The Lego Movie . 
 = = = With other heroes = = = 
 2008 : Justice League : The New Frontier , based on the comic of the same name with Jeremy Sisto voicing Batman 
 2009 : Superman / Batman : Public Enemies , based on the comic of the same name with Kevin Conroy voicing Batman 
 2010 : Justice League : Crisis on Two Earths , a loose adaptation of various DC comics with William Baldwin voicing Batman 
 2010 : Superman / Batman : Apocalypse , based on Superman / Batman : The Supergirl from Krypton with Kevin Conroy voicing Batman 
 2010 : DC Super Friends , based on the Fisher @-@ Price toyline with Daran Norris voicing Batman 
 2012 : Justice League : Doom , based on JLA : Tower of Babel with Kevin Conroy voicing Batman 
 2013 : Justice League : The Flashpoint Paradox , based on Flashpoint with Kevin McKidd voicing Batman 
 2014 : JLA Adventures : Trapped in Time , an original story with Diedrich Bader voicing Batman 
 2014 : Justice League : War , based on Justice League : Origin with Jason O 'Mara voicing Batman 
 2014 : Lego DC Comics : Batman Be @-@ <unk> animated television special , with Troy Baker reprising his role as Batman from the Lego video games . 
 2015 : Justice League : Throne of Atlantis , based on Throne of Atlantis with Jason O 'Mara voicing Batman 
 2015 : Justice League : Gods and Monsters 
 2015 : Lego DC Comics Super Heroes : Justice League vs. Bizarro League , with Troy Baker reprising his role . 
 2016 : Lego DC Comics Super Heroes : Justice League : Cosmic Clash , with Troy Baker reprising his role . 
 = = = The Lego Movie series = = = 
 2014 : A Lego @-@ themed version of Batman appears in The Lego Movie , voiced by Will Arnett . 
 2017 : The character receives his own spin @-@ off film , The Lego Batman Movie , voiced again by Will Arnett . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 2008 : Batman : Gotham Knight , a collection of original shorts with Kevin Conroy voicing Batman 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office performance = = = 
 = = = Critical and public response = = = 
 = = = Academy Awards = = = 
 = Platine War = 
 The Platine War ( 18 August 1851 – 3 February 1852 ) was fought between the Argentine Confederation and an alliance consisting of the Empire of Brazil , Uruguay and the Argentine provinces of Entre Ríos and Corrientes . The war was part of a long @-@ running contest between Argentina and Brazil for influence over Uruguay and Paraguay , and hegemony over the Platine region ( areas bordering the Río de la Plata ) . The conflict took place in Uruguay , on the Río de la Plata , and northeastern Argentina . Uruguay 's internal troubles , including the long @-@ running Uruguayan Civil War , " La Guerra Grande " ( The Great War ) , were heavily influential factors leading to the Platine War . 
 In 1850 , the Platine region was politically unstable . Although the Governor of Buenos Aires Juan Manuel de Rosas had used his position to gain dictatorial control over other Argentine provinces , his rule was plagued by a series of regional rebellions . Meanwhile , Uruguay struggled with a long @-@ running civil war which started after acquiring independence from Brazil in 1828 after conclusion of Cisplatine War . Rosas backed the Uruguayan Blanco party in this conflict , and further desired to extend Argentine borders to areas formerly occupied by the Spanish Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata . This meant asserting control over Uruguay , Paraguay , and Bolivia . This threatened Brazilian interests and sovereignty since the old Spanish Viceroyalty had also included territories which had since been incorporated into Brazil 's province of Rio Grande do Sul . 
 Brazil actively pursued ways to eliminate threat from Rosas . In 1851 , it allied with the Argentine breakaway provinces of Corrientes and Entre Rios ( led by Justo José de Urquiza ) , and the anti @-@ Rosas Colorado party in Uruguay . Brazil next secured the south @-@ western flank by signing defensive alliances with Paraguay and Bolivia . Faced with an offensive alliance against his regime , Rosas declared war on Brazil . 
 Allied forces first advanced into Uruguayan territory , defeating the Rosas supporters from the Blanco party led by Manuel Oribe . Afterwards , the Allied army was divided , with the main arm advancing by land to engage Rosas 's main defenses and the other launching a seaborne assault directed at Buenos Aires . 
 The Platine War ended in 1852 with the Allied victory at the Battle of Caseros , for some time establishing Brazilian hegemony over much of South America . The war ushered a period of economic and political stability in the Empire of Brazil . With Rosas gone , Argentina began a political process which would result in a more unified state . However , the end of the Platine war did not completely resolve issues within the Platine region . Turmoil continued in subsequent years , with internal disputes among political factions in Uruguay , a long civil war in Argentina , and an emergent Paraguay asserting its claims . Two more major international wars ( see : Paraguayan War ) followed during the next two decades , sparked by territorial ambitions and conflicts over influence . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Rosas rule in Argentina = = = 
 Don Juan Manuel de Rosas became governor of Buenos Aires after the brief period of anarchy following the end of the Cisplatine War in 1828 . In theory , Rosas only held as much power as governors of the other Argentine provinces , but in reality he ruled over the entire Argentine Confederation , as the country was then known . Although he was one of the Federalists , a faction which demanded greater provincial autonomy , in practice Rosas exercised control over the other provinces and become the virtual dictator of Argentina . During his 20 @-@ year government , the country witnessed the resurgence of armed conflicts between the Unitarians ( his rival political faction ) and the Federalists . 
 Rosas desired to recreate the former Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata . He aimed to build a powerful , republican state with Argentina placed at the its center . The defunct Viceroyalty had shattered into several separate nations following the Argentine War of Independence at the beginning of the 19th century . To achieve reunification , the Argentine government needed to annex the three neighboring countries - Bolivia , Uruguay and Paraguay , as well as to incorporate a portion of the southern region of Brazil . Rosas first had to gather allies across the region who shared his vision . In some instances , this meant that he had to become involved in the internal politics of neighboring countries , backing those sympathetic to union with Argentina , and occasionally even financing rebellions and wars . 
 = = = Paraguay = = = 
 Paraguay considered itself a sovereign nation since 1811 , but it was not recognized as such by any other nation . Argentina viewed it as a rebellious province . The Paraguayan dictator José Gaspar Rodríguez de Francia decided that the best way to maintain his own rule and the independence of Paraguay from Argentina was to isolate the country from contacts with the outside world . It was for this reason that , up until 1840 , Paraguay had avoided establishing diplomatic relations with other nations . With the death of Francia , this policy began to shift , and his successor Don Carlos Antonio López signed two treaties in July 1841 . These were the " Friendship , Commerce and Navigation " and " Limits " agreements made with the Argentine province of Corrientes , which itself had broken away from Argentina under Rosas . Meanwhile , Rosas increasingly put pressure on Paraguay . He continued to refuse to recognize Paraguayan independence and placed a blockade on international traffic to and from Paraguay on the Paraná river . 
 = = = Uruguayan conflict = = = 
 The old Brazilian province of Cisplatina had become independent Oriental Republic of Uruguay after the Cisplatine War of the 1820s . The country soon was engulfed in a long civil war between its two political parties : the Blancos , led by Don Juan Antonio Lavalleja , and the Colorados , led by Don <unk> Rivera . 
 Lavalleja soon discovered that Rosas in neighbouring Buenos Aires was interested in aiding him financially and militarily . In 1832 , Lavalleja began to receive aid from Bento Gonçalves , a soldier and farmer from the Brazilian province of Rio Grande do Sul . Gonçalves had been encouraged by Rosas to rebel against the Brazilian government in 1835 , with the ultimate aim of enabling Argentina to annex the province of Rio Grande do Sul . Together , Lavalleja and Gonçalves initiated a military campaign in Uruguay which was characterized by extensive violence and pillage . Gonçalves betrayed Rosas and Lavalleja by becoming an ally of Rivera . Both then invaded Uruguay and overran most of the country outside the environs of the capital , Montevideo . Defeated , the then @-@ Uruguayan president Manuel Oribe , like the betrayed Lavalleja a member of the Blanco party , resigned his position as president and fled to Argentina . 
 Rosas was determined to restore Argentine suzerainty over Uruguay and take revenge on Gonçalves . A series of interventions resulted . In 1839 an army led by Lavalleja , Oribe and Justo José de Urquiza , ( Governor of Entre Rios ) was quickly defeated by Rivera . At this point , Lavalleja turned his back on the conflict and played no further part in the civil war . Rosas sent another army of Argentines and Uruguayans in 1845 , led by Oribe and Urquiza , and this time defeated Rivera 's forces , slaughtering the survivors . Rivera was one of the few who managed to escape , and went into exile in Rio de Janeiro . What remained of Rivera 's Colorados held power only in the country 's capital Montevideo as Oribe 's forces began the Great Siege of Montevideo . The violence in Uruguay escalated , with Oribe 's men killing more than 17 @,@ 000 Uruguayans and 15 @,@ 000 Argentinians during the conflict . 
 Oribe 's control of nearly all of Uruguay had been secured , enabling him to launch an invasion of southern Brazil , his forces stealing cattle , looting ranches , and liquidating political enemies as they went . More than 188 Brazilian farms were attacked , with 814 @,@ 000 cattle and 16 @,@ 950 horses stolen . Local Brazilians independently decided to retaliate , making raids into Uruguay which became known as " <unk> " , in reference to the violence in western North America during California 's revolt against Mexico , its brief independence and subsequent annexation by the U.S. As conflict further escalated with the persistent support of Rosas for the Blancos , anarchy spread over wide areas in the region ; with a growing threat to trade , the era 's two greatest powers , France and Great Britain , were induced to declare war on Argentina and impose the Anglo @-@ French blockade of the Río de la Plata . Buenos Aires suffered repeated attacks from Anglo @-@ French fleets . The Argentine government was able to mount effective resistance , however , leading to a peace accord in 1849 . 
 = = = Empire of Brazil reacts = = = 
 By the middle of the 19th century , the Empire of Brazil was the richest and most powerful nation in Latin America . It thrived under democratic institutions and a constitutional monarchy , and prided itself on the absence of the caudillos , dictators and coups d 'état which were common across the rest of the continent . During the minority of emperor Pedro II in the 1830s , however , there had been internal rebellions driven by local disputes for power within a few provinces . One of these , the Ragamuffin War , had been led by Gonçalves , as noted above . 
 For the Brazilian Empire , expansionist plans on the part of powerful , republican Argentina represented an existential threat . It also signified a threat to Brazilian hegemony across its southern borders . A successful Argentine bid to incorporate Paraguay and Uruguay into a reconstituted Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata ( and control of the Platine river network consequently passing into entirely hostile hands ) would have threatened to cut communication between the Brazilian province of Mato Grosso and Rio de Janeiro . With river transportation denied , the alternative land routes would require months of travel instead of days . Nor was Brazil keen to share a direct border with Argentina , fearing an increased vulnerability to an invasion by Rosas . 
 The members of the Brazilian Cabinet could not reach agreement as to how to address the danger posed by Rosas . Some ministers advocated seeking a peaceful resolution at any cost . These feared Brazil was unprepared for war and that a defeat would lead to a situation similar to the chaos following the loss of Cisplatine in the 1820s , which ended in abdication by Dom Pedro I , the Emperor 's father . Other ministers took the position that only a military response would eliminate the threat . In 1849 , however , Paulino José Soares de Sousa , a member of the pro @-@ war faction and later Viscount of Uruguai , was chosen as the new minister of Foreign Affairs . Soares made clear his intent to deal with Argentina without foreign assistance , announcing that the " Imperial Government does not desire or judge convenient an alliance with France or any other European nation related to the matters in the Platine region . It understands that they must be resolved by the nations which [ we ] are closely connected with ... It will not admit European influence over America . " The Empire of Brazil was determined to extend its zone of influence over South America . 
 The cabinet settled upon a risky alternative to resolve the complicated situation in the Platine region . Instead of undertaking a period of conscription to build up the Brazilian Army , which would have been costly , the Council decided to rely on the standing army . It sent a contingent south to secure the region . Brazil held an advantage in possessing a powerful and modern navy , along with an experienced professional army hardened by years of internal and external warfare . Up until this point , no other nation in South America possessed true navies or regular armies . Rosas ' and Oribe 's forces were largely made up of irregular troops on loan from those caudillos who supported them . Even a decade later , Argentina could only field an army of 6 @,@ 000 men . Brazil also decided to adopt Rosas ' own tactics by financing his opponents to weaken him both internally and externally . 
 = = = Alliance against Rosas = = = 
 The Brazilian government set about creating a regional alliance against Rosas , sending a delegation to the region led by Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão ( later the Marquis of Paraná ) , who held plenipotentiary authority . He was assisted by José Maria da Silva Paranhos ( later the Viscount of Rio Branco ) . Brazil signed a treaty with <unk> in which Bolivia agreed to strengthen its border defenses to deter any attack by Rosas , though it declined to contribute troops to a war with Argentina . 
 Isolationist Paraguay was more difficult to win over . Brazil made the initial overtures , becoming the first country to formally recognise Paraguayan independence in 1844 . This soon led to the establishment of excellent diplomatic relations . The Brazilian ambassador in Paraguay , <unk> Bueno , became a private councilor to President Carlos Antonio López . A defensive alliance was signed on 25 December 1850 between Brazil and Paraguay , in which López agreed to supply the Empire with horses for its army . But Paraguay refused to contribute troops to fight Rosas , believing that Justo José Urquiza ( who had invaded Uruguay in 1839 and in 1845 ) , the ruler of the Argentine Entre Rios province , secretly wished to annex Paraguay . 
 Brazil 's involvement in the Uruguayan civil war also began to deepen . Luis Alves de Lima e Silva , the Count of Caxias , assumed the presidency ( governorship ) of Rio Grande do Sul and the command of the four Brazilian Army divisions headquartered in the province . Beginning in 1849 , the Imperial government directly assisted the besieged Uruguayan government of Colorados in Montevideo , and on 6 September 1850 the Uruguayan representative Andres Lamas signed an agreement with Irineu Evangelista de Sousa to transfer money to the Montevideo government through his bank . On 16 March 1851 , the Empire of Brazil openly declared its support of Colorado government of Uruguay against Oribe , something it had been covertly doing for more than two years . This did not please the Argentine government , and it began mobilizing for war . 
 Brazil had also been searching for support against Rosas inside Argentina , with some success . On 1 May 1851 , the province of Entre Rios , still governed by Urquiza , declared to Rosas that " it is the will of its people to re @-@ assume the entire exercise of its own sovereignty and power which had been delegated to the governor of Buenos Aires . " It was followed by the province of Corrientes , governed by Benjamín <unk> , which sent the same message . Brazil encouraged and financially supported both uprisings . One of the reasons for Urquiza 's betrayal of Rosas was a long @-@ running rivalry . Rosas had tried to remove him from power several times since 1845 , suspecting that the caudillo was nurturing designs for his overthrow . This was the trigger for military intervention , and Brazil sent a naval force to the Platine region , basing it near the port of Montevideo . The British Rear admiral John Pascoe Grenfell , a veteran of the Brazilian War of Independence and of the Cisplatine War , was appointed to lead the fleet , which reached Montevideo on 4 May 1851 . His command included 1 frigate , 7 corvettes , 3 brigs and 6 steamships . The Brazilian Armada had a total of 59 vessels of various types in 1851 , including 36 armed sailing ships , 10 armed steamships , 7 unarmed sailing ships and 6 sailing transports . 
 Uruguay , Brazil and the Argentine provinces of Entre Rios and Corrientes joined in an offensive Alliance against Rosas on 29 May 1851 . The text of the treaty declared that the objective was to protect Uruguayan independence , pacify its territory , and expel Oribe 's forces . Urquiza would command the Argentine forces and Eugenio Garzón would lead the Colorado Uruguayans , with both receiving financial and military aid from the Empire of Brazil . 
 This was followed on 2 August 1851 by landings of the first Brazilian detachments in Uruguay , consisting of approximately 300 soldiers of the 6th Battalion of Skirmishers sent to protect Fuerte del Cerro ( Cerro Fort ) . In response , Rosas declared war against Brazil on 18 August 1851 . 
 According to Herrera y <unk> , Rosas would have said , as war approached : " poor Brazilians , I 'm going to make of their Emperor my butler " . 
 = = Stage 1 - Allied invasion of Uruguay = = 
 The Count of Caxias led a Brazilian army of 16 @,@ 200 professional soldiers across the border between Rio Grande do Sul and Uruguay on 4 September 1851 . His force consisted of four divisions , with 6 @,@ 500 infantrymen , 8 @,@ 900 cavalrymen , 800 artillerymen and 26 cannons , a little under half the total Brazilian army ( 37 @,@ 000 men ) ; while another 4 @,@ 000 of his men remained in Brazil to protect its border . 
 The Brazilian Army entered Uruguay in three groups : the main force , consisting of the 1st and 2nd divisions left from Santana do <unk> — around 12 @,@ 000 men under Caxias 's personal command . The second force , under the command of Colonel David Canabarro departed from <unk> , comprising the 4th division , protecting Caxias ' right flank . The third force , the 3rd Division under Brigadier General José Fernandes , left from Jaguarão , protecting Caxias ' left . Canabarro 's 4th Division joined Caxias 's troops shortly after arriving at the Uruguayan town of <unk> , the combined force then joining up with Fernandes just before reaching Montevideo . 
 = = = Defeat of Oribe = = = 
 Meanwhile , the troops of Urquiza and Eugenio Garzón had surrounded the army of Oribe near Montevideo . Their forces numbered roughly 15 @,@ 000 men , almost double Oribe 's 8 @,@ 500 . Realising that the Brazilians were approaching and knowing that there was no hope of victory , Oribe <unk> his troops to surrender without a fight on 19 October , and retreated into seclusion on his farm in Paso del Molino . 
 The Brazilian fleet , with their ships scattered throughout the River Plate and tributaries , prevented the defeated army of Oribe from escaping into Argentina . Urquiza suggested to Grenfell that they should simply kill the resulting prisoners of war , but Grenfell refused to harm any of them . Instead , Oribe 's Argentine soldiers were incorporated into the army of Urquiza , and the Uruguayans into Garzon 's . 
 The Brazilian army easily took the remaining Blanco Uruguayan territory , fending off remnants of Oribe 's troops who attacked its flanks in several skirmishes . On 21 November the representatives of Brazil , Uruguay , Entre Rios and Corrientes then formed another alliance in Montevideo with the objective of " freeing the Argentine people from the oppression it suffers under the tyrant rule of Governor Rosas ” . 
 = = Stage 2 - Allied invasion of Argentina = = 
 = = = Allied army advance = = = 
 Shortly after the surrender of Oribe , the Allied forces split into two groups , the plan being for one force to maneuver upriver and sweep down on Buenos Aires from Santa Fe , while the other would make a landing at the port of Buenos Aires itself . The first of these groups , was composed of Uruguayan and Argentine troops , along with the 1st Division of the Brazilian Army under Brigadier General Manuel Marques de Sousa ( later the Count of Porto Alegre ) . It was initially based in the town of Colonia del Sacramento in the south of Uruguay across the Río de la Plata estuary from the city of Buenos Aires . 
 On 17 December 1851 , a squadron of Brazilian ships , consisting of four steamships , three corvettes and one brig under the command of Grenfell , forced a passage of the Paraná River in the battle which became known as the Passage of the Tonelero . The Argentines had formed a powerful defensive line at The Tonelero Pass , near the cliffs of Acevedo , protected by 16 pieces of artillery and 2 @,@ 000 riflemen under the command of general Lucio Norberto <unk> . The Argentine troops exchanged fire with the Brazilian warships but were unable to prevent from them from progressing upriver . The following day , the Brazilian ships returned and broke their way through The Tonelero 's defenses , carrying the remaining troops of Marques de Sousa 's Brazilian division upstream towards <unk> . This second influx of ships caused <unk> and his soldiers to withdraw in chaos , abandoning their artillery , believing that the Allies were intending to land and attack their positions from the rear . 
 The Allied army continued to make its way to the assembly point at <unk> . Urquiza and his cavalry traveled overland from Montevideo , while the infantry and artillery were carried by Brazilian warships up the Uruguay River . After meeting up , they marched west until they reached the city of Diamante on the east side of the Paraná River in the middle of December 1851 . Eugenio Garzón and his the Uruguayan troops were taken from Montevideo up to Potrero Perez by Brazilian warships and continued on foot until arriving at Diamante on 30 December 1851 , when all the Allied forces were finally reunited . 
 From Diamante contingents were ferried to the other side of the Paraná River , landing at Santa Fé . The Confederate Argentine troops in the region ran away without offering any resistance . The Allied Army , or the “ Grand Army of South America ” as it was officially called by Urquiza , marched on towards Buenos Aires . 
 Meanwhile , the second force , comprising the majority of the Brazilian troops ( about 12 @,@ 000 men ) under the command of Caxias , had remained in Colonia del Sacramento . The Brazilian commander took the steamship Dom Afonso ( named in honor of the late Prince Afonso ) and entered the port at Buenos Aires to select the best place to disembark his troops . He expected to have to defeat the Argentine flotilla anchored there , but the force did nothing to stop him and he safely returned to Sacramento to plan his assault . The attack was aborted , however , when news arrived of the Allied victory at Caseros . 
 = = = Rosas defeated = = = 
 The Allied army had been advancing on the Argentinian capital of Buenos Aires by land , while the Brazilian Army commanded by Caxias planned a supporting attack by sea . On 29 January at the Battle of Alvarez Field the Allied vanguard defeated a force of 4 @,@ 000 Argentines led by two colonels which General Ángel Pacheco had sent to slow down the advance . Pacheco retreated . Two days later , troops under his personal command were defeated at the Battle of Marques Bridge by two allied divisions . On 1 February 1852 , the Allied troops encamped approximately nine kilometers from Buenos Aires . The next day a brief skirmish between the vanguards of both armies ended with a retreat by the Argentines . 
 On 3 February the Allied army encountered the main Argentine force commanded by Rosas himself . On paper , the two sides were well @-@ matched . The Allies included 20 @,@ 000 Argentines , 2 @,@ 000 Uruguayans , 4 @,@ 000 Brazilian elite troops totalling 26 @,@ 000 men and 45 cannon ( 16 @,@ 000 cavalrymen , 9 @,@ 000 infantrymen and 1 @,@ 000 artillerymen ) . On the Argentine side , Rosas had 15 @,@ 000 cavalrymen , 10 @,@ 000 infantrymen and 1 @,@ 000 artillerymen , totalling 26 @,@ 000 men and 60 cannon . Rosas had been able to select the best positions for his army , choosing the high ground on the slopes of a hill at Caseros , which lay on the other side of the Morón creek . His headquarters were based in a mansion at the top of Caseros . 
 The Allied commanders were de Sousa , Manuel Luis Osório ( later the Marquis of Erval ) , Jose Maria <unk> , Jose Miguel Galán ( who replaced Garzón after his unexpected death in December 1851 ) , Urquiza , and the future Argentine presidents Bartolomé Mitre and Domingo Sarmiento — the latter both leading the Argentine Unitarians . These men formed a War Council , and gave orders to commence the attack . Almost immediately the forward units of the two armies began to engage in battle . 
 The Battle of Caseros resulted in a decisive victory for the Allies . Although they started with the inferior position on the battlefield , the Allied soldiers managed to annihilate Rosas 's troops in a fight that lasted for most of the day . A few minutes before the Allied forces reached Rosas ' headquarters , the Argentine dictator escaped the battlefield . Disguised as a sailor , he sought out Robert Gore , British ambassador in Buenos Aires , and requested asylum . The ambassador agreed to have de Rosas and his daughter <unk> taken to the United Kingdom , where he would spend the last twenty years of his life . The official report stated that 600 men on the Allied side had been wounded or died , while the Argentine losses were 1 @,@ 400 killed or wounded and 7 @,@ 000 captured . Given the duration and scale of the battle , however , this may be an underestimate . 
 To mark their victory , the Allied troops marched in triumph through the streets of Buenos Aires . The parades included the Brazilian Army , which insisted that their triumphal procession take place on 20 February , to mark payback for the defeat it had suffered at the Battle of <unk> twenty five years before on that date . The population of Buenos Aires was said to have looked on silently with a combination of shame and hostility as the Brazilians passed . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Brazil = = = 
 The triumph in Caseros was a pivotal military victory for Brazil . The independence of Paraguay and Uruguay was secured , and the planned Argentine invasion of Rio Grande do Sul was blocked . In a period of three years , the Empire of Brazil had destroyed any possibility of reconstituting a state encompassing the territories of old Viceroyalty of the Rio de la Plata , a goal cherished by many in Argentina since independence . Brazil 's army and fleet had accomplished what Great Britain and France , the great powers of that time , had not achieved through interventions by their powerful navies . This represented a watershed for the history of the region as it not only ushered in Imperial hegemony over the Platine region , but , according to Brazilian historian J. F. Maya <unk> , also in the rest of South America . The War of the Triple Alliance eighteen years later would only be a confirmation of Brazilian dominance . 
 Hispanic American nations from Mexico to Argentina suffered from coups d 'état , revolts , dictatorships , political upheavals , economic instability , civil wars and secessions . Brazil , on the other hand , came out of the conflict with its system of constitutional monarchy strengthened and the cessation of internal revolts . The problematic province of Rio Grande do Sul had actively participated in the war effort . As a consequence , there was increased identification with Brazil among its populace , quelling of separatist feeling , and an easier and effective integration with the rest of the nation . Internal stability also allowed Brazil to begin assuming a respected place on the international scene , coinciding with the parallel emergence of the United States which was only now establishing its own borders . The European powers perceived in the Empire of Brazil a rare exception in a continent afflicted by civil wars and dictatorships . Brazil entered into a period of great economic , scientific and cultural prosperity , lasting from 1850 until the end of its monarchy . 
 = = = Argentina = = = 
 Soon after the Battle of Caseros the San Nicolás Agreement was signed . It was meant to comply with the constitutional mandate of the Federal pact that presided over the Argentine Confederation , convening a Constitutional Assembly to meet in Santa Fe . This agreement was not accepted by the province of Buenos Aires , since it reduced its influence and power over the other provinces . Buenos Aires thereupon seceded from the confederation , thus Argentina got divided into two rival , independent states which fought to establish dominance . On the one side were the Federalists of the Argentine Confederation , led by Justo José de Urquiza . On the other , the <unk> of Buenos Aires . The civil war was only brought to an end with the decisive victory of Buenos Aires over the Federation at the 1861 Battle of Pavón . The <unk> liberal leader Bartolomé Mitre was elected the first President of a united Argentine Republic in 1862 . 
 = = = Paraguay and Uruguay = = = 
 With the opening of the Platine rivers , Paraguay now found it possible to contract with European technicians and Brazilian specialists to aid in its development . Unhindered access to the outside world also enabled it to import more advanced military technology . During the greater part of the 1850s , the dictator Carlos López harassed Brazilian vessels attempting to freely navigate the Paraguay River . López feared that the province of Mato Grosso might become a base from which an invasion from Brazil could be launched . This dispute was also leverage with the Imperial government for acceptance of his territorial demands in the region . The nation also experienced difficulties in delimiting its borders with Argentina which wanted the whole Gran Chaco region : a demand which Paraguay could not accept , as this would entail surrendering more than half of its national territory . 
 The end of the Platine War did not bring a halt to conflict in the region . Peace remained out of reach in Uruguay , which remained unstable and in a state of constant crisis due to continuing internecine strife between the Blancos and Colorados . Border disputes , power struggles among diverse regional factions , and attempts to establish regional and internal influence would eventually spark the Uruguayan War as well as the later Paraguayan War . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = Stan Benjamin = 
 Alfred Stanley " Stan " Benjamin ( May 20 , 1914 – December 24 , 2009 ) was a right fielder in Major League Baseball for five seasons ; four with the Philadelphia Phillies ( 1939 – 1942 ) , of the National League ( NL ) , and one with the Cleveland Indians ( 1945 ) , of the American League ( AL ) . The 6 ' 2 " , 194 lb . Benjamin batted and threw right @-@ handed , and was born in Framingham , Massachusetts . After graduating from high school , he attended Western Maryland College , now known as McDaniel College , where he played baseball , basketball , and football . 
 In addition to his major league playing career , he played in minor league baseball for ten seasons . He began at the age of 23 , with the Thomasville Orioles of the Georgia – Florida League in 1937 , and finished as the player @-@ manager for the Fresno Cardinals of the California League in 1948 . During that time , he played in 955 minor league games , and batted .304 , and hit 52 home runs . In the early 1940s , he was an assistant football coach at Northeastern University . Later , during his minor league career , he began coaching high school football , part @-@ time , in his home town of Framingham , and then full @-@ time once his playing and managing career ended . 
 Starting in 1948 , he was the head baseball coach and assistant football coach for Greenfield High School in Greenfield , Massachusetts , and took over the head football coaching duties in 1958 . He held both positions , in addition to being a physical education teacher for a local middle school and part @-@ time basketball referee until 1964 . In 1965 , he was hired as a talent scout for the Houston Astros , a job he held for nearly 40 years . It was his evaluation of Jeff Bagwell that led the Astros to acquire him from the Boston Red Sox for Larry Andersen . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born on May 20 , 1914 , in Framingham , Massachusetts , Benjamin graduated from Framingham High School in 1932 , and later attended Western Maryland College , later renamed McDaniel College , on an athletic scholarship . He played football , basketball , and baseball and claimed to have once competed against Ohio State University track star and Olympic gold medalist Jesse Owens . When he was an end on the college 's football team , he was presented with the game ball autographed by his teammates after a 12 – 6 victory over Boston College . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues = = = 
 Benjamin signed his first professional baseball contract with the Thomasville Orioles of the Class D minor league baseball Georgia – Florida League in 1937 . He played for this team for the 1937 and 1938 seasons as their third baseman . In 1937 , he batted .310 , and hit one home run . In 97 games played during the 1938 season , he batted .348 , hit 32 doubles , 12 triples , and three home runs . For the 1939 season , he joined the Chattanooga Lookouts of the Class A1 Southern Association as an outfielder ; he batted .323 , and hit 27 doubles , eight triples , and five home runs in 135 games played . It was at the conclusion of this minor league season , that he became a late @-@ season acquisition of the Philadelphia Phillies . 
 = = = Major leagues = = = 
 Benjamin made his Major League Baseball debut on September 16 , 1939 , with the Phillies , and appeared in 12 games , fielding a variety of positions , including all three outfield positions , and third base as well . He had 50 at bats that season , and collected seven hits for a <unk> batting average . 
 The next season , he was optioned by the Phillies to the Baltimore Orioles of the Class AA International League , one of their minor league affiliates , as an outfielder . During the 1940 season , he played in 108 games , batted .304 , and hit 16 doubles , seven triples , and 11 home runs . At the conclusion of this season , he was a late @-@ season call @-@ up by the Phillies . He played in eight games and had two hits in nine at bats for a .222 batting average . 
 His most productive major league season came in 1941 , when he played a full season with the Phillies . He posted career @-@ highs in home runs ( 3 ) , RBIs ( 27 ) , runs scored ( 47 ) , hits ( 113 ) , doubles ( 20 ) , triples ( 7 ) , stolen bases ( 17 ) and games played ( 129 ) . In a game against the New York Giants on June 28 , Benjamin singled to bring home the game @-@ winning run in bottom of the 12th inning . On July 1 , he again produced a game @-@ winning single , this time in the bottom of the tenth inning , defeating the Brooklyn Dodgers . He began the 1942 season with the Phillies and batted .224 in 78 games before being sold , on August 5 , to the Louisville Colonels , a Class AA American Association affiliate of the Boston Red Sox . 
 = = = Return to the minors = = = 
 Benjamin finished the 1942 season with the Colonels as their third baseman . He appeared in 38 games , hit three home runs , and had a .303 batting average . Before the 1943 season , the Red Sox were in need of more outfielders , so manager Joe Cronin gave Benjamin a tryout in mid @-@ March ; however , he was not signed , and he continued to play with the Colonels , moving back to the outfield . In 123 games played , he hit just .237 , and did not hit a home run . 
 He returned to the Baltimore Orioles of the International League for the 1944 season , which had switched its major league affiliation to the Cleveland Indians . He enjoyed a resurgence in his offensive statistics that season , as his batting average rose to .301 , and he hit 24 doubles , eight triples , and 12 home runs in 133 games played . The Indians called up Benjamin for the 1945 season , and even though he was part of their regular roster , he appeared in only 14 games , batting .333 . On March 26 , 1946 , he was released by the Cleveland Indians , and he would never appear in another major league game . In his five @-@ season major league career , Benjamin hit .229 with five home runs and 41 RBIs in 241 games . 
 He played for and managed the Nazareth Cement Dusters of the Class D North Atlantic League . He played several different positions that season , including two games at pitcher . He batted .312 and hit four home runs during his only season with the Cement Dusters . Benjamin played for several different teams in 1947 , beginning the season with the Houston Buffaloes , a St. Louis Cardinals affiliate , but later joined the San Antonio Missions , a St. Louis Browns affiliate . Both teams were in the Texas League . Late in the season , the Browns promoted him to their Class AAA team , the Toledo Mud Hens of the American Association . In 1948 , he played for , and managed , the Fresno Cardinals of the Class C California League , an affiliate of the St. Louis Cardinals . In 125 games played that season , he batted .326 and hit 27 doubles , five triples , and nine home runs . After the season completed , he retired as a player . 
 = = Post @-@ playing career = = 
 = = = High school athletics = = = 
 After his baseball playing career ended , he moved to Greenfield , Massachusetts , and became an assistant football coach at Greenfield High School , while also working as a physical education teacher at a nearby middle school . Benjamin was Greenfield 's head football coach from 1958 to 1964 , as well as the head baseball coach from 1948 to 1964 . He coached the baseball team to several Western Massachusetts championships . Among the other duties , he also refereed high school and college basketball games in New England , as well as working as an assistant football coach at Deerfield Academy in 1964 and 1965 . He was also an assistant football coach for Northeastern University in the early 1940s . 
 = = = Scouting career = = = 
 Benjamin began his career as a talent scout for the Houston Astros in 1965 , and stayed in that capacity until retiring in 2002 . During his time with the Astros franchise he scouted amateur players in the New England region , as well as the American League East teams and their minor league affiliates . He later became the team 's scouting supervisor for the Northeast . He also scouted major league teams during spring training in Florida and spent many summer evenings evaluating some of the nation 's best college players in the Cape Cod Baseball League . 
 In 1970 , Mike Flanagan was suffering arm problems , and many scouts decided that he did not have a future baseball career , but he could hit well , so Benjamin suggested to the Astros that they could use him in that capacity and wait to see if his arm would recuperate . The Astros drafted Flanagan , but he decided not to sign , and instead attended University of Massachusetts Amherst on a baseball scholarship . During the 1990 season , the Astros were approached by the Boston Red Sox , who needed pitching and were interested in Larry Andersen . Benjamin recommended that they ask for Red Sox minor leaguer Jeff Bagwell in return . The Astros were hesitant initially due to Bagwell 's low home run totals , but Benjamin convinced them by explaining that his numbers were deceiving due to the large ballpark that he played in . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Benjamin was married to his wife Barbara , maiden name Hall , from 1941 until her death 54 years later in 1995 . She was attending Framingham State Teachers College when they met , and school rules forbade female students from getting married or they faced expulsion . Town records didn 't publish marriages until after January 1 , each year , so the couple got married at 1 a.m. on New Year 's Day 1941 at her home in Raynham , Massachusetts . This prevented the school from learning about her marriage until after she had graduated . The Benjamins had one son , Richard , and three daughters , Nancy , Janice , and Joanne ; as well as 12 grandchildren , and 11 great @-@ grandchildren . 
 Benjamin died at the age of 95 , of heart failure , in his daughter 's home on December 24 , 2009 , in Harwich , Massachusetts . He is interred at Green River Cemetery in Greenfield , Massachusetts . 
 Benjamin was a member of both the McDaniel College and Massachusetts Baseball Coaches Association hall of fame , and in 2008 , he received a special recognition award from the Professional Baseball Scouts Foundation . Tal Smith , Astros ' president of baseball operations , said of Benjamin , " Stan 's positive evaluation of Bagwell was definitely a catalyst in our taking him ... He was a vital cog in our organization who had the ability to convey his opinion in a precise manner . You always knew where you stood with him . He was a longtime employee , but more important , a longtime friend . Smith also called him a " keen judge of talent . " 
 = Donald Trump ( Last Week Tonight ) = 
 " Donald Trump " is a segment of the HBO series Last Week Tonight with John Oliver , devoted to American businessman Donald Trump . It was first aired on February 28 , 2016 , as part of the third episode of the third season . During the 22 @-@ minute segment , comedian John Oliver discusses Trump 's 2016 presidential campaign and his long career in business . He also reveals that the Trump family name was changed at one point from the ancestral name " Drumpf " . 
 The segment , which is the show 's most viewed to date , popularized the term Donald Drumpf , and started a campaign urging viewers to " Make Donald Drumpf Again " – a play on Trump 's own campaign slogan , " Make America Great Again " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The 22 @-@ minute segment about Donald Trump was delivered by John Oliver on February 28 , 2016 , during the third episode of the third season of Last Week Tonight with John Oliver . The comedian introduces the topic of Trump 's presidential campaign by referring to it as " America 's back mole " , saying " It may have seemed harmless a year ago , but now that it 's become frighteningly bigger , it 's no longer wise to ignore it . " 
 Oliver then heavily criticizes Trump . He calls Trump a " serial liar " , and says that Trump had lied many times in the past , has made dubious and yet @-@ substantiated claims regarding his net worth , and has had " a string of broken business ventures [ including some of his real estate properties ] and the support of a former Klan leader , who he can 't decide whether or not to condemn " . Oliver mentions that Trump claimed to have declined an invitation to appear on Last Week Tonight despite never having been invited ; that Trump was not self @-@ funding his 2016 presidential campaign , despite Trump having said otherwise ; that Trump University ( among the defunct business ventures spearheaded by Trump that were cited in the segment ) misled people , since it was not a university , and despite Trump 's statement to the contrary , the related lawsuits were still pending ; and that Ivanka Trump , Donald 's daughter , had said – in an interview in the 2003 documentary Born Rich – that her father once portrayed himself as poorer than a homeless person . 
 The comedian also says that Trump had failed to repudiate former Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke in interviews with various Sunday morning talk shows on the day of the episode 's broadcast , after Duke advocated his white supremacist supporters the previous week to endorse Trump , due to the Republican candidate 's campaign rhetoric that have been criticized as bigoted towards Hispanics ( regarding his plan to reform the American immigration system , specifically by stemming illegal immigration across the U.S.-Mexico border through the construction of a border wall , and his statement in his introductory campaign speech suggesting that Mexico was importing drug dealers and criminals into the U.S. ) and Muslims ( in which Trump advocated a ban on Muslims seeking to enter the United States ) . In total , according to Oliver , Trump was lying three @-@ fourths ( 76 % ) of the time , citing a Politifact study of the statements made by Trump since he launched his Presidential campaign . He calls Trump inconsistent in the political views he expressed during and prior to his campaign , saying that " he 's been pro choice and pro @-@ life ; he 's been for and against assault weapon bans ; in favor of both bringing in Syrian refugees and deporting them out of the country , " as well as having advocated ( in a phone @-@ in interview on Fox & Friends ) committing a war crime by killing families of suspected terrorists as part of his strategy to defeat ISIS . 
 Oliver states that Trump had frequently threatened to file lawsuits against various people , but had never actually filed these lawsuits . He says that Trump was also sensitive about the size of his fingers due to an incident several years prior , in which Trump had been accosted about their size in a 1988 Spy feature piece criticizing him as a " short @-@ fingered <unk> , " resulting in him sending the now @-@ defunct magazine 's editor , E. Graydon Carter ( who discussed the story in a November 2015 Vanity Fair article ) , envelopes enclosed with a photo of Trump at various times in subsequent years that highlighted his fingers in a circular gold Sharpie marking to dispute the piece 's claims . Discussion of Trump 's " short fingers " was later covered by other media , but in a Twitter post two days after the segment 's original showing , Trump said that he was not aware that people knew about his " short fingers " . 
 = = = " Make Donald Drumpf Again " = = = 
 In the final portion of the segment , Oliver urges viewers to refer to Trump as " Drumpf " , the Trump family 's ancestral name . Oliver previously pointed out that Trump had repeatedly mocked Jewish @-@ American comedian Jon Stewart by referring to him as " Jonathan Leibowitz " , the comedian 's birth name . Oliver , an alumnus of Stewart 's Daily Show , justified the " Drumpf " epithet by insisting , paraphrasing Trump 's mockery of Stewart , " [ Trump ] should be proud of his heritage ! " Oliver opines that this name is much more reflective of Trump 's true nature , and says that if viewers wanted to vote for " the charismatic guy promising to make America great again " , they should " stop and take a moment to imagine how [ they ] would feel if [ they ] just met a guy named Donald Drumpf " . Furthermore , he says of the name , " Drumpf is much less magical . It 's the sound produced when a morbidly obese pigeon flies into the window of a foreclosed Old Navy . ... It 's the sound of a bottle of store @-@ brand root beer falling off the shelf in a gas station <unk> . " 
 A trademark application for the word " Drumpf " was filed with the United States Patent and Trademark Office by a company called Drumpf Industries , an LLC based in Delaware ; Oliver stated that he had trademarked that term . Oliver also released a Google Chrome browser extension called " <unk> " after the segment , which changes all instances of " Trump " to " Drumpf " on webpages . Oliver created the hashtag " # <unk> " during the segment . He also registered the web domain " <unk> " , selling baseball caps with the slogan " Make Donald Drumpf Again , " modeled after Trump 's own " Make America Great Again " hat . The website sold out of 35 @,@ 000 of these hats by March 27 . 
 = = Reception and aftermath = = 
 Immediately after the segment had aired , web searches for " Donald Drumpf " , a term mentioned in the segment 's final minutes , went viral . By March 1 , on which the " Super Tuesday " primaries were held , Google Searches for " Donald Drumpf " had surpassed those for " Ted Cruz " and " Marco Rubio , " Trump 's fellow candidates for the Republican presidential nomination at the time . 
 By the morning of March 4 , six days after the segment 's original air date , the " <unk> " Chrome extension had received over 333 @,@ 800 downloads and 5 @,@ 800 reviews . A similar add @-@ on for Mozilla Firefox with the same name had thousands of users . The extensions resulted in multiple outlets accidentally replacing Trump 's name . The American Jewish Congress announced the results of a poll of their members that referred to the candidate as " Donald Drumpf " , which they later acknowledged was an accident caused by someone 's use of the extension . Wired magazine published multiple articles replacing Trump 's name with the phrase " Someone with Tiny Hands " in reference to the " Short @-@ Fingered <unk> " meme , a result of another Chrome extension . 
 Reacting to the segment , Daniel Victor of The New York Times commented that " Donald Drumpf " was " a funny label " , but stated that " some fairness might be in order " . Victor stated that the Trump family had changed its name in the 17th century , and pointed out that many American entertainers and politicians , including two presidents ( Bill Clinton and Gerald Ford ) and a rival presidential candidate ( Hillary Clinton ) , had changed their names . CNET 's Chris <unk> called the segment a " lengthy excoriation " of Trump , and commented that Oliver had " a greater purpose " than " mere satire " , which was to influence Americans to care enough to vote against Trump . S.I. Rosenbaum , a freelance journalist with the The Washington Post , was more critical , saying that making fun of foreign names " <unk> in the very xenophobia that is Trump 's sick stock in trade " . Rosenbaum explained that : " We have a long history of this sort of thing in this country of immigrants — bestowing foreign @-@ sounding names to imply that the target isn 't really an American . " 
 <unk> , which received its namesake from Oliver 's segment , is a Twitterbot created at MIT which uses neural network technology and posts tweets to Twitter in an imitation of Trump . " The algorithm essentially learns an underlying structure from all the data it gets , and then comes up with different combinations of the data that reflect the structure that it was taught , " says the bot 's creator . He stated that if there were more data available , or even all the data that Facebook 's AI system can analyze , then the neural network would be better able to mimic the presidential candidate . 
 Within eight days of the original broadcast , the YouTube video of the segment had surpassed 19 million views , making it Oliver 's most watched segment . By comparison , the previous episode 's segment had a little over four million views on YouTube by that date . By March 8 , ten days after the broadcast , the website had sold over 35 @,@ 000 " Make Donald Drumpf Again " hats , comprising all of the inventory on hand . Other merchandise satirizing Trump had been sold by other retailers as well . By the end of March , the segment had been viewed 23 @.@ 3 million times on YouTube and 62 million times on Facebook , making its viewership " a record for any piece of HBO content . " 
 = = = Subsequent segments = = = 
 In much of a subsequent segment on March 20 , 2016 , three weeks after the original episode aired , Oliver talked about Drumpf 's proposed border wall between United States and Mexico , although the YouTube video 's description of the episode mentioned " Donald Drumpf 's " plan to build the wall . In that episode , titled " Border Wall " , Oliver explained some details of his criticism of Drumpf 's border wall idea , specifically the inconsistent estimates of the proposed wall 's construction cost as well as a federal law that prohibits building structures that may disrupt the flow of Rio Grande and other U.S. river basins ( citing an existing wall along the U.S.-Mexico border that had to be built several miles inland on the Texas side of the border because of such regulations ) . 
 In part of another subsequent segment on June 5 , 2016 , three months after " Donald Drumpf " first aired , Oliver talked about Drumpf 's business tactics at Drumpf University . 
 = = Name change timing dispute = = 
 While there was agreement among commentators that Drumpf was Trump 's ancestral name , and that neither Donald Trump nor his father were named Drumpf , they disagreed on whether the family name was changed in the 17th century or well into the 19th century , in 1885 . Kim <unk> of <unk> , a popular rumor @-@ debunking website , reported that Drumpf was indeed the original family name , but the writers at Snopes were unable to determine what year the name was changed to Trump . 
 Some commentators stated that the name change happened in 1885 , and that Donald Trump 's grandfather , Frederick Trump , was formerly named Friedrich Drumpf . However , other , published sources stated that the name change occurred in the 17th century . In her 2001 book The Trumps : Three Generations of Builders and a Presidential Candidate , biographer Gwenda Blair wrote that the Trumps ' family name was changed during the Thirty Years ' War , as evidenced by the name of John Philip Trump , who lived in the 17th century . Blair also wrote that Frederick Trump 's original name was Friedrich Trump , and his father , born in the 19th century , was Johannes Trump . This position was endorsed by The Boston Globe , as well as by Daniel Victor , a reporter for The New York Times who wrote , " Despite mistaken impressions , Mr. Trump and his recent relatives had nothing to do with the surname change . Mr. Oliver himself was careful to refer to a ' prescient ancestor . ' " Kate Connolly of The Guardian — who visited <unk> , where Trump 's grandfather was born — referred to Frederick as " Friedrich Trump , " saying that " the Trump family name has had various permutations over the past five hundred years , according to the local church register " ; she did not mention the name " Drumpf " , however . 
 Several sources reported that Friedrich , his father , and his aunt were all named Trump , thus placing the name change to before the 18th century . For instance , genealogy organization <unk> provided information on Friedrich Trump , listing his father as Johann Ii Trump , while a genealogist at About.com listed Donald Trump 's grandfather as Friederich Trump and great @-@ grandfather as Christian Johannes Trump . In his 2013 book America 's <unk> : The Compulsive Energy That Built a Nation , Joshua Kendall wrote that Donald Trump 's great @-@ grandfather and great @-@ <unk> ( Frederick 's father and aunt ) were called John Trump and Charlotte Luise Trump , respectively . 
 = John Edward Brownlee = 
 John Edward Brownlee , QC ( August 27 , 1883 – July 15 , 1961 ) was the fifth Premier of Alberta , Canada , serving from 1925 until 1934 . Born in Port Ryerse , Ontario , he studied history and political science at the University of Toronto 's Victoria College before moving west to Calgary to become a lawyer . His clients included the United Farmers of Alberta ( UFA ) ; through his connection with that lobby group , he was involved in founding the United Grain Growers ( UGG ) . 
 After the UFA entered electoral politics and won the 1921 election , new premier Herbert Greenfield asked Brownlee to serve as his attorney @-@ general . Brownlee agreed and was elected to the Legislative Assembly of Alberta in a by @-@ election in the riding of Ponoka . As attorney @-@ general , he was an important member of Greenfield 's government . He was closely involved in its most important activities , including efforts to better the lot of farmers living in Alberta 's drought @-@ ridden south , divest itself of money @-@ losing railways , and win jurisdiction over natural resources from the federal government . When a group of UFA backbenchers grew frustrated with Greenfield 's weak leadership , they asked Brownlee to replace him . Brownlee eventually agreed , and became premier in 1925 . 
 Brownlee enjoyed early success as premier : he handily won the 1926 election , signed an agreement with the federal government transferring control over Alberta 's natural resources to its provincial government , sold the struggling government railways to the Canadian National and Canadian Pacific railway companies , and ran a series of balanced budgets . Things became more difficult with the advent of the Great Depression . Brownlee was unable to restore the province to prosperity in the face of a global economic crisis , and reluctantly ran budget deficits . Political radicalism increased , and Brownlee found his orthodox approach to political economy under attack . 
 In 1934 , Vivian MacMillan , a family friend , sued Brownlee for seduction . Brownlee denied any sexual relationship , but the jury found in MacMillan 's favour . Though the judge disregarded the jury 's verdict , the trial 's lurid testimony and the stigma resulting from the jury 's finding forced Brownlee 's resignation as premier . He ran for re @-@ election in Ponoka in the 1935 provincial election but was defeated , as William Aberhart 's Social Credit League swept the province . Once out of politics , Brownlee resumed the practice of law and joined the management of the UGG , serving as its president and general manager from 1948 until shortly before his death in 1961 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 John Edward Brownlee was born August 27 , 1883 in Port Ryerse , Ontario , to William " Bill " James Brownlee ( 1856 – 1934 ) and Christina Brownlee ( née Shaw ) ( c . 1860 – 1941 ) . He was named for his maternal grandfather , miller John Shaw , and paternal grandfather , carpenter Edward James Brownlee . Christina Brownlee was a former school mistress and William James Brownlee was the operator of the Port Ryerse general store . John Brownlee had one sister , Maude , born September 12 , 1888 . The Brownlees lived in the general store building , and it was here that John spent the happiest times of his childhood : he much preferred his parents ' books , their political discussions with neighbours , and the details of their business to life outside the store . One anecdote has the village children , displeased with his serious temperament , throwing him into Lake Erie . By the age of seven , John was assisting at the store with such tasks as mixing butter from the different dairies with which his father dealt to produce a standardized blend . 
 By the end of the 1880s , Port Ryerse was dying out . The advent of railways was making tiny lake ports obsolete , and in Port Ryerse 's case this obsolescence was hastened by the town mill burning down in August 1890 . Against this backdrop , the family moved to Bradshaw , in Lambton County . There , John began school and attended Sunday school at the village 's Methodist church . He was the only pupil at his tiny school not from a farm ; he later claimed that this exposure to farmers gave him an early understanding of their concerns . He also became involved with his church 's young people 's club , which put on speaking programs . He was by nature shy , serious , and introverted , which made these programs a challenge at first ; however , he found that he was able to succeed at them through focus and discipline . 
 In September 1897 , Brownlee began high school . The closest high school was in Sarnia , too distant for a daily commute , so at the age of fourteen Brownlee boarded away from his family , seeing them only during holidays and occasional weekends . He was a good student — described by his instructors as " diligent " , if not brilliant — but was not a social success , being too studious for many of his peers . He wrote his departmental examinations in July 1900 and graduated shortly thereafter . 
 = = = Early professional career = = = 
 After graduating high school , Brownlee travelled with his father on a sales trip through northern Ontario , and otherwise assisted with the operation of the family business . His family expected him to become a teacher and , in September 1901 , just after his eighteenth birthday , he enrolled at Sarnia Model School . There , Brownlee completed a fifteen @-@ week program that included such subjects as school management , pedagogy , school law , reading instruction , and hygiene . He graduated December 12 , 1901 , second in his twenty @-@ person class , and within a month was one of two teachers at Bradshaw 's school . 
 He fast gained a reputation as a competent instructor : his old work ethic served him well , and his seriousness , cool blue @-@ grey eyes , and six foot four frame combined to give him an impressive presence . His $ 400 per year salary did not satisfy his ambition , and in the spring of 1904 , after two and a half years on the job , he decided that he wanted a university education . His teaching salary was not sufficient to finance this , so he spent the summer of 1904 selling a one volume encyclopaedia in the newly settled areas around Rapid City , Manitoba . Besides providing him with the income he required — he was a patient , effective salesman and later boasted that he was never thrown off of a farm — the job gave the now 21 @-@ year @-@ old Brownlee his first glimpse of Western Canada . Returning to Ontario at the summer 's end , he enrolled at Victoria College at the University of Toronto . 
 = = = University = = = 
 In Toronto , Brownlee pursued an honours program with specializations in history and political science . Besides these chosen subjects , he was required to study mathematics , biology , English literature , composition , Latin , and two additional languages — despite having some knowledge of French , he chose German and Hebrew . He continued his trend of diligent scholarship , and earned As in all subjects his first year except for Latin , German , and mathematics , in which he received Bs . The trend continued , and in his third year he was among the top five in his class in all subjects except economics , in which he was eighth . As he became more involved in extracurricular pursuits , these grades fell ; after his fourth and final year , he graduated with III Class Honours , leaving him out of the top tier of students . His professors included historian George Wrong , whom Brownlee held in high esteem . 
 Brownlee was involved in a wide array of extracurricular pursuits . Chief among these were the Union Literary Society ( dubbed " the Lit " ) , Acta Victoriana ( the college 's literary journal ) , and " the Bob " ( a satirical revue ) . The first of these allowed him to hone his skills at formal debate ; he earned a reputation as " one of the more effective although not the most dramatic of speakers " . In his involvement with the journal , he developed his business skills : in his second year he was named assistant business manager , and he was promoted to business manager in his fourth year . His financial management of Acta Victoriana , along with that of the college glee club ( for which he also served as business manager during his fourth year , organizing a ten @-@ day tour of the Niagara region ) , earned him accolades . For the Bob , Brownlee temporarily abandoned his seriousness to write skits poking fun at the college and his classmates ; these won good reviews , with the Acta Victoriana declaring the 1908 edition , which Brownlee headed , " one of the best ever " . The summer following his third year , he attended the Conference of College Young Men 's Associations at Niagara @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Lake , where he attended Bible study classes and heard guest speakers encourage him to pursue a career in the clergy . 
 Brownlee 's summers in university were spent selling stereoscopic viewers in England and magazine subscriptions in Toronto . He also derived a salary in his fourth year as business manager of the Acta Victoriana . These sources of income allowed him to rent a small room in a private home , and to subscribe to a meal plan at a local eatery for C $ 2 @.@ 50 per week . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 During Brownlee 's convocation in 1908 , he sneaked off to go canoeing in the Humber River with a female classmate , Isabella <unk> . Upon their return , they announced that they were engaged . The news stunned friends of both , none of whom was aware of any romance between the two ; moreover , the apparent spontaneity of the engagement seemed at odds with Brownlee 's reputation for seriousness and caution . The engagement did not last , and the following winter Brownlee met and began to court Florence Edy , an arts student at McMaster College . In the summer of 1909 , Edy moved with her family to Calgary ; Brownlee , for a combination of personal and professional reasons , soon followed . The pair was married December 23 , 1912 , at the Toronto home of Edy 's sister Blanche . A honeymoon trip back to Calgary via Chicago followed . 
 Brownlee and his wife had two sons : John Edy Brownlee was born December 1915 , and Alan Marshall Brownlee was born September 1917 . Florence 's pregnancy with Alan , combined with a bout of poor health before it , made her a virtual invalid in subsequent years . This was exacerbated by the 1919 birth and death in infancy of a daughter . Also in 1919 , Brownlee visited his family in Ontario ; he returned to Alberta with his sister , Maude , who assisted Florence with the care of her children . Soon after , a full @-@ time maid was hired . 
 While John Brownlee relished life in Alberta , Florence missed her friends and family in Ontario . Her own health was only made worse by worry about her sons ' : John was perpetually nervous , and Alan was high @-@ strung and sickly . It did not help that , beginning in 1921 , her husband spent the work week in Edmonton , commuting home to Calgary only for the weekends . This situation continued until 1923 , when the family moved to Edmonton 's Garneau region . In 1926 , on the way home from a visit east , Florence Brownlee and her sons were examined at the Mayo Clinic , where all three were given clean bills of health ; Florence in particular was advised to " resume a more active life " . 
 Although Brownlee 's public image was of a severe and humourless technocrat , in private he allowed himself some levity . Christmas morning 1923 , the Brownlee boys awoke to find footprints of coal dust leading from the fireplace to the stairs and a handwritten note from Santa Claus apologizing for the mess and explaining that he had been searching for one of his reindeer . It transpired that he had mistaken one of Florence 's feet , emerging from the covers at the foot of her bed , for an antler . On another occasion , Brownlee reacted to his sons ' displeasure at leaving his parents ' cat in Ontario by acquiring a large bloodhound , which he himself came to enjoy . 
 = = Legal career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 At the time of Brownlee 's graduation from Victoria College , the path of entry to his chosen profession , law , was through three years of articling instead of law school . Brownlee and Victoria classmate Fred Albright resolved to go west ; after narrowing the choice to either Calgary or Vancouver , the former was selected on the basis that its legal community was less established , and it offered better prospects to young lawyers without significant capital . There , Brownlee was articled to Lougheed , Bennett , Allison & McLaws , whose partners included Sir James Lougheed and R. B. Bennett . Brownlee became quite close to Bennett ; the future Prime Minister often visited him after hours while Brownlee was studying , and used his honed memory and impressive oratorical skills to give the younger man detailed lectures on whatever area of law he was reading about , illustrated by precise and invariably accurate references to cases . Despite his relationship with Bennett , Brownlee was dissatisfied with the work he was being given , and he moved to Muir , Jephson and Adams , where he hoped to practice more commercial law . There he benefited from the tutelage of James Muir , who spent hours finding precise citations relevant to Brownlee 's studies , and then left the <unk> open to the appropriate page for Brownlee to find the next morning . 
 On December 16 , 1912 , Brownlee was called to the Alberta Bar . He began work as an associate with Muir , Jephson and Adams ; in 1914 he was made partner . He took advantage of his membership in Victoria College 's newly founded Calgary alumni branch to build professional connections . On the outbreak of World War I , Brownlee did not enlist ; his biographer , Lakeland College historian Franklin Foster , speculates that this may have been because of his eyesight , but notes that he did not involve himself in patriotic fundraising or volunteer work and questions whether he " completely shared the values and ideals of his generation " . 
 = = = Farmers ' lawyer = = = 
 One of Muir , Jephson and Adams ' major clients was a new agricultural lobby organization called the United Farmers of Alberta ( UFA ) , and it was with this group that Brownlee began to work most closely . Among his first tasks for the UFA was to assist with the creation of a province @-@ wide farmer @-@ owned company to own and operate the province 's grain elevators . Early in 1913 , he was part of a delegation to lobby the provincial government of Arthur Sifton to grant a charter to such a company ; Sifton was cognizant of the political power of the UFA , and quickly incorporated the Alberta Farmers ' Cooperative Elevator Company ( AFCEC ) Limited , but refused the farmers ' request to guarantee bank loans to the new company . These guarantees were instead received from the Grain Growers ' Grain Company ( GGG ) , a Manitoba @-@ based equivalent of the AFCEC . 
 Brownlee became the AFCEC 's lawyer , and in that capacity dealt with lawsuits against the company alleging incompetence on the part of its general manager and fraud on the part of a former auditor . His most important work for the AFCEC , however , was in merging it with the GGG to form the United Grain Growers ( UGG ) . In 1916 , new AFCEC president Cecil Rice @-@ Jones began to advocate the amalgamation of western Canada 's farmer @-@ controlled grain elevator companies . The Saskatchewan Co @-@ operative Elevator Company was uninterested , leaving the AFCEC and the GGG as the two potential partners . After accompanying Rice @-@ Jones to a meeting with Alberta Public Works Minister Charles Stewart , Brownlee initially found himself in agreement with Stewart 's belief that the companies ' shareholders would not accept amalgamation , and that a holding company should instead be created to run both companies ' affairs . After further study , however , he changed his mind and pursued the amalgamation with his typical focus . He reviewed the two companies ' corporate charters , and found that the GGG 's prevented it from either selling out to another company or acquiring sufficient capitalization to buy out the AFCEC . The charter could only be amended by the Parliament of Canada , and the GGG was concerned that any request for amendment would lead eastern Canadian financial interests to successfully lobby for a weakening of farmers ' rights . A meeting of both companies ' boards at the GGG 's Winnipeg offices nevertheless reached the reluctant conclusion that such a request was necessary for amalgamation . Though Brownlee continued to fear resistance from shareholders , both companies ' annual general meetings approved the proposal . Brownlee was heavily involved at both meetings , fielding questions from shareholders about legal ramifications and serving on ad hoc subcommittees to study aspects of the proposal . Once the proposal was approved , he drew up the necessary agreements , bylaws , stock certificates , and other instruments . The UGG came into existence September 1 , 1917 . 
 As lawyer for the UGG , Brownlee began to sympathize with the prevailing farmers ' view that the eastern Canadian business establishment was hostile to their interests ( for example , when the UGG wanted to sell twine , no manufacturer would supply it ) . He recommended that the UGG reduce farmers ' reliance on the eastern establishment by expanding its operations into insurance , investment , and real estate . The result was the United Grain Growers Securities Ltd . He also helped the UGG quietly sell the stock it held in the Home Bank when UGG directors began to doubt the bank 's soundness ; this subtlety was considered essential , as the directors were concerned that airing their doubts publicly would make the bank 's failure a self @-@ fulfilling prophecy . When UGG Assistant General Manager J. R. Murray found an interested buyer , Brownlee advised Murray against insisting on an intricate written sales contract for fear that the buyer would sense the directors ' concerns . His advice was heeded , and the sale was concluded December 29 , 1919 . The bank failed less than four years later . 
 In July 1919 Brownlee left Muir , Jephson and Adams to accept a full @-@ time position with the UGG at $ 6 @,@ 000 per year . Several months later this was increased to $ 7 @,@ 500 in view of his increased responsibilities as General Manager of UGG Securities . In 1922 , he was made King 's Counsel . Brownlee was doing well in both law and business , and expected to continue doing so for the foreseeable future . 
 = = = UFA and politicization = = = 
 Though most of his legal work was for the AFCEC and then the UGG , Brownlee also made contact with leaders of the UFA proper , including William Irvine , Irene Parlby , Herbert Greenfield , and , most importantly , Henry Wise Wood . The charismatic Wood was the UFA 's president , and Brownlee often accompanied him to speaking engagements at UFA locals across Alberta in 1919 and 1920 . Wood held audiences enraptured with his sermons on cooperation and social justice — Brownlee at one point likened the UFA to a religion — while Brownlee explained the services offered by the UFA 's central office and answered members ' legal questions . His trips with Wood aroused Brownlee 's interest in the political side of the farmers ' movement , which he began to study in greater detail . 
 Another of Brownlee 's contacts was T. A. Crerar , who had recently become leader of the Progressive Party of Canada , and it was to him that Brownlee turned for his political education . Crerar introduced Brownlee to Ernest Charles Drury , the newly elected United Farmers of Ontario Premier of Ontario , and arranged for a meeting between Brownlee and Charles Stewart , by now Alberta Premier . During the latter meeting , Brownlee told Stewart that he felt that the UFA 's desires could be accommodated within Stewart 's Liberal government , but warned against a quick election . Foster suggests that this strategic advice from a political neophyte offended Stewart ; whether this is true or not , Stewart did call a quick election , for July 1921 . The UFA had decided in January 1919 , against Woods ' wishes , that it would run candidates in the next election . 
 Before the provincial election , there was a federal by @-@ election scheduled for June 1921 in Medicine Hat . Crerar 's Progressives were running Robert Gardiner , a local farmer , and Crerar asked Wood and Greenfield ( the Vice President of the UFA ) to broker an alliance between farmers and labour in the mixed rural @-@ urban riding . Before these efforts could come to fruition , the federal government of Conservative Arthur Meighen disclosed allegations of irregularities in the management of some of the UGG 's elevators . At a hearing on June 4 , former employees testified of storage bins with false bottoms and bribed railway employees . These allegations involved events from 1912 until 1914 , and their sudden prominence in 1921 made some in the UFA suspect that the hearings were politically motivated . Brownlee , as the UGG 's attorney , was successful in obtaining an injunction against further hearings until the UGG had time to conduct its own investigation and , as importantly , until the Medicine Hat by @-@ election was over . Gardiner won by a wide margin . 
