 While most of the UFA was preparing for the 1921 provincial election , Brownlee went on vacation in Victoria for a month ; despite his recent interest in politics , he still viewed himself as a lawyer and businessman with little role to play in the UFA 's electoral activities . Before leaving Calgary , he was assured by Wood that the UFA would not win more than 20 of the Legislative Assembly of Alberta 's 61 seats ; in fact , it won 38 . Brownlee watched the results come in at the offices of the Victoria Colonist . 
 The UFA , not a political party in the conventional sense , had contested the election without a leader . While its control of the majority of seats in the legislature entitled it , under the conventions of the Westminster parliamentary system , to form the government , it was not clear who would become Premier . Wood was the natural choice , but he declined the job for several reasons . To Brownlee 's surprise , Wood proposed that he should become premier instead . Brownlee declined , surmising that many of the newly elected farmer @-@ politicians would have seen an urban lawyer in the premier 's office as a repudiation of much of what they stood for . Ultimately , Greenfield was selected . 
 = = Attorney @-@ General = = 
 Greenfield appointed Brownlee his attorney @-@ general , and soon after Brownlee was acclaimed in a by @-@ election in Ponoka . His training in business and law , unique in the UFA caucus , gave him a central role in most of the government 's initiatives ; he also led the defense against attacks from the Liberal opposition , and eventually became responsible for setting the agenda for cabinet meetings . 
 Brownlee quickly entrenched himself in the conservative wing of the UFA caucus . He resisted measures that would take decision @-@ making out of government departments and transfer them to the caucus or UFA locals , and opposed the efforts of some UFA backbenchers to transform the application of the Westminster system in Alberta . When the UFA 's more radical elements called for the creation of a government @-@ owned bank , Brownlee dismissed the idea as neither financially nor constitutionally feasible . His concern for the government 's finances extended to its budget deficit ; when he found Greenfield 's spending cuts wanting , he cut staff from his own department to set an example . In a further attempt to better the government 's financial position , he unsuccessfully advocated the sale of the its four money @-@ losing railways to Canadian National ( CPR ) or Canadian Pacific ( CPR ) . 
 A longstanding objective of the Alberta government had been winning control of Alberta 's lands and natural resources from the federal government . The older provinces already had this control , but when Alberta , Saskatchewan , and Manitoba were admitted to Confederation , the federal government retained resource rights and paid the provincial governments an annual grant as compensation . As attorney @-@ general , Brownlee was Alberta 's chief negotiator in these efforts , and met frequently with representatives of Liberal Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King . While negotiations occasionally seemed promising , King was unwilling to fully commit to the transfer , possibly because Charles Stewart , now King 's Alberta lieutenant , and John R. Boyle , leader of the provincial Liberals , were sworn enemies of the UFA . 
 As a farmers ' government , the UFA was committed to helping farmers in the province 's drought @-@ stricken south . Brownlee authored the Drought Relief Act , which created a Drought Relief Commissioner to provide farmers with financial counselling and help them reach settlements with banks when they were unable to pay their debts . He also played a leading role in the creation of the Alberta Wheat Pool . 
 Brownlee 's department was responsible for administration of prohibition . Though the policy initially enjoyed the support of most Albertans , disregard for it was sufficiently widespread that effective enforcement proved impossible . The 1922 murder of Alberta Provincial Police constable Steve Lawson by bootleggers Emil Picariello and Florence <unk> , for which they were hanged , helped turn public opinion against it . A referendum held on the issue found most voters willing to replace prohibition with government @-@ owned liquor stores and rigidly @-@ regulated beer parlours . And the Act was repealed . The Lord 's Day Act , which prohibited most commerce on Sundays , was also Brownlee 's responsibility , though he had little enthusiasm for it and prosecuted only the most flagrant violations . 
 Many UFA MLAs came to see the government 's reliance on Brownlee as embarrassing , and Greenfield 's abilities as too limited to continue to lead . In 1924 , they pressured Greenfield to resign so Brownlee could replace him ; Brownlee scuppered the plot by warning that Greenfield 's resignation would be accompanied by his own . A second attempt in 1925 was successful when Wood intervened to convince Brownlee to accept the premiership and Greenfield assured him that he would be pleased to be rid of it . Brownlee became Premier of Alberta November 23 , 1925 . 
 = = Premier = = 
 = = = First term ( 1926 – 1930 ) = = = 
 Brownlee 's first challenges as premier were similar to those he had faced as attorney @-@ general : winning control of Alberta 's natural resources , selling the money @-@ losing railways , and balancing the provincial budget . Before he could do any of these , however , he needed to win the impending provincial election . He accomplished this by winning 43 seats in the 1926 election , an increase from the 38 that the UFA had won in 1921 and enough for a majority in the 60 @-@ seat legislature . 
 Once returned to office , Brownlee turned his attention to his other priorities . Many of them required the cooperation of King 's Liberal federal government : provincial control of resources would require the acquiescence of the federal government , and Brownlee felt that the deficit was in part the result of the federal government 's failure to cover its rightful share of expenses . King was himself reliant on the UFA : his minority government was survived thank to the support of Progressives and allied factions , including the 11 UFA MPs . Though some UFA legislators preferred Arthur Meighen 's Conservatives , Brownlee personally supported the King government , and even appeared to consider an offer from the Prime Minister to take Brownlee into his cabinet . 
 Brownlee attempted to leverage his relationship with King to win provincial control of natural resources . He won such an agreement in 1926 , but it was soon scuttled by the federal addition of a clause requiring Alberta to continue supporting separate Roman Catholic schools . <unk> over this clause persisted until 1929 , when a compromise was reached . All that remained was the question of compensation to Alberta for land given away by the federal government , and by the end of 1929 agreement on this too was reached . Brownlee returned from Ottawa to Alberta , where he was greeted by 3 @,@ 000 cheering supporters . 
 Brownlee was similarly successful in divesting the government of its railways . When his initial attempts to sell them to the CNR or CPR failed , the provincial government took over direct operation of the lines in 1927 . In 1928 , they began to show a profit , and one of the lines was soon sold to the CPR . A joint offer from the CPR and CNR for the remaining lines was judged too low , and they were sold to the CPR near the end of 1928 for $ 25 million . 
 Control of natural resources and the divestment of the railways were two factors that permitted balanced provincial budgets , the first of which was registered in 1925 . Despite this success , Brownlee continued to advocate austerity , and tried unsuccessfully to persuade the federal government to assume a greater share of the costs of new social programs , such as the old age pension . His resulting reputation as a penny @-@ <unk> came at a cost to his personal popularity . 
 Brownlee 's government also attempted to advance a progressive agenda . One way this manifested itself was an attempt to consolidate Alberta 's thousands of school districts into a far smaller number of school divisions . The plan was supported by educational reformers who believed that the decentralized status quo made province @-@ wide reform impossible , but was scrapped when rural residents expressed fears that it would mean the closure of local schools . Another progressive initiative was the Sexual Sterilization Act of Alberta , which allowed for the sterilization of " mental defectives " . While the act , repealed in 1972 , is now viewed as barbaric , at the time it enjoyed the support of moral reformers like Nellie McClung , who believed it was for the subjects ' own protection . 
 = = = Second term ( 1930 – 1934 ) = = = 
 Brownlee campaigned vigorously during the 1930 election , and was re @-@ elected with a slightly diminished majority . However , the Great Depression was making itself felt in Alberta . The price of wheat , Alberta 's major export , declined from a high of $ 1 @.@ 78 per bushel in the summer of 1929 , to $ 1 @.@ 00 in the following March , to $ 0 @.@ 45 by the end of 1930 . The Alberta Wheat Pool ( AWP ) guaranteed its members a minimum price of $ 1 @.@ 00 per bushel ( itself not enough for many farmers to earn a living ) , and it found itself facing ruination . Banks denied credit to it and to individual farmers , which in turn made it difficult for the latter to afford seed for the 1931 crop . The provincial government faced calls to provide loan guarantees . Brownlee was concerned that such guarantees would encourage lenders to make loans at higher interest rates , with the knowledge that the provincial government would pay them if the farmers defaulted . He sought a federally guaranteed minimum price of $ 0 @.@ 70 per bushel , but was rebuffed by Prime Minister R. B. Bennett , who saw the source of the problem as a global oversupply . 
 As farms failed , many young people migrated from farms to Alberta 's cities , where the situation was scarcely better . As the unemployment rate rose , so did labour militancy . December 1932 saw a " hunger march " , in which more than a thousand unemployed men and women attempted to hold a protest march to the Alberta legislature . Brownlee requested the Edmonton city government to prohibit such a display . While he pronounced himself sympathetic to the workers ' ordeal , he said he felt such an event would create a volatile atmosphere that would breed radicalism and communism . It was through this lens that he had viewed the 1932 founding of the Co @-@ operative Commonwealth Federation ( CCF ) . Though many UFA members supported this new party , which saw itself as a partnership between farmers and labourers , Brownlee considered it dangerously socialist . When the Hunger March @-@ ers attempted to go ahead without government sanction and were brutally dispersed by Mounties and Edmonton city police , Brownlee took much of the blame . 
 Further weakening Brownlee 's control of the situation , the UFA , around this time , took a sharp left @-@ ward turn , as Robert Gardiner replaced retiring Henry Wise Wood as president of the provincial body . 
 The weakened economy presented significant challenges to provincial government finances . 1931 saw the first deficit of Brownlee 's premiership , of approximately $ 2 @.@ 5 million , and 1932 's was still larger . During the latter year , the province came within hours of defaulting on a $ 3 million bond , which was avoided only by a loan from the federal government . Brownlee cut spending aggressively : he closed most of the province 's agricultural colleges , reduced the civil service by more than a third , cut provincial employees ' salaries , and disbanded the Alberta Provincial Police , replacing it with the RCMP . His government also increased corporate taxes and implemented a new provincial income tax . These measures proved insufficient , and Brownlee joined his colleagues in the other western provinces in entreating Bennett to help . Bennett said he was privately sympathetic to Brownlee but refused to provide assistance . 
 In 1933 , Brownlee was appointed to the Royal Commission on Banking and Currency as a representative of unorthodox economic views ( despite his conservative approach to Alberta 's finances - outside of the province he was viewed as a spokesperson of the progressive movement ) . Brownlee argued that banks were treating Eastern and Western debtors unequally , and that they were charging predatory interest rates to farmers . He joined the majority on the Commission in calling for the creation of a central bank in Canada but was alone in proposing that it be entirely publicly controlled . 
 During the Great Depression 's early years , Calgary schoolteacher and evangelist William Aberhart began to preach a version of C. H. Douglas 's social credit economic theory . Brownlee believed that Aberhart 's proposals would be both unconstitutional ( if implemented by a provincial government , which did not have control over monetary policy ) and ineffective ( since they would not create markets for Alberta 's agricultural products ) . As Aberhart gained popularity , Brownlee attacked his solutions as illusory but had little of his own to offer but critiques and orthodoxy . 
 = = = Sex scandal = = = 
 In 1934 , Brownlee was sued for the seduction of Vivian MacMillan , a Brownlee family friend and clerk in the provincial Attorney @-@ General 's office . MacMillan alleged that Brownlee had seduced her in 1930 and that the subsequent affair had lasted until 1933 ; Brownlee denied her story completely and said that the lawsuit was the result of a conspiracy between MacMillan , her fiance , and Brownlee 's opponents in the Liberal Party . After a sensational and well @-@ publicized trial , the jury found in MacMillan 's favour . However , Justice William Carlos Ives , who presided over the trial , disregarded its finding , ruling that MacMillan had failed to show that she had suffered any damage . Appeals eventually led to the Judicial Committee of the British Privy Council , at the time Canada 's highest court of appeal , where MacMillan emerged victorious . 
 Once the jury issued its finding , Brownlee realized that his time as Premier was finished . He announced that he would resign as soon as a successor could be found , and on July 10 , 1934 , was replaced by Richard Gavin Reid . 
 = = Later political career = = 
 In the months after his resignation , Brownlee kept a low profile , though he was still MLA for Ponoka . He returned to the public eye with a speech to the January 1935 UFA convention attacking Aberhart 's plans to implement social credit in Alberta alone : " I would impress you that nothing but disillusionment , loss of hope and additional despair can follow any attempt to inaugurate a system of that kind , because the Province has no jurisdiction in these matters . " Despite hearing directly from Aberhart , the convention defeated by a wide margin a motion to endorse his version of social credit . 
 Reid 's government made Brownlee its chief strategist against Aberhart and social credit . One tactic he adopted was C. H. Douglas to serve as a consultant to the Alberta government on economic reconstruction . In doing this , Brownlee hoped both to co @-@ opt the promise of social credit for the benefit of the UFA and to discredit Aberhart by demonstrating how widely his interpretation of social credit differed from Douglas 's . This effort failed because Albertans , confronted by the contrast between the fiery , charismatic Aberhart and the aloof , technocratic Douglas , preferred the former . Brownlee also invited Aberhart to come to Edmonton and prepare proposals on which the government could act ; this was an attempt to force him to take specific positions that could be attacked rather than relying on vague assurances of economic salvation , but was foiled by Aberhart 's continued evasiveness . 
 Brownlee himself toured southern Alberta attacking Aberhart 's policies as vague and unconstitutional . In April 1935 , he gave a series of radio speeches designed to counter Aberhart 's popular radio program , Back to the Bible Hour . When his customary appeals to logic did not work , Brownlee resorted to attacking Aberhart personally , comparing him to the Pied Piper of Hamelin . Aberhart did not resist the comparison , retorting that the pied piper had " rid the capitol of all the rats " ; Brownlee responded that , after doing that , he had led its children to their destruction . In May 1935 , after Aberhart announced that his social credit movement would contest the next provincial election , Brownlee ridiculed its candidate @-@ selection process — in which Aberhart personally interviewed and selected more candidates for each riding than could ultimately run — as one in which the candidates would be " wrapped in cellophane and carefully hidden away so they will not dry out on [ Aberhart ] , until the day he calls out the fittest and discards the rest " . 
 The 1935 election took place August 22 . Brownlee spent most of the campaign trying to retain his own riding of Ponoka . Despite the respect he commanded , his constituents were in desperate economic straits and tired of the UFA 's orthodoxy , which had failed to raise their condition . As Brownlee later recalled : 
 One man got up and said , " Mr. Brownlee , we have listened to you with a great deal of attention and the answers you have given seem pretty hard to meet . But I have one more question … I 'm selling my wheat at 25 cents a bushel . If I tried to sell a steer tomorrow I 'd probably hardly get enough to pay the freight . I get 3 cents a dozen for eggs . I 'm lucky to get a dollar for a can of cream . Will you tell me what I 've got to lose ? " and a cheer went over the audience . I knew then what the result of the election was going to be . 
 On election day , every UFA candidate in the province was defeated , as Aberhart 's Social Crediters won 56 of 63 seats . In Ponoka , Social Credit 's Edith Rogers defeated Brownlee 2 @,@ 295 votes to 879 . After this election , Brownlee never sought political office again . 
 = = Life after politics = = 
 Shortly after his electoral defeat , Brownlee started a new law firm based in Edmonton . The United Grain Growers soon re @-@ appointed him as their general counsel . By 1940 , Brownlee had restored his career to it position before he entered politics : his firm counted a number of major agricultural companies among its clients , and the UGG too brought him considerable work . He was also hired to write a legal column for the Western Review newspaper . 
 In his capacity as UGG general counsel , Brownlee was responsible for its restructuring . Its bylaws provided that only farmers could buy shares directly from the company , but placed no limitation on who could buy them from other shareholders . This had the effect of limiting capital inflow , since few farmers could afford to buy shares during the depression , and transferring control of the company to non @-@ farmers , who were purchasing shares from impoverished farmers . Brownlee 's solution was to create two classes of share : an investment share with a par value of $ 20 , and a voting share with a par value of $ 5 . The former could be held by any person , to a maximum of 250 shares per person , while the latter could be held only by farmers , to a maximum of 25 shares per person . 
 = = = UGG director and vice president = = = 
 When he restructured the UGG 's capital , Brownlee included a rider that non @-@ farmers who held shares at the time the new structure came into effect could hold voting shares . This clause allowed him to do so , and in consequence to be elected to the company 's board of directors at the 1942 annual shareholders ' meeting ; he was also appointed the UGG 's vice president . 
 At the time of Brownlee 's appointment , the UGG was embroiled in an income tax dispute . Though the farmers ' movement had generally supported the 1917 introduction of income tax , as rates climbed the UGG began to resent it , especially given that the pools were exempt . While the rationale for this exemption — that the pools were agents of their members , and that any income should therefore be taxed as personal income once disbursed , and not as corporate income pre @-@ disbursal — was initially accepted , the UGG argued that the pools ' 1931 reorganization eliminated the differences between them and the UGG , and that the exemption thus put the UGG at a competitive disadvantage . In 1941 , Brownlee travelled to Ottawa to express the UGG 's case ; there he collaborated with O. M. Biggar , representing the private grain companies in the form of the North @-@ West Line Elevators Association ( <unk> ) , who also objected to the pools ' exemption , on a joint brief to the Minister of National Revenue . The government ruled that the pools were taxable ; the pools appealed to the Exchequer Court , which found in the government 's favour in 1943 . By this time , the government had agreed not to tax the pools for pre @-@ 1941 revenue and to grant generous exemptions on taxation thereafter . 
 After World War II , the federal government appointed the Royal Commission on Taxation of Cooperatives to examine the question in greater detail . Brownlee prepared the UGG 's submission , and was pleased with the Commission 's eventual findings : it recognized the UGG as a cooperative , and recommended that it be granted the same exemptions as the pools enjoyed . However , the government still intended to collect taxes from 1940 and 1941 from the UGG , but not from the pools . In February 1947 , Brownlee returned to Ottawa to present the UGG 's case to Finance Minister Douglas Abbott , who eventually sided with the UGG and extended the pools ' exemption to it . 
 The acrimony this dispute engendered between the pools and the UGG led the former to suggest that the latter was not a true cooperative , but rather an old @-@ style grain company . Brownlee played a major role in disputing these allegations , and was a major contributor to The Grain Growers ' Record 1906 – 1943 , the UGG 's written response . When he , as the UGG 's delegate to the Canadian Federation of Agriculture , opposed a resolution calling for the continued tax @-@ exempt status of pools , the resolution 's proponents suggested stating that it was " endorsed by the cooperatives " ; Brownlee objected that the UGG was a cooperative , and the wording was withdrawn . The Alberta Wheat Pool later published a pamphlet entitled A History of Events Leading to Taxation of Cooperatives , which placed much of the blame on the UGG and Brownlee , accusing the latter of working with the hated private grain companies to " enforce taxation of the Wheat Pools " . Seizing on an incorrect date in the pamphlet , Brownlee dismissed the charges — which were substantially true , in light of his 1941 joint brief with Biggar — as factually incorrect . Though UGG shareholders subjected him to vigorous questioning , he held firm and the controversy died down after he gave a series of radio addresses in Alberta , Saskatchewan , and Manitoba . 
 = = = UGG President = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1940s , UGG President and General Manager R. S. Law fell ill , and in February 1947 , Brownlee was named the UGG 's Acting General Manager . On January 1 , 1948 , he became full General Manager . In spring 1948 Law stepped down completely , and on May 1 Brownlee succeeded him as President and General Manager . 
 In this capacity , he had offices in Calgary and Winnipeg . He worked constantly , often arriving at work on a Monday with a briefcase full of dictation machine recordings for secretaries to transcribe . Foster says that Brownlee was known by his staff as " a man whose life was his work , who lived in his briefcase , and whose only recreation seemed to be changing from one job to another " . 
 He turned this work ethic to expanding the company , building new grain elevators and purchasing existing ones . At the same time , he undertook a study of the operating costs and volume of each of the UGG 's delivery points . He found that roughly a dozen elevators were losing money , with climbing costs threatening to increase this number . Brownlee tried to reach accommodations with the UGG 's competitors to divide among them centres too small to support more than one elevator , and achieved some success , especially with the Alberta Wheat Pool . At the same time , Brownlee increased the UGG 's presence in larger centres , especially Regina , Brandon , and Winnipeg . 
 Brownlee remained intimately involved in the grain industry even outside the UGG , in part through his position on the Canadian Federation of Agriculture executive . In this capacity , he found himself in the middle of a controversy over the British Wheat Agreement ( <unk> ) . The <unk> was an agreement to sell wheat to British clients at a fixed price over a four @-@ year period . The price was to be adjusted during the following two years , " having regard to " world wheat prices . During the first four years , world wheat prices were continually above the price stipulated in the agreement , breeding resentment towards the British , especially since they sold much of this fixed price wheat for a large profit in European markets . This was exacerbated when the British refused to adjust the price upwards for the last two years , on the grounds that there was nothing in the agreement to compel them to do so . The result was considerable ill will and a loss by grain farmers of an estimated $ 350 million . The federal government , which had negotiated the agreement , offered to supplement the British payments by $ 65 million , a sum large enough to raise the ire of eastern Canadians but too small to placate western farmers . Brownlee , who had opposed the agreement , authorized a purchase of advertising across the country pointing out that the government fixed the domestic price of wheat at $ 0 @.@ 77 per bushel while the world price reached as high as $ 2 @.@ 18 . In Brownlee 's view , the $ 65 million payment by the government paled in comparison to the benefit to consumers of the federal policy . Subsequent international agreements , for which Brownlee acted as an advisor to the Canadian delegation , resulted in more favourable terms for farmers . Brownlee 's continued status as one of the grain industry 's leading figures was also exhibited by his involvement in government relations . He appeared before the Canadian House of Commons Standing Committee on Agriculture to oppose a system of allocating box cars to each grain elevator by formula , favouring instead a system whereby the Canadian Wheat Board retained the flexibility to assign them as it saw fit . In his September 1960 submission to the Royal Commission on Transportation , In Defense of the Crow 's Nest Pass Rates , he rejected the railways ' calls to deregulate the rates they charged for the shipment of grain . 
 Brownlee 's presidency coincided with the fiftieth anniversary of the Grain Growers Grain Company , one of the UGG 's founding organizations . In celebration of the event , Brownlee travelled around the country speaking to UGG outlets . He also oversaw the publication , and wrote much , of The First Fifty Years , a history of the UGG to that point . In this capacity , he came into conflict with UGG Vice President R. C. Brown , in charge of the UGG department that published the book , and Assistant General Manager P. C. Watt . Brownlee had an interventionist style as President , which Foster acknowledged sometimes " verged on outright interference " . As the years wore on , his decision @-@ making became more autocratic , with the board of directors expected to serve as a rubber stamp . 
 On June 21 , 1961 , ill health forced Brownlee 's resignation from the UGG . 
 = = = Later political activities = = = 
 Brownlee never sought political office after his 1935 defeat , and commented publicly on political issues only rarely . His distaste for Aberhart 's social credit government — and in particular its contention , which Brownlee viewed as unfair , that the UFA had left the government bankrupt — did not prevent him from advising it behind the scenes on a number of issues , most notably Alberta 's submission to the Rowell @-@ Sirois Commission , The Case for Alberta . 
 In the early 1940s , he met M. J. Coldwell , the new federal leader of the CCF , on a train . According to Coldwell , in the ensuing conversation Brownlee indicated that he would be prepared to consider running federally as a CCF candidate . Coldwell excitedly reported this to some of the CCF 's Alberta leaders ; one of them telephoned Brownlee to question whether Coldwell 's report was true . Brownlee adhered to a conservative view of how politics should be conducted , and was perhaps put off by the audacious telephone call ; despite an apology from Coldwell , Brownlee did not indicate any further interest in running for the CCF . 
 Brownlee 's occasional public comments on political issues still attracted considerable attention . He spoke to the 1944 UFA convention on post @-@ war reconstruction , and expressed pessimism about Canada 's economic prospects . He advocated a policy of full employment , and emphasized that jobs had to be meaningful rather than " put [ ting ] men to work building roads like coolies in China when machines can do it better " . He criticized the government @-@ imposed wartime ceiling on wheat prices , of $ 1 @.@ 25 per bushel , as forcing farmers to shoulder an unfair burden of a national crisis , as they had during the depression . 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 Brownlee 's father had died in January 1934 , while the MacMillan suit was still pending . In April 1941 , his mother died intestate and left an estate of $ 1 @,@ 507 . Brownlee relinquished any claim on the estate in favour of his sister , who had cared for their mother in her last years . 
 Brownlee 's sons became successful at their careers : Alan graduated from law at the University of Alberta and joined his father 's firm , which was renamed Brownlee , Baldwin and Brownlee , while John studied photography in Los Angeles and returned to Canada to work as a photographer . Both married and had children . In time , Brownlee relinquished the law firm — now Brownlee and Brownlee — to Alan , and returned to Calgary , where he and his wife led a quiet , reserved life . When Calgary planners announced their intention to widen Memorial Drive , where the Brownlees lived , several residents expressed concern that the plan would destroy the street 's trees ; they consulted Brownlee , who telephoned the mayor and saved the trees . 
 In his last years , Brownlee received a number of honours . Premier of Manitoba Duff Roblin inducted him into the province 's Order of the Buffalo Hunt in November 1960 , in recognition of his contributions to the prairie provinces . The UFA awarded him an honorary life membership , and Prime Minister John Diefenbaker appointed him to the National Productivity Council , though ill health prevented him from participating after its inaugural March 1961 meeting . 
 Beginning in June 1957 , Brownlee underwent a series of major surgeries . By this time his memory was failing , and he often had to ask his wife for details that escaped him . He died July 15 , 1961 , two weeks after resigning from the UGG board and barely three after resigning as President . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 As Premier , Brownlee is most remembered for the sex scandal that ended his career ; his accomplishments are largely forgotten . Still , he is highly regarded by historians : Foster calls him " Alberta 's greatest <unk> and cites , in particular , his successful negotiations for the transfer of resource rights to the provincial government as the cause of Alberta 's subsequent prosperity . Journalist Ted Byfield concurs , noting that his willingness to confront the federal government sets him apart from Ernest Manning , another contender for the title . In 1980 , the Edmonton Journal wrote , " The lasting political estate left by former Premier John Brownlee has made Alberta what it is today , one of Canada 's wealthiest provinces fuelled by billions of dollars in oil and gas royalties . " 
 A University of Calgary undergraduate seminar in 2005 ranked Brownlee as the province 's third greatest premier , behind Manning and Peter Lougheed . 
 Brownlee 's impact is also felt through the organizations he participated in founding : the Alberta Wheat Pool remained an important player in Canadian agriculture until 1998 , when it merged with Manitoba Pool Elevators to form <unk> Cooperative Ltd .. In 2001 , this new company merged with the UGG to form <unk> United . In 2007 , the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool took it over , forming <unk> . Brownlee 's vision , unique among the members of the Macmillan Commission , of a publicly controlled central bank became a reality in 1938 , when the Bank of Canada shifted from private to government control . 
 Brownlee was buried at Evergreen Memorial Gardens near Edmonton . The provincial government 's John E. Brownlee Building in Edmonton is named in his honour , as is the University of Alberta Faculty of Law 's John E. Brownlee Memorial Prize in Local Government Law . 
 = = Electoral record = = 
 = = = As party leader = = = 
 = = = As MLA = = = 
 = Mimicry = 
 In evolutionary biology , mimicry is a similarity of one species to another that protects one or both . In the case of prey species , it is a class of antipredator adaptation . This similarity can be in appearance , behaviour , sound or scent . Mimics occur in the same areas as their models . 
 Mimicry occurs when a group of organisms , the mimics , evolve to share perceived characteristics with another group , the models . The evolution is driven by the selective action of a signal @-@ receiver or dupe . Birds , for example , use sight to identify palatable insects ( the mimics ) , whilst avoiding the noxious models . 
 The model is usually another species , except in cases of automimicry , where for example the back end of a butterfly may resemble its head , deceiving a predator both about where to strike , and the butterfly 's likely direction of movement . The deceived signal @-@ receiver is typically another organism , such as the common predator of two species . As an interaction , mimicry is in most cases advantageous to the mimic and harmful to the receiver , but may increase , reduce or have no effect on the fitness of the model depending on the situation . The model may be hard to identify : for example , eyespots may not resemble any specific organism 's eyes , and camouflage often cannot be attributed to a particular model . 
 Mimicry is related to camouflage , in which a species resembles its surroundings or is otherwise difficult to detect . In particular , mimesis , in which the mimic takes on the properties of a specific object or organism , but one to which the dupe is indifferent , is an area of overlap between camouflage and mimicry . For example , animals such as flower mantises , planthoppers and geometer moth caterpillars that resemble twigs , bark , leaves or flowers are <unk> The difficulty is sometimes avoided by choosing a different term ; " crypsis " ( in the broad sense ) is sometimes used to encompass all forms of avoiding detection , such as mimicry , camouflage and hiding . 
 Though visual mimicry through animal coloration is most obvious to humans , other senses such as olfaction ( smell ) or hearing may be involved , and more than one type of signal may be employed . Mimicry may involve morphology , behaviour , and other properties . In any case , the signal always functions to deceive the receiver by preventing it from correctly identifying the mimic . In evolutionary terms , this phenomenon is a form of co @-@ evolution usually involving an evolutionary arms <unk> Mimicry should not be confused with convergent evolution , which occurs when species come to resemble each other by adapting to similar lifestyles . 
 Mimics may have different models for different life cycle stages , or they may be polymorphic , with different individuals imitating different models . Models themselves may have more than one mimic , though frequency dependent selection favors mimicry where models outnumber mimics . Models tend to be relatively closely related organisms , but mimicry of vastly different species is also known . Most known mimics are insects , though many other animal mimics are known . Plants and fungi may also be mimics , though less research has been carried out in this area . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Use of the word mimicry dates to 1637 . It derives from the Greek term <unk> , " imitative " , in turn from <unk> , the verbal adjective of <unk> , " to imitate " . Originally used to describe people , " mimetic " was used in zoology from 1851 , " mimicry " from 1861 . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Many types of mimicry have been described . An overview of each follows , highlighting the similarities and differences between the various forms . Classification is often based on function with respect to the mimic ( e.g. , avoiding harm ) . Some cases may belong to more than one class , e.g. , automimicry and aggressive mimicry are not mutually exclusive , as one describes the species relationship between model and mimic , while the other describes the function for the mimic ( obtaining food ) . 
 = = = Defensive = = = 
 Defensive or protective mimicry takes place when organisms are able to avoid harmful encounters by deceiving enemies into treating them as something else . 
 The first three such cases discussed here entail mimicry of organisms protected by warning coloration : 
 Batesian mimicry , where a harmless mimic poses as harmful ; 
 Müllerian mimicry , where two or more harmful species mutually advertise themselves as harmful ; 
 Mertensian mimicry , where a deadly mimic resembles a less harmful but lesson @-@ teaching model . 
 The fourth case , Vavilovian mimicry , where weeds resemble crops , is important for several reasons , and in this case humans are the agent of selection . 
 = = = = Batesian = = = = 
 In Batesian mimicry the mimic shares signals similar to the model , but does not have the attribute that makes it unprofitable to predators ( e.g. , unpalatability ) . In other words , a Batesian mimic is a sheep in wolf 's clothing . It is named after Henry Walter Bates , an English naturalist whose work on butterflies in the Amazon rainforest ( described in The Naturalist on the River Amazons ) was pioneering in this field of study . Mimics are less likely to be found out ( for example by predators ) when in low proportion to their model . This phenomenon is called negative frequency dependent selection , and it applies in most forms of mimicry . Batesian mimicry can only be maintained if the harm caused to the predator by eating a model outweighs the benefit of eating a mimic . The nature of learning is weighted in favor of the mimics , for a predator that has a bad first experience with a model tends to avoid anything that looks like it for a long time , and does not re @-@ sample soon to see whether the initial experience was a false negative . However , if mimics become more abundant than models , then the probability of a young predator having a first experience with a mimic increases . Such systems are therefore most likely to be stable where both the model and the mimic occur , and where the model is more abundant than the mimic . This is not the case in Müllerian mimicry , which is described next . 
 There are many Batesian mimics in the order Lepidoptera . Consul <unk> and <unk> <unk> imitate unpalatable Heliconius butterflies such as H. <unk> . Several palatable moths produce ultrasonic click calls to mimic unpalatable tiger moths . Octopuses of the genus <unk> ( the mimic octopus ) are able to intentionally alter their body shape and coloration to resemble dangerous sea snakes or lionfish . In the Amazon , the helmeted woodpecker ( Dryocopus galeatus ) , a rare species which lives in the Atlantic Forest of Brazil , Paraguay , and Argentina , has a similar red crest , black back , and barred underside to two larger woodpeckers : Dryocopus lineatus and <unk> robustus . This mimicry reduces attacks on Dryocopus galeatus from other animals . Scientists had falsely believed that D. galeatus was a close cousin of the other two species , because of the visual similarity , and because the three species live in the same habitat and eat similar food . 
 = = = = Müllerian = = = = 
 Müllerian mimicry , named for the German naturalist Fritz Müller , describes a situation where two or more species have similar warning or aposematic signals and both share genuine anti @-@ predation attributes ( e.g. , being unpalatable ) . At first , Bates could not explain why this should be so — if both were harmful why did one need to mimic another ? Müller put forward the first explanation for this phenomenon : if a common predator confuses two species , individuals in both those species are more likely to survive . This type of mimicry is unique in several respects . Firstly , both the mimic and the model benefit from the interaction , which could thus be classified as mutualism in this respect . The signal receiver is also advantaged by this system , despite being deceived about species identity , as it avoids potentially harmful encounters . The usually clear distinction between mimic and model is also blurred . Where one species is scarce and another abundant , the rare species can be said to be the mimic . When both are present in similar numbers , however , it is more realistic to speak of each as a co @-@ mimic than of distinct ' mimic ' and ' model ' species , as their warning signals tend to converge . Also , the two species may exist on a continuum from harmless to highly noxious , so Batesian mimicry grades smoothly into Müllerian convergence . 
 The monarch butterfly ( Danaus <unk> ) is a member of a Müllerian complex with the viceroy butterfly ( <unk> <unk> ) , sharing coloration patterns and display behavior . The viceroy has subspecies with somewhat different coloration , each closely matching the local Danaus species . For example , in Florida , the pairing is of the viceroy and the queen butterfly , whereas in Mexico the viceroy resembles the soldier butterfly . The viceroy is thus involved in three different Müllerian pairs . This example was long believed to be Batesian , with the viceroy mimicking the monarch , but the viceroy is actually the more unpalatable species . The genus Morpho is palatable , but some species ( such as M. <unk> ) are strong fliers ; birds – even species that specialize in catching butterflies on the wing – find it hard to catch them . The conspicuous blue coloration shared by most Morpho species may be Müllerian , or may be " pursuit aposematism " . The " orange complex " of distasteful butterfly species includes the <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and Dryas <unk> . At least seven species of millipedes in the genera <unk> and <unk> ( <unk> ) form a Müllerian mimicry ring in the eastern United States , in which unrelated polymorphic species converge on similar color patterns where their range overlaps . 
 = = = = <unk> / Mertensian = = = = 
 <unk> or Mertensian mimicry describes unusual cases where deadly prey mimic a less dangerous species . It was first proposed by Emsley as a possible answer for the theoretical difficulties a predator species faces when associating an aposematic phenotype of potentially dangerous animals , such as the coral snake , with unprofitability when the predator has an increased risk of death , negating any learned behaviour . The theory was developed by the German biologist Wolfgang <unk> in a chapter of Mimicry in Plants and Animals , who named it after the German herpetologist Robert Mertens . Sheppard points out that Hecht and Marien put forward a similar hypothesis ten years earlier . This scenario is a little more difficult to understand , since in other types of mimicry it is usually the most harmful species that is the model . But if a predator dies , it cannot learn to recognize a warning signal , e.g. , bright colors in a certain pattern . In other words , there is no advantage in being aposematic for an organism that is likely to kill any predator it succeeds in poisoning ; such an animal is better off being camouflaged , to avoid attacks altogether . If , however , there were some other species that were harmful but not deadly as well as aposematic , the predator could learn to recognize its particular warning colors and avoid such animals . A deadly species could then profit by mimicking the less dangerous aposematic organism if this reduces the number of attacks . The exception here , ignoring any chance of animals learning by watching a conspecific die ( see <unk> et al. for a discussion of observational learning and mimicry ) , is the possibility of not having to learn that it is harmful in the first place : instinctive genetic programming to be wary of certain signals . In this case , other organisms could benefit from this programming , and Batesian or Müllerian mimics of it could potentially evolve . In fact , it has been shown that some species do have an innate recognition of certain aposematic warnings . Hand @-@ reared turquoise @-@ browed motmots ( <unk> <unk> ) , avian predators , instinctively avoid snakes with red and yellow rings . Other colors with the same pattern , and even red and yellow stripes with the same width as rings , were tolerated . However , models with red and yellow rings were feared , with the birds flying away and giving alarm calls in some cases . This provides an alternative explanation to Mertensian mimicry . See Greene and McDiarmid for a review of the subject . 
 Some harmless milk snake ( Lampropeltis <unk> ) subspecies , the moderately toxic false coral snakes ( genus <unk> ) , and the deadly coral snakes ( genus Micrurus ) all have a red background color with black and white / yellow rings . In this system , both the milk snakes and the deadly coral snakes are mimics , whereas the false coral snakes are the model . It has also been suggested that this system could be an instance of <unk> , the similar colour patterns having evolved independently in similar habitats . 
 = = = = Wasmannian = = = = 
 Wasmannian mimicry refers to cases where the mimic resembles a model along with which it lives ( inquiline ) in a nest or colony . Most of the models here are social insects such as ants , termites , bees and wasps . 
 = = = = <unk> weeds = = = = 
 Vavilovian mimicry describes weeds that come to share characteristics with a domesticated plant through artificial selection . It is named after Russian botanist and geneticist Nikolai Vavilov . Selection against the weed may occur either by manually killing the weed , or by separating its seeds from those of the crop . The latter process , known as winnowing , can be done manually or by a machine . 
 Vavilovian mimicry presents an illustration of unintentional ( or rather ' anti @-@ intentional ' ) selection by man . While some cases of artificial selection go in the direction desired , such as selective breeding , this case presents the opposite characteristics . <unk> do not want to select weeds that look increasingly like the cultivated plant , yet there is no other option . One case is Echinochloa <unk> , a species of grass found as a weed in rice ( Oryza sativa ) fields . The plant looks similar to rice ; its seeds are often mixed in rice and have become difficult to separate through Vavilovian mimicry . A similar problem in agriculture is pesticide resistance : farmers do not wish to select for weeds that have increasingly similar resistance to pesticides as the crop itself , yet that is the inevitable effect . Vavilovian mimics may eventually be domesticated themselves , as in the case of rye in wheat ; Vavilov called these weed @-@ crops secondary crops . 
 Vavilovian mimicry can be classified as defensive mimicry , in that the weed mimics a protected species . This bears strong similarity to Batesian mimicry in that the weed does not share the properties that give the model its protection , and both the model and the dupe ( in this case people ) are harmed by its presence . There are some key differences , though ; in Batesian mimicry , the model and signal receiver are enemies ( the predator would eat the protected species if it could ) , whereas here the crop and its human growers are in a mutualistic relationship : the crop benefits from being dispersed and protected by people , despite being eaten by them . In fact , the crop 's only " protection " relevant here is its usefulness to humans . Secondly , the weed is not eaten , but simply destroyed . The only motivation for killing the weed is its effect on crop yields . Finally , this type of mimicry does not occur in ecosystems unaltered by humans . 
 = = = = Protective egg decoys = = = = 
 Unlike the previously mentioned forms of mimicry , Gilbertian mimicry involves only two species . The potential host ( or prey ) drives away its parasite ( or predator ) by mimicking it , the reverse of host @-@ parasite aggressive mimicry . It was coined by Pasteur as a phrase for such rare mimicry systems , and is named after the American ecologist Lawrence E. Gilbert . 
 This form of protective mimicry occurs in the genus Passiflora . The leaves of this plant contain toxins that deter herbivorous animals — however some Heliconius butterfly larvae have evolved enzymes that break down these toxins , allowing them to specialize on this genus . This has created further selection pressure on the host plants , which have evolved stipules that mimic mature Heliconius eggs near the point of hatching . These butterflies tend to avoid laying eggs near each existing ones , which helps avoid exploitative intraspecific competition between caterpillars — those that lay on vacant leaves provide their offspring with a greater chance of survival . Most Heliconius larvae are cannibalistic , meaning that on leaves older eggs hatch first and eat the new arrivals . Thus , it seems that such plants have evolved egg dummies due to these grazing herbivore enemies . In addition , the decoy eggs are also nectaries , attracting predators of the caterpillars such as ants and wasps . This acts as a further defense of the plant against the caterpillars . 
 = = = = Protective mimicry within a species = = = = 
 <unk> mimicry , named after Lincoln P. Brower and Jane Van Zandt Brower , is a form of automimicry ; where the model belongs to the same species as the mimic . This is the analogue of Batesian mimicry within a single species , and occurs when there is a palatability spectrum within a population . Examples include the monarch and the queen from the <unk> subfamily , which feed on milkweed species of varying toxicity . These species store toxins from its host plant , which are maintained even in the adult ( imago ) form . As levels of toxin vary depending on diet during the larval stage , some individuals are more toxic than others . Less palatable organisms , therefore , mimic more dangerous individuals , with their likeness already perfected . 
 This is not always the case , however . In sexually dimorphic species , one sex may be more of a threat than the other , which could mimic the protected sex . Evidence for this possibility is provided by the behavior of a monkey from Gabon , which regularly ate male moths of the genus <unk> , but promptly stopped after it tasted a noxious female . 
 = = = Aggressive = = = 
 Aggressive mimicry describes predators ( or parasites ) that share the same characteristics as a harmless species , allowing them to avoid detection by their prey ( or host ) . The mimic may resemble the prey or host itself , or another organism that is either neutral or beneficial to the signal receiver . In this class of mimicry , the model may be affected negatively , positively or not at all . Just as parasites can be treated as a form of predator , host @-@ parasite mimicry is treated here as a subclass of aggressive mimicry . 
 The mimic may have a particular significance for duped prey . One such case is spiders , amongst which aggressive mimicry is quite common both in luring prey and disguising stealthily approaching predators . One case is the golden orb weaver ( Nephila <unk> ) , which spins a conspicuous golden colored web in well @-@ lit areas . Experiments show that bees are able to associate the webs with danger when the yellow pigment is not present , as occurs in less well @-@ lit areas where the web is much harder to see . Other colors were also learned and avoided , but bees seemed least able to effectively associate yellow pigmented webs with danger . Yellow is the color of many nectar bearing flowers , however , so perhaps avoiding yellow is not worthwhile . Another form of mimicry is based not on color but pattern . Species such as the silver <unk> ( Argiope <unk> ) employ prominent patterns in the middle of their webs , such as zigzags . These may reflect ultraviolet light , and mimic the pattern seen in many flowers known as nectar guides . Spiders change their web day to day , which can be explained by bee 's ability to remember web patterns . Bees are able to associate a certain pattern with a spatial location , meaning the spider must spin a new pattern regularly or suffer diminishing prey capture . 
 Another case is where males are lured towards what seems to be a sexually receptive female . The model in this situation is the same species as the dupe . Beginning in the 1960s , James E. Lloyd 's investigation of female fireflies of the genus Photuris revealed they emit the same light signals that females of the genus Photinus use as a mating signal . Further research showed male fireflies from several different genera are attracted to these " femmes fatales " , and are subsequently captured and eaten . Female signals are based on that received from the male , each female having a repertoire of signals matching the delay and duration of the female of the corresponding species . This mimicry may have evolved from non @-@ mating signals that have become modified for predation . 
 The <unk> katydid <unk> <unk> of inland Australia is capable of attracting male cicadas of the tribe <unk> by imitating the species @-@ specific reply clicks of sexually receptive female cicadas . This example of acoustic aggressive mimicry is similar to the Photuris firefly case in that the predator 's mimicry is remarkably versatile – playback experiments show that C. <unk> is able to attract males of many cicada species , including <unk> cicadas from other continents , even though cicada mating signals are species @-@ specific . 
 Some carnivorous plants may also be able to increase their rate of capture through mimicry . 
 Luring is not a necessary condition however , as the predator still has a significant advantage simply by not being identified as such . They may resemble a mutualistic symbiont or a species of little relevance to the prey . 
 A case of the latter situation is a species of cleaner fish and its mimic , though in this example the model is greatly disadvantaged by the presence of the mimic . Cleaner fish are the allies of many other species , which allow them to eat their parasites and dead skin . Some allow the cleaner to venture inside their body to hunt these parasites . However , one species of cleaner , the bluestreak cleaner wrasse ( Labroides dimidiatus ) , is the unknowing model of a mimetic species , the sabre @-@ toothed blenny ( <unk> taeniatus ) . This wrasse resides in coral reefs in the Indian and the Pacific Oceans , and is recognized by other fishes that then let it clean them . Its imposter , a species of blenny , lives in the Indian Ocean — and not only looks like it in terms of size and coloration , but even mimics the cleaner 's " dance " . Having fooled its prey into letting its guard down , it then bites it , tearing off a piece of its fin before fleeing . Fish grazed on in this fashion soon learn to distinguish mimic from model , but because the similarity is close between the two they become much more cautious of the model as well , so both are affected . Due to victims ' ability to discriminate between foe and helper , the blennies have evolved close similarity , right down to the regional level . 
 Another interesting example that does not involve any luring is the zone @-@ tailed hawk , which resembles the turkey vulture . It flies amongst the vultures , suddenly breaking from the formation and ambushing its prey . Here the hawk 's presence is of no evident significance to the vultures , affecting them neither negatively or positively . 
 = = = = Parasites = = = = 
 Parasites can also be aggressive mimics , though the situation is somewhat different from those outlined previously . Some predators have a feature that draws prey ; parasites can also mimic their host 's natural prey , but are eaten themselves , a pathway into their host . <unk> , a genus of flatworm , matures in the digestive system of songbirds , their eggs then passing out of the bird via the feces . They are then taken up by Succinea , a terrestrial snail . The eggs develop in this intermediate host , and then must find a suitable bird to mature in . Since the host birds do not eat snails , the <unk> has another strategy to reach its host 's intestine . They are brightly colored and move in a pulsating fashion . A <unk> @-@ sac pulsates in the snail 's eye stalks , coming to resemble an irresistible meal for a songbird . In this way , it can bridge the gap between hosts , allowing it to complete its life cycle . A nematode ( <unk> <unk> ) changes the colour of the abdomen of workers of the canopy ant Cephalotes atratus to make it appear like the ripe fruits of <unk> <unk> . It also changes the behaviour of the ant so that the gaster ( rear part ) is held raised . This presumably increases the chances of the ant being eaten by birds . The droppings of birds are collected by other ants and fed to their brood , thereby helping to spread the nematode . 
 In an unusual case , <unk> larvae of some beetles of the genus <unk> form a group and produce a pheromone that mimics the sex attractant of its host bee species . When a male bee arrives and attempts to mate with the mass of larvae , they climb onto his abdomen . From there , they transfer to a female bee , and from there to the bee nest to parasitize the bee larvae . 
 Host @-@ parasite mimicry is a two species system where a parasite mimics its own host . Cuckoos are a canonical example of brood parasitism , a form of kleptoparasitism where the mother has its offspring raised by another unwitting organism , cutting down the biological mother 's parental investment in the process . The ability to lay eggs that mimic the host eggs is the key adaptation . The adaptation to different hosts is inherited through the female line in so @-@ called gentes . Cases of intraspecific brood parasitism , where a female lays in conspecific 's nest , as illustrated by the goldeneye duck ( Bucephala <unk> ) , do not represent a case of mimicry . Another example is that of chemical mimicry , in which the parasitic butterfly Phengaris rebeli , which parasitizes the ant species Myrmica schencki by releasing chemicals that fool the worker ants to believe that the caterpillar larvae are ant larvae , and enable the P. rebeli larvae to be brought directly into the M. schencki nest . Parasitic ( cuckoo ) bumblebees ( formerly Psithyrus , now included in Bombus ) resemble their hosts more closely than would be expected by chance , at least in areas like Europe where parasite @-@ host co @-@ speciation is common . However , this is explainable as Müllerian mimicry , rather than requiring the parasite 's coloration to deceive the host and thus constitute aggressive mimicry . 
 = = = Reproductive = = = 
 Reproductive mimicry occurs when the actions of the dupe directly aid in the mimic 's reproduction . This is common in plants with deceptive flowers that do not provide the reward they seem to offer . Other forms of mimicry have a reproductive component , such as Vavilovian mimicry involving seeds , and brood parasitism , which can also involve aggressive mimicry . 
 = = = = Mimicry of flowers = = = = 
 Bakerian mimicry , named after Herbert G. Baker , is a form of automimicry where female flowers mimic male flowers of their own species , cheating pollinators out of a reward . This reproductive mimicry may not be readily apparent as members of the same species may still exhibit some degree of sexual dimorphism . It is common in many species of <unk> . 
 Like Bakerian mimicry , <unk> mimicry is a form of reproductive floral mimicry , but the model belongs to a different species than the mimic . The name refers to Calaway H. Dodson . By providing similar sensory signals as the model flower , it can lure its pollinators . Like Bakerian mimics , no nectar is provided . <unk> <unk> ( Orchidaceae ) resembles flowers of Lantana camara and <unk> <unk> , and is pollinated by monarch butterflies and perhaps hummingbirds . Similar cases are seen in some other species of the same family . The mimetic species may still have pollinators of its own though . For example , a <unk> beetle , which usually <unk> correspondingly colored Cistus flowers , is also known to aid in pollination of <unk> species that are normally pollinated by bees . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 <unk> occurs when a flower mimics a female of a certain insect species , inducing the males to try to copulate with the flower . This is much like the aggressive mimicry in fireflies described previously , but with a more benign outcome for the pollinator . This form of mimicry has been called <unk> mimicry , after Maurice @-@ Alexandre <unk> , who first described the phenomenon . It is most common in orchids , which mimic females of the order Hymenoptera ( generally bees and wasps ) , and may account for around 60 % of <unk> . Depending on the morphology of the flower , a pollen sac called a pollinia is attached to the head or abdomen of the male . This is then transferred to the stigma of the next flower the male tries to inseminate , resulting in pollination . Visual mimicry is the most obvious sign of this deception for humans , but the visual aspect may be minor or non @-@ existent . It is the senses of touch and olfaction that are most important . 
 = = = = Inter @-@ sexual mimicry = = = = 
 Inter @-@ sexual mimicry occurs when individuals of one sex in a species mimic members of the opposite sex . An example is the three male forms of the marine isopod <unk> sculpta . Alpha males are the largest and guard a harem of females . Beta males mimic females and manage to enter the harem of females without being detected by the alpha males allowing them to mate . Gamma males are the smallest males and mimic juveniles . This also allows them to mate with the females without the alpha males detecting them . Similarly , among common side @-@ blotched lizards , some males mimic the yellow throat coloration and even mating rejection behavior of the other sex to sneak matings with guarded females . These males look and behave like unreceptive females . This strategy is effective against " usurper " males with orange throats , but ineffective against blue throated " <unk> " males , which chase them away . Female spotted hyenas have pseudo @-@ penises that make them look like males . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> or intraspecific mimicry occurs within a single species . One form of such mimicry is where one part of an organism 's body resembles another part . For example , the tails of some snakes resemble their heads and they show behavior such as moving backwards when threatened and presenting the predator with the tail , thereby improving their chances of escape without fatal harm . Some species of fishes have eyespots near their tails , and when mildly alarmed swim slowly backwards , presenting the tail as a head . Some insects too , have tail patterns and appendages of various degrees of sophistication that promote attacks at the rear rather than at the head . Several species of pygmy owl bear " false eyes " on the back of the head , misleading predators into reacting as though they were the subject of an aggressive stare . 
 Some writers use the term " automimicry " when the mimic imitates other morphs within the same species . For example , in a species where males mimic females or vice versa , this may be an instance of sexual mimicry in evolutionary game theory . Examples are found in some species of birds , fishes , and lizards . Quite elaborate strategies along these lines are known , such as the well @-@ known " scissors , paper , rock " mimicry in Uta <unk> , but there are qualitatively different examples in many other species , such as some <unk> . 
 Many species of insects are toxic or distasteful when they have fed on certain plants that contain chemicals of particular classes , but not when they have fed on plants that lack those chemicals . For instance , some species of the subfamily <unk> feed on various species of the <unk> in the family Apocynaceae , which render them poisonous and emetic to most predators . Such insects frequently are aposematically coloured and patterned . When feeding on innocuous plants however , they are harmless and nutritious , but a bird that once has sampled a toxic specimen is unlikely to eat harmless specimens that have the same aposematic coloration . When regarded as mimicry of toxic members of the same species , this too may be seen as automimicry . 
 Some species of caterpillar , such as many hawkmoths ( Sphingidae ) , have eyespots on their anterior abdominal segments . When alarmed , they retract the head and the thoracic segments into the body , leaving the apparently threatening large eyes at the front of the visible part of the body . 
 Many insects have filamentous " tails " at the ends of their wings and patterns of markings on the wings themselves . These combine to create a " false head " . This misdirects predators such as birds and jumping spiders ( Salticidae ) . Spectacular examples occur in the hairstreak butterflies ; when perching on a twig or flower , they commonly do so upside down and shift their rear wings repeatedly , causing antenna @-@ like movements of the " tails " on their wings . Studies of rear @-@ wing damage support the hypothesis that this strategy is effective in deflecting attacks from the insect 's head . 
 = = = Others = = = 
 Some forms of mimicry do not fit easily within the classification given previously . 
 Floral mimicry is induced by the <unk> fungus <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> . In this unusual case , a fungal plant pathogen infects leaves of blueberries , causing them to secrete sugars , in effect mimicking the nectar of flowers . To the naked eye the leaves do not look like flowers , yet they still attract pollinating insects like bees using an ultraviolet signal . This case is unusual , in that the fungus benefits from the deception but it is the leaves that act as mimics , being harmed in the process . It is similar to host @-@ parasite mimicry , but the host does not receive the signal . It has a little in common with automimicry , but the plant does not benefit from the mimicry , and the action of the pathogen is required to produce it . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 It is widely accepted that mimicry evolves as a positive adaptation . The <unk> and novelist Vladimir Nabokov argued that although natural selection might stabilize a " mimic " form , it would not be necessary to create it . 
 The most widely accepted model used to explain the evolution of mimicry in butterflies is the two @-@ step hypothesis . The first step involves mutation in modifier genes that regulate a complex cluster of linked genes that cause large changes in morphology . The second step consists of selections on genes with smaller phenotypic effects , creating an increasingly close resemblance . This model is supported by empirical evidence that suggests that a few single point mutations cause large phenotypic effects , while numerous others produce smaller effects . Some regulatory elements collaborate to form a <unk> for the development of butterfly color patterns . The model is supported by computational simulations of population genetics . The Batesian mimicry in Papilio <unk> is controlled by the <unk> gene . 
 Some mimicry is imperfect . Natural selection drives mimicry only far enough to deceive predators . For example , when predators avoid a mimic that imperfectly resembles a coral snake , the mimic is sufficiently protected . 
 Convergent evolution is an alternative explanation for why organisms such as coral reef fish and benthic marine invertebrates such as sponges and nudibranchs have come to resemble each other . 
 = = = Children 's = = = 
 Hoff , M. K. ( 2003 ) Mimicry and Camouflage . Creative Education . Mankato , Minnesota , USA , Great Britain . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 237 @-@ 9 . 
 = The Box Tree = 
 The Box Tree is a restaurant located in Ilkley , West Yorkshire , England . It has been operated by chef Simon Gueller and his wife , Rena , since 2005 . Under their management the restaurant has been redecorated , although elements from the original owners of the restaurant remain . Reception by food critics has improved over the years ; the restaurant has a single Michelin star and three AA rosettes . A sister company is also run by the chef , called Box Tree Events . 
 The restaurant opened originally as a tearoom in 1962 , and went on to become one of the first four British restaurants to win two stars in 1977 . After losing both stars , it regained a star between 1996 and 2001 , whilst owned by Helen Avis . In 2010 , former employee Marco Pierre White bought into the restaurant . It serves modern French cuisine , and has also been awarded three AA rosettes and listed in Harden 's restaurant guide . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Box Tree has been located at 35 – 37 Church Street in Ilkley since its original opening under Malcolm Reid and Colin Long in 1962 . It has been operated by Simon and Rena Gueller since 2004 , originally under lease from the previous operator . Gueller had previously been head chef at the Michelin @-@ starred restaurant Rascasse . The Guellers also run a sister company called Box Tree Events , which provides outside catering . 
 After being purchased by the Guellers in 2004 , the restaurant was redecorated and modernised , the décor having become shabby under previous owners . The new decorations included recessed lighting and fabric @-@ covered walls . There is a fireplace in the centre of the dining room , with an 18th @-@ century settle ( a type of bench ) beside it . Elements from the Reid and Long era remain , with the bar and ceilings still being recognisable from their time at the restaurant . 
 = = = Menu = = = 
 The current menu still has elements from the earlier days of the restaurant , such as lobster <unk> and grouse . Chef Gueller produces modern French cuisine , with classical elements . Dishes on the restaurant 's menu include a <unk> of foie gras served with a salad of smoked eel , alongside apple served both as a jelly and as a purée . Foie gras was temporarily taken off the menu in 2008 following threats of protests from animal rights activists . The dish was later restored to the menu , and foie gras has also since been served with a duck <unk> and pistachios . 
 To celebrate the 45th anniversary of the restaurant in 2008 , Gueller recreated elements of the 1963 menu , but decided not to make certain dishes such as chicken chasseur or melon boats . Other parts of the original menu included crêpes and half a grilled grapefruit . The dishes selected were included for a week in a six course 1960s set menu . 
 = = History = = 
 The sandstone building itself dates back to the 1720s . It was purchased by Reid and Long in 1962 who initially operated the premises as a tea room . The restaurant gained two Michelin stars in 1977 ; that year 's list was the first with two star restaurants in the UK ( the others were The Waterside Inn , Le Gavroche and The Connaught ) . 
 Following the Michelin stars , the restaurant became a hot @-@ spot for celebrities , with the singer Johnny Mathis being a regular , and both Shirley Bassey and Margaret Thatcher were seen at the restaurant . In 1979 future multi @-@ Michelin star chef Marco Pierre White began working at the Box Tree at the age of 17 , under Reid and Long ; he received his training at the restaurant . He later recalled in his book White Heat that the restaurant made him obsessed with food and he still considers the restaurant to be his spiritual home . 
 After holding the two Michelin stars until 1988 , and then losing its single star in 1991 , in 1992 the restaurant went into receivership and was purchased by Helen Avis . Under chef Thierry <unk> @-@ <unk> , the restaurant was restored to a single Michelin star in 1996 . White returned to the restaurant as a consultant in 1994 , which lasted two months and ended in a court case against the chef with damages of £ 880 awarded after he damaged a ceiling . 
 <unk> @-@ <unk> left the restaurant in 2001 , and was replaced by Toby Hill , the youngest chef ever to hold a Michelin star . The change of chef also changed the style of food served to a " Mediterranean slant " . something which did not last as Hill left after only seven months in charge of the kitchen . He was replaced by Shane Goodway in 2002 and the style reverted to traditional French . The restaurant lost the Michelin star in the 2003 edition of the guide and was no longer included in either the AA Restaurant Guide or the Good Food Guide . Goodway left the kitchen shortly after the restaurant lost the Michelin star , but stated that the decision had been taken before they had been informed . 
 The Guellers leased the restaurant from Avis in 2004 . Within five months of re @-@ opening it regained a Michelin star . Having been friends with Simon Gueller since they were teenagers , Marco Pierre White returned to the restaurant in 2007 in order to film segments for the ITV1 cookery reality television show Hell 's Kitchen . White has aspirations to work with Gueller to return the Box Tree to its former status as a two @-@ Michelin @-@ starred restaurant . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Jan Moir reviewed the restaurant in 2004 for The Daily Telegraph shortly after Gueller took over and refurbished the restaurant . She praised the lighter style of the food under the new chef and , although she was initially concerned over the waiter suggesting squab pigeon , she described the dish as " neatly executed " , and the most successful dish that she tasted . She thought that the chef was good , but needed time to settle in and described his wife Rina in front of house as a " complete natural " . Jay Rayner visited the restaurant in 2005 , prior to the restaurant being awarded a new Michelin star . He pointed out some issues regarding menu pricing as there were differences in prices on the website as opposed to in person . He thought that the scallops were undercooked , and the brioche served with a beef tenderloin arrived soggy . He said that the dishes " showed an understanding of the fundamentals " , but were not of particular note . 
 In 2012 , Jill Turton ate at the restaurant for the Yorkshire Post following the restaurant 's fiftieth anniversary , and described some dishes , such as asparagus and a soft @-@ boiled egg which had been cooked in a bain @-@ marie , as " perfect " . She described the meal overall as " terrific " , but said that the desserts were not a stretch for the kitchen , having ordered a chocolate brownie . 
 Harden 's , a British restaurant guide , describes the food as " light and delicious " , and the cooking as " exemplary " . In its review system , it rates the food as one out of five ( one being the highest rating available ) , and both service and ambiance as two out of five . The Automobile Association has awarded The Box Tree three AA rosettes . 
 = Alloxylon pinnatum = 
 Alloxylon pinnatum , commonly known as Dorrigo waratah , is a tree of the family Proteaceae found in warm @-@ temperate rainforest of south @-@ east Queensland and northern New South Wales in eastern Australia . It has shiny green leaves that are either pinnate and up to 30 cm ( 12 in ) long , or lanceolate ( spear @-@ shaped ) and up to 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) long . The prominent pinkish @-@ red flower heads , known as inflorescences , appear in spring and summer ; these are made up of 50 to 140 individual flowers arranged in corymb or raceme . These are followed by rectangular woody seed pods , which bear two rows of winged seeds . 
 Previously known as Oreocallis pinnata for many years , it was transferred to the new genus Alloxylon by Peter Weston and Mike Crisp in 1991 . This genus contains the four species previously classified in Oreocallis that are found in Australasia . Its terminal tubular flowers indicate that the species is pollinated by birds . Classified as near threatened under the Queensland Nature Conservation Act 1992 , Alloxylon pinnatum has proven difficult to keep alive in cultivation . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Dorrigo waratah is a rainforest tree that reaches 25 m ( 82 ft ) high and a has non @-@ buttressed trunk of 1 @.@ 5 m ( 5 ft ) diameter at breast height ( dbh ) . The bark is greyish brown and covered in many small pimples , rendering it sandpaper @-@ like in texture . The green foliage consists of several distinct juvenile and adult leaf forms , which are arranged alternately along the stems . Juvenile leaves are light green and at first simple , with a single blade . Successive leaves on more mature plants become more complex , or pinnate , with deep ' pinnae ' ( lobes ) ; these leaves are up to 30 cm ( 12 in ) long with 2 – 11 leaflets . Some adult leaves are simple — with a single lanceolate leaf blade — and up to 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) long ; these are generally located near the flower heads . Among the green foliage there are occasional yellow leaves . New branchlets and leaves are covered in brown hair . 
 The pinkish @-@ red compound flowerheads , known as inflorescences , are up to 20 cm ( 8 cm ) across in spring to summer , and contain between 50 and 140 smaller flowers , arranged in a corymb or raceme . These individual flowers are 3 – 3 @.@ 8 cm ( 1 1 ⁄ 8 – 1 1 ⁄ 2 in ) long and sit atop stalks ( known as pedicels ) up to 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 3 ⁄ 8 in ) in length , which arise in pairs off the main stalk within the inflorescence . Each flower consists of a tubular perianth , which partly splits along one side at anthesis to release the thick style . The stigma is contained within a slanting disc @-@ like structure at the tip of the style . The tubular perianth splits into four segments at its tip , and the anther lies in the concave parts within each of these segments . The flower parts are glabrous ( smooth ) . The pollen is crimson . After flowering , the 8 – 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) long woody <unk> develops . Cylindrical in shape , it splits down one side to release the seed , which are ripe from February to June . The seeds are arranged in two rows , with at least four seeds in each row . Each seed is separated from the others by a membranous separator , and has a long rectangular wing , which is much longer than the seed itself . Alloxylon pinnatum can be distinguished from other members of the genus Alloxylon by its pinnate adult leaves . This feature serves to differentiate it as other species in the genus have simple adult leaves . The other species have inflorescences with fewer flowers ( 50 maximum ) , and have yellow pollen . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 First described as a variety of what was then known as Embothrium wickhamii by Joseph Maiden and Ernst <unk> in 1911 after a collection by <unk> , the Dorrigo waratah was raised to species status and reclassified as Oreocallis pinnata by Dutch botanist Hermann Otto <unk> in 1954 . The Australian members of the genus Oreocallis were recognised as markedly distinct from the South American species , which saw them allocated to the new genus Alloxylon . Hence , Oreocallis pinnata was given the new combination Alloxylon pinnatum in 1991 by Peter Weston and Mike Crisp of the Royal Botanic Gardens in Sydney . The species name refers to the pinnate leaves . Aside from Dorrigo waratah , it has also been called the Dorrigo oak , red silky oak , tree waratah , pink silky oak , red oak , Queensland waratah , and waratah oak . The genus name is derived from Ancient Greek <unk> , meaning " other " or " strange " , and <unk> , meaning " wood " . It refers to the genus 's unusual cell architecture compared with the related genera Telopea and Oreocallis . 
 Alloxylon pinnatum and the other three tree waratah species lie in the subtribe Embothriinae , along with the true waratahs ( Telopea ) , Oreocallis and the Chilean firetree ( Embothrium coccineum ) from South America . Almost all these species have red flowers that are terminal ( arising at the ends of branches ) , and hence the subtribe 's origin and floral appearance most likely predates the splitting of Gondwana into Australia , Antarctica , and South America over 60 million years ago . The position , colour and tubular shape of the flowers suggest that they are bird @-@ pollinated , and have been so since the radiation of nectar @-@ feeding birds such as honeyeaters in the Eocene . <unk> ambiguus is an ancient member of the proteaceae known only from pollen deposits , originally described from Eocene deposits in Victoria . The fossil pollen closely resembles that of Telopea truncata , A. pinnatum and Oreocallis grandiflora . 
 Cladistic analysis of morphological features within the Embothriinae showed A. pinnatum to be the earliest offshoot within the genus and sister to the other three species . Along with members of other genera in the Embothriinae , A. pinnatum has crimson pollen , while the other three Alloxylon species have yellow pollen . Hence it is likely that the ancestral pollen colour was red , and remained so with the emergence of the genus Alloxylon , yet changed to yellow after the divergence of A. pinnatum . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Dorrigo waratah is found in warm @-@ temperate rainforest from altitudes of 700 to 1 @,@ 250 m ( 2 @,@ 300 to 4 @,@ 100 ft ) along the McPherson Range in south @-@ east Queensland and the Dorrigo Plateau in northern New South Wales , with dominant tree species such as <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) and Antarctic beech ( <unk> moorei ) . In Queensland it is associated with golden sassafras ( <unk> sassafras ) and native crabapple ( <unk> ovata ) . It commonly grows on southern aspects of hills and slopes . 
 = = = Conservation status = = = 
 Alloxylon pinnatum is classified as <unk> under the Rare or Threatened Australian Plant ( ROTAP ) criteria for threatened species , and listed as near threatened under the Queensland Nature Conservation Act 1992 . In 2016 , it was one of eleven species selected for the Save a Species Walk campaign in April 2016 ; scientists walked 300 km to raise money for collection of seeds to be prepared and stored at the Australian <unk> at the Australian Botanic Garden , Mount Annan . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 The bright , prominently displayed flowers and bird @-@ attracting properties of Alloxylon pinnatum make it a desirable garden plant . It reaches only about 6 – 10 m ( 20 – 33 ft ) in cultivation , but has proven difficult to grow . Alloxylon pinnatum has been successfully cultivated at the Australian National Botanic Gardens in Canberra in a sheltered position in part @-@ shade with a thick layer of mulch . It is propagated most easily by seed , which is ripe from February to June and keeps for around twelve months . Seedlings often perish once 15 cm ( 6 in ) high , and are difficult to transplant . It has also been grown at Mount Tomah Botanic Garden , where it was noted to be exacting in its requirements , needing very good drainage as well as a sheltered location to survive . It is slow growing ; specimens planted in 1989 have been flowering since 1999 . The considerably easier to grow A. flammeum has been considered as a stock plant for grafting . 
 The pinkish red timber has been used for <unk> and furniture making . It is soft and light , weighing 500 kg per cubic metre . 
 = Colin Doyle ( footballer ) = 
 Colin Anthony Doyle ( born 12 June 1985 ) is an Irish professional footballer who plays as a goalkeeper for Bradford City and the Republic of Ireland national team . Doyle spent twelve years as a professional with Birmingham City . He made his debut in the Football League in April 2005 while on loan to Championship club Nottingham Forest , and also had loan spells at Chester City , Millwall and Coventry City . In 2015 , he signed for Blackpool . 
 At international level , Doyle has represented the Republic of Ireland at under @-@ 21 , B and senior levels . He made his full international debut in May 2007 against Ecuador . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Doyle was born in Cork , County Cork . He played both Gaelic football and hurling with his local club , Douglas , before taking up association football with Cork side Douglas Hall . He joined Birmingham City as an academy scholar during 2001 , before signing his first professional contract in 2003 . He made his first senior appearance for the club during the 4 – 0 victory over the Malaysian national team during the first Premier League Asia Trophy on 26 July 2003 , replacing Ian Bennett with 13 minutes of the game remaining . 
 Having not yet made a professional appearance for Birmingham , Doyle joined League Two side Chester City on loan in October 2004 . Chester 's first @-@ choice goalkeeper Wayne Brown was injured and they needed cover for reserve Chris Mackenzie . While at Chester , Doyle played his first game in English senior football as Chester defeated Rochdale in the Football League Trophy . 
 After returning to Birmingham , Doyle soon linked up with Championship club Nottingham Forest on a short @-@ term loan deal in December 2004 . The loan was then extended to keep him at the City Ground for the rest of the season . Doyle made his first @-@ team debut for Forest in a fifth @-@ round FA Cup tie against Tottenham Hotspur on 20 February 2005 . As the game approached half @-@ time , Doyle gifted Tottenham the lead as a Jermain Defoe free kick bounced out of his hands and into the net , but Forest were able to equalise in the second half to take the tie to a replay . Even though Doyle only played in a further three league games for Forest , he said he was glad to be able to play regular reserve @-@ team football and the loan spell had exceeded his expectations . He was rumoured to be returning to Forest on loan for the following season , a move which did not occur . 
 Doyle 's next loan move saw him join Millwall in November 2005 for a month . He went straight into the team for their game against Leeds United on 26 November . With the game goalless going into injury time , Millwall defender Ben May put the ball past Doyle for an own goal to give Leeds a 1 – 0 victory . Doyle was recalled from loan on 19 December to cover for the suspended Nico Vaesen . Doyle was on the bench for Birmingham 's Football League Cup quarter @-@ final against Manchester United the next day , and then returned to Millwall three days later on an emergency seven @-@ day loan . This loan deal was extended for another seven days before Doyle returned to Birmingham on 5 January 2006 after manager Steve Bruce had refused Millwall permission to use him in the FA Cup . A week later , Doyle agreed to go to Millwall for a third loan spell in the 2005 – 06 season , this time staying with " The Lions " until the end of the season . In total , Doyle played 14 games for Millwall during his three loan spells , keeping two clean sheets . 
 = = = First @-@ team football with Birmingham = = = 
 During his loan spell at Millwall , Doyle had suggested he might want to stay with the club on a permanent basis , despite the offer of a new contract from his parent club . However , at the end of the season he signed a two @-@ year deal with Birmingham . Because Vaesen 's contract had expired , there was an expectation that Doyle would step up to second @-@ choice goalkeeper behind Maik Taylor . Doyle played his first competitive game for Birmingham in their League Cup first @-@ round match against Shrewsbury Town on 22 August 2006 , in which he kept a clean sheet as his club won 1 – 0 . With Taylor injured , Doyle made his first league appearance for Birmingham four days later in a 2 – 0 defeat away to Cardiff City . Doyle played in the second and third rounds of the League Cup , against Wrexham and Sheffield United , 
 Doyle was preferred to Taylor for the visit to Colchester United in February 2007 ; according to the Birmingham Mail , " Doyle was unruffled and did himself a lot of good . His handling was sound , he got the game moving quickly and even though some of his kicks were skewed wide , he whacked the ball long and hard . " Assistant manager Eric Black said that Doyle had " shown that he 's more than capable and he 's ready to have a go now and challenge Maik Taylor " for the starting position . He kept his place in the team for the remainder of the season as Birmingham were promoted back to the Premier League . At the club 's end of season awards , Doyle picked up the " Magic Moment of the Season " award , for his penalty save against Wolverhampton Wanderers at Molineux that gained Birmingham a crucial three points , and the " Breakthrough " award . Doyle finished the season with eight clean sheets from 22 appearances . 
 He remained in the starting line @-@ up for the start of the 2007 – 08 Premier League season , but after a difficult first three games , he was dropped in favour of Taylor , and Richard <unk> was selected as substitute goalkeeper . Birmingham were relegated at the end of the season but won immediate promotion back to the Premier League the following season ; Doyle played in two league games . 
 = = = Return to second choice = = = 
 Following the loan signing of Joe Hart from Manchester City for the 2009 – 10 Premier League season , Doyle remained third choice , behind Hart and Taylor , a position he retained after Hart 's replacement by England international Ben Foster and Taylor 's signing of a contract extension before the 2010 – 11 season . 
 On 29 July 2010 , Doyle had a trial with Plymouth Argyle , playing 45 minutes of a friendly against Hereford United , but no deal materialised , and on 10 August 2010 , Doyle signed on loan for Coventry City . He was signed as emergency cover while <unk> Westwood was away on international duty , coming in for the League Cup match against Morecambe , but was recalled only a day later because of an injury to Foster . In January 2011 , Doyle played his first game for Birmingham for nearly two years in a 3 – 2 defeat of Coventry in the FA Cup fourth round , and kept his place for the fifth @-@ round tie against Sheffield Wednesday , keeping a clean sheet as the home side won 3 – 0 . He made his first Premier League appearance since August 2007 , as a first @-@ half substitute for the injured Foster , in a 5 – 0 defeat at Liverpool in April in which he conceded three goals . 
 After Birmingham were relegated at the end of the season , the club took up their option of an extra year on Doyle 's contract , despite accusations of inappropriate late @-@ night drinking after the club 's end @-@ of @-@ season dinner . He made 16 appearances in the 2011 – 12 season , including three matches in Birmingham 's UEFA Europa League campaign , and both legs of the Championship play @-@ off semi @-@ final . He made an error in a 2 – 1 win over Maribor , where he misjudged a pass from Jonathan Spector to allow Dalibor <unk> to score the game 's opening goal . In the FA Cup , Doyle saved two penalties from Juan Mata in the FA Cup ; one in the initial fifth @-@ round match , which finished 1 – 1 , and one in the replay , which ended in a 2 – 0 defeat . His performance in the initial game against Chelsea resulted in him being named as the man of the match . At the end of the season , he received a special award for completing ten senior seasons with the club , extended to an eleventh when he signed a one @-@ year contract , despite expectations that youngster Jack Butland might be first choice goalkeeper . 
 Doyle made his first appearance of the 2012 – 13 season in a 3 – 2 League Cup defeat at Coventry City . Despite only playing three games during the 2012 – 13 season , Doyle was offered a new two @-@ year contract at the end of the season . 
 In July 2013 , Doyle was brought on as a centre forward for the last six minutes of a pre @-@ season game against Shamrock Rovers because of an injury to striker Matt Green after all the outfield substitutes had been used . Again , he made his first competitive appearance of the season in the League Cup . In the 2014 – 15 season , he played three cup matches and once in the league , putting in an impressive performance in a 1 – 0 defeat at Blackburn Rovers when Darren Randolph was suspended . He was released when his contract expired at the end of his twelfth season as a professional with Birmingham City . The Birmingham Mail dubbed his departure the " end of an era " . 
 = = = Blackpool = = = 
 In June 2015 , Doyle signed a two @-@ year contract with Blackpool , newly relegated to League One . He was named club captain , and selected as starting goalkeeper , ahead of Kyle <unk> , for the opening match of the season , away to Colchester United . He made several saves to keep his side in the match , but damaged a shoulder in thwarting Colchester 's Gavin Massey and had to leave the field . After an initial prognosis of three months out , a scan suggested he could return to action within a month . He was back in the team for the visit to Scunthorpe United on 5 September , and produced a man @-@ of @-@ the @-@ match performance that earned him a place in the Football League 's Team of the Week as Blackpool won their first match of the season . Ankle ligament damage suffered in early November kept him out until the new year . 
 = = = Bradford City = = = 
 Following Blackpool 's relegation , Doyle joined League One side Bradford City for a fee of £ 1 after Bradford triggered a release clause in Doyle 's contract . 
 = = International career = = 
 In August 2006 , Doyle played for the Republic of Ireland under @-@ 21s away against Greece and kept a clean sheet in a 2 – 0 victory . He went on to make three further appearances for the U21 side . He made his first appearance for the senior national team , starting in a 1 – 1 friendly draw with Ecuador , on 23 May 2007 . The match was at Giants Stadium in East Rutherford , New Jersey . Following this match , he made an appearance for the Republic of Ireland B squad , playing 81 minutes of a match against Scotland B on 20 November 2007 . 
 = = Club statistics = = 
 As of match played 8 May 2016 
 = Rescued by Rover = 
 Rescued by Rover is a 1905 British short silent drama film , directed by Lewin Fitzhamon , about a dog who leads its master to his kidnapped baby , which was the first to feature the Hepworth 's family dog Blair in a starring role ; following the release , the dog became a household name and he is considered to be the first dog film star . The film , which according to Michael Brooke of BFI Screenonline , " marks a key stage in the medium 's development from an amusing novelty to the seventh art , " and , " possibly the only point in film history when British cinema unquestionably led the world , " was an advance in filming techniques , editing , production and story telling . 
 Four hundred prints were sold , so many that the negatives wore out twice , requiring the film to be re @-@ shot each time . Two professional actors were paid to appear , and the film is cited as the first film to have used paid actors . The style of shooting and editing would bridge the gap between the styles of directors Edwin Stanton Porter and D. W. Griffith , and prints have been preserved in both the United States and the United Kingdom . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film opens with Rover , a collie playing with a child in front of a fireplace . Later that day , the baby is taken out in a pram by her nurse . The nurse refuses to aid a beggar woman , and is then distracted upon meeting a soldier . While talking to the soldier , she pays no attention to the baby , and the beggar woman approaches from behind and snatches the sleeping child . 
 In the next scene , the nurse confesses to the mother that the child has been lost . Rover , also sitting in the room , listens before jumping through the window and racing down the street , going around a corner and across a river . The dog makes its way to a slum and barges through each and every door ; he finds the right one and enters . In an attic , the beggar woman is removing the clothing from the child ; the dog enters and is driven off by the beggar . 
 The dog leaves the house and swims back across the river , down the street and into its master and mistress 's home . In a study , the child 's father is sitting ; Rover enters and pleads with him to follow . They leave , with the man following the dog across the river in a boat to the slums . They enter the room where the child is hidden , and the father quickly takes the child from the beggar woman and leaves with the dog . Upon their return home , the child is placed in the arms of the mother , while Rover prances happily around them . 
 = = Production = = 
 Rescued by Rover was predominantly a family affair – Cecil Hepworth 's wife , Margaret , wrote the scenario and played the role of the mother on screen . Hepworth himself directed , painted the scenery and acted as the father . Their child was the baby on screen , and the part of Rover was played by the family dog , Blair . Two professional actors were paid to appear , Sebastian Smith as the soldier , and his wife as the old woman who stole the baby . The two actors were paid half a guinea each ; Hepworth would recall " We couldn 't get them for less " . The film is often cited as the first film to have used paid actors . Completing the cast was Mabel Clark , who had previously played Alice in Hepworth 's version of Alice in Wonderland , as the child 's nurse . Clark was also the cutting room assistant . 
 The movie was so successful that Hepworth had to re @-@ shoot the entire film twice . The first two negatives wore out in meeting the demand for prints . 
 = = Release = = 
 Rescued by Rover is often considered to be the United Kingdom 's first major fiction film . Some four hundred prints were sold at a price of £ 8 each , and they circulated for at least four or five years . The character of Rover the dog , played by Hepworth 's family dog Blair , became a household name and is considered the world 's first canine film star . This first appearance of a dog in a narrative based film caused the uncommon name of Rover to become popular for dogs . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Previous films by Hepworth and his company had been considered a continuation of the cinema of attractions . The first few years of the 20th century were a period in which many film @-@ makers began placing a higher emphasis on portraying a narrative story , and lesser so more on the image and the ability to show something . The film is considered a step forward in both film grammar and structure . Contemporary audiences may find it rather hoary , although one scholar has noted the format would be familiar to fans of the dog character Lassie . 
 It gave rise to a number of other chase films centred on animals , including Lewin Fitzhamon 's later film Dumb <unk> ( 1907 ) . Rescued by Rover has parallels with D. W. Griffith 's debut film The Adventures of Dollie ( 1908 ) . 
 Rescued by Rover contains more than twenty shots ; this is a considerable advance when compared with Hepworth 's own How it Feels to be Run Over ( 1900 ) , which contains a single shot . This not only made the film longer , but demonstrated that advances in film language could be made in editing as well as shooting . Additionally , the editing of Rescued by Rover is notable in its use of time contractions , which made Rover 's journeys take considerably less time by portrayal than they would have in reality . 
 In linking these shots together , Hepworth attempted to avoid the confusion of earlier multi @-@ shot films such as Edwin S. Porter 's The Great Train Robbery ( 1903 ) . Three shots are used to set up the plot , that of the baby being stolen by a beggar woman . Nearly all of the following shots show Rover tracking down the child . When the dog returns home , the shots ' settings are repeated in reverse as the dog travels them ; they are shown again in the original order , for a third time , when the dog brings the father . A fourth repetition is , rather radically for its time , spared by showing the kidnapper 's return to her room followed by a shot of the reunited family . 
 With its form and structure in consideration , Rescued by Rover shows a growing understanding among directors of how stories can be told on film ; that is , the belief that the audience does not need to see the family return to their home , but will instead assume this occurred while the beggar woman was returning to her hovel . While the duration of the shot does not correspond with the time necessary for the father and the family dog to travel back , it also does not affect the sense of realistic on @-@ screen representation . 
 Also , cinematographic improvements that modern viewers would find relatively minor were noted in their day . In the attic scenes , for instance , Hepworth 's use of arc lights was celebrated for being an early use of harsh lighting conditions to create ambiance and indicate a dangerous setting . Prints have been saved both in the Library of Congress film archive , and the National Film and Television Archive of the British Film Institute . 
 = Un Poco de Amor = 
 " Un Poco de Amor " ( English : " A Little Bit of Love " ) is a song by Colombian singer @-@ songwriter Shakira , taken from her debut studio album Pies Descalzos . It was released on May 16 , 1996 , by Sony Music and Columbia Records as the fourth single from the album . The song was written and produced by Shakira and Luis Fernando Ochoa . " Un Poco de Amor " is a Latin pop song that incorporates reggae elements . Lyrically , it states that Shakira is waiting to find someone who loves her . 
 Upon its release , " Un Poco de Amor " received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who recognized it as a stand @-@ out track from Pies Descalzos . The song peaked at number 11 on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs and Latin Songs component charts . While less successful than its preceding singles , its performance continued to aid its parent album in becoming her breakthrough record , which eventually attained platinum certifications in Argentina , Brazil , Colombia , and the United States . 
 A Portuguese @-@ language translation of the track titled " Um <unk> de Amor " appeared on Shakira 's first remix album The Remixes in 1997 . The song has additionally been performed during two of her concert tours to date . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Shakira released her first official studio album Pies Descalzos in 1995 by Sony Music and Columbia Records . Assuming a prominent position in its production , she co @-@ wrote and co @-@ produced each of the eleven tracks included on the record . <unk> as the fourth single from the project , " Un Poco de Amor " saw additional songwriting and production from Luis Fernando Ochoa . The track is heavily influenced by Latin pop elements , and additionally incorporates reggae styles . Lyrically , it states that Shakira is waiting to find someone who loves her . It became her first track to include phrases in English , performed by the uncredited Howard Glasford . 
 The accompanying music video for " Un Poco de Amor " was directed by Gustavo Garzón . The clip depicts a black @-@ haired and red @-@ haired Shakira dancing with Glasford , in addition to members of various ethnic groups . The music video received a Billboard Latin Music Award for Pop Video of the Year . A Portuguese version of the song , entitled " Um <unk> de Amor " , was included in Shakira 's 1997 remix album The Remixes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon its release , " Un Poco de Amor " received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who recognized it as a stand @-@ out track from Pies Descalzos . Carlos Quintana of About.com complimented the track for its reggae influences , and placed it among his personal favorites from the record . Similarly , Jose F. Promis from Allmusic praised it for being a " dancehall @-@ lite " track , going on to select the song as an " Allmusic Pick " . The song peaked at number 11 on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs and Latin Songs component charts . While less successful than its preceding singles , its performance continued to aid its parent album in becoming her breakthrough record , which eventually attained platinum certifications in Argentina , Brazil , and the United States . Pies Descalzos was also awarded the " Diamond Prism " award in Colombia . 
 In 1996 , " Un Poco de Amor " was included in the reissue of Pies Descalzos , titled Colección de Oro . In 2005 , it was featured as the third track for Shakira 's first greatest hits album Grandes Éxitos . Its appearance in both records was complimented as being reminiscent of her rise to prominence . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Shakira has performed " Un Poco de Amor " during two of her concert tours thus far . She first performed the track in Mexico City during her Tour Pies Descalzos , which ran from 1996 through 1997 . It was also included during the Tour of the Mongoose , held in support of her third studio album Laundry Service . The song was notably absent from her Tour <unk> , Oral Fixation Tour , and The Sun Comes Out World Tour . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Remix EP 
 " Un Poco De Amor " 
 " Un Poco De Amor " ( Memes Dancehall Posse Mix ) 
 " Un Poco De Amor " ( The Extended Dancehall 12 ) 
 " Un Poco De Amor " ( Memes Jazz Experience ) 
 " Un Poco De Amor " ( Instrumental ) 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Japanese aircraft carrier Unryū = 
 The Japanese aircraft carrier Unryū ( <unk> , Cloud Dragon ) was the lead ship of her class of fleet aircraft carriers built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) during World War II . She was commissioned in mid @-@ 1944 , but fuel and aircrew shortages limited her use to Japanese waters . The impending American invasion of Luzon caused the IJN to order her to transport aircraft and supplies to the Philippines in December . The ship was torpedoed and sunk by the American submarine USS Redfish in the East China Sea during the voyage . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The last purpose @-@ built Japanese carrier construction during World War II was a group of vessels based on an improved Hiryū design , but with individual units differing in detail reflecting the changing circumstances as the conflict in the Pacific approached its conclusion . Unryū was ordered , under the provisional name of # 302 , as part of the Rapid Naval Armaments Supplement Programme of 1941 . The ship was one of 16 Unryū @-@ class aircraft carriers planned , although only three were completed before the end of the war . 
 Unryū had a length of 227 @.@ 35 meters ( 745 ft 11 in ) overall . She had a beam of 22 meters ( 72 ft 2 in ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 73 meters ( 28 ft 8 in ) . She displaced 20 @,@ 450 metric tons ( 20 @,@ 130 long tons ) . Her crew consisted of 1 @,@ 595 officers and men . 
 The ship used the same turbines and boilers as used in the heavy cruiser Suzuya . These consisted of four geared steam turbine sets with a total of 152 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 113 @,@ 000 kW ) , each driving one shaft , using steam provided by eight Kampon Type B water @-@ tube boilers . The ship had a designed speed of 34 knots ( 63 km / h ; 39 mph ) . Unryū carried 3 @,@ 670 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 610 long tons ) of fuel oil which gave her a range of 8 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 000 km ; 9 @,@ 200 mi ) at 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . She had two funnels on the starboard side , each angled below the horizontal . They were fitted with a water @-@ cooling system to reduce the turbulence caused by hot exhaust gases . 
 = = = Flight deck arrangements = = = 
 Unryū 's flight deck was 216 @.@ 9 meters ( 711 ft 7 in ) long and had a maximum width of 27 meters ( 88 ft 7 in ) . A small island was mounted well forward on the starboard side and contained the ship 's bridge and air operations control center . It was fitted with a small tripod mast that mounted one of the ship 's radar antennas . The ship was designed with two superimposed hangars that were served by two aircraft elevators , each 14 by 14 meters ( 46 by 46 ft ) ; the center elevator as used in Hiryū was deleted to simplify construction and reduce stress in the hull . The elevators had a maximum capacity of 7 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 15 @,@ 000 lb ) and took 19 seconds to go from the lower hangar to the flight deck . Unryū was fitted with hydraulically operated Type 3 arresting gear with nine cables . She also mounted three Type 3 crash barricades . No aircraft catapult was fitted . The ship mounted a retractable crane on the starboard side of the flight deck , just aft of the rear elevator . Unryū carried 397 @,@ 340 liters ( 87 @,@ 400 imp gal ; 104 @,@ 970 U.S. gal ) of aviation gasoline for her aircraft . 
 The ship 's air group was originally intended to consist of 12 Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighters , plus 3 in storage , 27 Aichi D3A Val dive bombers , plus 3 in reserve , and 18 Nakajima B5N " Kate " torpedo bombers plus 2 in crates . Amagi 's hangars could not accommodate so many aircraft so 11 planes were planned to be permanently carried on the flight deck . In 1943 the air group was revised to consist of 18 Mitsubishi A7M " Sam " fighters ( + 2 in storage ) , 27 Yokosuka D4Y " Judy " dive bombers and 6 Nakajima C6N " Myrt " reconnaissance aircraft . Of these , the C6Ns were intended to be carried on the flight deck . When the ship commissioned in 1944 , neither the A7M nor the C6Ns were yet in service , so the air group was reconfigured to consist of 27 Zeros , 12 D4Ys , 3 of which were to be the reconnaissance version , and 9 Nakajima B6N " Jill " torpedo bombers . By this time , however , the shortage of carrier @-@ qualified aircrew was such that they were ordered to operate from shore bases and Unryū never embarked her full air group . 
 = = = Armor , armament and sensors = = = 
 Unryū 's waterline armored belt was 46 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) thick over her machinery spaces , but this increased to 140 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) over her magazines . Her deck armor above the machinery was 25 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) thick , but the armor above the magazines was 56 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) thick . 
 The ship 's primary armament consisted of a dozen 40 @-@ caliber 12 @.@ 7 cm ( 5 in ) Type 89 anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns in twin mounts on sponsons on the ship 's sides . Unryū was initially equipped with 16 triple 25 mm ( 1 in ) Type 96 and 3 single Type 96 AA gun mounts , most on sponsons along the sides of the hull . These guns were supplemented by six 28 @-@ round AA rocket launchers . Shortly after completion , another 4 triple and 13 single 25 mm mounts were added . For defense against submarines , the carrier was fitted with six depth charge throwers and carried between six and ten depth charges for them . A Type 3 sonar and a Type 93 hydrophone were fitted to detect any submarines . 
 Two Type 94 high @-@ angle fire @-@ control directors , one on each side of the ship , were fitted to control the Type 89 guns . Each director mounted a 4 @.@ 5 @-@ meter ( 14 ft 9 in ) rangefinder . Six Type 95 directors controlled the 25 mm guns and the 12 cm rocket launchers . Early warning was provided by two Type 2 , Mark 2 , Model 1 air search radars . One of these was mounted on the top of the island while the other retracted into the port side of the flight deck , between the two elevators . In addition , Unryū had two smaller Type 3 , Mark 1 , Model 3 early @-@ warning radars , one mounted on the tripod mast on the island and the other on the starboard aft retractable radio mast . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Unryū was laid down at Yokosuka Naval Arsenal on 1 August 1942 and launched on 25 September 1943 . Upon commissioning on 6 August 1944 , she was assigned to the 3rd Fleet . She underwent shakedown and trials within Tokyo Bay through mid @-@ September , and was then transferred to Kure Naval District , from which she made numerous training runs around the Seto Inland Sea until December . From 30 October to 7 November , she served briefly as the flagship of Vice Admiral Jisaburo Ozawa ’ s Mobile Fleet . Eight days later , the Mobile Fleet was disbanded and the ship was transferred to Carrier Division 1 . Later that month , some A6Ms and B6Ns were embarked . 
 = = = Final voyage = = = 
 On 13 December 1944 , thirty Yokosuka <unk> <unk> kamikaze rocket planes were loaded aboard Unryū for transport to Manila in the Philippines . Four days later , on 17 December 1944 , Unryū departed Kure , Hiroshima escorted by the destroyers Shigure , <unk> , and <unk> under the overall command of Captain Konishi . Her maiden sea voyage was a vain attempt to reinforce the garrison on the island of Luzon just prior to the Allied landings there . 
 On 19 December 1944 , Unryū was torpedoed and sunk by the submarine USS Redfish . Redfish fired four torpedoes , one of which hit directly under the carrier 's bridge on the starboard side at 16 : 35 . The hit stopped the vessel dead in the water as it severed the main steam line , flooded two boiler rooms , started several fires and gave the ship a 3 @-@ degree list . Just as the carrier began to get underway , another torpedo struck at 16 : 50 on the starboard side abreast the forward elevator and the highly volatile forward aviation gasoline tanks . The resulting explosion caused the warheads of the Ohka kamikaze planes stored on the lower hangar deck to detonate and essentially blew the bow off the ship . The ship listed to 30 degrees very quickly and the order to abandon ship was given . With a 90 @-@ degree list , the ship sank bow @-@ first to the bed of the East China Sea in just seven minutes at position 29 ° 59 ′ N 124 ° 03 ′ E. Casualties were very heavy with 1 @,@ 238 officers , crewmen and passengers losing their lives . Only 145 men survived to be rescued by Shigure , which returned to Sasebo , Nagasaki on 22 December . Unryū was struck from the Navy List on 20 February 1945 . 
 = Juldarigi = 
 Juldarigi ( Hangul : <unk> , also <unk> ) is a traditional Korean sport similar to tug of war . It has a ritual and divinatory significance to many agricultural communities in the country , and is performed at festivals and community gatherings . The sport uses two huge rice @-@ straw ropes , connected by a central peg , which are pulled by teams representing the East and West sides of the village ( the competition is often rigged in favour of the Western team ) . A number of religious and traditional rituals are performed before and after the actual competition . 
 Several areas of Korea have their own distinct variations of juldarigi , and similar tug @-@ of @-@ war games with connections to agriculture are found in rural communities across Southeast Asia . 
 = = Cultural significance = = 
 Juldarigi is an important part of several agricultural celebrations , and is a common event at the <unk> lunar festival . 
 As with many Korean rural folk traditions , the sport is regarded as a predictor of future events , specifically harvests . The outcome of a ritualised contest between the two sides of a village ( East and West ) was seen as an indicator of the abundance ( or otherwise ) of that year 's rice crop , which would be harvested in the autumn ; as a result , juldarigi and similar folk sports are predominant in the rice @-@ growing areas of the South . This is due to the common association in Southeast Asia between dragons ( which the ropes of the juldarigi are thought to resemble ) and rain ; as a result juldarigi or similar tug @-@ of @-@ war ceremonies have also historically been staged during periods of drought . The connection of the two ropes used ( with one rope 's smaller loop being placed through the other 's larger loop ) is reminiscent of sexual intercourse , which also gives rise to the sport 's association with fecundity . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 The straw ropes used in juldarigi are immense , up to 200m in length and 1m in diameter . They can weigh as much as 40 tons . They are constructed of twisted rice straw ; this choice of material is symbolic , since rice is the staple grain in the areas where juldarigi is practiced . The construction process is a communal event , reflecting the communal nature of rice cultivation . Two ropes are used , one for each team ; they are connected by a wooden beam or stump known as a <unk> , around three metres long . The rope held by the Eastern team is termed the <unk> ( Hangul : <unk> " male rope " ) and the Western team hold the <unk> ( Hangul : <unk> " female rope " ) . Because of the ropes ' great size , they cannot be grasped directly ; players attached smaller side @-@ ropes to the main rope to act as handles and fray its ends to provide additional hand @-@ holds . 
 = = Ceremony = = 
 The ceremony leading up to the tug of war begins at around midnight on the eve of the festival . Both teams repair to their respective ropes and offer prayers for victory ; this rite is known as <unk> ( Hangul : <unk> ; hanja : <unk> ) . During this time , the teams guard their ropes against tampering , as well as preventing members of the opposing team from stepping over it ( it is believed that a woman who steps over the rope at this time will conceive a male heir ) . Punishments can be severe ; there are records of a woman being stoned to death in the early 20th century for such an infraction . The teams then gather at the festival site and perform further prayers , this time for the safety and prosperity of the village ; sacrifices are also offered to <unk> , the earth goddess . These communal rituals are called <unk> ( Hangul : <unk> ; hanja : <unk> ) . At dawn , after the completion of these ceremonies , the two teams fetch their ropes to the site ; this involves a procession with flags and costumes , accompanied by percussion music . There is then a staged debate over the connection of the two ropes , which has a symbolic sexual aspect ; innuendo and bawdy taunts of the other team are common . 
 Once the two ropes are lashed together around the <unk> , the contest begins , to the shouts and cheers of the celebrants . The actual competition is short , with victory usually decided after a single pull ( although some contests are played to best of three ) . Because of the association of the Western direction with the concept of fertility and fecundity , the match is often fixed to ensure that the West team win ( and thus ensure a bounteous harvest ) . After celebrating at the house of their team 's captain , the winners will then proceed to the house of the losing team 's captain to offer their commiserations ; this often resembles a funeral procession . Both ropes are taken by the winning team , dissected and sold ; the straw taken from them is believed to have unusual protective or nourishing properties . 
 A children 's version , known as <unk> juldarigi ( Hangul : <unk> , " alley tug @-@ of @-@ war " ) is often played in the streets before the main event . 
 = = Regional variations = = 
 Two forms of juldarigi , from Gijisi ( <unk> ) and <unk> , are recognised as Important Intangible Cultural Properties of Korea . The Yeongsan ceremony is held later in the year than elsewhere , having been moved from the lunar festival to March 1 in the mid @-@ twentieth century ( to commemorate the March 1st Movement ) . In 2009 , a special ₩ 20000 coin was minted in South Korea commemorating the Yeongsan juldarigi . In Gijisi , where the sport has been practiced for at least 500 years , the traditional East / West divide is replaced with a division of teams into upriver and downriver . The centipede @-@ like shape of the rope is said to resemble the way in which the villages of the region are arranged . Gijisi is also home to a museum devoted to the practice of juldarigi . 
 The Miryang <unk> Festival features a unique form of this sport called <unk> ( Hangul : <unk> ) or " spider tug @-@ of @-@ war " , which is unique to Miryang . In this version , participants are tied by ropes to a central ring , and pull in all directions . 
 Similar communal tug @-@ of @-@ war games take place in Laos , Cambodia and Myanmar , in all cases having a connection to fecundity and the prospect of a bountiful harvest . The Kansai region of Japan also has a tug @-@ of @-@ war ceremony which is believed to have been introduced by Korean immigrants . 
 = The Sun Comes Out World Tour = 
 The Sun Comes Out World Tour ( also known as the Sale el Sol World Tour ) was the fifth concert tour by Colombian singer @-@ songwriter Shakira , launched in support of her eighth and ninth studio albums , She Wolf ( 2009 ) and Sale El Sol ( 2010 ) . After a special tour preview show held in Montreal , Canada , on 15 September 2010 , the North American leg of the tour commenced at Uncasville , Connecticut , on 17 September , and closed at Rosemont , Illinois , on 29 October 2010 . The European leg of the tour was planned to commence at Lyon , France , on 16 November , and end in London , England , on 20 December 2010 . The tickets for the initial dates of the European leg were soon sold out , and Shakira extended the tour into 2011 , beginning by announcing a show at Paris , France ; venues at countries such as Croatia , Russia , Spain and Switzerland were soon added . The Latin American leg of the tour was a part of the Pop Festival and visited countries like Argentina , Brazil , Colombia and Mexico were added to the tour dates . 
 The setlist of the tour was composed of songs taken primarily from Shakira 's ninth studio album Sale el Sol ; the rest were from her previous studio albums . The stage was shaped like the letter " T " to enable maximum amount of viewers to see Shakira easily . A large screen was set behind the stage , on which various visuals , designed by entertainment branding agency Loyalkaspar , were projected . For the performances , Shakira mainly wore a mesh gold crop top coupled with skin @-@ tight leather pants . Other attires Shakira wore during the concert shows included a hooded pink gown , a flamenco @-@ skirt , and a feathery blue dress . 
 The concert shows were well received by critics , many of whom praised the charisma Shakira displayed during the performances . Commercially , the tour was a success . It ranked at number 40 on Pollstar 's 2010 year @-@ end " Top 50 North American Tours " list as it grossed a total of $ 16 @.@ 9 million in the continent , with total ticket sales amounting up to 524 @,@ 723 . In 2011 , the tour ranked at number 20 on Pollstar 's 2011 " Top 25 Worldwide Tours " with a total gross of $ 53 @.@ 2 million and ticket sales amounting up to 692 @,@ 064 . A live album of the show held at the Palais Omnisports de Paris @-@ Bercy in Paris , France , was released as Shakira : Live from Paris , on 5 December 2011 . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 3 May 2010 , Shakira 's official website announced dates for the North American leg of the then @-@ unnamed global tour . Three dates and locations were confirmed in the announcement : the tour would appear in Madison Square Garden in New York , on 21 September , Toyota Center in Houston , on 8 October , and Staples Center in Los Angeles , on 23 October . Following a pre @-@ sale period , the tickets for the three locations were made available for public purchase on 7 May , on Shakira 's official website . The prices of the tickets ranged from $ 9 @.@ 50 to $ 149 @.@ 50 . By 23 , 19 August new tour dates and locations were added to the initial ones , summing the total count of the 2010 North American shows to 22 . It was also announced that a special tour preview show would be held in Montreal , Canada , on 15 September , to offer fans " an exclusive look at Shakira 's worldwide arena tour " , prior to the tour 's official commencement in Uncasville , Connecticut , on 17 September . The last location for the tour to touch upon was Rosemont , Illinois , on 29 October . 
 On 28 June , Shakira announced the dates for the European leg of the tour . 22 dates and locations were announced in total and the tour would begin at the Halle Tony Garnier concert hall in Lyon , on 16 November , and end at the O2 Arena in London , on 20 December . Notable locations the tour would appear in were the Palais Omnisports de Paris @-@ Bercy in Paris , the Festhalle Frankfurt in Frankfurt , the Manchester Arena in Manchester and The O2 in Dublin . After the tickets of the European leg of the tour were sold @-@ out , Shakira extended the tour into 2011 and announced a show to be held at the Palais Omnisports de Paris @-@ Bercy in Paris , on 14 June . Later , Shakira decided to add another date to the Paris show of the tour and set 13 June to perform at the Palais Omnisports de Paris @-@ Bercy . By 15 March , new tour dates were added at locations such as Croatia , Russia , Spain and Switzerland . 
 On 3 December , the Latin America dates of the tour were announced . The first date of the tour was decided to be held on 1 March in Salta , Argentina . Other locations the tour would touch upon included Bogotá , in Shakira 's native country Colombia , San José , in Costa Rica , Mexico City , in Mexico , and São Paulo , in Brazil . The final date for the Latin American leg of the tour was scheduled to be held on 12 April , in Panama . 
 The name of the tour was initially speculated to be " Tour of Earthly Delights " , until Shakira 's official website revealed the poster of the tour on 8 September , which highlighted " The Sun Comes Out World Tour " as the name . The poster of the tour features Shakira jumping in the air wearing a golden bikini top coupled with golden pants , similar to the cover art of her 2010 single " Loca " . The tour was launched to promote Shakira 's eighth studio album She Wolf , which was released in October 2009 , and her ninth studio album Sale el Sol , which was set to release on 19 October 2010 . The words " Sale el Sol " are Spanish for " The Sun Comes Out " , hence the tour was also referred to as the Sale el Sol World Tour . 
 = = Development = = 
 In 2008 , Shakira signed a 10 @-@ year deal with international touring giant Live Nation , which prompted Forbes to deem her as the fourth highest earning female musician in history . The Sun Comes Out World Tour was her first tour to be promoted by Live Nation . The Latin American leg of the tour was part of Pop Festival , a " brand new festival that will bring international music stars to Latin America , and which will also showcase the latest in contemporary art and technology " . According to Valentina España , senior managing editor of <unk> , the production budget of the tour was big enough to " put Britney 's Circus ( Tour ) to shame " . Shakira talked about the tour , saying : 
 " It 's going to have themes and there 'll be a lot of audience interaction . My live show will have a lot of that — a lot of dancing , a joie de vivre . I feel such freedom on stage . It 's such a rush to be performing . I like to see everybody 's faces on stage , to see the reaction . Normally , you can only see the front row because of the lights . So you 'll see a lot of ( my ) energy ... but there are also going to be other moments that I hope are artistically energetic . I want people to feel things up close " 
 On 27 November 2009 , it was revealed that Shakira was conducting auditions to choose a different opening act for each of the tour 's appearances in different cities . The acts willing to audition were required to upload videos of their performances to Shakira 's official website . Fans were allowed to vote for their favourite acts and the ones with the most would proceed to the finals ; Shakira and her team would then pick the winner out of them . Sean Wolfington , Shakira 's digital @-@ business partner , talked about the decision and told the New York Post that " The artists will open for Shakira live in big cities and virtually through a video performance in smaller markets . There are a lot of talented artists , and Shakira wants to help them by giving them part of her stage " . The visuals and conceptual video scenes for the tour were managed and designed by entertainment branding agency Loyalkaspar , who had previously designed tour visuals for artists like U2 and Jay @-@ Z. Elliott <unk> , the creative director of the agency , talked about the project , saying that " Shakira was a much bigger undertaking then anything we 've attempted previously . They were looking for original content that had to work over two LED screens and on a huge projector mapping surreal models of an ever @-@ changing animated face , all in just three weeks . This is for her global world tour , so modifications to the setlist and track durations continued through nine rounds of revisions " . The visuals were projected onto the large screen set behind the stage . The stage was shaped in the form of the letter " T " to enable maximum amounts of viewers to see Shakira . 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 The concert began with the lights dimming and a sole spotlight being focused on the crowd . The spotlight then followed Shakira as she entered the hall wearing a hooded fuchsia gown . Singing the " pensive " and " sentimental " ballad " Pienso En <unk> " ( " I Think of You " ) , she began walking towards the stage while shaking her fans ' hands and hugging them . As soon as Shakira climbed the stage , she threw off the gown to reveal her main attire : a mesh gold crop top coupled with skin @-@ tight leather pants . A more energetic routine followed as she " sprinted , jumped , and <unk> " across the stage while performing more guitar @-@ oriented versions of " Why Wait " and " Te Dejo Madrid " ( " I Leave You Madrid " ) . After stopping to play a harmonica solo , Shakira performed " Si Te Vas " ( " If You Go " ) accompanied by " dense " musical instrumentation . This was followed by a more rock @-@ tinged performance of " Whenever , Wherever " , during which Shakira invited four female fans onto the stage and taught them how to belly dance . 
 The band moved to a small platform in the middle of the hall and Shakira came onto the stage after changing into a wine red @-@ coloured flamenco skirt . A short set of acoustic songs followed , beginning with a cover of " Nothing Else Matters " , a ballad by American heavy metal band Metallica . According to Jon Parales from The New York Times , the cover of the song " made it sound Andean , with six @-@ beat drumming and the strumming of a ukulele @-@ sized charango " . The cover was blended straight into a performance of " Despedida " ( " Farewell " ) , a song recorded by Shakira for the soundtrack of the 2007 film Love in the Time of Cholera , during which she " tested " her band drummer 's musical skill by " incorporating him into her moves " . " Gypsy " was performed with a " folk lilt " and Shakira 's vocals were backed by " accordion , fiddles and the rhythm section " . The segment was closed with a performance of " La Tortura " ( " Torture " ) . 
 The mariachi @-@ influenced " Ciega , Sordomuda " ( " Blind , Deaf , and Dumb " ) was performed using a Stroh violin , which was used to replace the horn sections of the original recording . David Hardwick from <unk> said the use of the instrument was " impressive " . She then sang the power ballad " Underneath Your Clothes " . A large animated face resembling that of Residente , the lead singer of Puerto Rican band Calle 13 , was projected onto the screen behind the stage during the performance of " Gordita " ( " Chubby " ) , a hip hop and rap track in which the artist was featured . The face was used to cover Residente 's portions of the song through prerecorded vocals . Shakira then sang the " Sale el Sol , " a song which was originally said to be dedicated to Argentine musician Gustavo Cerati , Shakira 's close friend and frequent collaborator , who had been in a coma . Shakira then changed into a pair of neon leopard @-@ print pants and performed " Loca " ( " Crazy " ) with more " intricate and urban choreographies " . Shakira then let out a long howl , signaling the start of the performance of " She Wolf " . The performance marked the first time back @-@ up dancers were featured in the show . Dave Simpson from The Guardian commented that Shakira was " howling like a banshee " during the performance . The performance of the Middle Eastern music @-@ flavoured " Ojos Así " ( " Eyes Like Yours " ) was the final one on the setlist of the concert . Shakira incorporated belly dancing steps into her choreography during the performance . 
 The encore segment of the concert began with a performance of " Antes de las Seis " ( " Before Six O 'clock " ) , during which artificial snow was launched into the air as the song neared its end . The keyboardist of the concert band impersonated Haitian @-@ American rapper Wyclef Jean , the featured artist on Shakira 's hit single " Hips Don 't Lie " during the performance of the song . The concert show ended with the performance of " Waka Waka ( This Time for Africa ) " , the worldwide hit Shakira recorded as the official anthem song of the 2010 FIFA World Cup , during which she again invited fans onto the stage to dance with her as confetti " filled the entire arena " . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The tour received numerous positive reviews from critics . Terry Mathews from The Sulphur Springs News @-@ Telegram , in his review of the concert held at the American Airlines Center in Dallas , opined that the show was " equally enormous and bombastic as it was intimate " and that there was a " joyful atmosphere after the show " , which proved that Shakira " had done her job " . However , she also felt that the " fast paced , familiar tracks " of She Wolf should have been included more on the setlist rather than the " still unknown singles " of Sale el Sol . Mikael Wood from the Los Angeles Times , in his review of the concert held at the Staples Center in Los Angeles , also complimented Shakira 's charisma and praised her for not going over the top , instead noting that she was " carrying out a plan , skillfully and with no shortage of superstar charisma " . Dakin Hardwick from <unk> , in his review of the concert held at the Oracle Arena in Oakland , praised Shakira 's interaction with the fans and called her " truly one of the great performers " , commenting that " the woman simply will not stop dancing " . Jim Farber from Daily News , in his review of the concert held at Madison Square Garden in New York , felt that Shakira 's voice lacked sensuality and that it " displayed a <unk> , <unk> style " . However , he also said that her energetic live performance and ability to dance " smoothed out her rougher elements " , and that she " whipped up the kind of charisma that doesn 't need to come from any particular place to charm " . Jon Pareles from The New York Times , in his review of the concert held at Madison Square Garden in New York , praised Shakira 's multi @-@ cultural approach during the show and called it " globalization " with " pure positive thinking " and Shakira a " star with a conscience " . Mick <unk> from The Hollywood Reporter , in his review of the concert held at Madison Square Garden in New York , said that the show " cemented Shakira 's place as an arena @-@ rock star " , and concluded that the concert was an " effervescent message of love from a world music diva with dance fever " . 
 Tim Burrows from The Telegraph , in his review of the concert held at the O2 Arena in London , complimented Shakira 's charisma during the show and her ability to make sure that the " crowd still left glowing " , saying that it was the product of a " masterclass in cold calculation " . Dave Simpson from The Guardian , in his review of the concert held at the Manchester Arena in Manchester , favoured Shakira 's charisma and bold sexuality , noting that it is " upfront and yet nowhere near as overt as a Christina Aguilera or Madonna " . He described Shakira 's approach towards the performances during the show , saying that she " gives everything to the performance while revealing nothing " , and that she appears to be " simultaneously like a <unk> pop mastermind and an overawed little girl having tremendous fun " . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 During its North American appearances spanning from 21 September to 23 October 2010 , the tour grossed $ 3 @,@ 685 @,@ 377 , and ranked at number four on Billboard Hot Tours chart on 11 November 2010 . The shows at Madison Square Garden in New York and Staples Center in Los Angeles were sold out . Pop Festival , the sponsor of the Latin American leg of the tour , grossed $ 13 @,@ 516 @,@ 890 during the dates spanning from 12 to 27 March 2011 , and ranked at number two on the Billboard Hot Tours chart on 8 April 2011 . According to Spanish automobile manufacturer SEAT , the sponsor of the European leg , the 21 venues the tour appeared at were all sold @-@ out , and attended by an approximate total of 360 @,@ 000 fans . It was one of the highest grossing tours of the year 2010 . 
 According to Pollstar , the tour grossed a total of $ 16 @.@ 9 million during its North American dates , thus ranking at number 40 on Pollstar 's 2010 year @-@ end " Top 50 North American Tours " list . In North America , the tour sold an average of 9 @,@ 335 tickets , and a total of 205 @,@ 271 tickets . Its average gross was $ 768 @,@ 182 . Worldwide , the tour grossed a total of $ 39 @.@ 9 million from 1 January 2011 , to 30 June 2011 , and ranked at number 11 on Pollstar 's " Top 50 Worldwide Tours " list , compiled on the basis of this period . It sold an average of 11 @,@ 661 tickets , and a total of 524 @,@ 723 tickets . Its average gross was $ 886 @,@ 667 during this period . From 1 January 2011 , to 31 December 2011 , the tour grossed a total of $ 53 @.@ 2 million , and ranked at number 20 on Pollstar 's " Top 25 Worldwide Tours " , compiled on the basis of this period . It sold an average of 13 @,@ 106 tickets , and a total of 692 @,@ 064 tickets . Its average gross was $ 1 @,@ 108 @,@ 333 . 
 = = Live recording = = 
 The performances that took place at the Palais Omnisports de Paris @-@ Bercy in Paris , France , on 13 and 14 June 2011 , were recorded for inclusion in the live album of the tour . The live album was titled Live from Paris ( En Vivo Desde París in Hispanic countries ) , and was released on 5 December 2011 . It was made available in three formats : an exclusive edition which includes a DVD and live audio CD , a standard DVD edition , and a Blu @-@ ray Disc edition . The debut of the live album was preceded by the release of " Je l 'aime à <unk> " , Shakira 's rendition of the original song written and performed by French singer @-@ songwriter Francis Cabrel , on 29 November 2011 . In France , Live from Paris was certified platinum in France by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique for sales of 100 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = Opening acts = = 
 = = Set list = = 
 The following set list is representative of the show on 21 September 2010 . 
 " Pienso en Ti " 
 " Why Wait " 
 " Te Dejo Madrid " 
 " Si Te Vas " 
 " Whenever , Wherever " 
 " Inevitable " 
 " El Nay A <unk> Nay " ( Interlude ) 
 Medley : " Nothing Else Matters " / " Despedida " 
 " Gypsy " 
 " La Tortura " 
 " Ciega , Sordomuda " 
 " Underneath Your Clothes " 
 " Gordita " 
 " Sale el Sol " 
 " Las de la Intuición " 
 " Loca " 
 " She Wolf " 
 " Ojos Así " 
 " Antes de las Seis " 
 " Hips Don 't Lie " 
 " Waka Waka ( This Time for Africa ) " 
 = = Rock In Rio ( 2011 ) = = 
 The following set list is representative of the show during Rock In Rio in Brazil during her 2011 leg . 
 " Estoy Aqui " 
 " Te Dejo Madrid " 
 " Si Te Vas " 
 " Whenever , Wherever " 
 " Inevitable " 
 " El Nay A <unk> Nay " ( Interlude ) 
 Medley : " Nothing Else Matters " / " Despedida " 
 " Gypsy " 
 " La Tortura " 
 " Ciega , Sordomuda " 
 " Sale el Sol " 
 " Las de la Intuición " 
 " Loca " 
 " She Wolf " 
 " Ojos Así " 
 " Pais Tropical " 
 " Hips Don 't Lie " 
 " Waka Waka ( This Time for Africa ) " 
 Additional notes : 
 Certain songs were performed in their Spanish versions on select dates 
 " Pienso en ti , " " Underneath Your Clothes , " " Si Te Vas , " and " Gordita " were not performed on select dates . 
 A cover of " Je l 'aime à <unk> " by Francis Cabrel was performed on Francophone dates . 
 " Estoy Aquí " was performed as the opening number on select dates . 
 A cover of " Pais Tropical " by Jorge Ben Jor was performed with Brazilian artist Ivete Sangalo at the concert held in Rock in Rio , Brazil , instead of " Antes de las Seis . " 
 = = Tour dates = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for the tour adapted from the liner notes of Live from Paris DVD , and AllMusic . 
 = Persona 2 : Eternal Punishment = 
 Persona 2 : Eternal Punishment ( ペルソナ2 <unk> , Perusona Tsū : Batsu ) is a role @-@ playing video game developed by Atlus , and chronologically the third installment in the Persona series , a subseries of the Megami Tensei franchise . It was originally published in 2000 by Atlus in Japan and North America for the PlayStation . The game was later remade by Atlus for the PlayStation Portable . This version , released in Japan in 2012 , did not receive an overseas release . In response to this , the PlayStation version was released on PlayStation Network in 2013 . 
 Eternal Punishment takes place in the fictional Japanese city of Sumaru , and is a direct sequel to Persona 2 : Innocent Sin . Taking place a few months after Innocent Sin , the game follows reporter Maya <unk> as she investigates the Joker Curse , a malign phenomenon where people 's wishes and rumors are coming true and causing chaos . During her investigations , she and others who join her gain the ability to summon Personas , personified aspects of their personalities . The gameplay features turn @-@ based battle gameplay , where characters use their Personas in battle against demons , and a separate Rumor system , where rumors spread around the city can influence events in the characters ' favor . 
 Halfway through the production of Innocent Sin , writer Tadashi Satomi felt that a fresh point of view was needed in addition to Tatsuya , laying the groundwork for Eternal Punishment . The original producer ( Kouji Okada ) , character designer ( Kazuma Kaneko ) and composers ( Toshiko Tasaki , Kenichi Tsuchiya and Masaki Kurokawa ) returned alongside Satomi . The second game began development after Innocent Sin was completed , and while it reused most of the assets from Innocent Sin , the gameplay and Rumor system were improved upon . The game 's theme song , " Change Your Way " , was written by English singer @-@ songwriter Elisha La 'Verne based on the game 's premise . Reception of the game in Japan and the west has generally been positive , with reviewers appreciating improvements over Innocent Sin , the plot , the gameplay systems , and the improved localization compared to the original Persona . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Persona 2 : Eternal Punishment is a role @-@ playing game where the player takes control of a group of characters exploring the fictional city of Sumaru . The camera follows the party from an adjustable angled overhead perspective . The city in general is navigated using an overworld map . A key element to the story and gameplay is the Rumor system : after the characters hear a rumor , they can spread that rumor around the city using certain characters , and those rumors can grant the characters special items or other positive or negative effects . 
 Battles consist of both story @-@ related boss fights and random encounters with standard enemies . Battles are turn @-@ based , with the player characters and enemies moving around a small battle arena to perform actions . Once the player has laid out their strategy in the battle menu , the characters perform their assigned actions until the battle ends with victory for one side or the player pauses the action to change strategies . Instead of the grid @-@ based battle system from the original Persona , party members and enemy units act in the same phase of a turn , rather than being restricted by their placement on the field . 
 During battle , players cast spells using an assigned Persona : each spell drains a character 's Spell Point meter . Each Persona has different elemental strengths and weaknesses , and different Personas can be used for defense , healing or elemental attacks . While a Persona is originally quite weak , if it is used enough , it will achieve a higher rank , with Rank 8 being the highest possible . As the Persona 's rank is raised , that Persona is able to cast more powerful spells . In addition to individual actions , the player can align characters to trigger a Fusion Spell : when two or more party members use a certain sequence of spells , they will automatically summon multiple Personas to generate a powerful attack . During battles , both characters and Personas earn experience points . The player has the option to activate an Auto @-@ battle option , having combat play out without player interaction . 
 During battle , the player can converse with enemies , though they are restricted to a single set of dialogue options instead of four as in the original Persona . If the player succeeds in talking with the enemy using the right character , it both causes the enemy to leave the battlefield and gains a spell card ( a Tarot card linked to one of the Arcanum or family of Personas ) , which can be used to create Personas in a location called the Velvet Room . In the Velvet Room , the player can summon a new Persona that belongs to a spell card 's particular Persona family group . As a character gains experience levels , more powerful Personas from a spell card 's group become available . In addition to pre @-@ set spell cards , the player can also obtain blank skill cards by forming contracts with enemies through the right conversation . These blank skill cards can be tailored to fit a chosen Persona family . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Set a few months after the ending of Persona 2 : Innocent Sin , Eternal Punishment takes place in 1999 in Sumaru ( <unk> ) , a fictional seaside city in Japan with a population of 1 @.@ 28 million , its own television stations , and a structure leftover from its foundations during the Warring States period . Many of the characters come from two high schools in Sumaru : Seven Sisters ( <unk> ) , a prestigious school that is the setting of Innocent Sin , and the less @-@ prestigious Kasugayama ( <unk> ) . All the protagonists wield Personas , manifestations of their personalities . The ability to wield Personas was granted to them by Philemon , a benevolent personification of humanity 's Collective Unconscious . The events of Innocent Sin are said to stem from a contest between Philemon and his opposite Nyarlathotep to see if humans could find a higher purpose in life despite embracing contradictory emotions . During the events of Innocent Sin , Nyarlathotep influenced events in his favor and all the world except Sumaru City was destroyed . In order to reset events , the party used the power of the Collective Unconscious to will the key event that caused the events of Innocent Sin out of existence in exchange for their memories of those events : this created an alternate timeline , with the Innocent Sin timeline existing as a separate " Other Side " . A key element to the story of Eternal Punishment is Kegare , a negative energy that can possess humans and trigger rises in crime and the perpetuation of more Kegare . 
 The main protagonist of Eternal Punishment is Maya Amano , a reporter for teen magazine " Coolest " who was a playable character in Innocent Sin . She is joined on her adventure by others , including people who were involved in the events of Innocent Sin : Tatsuya Suou , a student at Seven Sisters and the main protagonist of Innocent Sin ; Ulala Serizawa , a school friend of Maya 's an aspiring fashion designer ; Baofu , a former prosecuting attorney out for revenge against the Taiwanese Mafia ; and Katsuya Suou , Tatsuya 's older brother and a sergeant in the Sumaru City Police Department . Returning antagonists include Tatsuya Sudou , a madman who was involved in the incident that precipitated the events of Innocent Sin ; and Takahisa Kandori , a former servant of Nyarlathotep and the main antagonist of Revelations : Persona who is resurrected through the power of Kotodama . Kandori in turn serves Tatsuzou Sudou , Tatsuya Sudou 's father . Two other central characters from Revelations : Persona , Kei Nanjō and Eriko Kirishima , act as supporting characters and optional playable characters . The other protagonists of Innocent Sin ( Eikichi " Michel " <unk> , Lisa " Ginko " Silverman , Jun Kashihara ) play minor supporting roles . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Eternal Punishment begins when Maya is sent to write a story about the Joker phenomenon : according to rumor , if someone phones their own number , the Joker will kill on request . Going to Seven Sisters , she , Ulala , and Katsuya find the school principal murdered by the Joker . The Joker then attacks them , forcing each of them to summon their Personas . After the Joker knocks them out , Philemon contacts them and warns of a growing danger to the city . After waking , the three pursue the Joker into the school clock tower , where he attempts for force a student to remember the events of Innocent Sin . They are saved by Tatsuya , who tells Maya to forget about him . After Katsuya is removed from the case by his superior Captain Shimazu , he teams up with Maya and Ulala to find the Joker . They eventually ally with Baofu , who believes that Tatsuya Sudou and his father Tatsuzou are involved with the Joker . Going to the mental institution where Sudou is held , they discover that Tatsuzou sent Taiwanese Mafia hitmen to kill Sudou . Once confronted , Sudou admits that he is the Joker , and reveals that he is attempting to trigger the reappearance of the Other Side . Pursuing him to the Sky Museum , the party runs into Tatsuya and saves Jun from Sudou after Sudou sets the building on fire . After escaping with the museum 's visitors on a blimp , an injured Sudou makes a final attack that damages the blimp before Tatsuya kills him . When the party regroup , Tatsuya has vanished . 
 Upon their return , the party continue to investigate Tatsuzou 's activities , and find that negative feelings are turning other people into new " Jokers " , who are in turn being kidnapped by Tatsuzou 's agents . The party eventually learn that Tatsuzou and a secret organization he leads , the New World Order , are manipulating Sumaru 's government , corporations , and media for his own ends . After this , they hear of two others , Kei and Eriko , investigating the New World Order and their links with the Joker curse and an increasingly prevalent fortune telling craze used to manipulate the spread of rumors : they are involved due to the possible involvement of Kandori , a former enemy of theirs , who is posing as Tatsuzou 's secretary . Depending on the party 's actions at this point , either Kei or Eriko will join their party as they go to investigate the holding area for the new Jokers . Upon arriving , they find Eikichi captured by Kandori while looking for a friend . While Kandori attempts to awaken Eikichi 's memories of the Other Side , Tatsuya intervenes and enables the party and Eikichi to escape . The group then save Lisa and her girl group from their promoter , another Order member , with help from Tatsuya , who again vanishes afterwards . Through a friendly informant in the Police , they learn the New World Order 's ultimate goal : to raise Sumaru City in the rumor @-@ generated spaceship " Torifune " , and trigger the destruction of the Earth 's surface by sacred dragons by creating a concentration of Kegare to create a new world free of sin . The only way to stop the plan 's fulfillment is defeating the Order . 
 After failing to corner Tatsuzou and puzzled about Tatsuya 's motives , the party finally persuade Tatsuya to reveal the truth . During the original confrontation with Nyarlathotep , Maya was killed , prompting the rest of the group ( Tatsuya , Lisa , Jun and Eikichi ) to reset events . Tatsuya refused to forget the events of the Other Side , creating a dangerous loophole : if all the other members of the original group could be forced to remember , the Other Side would be brought back into existence , destroying the present reality . After revealing this , Tatsuya is allowed to join the party in place of either Kei or Eriko . After returning to Sumaru proper , the city is raised by Tatsuzou as part of Torifune . Successfully infiltrating Torifune and defeating Tatsuzou and his " god " <unk> , the city returns to the surface , but the party are drawn into the Collective Unconscious by Nyarlathotep . Making their way into his domain , they discover Nyarlathotep has kidnapped Eikichi , Lisa and Jun in an effort to force their memories of the Other Side into reality . Defeating the Shadow <unk> guarding them , the party saves each of them , then confront Nyarlathotep , who mocks Tatsuya for refusing to fulfill his part of Philemon 's agreement . After Nyarlathotep is defeated , Tatsuya fulfills his side of the bargain , and after saying his final goodbyes separates his Other Side consciousness from his current self . With the city returned to normal and any specific memories of the Other Side gone , the party return to their normal lives . 
 = = Development = = 
 The concept for Eternal Punishment emerged during the writing for Persona 2 : Innocent Sin . Halfway through writing the latter 's script , Tadashi Satomi felt that the draft gave him the impression of needing an alternate point of view to that of the main hero . This concept formed the basis for Eternal Punishment 's plot . To foreshadow this , the team showed the main characters from Eternal Punishment through minor roles in Innocent Sin . Eternal Punishment began full development after the release of Innocent Sin . Innocent Sin and Eternal Punishment both used the same game engine and structure . Kouji Okada , Innocent Sin 's producer , returned in the same role . When developing Eternal Punishment , the development team took what they learned from Innocent Sin and used it to improve the gameplay and the Rumor system . One of the biggest concerns when making Eternal Punishment was how much the development staff wanted to include , which went well beyond their original plans . 
 The overarching theme of Eternal Punishment , as with Persona and Innocent Sin , was exploration of the human psyche and the main characters discovering their true selves . While Innocent Sin focused on the protagonists as teenagers , Eternal Punishment looked at the protagonists as adults : for its central character theme , Eternal Punishment focused on how people realize their true selves as adults faced with reality . A theme carried over from Innocent Sin was the " power of Kotodama " , the Japanese belief that words can influence the physical and spiritual world , with this power manifesting through the spreading of rumors . Terms and concepts used in the games , including Persona , Shadows and the character Philemon , were drawn from Jungian psychology and archetypes . The character of Nyarlathotep , who had made a cameo appearance as a Persona in the original game , was inspired by the character of the same name from H. P. Lovecraft 's Cthulhu Mythos . Other antagonists and enemy creatures in the games were also drawn from the Cthulhu Mythos and played a key role in the narrative . 
 The main characters were designed by Kazuma Kaneko , while secondary characters were designed by Shigenori Soejima . The protagonists of Eternal Punishment were adults and so could not be given a single standardized outfit as the high school protagonists of Innocent Sin had been . While designing the outfits for Eternal Punishment , Kaneko tried to keep an image of normal adults in mind , but in doing so was restricted when trying to portray the characters ' heroism . In the end , he designed the characters to look normal while having a " different feeling " from other people . One of the characters that helped drive this style home was Ulala , who was a minor character in Innocent Sin and a main protagonist in Eternal Punishment . The Joker character from Innocent Sin was carried over into Eternal Punishment : the new Joker 's actions were made increasingly murderous , creating a contrast between the two incarnations . 
 = = = Port and localization = = = 
 Eternal Punishment was first announced in April at the 2000 Tokyo Game Show . During the show , Atlus held a talk spot hosted by Kouji Okada and Kazuma Kaneko , and featuring an appearance by Elisha La 'Verne , the singer responsible for the game 's theme song . Unlike Innocent Sin , Eternal Punishment was chosen for release in the West . Its localization was significantly different to that done for the original Persona , released in 1996 . Persona received numerous alterations for its overseas release , including altering character and location names . For Eternal Punishment and future titles , Atlus decided to remain as faithful as possible to the Japanese version . According to Atlus , the game marks a " halfway point " in their localization history : while more faithful to the Japanese version than the original Persona , it still needed to take that previous localization into account for the naming of returning characters . Its release in the West was officially announced the following month at that year 's Electronic Entertainment Expo , with Atlus previously teasing it as a " secret RPG " . Eternal Punishment received a limited reprint exclusive to Amazon.com in 2008 to celebrate the release of Shin Megami Tensei : Persona 4 . 
 Eternal Punishment was remade for the PlayStation Portable . Like the remake of Innocent Sin , it was directed by Shoji Meguro . The original plan at Altus was to have Innocent Sin and Eternal Punishment released as a single game , but both could not fit onto a single UMD . Even before the completion of Innocent Sin 's remake , when there were no plans for a remake of Eternal Punishment , Meguro was keen to make one if the opportunity arose . For the remake , the team had two points of reference : the original version , and the remake of Innocent Sin . The team carried over most of the features implemented Innocent Sin 's remake while further simplifying and streamlining the mechanics , aiming for a " culmination " to Persona 2 as a whole . A large portion of the initial work was playing through the original version . A new opening animation was created by anime production company Madhouse . In addition to the gameplay modifications , a new scenario was added focusing on Tatsuya 's activities before he joined the party . Satomi , after having written the script for a downloadable quest for Innocent Sin 's remake , was asked whether he would like to write a new scenario for the Eternal Punishment 's remake , and accepted willingly . During the writing process , Satomi suggested giving Maya dialogue , but this was vetoed as Persona protagonists were silent without exception . The scenario 's new characters were designed by Masayuki Doi . 
 The remake was announced in February 2012 by Famitsu . For the packaging , Kaneko was asked to design a new piece of key art . The artwork features Maya and her initial Persona Maia . The remake was not released outside Japan due to " unusual circumstances " . Game Informer included the game on its list of " RPGs Released Late In The PSP 's Life Cycle " , games that were likely never to see a release due to the flagging western PSP market . In response to the decision not to localize the remake , the original version was released on PlayStation Network in 2013 . As part of the announcement , PlayStation Blog released a guide showing which characters had received name changes in the original localization . Intended to be playable on PSP , PlayStation Vita and PlayStation 3 , a fault at release meant only the PS3 version was playable , with Sony creating a fix for the problem after players complained about the fault . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The original music for Eternal Punishment was composed by Toshiko Tasaki , Kenichi Tsuchiya and Masaki Kurokawa , the composers for Innocent Sin . As with Innocent Sin , Tsuchiya found the writing process difficult for a number of reasons . Tsuchiya 's favorite piece for the score , which was carried over from Innocent Sin , was " Maya 's Theme " . The tune has remained popular with the Persona fan base : Tsuchiya has attributed its popularity to the enduring nature of the Persona series as a whole , and compared it to a fashionable item of the time that now requires a " certain courage " to wear in later times . The game 's theme song , " Change your Way " , was written and sung by British singer @-@ songwriter Elisha La 'Verne , and the music was composed by <unk> La 'Verne wrote the song with the premise of Eternal Punishment in mind , and so she wanted the song to sound positive . For inspiration , she drew on her experiences of walking round London and seeing homeless people who appeared unable to improve their status : the song 's theme is that there is always a way out of a bad situation and you can change that situation for the better . The title also stemmed from this concept . Together with Innocent Sin , Eternal Punishment is the one of the first entries in the Megami Tensei series to feature voice acting . 
 For the PSP version , the music was remixed by Toshiki Konishi , Ryota Kozuka and Atsushi Kitajoh , who also worked on the remixed music for Innocent Sin 's port . The team , while remixing the music , did not want to destroy the original 's foundation . The ruling concept , as defined by Konishi , was " not to far and not too close to the original " . For the opening animation , Meguro requested Konishi to personally remix the game 's original opening theme . It was the first time he had been put in charge of an opening theme , and it proved troublesome for him , as he needed to rerecord the vocals and make sure he did justice to the original version . For Kitajoh , one of the most notable arrangements he did was for " Maya 's Theme " : Meguro , who had previously remixed this track for Persona 3 : FES , asked for a remix with a faster tempo and incorporated hard rock elements . The new scenario also used remixed music from the original game instead of new tracks . 
 = = Reception = = 
 During its first week of release in Japan , Eternal Punishment reached the top of Japanese sales charts , selling 106 @,@ 563 copies . The following week , the game was still in the top five , selling a further 16 @,@ 333 and bringing sales to 122 @,@ 896 . By the end of the year , it ranked at # 60 in Japan 's best @-@ selling titles of the year , with final sales totaling 200 @,@ 103 units . The PSP remake debuted at # 3 in Japanese sales charts , selling 24 @,@ 547 copies . The following week , it sold a further 4 @,@ 885 , but had dropped to # 20 . By October 2012 , as stated in Index Holding 's announced sales data , the game had sold just 60 @,@ 000 copies , putting it well behind other Atlus titles such as Etrian Odyssey IV : Legends of the Titan for the Nintendo 3DS and Persona 4 Golden for the Vita . 
 Famitsu praised the improvements made to the gameplay over Innocent Sin , calling the experience " thrilling " and citing the story as generally enjoyable . One comment was that the game 's aesthetics did not deviate much from those of Innocent Sin . The magazine 's later review of the remake was also fairly positive , finding the atmosphere sombre and the battles entertaining , stating that the reviewers appreciated being able to play both parts of Persona 2 on PSP . IGN 's David Smith , while noting the game 's slower pace than other contemporary RPGs , he generally enjoyed the plot 's mature themes and the Rumor and Persona systems . Summing up , he said : " Its unique visual style , its unusual characters , and its absorbing gameplay systems make it a game to kill plenty of hours with this winter . " 
 RPGFan 's Ken Chu , despite finding the camera 's movement speed awkward and disliking some aspects of the graphics , found the characters " reasonably strong " and generally praised the gameplay . He rounded off the review by saying that , because if its difficulty , it may put off more casual RPG players , but that other players " [ were ] strongly recommended to check it out . " GameSpot 's Jeff Gerstmann generally shared these points of praise with other reviewers , despite finding some aspects of gameplay potentially unbalanced and the graphics unappealing , said that " if [ players ] can manage to get over these flaws , you 'll find an RPG that dares to be different , but not at the sake of an interesting story and exciting gameplay . " A common point of praise with reviewers was the improved localization when compared to that of Persona , although opinions on the voice acting varied and faults in the grammar were mentioned . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Eternal Punishment was enough of a success to firmly establish the Persona franchise in the West , and would also be the last Persona game not to carry the Shin Megami Tensei moniker as of 2015 . The next title in the series , Shin Megami Tensei : Persona 3 for the PlayStation 2 , was released in 2006 . The game , along with Innocent Sin , received a spin @-@ off manga titled Persona : Tsumi to Batsu ( ペルソナ <unk> , Persona : Sin and Punishment ) , featuring new characters from Seven Sisters . Its 2011 reprint featured new content connecting the manga to Innocent Sin . In 2009 , Atlus and Bbmf developed and published a mobile version of the game titled Persona 2 : Eternal Punishment - Infinity Mask ( ペルソナ2 <unk> <unk> , Perusona Tsū : Batsu Infiniti <unk> ) . Similar to the mobile port of Innocent Sin , it incorporates the gameplay functions of the console version while tailoring them to a mobile device . Maya Amano was later featured in an internal tech demo for the graphics engine used in Shin Megami Tensei : Nocturne . 
 = Abu 'l @-@ Aswar Shavur ibn Fadl = 
 Abu 'l @-@ Aswar or Abu 'l @-@ <unk> Shavur ibn Fadl ibn Muhammad ibn Shaddad was a member of the Shaddadid dynasty . Between 1049 and 1067 he was the eighth Shaddadid ruler of Arran ( today in western Azerbaijan ) from Ganja . Prior to that , he ruled the city of Dvin ( in what is now Armenia and northeastern Turkey ) from 1022 as an autonomous lord . A capable warrior , and a wise and cunning ruler , Abu 'l @-@ Aswar was engaged in several conflicts with most of his neighbours . During his rule over Dvin , he was mostly involved in the affairs of the Armenian principalities . He collaborated with the Byzantine Empire in its conquest of the last remnants of Bagratid Armenia in 1045 , but when the Byzantines later turned on him , he survived three successive offensives that sought to take Ganja . In 1049 , a revolt in Ganja overthrew his infant great @-@ great @-@ nephew , <unk> . The rebels invited him to take up the family 's emirate , and he moved from Dvin to Ganja . Under his rule , the Shaddadid dynasty reached its zenith . He undertook successful campaigns into Georgia and Shirvan , although the limits of Shaddadid power were exposed by his failure to take over the Emirate of Tiflis and by devastating raids by the Alans . At the same time , his reign witnessed the rapid rise of the Seljuk Empire and the extension of its control over the Transcaucasian principalities . Abu 'l @-@ Aswar became a Seljuk vassal in 1054 / 5 . Although he gained control over the former Armenian capital of Ani through Seljuk patronage in 1065 , this association also paved the way for the dynasty 's decline after his death in November 1067 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 The main historical source on the Shaddadids is the work of the Ottoman historian Münejjim Bashi ( died 1702 ) . Münejjim Bashi considered the family to be of Kurdish origin , a view widely accepted by modern scholars . The family 's founder , Muhammad ibn Shaddad , briefly seized control of Dvin in the early 950s . The family then moved to Ganja , the main Muslim town of Arran , which was seized by Muhammad 's sons Lashkari ( I ) , Marzuban , and Fadl ( I ) c . 970 . The brothers successively ruled the city as emirs after that . Abu 'l @-@ Aswar Shavur was the second son of the youngest of the three brothers , and fourth Shaddadid ruler , Fadl . In his long reign ( 985 – 1031 ) , Fadl expanded the family 's control over much of Arran as well as parts of Armenia , capturing Syunik . Fadl was succeeded as emir at Ganja by his eldest son Musa ( r . 1031 – 1034 ) who was in turn murdered by his own son Abu 'l @-@ Hasan Lashkari ( II ) ( r . 1034 – 1049 ) . Abu 'l @-@ Aswar Shavur 's name is an Arabic – Persian hybrid : " Shavur " is the old Persian name " Shapur " , while his kunya contains the Arabicized form of the Iranian ( possibly Daylamite ) name " <unk> " ( cognate with <unk> , " horseman , knight " ) . 
 = = = Lord of Dvin ( 1022 – 49 ) = = = 
 Münejjim Bashi records that at the time of his death in 1067 , Abu 'l @-@ Aswar 's total reign , both in Ganja and before that " over some territories " , had lasted 46 years . " Some territories " clearly refers to his rule over Dvin , known from other sources , meaning that he became ruler of the city in c . 1022 . The city , although part of the Bagratid Kingdom of Armenia , had been left defenceless after the death of Gagik I of Armenia in 1020 and the dispute of his sons over their inheritance , and suffered a devastating Daylamite raid in 1021 which effectively cut it off from the remainder of the Armenian kingdom . In the aftermath , the city appears to have sought the protection of the Shaddadids , and Abu 'l @-@ Aswar became its ruler . From this base , he pursued a virtually independent course from his brother , and later his nephew , in Ganja , focused more on Armenia than Arran . Abu 'l @-@ Aswar was intimately connected with the Armenian princely houses , having married a sister of David I <unk> , King of Tashir . His second son even bore the typically Armenian name of Ashot . Due to his focus on the affairs of his domain , he is not mentioned by Münejjim Bashi until his takeover of the main family seat at Ganja in 1049 . For his activities in the period 1022 – 49 , the main sources derive from his opponents , the Armenians and the Byzantines . 
 Abu 'l @-@ Aswar is first recorded by the history of Matthew of Edessa in 1040 , when the Armenian nobleman Abirat , who had become embroiled in the dispute between Gagik I 's sons Ashot IV and Hovhannes @-@ Smbat III , came to Dvin . Fearful of the latter 's displeasure , Abirat with 12 @,@ 000 horsemen sought Abu 'l @-@ Aswar 's protection . Abu 'l @-@ Aswar initially welcomed Abirat and gave him a high position , but soon came to mistrust him , and had him killed , whereupon Abirat 's lieutenant Sare departed for Ani with Abirat 's supporters . Despite their kinship , at about the same time Abu 'l @-@ Aswar attacked David of Tashir . The Shaddadid army , numbering an impossible 150 @,@ 000 according to Matthew of Edessa , captured much of Tashir , but David was able to assemble a broad alliance against Abu 'l @-@ Aswar . David himself fielded 10 @,@ 000 troops , Hovhannes @-@ Smbat III of Ani sent 3 @,@ 000 men , the King of <unk> sent 2 @,@ 000 , and even the King of Georgia sent 4 @,@ 000 , while David also secured the public backing of the Catholicos of Albania . As a result , Abu 'l @-@ Aswar was defeated and evicted from Tashir . 
 Ashot IV and Hovhannes @-@ Smbat III died at almost the same time ( c . 1040 / 41 ) , and Ashot 's son Gagik II ( r . 1042 – 1045 ) succeeded them both and began consolidating his position . The chief danger to his throne was the Byzantine Empire , which throughout the early 11th century had been encroaching on the Armenian principalities . Hovhannes @-@ Smbat had even bequeathed his kingdom to the Empire , and after his death , Emperor Michael IV the <unk> ( r . 1034 – 1041 ) sent troops to capture Ani . Gagik managed to repel the attack , and political turmoil in Constantinople gained him a couple of years of reprieve after that , but in 1042 a new emperor , Constantine IX Monomachos ( r . 1042 – 1055 ) , came to the throne determined to secure Byzantine claims in Armenia . 
 To this end , he contacted Abu 'l @-@ Aswar and called upon him to attack the Armenians from the rear . Abu 'l @-@ Aswar agreed , in exchange for guarantees that he would retain his conquests , a request granted in an imperial chrysobull . Faced with a two @-@ pronged assault , Gagik was forced to visit Constantinople . There he was kept hostage and Ani was surrendered to the Byzantines in 1045 . Notwithstanding his previous promises , immediately after taking possession of Ani , the emperor requested that Abu 'l @-@ Aswar vacate the fortresses he had conquered . When the latter refused , a large army under Michael <unk> and the magistros Constantine the Alan , containing numerous Armenians , marched against Dvin . Abu 'l @-@ Aswar let them approach , and then opened the irrigation canals and flooded the plain around the city . Stuck in the mud , the besiegers were easy prey for the Shaddadid archers , who inflicted huge casualties on the Byzantine force . Constantine IX responded by placing Katakalon Kekaumenos and the parakoimomenos Constantine in charge of Armenia . Instead of attacking Dvin , however , the new Byzantine leadership concentrated its efforts on recovering the forts captured by Abu 'l @-@ Aswar . <unk> , <unk> , and Khor <unk> fell to the Byzantine army , but <unk> ( modern Yerevan ) resisted until September 1047 , when the outbreak of a rebellion led by Leo Tornikios forced the army 's recall to Constantinople . A peace treaty was hastily concluded , whereby Abu 'l @-@ Aswar agreed not to raid Byzantine territory and to recognize the authority of the emperor . 
 The successful resistance of Dvin put an end to the Byzantine advance in Armenia , helping preserve the independence of the smaller Armenian realms of Syunik , Tashir and Khachen . Soon after , the regional balance of power was permanently altered with the first large @-@ scale raid of the Seljuk Turks under <unk> ibn Arslan Isra 'il and Ibrahim Inal into Byzantine Armenia in 1048 . While the Shaddadids may have been tempted to see in them welcome allies against the Byzantines , they were equally likely to be a threat , as demonstrated by the attack on Ganja by <unk> in 1046 / 47 . 
 Shortly after , in late 1048 or early 1049 — although some authors have suggested a later date , c . 1050 ( A.F. <unk> and M.H. <unk> ) or even c . 1055 / 56 ( E. <unk> ) — the Byzantines launched another offensive against Dvin under the <unk> Nikephoros . According to the contemporary Byzantine historian John Skylitzes , this was because Abu 'l @-@ Aswar ( " <unk> " , as the Byzantines called him ) had violated the previous agreement and raided Byzantine lands . The Shaddadid ruler remained ensconced in Dvin , while the Byzantines devastated its environs " as far as the Iron Bridge and Ganja " , forcing Abu 'l @-@ Aswar to renew his previous oath of subservience and hand over his great @-@ nephew Ardashir , the son of Abu 'l @-@ Hasan Lashkari , as a hostage . 
 = = = Emir of Ganja ( 1049 – 67 ) = = = 
 In 1049 , Abu 'l @-@ Aswar 's nephew Lashkari , the emir of Ganja , died , after a troubled reign of 15 years . He was succeeded by his infant son <unk> , but actual power was in the hands of his chamberlain ( hajib ) , Abu Mansur . After barely two months , a group of elders opposed to the new regime 's policies deposed Abu Mansur while he was at Shamkur and called upon Abu 'l @-@ Aswar to assume control of Ganja as well . Abu 'l @-@ Aswar agreed and abandoned Dvin , which had become too exposed to the Byzantines . The city was left in the hands of a series of governors until 1053 , when he appointed his son Abu Nasr Iskandar as ruler of the city and the surrounding regions . The Shaddadid ruler first set things in order in Shamkur , and then entered Ganja , taking possession " all the lands of Arran and its fortresses " . 
 At this point in his career , Abu 'l @-@ Aswar had achieved a considerable reputation as a ruler and a warrior ; the Ziyarid prince <unk> ( r . 1050 – 1087 ) , who later wrote a well @-@ known mirror for princes , the <unk> , even came to Ganja and spent several years at the Shaddadid court to participate in the jihad against the Christians , after having spent eight years at the court of Maw <unk> of Ghazni . According to <unk> , his host was " a great king , a man firm and clever , [ ... ] just , courageous , eloquent <unk> , of pure faith and far @-@ sighted " . This estimate was shared by the Byzantines , for Skylitzes likewise calls him " as clever a strategist as anybody else , capable of thwarting the enemies ' tactics and policies " , while Münejjim Bashi writes that after his takeover of Ganja , " Abu 'l @-@ Aswar [ ... ] restored the name of the dynasty to life after it had nearly died out . He became strong and the situation of the subjects and the army became orderly . " 
 According to Münejjim Bashi , in 1053 , Abu 'l @-@ Aswar seized the ( unidentified ) fortress of Basra from the Georgians , and refortified and garrisoned it with many men . In 1054 / 5 , along with many of the neighbouring rulers , he became a vassal of the Seljuk Sultan Toghrul Beg ( r . 1037 – 1063 ) , although at least initially the impact of Seljuk overlordship seems to have been light , as neither Toghrul nor his successor Alp Arslan ( r . 1063 – 1072 ) appeared on Shaddadid coinage at this time . In 1062 , Abu 'l @-@ Aswar received a delegation from the Emirate of Tiflis , an isolated Muslim stronghold within the Christian Georgian kingdoms . Following the death of Emir Ja 'far ibn Ali , the locals had evicted his quarrelling sons , and now asked Abu 'l @-@ Aswar to assume control of the city . The Shaddadid ruler was inclined to accept , but his vizier , Bakhtiyar ibn Salman , dissuaded him by warning that such an action would disperse his limited forces . After Abu 'l @-@ Aswar 's refusal , Tiflis was occupied by the Georgians , until they were evicted by Alp Arslan in 1068 . This event highlighted the limitations of Shaddadid power , which was further demonstrated by an Alan invasion through the Darial Pass in the same year : more than 20 @,@ 000 inhabitants of Arran were carried off as slaves according to Münejjim Bashi 's account . In response to the Alan threat , Abu 'l @-@ Aswar built a wall and moat around the suburb ( <unk> ) of his capital Ganja . The gates installed by Abu 'l @-@ Aswar for this new fortification were carried off by the Georgians under Demetrius I in 1139 , and are still preserved at the Gelati Monastery in modern Georgia . In 2012 – 14 , replicas of the original gates were installed in Ganja 's Museum of Archaeology and Ethnography . 
 At the same time , Abu 'l @-@ Aswar 's relations with his neighbour , Shirvanshah <unk> I ( r . 1063 – 1069 ) , abruptly deteriorated . The two dynasties were linked by family ties — <unk> 's predecessor , Sallar ( r . 1050 – 1063 ) , had even been married to a daughter of Abu 'l @-@ Aswar — but now the Shaddadid ruler launched a series of invasions against Shirvan . In spring 1063 , Abu 'l @-@ Aswar captured the <unk> castle , marched on to the capital of Shirvan , <unk> , defeated the Shirvanshah 's forces in battle , plundered their camp , and captured his own daughter , her treasure and retinue . He then withdrew to Arran , but in July returned to Shirvan to raid it . In the next year , he again invaded Shirvan and captured a number of fortresses , while the local Kurdish tribes went over to him . After his return to Ganja , a peace treaty was signed with the Shirvanshah in June / July 1064 , whereby Abu 'l @-@ Aswar returned <unk> in exchange for 40 @,@ 000 gold dinars . 
 In 1064 , the Seljuk sultan Alp Arslan invaded Byzantine Armenia and took Ani . Abu 'l @-@ Aswar himself led raids into the area , capturing the unidentified fortress of <unk> ( " one of the best in Armenia " according to Münejjim Bashi ) . Münejjim Bashi further records that Alp Arslan handed over control of Ani to him ; Ibn al @-@ Athir reports the transfer to an unnamed emir , while Vardan Areveltsi records that the fortress was granted only to Abu 'l @-@ Aswar 's son and successor , Fadl . Immediately after his return to Ganja and the dispersal of his army , however , the Alans again crossed the Darial Pass in October 1065 , and , allied with the inhabitants of <unk> , raided Arran . At Shamkur they killed more than 200 volunteers for the jihad , and raided even to the very gates of Ganja itself , before moving on to raid the environs of Barda 'a . Abu 'l @-@ Aswar and his troops preferred to remain within the protection of the walled cities rather than face the raiders in the field , and the Alans reached all the way to the Araxes before turning back north , along with the prisoners they had taken . 
 Abu 'l @-@ Aswar died on 19 November 1067 , and was buried at the main mosque of Ganja . He was succeeded by his eldest son , Fadl II , whom he had already announced as his heir , and to whom the oath of allegiance ( bay 'ah ) had been taken by the Shaddadid family , the army and the people of Arran . Apart from Fadl , Abu 'l @-@ Aswar had four more sons — Ashot , Iskandar , <unk> , and Marzuban — as well as an unnamed daughter , wife of the Shirvanshah Sallar . 
 Abu 'l @-@ Aswar 's reign represented the zenith of the Shaddadid dynasty , but their fall began almost immediately after his death : the Seljuks strengthened their grip on Arran and the other principalities of the region , and Alp Arslan visited Ganja in person to extract an enormous tribute . Fadl II 's reign was troubled — at one point he was captured and held by the Georgians for eight months — but he managed to capture Derbent . Fadl II was overthrown by his son <unk> ( Fadl III ) in 1073 , who was in turn deposed in 1075 by the Turkish ghulam Sav Tegin , to whom the Seljuks had assigned control of Arran and Derbent . This ended the family 's rule over Arran , but a junior line , led by Abu 'l @-@ Aswar 's third son <unk> , continued to govern Ani as emirs , initially as Seljuk , and later as Georgian , vassals . This last branch of the Shaddadids maintained a precarious independence until the end of their dynasty in c . 1200 . 
 = Delaware Route 300 = 
 Delaware Route 300 ( DE 300 ) is an 11 @.@ 83 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 19 @.@ 04 km ) state highway in Kent County , Delaware . The route is a continuation of Maryland Route 300 ( MD 300 ) from the Maryland border near Everetts Corner . It runs in a northeast direction from there to Smyrna , where it ends at U.S. Route 13 ( US 13 ) while concurrent with DE 6 . Along the way , DE 300 passes through rural areas as well as the towns of Kenton and Clayton . The road intersects DE 44 in Everetts Corner , DE 11 southwest of Kenton , DE 42 in Kenton , DE 15 between Kenton and Clayton , and DE 6 in Smyrna . The road was first built as a state highway in the 1920s and 1930s between the Maryland border and Clayton , with the DE 300 designation given to the road by 1936 . The route was extended to its current terminus in the 1950s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 300 begins at the Maryland border , where it continues west into that state as MD 300 . From the state line , the route heads east on two @-@ lane undivided Sudlersville Road through agricultural areas and woods with some homes . A short distance after the state line , the road intersects the western terminus of DE 44 in Everetts Corner . DE 300 continues east @-@ northeast , intersecting the northern terminus of DE 11 . The route curves northeast , crossing an abandoned railroad line before entering Kenton . At this point , the road becomes Main Street and passes homes with a few businesses , intersecting DE 42 in the center of town . 
 Past Kenton , DE 300 continues northeast on <unk> Pond Road , passing through more farm fields with some woodland and residences . The road forms a brief concurrency with DE 15 before heading north . DE 300 enters Clayton , running northeast through industrial areas and crossing Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary railroad line . The route continues past a mix of homes and businesses , heading into Smyrna and intersecting DE 6 . At this point , DE 6 turns northeast and forms a concurrency with DE 300 on Glenwood Avenue . The road widens into a divided highway before it intersects US 13 in a business area . At this point , DE 300 ends and DE 6 turns southeast to form a concurrency with US 13 . 
 DE 300 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 16 @,@ 120 vehicles at the eastern terminus at US 13 to a low of 1 @,@ 756 vehicles at the DE 11 intersection . The portion of DE 300 between the Maryland border and DE 44 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1920 , what is now DE 300 existed as an unimproved county road . The road was completed as a state highway between Kenton and Clayton and was proposed as one west of Kenton four years later . By 1931 , the entire route between Clayton and the Maryland border was completed as a state highway . DE 300 was designated between the Maryland border and an intersection with DE 6 between Clayton and Smyrna by 1936 . By 1954 , DE 300 was extended east to its present terminus at US 13 in Smyrna . By the 1990s , DE 6 was routed along DE 300 in Smyrna , bypassing the downtown area . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Kent County . 
 = Live and Let Die ( novel ) = 
 Live and Let Die is the second novel in Ian Fleming 's James Bond series of stories , and is set in London , the US and Jamaica . It was first published in the UK by Jonathan Cape on 5 April 1954 . Fleming wrote the novel at his Goldeneye estate in Jamaica before his first book , Casino Royale , was published ; much of the background came from Fleming 's travel in the US and knowledge of Jamaica . 
 The story centres on Bond 's pursuit of " Mr Big " , a criminal who has links to the American criminal network , the world of voodoo and SMERSH — an arm of the Russian secret service — all of which are threats to the West . Bond becomes involved in the US through Mr Big 's smuggling of 17th @-@ century gold coins from British territories in the Caribbean . The novel deals with the themes of the ongoing East @-@ West struggle of the Cold War — including British and American relations , Britain 's position in the world , race relations and the struggle between good and evil . 
 As with Casino Royale , Live and Let Die was broadly well received by the critics . The initial print run of 7 @,@ 500 copies quickly sold out and a second print run was ordered within the year . US sales , when the novel was released there a year later , were much slower . Following a comic @-@ strip adaptation in 1958 – 59 by John McLusky in the Daily Express , the novel was adapted in 1973 as the eighth film in the Eon Productions Bond series and the first to star Roger Moore as Bond . Major plot elements from the novel were also incorporated into the Bond films For Your Eyes Only in 1981 and Licence to Kill in 1989 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The British Secret Service agent James Bond is sent by his superior , M , to New York City to investigate " Mr Big " , real name Buonaparte Ignace Gallia . Bond 's target is an agent of the Soviet counterintelligence organisation SMERSH , and an underworld voodoo leader who is suspected of selling 17th @-@ century gold coins in order to finance Soviet spy operations in America . These gold coins have been turning up in Harlem and Florida and are suspected of being part of a treasure that was buried in Jamaica by the pirate Sir Henry Morgan . 
 In New York Bond meets up with his counterpart in the CIA , Felix Leiter . The two visit some of Mr Big 's nightclubs in Harlem , but are captured . Bond is interrogated by Mr Big , who uses his fortune @-@ telling employee , Solitaire ( so named because she excludes men from her life ) , to determine if Bond is telling the truth . Solitaire lies to Mr Big , supporting Bond 's cover story . Mr Big decides to release Bond and Leiter , and has his henchman Tee @-@ Hee break one of Bond 's fingers . On leaving , Bond kills Tee @-@ Hee and several more of Mr Big 's men , while Leiter is released with minimal physical harm by a gang member , sympathetic because of a shared appreciation of jazz . 
 Solitaire later leaves Mr Big and contacts Bond ; the couple travel by train to St. Petersburg , Florida , where they meet Leiter . While Bond and Leiter are scouting one of Mr Big 's warehouses used for storing exotic fish , Solitaire is kidnapped by Mr Big 's minions . Leiter later returns to the warehouse by himself , but is either captured and fed to a shark or tricked into standing on a trap door over the shark tank through which he falls ; he survives , but loses an arm and a leg . Bond finds him in their safe house with a note pinned to his chest " He disagreed with something that ate him " . Bond then investigates the warehouse himself and discovers that Mr Big is smuggling gold by placing it in the bottom of fish tanks holding poisonous tropical fish , which he is bringing into the US . He is attacked in the warehouse by the Robber , another of Mr Big 's men ; during the resultant gunfight , Bond outwits the Robber and causes him to fall into the shark tank . 
 Bond continues his mission in Jamaica , where he meets a local fisherman , Quarrel , and John Strangways , the head of the local MI6 station . Quarrel gives Bond training in scuba diving in the local waters . Bond swims through <unk> and barracuda @-@ infested waters to Mr Big 's island and manages to plant a limpet mine on the hull of his yacht before being captured once again by Mr Big . Bond is reunited with Solitaire ; the following morning Mr Big ties the couple to a line behind his yacht and plans to drag them over the shallow coral reef and into deeper water so that the sharks and barracuda that he attracts to the area with regular feedings will eat them . 
 Bond and Solitaire are saved when the limpet mine explodes seconds before they are dragged over the reef : though temporarily stunned by the explosion and injured on the coral , they are protected from further harm by the reef and Bond watches as Mr Big , who survived the explosion , is killed by the sharks and barracuda . Quarrel then rescues the couple . 
 = = Background = = 
 Between January and March 1952 the journalist Ian Fleming wrote Casino Royale , his first novel , at his Goldeneye estate in Jamaica . Fleming conducted research for Live and Let Die , and completed the novel before Casino Royale was published in January 1953 , four months before his second book was published . Fleming and his wife Ann flew to New York before taking the Silver Meteor train to St. Petersburg in Florida and then flying on to Jamaica . In doing so they followed the same train route Fleming had taken with his friend Ivar Bryce in July 1943 , when Fleming had first visited the island . 
 Once Fleming and his wife arrived at Goldeneye , he started work on the second Bond novel . In May 1963 he wrote an article for Books and Bookmen magazine describing his approach to writing , in which he said : " I write for about three hours in the morning ... and I do another hour 's work between six and seven in the evening . I never correct anything and I never go back to see what I have written ... By following my formula , you write 2 @,@ 000 words a day . " As he had done with Casino Royale , Fleming showed the manuscript to his friend , the writer William Plomer , who reacted favourably to the story , telling Fleming that " the new book held this reader like a limpet mine & the denouement was shattering " . On a trip to the US in May 1953 Fleming used his five @-@ day travelling time on RMS Queen Elizabeth to correct the proofs of the novel . 
 Fleming intended the book to have a more serious tone than his debut novel , and he initially considered making the story a meditation on the nature of evil . The novel 's original title , The Undertaker 's Wind , reflects this ; the undertaker 's wind , which was to act as a metaphor for the story , describes one of Jamaica 's winds that " blows all the bad air out of the island " . 
 The literary critic Daniel <unk> Savoye considers the titles of Fleming 's novels to have importance individually and collectively ; Live and Let Die , he writes , " turns an expression of collective wisdom , in this case fraternal and positive , into its exact opposite , suggesting a materialistic epistemological outlook , individualistic and lucid " . This is in keeping with the storyline in that Bond brings order without which " the world would quickly turn into the dystopian , barbarian reality feared by [ Thomas ] Hobbes and celebrated by [ Marquis ] de Sade . " 
 Although Fleming provided no dates within his novels , two writers have identified different timelines based on events and situations within the novel series as a whole . John Griswold and Henry Chancellor — both of whom have written books on behalf of Ian Fleming Publications — put the events of Live and Let Die in 1952 ; Griswold is more precise , and considers the story to have taken place in January and February that year . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Plot inspirations = = = 
 Much of the novel draws from Fleming 's personal experiences : the opening of the book , with Bond 's arrival at New York 's Idlewild Airport was inspired by Fleming 's own journeys in 1941 and 1953 , and the warehouse at which Leiter is attacked by a shark was based on a similar building Fleming and his wife had visited in St. Petersburg , Florida on their recent journey . He also used his experiences on his two journeys on the Silver Meteor as background for the route taken by Bond and Solitaire . 
 Some of Fleming 's friends had their names used in the story , with Ivar Bryce giving his name to the alias used by Bond , while another friend , Tommy Leiter , found his surname being used for Felix Leiter ; Ivar Bryce 's middle name of Felix was used for Leiter 's first name , while John Fox @-@ Strangways saw part of his surname being used for the name of the MI6 station chief in Jamaica . Fleming also used the name of the local Jamaican Rufous @-@ throated solitaire bird as the name of the book 's main female character . 
 Fleming 's experiences on his first scuba dive with Jacques Cousteau in 1953 provided much of the description of Bond 's swim to Mr Big 's boat , while the concept of limpet @-@ mining is probably based on the wartime activities of the elite 10th Light Flotilla , a unit of Italian navy frogmen . Fleming also used , and extensively quoted , information about voodoo from his friend Patrick Leigh Fermor 's 1950 book The Traveller 's Tree , which had also been partly written at Goldeneye . 
 Fleming had a long @-@ held interest in pirates , from the novels he read as a child , through to films such as Captain Blood ( 1935 ) with Errol Flynn , which he enjoyed watching . From his Goldeneye home on Jamaica 's northern shore , Fleming had visited Port Royal on the south of the island , which was once the home port of Sir Henry Morgan , all of which stimulated Fleming 's interest . For the background to Mr Big 's treasure island , Fleming appropriated the details of <unk> Island in Port Maria Bay , which was the true location of Morgan 's hoard . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Fleming builds the main character in Live and Let Die to make Bond come across as more human than in Casino Royale , becoming " a much warmer , more likeable man from the opening chapter " , according to the American novelist Raymond Benson , who between 1997 and 2002 wrote a series of Bond novels and short stories . Savoye sees the introduction of a vulnerable side to Bond , identifying the agent 's tears towards the end of the story as evidence of this . Similarly , over the course of the book , the American character Leiter develops and also emerges as a more complete and human character and his and Bond 's friendship is evident in the story . Despite the relationship , Leiter is again subordinate to Bond . While in Casino Royale his role was to provide technical support and money to Bond , in Live and Let Die the character is secondary to Bond , and the only time he takes the initiative , he loses an arm and a leg , while Bond wins his own battle with the same opponent . Although Fleming had initially intended to kill Leiter off in the story , his American literary agent protested , and the character was saved . 
 Quarrel was Fleming 's ideal concept of a black person , and the character was based on his genuine liking for Jamaicans , whom he saw as " full of goodwill and cheerfulness and humour " . The relationship between Bond and Quarrel was based on a mutual assumption of Bond 's superiority . Fleming described the relationship as " that of a Scots laird with his head stalker ; authority was unspoken and there was no room for servility " . 
 Fleming 's villain was physically abnormal — as many of Bond 's later adversaries were . Mr Big is described as being intellectually brilliant , with a " great football of a head , twice the normal size and very nearly round " and skin which was " grey @-@ black , taut and shining like the face of a week @-@ old corpse in the river " . For Benson , " Mr Big is only an adequate villain " , with little depth to him . According to the literary analyst LeRoy L. Panek , in his examination of 20th century British spy novels , Live and Let Die showed a departure from the " gentleman crook " that showed in much earlier literature , as the intellectual and organisational skills of Mr Big were emphasised , rather than the behavioural . Within Mr Big 's organisation , Panek identifies Mr Big 's henchmen as " merely incompetent gunsels " when compared with Bond , who the latter can eliminate with relative ease . 
 = = Style = = 
 Benson analysed Fleming 's writing style and identified what he described as the " Fleming Sweep " : a stylistic point that sweeps the reader from one chapter to another using ' hooks ' at the end of chapters to heighten tension and pull the reader into the next : Benson felt that the " Fleming Sweep never achieves a more engaging rhythm and flow " than in Live and Let Die . The writer and academic Kingsley Amis — who also subsequently wrote a Bond novel — disagrees , and thinks that the story has " less narrative sweep than most " . Parker considers the novel possibly Fleming 's best , as it has a tight plot and is well paced throughout ; he thinks the book " establishes the winning formula " for the stories that follow . 
 Savoye , comparing the structure of Live and Let Die with Casino Royale , believes that the two books have open narratives which allow Fleming to continue with further books in the series . Savoye finds differences in the structure of the endings , with Live and Let Die 's promise of future sexual encounters between Bond and Solitaire to be more credible than Casino Royale 's ending , in which Bond vows to battle a super @-@ criminal organisation . 
 Within the novel Fleming uses elements that are " pure Gothic " , according to the essayist Umberto Eco . This includes the description of Mr Big 's death by shark attack , in which Bond watches as " Half of The Big Man 's left arm came out of the water . It had no hand , no wrist , no wrist watch . " Eco considers that this is " not just an example of macabre sarcasm ; it is an emphasis on the essential by the inessential , typical of the école du regard . " Benson considers that Fleming 's experiences as a journalist , and his eye for detail , add to the verisimilitude displayed in the novel . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Live and Let Die , like other Bond novels , reflects the changing roles of Britain and America during the 1950s and the perceived threat from the Soviet Union to both nations . Unlike Casino Royale , where Cold War politics revolve around British @-@ Soviet tensions , in Live and Let Die Bond arrives in Harlem to protect America from Soviet agents working through the Black Power movement . In the novel America was the Soviet objective and Bond comments " that New York ' must be the fattest atomic @-@ bomb target on the whole face of the world ' . " 
 Live and Let Die also gave Fleming a chance to outline his views on what he saw as the increasing American colonisation of Jamaica — a subject that concerned both him and his neighbour Noël Coward . While the American Mr Big was unusual in appropriating an entire island , the rising number of American tourists to the islands was seen by Fleming as a threat to Jamaica ; he wrote in the novel that Bond was " glad to be on his way to the soft green flanks of Jamaica and to leave behind the great hard continent of <unk> . " 
 Bond 's briefing also provides an opportunity for Fleming to offer his views on race through his characters . " M and Bond ... offer their views on the ethnicity of crime , views that reflected ignorance , the inherited racialist prejudices of London clubland " , according to the cultural historian Jeremy Black . Black also points out that " the frequency of his references and his willingness to offer racial stereotypes [ was ] typical of many writers of his age " . The writer Louise Welsh observes that " Live and Let Die taps into the paranoia that some sectors of white society were feeling " as the civil rights movements challenged prejudice and inequality . That insecurity manifested itself in opinions shared by Fleming with the intelligence industry , that the American National Association for the Advancement of Colored People was a communist front . The communist threat was brought home to Jamaica with the 1952 arrest of the Jamaican politician Alexander Bustamante by the American authorities while he was on official business in Puerto Rico , despite the fact that he was avowedly anti @-@ communist . During the course of the year local Jamaican political parties had also expelled members for being communists . 
 Friendship is another prominent element of Live and Let Die , where the importance of male friends and allies shows through in Bond 's relationships with Leiter and Quarrel . The more complete characters profiles in the novel clearly showed the strong relationship between Bond and Leiter . In turn this provides a strengthened motive for Bond to chase Mr Big as revenge for the shark attack on Leiter . 
 Live and Let Die continues the theme Fleming examined in Casino Royale , that of evil or , as Fleming 's biographer , Andrew Lycett , describes it , " the banality of evil " . Fleming uses Mr Big as the vehicle to voice opinions on evil , particularly when he tells Bond that " Mister Bond , I suffer from boredom . I am prey to what the early Christians called ' accidie ' , the deadly lethargy that envelops those who are sated . " This allowed Fleming to build the Bond character as a counter to the accidie , in what the writer saw as a Manichaean struggle between good and evil . Benson considers evil as the main theme of the book , and highlights the discussion Bond has with René Mathis of the French Deuxième Bureau in Casino Royale , in which the Frenchman predicts Bond will seek out and kill the evil men of the world . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 = = = Publication history = = = 
 Live and Let Die was published in hardback by Jonathan Cape on 5 April 1954 and , as with Casino Royale , Fleming designed the cover , which again featured the title lettering prominently . It had an initial print run of 7 @,@ 500 copies which sold out , and a reprint of 2 @,@ 000 copies was soon undertaken ; by the end of the first year , a total of over 9 @,@ 000 copies had been sold . In May 1954 Live and Let Die was banned in Ireland by the Irish Censorship of Publications Board . Lycett observed that the ban helped the general publicity in other territories . In October 1957 Pan Books issued a paperback version which sold 50 @,@ 000 copies in the first year . 
 Live and Let Die was published in the US in January 1955 by Macmillan ; there was only one major change in the book , which was that the title of the fifth chapter was changed from " Nigger Heaven " to " Seventh Avenue " . Sales in the US were poor , with only 5 @,@ 000 copies sold in the first year of publication . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Philip Day of The Sunday Times noted " How wincingly well Mr Fleming writes " , while the reviewer for The Times , thought that " [ t ] his is an ingenious affair , full of recondite knowledge and horrific spills and thrills – of slightly sadistic excitements also – though without the simple and bold design of its predecessor " . Elizabeth L Sturch , writing in The Times Literary Supplement , observed that Fleming was " without doubt the most interesting recent recruit among thriller @-@ writers " and that Live and Let Die " fully maintains the promise of ... Casino Royale . " <unk> her praise of the book , Sturch thought that " Mr Fleming works often on the edge of flippancy , rather in the spirit of a highbrow " , although overall she felt that the novel " contains passages which for sheer excitement have not been surpassed by any modern writer of this kind " . The reviewer for The Daily Telegraph felt that " the book is continually exciting , whether it takes us into the heart of Harlem or describes an underwater swim in shark @-@ infested waters ; and it is more entertaining because Mr Fleming does not take it all too seriously himself " . George Malcolm Thompson , writing in The Evening Standard , believed Live and Let Die to be " tense ; ice @-@ cold , sophisticated ; Peter Cheyney for the carriage trade " . 
 Writing in The New York Times , Anthony Boucher — a critic described by Fleming 's biographer , John Pearson , as " throughout an avid anti @-@ Bond and an anti @-@ Fleming man " — thought that the " high @-@ spots are all effectively described ... but the narrative is loose and jerky " . Boucher concluded that Live and Let Die was " a lurid meller contrived by mixing equal parts of Oppenheim and Spillane " . In June 1955 Raymond Chandler was visiting the poet Stephen Spender in London when he was introduced to Fleming , who subsequently sent Chandler a copy of Live and Let Die . In response , Chandler wrote that Fleming was " probably the most forceful and driving writer of what I suppose still must be called thrillers in England " . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 Live and Let Die was adapted as a daily comic strip which was published in The Daily Express newspaper and syndicated around the world . The adaptation ran from 15 December 1958 to 28 March 1959 . The adaptation was written by Henry Gammidge and illustrated by John McLusky , whose drawings of Bond had a resemblance to Sean Connery , the actor who portrayed Bond in Dr. No three years later . 
 Before Live and Let Die had been published , the producer Alexander Korda had read a proof copy of the novel . He thought it was the most exciting story he had read for years , but was unsure whether it was suitable for a film . Nevertheless , he wanted to show the story to the directors David Lean and Carol Reed for their impressions , although nothing came of Korda 's initial interest . In 1955 , following the television broadcast of an adaptation of Fleming 's earlier novel Casino Royale , Warner Bros. expressed an interest in Live and Let Die , and offered $ 500 for an option , against $ 5 @,@ 000 if the film was made . Fleming thought the terms insufficient and turned them down . 
 Live and Let Die , a film based loosely on the novel starring Roger Moore as Bond , was released in 1973 , which played on the cycle of blaxploitation films produced at the time . The film was directed by Guy Hamilton , produced by Albert R. Broccoli and Harry Saltzman , and is the eighth in the Eon Productions Bond series . Some scenes from the novel were depicted in later Bond films , including the sequence of Bond and Solitaire being dragged behind Mr Big 's boat , which was used in the film For Your Eyes Only , while Felix Leiter was not fed to a shark until Licence to Kill , which also faithfully adapts Live and Let Die 's shoot @-@ out in the warehouse . 
 = Astronomy = 
 Astronomy , a natural science , is the study of celestial objects ( such as stars , galaxies , planets , moons , asteroids , comets and nebulae ) and processes ( such as supernovae explosions , gamma ray bursts , and cosmic microwave background radiation ) , the physics , chemistry , and evolution of such objects and processes , and more generally all phenomena that originate outside the atmosphere of Earth . A related but distinct subject , physical cosmology , is concerned with studying the Universe as a whole . 
 Astronomy is one of the oldest sciences . The early civilizations in recorded history , such as the Babylonians , Greeks , Indians , Egyptians , Nubians , Iranians , Chinese , and Maya performed methodical observations of the night sky . Historically , astronomy has included disciplines as diverse as astrometry , celestial navigation , observational astronomy and the making of calendars , but professional astronomy is nowadays often considered to be synonymous with astrophysics . 
 During the 20th century , the field of professional astronomy split into observational and theoretical branches . Observational astronomy is focused on acquiring data from observations of astronomical objects , which is then analyzed using basic principles of physics . Theoretical astronomy is oriented toward the development of computer or analytical models to describe astronomical objects and phenomena . The two fields complement each other , with theoretical astronomy seeking to explain the observational results and observations being used to confirm theoretical results . 
 Astronomy is one of the few sciences where amateurs can still play an active role , especially in the discovery and observation of transient phenomena . Amateur astronomers have made and contributed to many important astronomical discoveries . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Astronomy ( from the Greek <unk> from <unk> <unk> , " star " and <unk> <unk> from <unk> <unk> , " law " or " culture " ) means " law of the stars " ( or " culture of the stars " depending on the translation ) . Astronomy should not be confused with astrology , the belief system which claims that human affairs are correlated with the positions of celestial objects . Although the two fields share a common origin , they are now entirely distinct . 
 = = = Use of terms " astronomy " and " astrophysics " = = = 
 Generally , either the term " astronomy " or " astrophysics " may be used to refer to this subject . Based on strict dictionary definitions , " astronomy " refers to " the study of objects and matter outside the Earth 's atmosphere and of their physical and chemical properties " and " astrophysics " refers to the branch of astronomy dealing with " the behavior , physical properties , and dynamic processes of celestial objects and phenomena " . In some cases , as in the introduction of the introductory textbook The Physical Universe by Frank Shu , " astronomy " may be used to describe the qualitative study of the subject , whereas " astrophysics " is used to describe the physics @-@ oriented version of the subject . However , since most modern astronomical research deals with subjects related to physics , modern astronomy could actually be called astrophysics . Few fields , such as astrometry , are purely astronomy rather than also astrophysics . Various departments in which scientists carry out research on this subject may use " astronomy " and " astrophysics , " partly depending on whether the department is historically affiliated with a physics department , and many professional astronomers have physics rather than astronomy degrees . One of the leading scientific journals in the field is the European journal named Astronomy and Astrophysics . The leading American journals are The Astrophysical Journal and The Astronomical Journal . 
 = = History = = 
 In early times , astronomy only comprised the observation and predictions of the motions of objects visible to the naked eye . In some locations , early cultures assembled massive artifacts that possibly had some astronomical purpose . In addition to their ceremonial uses , these observatories could be employed to determine the seasons , an important factor in knowing when to plant crops , as well as in understanding the length of the year . 
 Before tools such as the telescope were invented , early study of the stars was conducted using the naked eye . As civilizations developed , most notably in Mesopotamia , Greece , India , China , Egypt , and Central America , astronomical observatories were assembled , and ideas on the nature of the Universe began to be explored . Most of early astronomy actually consisted of mapping the positions of the stars and planets , a science now referred to as astrometry . From these observations , early ideas about the motions of the planets were formed , and the nature of the Sun , Moon and the Earth in the Universe were explored philosophically . The Earth was believed to be the center of the Universe with the Sun , the Moon and the stars rotating around it . This is known as the geocentric model of the Universe , or the Ptolemaic system , named after Ptolemy . 
 A particularly important early development was the beginning of mathematical and scientific astronomy , which began among the Babylonians , who laid the foundations for the later astronomical traditions that developed in many other civilizations . The Babylonians discovered that lunar eclipses recurred in a repeating cycle known as a saros . 
 Following the Babylonians , significant advances in astronomy were made in ancient Greece and the Hellenistic world . Greek astronomy is characterized from the start by seeking a rational , physical explanation for celestial phenomena . In the 3rd century BC , Aristarchus of Samos estimated the size and distance of the Moon and Sun , and was the first to propose a heliocentric model of the solar system . In the 2nd century BC , Hipparchus discovered precession , calculated the size and distance of the Moon and invented the earliest known astronomical devices such as the astrolabe . Hipparchus also created a comprehensive catalog of 1020 stars , and most of the constellations of the northern hemisphere derive from Greek astronomy . The Antikythera mechanism ( c . 150 – 80 BC ) was an early analog computer designed to calculate the location of the Sun , Moon , and planets for a given date . Technological artifacts of similar complexity did not reappear until the 14th century , when mechanical astronomical clocks appeared in Europe . 
 During the Middle Ages , astronomy was mostly stagnant in medieval Europe , at least until the 13th century . However , astronomy flourished in the Islamic world and other parts of the world . This led to the emergence of the first astronomical observatories in the Muslim world by the early 9th century . In 964 , the Andromeda Galaxy , the largest galaxy in the Local Group , was discovered by the Persian astronomer Azophi and first described in his Book of Fixed Stars . The SN 1006 supernova , the brightest apparent magnitude stellar event in recorded history , was observed by the Egyptian Arabic astronomer Ali ibn Ridwan and the Chinese astronomers in 1006 . Some of the prominent Islamic ( mostly Persian and Arab ) astronomers who made significant contributions to the science include Al @-@ <unk> , <unk> , Azophi , <unk> , Biruni , <unk> , Al @-@ <unk> , and the astronomers of the <unk> and Samarkand observatories . Astronomers during that time introduced many Arabic names now used for individual stars . It is also believed that the ruins at Great Zimbabwe and Timbuktu may have housed an astronomical observatory . Europeans had previously believed that there had been no astronomical observation in pre @-@ colonial Middle Ages sub @-@ Saharan Africa but modern discoveries show otherwise . 
 The Roman Catholic Church gave more financial and social support to the study of astronomy for over six centuries , from the recovery of ancient learning during the late Middle Ages into the Enlightenment , than any other , and , probably , all other , institutions . Among the Church 's motives was finding the date for Easter . 
 = = = Scientific revolution = = = 
 During the Renaissance , Nicolaus Copernicus proposed a heliocentric model of the solar system . His work was defended , expanded upon , and corrected by Galileo Galilei and Johannes Kepler . Galileo used telescopes to enhance his observations . 
 Kepler was the first to devise a system that described correctly the details of the motion of the planets with the Sun at the center . However , Kepler did not succeed in formulating a theory behind the laws he wrote down . It was left to Newton 's invention of celestial dynamics and his law of gravitation to finally explain the motions of the planets . Newton also developed the reflecting telescope . 
 The English astronomer John Flamsteed catalogued over 3000 stars . Further discoveries paralleled the improvements in the size and quality of the telescope . More extensive star catalogues were produced by Lacaille . The astronomer William Herschel made a detailed catalog of nebulosity and clusters , and in 1781 discovered the planet Uranus , the first new planet found . The distance to a star was first announced in 1838 when the parallax of 61 Cygni was measured by Friedrich Bessel . 
 During the 18 – 19th centuries , attention to the three body problem by Euler , Clairaut , and D 'Alembert led to more accurate predictions about the motions of the Moon and planets . This work was further refined by Lagrange and Laplace , allowing the masses of the planets and moons to be estimated from their perturbations . 
 Significant advances in astronomy came about with the introduction of new technology , including the spectroscope and photography . Fraunhofer discovered about 600 bands in the spectrum of the Sun in 1814 – 15 , which , in 1859 , Kirchhoff ascribed to the presence of different elements . Stars were proven to be similar to the Earth 's own Sun , but with a wide range of temperatures , masses , and sizes . 
 The existence of the Earth 's galaxy , the Milky Way , as a separate group of stars , was only proved in the 20th century , along with the existence of " external " galaxies , and soon after , the expansion of the Universe , seen in the recession of most galaxies from us . Modern astronomy has also discovered many exotic objects such as quasars , pulsars , <unk> , and radio galaxies , and has used these observations to develop physical theories which describe some of these objects in terms of equally exotic objects such as black holes and neutron stars . Physical cosmology made huge advances during the 20th century , with the model of the Big Bang heavily supported by the evidence provided by astronomy and physics , such as the cosmic microwave background radiation , Hubble 's law , and cosmological abundances of elements . Space telescopes have enabled measurements in parts of the electromagnetic spectrum normally blocked or blurred by the atmosphere . Recently , in February 2016 , it was revealed that the LIGO project had detected evidence of gravitational waves , in September 2015 . 
 = = Observational astronomy = = 
 In astronomy , the main source of information about celestial bodies and other objects is visible light or more generally electromagnetic radiation . Observational astronomy may be divided according to the observed region of the electromagnetic spectrum . Some parts of the spectrum can be observed from the Earth 's surface , while other parts are only observable from either high altitudes or outside the Earth 's atmosphere . Specific information on these subfields is given below . 
 = = = Radio astronomy = = = 
 Radio astronomy studies radiation with wavelengths greater than approximately one millimeter . Radio astronomy is different from most other forms of observational astronomy in that the observed radio waves can be treated as waves rather than as discrete photons . Hence , it is relatively easier to measure both the amplitude and phase of radio waves , whereas this is not as easily done at shorter wavelengths . 
 Although some radio waves are produced by astronomical objects in the form of thermal emission , most of the radio emission that is observed from Earth is the result of synchrotron radiation , which is produced when electrons orbit magnetic fields . Additionally , a number of spectral lines produced by interstellar gas , notably the hydrogen spectral line at 21 cm , are observable at radio wavelengths . 
 A wide variety of objects are observable at radio wavelengths , including supernovae , interstellar gas , pulsars , and active galactic nuclei . 
 = = = Infrared astronomy = = = 
 Infrared astronomy is founded on the detection and analysis of infrared radiation ( wavelengths longer than red light ) . The infrared spectrum is useful for studying objects that are too cold to radiate visible light , such as planets , circumstellar disks or nebulae whose light is blocked by dust . Longer infrared wavelengths can penetrate clouds of dust that block visible light , allowing the observation of young stars in molecular clouds and the cores of galaxies . Observations from the Wide @-@ field Infrared Survey Explorer ( WISE ) have been particularly effective at unveiling numerous Galactic protostars and their host star clusters . With the exception of wavelengths close to visible light , infrared radiation is heavily absorbed by the atmosphere , or masked , as the atmosphere itself produces significant infrared emission . Consequently , infrared observatories have to be located in high , dry places or in space . Some molecules radiate strongly in the infrared . This allows the study of the chemistry of space ; more specifically it can detect water in comets . 
 = = = Optical astronomy = = = 
 Historically , optical astronomy , also called visible light astronomy , is the oldest form of astronomy . Optical images of observations were originally drawn by hand . In the late 19th century and most of the 20th century , images were made using photographic equipment . Modern images are made using digital detectors , particularly detectors using charge @-@ coupled devices ( CCDs ) and recorded on modern medium . Although visible light itself extends from approximately 4000 Å to 7000 Å ( 400 nm to 700 nm ) , that same equipment can be used to observe some near @-@ ultraviolet and near @-@ infrared radiation . 
 = = = Ultraviolet astronomy = = = 
 Ultraviolet astronomy refers to observations at ultraviolet wavelengths between approximately 100 and 3200 Å ( 10 to 320 nm ) . Light at these wavelengths is absorbed by the Earth 's atmosphere , so observations at these wavelengths must be performed from the upper atmosphere or from space . Ultraviolet astronomy is best suited to the study of thermal radiation and spectral emission lines from hot blue stars ( OB stars ) that are very bright in this wave band . This includes the blue stars in other galaxies , which have been the targets of several ultraviolet surveys . Other objects commonly observed in ultraviolet light include planetary nebulae , supernova remnants , and active galactic nuclei . However , as ultraviolet light is easily absorbed by interstellar dust , an appropriate adjustment of ultraviolet measurements is necessary . 
 = = = X @-@ ray astronomy = = = 
 X @-@ ray astronomy is the study of astronomical objects at X @-@ ray wavelengths . Typically , X @-@ ray radiation is produced by synchrotron emission ( the result of electrons orbiting magnetic field lines ) , thermal emission from thin gases above 107 ( 10 million ) kelvins , and thermal emission from thick gases above 107 Kelvin . Since X @-@ rays are absorbed by the Earth 's atmosphere , all X @-@ ray observations must be performed from high @-@ altitude balloons , rockets , or spacecraft . Notable X @-@ ray sources include X @-@ ray binaries , pulsars , supernova remnants , elliptical galaxies , clusters of galaxies , and active galactic nuclei . 
 = = = Gamma @-@ ray astronomy = = = 
 Gamma ray astronomy is the study of astronomical objects at the shortest wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum . Gamma rays may be observed directly by satellites such as the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory or by specialized telescopes called atmospheric Cherenkov telescopes . The Cherenkov telescopes do not actually detect the gamma rays directly but instead detect the flashes of visible light produced when gamma rays are absorbed by the Earth 's atmosphere . 
 Most gamma @-@ ray emitting sources are actually gamma @-@ ray bursts , objects which only produce gamma radiation for a few milliseconds to thousands of seconds before fading away . Only 10 % of gamma @-@ ray sources are non @-@ transient sources . These steady gamma @-@ ray emitters include pulsars , neutron stars , and black hole candidates such as active galactic nuclei . 
 = = = Fields not based on the electromagnetic spectrum = = = 
 In addition to electromagnetic radiation , a few other events originating from great distances may be observed from the Earth . 
 In neutrino astronomy , astronomers use heavily shielded underground facilities such as SAGE , <unk> , and Kamioka II / III for the detection of neutrinos . The vast majority of the neutrinos streaming through the Earth originate from the Sun , but 24 neutrinos were also detected from supernova 1987A . Cosmic rays , which consist of very high energy particles that can decay or be absorbed when they enter the Earth 's atmosphere , result in a cascade of particles which can be detected by current observatories . Additionally , some future neutrino detectors may also be sensitive to the particles produced when cosmic rays hit the Earth 's atmosphere . 
 Gravitational @-@ wave astronomy is an emerging new field of astronomy which aims to use gravitational @-@ wave detectors to collect observational data about compact objects . A few observatories have been constructed , such as the Laser Interferometer Gravitational Observatory LIGO . LIGO made its first detection on 14 September 2015 , observing gravitational waves from a binary black hole . A second gravitational wave was detected on 26 December 2015 and additional observations should continue but gravitational waves are extremely difficult to detect . 
 Combining observations made using electromagnetic radiation , neutrinos or gravitational waves with those made using a different means , which shall give complementary information , is known as multi @-@ messenger astronomy . 
 = = = Astrometry and celestial mechanics = = = 
 One of the oldest fields in astronomy , and in all of science , is the measurement of the positions of celestial objects . Historically , accurate knowledge of the positions of the Sun , Moon , planets and stars has been essential in celestial navigation ( the use of celestial objects to guide navigation ) and in the making of calendars . 
 Careful measurement of the positions of the planets has led to a solid understanding of gravitational perturbations , and an ability to determine past and future positions of the planets with great accuracy , a field known as celestial mechanics . More recently the tracking of near @-@ Earth objects will allow for predictions of close encounters , and potential collisions , with the Earth . 
 The measurement of stellar parallax of nearby stars provides a fundamental baseline in the cosmic distance ladder that is used to measure the scale of the Universe . Parallax measurements of nearby stars provide an absolute baseline for the properties of more distant stars , as their properties can be compared . Measurements of radial velocity and proper motion plot the movement of these systems through the Milky Way galaxy . Astrometric results are the basis used to calculate the distribution of dark matter in the galaxy . 
 During the 1990s , the measurement of the stellar wobble of nearby stars was used to detect large extrasolar planets orbiting nearby stars . 
 = = Theoretical astronomy = = 
 Theoretical astronomers use several tools including analytical models ( for example , <unk> to approximate the behaviors of a star ) and computational numerical simulations . Each has some advantages . Analytical models of a process are generally better for giving insight into the heart of what is going on . Numerical models reveal the existence of phenomena and effects otherwise unobserved . 
 Theorists in astronomy endeavor to create theoretical models and from the results predict observational consequences of those models . The observation of a phenomenon predicted by a model allows astronomers to select between several alternate or conflicting models . 
 Theorists also try to generate or modify models to take into account new data . In the case of an inconsistency , the general tendency is to try to make minimal modifications to the model so that it produces results that fit the data . In some cases , a large amount of inconsistent data over time may lead to total abandonment of a model . 
 Topics studied by theoretical astronomers include : stellar dynamics and evolution ; galaxy formation ; large @-@ scale structure of matter in the Universe ; origin of cosmic rays ; general relativity and physical cosmology , including string cosmology and <unk> physics . Astrophysical relativity serves as a tool to gauge the properties of large scale structures for which gravitation plays a significant role in physical phenomena investigated and as the basis for black hole ( astro ) physics and the study of gravitational waves . 
 Some widely accepted and studied theories and models in astronomy , now included in the Lambda @-@ CDM model are the Big Bang , Cosmic inflation , dark matter , and fundamental theories of physics . 
 A few examples of this process : 
 Dark matter and dark energy are the current leading topics in astronomy , as their discovery and controversy originated during the study of the galaxies . 
 = = Specific subfields = = 
 = = = Solar astronomy = = = 
 At a distance of about eight light @-@ minutes , the most frequently studied star is the Sun , a typical main @-@ sequence dwarf star of stellar class G2 V , and about 4 @.@ 6 billion years ( Gyr ) old . The Sun is not considered a variable star , but it does undergo periodic changes in activity known as the sunspot cycle . This is an 11 @-@ year fluctuation in sunspot numbers . Sunspots are regions of lower @-@ <unk> average temperatures that are associated with intense magnetic activity . 
 The Sun has steadily increased in luminosity over the course of its life , increasing by 40 % since it first became a main @-@ sequence star . The Sun has also undergone periodic changes in luminosity that can have a significant impact on the Earth . The Maunder minimum , for example , is believed to have caused the Little Ice Age phenomenon during the Middle Ages . 
 The visible outer surface of the Sun is called the photosphere . Above this layer is a thin region known as the chromosphere . This is surrounded by a transition region of rapidly increasing temperatures , and finally by the super @-@ heated corona . 
 At the center of the Sun is the core region , a volume of sufficient temperature and pressure for nuclear fusion to occur . Above the core is the radiation zone , where the plasma conveys the energy flux by means of radiation . Above that are the outer layers that form a convection zone where the gas material transports energy primarily through physical displacement of the gas . It is believed that this convection zone creates the magnetic activity that generates sunspots . 
 A solar wind of plasma particles constantly streams outward from the Sun until , at the outermost limit of the Solar System , it reaches the heliopause . This solar wind interacts with the magnetosphere of the Earth to create the Van Allen radiation belts about the Earth , as well as the aurora where the lines of the Earth 's magnetic field descend into the atmosphere . 
 = = = Planetary science = = = 
 Planetary science is the study of the assemblage of planets , moons , dwarf planets , comets , asteroids , and other bodies orbiting the Sun , as well as extrasolar planets . The Solar System has been relatively well @-@ studied , initially through telescopes and then later by spacecraft . This has provided a good overall understanding of the formation and evolution of this planetary system , although many new discoveries are still being made . 
 The Solar System is subdivided into the inner planets , the asteroid belt , and the outer planets . The inner terrestrial planets consist of Mercury , Venus , Earth , and Mars . The outer gas giant planets are Jupiter , Saturn , Uranus , and Neptune . Beyond Neptune lies the Kuiper Belt , and finally the Oort Cloud , which may extend as far as a light @-@ year . 
 The planets were formed in the protoplanetary disk that surrounded the early Sun . Through a process that included gravitational attraction , collision , and accretion , the disk formed clumps of matter that , with time , became protoplanets . The radiation pressure of the solar wind then expelled most of the <unk> matter , and only those planets with sufficient mass retained their gaseous atmosphere . The planets continued to sweep up , or eject , the remaining matter during a period of intense bombardment , evidenced by the many impact craters on the Moon . During this period , some of the protoplanets may have collided , the leading hypothesis for how the Moon was formed . 
 Once a planet reaches sufficient mass , the materials of different densities segregate within , during planetary differentiation . This process can form a stony or metallic core , surrounded by a mantle and an outer surface . The core may include solid and liquid regions , and some planetary cores generate their own magnetic field , which can protect their atmospheres from solar wind stripping . 
 A planet or moon 's interior heat is produced from the collisions that created the body , radioactive materials ( e.g. uranium , thorium , and 26Al ) , or tidal heating . Some planets and moons accumulate enough heat to drive geologic processes such as volcanism and tectonics . Those that accumulate or retain an atmosphere can also undergo surface erosion from wind or water . Smaller bodies , without tidal heating , cool more quickly ; and their geological activity ceases with the exception of impact cratering . 
 = = = Stellar astronomy = = = 
 The study of stars and stellar evolution is fundamental to our understanding of the Universe . The astrophysics of stars has been determined through observation and theoretical understanding ; and from computer simulations of the interior . Star formation occurs in dense regions of dust and gas , known as giant molecular clouds . When destabilized , cloud fragments can collapse under the influence of gravity , to form a protostar . A sufficiently dense , and hot , core region will trigger nuclear fusion , thus creating a main @-@ sequence star . 
 Almost all elements heavier than hydrogen and helium were created inside the cores of stars . 
 The characteristics of the resulting star depend primarily upon its starting mass . The more massive the star , the greater its luminosity , and the more rapidly it expends the hydrogen fuel in its core . Over time , this hydrogen fuel is completely converted into helium , and the star begins to evolve . The fusion of helium requires a higher core temperature , so that the star both expands in size , and increases in core density . The resulting red giant enjoys a brief life span , before the helium fuel is in turn consumed . Very massive stars can also undergo a series of decreasing evolutionary phases , as they fuse increasingly heavier elements . 
 The final fate of the star depends on its mass , with stars of mass greater than about eight times the Sun becoming core collapse supernovae ; while smaller stars form a white dwarf as it ejects matter that forms a planetary nebulae . The remnant of a supernova is a dense neutron star , or , if the stellar mass was at least three times that of the Sun , a black hole . Close binary stars can follow more complex evolutionary paths , such as mass transfer onto a white dwarf companion that can potentially cause a supernova . Planetary nebulae and supernovae are necessary for the distribution of metals to the interstellar medium ; without them , all new stars ( and their planetary systems ) would be formed from hydrogen and helium alone . 
 = = = Galactic astronomy = = = 
 Our solar system orbits within the Milky Way , a barred spiral galaxy that is a prominent member of the Local Group of galaxies . It is a rotating mass of gas , dust , stars and other objects , held together by mutual gravitational attraction . As the Earth is located within the dusty outer arms , there are large portions of the Milky Way that are obscured from view . 
 In the center of the Milky Way is the core , a bar @-@ shaped bulge with what is believed to be a supermassive black hole at the center . This is surrounded by four primary arms that spiral from the core . This is a region of active star formation that contains many younger , population I stars . The disk is surrounded by a spheroid halo of older , population II stars , as well as relatively dense concentrations of stars known as globular clusters . 
 Between the stars lies the interstellar medium , a region of sparse matter . In the densest regions , molecular clouds of molecular hydrogen and other elements create star @-@ forming regions . These begin as a compact pre @-@ stellar core or dark nebulae , which concentrate and collapse ( in volumes determined by the Jeans length ) to form compact protostars . 
 As the more massive stars appear , they transform the cloud into an H II region ( ionized atomic hydrogen ) of glowing gas and plasma . The stellar wind and supernova explosions from these stars eventually cause the cloud to disperse , often leaving behind one or more young open clusters of stars . These clusters gradually disperse , and the stars join the population of the Milky Way . 
 Kinematic studies of matter in the Milky Way and other galaxies have demonstrated that there is more mass than can be accounted for by visible matter . A dark matter halo appears to dominate the mass , although the nature of this dark matter remains undetermined . 
 = = = Extragalactic astronomy = = = 
 The study of objects outside our galaxy is a branch of astronomy concerned with the formation and evolution of Galaxies ; their morphology ( description ) and classification ; and the observation of active galaxies , and at a larger scale , the groups and clusters of galaxies . Finally , the latter is important for the understanding of the large @-@ scale structure of the cosmos . 
 Most galaxies are organized into distinct shapes that allow for classification schemes . They are commonly divided into spiral , elliptical and Irregular galaxies . 
 As the name suggests , an elliptical galaxy has the cross @-@ sectional shape of an ellipse . The stars move along random orbits with no preferred direction . These galaxies contain little or no interstellar dust ; few star @-@ forming regions ; and generally older stars . Elliptical galaxies are more commonly found at the core of galactic clusters , and may have been formed through mergers of large galaxies . 
 A spiral galaxy is organized into a flat , rotating disk , usually with a prominent bulge or bar at the center , and trailing bright arms that spiral outward . The arms are dusty regions of star formation where massive young stars produce a blue tint . Spiral galaxies are typically surrounded by a halo of older stars . Both the Milky Way and our nearest galaxy neighbor , the Andromeda Galaxy , are spiral galaxies . 
 Irregular galaxies are chaotic in appearance , and are neither spiral nor elliptical . About a quarter of all galaxies are irregular , and the peculiar shapes of such galaxies may be the result of gravitational interaction . 
 An active galaxy is a formation that emits a significant amount of its energy from a source other than its stars , dust and gas . It is powered by a compact region at the core , thought to be a super @-@ massive black hole that is emitting radiation from in @-@ falling material . 
 A radio galaxy is an active galaxy that is very luminous in the radio portion of the spectrum , and is emitting immense plumes or lobes of gas . Active galaxies that emit shorter frequency , high @-@ energy radiation include Seyfert galaxies , Quasars , and Blazars . Quasars are believed to be the most consistently luminous objects in the known universe . 
 The large @-@ scale structure of the cosmos is represented by groups and clusters of galaxies . This structure is organized into a hierarchy of groupings , with the largest being the superclusters . The collective matter is formed into filaments and walls , leaving large voids between . 
 = = = Cosmology = = = 
 Cosmology ( from the Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) " world , universe " and λόγος ( logos ) " word , study " or literally " logic " ) could be considered the study of the Universe as a whole . 
 Observations of the large @-@ scale structure of the Universe , a branch known as physical cosmology , have provided a deep understanding of the formation and evolution of the cosmos . Fundamental to modern cosmology is the well @-@ accepted theory of the big bang , wherein our Universe began at a single point in time , and thereafter expanded over the course of 13 @.@ 8 billion years to its present condition . The concept of the big bang can be traced back to the discovery of the microwave background radiation in 1965 . 
 In the course of this expansion , the Universe underwent several evolutionary stages . In the very early moments , it is theorized that the Universe experienced a very rapid cosmic inflation , which homogenized the starting conditions . Thereafter , nucleosynthesis produced the elemental abundance of the early Universe . ( See also nucleocosmochronology . ) 
 When the first neutral atoms formed from a sea of primordial ions , space became transparent to radiation , releasing the energy viewed today as the microwave background radiation . The expanding Universe then underwent a Dark Age due to the lack of stellar energy sources . 
 A hierarchical structure of matter began to form from minute variations in the mass density of space . Matter accumulated in the densest regions , forming clouds of gas and the earliest stars , the Population III stars . These massive stars triggered the reionization process and are believed to have created many of the heavy elements in the early Universe , which , through nuclear decay , create lighter elements , allowing the cycle of nucleosynthesis to continue longer . 
 Gravitational aggregations clustered into filaments , leaving voids in the gaps . Gradually , organizations of gas and dust merged to form the first primitive galaxies . Over time , these pulled in more matter , and were often organized into groups and clusters of galaxies , then into larger @-@ scale superclusters . 
 Fundamental to the structure of the Universe is the existence of dark matter and dark energy . These are now thought to be its dominant components , forming 96 % of the mass of the Universe . For this reason , much effort is expended in trying to understand the physics of these components . 
 = = Interdisciplinary studies = = 
 Astronomy and astrophysics have developed significant interdisciplinary links with other major scientific fields . Archaeoastronomy is the study of ancient or traditional astronomies in their cultural context , utilizing archaeological and anthropological evidence . Astrobiology is the study of the advent and evolution of biological systems in the Universe , with particular emphasis on the possibility of non @-@ terrestrial life . <unk> is the application of statistics to astrophysics to the analysis of vast amount of observational astrophysical data . 
 The study of chemicals found in space , including their formation , interaction and destruction , is called astrochemistry . These substances are usually found in molecular clouds , although they may also appear in low temperature stars , brown dwarfs and planets . <unk> is the study of the chemicals found within the Solar System , including the origins of the elements and variations in the isotope ratios . Both of these fields represent an overlap of the disciplines of astronomy and chemistry . As " forensic astronomy " , finally , methods from astronomy have been used to solve problems of law and history . 
 = = Amateur astronomy = = 
 Astronomy is one of the sciences to which amateurs can contribute the most . 
 Collectively , amateur astronomers observe a variety of celestial objects and phenomena sometimes with equipment that they build themselves . Common targets of amateur astronomers include the Moon , planets , stars , comets , meteor showers , and a variety of deep @-@ sky objects such as star clusters , galaxies , and nebulae . Astronomy clubs are located throughout the world and many have programs to help their members set up and complete observational programs including those to observe all the objects in the Messier ( 110 objects ) or Herschel 400 catalogues of points of interest in the night sky . One branch of amateur astronomy , amateur astrophotography , involves the taking of photos of the night sky . Many amateurs like to specialize in the observation of particular objects , types of objects , or types of events which interest them . 
 Most amateurs work at visible wavelengths , but a small minority experiment with wavelengths outside the visible spectrum . This includes the use of infrared filters on conventional telescopes , and also the use of radio telescopes . The pioneer of amateur radio astronomy was Karl Jansky , who started observing the sky at radio wavelengths in the 1930s . A number of amateur astronomers use either homemade telescopes or use radio telescopes which were originally built for astronomy research but which are now available to amateurs ( e.g. the One @-@ Mile Telescope ) . 
 Amateur astronomers continue to make scientific contributions to the field of astronomy and it is one of the few scientific disciplines where amateurs can still make significant contributions . Amateurs can make occultation measurements that are used to refine the orbits of minor planets . They can also discover comets , and perform regular observations of variable stars . Improvements in digital technology have allowed amateurs to make impressive advances in the field of astrophotography . 
 = = Unsolved problems in astronomy = = 
 Although the scientific discipline of astronomy has made tremendous strides in understanding the nature of the Universe and its contents , there remain some important unanswered questions . Answers to these may require the construction of new ground- and space @-@ based instruments , and possibly new developments in theoretical and experimental physics . 
 What is the origin of the stellar mass spectrum ? That is , why do astronomers observe the same distribution of stellar masses – the initial mass function – apparently regardless of the initial conditions ? A deeper understanding of the formation of stars and planets is needed . 
 Is there other life in the Universe ? Especially , is there other intelligent life ? If so , what is the explanation for the Fermi paradox ? The existence of life elsewhere has important scientific and philosophical implications . Is the Solar System normal or atypical ? 
 What caused the Universe to form ? Is the premise of the Fine @-@ tuned universe hypothesis correct ? If so , could this be the result of cosmological natural selection ? What caused the cosmic inflation that produced our homogeneous universe ? Why is there a baryon asymmetry ? 
 What is the nature of dark matter and dark energy ? These dominate the evolution and fate of the cosmos , yet their true nature remains unknown . What will be the ultimate fate of the universe ? 
 How did the first galaxies form ? How did supermassive black holes form ? 
 What is creating the ultra @-@ high @-@ energy cosmic rays ? 
 Why is the abundance of lithium in the cosmos four times lower than predicted by the standard Big Bang model ? 
 What really happens beyond the event horizon ? 
 = Harris Theater ( Chicago ) = 
 The Joan W. and Irving B. Harris Theater for Music and Dance ( also known as the Harris Theater for Music and Dance , the Harris & Harris Theater or , most commonly , the Harris Theater ) is a 1 @,@ 525 @-@ seat theater for the performing arts located along the northern edge of Millennium Park on Randolph Street in the Loop community area of Chicago in Cook County , Illinois , US . The theater , which is largely underground due to Grant Park @-@ related height restrictions , was named for its primary benefactors , Joan and Irving Harris . It serves as the park 's indoor performing venue , a complement to Jay Pritzker Pavilion , which hosts the park 's outdoor performances . 
 Constructed in 2002 – 2003 , it provides a venue for small and medium @-@ sized music and dance groups , which had previously been without a permanent home and were underserved by the city 's performing venue options . Among the regularly featured local groups are Joffrey Ballet , Hubbard Street Dance Chicago and Chicago Opera Theater . It provides subsidized rental , technical expertise , and marketing support for the companies using it , and turned a profit in its fourth fiscal year . 
 The Harris Theater has hosted notable national and international performers , such as the New York City Ballet 's first visit to Chicago in over 25 years ( in 2006 ) . The theater began offering subscription series of traveling performers in its 2008 – 2009 fifth anniversary season . Performances through this series have included the San Francisco Ballet , Mikhail Baryshnikov , and Stephen Sondheim . 
 The theater has been credited as contributing to the performing arts renaissance in Chicago , and has been favorably reviewed for its acoustics , sightlines , proscenium and for providing a home base for numerous performing organizations . Although it is seen as a high caliber venue for its music audiences , the theater is regarded as less than ideal for jazz groups because it is more expensive and larger than most places where jazz is performed . The design has been criticized for traffic flow problems , with an elevator bottleneck . However , the theater 's prominent location and its underground design to preserve Millennium Park have been praised . Although there were complaints about high priced events in its early years , discounted ticket programs were introduced in the 2009 – 10 season . 
 = = Background and construction = = 
 The Harris Theater was built to fill the need for a modern performance venue in downtown Chicago , which would be a new home for previously itinerant performing arts companies . Such troupes were never sure from year to year where they would be able to perform ; for example , the Chicago Tribune reported in 1993 that six dance companies lost their performance space during renovations at the Civic Opera House . The need for a new theater was identified by the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation in a 1990 study ; the new venue had to be flexible , affordable , and technically and physically " state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art " . Once the need was identified , the theater was the culmination of " years of planning by Chicago 's philanthropic , arts , business and government leaders " including groups like Music of the Baroque , which now perform there regularly . The plan also extended Chicago 's performing arts district , which had been predominantly west of Michigan Avenue , east towards Lake Michigan , and linked it more with the Museum Campus and Michigan Avenue cultural institutions . 
 The Harris Theater is in Grant Park , which lies between Lake Michigan to the east and the Loop to the west , and has been Chicago 's front yard since the mid @-@ 19th century . Grant Park 's northwest corner , north of Monroe Street and the Art Institute , east of Michigan Avenue , south of Randolph Street , and west of Columbus Drive , had been Illinois Central rail yards and parking lots until 1997 , when it was made available for development by the city as Millennium Park . As of 2007 , Millennium Park trails only Navy Pier as a Chicago tourist attraction . 
 In 1836 , a year before Chicago was incorporated , the Board of Canal Commissioners held public auctions for the city 's first lots . Foresighted citizens , who wanted the lakefront kept as public open space , convinced the commissioners to designate the land east of Michigan Avenue between Randolph Street and Park Row ( 11th Street ) " Public Ground — A Common to Remain Forever Open , Clear and Free of Any Buildings , or Other Obstruction , whatever . " Grant Park has been " forever open , clear and free " since , protected by legislation that has been affirmed by four previous Illinois Supreme Court rulings . In 1839 , United States Secretary of War Joel Roberts Poinsett declared the land between Randolph Street and Madison Street east of Michigan Avenue " Public Ground forever to remain vacant of buildings " . 
 Aaron Montgomery Ward , who is known both as the inventor of mail order and the protector of Grant Park , twice sued the city of Chicago to force it to remove buildings and structures from Grant Park and to keep it from building new ones . In 1890 , arguing that Michigan Avenue property owners held easements on the park land , Ward commenced legal actions to keep the park free of new buildings . In 1900 , the Illinois Supreme Court concluded that all landfill east of Michigan Avenue was subject to dedications and easements . In 1909 , when he sought to prevent the construction of the Field Museum of Natural History in the center of the park , the courts affirmed his arguments . As a result , the city has what are termed the Montgomery Ward height restrictions on buildings and structures in Grant Park ; structures over 40 feet ( 12 m ) tall are not allowed in the park , with the exception of <unk> . Therefore , the theater is mostly underground , while the adjacent Jay Pritzker Pavilion was described as a work of art to dodge the height restriction . 
 The theater is named for its primary benefactors , Joan and Irving Harris , who gave a gift of $ 15 million gift ( $ 19 @.@ 7 million in current dollars ) and a $ 24 million ( $ 31 @.@ 6 million ) construction loan to the Music and Dance Theater Chicago ; this was believed to be largest single monetary commitment ever to a performing arts organization in Chicago . The <unk> had a long history of philanthropy benefitting the arts . 
 The Harris Theater was designed by Thomas Beeby of Hammond Beeby Rupert Ainge Architects ; his previous work in Chicago includes the Harold Washington Library Center and the Art Institute of Chicago Building 's Rice Wing . Thornton <unk> was the structural engineer . The building is located on ground leased from the City of Chicago , and cost $ 52 @.@ 7 million ( $ 67 @.@ 8 million in current dollars ) . Construction began on February 1 , 2002 , and the theater opened for use on November 8 , 2003 . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The above @-@ ground entrance to the Harris Theater is a glass @-@ walled lobby at 205 E. Randolph Street , which spans several metallic and neon floors in what the Chicago Tribune 's Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning architecture critic Blair Kamin describes as " a multistory shaft of space that explodes downward from street level " . The theater and adjacent Millennium Park Garage are located mostly underground , with a passage connecting them . Kamin also notes that the theater 's underground design and the Millennium Park Garage entrance causes many theater goers to miss the spatial grandeur of the lobby , and has led to complaints about the time it takes to descend the many stairs to the theater . The theater has a rooftop terrace that is available for private events . 
 The Harris Theater is located beneath and directly north of the Jay Pritzker Pavilion , Millennium Park 's outdoor performance venue . The theater and pavilion were built adjacent to each other at about the same time , with the benefit that they share a loading dock , rehearsal rooms and other backstage facilities . The entire auditorium is in a cube 100 feet ( 30 @.@ 5 m ) on a side , so all the seats are relatively close to the stage . The seating capacity is 1525 , with approximately 600 main floor seats , 500 raised orchestra level seats and 400 balcony seats . The modern orchestra pit , which can be closed , accommodates 45 musicians . The seats are maplewood ; carpeting and walls have a muted color scheme — blacks , charcoals and grays . Kamin felt the modest palette is appropriate for a modest structure that attempts to complement the exuberant neighboring pavilion . 
 The proscenium is 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) high and is flanked by 75 @-@ foot ( 22 @.@ 9 m ) steel reflector towers to help focus sound . The stage is both 45 feet ( 13 @.@ 7 m ) wide and deep , with 75 feet ( 22 @.@ 9 m ) of <unk> above . The offstage right distance is 26 feet ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) , while offstage left is 27 feet 10 inches ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) . The theater 's sightlines and acoustics provide " an unusually modern and stainless @-@ steel bolstered environment " for experiencing performances according to the <unk> City Guide . 
 The original design planned for most theater patrons to enter the theater from the underground parking garage , but the success of Millennium Park and neighboring businesses has caused most attendees to enter at street level . The design 's limited elevator service has caused bottlenecks for street level patrons . Additional elevators and escalators , which would require special dedicated funding , have been considered . The initial construction leaked and did not protect some non @-@ public spaces from water exposure ; this cost Chicago taxpayers $ 1 million for repairs in 2008 . 
 = = Performers and Events = = 
 The Harris Theater is a privately owned institution serving mostly local mid @-@ size non @-@ profit arts companies and projects , including those , like Old Town School of Folk Music , which sponsor touring artists . The theater provides subsidized rental , technical expertise , and marketing support , and underwrites over two @-@ thirds of the daily usage costs for its non @-@ profit users while providing marketing , box office , front of house , and technical services at no extra charge . As of 2008 , the theater was used on average 262 days a year for 112 different performances with audiences at about 65 percent of capacity . 
 = = = Local performers = = = 
 When the Harris Theater opened , it served as the home venue for a dozen founding music and dance groups : Ballet Chicago , Chicago Opera Theater , Chicago Sinfonietta , The Dance Center of Columbia College Chicago , Hubbard Street Dance Chicago , Joffrey Ballet of Chicago , Lyric Opera Center for American Artists , Mexican Fine Arts Center Museum , <unk> Dance Theatre of Chicago , Music of the Baroque , Old Town School of Folk Music , and Performing Arts Chicago . After the 2003 opening , small dance companies aspired to perform in the state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art theater ; one such troupe , Luna Negra Dance Theater , achieved its goal and performed there in 2006 and 2007 . 
 In 2010 , Frommer 's noted that the major local dance troupes performing regularly at the theater included Columbia College Chicago , Hubbard Street , Joffrey , <unk> , and River North Dance Company . The 2009 edition of Fodor 's cited Music of the Baroque 's seven performances at the Harris Theater each year . The theater also hosts Grant Park Music Festival events that include a few free seats . According to the 2005 Frommer 's Irreverent Guide to Chicago , by providing a regular performing venue , the Harris Theater has also " raised the profile of local dance groups " in Chicago . 
 The attempt to facilitate modest @-@ sized performance groups has been recognized by philanthropists ; both the Chicago @-@ based John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation and the New York @-@ based Andrew W. Mellon Foundation have provided grants to the theater . For example , in 2009 the MacArthur Foundation gave the theater $ 150 @,@ 000 over three years " in support of a subsidized usage program for smaller arts organizations " . 
 = = = Visiting performers = = = 
 In the fall of the 2006 – 07 season , the Harris Theater hosted the New York City Ballet for five days of performances that marked the company 's first visit to Chicago in over 25 years . This presentation grossed $ 2 @.@ 3 million and enticed 600 new donors to support the theater , which netted $ 800 @,@ 000 for operations and rental subsidies for its resident troupes . This contributed to the theater 's first year of profitability in fiscal year 2007 ; it had net income of $ 1 @.@ 3 million on revenues of $ 8 @.@ 2 million . In July 2007 , Mikhail Baryshnikov made his first visit to Chicago as a performer in seven years , with two shows at the theater . 
 The theater began to present its own music series of touring groups in its fifth season ( 2008 – 09 ) , which put it in competition with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra 's " Symphony Center Presents " series and Chicago 's Auditorium Theatre . The " Harris Theater Presents " series was in addition to programs by its numerous resident performing arts groups . The theater 's music series for the 2008 – 09 season included a five @-@ concert classical music series and a three @-@ performance dance series by the San Francisco Ballet and the Lar Lubovitch Dance Company . The San Francisco Ballet is America 's oldest professional ballet troupe , and was on a widely publicized four @-@ city 75th anniversary celebration tour . Many of the performers for the Harris Theater 's first subscription series were internationally acclaimed artists . 
 The lineup for the Harris Theater 's 2009 – 10 second subscription season included Mikhail Baryshnikov , Lang Lang , Kathleen Battle and Stephen Sondheim . Harris theater has been involved in hosting the Chicago International Film Festival . Prior to 2008 , the Chicago Theatre had hosted the annual opening @-@ night film of the festival , but that year the festivities were moved to the Harris Theater . 
 The theater has hosted several successful jazz performances , including Nicholas Payton 's comeback and the first indoor Chicago show by the Portuguese <unk> singer Mariza . In 2005 , the theater hosted the 14th annual Jazz Dance World Congress , and the following year it hosted " Imagine Tap ! " , a show that featured an array of tap dance styles . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Harris Theater has been the subject of numerous reviews , which are probably best summed up by the Chicago Tribune 's architecture critic Blair Kamin , who describes it as a " solid , though not unqualified , success " , while giving it a two star rating ( out of a possible four ) . Among the foibles that he notes were the off @-@ putting industrial aesthetics , mundane concrete @-@ framing , under @-@ refined modest palette and blunt entrance . However , Kamin praises the spacious lobby and the theater 's underground design as a concession to preserve the green lakefront . 
 Kamin also praises the design of the proscenium and the venue 's sightlines and acoustics , which also drew praise from Tribune journalist Howard Reich and Chicago Sun @-@ Times journalist Wynne Delacoma . Reich , who notes that the theater has a wonderful stage , describes the theater as a blessing for both audiences and arts organizations because its high profile confers " instant prominence and credibility to musicians and presenters " . Reich feels it is a less than perfect jazz music venue because of its " cavernous " size and high rental cost ( $ 4 @,@ 750 in 2008 , plus costs for stagehands ) . Nonetheless , Delacoma describes it as " an astonishingly beautiful place to listen to music . Its acoustics cradle sound like a velvet @-@ lined jewel box . " 
 Tribune journalist Chris Jones credits the theater 's founding as part of Chicago 's performing arts renaissance , and praises it as " the only major Chicago arts building with a long @-@ term commitment to equal partnerships " with its performance groups . Another Tribune journalist , John von Rhein , describes the theater as a boon to the performing groups that it serves , and praises it for being state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art . He also notes that because of the theater 's success it is able " to present an increasing number of risky , sometimes boundary @-@ busting events the likes of which audiences will hear nowhere else in the area " . 
 However , von Rhein notes that the theater 's size poses a challenge to the performers attempting to fill its seats , and feels that it overemphasizes high @-@ priced events . In 2009 – 2010 , the theater introduced a pair of discounted ticket programs : a five dollar lunchtime series of 45 @-@ minute dance performances , and a discounted ten dollar ticket program was initiated for in @-@ person , cash @-@ only purchases in the last 90 minutes before performances . 
 The theater has been recognized with the 2002 American Architecture Award , and the 2005 American Institute of Architects Chicago Institutional Design Excellence Award . In 2008 , Joan Harris was recognized with a National Arts Award from Americans for the Arts for her arts leadership and achievement , exemplified in part by funding the Harris Theater with her late husband . 
 = M @-@ 106 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 106 is a state trunkline highway in the Lower Peninsula of the US state of Michigan in and near the city of Jackson . M @-@ 106 travels in a southwest @-@ to @-@ northeast direction from Jackson to Gregory at a junction with M @-@ 36 just a few miles northwest of Hell . The highway was first designated in 1928 running north out of downtown Jackson . It connected U.S. Highway 12 ( US 12 ) to the state prison and Bunkerhill Road . A pair of changes in the early 1930s resulted in the extension eastward to Gregory . From the 1960s until the early years of the 21st century , a section of M @-@ 106 in downtown Jackson was routed along one @-@ way streets . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 106 starts in downtown Jackson at the corner of Cooper Street and Michigan Avenue . Michigan Avenue runs east – west carrying Business Loop Interstate 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 ) , Business US 127 ( Bus . US 127 ) and M @-@ 50 , and Cooper Street runs northwesterly from here carrying M @-@ 106 . The highway passes through residential neighborhoods immediately north of downtown , and turns due north near Jackson Catholic Middle School and the historic Michigan State Prison . Continuing a few miles north through an interchange with I @-@ 94 and US 127 , M @-@ 106 runs north out of town . Cooper Street continues out of town , and the trunkline runs by the State Prison of Southern Michigan . 
 North of the current prison , the highway curves to the northwest following Bunkerhill Road . Through this area , M @-@ 106 runs through farm fields and forests . The highway turns onto Plum Orchard Road near <unk> Lake and runs east into the community of <unk> . M @-@ 106 merges onto Territorial Road east of the town before crossing the county line into Ingham County . South of Stockbridge , M @-@ 106 merges with M @-@ 52 and the two run concurrently into that community . M @-@ 106 turns east in the downtown area and continues along Morton Road into Livingston County . The highway ends at a junction with M @-@ 36 in Gregory . 
 M @-@ 106 is maintained by MDOT like other state highways in Michigan . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic that uses the roadways under its jurisdiction . These volumes are expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . MDOT 's surveys in 2010 showed that the highest traffic levels along M @-@ 106 were the 15 @,@ 474 vehicles daily south of I @-@ 94 ; the lowest counts were the 1 @,@ 550 vehicles per day in near the M @-@ 36 junction . The only section of M @-@ 106 has been listed on the National Highway System ( NHS ) is between M @-@ 50 and I @-@ 94 in Jackson . The NHS is a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 106 was first designated in 1928 on a route that ran from US 12 ( Michigan Avenue ) along Cooper Street to Bunkerhill Road , a total of 4 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) . This highway was extended north to Stockbridge in late 1930 or early 1931 . A further realignment of M @-@ 36 resulted in the extension of M @-@ 106 to Gregory . Cooper Street in Jackson was converted to one @-@ way , southbound traffic in 1967 . A northbound routing along Milwaukee Street was established . The south end of southbound M @-@ 106 was trimmed back to end at BL I @-@ 94 / Bus . US 127 / M @-@ 50 . Two @-@ way traffic was restored in 2004 . M @-@ 106 was shifted to run only along Cooper Street ( formerly Milwaukee Street ) , and Francis Street ( formerly Cooper Street ) is left as an unsigned trunkline . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Flag of Europe = 
 The Flag of Europe , or European Flag , consists of a circle of 12 golden ( yellow ) stars on an azure background . It is an official symbol of two separate organizations — the Council of Europe ( CoE ) and the European Union ( EU ) — both of which term it the " Flag of Europe " or the " European Flag " . It was first adopted in 1955 by the Council of Europe to represent the European continent as a whole . Due to the subsequent emergence of the EU , the flag is sometimes colloquially known as the " flag of the European Union " , but this term is not official . 
 In its broadest sense , the flag represents the continent of Europe or the countries of Europe independent of any institution . Consequently , the number of stars does not vary according to the member states as they are intended to represent all the peoples of Europe , including those outside the EU . 
 The flag was designed in 1955 for the Council of Europe as its symbol , and the CoE urged it to be adopted by other organisations . In 1985 the European Economic Community ( EEC ) , adopted it as its own flag ( having had no flag of its own before ) at the initiative of the European Parliament . 
 The flag is not mentioned in the EU 's treaties , its incorporation being dropped along with the European Constitution , but it is formally adopted in law . In order to avoid confusion with the European Union , the Council of Europe has a distinctive " Council of Europe Logo " , which employs a lower @-@ case " e " in the centre . The Logo is not meant to be a substitute for the flag , which the Council flies in front of and in its headquarters , annexes and field office premises . 
 Since its adoption by the European Union it has become more associated with the EU due to the EU 's higher profile and heavy usage of the emblem . The flag has also been used to represent Europe in sporting events and as a pro @-@ democracy banner outside the Union . It has partly inspired other flags , such as those of other European organisations and those of sovereign states where the EU has been heavily involved ( such as Kosovo and Bosnia and Herzegovina ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 The search for a symbol began in 1950 when a committee was set up in order to look into the question of a European flag . There were numerous proposals but a clear theme for stars and circles emerged . Count Richard Nikolaus von <unk> @-@ Kalergi proposed that they adopt the flag of his International <unk> Union , which was a blue field , with a red cross inside an orange circle at the centre , which he had himself recently adopted for the European Parliamentary Union . Due to the cross symbolism , this was rejected by Turkey ( a member of the Council of Europe since 1949 ) . Kalergi then suggested adding a crescent to the cross design , to overcome the Muslim objections . Another organisation 's flag was the European Movement , which had a large green E on a white background . A further design was one based on the Olympic rings : eight silver rings on a blue background . It was rejected due to the rings ' similarity with " dial " , " chain " and " zeros " . One proposal had a large yellow star on a blue background , but it was rejected due to its similarity with the so @-@ called Burnet flag and the flag of the Belgian Congo . 
 The Consultative Assembly narrowed their choice to two designs . One was by Salvador de Madariaga , the founder of the College of Europe , who suggested a constellation of stars on a blue background ( positioned according to capital cities , with a large star for Strasbourg , the seat of the Council ) . He had circulated his flag round many European capitals and the concept had found favour . The second was a variant by Arsène Heitz , who worked for the Council 's postal service and had submitted dozens of designs ; the design of his that was accepted by the Assembly was similar to Salvador de Madariaga 's , but rather than a constellation , the stars were arranged in a circle . In 1987 , Heitz claimed that his inspiration had been the crown of twelve stars of the Woman of the Apocalypse , often found in Marian iconography ( see below ) . 
 The Consultative Assembly favoured Heitz 's design . However , the flag the Assembly chose had fifteen stars , reflecting the number of states of the Council of Europe . The Consultative Assembly chose this flag and recommended the Council of Europe to adopt it . The Committee of Ministers ( the Council 's main decision making body ) agreed with the Assembly that the flag should be a circle of stars , but the number was a source of contention . The number twelve was chosen , and Paul M. G. Lévy drew up the exact design of the new flag as it is today . The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe approved it on 25 October 1955 . Adopted on 8 December 1955 , the flag was unveiled at the Château de la <unk> in Paris on 13 December 1955 . 
 Unsuccessful entries 
 = = = European Communities = = = 
 Following Expo 58 in Brussels , the flag caught on and the Council of Europe lobbied for other European organisations to adopt the flag as a sign of European unity . The European Parliament took the initiative in seeking a flag to be adopted by the European Communities . Shortly after the first direct elections in 1979 a draft resolution was put forward on the issue . The resolution proposed that the Communities ' flag should be that of the Council of Europe and it was adopted by the Parliament on 11 April 1983 . 
 The June 1984 European Council ( the Communities ' leaders ) summit in Fontainebleau stressed the importance of promoting a European image and identity to citizens and the world . The following year , meeting in Milan , the 28 – 29 June European Council approved a proposal from the Committee on a People ’ s Europe ( <unk> Committee ) in favour of the flag and adopted it . Following the permission of the Council of Europe , the Communities began to use it from 1986 , with it being raised outside the Berlaymont building ( the seat of the European Commission ) for the first time on 29 May 1986 . The European Union , which was established by the Maastricht Treaty in 1992 to replace the EC and encompass its functions , also adopted the flag . Since then the use of the flag has been controlled jointly by the Council of Europe and the European Union . 
 = = = Previous flags = = = 
 Prior to development of political institutions , flags representing Europe were limited to unification movements . The most popular were the European Movement 's large green ' E ' on a white background , and the " Pan European flag " ( see " Creation " below ) . With the development of institutions , aside from the Council of Europe , came other emblems and flags . None were intended to represent wider Europe and have since been replaced by the current flag of Europe . 
 The first major organisation to adopt one was the European Coal and Steel Community ( ECSC ) , which merged into the European Communities . The ECSC was created in 1952 and the flag of the ECSC was unveiled in 1958 Expo in Brussels . 
 The flag had two stripes , blue at the top , black at the bottom with six gold ( silver after 1973 ) stars , three on each stripe . Blue was for steel , black for coal and the stars were the six member @-@ states . The stars increased with the members until 1986 when they were fixed at twelve . When the ECSC treaty expired in 2002 , the flag was lowered outside the European Commission in Brussels and replaced with the European flag . 
 The European Parliament also used its own flag from 1973 , but never formally adopted it . It fell out of use with the adoption of the twelve star flag by the Parliament in 1983 . The flag followed the yellow and blue colour scheme however instead of twelve stars there were the letters EP and PE ( initials of the European Parliament in the six community languages at the time ) surrounded by a wreath . 
 = = = Barcode flag = = = 
 In 2002 , Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas and his architecture firm Office for Metropolitan Architecture ( OMA ) designed a new flag in response to Commission President Romano Prodi 's request to find ways of rebranding the Union in a way that represents Europe 's " diversity and unity " . The proposed new design was dubbed the " barcode " , as it displays the colors of every European flag ( of the then 15 members ) as vertical stripes . As well as the barcode comparison , it had been compared unfavourably to wallpaper , a TV test card , and deckchair fabric . Unlike the current flag , it would change to reflect the member states . 
 It was never officially adopted by the EU or any organisation ; however , it was used as the logo of the Austrian EU Presidency in 2006 . It had been updated with the colours of the 10 members who had joined since the proposal , and was designed by Koolhaas 's firm . Its described aim is " to portray Europe as the common effort of different nations , with each retaining its own unique cultural identity " . There were initially some complaints , as the stripes of the flag of Estonia were displayed incorrectly . 
 = = = Recent events = = = 
 In April 2004 , the flag was flown in space for the first time by European Space Agency astronaut André Kuipers while on board the International Space Station . 
 The flag was to have been given a formal status in the proposed European Constitution . However , since the ratification of that failed , the leaders removed the state @-@ like elements such as the flag from the replacement Treaty of Lisbon . The European Parliament however had supported the inclusion of symbols , and in response backed a proposal to use the symbols , such as the flag more often in the Parliament . Jo <unk> MEP suggesting that the Parliament should again take the avant @-@ garde in their use . Later , in September 2008 , Parliament 's Committee on Constitutional Affairs proposed a formal change in the institution 's rules of procedure to make better use of the symbols . Specifically , the flag would be present in all meeting rooms ( not just the hemicycle ) and at all official events . The proposal was passed on 8 October 2008 by 503 votes to 96 ( 15 abstentions ) . 
