 Additionally , a declaration by sixteen Member States on the symbols , including the flag , was included in the final act of the Treaty of Lisbon stating that the flag , the anthem , the motto and the currency and Europe Day " will for them continue as symbols to express the sense of community of the people in the European Union and their allegiance to it . " 
 = = Usage = = 
 = = = Council of Europe = = = 
 The flag was originally designed by the Council of Europe , and as such the CoE holds the copyright for the flag . However , the Council of Europe agreed that the European Communities could use the flag and it had promoted its use by other regional organisations since it was created . The Council of Europe now shares responsibility with the European Commission for ensuring that use of the symbol respects the dignity of the flag — taking measures to prevent misuse of it . 
 Besides using the flag , the Council also uses a defaced version of the flag as its emblem : it is the existing design with a stylised , green " e " over the stars . 
 = = = European Union = = = 
 The flag symbolises the EU as a whole . All EU institutions , bodies and agencies have their own logo or emblem , albeit often inspired by the flag 's design and colours . As part of the EU 's usage , the flag appears on the euro banknotes . Euro coins also display the twelve stars of the flag on both the national and common sides and the flag is sometimes used as an indication of the currency or the eurozone ( a collective name for those countries that use the Euro ) . The flag appears also on many driving licences and vehicle registration plates issued in the Union . 
 = = = = Protocol = = = = 
 It is mandatory for the flag to be used in every official speech made by the President of the European Council and it is often used at official meetings between the leaders of an EU state and a non @-@ EU state ( the national flag and European flag appearing together ) . While normally the national flag takes precedence over the European flag in the national context , meetings between EU leaders sometimes differ . For example , the Italian flag code expressly replaces the Italian flag for the European flag in precedence when dignitaries from other EU countries visit – for example the EU flag would be in the middle of a group of three flags rather than the Italian flag . 
 The flag is usually flown by the government of the country holding the rotating presidency Council of Ministers , though in 2009 the Czech President Václav Klaus , a eurosceptic , refused to fly the flag from his castle . In response , Greenpeace projected an image of the flag onto the castle and attempted to fly the flag from the building themselves . 
 Some members also have their own rules regarding the use of the flag alongside their national flag on domestic occasions , for example the obligatory use alongside national flags outside police stations or local government buildings . As an example according to the Italian laws it is mandatory for most public offices and buildings to hoist the European Flag alongside the Italian national Flag ( Law 22 / 2000 and Presidential Decree 121 / 2000 ) . Outside official use , the flag may not be used for aims incompatible with European values . 
 In national usage , national protocol usually demands the national flag takes precedence over the European flag ( which is usually displayed to the right of the national flag from the observer 's perspective ) . On occasions where the European flag is flown alongside all national flags ( for example , at a European Council meeting ) , the national flags are placed in alphabetical order ( according to their name in the main language of that state ) with the European flag either at the head , or the far right , of the order of flags . 
 Extraordinary flying of the flag is common on the EU 's flag day , known as Europe Day , which is celebrated annually on 9 May . On Europe Day 2008 , the flag was flown for the first time above the German Reichstag . 
 = = = = Military and naval use = = = = 
 In addition to the flags use by the government and people , the flag is also used in EU military operations ; however , it is not used as a civil ensign . In 2003 , a member of the European Parliament tabled a proposal in a temporary committee of the European Parliament that national civil ensigns be defaced with the European flag . This proposal was rejected by Parliament in 2004 , and hence the European flag is not used as a European civil ensign . 
 Despite not having a civil ensign , the EU 's Fishery Inspection teams display a blue and yellow pennant . The pennant is flown by inspection vessels in EU waters . The flag is triangular and quartered blue and yellow and was adopted according to EEC Regulation # 1382 / 87 on 20 May 1978 . There are no other variants or alternative flags used by the EU ( in contrast to countries which have presidential , naval and military variants ) . 
 = = = Ukraine = = = 
 The flag became a symbol of European integration of Ukraine in 2010s , particularly after Euromaidan . Ukraine is not a part of the EU but the flag is used by the Cabinet of Ukraine , Prime Minister of Ukraine , and MFA UA during official meetings . 
 = = = Wider use = = = 
 The flag has been used to represent Europe in its wider sense . The Council of Europe covers all but three European countries , thereby representing much of Europe . 
 In particular , the flag has become a banner for pro @-@ Europeanism outside the Union , for example in Georgia , where the flag is on most government buildings since the coming to power of Mikhail Saakashvili , who used it during his inauguration , stating : " [ the European ] flag is Georgia ’ s flag as well , as far as it embodies our civilisation , our culture , the essence of our history and perspective , and our vision for the future of Georgia . " It was later used in 2008 by pro @-@ western Serbian voters ahead of an election . 
 It is also used as a pro @-@ democracy emblem in countries such as Belarus , where it has been used on protest marches alongside the banned former national flag and flags of opposition movements . The flag was used widely in a 2007 European March in Minsk as protesters rallied in support of democracy and accession to the EU . Similarly , the flag was flown during the 2013 Euromaidan pro @-@ democracy and pro @-@ EU protests in Ukraine . 
 The flag , or features of it , are often used in the logos of organisations of companies which stress a pan @-@ European element , for example European lobbyist groups or transnational shipping companies . 
 The flag is also used in certain sports arrangements where a unified Team Europe is represented as in the Ryder Cup and the Mosconi Cup . 
 Following the 2004 Summer Olympics , President Romano Prodi pointed out that the combined medal total of the European Union was far greater than that of any other country and called for EU athletes to fly the European flag at the following games alongside their own as a sign of solidarity ( which did not happen ) . 
 The design of the European flag was displayed on the Eiffel Tower in Paris to celebrate the French presidency of the EU Council in the second half of 2008 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The flag is rectangular with 2 : 3 proportions : its fly ( width ) is one and a half times the length of its hoist ( height ) . Twelve gold ( or yellow ) stars are centered in a circle ( the radius of which is a third of the length of the hoist ) upon a blue background . All the stars are upright ( one point straight up ) , have five points and are spaced equally according to the hour positions on the face of a clock . The diameter of each star is equal to one @-@ ninth of the height of the hoist . 
 The heraldic description given by the EU is : " On an azure field a circle of twelve golden mullets , their points not touching . " The Council of Europe gives the flag a symbolic description in the following terms ; 
 Against the blue sky of the Western world , the stars represent the peoples of Europe in a circle , a symbol of unity . Their number shall be invariably set at twelve , the symbol of completeness and perfection . 
 = = = Colours = = = 
 The base colour of the flag is a dark blue ( reflex blue , a mix of cyan and magenta ) , while the golden stars are portrayed in Yellow . The colours are regulated according to the Pantone colouring system ( see table for specifications ) . 
 A large number of designs were proposed for the flag before the current flag was agreed . The rejected proposals are preserved in the Council of Europe Archives . One of these consists of a design of white stars on a light blue field , as a gesture to the peace and internationalism of the United Nations . An official website makes a reference to blue and gold being the original colours of Count Richard Nikolaus von <unk> @-@ Kalergi , who proposed a Pan European Union in 1923 , and was an active proponent of the early Community . 
 = = = Number of stars = = = 
 The number of stars on the flag is fixed at 12 , and is not related to the number of member states of the EU ( although the EU did have 12 member states from 1986 to 1994 ) . This is because it originally was the flag of the Council of Europe . In 1953 , the Council of Europe had 15 members ; it was proposed that the future flag should have one star for each member , and would not change based on future members . West Germany objected to this as one of the members was the disputed area of Saarland , and to have its own star would imply sovereignty for the region . Twelve was eventually adopted as a number with no political connotations and as a symbol of unity . In his 2006 book Boris Johnson drew attention to the Emperor Necklace which depicts twelve Caesars , and looks ' uncannily like the euro flag ' . While 12 is the correct number of stars , sometimes flags or emblems can be found that incorrectly show 15 ( as of the rejected proposal ) or 25 ( as suggested by some after the expansion of the EU to 25 member states in 2004 ) . However , the flag also remains that of the Council of Europe , which now has 47 member states . 
 = = Derivative designs = = 
 The design of the European flag has been used in a variation , such as that of the Council of Europe mentioned above , and also to a greater extent such as the flag of the Western European Union ( WEU ; now defunct ) , which uses the same colours and the stars but has a number of stars based on membership and in a semicircle rather than a circle . It is also defaced with the initials of the former Western European Union in two languages . 
 The flag of Bosnia and Herzegovina does not have such a strong connection as the WEU flag , but was partly inspired by the European involvement in , and aspirations of , Bosnia and Herzegovina . It uses the same blue and yellow colours and the stars , although of a different number and colour , are a direct reference to those of the European flag . 
 Likewise , the Republic of Kosovo uses blue , yellow and stars in its flag in reference to the European flag , symbolising its European ambitions ( membership of the European Union ) . Kosovo has , like Bosnia and Herzegovina , seen heavy European involvement in its affairs , with the European Union assuming a supervisory role after its declared independence in 2008 . 
 The flag of the Brussels @-@ Capital Region consists of a yellow iris with a white outline upon a blue background . Its colours are based on the colours of the Flag of Europe , because Brussels is considered the unofficial capital of the EU . 
 The national flag of Cape Verde also shows similarity to the flag of the European Union . The flag is made of a circular formation of ten yellow stars on a dark blue background and a band of white and red . The stars represent the main islands of the nation ( a chain of islands off the coast of West Africa ) . The blue represents the ocean and the sky . The band of white and red represents the road toward the construction of the nation , and the colours stand for peace ( white ) and effort ( red ) . The flag was adopted on 22 September 1992 . 
 Other labels take reference to the European flag such as the EU organic food label that uses the twelve stars but <unk> them into the shape of a leaf on a green background . The original logo of the European Broadcasting Union used the twelve stars on a blue background adding ray beams to connect the countries . 
 = = Marian interpretation = = 
 In 1987 , following the adoption of the flag by the EEC , Arsène Heitz ( 1908 – 89 ) , one of the designers who had submitted proposals for the flag 's design , suggested a religious inspiration for it . He claimed that the circle of stars was based on the iconographic tradition of showing the Blessed Virgin Mary as the Woman of the Apocalypse , wearing a " crown of twelve stars " . The French satirical magazine Le Canard <unk> reacted to Heitz 's statement with an article entitled L ’ Europe <unk> par la Sainte Vierge ( " Europe <unk> by the Blessed Virgin " ) in the 20 December 1989 edition . Heitz also made a connection to the date of the flag 's adoption , 8 December 1955 , coinciding with the Catholic Feast of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary . 
 Paul M. G. Lévy , then Director of Information at the Council of Europe responsible for designing the flag , in a 1989 statement maintained that he had not been aware of any religious connotations . 
 In an interview given 26 February 1998 , Lévy denied not only awareness of the " Marian " connection , but also denied that the final design of a circle of twelve stars was Heitz 's . To the question " Who really designed the flag ? " Lévy replied : 
 " I did , and I calculated the proportions to be used for the geometric design . Arsène Heitz , who was an employee in the mail service , put in all sorts of proposals , including the 15 @-@ star design . But he submitted too many designs . He wanted to do the European currencies with 15 stars in the corner . He wanted to do national flags incorporating the Council of Europe flag . " 
 Carlo <unk> <unk> ( 2005 ) has reconstructed the design process to the effect that Heitz 's proposal contained varying numbers of stars , from which the version with twelve stars was chosen by the Committee of Ministers meeting at Deputy level in January 1955 as one out of two remaining candidate designs . 
 Lévy 's 1998 interview apparently gave rise to a new variant of the " Marian " anecdote . An article published in Die Welt in August 1998 alleged that it was Lévy himself who was inspired to introduce a " Marian " element as he walked past a statue of the Blessed Virgin Mary . 
 An article posted in La Raison in February 2000 further connected the donation of a stained glass window for Strasbourg Cathedral by the Council of Europe on 21 October 1956 . This window , a work by Parisian master Max <unk> , shows a blessing Madonna underneath a circle of 12 stars on dark blue ground . The overall design of the Madonna is inspired by the banner of the cathedral 's <unk> <unk> des Hommes , and the twelve stars are found on the statue venerated by this congregation inside the cathedral ( twelve is also the number of members of the congregation 's council ) . 
 = = Similar flags = = 
 = Avengers : Age of Ultron = 
 Avengers : Age of Ultron is a 2015 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics superhero team the Avengers , produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures . It is the sequel to 2012 's The Avengers and the eleventh film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) . The film was written and directed by Joss Whedon and features an ensemble cast that includes Robert Downey Jr . , Chris Hemsworth , Mark Ruffalo , Chris Evans , Scarlett Johansson , Jeremy Renner , Don Cheadle , Aaron Taylor @-@ Johnson , Elizabeth Olsen , Paul Bettany , Cobie Smulders , Anthony Mackie , Hayley Atwell , Idris Elba , Stellan Skarsgård , James Spader , and Samuel L. Jackson . In Avengers : Age of Ultron , the Avengers fight Ultron , an artificial intelligence obsessed with causing human extinction . 
 The sequel was announced in May 2012 , after the successful release of The Avengers . Whedon , the director of the first film , was brought back on board in August and a release date was set . By April 2013 , Whedon had completed a draft of the script , and casting began in June with the re @-@ signing of Downey . Second unit filming began in February 2014 in South Africa with principal photography taking place between March and August 2014 . The film was primarily shot at Shepperton Studios in Surrey , England , with additional footage filmed in Italy , South Korea , Bangladesh , New York , and various locations around England . While in post production , the film was converted to 3D and over 3 @,@ 000 visual effects shots were added . 
 Avengers : Age of Ultron premiered in Los Angeles on April 13 , 2015 , and was released on May 1 , 2015 in North America , in 3D and IMAX 3D . The film received positive reviews from critics , most of whom enjoyed its action sequences and villain , judging them to be extravagant but unmemorable . It grossed over $ 1 @.@ 4 billion worldwide , making it the seventh @-@ highest @-@ grossing film in history and the fourth @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of 2015 . Two sequels , Avengers : Infinity War – Part 1 and Avengers : Infinity War – Part 2 , are scheduled to be released on May 4 , 2018 , and May 3 , 2019 , respectively . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the Eastern European country of Sokovia , the Avengers – Tony Stark , Steve Rogers , Thor , Bruce Banner , Natasha Romanoff , and Clint Barton – raid a Hydra facility commanded by Baron Wolfgang von Strucker , who has been experimenting on humans using the scepter previously wielded by Loki . They encounter two of Strucker 's experiments – twins Pietro , who has superhuman speed , and Wanda Maximoff , who can manipulate minds and project energy – and apprehend Strucker , while Stark retrieves Loki 's scepter . 
 Stark and Banner discover an artificial intelligence within the scepter 's gem , and secretly use it to complete Stark 's " Ultron " global defense program . The unexpectedly sentient Ultron , believing he must eradicate humanity to save Earth , eliminates Stark 's A.I. J.A.R.V.I.S. and attacks the Avengers at their headquarters . Escaping with the scepter , Ultron uses the resources in Strucker 's Sokovia base to upgrade his rudimentary body and build an army of robot drones . Having killed Strucker , he recruits the Maximoffs , who hold Stark responsible for their parents ' deaths by his weapons , and go to the base of arms dealer Ulysses Klaue to obtain <unk> vibranium . The Avengers attack Ultron and the Maximoffs , but Wanda subdues them with haunting visions , causing the Hulk ( Banner ) to rampage until Stark stops him with his anti @-@ Hulk <unk> 
 A worldwide backlash over the resulting destruction , and the fears Wanda 's hallucinations incited , send the team into hiding at a safehouse . Thor departs to consult with Dr. Erik Selvig on the meaning of the apocalyptic future he saw in his hallucination , while Romanoff and Banner plan to flee together after realizing a mutual attraction . However , Nick Fury arrives and encourages the team to form a plan to stop Ultron . In Seoul , Ultron forces the team 's friend Dr. Helen Cho to use her synthetic @-@ tissue technology , together with vibranium and the scepter 's gem , to perfect a new body for him . As Ultron uploads himself into the body , Wanda is able to read his mind ; discovering his plan for human extinction , the Maximoffs turn against Ultron . Rogers , Romanoff , and Barton find Ultron and retrieve the synthetic body , but Ultron captures Romanoff . 
 The Avengers fight amongst themselves when Stark secretly uploads J.A.R.V.I.S. – who is still operational after hiding from Ultron inside the Internet – into the synthetic body . Thor returns to help activate the body , explaining that the gem on its brow – one of the six Infinity Stones , the most powerful objects in existence – was part of his vision . This " Vision " and the Maximoffs accompany the Avengers to Sokovia , where Ultron has used the remaining vibranium to build a machine to lift a large part of the capital city skyward , intending to crash it into the ground to cause global extinction . Banner rescues Romanoff , who awakens the Hulk for the battle . The Avengers fight Ultron 's army while Fury arrives in a Helicarrier with Maria Hill , James Rhodes and S.H.I.E.L.D. agents to evacuate civilians . Pietro dies when he shields Barton from gunfire , and a vengeful Wanda abandons her post to destroy Ultron 's primary body , which allows one of his drones to activate the machine . The city plummets , but Stark and Thor overload the machine and shatter the landmass . In the aftermath , the Hulk , unwilling to endanger Romanoff by being with her , departs in a <unk> , while the Vision confronts Ultron 's last remaining body . 
 Later , with the Avengers having established a new base run by Fury , Hill , Cho , and Selvig , Thor returns to Asgard to learn more about the forces he suspects have manipulated recent events . As Stark leaves and Barton retires , Rogers and Romanoff prepare to train new Avengers : Rhodes , the Vision , Sam Wilson , and Wanda . 
 In a mid @-@ credits scene , Thanos , dissatisfied by the failures of his pawns , dons a <unk> and vows to retrieve the Infinity Stones himself . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Robert Downey , Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man : 
 The benefactor of the Avengers , who is a self @-@ described genius , billionaire , playboy , and philanthropist with electromechanical suits of armor of his own invention . On how his character evolves after the events of Iron Man 3 , Downey said , " ... I think he realizes that tweaking and making all the suits in the world — which is what he has been doing — still didn 't work for that thing of his tour of duty that left him a little PTSD . So his focus is more on how can we make it so that there 's no problem to begin with . That , you know , there 's a bouncer at our planet 's rope . That 's the big idea . " 
 Chris Hemsworth as Thor : 
 An Avenger and the crown prince of Asgard , based on the Norse mythological deity of the same name . Regarding Thor 's place in the film , Hemsworth stated that Thor has remained on Earth since Thor : The Dark World and has begun to feel at home here so he considers the threat from Ultron to be a personal attack . Hemsworth stated that he had to work harder to bring new elements to the character to avoid repeating himself saying , " It gave us room to kind of make him a little more grounded and human and have him in some civilian clothes and mixing it up at a party . " Hemsworth noted that this is the first MCU film in which he did not work closely with Tom Hiddleston so Thor 's motivation in this film is completely different as it was previously driven by his relationship with Loki . 
 Mark Ruffalo as Bruce Banner / Hulk : 
 An Avenger and a genius scientist who , because of exposure to gamma radiation , transforms into a monster when enraged or agitated . Ruffalo worked with motion capture performer Andy Serkis ' The Imaginarium Studios in preparation for the role . Ruffalo stated that the role grew from the previous film and is a bit " more complex . " Ruffalo explained that a confrontation is brewing between Banner and the Hulk saying , " There 's a very cool thing happening : Hulk is as afraid of Banner as Banner is afraid of Hulk .. and they have got to come to peace somehow with each other . " While filming in London , Ruffalo said that Whedon still had not given him any of the Hulk 's lines . Whedon later explained that he writes the Hulk 's dialogue spontaneously , saying , " What makes the Hulk so hard to write is that you 're pretending he 's a werewolf when he 's a superhero . You want it vice versa ... So the question is , how has he progressed ? How can we bring changes on what the Hulk does ? And that 's not just in the screenplay , that 's moment to moment . " 
 Chris Evans as Steve Rogers / Captain America : 
 The leader of the Avengers and a World War II veteran , who was enhanced to the peak of human physicality by an experimental serum and frozen in suspended animation before waking up in the modern world . Evans stated that since the fall of S.H.I.E.L.D. in Captain America : The Winter Soldier , Rogers has been left to depend on his Avenger teammates without the structure of military life and is now " looking to understand where he belongs , not just as a soldier , as Captain America , but as Steve Rogers , as a person . " Evans said that he was able to maintain the strength he built up for Captain America : The Winter Soldier by working out up to an hour a day . Regarding Captain America 's fighting style , Evans felt he did not want to take a step back from the skills shown in The Winter Soldier , making sure Rogers ' fight style advanced , showing " a consistent display of strength " and having Rogers utilizing his environment . 
 Scarlett Johansson as Natasha Romanoff / Black Widow : 
 An Avenger who formerly worked for S.H.I.E.L.D. as a highly trained spy . Producer Kevin Feige stated that more of the character 's backstory is explored in the film . Johansson elaborated , " In Avengers 2 we go back ... we definitely learn more about Widow 's backstory , and we get to find out how she became the person you see . All of these characters have deep , dark pasts , and I think that the past catches up to some of us a little bit . " On where the film picks up Widow 's story , Johansson felt it was a continuation of what was seen for her character in The Winter Soldier , with the fact that " ' [ Widow ] never made an active choice . [ She 's ] a product of other people 's imposition . ' That 's going to catch up with her . That 's bound to have a huge effect . There 's got to be a result of that realization ... You 'll see her actively making some choices in her life , for better or worse . " A mixture of close @-@ ups , concealing costumes , stunt doubles and visual effects were used to help hide Johansson 's pregnancy during filming . 
 Jeremy Renner as Clint Barton / Hawkeye : 
 An Avenger and master archer who previously worked as an agent for S.H.I.E.L.D. Whedon said that Hawkeye interacts more with the other characters in the film , as opposed to the first film where the character had been " possessed pretty early by a bad guy and had to walk around all <unk> . " As the character did not appear in any other of Marvel 's Phase Two films , Whedon stated Age of Ultron sheds light on to what the character was doing since the end of The Avengers . Renner described the character as " kind of a loner " and " a team player only ' cause he sort of has to be . He 's not really a company man . Captain America can be that guy . In [ Age of Ultron ] you 'll understand why [ Hawkeye ] thinks the way he thinks . " 
 Don Cheadle as James " Rhodey " Rhodes / War Machine : An officer in the U.S. Air Force and Tony Stark 's close personal friend who operates the War Machine armor . 
 Aaron Taylor @-@ Johnson as Pietro Maximoff / Quicksilver : 
 The twin brother of the Scarlet Witch , who can move at superhuman speed . Taylor @-@ Johnson felt Pietro was defined by the fact that he and his sister were abandoned by their family , and they both had to grow up " in Eastern Europe defending and looking out for themselves and each other , " that they both look to the other for guidance . Taylor @-@ Johnson also said that Quicksilver was " very overprotective " of Scarlet Witch and has " real anger frustration " , which results in him being easily bored because of a short attention span . Feige stated exploring Quicksilver 's relationship with his sister and his backstory growing up in Eastern Europe would help differentiate the character from Evan Peters ' version in X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past ( 2014 ) . Taylor @-@ Johnson stated that the running style for Quicksilver went through multiple iterations , saying , " The running style we tested early on was just very one @-@ dimensional and boring to look at , but if you try to do free running , like parkour , then that 's very much Captain America 's style ... You have to find your own place in the stunt world . " Much of Taylor @-@ Johnson 's scenes were filmed outdoors to give " life " to his running , as opposed to running indoors in front of a green screen . 
 Elizabeth Olsen as Wanda Maximoff / Scarlet Witch : 
 The twin sister of Quicksilver , who can engage in hypnosis and telekinesis . Olsen felt Wanda was " overly stimulated " rather than " mentally insane " because " she has such a vast amount of knowledge that she 's unable to learn how to control it . No one taught her how to control it properly ... she can connect to this world and parallel worlds at the same time , and parallel times . " Describing her character 's mind control powers , Olsen said that the character is able to do more than manipulating someone 's mind , with Scarlet Witch able to " feel and see what they feel and see " by projecting visions that they have never seen . Olsen expanded saying , " What I love about her is that , in so many superhero films , emotions are kind of negated a bit , but for her everything that someone else could feel — like their weakest moments — she physically goes through that same experience with them , which is pretty cool . " Olsen drew on her relationship with her older brother and her sisters to prepare for the role , as well as looking to the comics for inspiration . Olsen revealed that Whedon was inspired by dancers as a way to visually represent how the character moves . As such , Olsen mostly trained with a dancer in lieu of traditional stunt training . Olsen is signed for this film and another . 
 Paul Bettany as J.A.R.V.I.S. and Vision : 
 Bettany , who voiced J.A.R.V.I.S. , Stark 's A.I. companion in previous films , was cast again as the Vision , an android created by Ultron . Bettany stated that he was surprised when Whedon asked him if he wanted to be the Vision because once an actor has been cast as a particular character in the MCU , they usually are not cast as another . On what intrigued him about the Vision , Bettany said , " The thing that appealed to me is that this sort of nascent creature being born , being both omnipotent and totally naive , the sort of danger of that and complex nature of a thing being born that is that powerful and that created in a second and the choices he makes morally are really complex and interesting . They 've really managed to maintain all of that " . Bettany also stated that the Vision feels paternal and protective to a number of people in the film , particularly Scarlet Witch , and has the ability to change his density . Bettany did wire work for the part . Whedon stated he wanted to include the Vision in a second Avengers film before he signed onto the first film . Bettany 's make @-@ up , which consisted of a mix of face paint and prosthetics , took two hours to apply with make @-@ up artists Jeremy Woodhead and Nik Williams citing the correct hue of the Vision 's skin as the hardest thing to figure out . 
 Cobie Smulders as Maria Hill : 
 A former high @-@ ranking S.H.I.E.L.D. agent who now works for Stark . Describing Hill 's situation in the film , Smulders said that after The Winter Soldier , Hill does not " really know who 's a good guy and who 's a bad guy and she 's trying to figure out that throughout this film . " She added , " She 's not getting any sleep . She 's doing all the work . She doesn 't have the kind of manpower that she had in S.H.I.E.L.D. , " instead working for Tony Stark at the Avenger 's headquarters " trying to keep everything running as smoothly as possible ... it 's an entirely different vibe for her . " 
 Anthony Mackie as Sam Wilson / Falcon : 
 A former pararescueman trained by the military in aerial combat using a specially designed wing pack and a friend of Steve Rogers . Discussing the relationship between Wilson and Rogers , Mackie said that the two characters have a mutual " soldier respect " , which is explored in the film and in Captain America : Civil War . Feige said that it was decided to reshoot the final scene of the film to incorporate the new Falcon suit designed for Ant @-@ Man , which released after Age of Ultron , as Falcon was originally shot in his original suit from The Winter Soldier . Mackie stated he did not realize Wilson had become an Avenger until he watched the film at the premiere , as he was only given the script for the scenes he worked on . 
 Hayley Atwell as Peggy Carter : A retired officer with the Strategic Scientific Reserve and a co @-@ founder of S.H.I.E.L.D. , who is a former love interest of Steve Rogers . 
 Idris Elba as Heimdall : The all @-@ seeing , all @-@ hearing Asgardian sentry of the Bifröst Bridge , based on the mythological deity of the same name . 
 Stellan Skarsgård as Erik Selvig : 
 An astrophysicist and a friend of Thor . Skarsgård said he was originally not supposed to appear in the film , but received a call because " they 'd written a couple of scenes , and I went and did them , " not knowing if the scenes would appear in the final cut of the film . 
 James Spader as Ultron : 
 An artificial intelligence repurposed by Tony Stark and Bruce Banner for a pilot peace program that is overwhelmed with a god complex , and now desires to pacify the Earth by eradicating humanity . Director Joss Whedon stated that Spader was his " first and only choice " for the role , because of his " hypnotic voice that can be eerily calm and compelling " while also being very human and humorous . Feige clarified that Spader 's face and body were motion captured " to create a whole performance ... We did not hire James Spader to do a robot voice . " Extensive scans were taken of Spader 's head and body in preparation for the role . About the character Whedon said , " He 's always trying to destroy the Avengers , goddamn it , he 's got a bee in his bonnet . He 's not a happy guy , which means he 's an interesting guy . He 's got pain . And the way that manifests is not going to be standard robot stuff . " Whedon added that Ultron is " not a creature of logic — he 's a robot who 's genuinely disturbed . We 're finding out what makes him menacing and at the same time endearing and funny and strange and unexpected , and everything a robot never is . " Whedon compared Ultron to Frankenstein 's monster , saying , " It 's our new Frankenstein myth [ ... ] We create something in our own image and the thing turns on us . It has that pain of ' Well , why was I made ? I want to kill Daddy . ' " Spader called the character " self @-@ absorbed " and added , " I think he sees the Avengers as being part of a problem , a more comprehensive problem in the world . He sees the world from a very strange , [ biblical ] point of view because he 's brand new , he 's very young ... He 's immature , and yet has knowledge of comprehensive , broad history and precedent , and he has created in a very short period of time a rather skewed worldview . " Spader elaborates , " He truly is an artificial intelligence with absolutely no censorship at all , no parameters really … he ’ s got too much power , too much strength and speed and size , so he ’ s a very dangerous child . " 
 Samuel L. Jackson as Nick Fury : 
 The former director of S.H.I.E.L.D. who originally recruited the Avengers and continues to be a mentor and leader for the team . Jackson described the role as a cameo , saying , " I 'm just kind of passing by there ... Because , it 's another one of those ' people who have powers fighting people who have powers ' . That 's why I didn 't get to New York in The Avengers . There 's not a lot I could do except shoot a gun . " 
 Thomas Kretschmann and Henry Goodman reprise their roles as Baron Wolfgang von Strucker and Dr. List , Hydra leaders who specialize in human experimentation , advanced robotics , and artificial intelligence from Captain America : The Winter Soldier . Linda <unk> portrays Laura Barton , Hawkeye 's wife . Claudia Kim portrays Helen Cho , a world @-@ renowned geneticist who helps the Avengers from her office in Seoul , and Andy Serkis portrays Ulysses Klaue , a black @-@ market arms dealer , smuggler and gangster who is a former acquaintance from Stark 's weapons @-@ dealing days . Julie Delpy appears as Madame B. , who mentored Black Widow into becoming an assassin . Kerry Condon voices the artificial intelligence <unk> , a replacement for J.A.R.V.I.S. , while Spader also voices Stark 's Iron Legion droids . Josh Brolin makes an uncredited appearance during the mid @-@ credits scene as Thanos , reprising his role from Guardians of the Galaxy . Avengers co @-@ creator Stan Lee makes a cameo appearance in the film as a military veteran who attends the Avengers ' victory party . Tom Hiddleston was to reprise his role of Loki , but his scenes did not make the theatrical cut of the film . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In October 2011 , Kevin Feige , president of Marvel Studios said the studio was beginning to look at their Phase Two films , which would start with Iron Man 3 and would culminate in a second Avengers film . In March 2012 , Joss Whedon , director of the first film , stated that he would want a sequel to be " smaller . More personal . More painful . By being the next thing that should happen to these characters , and not just a rehash of what seemed to work the first time . By having a theme that is completely fresh and organic to itself . " Despite the production of the film becoming increasingly wider in scope , Feige maintained that this was not their intention , always looking to see where the team wanted to take the characters , over how to make it bigger than The Avengers . 
 At the premiere of The Avengers , Feige said the studio had an option for Whedon to return as director . In May 2012 , after the successful release of the first film , Disney CEO Bob Iger announced a sequel was in development . Most of the film 's cast members were under contract to potentially appear in the sequel ; however , Robert Downey Jr. was not , as his four picture deal with Marvel expired after Iron Man 3 . 
 At the 2012 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , Whedon said he was undecided about directing . However , in August 2012 , Iger announced that Whedon would return to write and direct the sequel and develop the Marvel television series , Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , for ABC . Later in the month , Disney set a May 1 , 2015 release date . When asked about his decision to return , Whedon said , " Avengers 2 , it wasn 't a tough decision . For a long time I thought , ' Well , it 's just not going to happen . ' Then when I actually started to consider it , it became so clear that I desperately wanted to say more about these characters , it would 've been an easy no and it was a spectacularly easy yes . There was no wrestling . " Whedon said that they intended for the film 's production to not be as rushed as the first one . 
 In December 2012 , Whedon stated that he had completed an outline for the film . In February , at the 2013 Jameson Dublin International Film Festival , Whedon said that death would play a theme in the sequel , and in March , he said that he looked to The Empire Strikes Back and The Godfather Part II as inspirations . 
 Feige revealed that Captain Marvel , who is scheduled to appear in her own MCU film in 2019 , appeared in an early draft of the screenplay , but was removed since the character had not yet been cast , saying , " It didn 't feel like the time . We didn 't want to introduce her fully formed flying in a costume before you knew who she was or how she came to be . " Whedon went so far as to shoot visual effects plates for Captain Marvel to fly into Avengers Tower at the end of the film ; those shots were reused , however , for Scarlet Witch instead . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 By April 2013 , filming was scheduled to begin in early 2014 at Shepperton Studios in England . At the Hollywood premiere of Iron Man 3 , Whedon said that he had completed a draft of the script , started the storyboard process , and met with actors . Whedon also mentioned that he wrote with Downey in mind and included a " brother / sister act " from the comic books , later confirming that he was referring to Quicksilver and Scarlet Witch . Whedon explained his rationale for including the characters in the film saying , " their powers are very visually interesting . One of the problems I had on the first one was everybody basically had punchy powers ... [ Quicksilver ] ' s got super speed . [ Scarlet Witch ] can weave spells and a little telekinesis , get inside your head . There 's good stuff that they can do that will help sort of keep it fresh , " though cautioned he was not throwing in more characters for the sake of doing that . Whedon stated that the twins allowed him to add more conflict : " They don 't like America , and they don 't like the Avengers ... The Avengers are like a world power , and not everybody 's on board with the Avengers coming in and starting fights , even in the name of justice . So you need that dissenting voice , and you need to understand it and sympathize with it . " Because Marvel Studios shares the film rights to Quicksilver and Scarlet Witch with 20th Century Fox and had to avoid conflict with Fox 's X @-@ Men films , Whedon introduced two important characters into the Marvel Cinematic Universe completely on his terms for the first time , which allowed him to connect their origin stories to the universe that they created and avoid the concept of mutants . Whedon relished at the storytelling opportunities by introducing a character with telepathic powers , explaining , " it meant we could spend a little time inside the Avengers ' heads — either their past or their impressions of what 's going on , or their fears , or all of the above . " By May , Downey had entered negotiations to extend his contract with Marvel Studios and reprise his role as Iron Man in the film . A month later , Downey signed on to return for the then @-@ untitled Avengers sequel , as well as a third Avengers film . 
 At the 2013 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , Whedon announced the film would be subtitled Age of Ultron . Despite the subtitle , the film is not based on the 2013 comic book miniseries Age of Ultron . Feige explained that they simply liked the title Age of Ultron but the plot was taken from decades of Avengers story arcs . Whedon added that Ultron 's origin would differ from his comics roots , and that Hank Pym would not be involved with Ultron 's creation . Whedon disclosed that Edgar Wright had rights to the character first through his inclusion in Ant @-@ Man , which was already in development . He also thought that Ultron needed to be conceived through the Avengers and since they already had Tony Stark and Bruce Banner on the team , it would not make sense to bring in a third scientist . Whedon also said the film would have a darker tone due to Ultron 's involvement . 
 The title of the film came as a surprise to many fans who were expecting Thanos , the mastermind behind the events of the first film , to be the main villain in the sequel , with Whedon saying , " Thanos was never meant to be the next villain . He 's always been the overlord of villainy and darkness . " Commenting on finding the right balance between <unk> and fantasy @-@ based heroes in Avengers : Age of Ultron , Feige said " Iron Man is a very technological hero his movies are always technologically based . The first Thor was all about introducing Asgard and Thor in that more fantastical realm into the more reality @-@ based MCU ... As we go into Ultron clearly he does come out of technology , but we 're using all of our tools at our disposal that we 've established so far as part of the MCU to build the storyline of Age of Ultron . " 
 Casting continued into August 2013 , with the announcement that James Spader would play Ultron . In November , Marvel confirmed that Elizabeth Olsen and Aaron Taylor @-@ Johnson would play the Scarlet Witch and Quicksilver , respectively . Taylor @-@ Johnson had been in negotiations since as early as June , while Olsen 's potential involvement was first reported in August . By the end of the year , Mark Ruffalo , Chris Evans , Samuel L. Jackson , Chris Hemsworth , Scarlett Johansson , Jeremy Renner and Cobie Smulders were confirmed to be returning to their roles from the first film , and Don Cheadle , who portrayed James Rhodes in the Iron Man films , had committed to a part in the film . In the early months of 2014 , Thomas Kretschmann was cast as Baron Wolfgang von Strucker , Claudia Kim was cast in an unspecified role , and Paul Bettany , who voiced J.A.R.V.I.S. in previous MCU films , was cast as the Vision . Whedon said " juggling " all the characters in the film was " a nightmare " explaining , " They 're very disparate characters . The joy of the Avengers is they really don 't belong in the same room . It 's not like the X @-@ Men , who are all tortured by the same thing and have similar costumes . These guys are just all over the place . And so it 's tough . Honestly , this is as tough as anything I 've ever done . " 
 On January 24 , 2014 , the Forte di Bard Association announced that filming would take place at Fort Bard in the Aosta Valley region of Italy in March 2014 , as well as other locations in Aosta Valley including Aosta , Bard , Donnas , Pont @-@ Saint @-@ Martin , and <unk> . The next month , the Gauteng Film Commission announced that action sequences would be filmed in Johannesburg , South Africa and other locations in Gauteng , beginning in mid @-@ February . A few weeks later Marvel announced that portions of the film would be shot in South Korea . Feige cited the nation 's " cutting @-@ edge technology , beautiful landscapes and spectacular architecture " as ideal for the film . The nation 's capital , Seoul , and Seoul 's surrounding province , Gyeonggi , were selected as filming locations , with South Korea 's Ministry of Culture , Sports and Tourism reimbursing up to 30 % of the studio 's expenditures , as part of a state @-@ funded incentive program . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming began on Tuesday , February 11 , 2014 in Johannesburg , South Africa , having been postponed that Monday . Second unit crews shot action sequences without the main cast , to be used as background plates for scenes featuring the Hulk , in the Central Business District of Johannesburg for a period of two weeks . By mid @-@ March , principal photography had begun at Shepperton Studios near London and was scheduled to film there for at least four months . Filming at Shepperton as well as other locations in England allowed Whedon to get a " number of different looks and textures and moods " to give the film a different palette and fresh aesthetic from its predecessor . Production designer Charles Wood built an enormous , new Avengers Tower set , one of the largest sets ever built for a Marvel film . The set featured multiple connected environments and levels . On March 22 , production moved to Fort Bard , Italy and continued in the Aosta Valley region through March 28 . The region doubled as the fictional Eastern European nation of Sokovia , with crews replacing local storefronts with Cyrillic script . Filming in South Korea began on March 30 on the <unk> Bridge , and continued through April 14 at various locations in Seoul . While in Seoul , the production was able to attach cameras to drones and race cars to get unique camera angles and footage . An artificial island on the Han River known as the <unk> <unk> served as the headquarters of an IT institute featured in the film . Scenes involving Ultron 's attack on parts of the city were shot in the Gangnam District . 
 In April , shooting began in Hawley Woods in Hampshire , England , and Hayley Atwell , who played Peggy Carter in previous MCU films , filmed scenes inside the Rivoli Ballroom in London while extras performed the Lindy Hop . That June , scenes were shot at the University of East Anglia in Norwich and at Dover Castle in Kent , with Dover Castle used for interior shots of Strucker 's Hydra base in Sokovia . The next month , filming took place at a training facility for London 's Metropolitan Police Service , which doubled as a city in Sokovia . Additional filming took place in Chittagong , Bangladesh , including the Chittagong Ship Breaking Yard , and in New York . On August 6 , Whedon announced on social media that he had completed principal photography on Avengers : Age of Ultron . Disney spent $ 330 @.@ 6 million on Avengers : Age of Ultron from February 2013 to November 2014 , but $ 50 @.@ 7 million of this was offset by payments from the UK tax authority . A report on actual production costs for films from <unk> Inc . , indicated a gross budget of $ 316 million , with a net of $ 267 @.@ 4 million for Avengers : Age of Ultron . 
 Cinematographer Ben Davis , who also worked with Marvel on Guardians of the Galaxy , shot the film with a main unit of three Arri Alexa cameras . Davis said , " Although the Alexa was Marvel 's preferred camera , we weren 't locked into that choice from the start . What wasn 't negotiable was the fact that we were shooting digital : that 's how Marvel shoots all of its films . " Davis also used <unk> Design 's Pocket Cinema Cameras to meet the needs of the second unit kit explaining , " The second unit typically needs a fleet of smaller cameras that are less expensive and are rugged enough to handle the various trials by fire , as it were , that we throw at them . " About the camera system , Whedon stated that this film was shot very differently from the first one ; using lots of long lenses , and that he aimed to shoot the film almost like a documentary . To create the scenes depicting how Quicksilver views the world , scenes were shot with an ultra @-@ high @-@ speed camera and later combined with shots of Taylor @-@ Johnson moving through the same scene at normal speed . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 In June 2014 , the IMAX Corporation announced that the IMAX release of the film would be converted to IMAX 3D . Following the completion of principal photography several more cast members were revealed including Stellan Skarsgård , Anthony Mackie , Idris Elba and Tom Hiddleston , who all reprise their roles from previous MCU films . However , Hiddleston 's scenes did not make the theatrical cut of the film , with Whedon saying what was shot " didn 't play " and he did not want the film to feel " overstuffed " . According to Hiddleston , " In test screenings , audiences had overemphasized Loki 's role , so they thought that because I was in it , I was controlling Ultron , and it was actually <unk> people 's expectations . " Whedon later explained that Elba and Atwell appear in the film because of exploring the psyches of the Avengers from Scarlet Witch 's power . In December 2014 , Kim 's role was revealed as Dr. Helen Cho . Additional scenes were scheduled to be filmed in January 2015 at Pinewood Studios . In February 2015 , Marvel confirmed through promotional material that Serkis portrays Ulysses Klaue in the film . In early April 2015 , Linda <unk> and Julie Delpy were confirmed to be part of the film 's cast . At the same time , Whedon stated that the film would not contain a post @-@ credits scene , which had become customary for MCU films . Whedon tried to come up with a post @-@ credit scene but felt that he could not top the " Shawarma scene " in The Avengers explaining , " It didn 't seem to lend itself in the same way , and we wanted to be true to what felt right . The first rule of making a sequel is take the best moments and do something else . Don 't do the Indiana Jones gun trick again differently . Just go somewhere else . Don 't try to hit the same highs , because people will sense it . " However Feige clarified , " There will be a tag [ shortly after the credits start ] . But there 's not a post @-@ post @-@ credit scene . " 
 In May 2015 , Whedon revealed he was in conflict with Marvel executives and the film 's editors about certain scenes in the film . The executives were not " thrilled " with the scenes at Hawkeye 's farm or the dream sequences the Avengers experience because of Scarlet Witch . Also , Whedon had originally shot a much longer scene with Thor and Selvig in the cave , compromising with including a reduced amount of the total footage shot , as test audiences did not respond to it . In the scene , Thor would be possessed by a Norn , a goddess of destiny , while Selvig would quiz her about Thor 's hallucination . Additionally , Whedon reiterated he had wanted to include Captain Marvel and Spider @-@ Man at the end , but deals for each character ( signing of an actress and a deal with Sony Pictures Entertainment , respectively ) were not completed in time for their inclusion . 
 The film contains 3 @,@ 000 visual effects shots , completed by ten different visual effects studios , including Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) , Trixter , Double Negative , Animal Logic , Framestore , Lola VFX , Territory , Perception , Method Studios , Luma Pictures and The Third Floor . ILM opened a facility in London , citing Avengers : Age of Ultron as a catalyst for the expansion , and developed a new motion capture system for the film called Muse , which can better capture an actor 's performance and combine different takes . About the motion capture process , Ruffalo called it " more of a collaboration " since the technology is advancing , with " the face capture and the motion capture can now [ being ] put together , [ allowing ] you [ to ] get a lot more latitude as a performer ... you 're no longer constricted by the attributes that you have as a person : your age , or weight , or size . None of that matters anymore . And so there 's this whole exciting place to go that is kind of unknown . " Visual effects supervisor Christopher Townsend said that the visual effects team considered depicting the Hulk when manipulated by Wanda Maximoff as being grey skinned with red eyes , but eventually decided against it , as they did not want to confuse audiences who might associate it with " Joe <unk> " , the grey Hulk from the comics . 
 Method Studios created the interior of the new Avengers training facility by digitally designing the training facility , extracting the characters from the original set and placing them into the new CG environment . Method also contributed to Iron Man 's new Mark 45 suit and played a key role in creating Scarlet Witch 's CG mind control effect . Following the trend in recent years , most of the computer screens in Stark 's lab , Dr Cho 's laboratory , the <unk> and other locations in the film were not added in post @-@ production but were actually working screens on set , adding to the realism of the film and saving some on the post @-@ production budget . London @-@ based Territory Studio delivered the screen visuals filled with unique imagery and animations that matched the character using them . Perception worked on the main @-@ on @-@ end and main titles for the film . Before settling on the marble monument depiction for the main @-@ on @-@ end titles , Perception created three other versions , which were based on Ultron 's hive mind ability from the film , " renderings of power and pure energy " inspired by classic comic panels , and classic moments for each character . The final design was inspired by war monuments such as the Iwo Jima memorial . For the main titles , Marvel wanted the typeface to be a direct continuation of the first film . Perception made the typeface a marble texture to mimic the main @-@ on @-@ end titles and changed the title 's rotation ( away from the camera instead of towards the camera in The Avengers ) , before " Age of Ultron " overtakes " Avengers " in a vibranium texture . 
 = = Music = = 
 In March 2014 , Brian Tyler signed on to compose the film 's score , replacing the composer for the first film , Alan Silvestri , while also marking his third film collaboration with Marvel following Iron Man 3 and Thor : The Dark World in 2013 . Tyler stated that the score pays homage to John Williams ' scores for Star Wars , Superman , and Raiders of the Lost Ark and references the scores for the Iron Man , Thor , and Captain America films in order to create a similar musical universe , saying , " That 's the goal for sure . You have to build in nostalgia and do it upfront so you can relate to it . " Danny Elfman also contributed music to the score , using Silvestri 's theme from the first film to create a new hybrid theme . Hollywood Records released the album digitally on April 28 , 2015 , and in physical formats on May 19 . 
 = = Release = = 
 Avengers : Age of Ultron made its world premiere at the Dolby Theatre in Hollywood on April 13 , 2015 , and held its European premiere on April 21 at the Vue West End in London . The film was released in 11 territories on April 22 , with its release jumping to 55 % of its international market ( 44 countries ) by the end of its first weekend , before the North American release on May 1 , in 3D and IMAX 3D . In North America , the film opened in 4 @,@ 276 theaters , including 2 @,@ 761 3D theaters , 364 IMAX , 400 premium large format , and 143 D @-@ Box theaters . Many independent theater owners in Germany ( approximately 700 screens ) boycotted the film in response to Disney raising its rental fee from 47 @.@ 7 % to 53 % of ticket sales . The owners felt that the " increased fees , coupled with the cost of digitization , and rising staff and marketing costs may force some of them out of business . " 
 In September 2014 , TNT acquired the US cable broadcast rights , for broadcast two years after its theatrical release . On March 4 , 2015 , ticket pre @-@ sales for the film began . Variety noted , " The two @-@ month gap between advance sales and the release is much wider than normal and reflects the heavy fan anticipation for " the film . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 At the 2013 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , Whedon introduced a teaser trailer for the film , which included a look at an Ultron helmet and a title treatment . Footage of the teaser , as well as a brief interview with Whedon , was made available as part of Iron Man 3 's second screen companion app for its Blu @-@ ray release on September 24 , 2013 . On March 18 , 2014 , ABC aired a one @-@ hour television special titled , Marvel Studios : Assembling a Universe , which included a sneak peek of Avengers : Age of Ultron . The special debuted concept art for Quicksilver and Scarlet Witch , as well as art of the Hulk fighting the " <unk> " Iron Man suit . Harley @-@ Davidson partnered with Marvel to provide their first electric motorcycle , Project <unk> , for use by Black Widow in the film . At the 2014 San Diego Comic @-@ Con , the cast was introduced to promote the film , along with screening footage from the film . Avengers : Age of Ultron received the second most amount of social media mentions at the convention , following Batman v Superman : Dawn of Justice , but had a higher intend @-@ to @-@ see response . 
 The first trailer was scheduled to premiere during the airing of an episode of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. on October 28 , 2014 . However , on October 22 , the trailer leaked online , and within a few hours Marvel officially released the trailer on YouTube . Entertainment Weekly and The Hollywood Reporter noted the effective use of the song " I 've Got No Strings " from Pinocchio ( 1940 ) in the trailer . Scott Mendelson of Forbes felt the trailer was " such a textbook ' dark sequel ' trailer that it borders on parody " but said , " it 's a pretty spectacular piece of marketing , one that elevates itself both by the music choices and by James Spader 's vocals as the title villain " . The trailer received 34 @.@ 3 million global views in 24 hours , 26 @.@ 2 million from Marvel 's YouTube channel , which broke the previous record held by Iron Man 3 with 23 @.@ 14 million views . In comparison , the original Avengers teaser received 20 @.@ 4 million views in 24 hours after its debut . In response , Marvel agreed to air footage from Age of Ultron during the episode of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. that was originally scheduled to premiere the trailer . At the end of October , Marvel Comic 's Editor @-@ in @-@ Chief Axel Alonso stated there were comic tie @-@ in plans for the film . 
 In November 2014 , ABC aired another one @-@ hour television special titled Marvel 75 Years : From Pulp to Pop ! , which featured behind the scenes footage of Age of Ultron . Also in November , an extended trailer debuted on Samsung Mobile 's YouTube channel , featuring product placement for various Samsung devices . In December 2014 , additional behind the scenes footage was released as a special feature on the Guardians of the Galaxy <unk> @-@ ray , highlighting the various filming locations for the film . Also in the month , ABC announced that an episode of Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. would tie @-@ in to the events of the film . The episodes " The Frenemy of My Enemy " and " The Dirty Half Dozen " feature " Easter eggs , plot threads and other connective tissue leading into the opening scene of Avengers : Age of Ultron " while " Scars " explores the aftermath of the film . 
 In January 2015 , a featurette focusing on Ultron was shown at Samsung 's " Night With Marvel " event at the 2015 Consumer Electronics Show ( CES ) . Also at CES , Samsung revealed a selection of hardware inspired by the Avengers films , as well as a simulation of Avengers Tower via its Gear VR virtual reality device . A second trailer premiered on ESPN on January 12 , 2015 during the broadcast of the 2015 College Football Playoff National Championship . Mendelson enjoyed the trailer , but wished it did not reveal as many story elements as it did . However , he added , " the marketing thus far [ for the film ] has been far superior to much of what sold The Avengers three years ago , both in terms of the specific footage and the artistic choices being made ... I 'm sold , and I imagine most of the general moviegoers are already onboard too . " 
 On February 3 , 2014 , Marvel " stealth released " a one @-@ shot tie @-@ in comic , Avengers : Age of Ultron Prelude — This Scepter 'd Isle . Written by Will Corona Pilgrim and illustrated by <unk> Alves , it reveals how Strucker came into possession of Loki 's scepter and the origin of the Maximoff twins ' abilities . At the end of the month , the film 's official poster was revealed . Graeme McMillian of The Hollywood Reporter criticized it for its lack of originality , calling it " pretty much the poster for the first Avengers movie , except with added flying robots in the background " and the fact that it incorporated many of the same tropes the other MCU Phase Two film posters did . These included : the hero ( es ) staring off camera ; destruction in the background as well as something occurring in the sky ; and poor Photoshop on the poster , highlighting the fact that each of the actors were obviously photographed separately and were later composited together into the poster . Mendelson agreed with many of McMillian 's observations , and called the poster " hilariously photoshopped " . 
 The final trailer was " unlocked " by fans on March 4 , 2015 , via the use of hashtags on Twitter , ahead of its broadcast debut during the series premiere of American Crime on March 5 . Mendelson felt " this [ was ] a fine final trailer , teasing what we already know , hinting at the scale and a few new action beats without telling us much we don 't already know " adding , " Here we have the fourth and final Avengers : Age of Ultron trailer and we don 't know all that much about what transpires in a moment @-@ to @-@ moment sense in the finished 150 @-@ minute feature . I have expressed my concern dating back to October that Marvel and Disney would release too many trailers and would by default give away too much plot and character information between October and May . But if this really is the final Avengers 2 trailer , then at least on the trailer front they have kept the film relatively unspoiled . " A week after the final trailer debuted , Marvel revealed that the trailer had " smashed records " with over 35 million views . 
 In April 2015 , members of the cast presented Downey with the MTV Generation Award at the 2015 MTV Movie Awards , along with debuting an exclusive clip from the film . On April 27 , Downey and Renner along with executives from Marvel Entertainment rang the opening bell of the New York Stock Exchange in celebration of the film 's theatrical release . Disney spent a total of $ 26 @.@ 9 million on television advertisements for the film , from an estimated total marketing budget of $ 180 million . 
 = = = = Merchandise = = = = 
 In January 2015 , Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment and Traveller 's Tales announced a Lego video game adaptation of the first film and Age of Ultron for release in late 2015 on a variety of video game consoles . In March 2015 , Disney said it planned to broaden its merchandising strategy with Avengers : Age of Ultron by expanding the target demographics to women and to fans of the individual superheroes that make up the Avengers . Paul Gitter , senior vice president of Marvel licensing for Disney Consumer Products , said , " For the first film , we primarily focused on the Avengers property and the group shots ... Now we 're broadening the line and scope to create skews that focus on the team and the individuals characters , as well . " Disney Consumer Products partnered with Hasbro , Lego , Hot Wheels and Funko for action figures , playsets and other toys , and with Under Armour for apparel . Disney established new partnerships in the food and packaged @-@ goods categories , including with Sage Fruit , ConAgra , <unk> and <unk> . Walt Disney India 's consumer products partnered with 50 brands to promote the film in India , considered the highest ever for any film — Hollywood or Bollywood — released in India ( the previous record held by Ra.One had 25 partners ) . Some of the brands include Amazon India , toy retailer Hamleys India , online fashion store Myntra , Hero Cycles , Mountain Dew , Liberty Shoes , Tupperware , and Subway restaurants among others . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Avengers : Age of Ultron was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on digital download on September 8 , 2015 and on Blu @-@ ray and DVD on October 2 , 2015 . The digital and Blu @-@ ray releases include behind @-@ the @-@ scenes featurettes , audio commentary , deleted scenes and a blooper reel . The film was also collected in a 13 @-@ disc box set , titled " Marvel Cinematic Universe : Phase Two Collection " , which includes all of the Phase Two films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . It was released on December 8 , 2015 . In July 2015 , Whedon stated that he did not intend on releasing a director 's cut of Avengers : Age of Ultron because despite the film 's complexity , he was satisfied with the theatrical version and did not think it needed to be tweaked . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Avengers : Age of Ultron grossed $ 459 million in North America and $ 946 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 1 @.@ 405 billion . It is the seventh highest @-@ grossing film worldwide and the fourth highest @-@ grossing 2015 film . Avengers : Age of Ultron 's worldwide opening of $ 392 @.@ 5 million is the seventh @-@ largest ever . The film set a worldwide IMAX opening @-@ weekend record with $ 25 @.@ 2 million ( previously held by The Dark Knight Rises ) and also broke the record for the fastest movie to make over $ 40 million in IMAX theaters , doing so in 12 days . According to some analysts , the opening weekend box office gross was lower than expected because of the weekend 's featured boxing match between Floyd Mayweather and Manny Pacquiao . Deadline.com calculated the net profit of the film to be $ 382 @.@ 32 million , when factoring together " production budgets , P & A , talent participations and other costs , with box office grosses , and ancillary revenues from VOD to DVD and TV , " placing it fourth on their list of 2015 's " Most Valuable Blockbusters " . 
 On May 15 , 2015 , Avengers : Age of Ultron became the twenty @-@ first film in cinematic history , the third Marvel Studios film and the eighth film distributed by Disney to cross the $ 1 billion threshold at the box office . 
 = = = = North America = = = = 
 Avengers : Age of Ultron earned $ 84 @.@ 46 million on its opening day , marking the biggest opening day for a superhero film and the second @-@ biggest opening and second @-@ biggest single @-@ day gross , behind Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 ( $ 91 @.@ 7 million ) . The film 's Friday gross included $ 27 @.@ 6 million from Thursday night , which began at 7 p.m. , and was the sixth @-@ highest ever for Thursday preview earnings and the highest among Marvel films . The film totaled $ 191 @.@ 3 million in its opening weekend , the third @-@ highest gross behind Jurassic World ( $ 208 @.@ 8 million ) and The Avengers ( $ 207 @.@ 4 million ) . It also saw the second @-@ highest IMAX opening weekend total with $ 18 million ( behind The Dark Knight Rises ) , a record $ 13 @.@ 5 million from premium large format theaters and the highest share for the first weekend in May , accounting for 85 % of the top twelve box office total earnings ( previously held by Spider @-@ Man 3 ) . Of those in attendance the first weekend , 59 % were male , 41 % were female and 59 % were over the age of 25 . 
 In its second weekend , the film fell 59 % , earning $ 77 @.@ 7 million , which was the second @-@ biggest second weekend gross behind The Avengers ' $ 103 million ( both were surpassed a month later by Jurassic World 's $ 106 @.@ 6 million ) . It holds the record for the second biggest loss between first and second weekends with $ 113 @.@ 6 million , only behind Deathly Hallows – Part 2 's $ 121 million loss between its first and second weekends in 2011 . As of July 24 , 2016 , it is the tenth @-@ highest domestic @-@ grossing film , and the third highest of 2015 . 
 = = = = Outside North America = = = = 
 Avengers : Age of Ultron earned $ 200 @.@ 2 million in its first weekend from 44 countries , opening in first in all , which was 44 % above its predecessor 's opening . Additionally , the film saw the largest non @-@ China international IMAX opening with $ 10 @.@ 4 million . The top earning countries were South Korea ( $ 28 @.@ 2 million ) , the UK ( $ 27 @.@ 3 million ) and Russia ( $ 16 @.@ 2 million ) . The film broke records in many countries , including : opening @-@ day records in Mexico ( $ 6 @.@ 8 million ) , the Philippines ( $ 1 @.@ 6 million ) and Indonesia ( $ 900 @,@ 000 ) ; opening @-@ weekend records in Mexico ( $ 25 @.@ 5 million ) , Russia and the CIS ( $ 16 @.@ 2 million ) , Hong Kong ( $ 6 @.@ 4 million ) and the Philippines ( $ 7 @.@ 7 million ) ; and highest opening weekend for a superhero film in the UK , Ireland and Malta ( $ 27 @.@ 3 million ) , Germany ( $ 9 @.@ 3 million ) , Sweden , Norway , and the Netherlands . 
 In the UK , where Age of Ultron was filmed , it earned $ 5 @.@ 4 million on its opening day and $ 27 @.@ 3 million during the weekend , setting an opening @-@ weekend record for a superhero film , Marvel 's biggest opening in Britain , the biggest April opening , the eighth @-@ biggest debut . It also set the best single @-@ day earning for a Disney and superhero film with its $ 9 @.@ 4 million haul on Saturday . In South Korea , also where part of the film was shot , the film earned $ 4 @.@ 9 million on its opening day and $ 28 @.@ 2 through the weekend . It held the record for advance @-@ ticket sales rate , accounting for 96 % of tickets reserved , breaking Transformers : Dark of the Moon 's record of 94 @.@ 6 % in 2011 , the widest release ever , across 1 @,@ 826 screens , also breaking Dark of the Moon 's 1 @,@ 420 screens , and the fastest imported film to surpass one million admissions , doing so in two days ; it topped the box office for three consecutive weekends , and became the biggest Disney / Marvel release as well as the second biggest Western film in the country . The Chinese opening scored the biggest weekday opening day , as well as the biggest Disney / Marvel opening , with $ 33 @.@ 9 million , and the second @-@ biggest six @-@ day start with $ 156 @.@ 3 million ( behind Furious 7 ) of which $ 17 @.@ 5 million came from IMAX theaters — the biggest ever . 
 As of January 3 , 2016 , it is the seventh highest @-@ grossing film , and the fourth highest @-@ grossing 2015 film . Additionally , the film 's largest markets as of July 17 , 2015 are : China ( $ 240 @.@ 1 million ) , South Korea ( $ 80 @.@ 5 million ) , and the UK , Ireland and Malta ( $ 76 @.@ 6 million ) . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 75 % approval rating with an average rating of 6 @.@ 7 / 10 based on 302 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " <unk> and eye @-@ popping , Avengers : Age of Ultron serves as an overstuffed but mostly satisfying sequel , reuniting its predecessor 's unwieldy cast with a few new additions and a worthy foe . " On Metacritic , the film achieved an average score of 66 out of 100 , based on 49 critics , signifying " generally favorable reviews " . CinemaScore reported that audiences gave the film an " A " grade on an A + to F scale . 
 Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter said , " Avengers : Age of Ultron succeeds in the top priority of creating a worthy opponent for its superheroes and giving the latter a few new things to do , but this time the action scenes don 't always measure up . " Scott Foundas of Variety wrote , " If this is what the apotheosis of branded , big @-@ studio entertainment has come to look like in 2015 , we could be doing much worse . Unlike its title character , Age of Ultron most definitely has soul . " Writing for the Chicago Sun @-@ Times and giving the film three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of four stars , Richard Roeper said , " Some day , an Avengers film might collapse under the weight of its own awesomeness . I mean , how many times can they save the world ? But this is not that day . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote , " Age of Ultron is a whole summer of fireworks packed into one movie . It doesn 't just go to 11 , it starts there . [ Joss Whedon ] takes a few wrong turns , creating a jumble when the action gets too thick . But he recovers like a pro , devising a spectacle that 's epic in every sense of the word . " Matt Zoller Seitz of RogerEbert.com , who in the past grieved of the reliance on formula by most superhero films , gave the film three out of four stars and stated that despite being " bigger , louder and more disjointed " than its predecessor , " it ’ s also got more personality — specifically Whedon ’ s — than any other film in the now seven @-@ year @-@ old franchise . " 
 Conversely , Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times said , " Although this movie is effective moment to moment , very little of it lingers in the mind afterward . The ideal vehicle for our age of immediate sensation and instant gratification , it disappears without a trace almost as soon as it 's consumed . " Scott Mendelson of Forbes said , " Avengers : Age of Ultron plays like an obligation , a box to be checked off on a list before all parties move onto the things they really want to do . " Manohla Dargis of The New York Times wrote , " This Avengers doesn 't always pop the way that the first one sometimes did , partly because its villain isn 't as memorable , despite Mr. Spader 's silky threat . " Camilla Long of The Sunday Times remarked , " Two hours of boredom and boobs add up to a sorry basis for the new Avengers . " Much like the release of Guardians of the Galaxy , the film received mixed reviews upon release in China , due to poor translations . The translations , which were said to be too literal , were thought " to have been done by Google <unk> . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In December 2015 , the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences placed Avengers : Age of Ultron on their shortlist of potential nominees for the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects at the 88th Academy Awards , but ultimately did not nominate it for the award . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 The two @-@ part Avengers : Infinity War will be directed by Anthony and Joe Russo , from a script by Christopher Markus & Stephen McFeely . Part 1 is scheduled to be released on May 4 , 2018 , with Part 2 scheduled for May 3 , 2019 . Downey , Evans , Hemsworth , Hiddleston , Ruffalo , Renner , and Brolin are expected to reprise their roles as Iron Man , Captain America , Thor , Loki , Hulk , Hawkeye , and Thanos , respectively , in the films . Chris Pratt , who played Peter Quill / Star @-@ Lord in Guardians of the Galaxy and its sequel , will also appear in the films . 
 = Fame Kills : Starring Kanye West and Lady Gaga = 
 Fame Kills : Starring Kanye West and Lady Gaga was a planned co @-@ headlining concert tour by American rapper Kanye West and singer Lady Gaga . For the tour , which would have supported West 's fourth album 808s & Heartbreak ( 2008 ) and Gaga 's The Fame Monster EP ( 2009 ) , the pair conceived a production that would unite their different musical audiences . The tour was scheduled to run from November 2009 to January 2010 , but was canceled after public controversy regarding West 's interruption of Taylor Swift 's Best Female Video speech at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards . Shortly after the cancellation , Gaga embarked on her own tour , The Monster Ball Tour , while West took a break from his career . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 In June 2009 , West announced on The View he would be touring with Gaga , but she would not perform as an opening act . " She 's talented and so incredible that she 's not an opening act , " he said . " We 're doing it together , with no opening act . " In August , Gaga expressed her belief that the tour would be " one of the most groundbreaking moments in touring history . " Before the singer agreed to collaborate with West , she demanded that the tour would remain accessible to her gay fans . " I 'm gay , " she recalled telling West in an interview with Out magazine , " my music is gay . My show is gay . And I love that it 's gay . And I love my gay fans and they 're all going to be coming to our show . And it 's going to remain gay . " 
 The tour 's stage was designed by Gaga and West as a traverse ; " Instead of being on just one end of the arena , the stage traverses the entire arena , " Gaga noted . " It 's not really in @-@ the @-@ round ; it 's more of a runway . " The concept of the tour was to feature the performers on opposite ends of the stage , with Gaga 's end representing " home and humble beginnings " and West 's end representing " the fame , " with the two fighting for each other 's positions throughout the show . West would perform his singles , Gaga would perform hers , and then the duo would perform several duets . 
 Gaga said she enjoyed designing Fame Kills with West , calling themselves " creative kindreds . " She explained that they did not plan to tour for themselves , but rather for " everybody else " ; the goal of the tour would have been to bring two different groups of fans and music enthusiasts together . " I make pop music and Kanye 's fans love pop music because he has changed what hip @-@ hop means , " she said . " For me , the tour is more about just bringing people together and having a big dance party . The show is a celebration of creativity , art , fashion and choreography . " She also noted that West showed her a lot during the creative planning of the show , such as one instance where Gaga wanted to put side panels on the stage that would have obstructed the view for some fans . " He was like , ' I 'm not selling a ticket to a fan who can 't see the show , ' and he 's right , " she said . 
 A promotional video for the tour was released in September 2009 . West posted the video on his blog accompanied by the text , " What happened to all the rock stars ? The fame killed them ! " The 30 @-@ second clip features slow @-@ motion footage of a topless Gaga being carried by a man presumed to be West . Daniel Kreps from Rolling Stone described it as " soft 70s porn " , while adding that he had " no idea what [ the text in the video ] has to do with the 30 @-@ second clip , but we 're sure it 'll start to make more sense as more promos roll out as we approach the tour 's launch . " 
 = = Cancellation = = 
 Following singer Taylor Swift 's win for the music video " You Belong with Me " at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards for Best Female Video , West stormed the stage , grabbed Swift 's microphone , and declared that singer Beyoncé deserved the award for her " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " video . He declared , " Yo , Taylor , I 'm really happy for you , and I 'm going to let you finish , but Beyoncé had one of the best videos of all time . " West was profusely criticized from celebrities and fans alike over the incident . Following the interruption , the status of Fame Kills was rumored to be in question . A representative from an US urban radio station commented : " I think this could potentially affect his upcoming tour with Lady Gaga . This isn 't an urban tour — urban audiences can be a bit more forgiving than mainstream audiences are . I can see him going on stage and people booing him . It 's unfortunate . " Less than a week after the ticket sales began , the tour was canceled but no reason was given . 
 Various reasons circulated as to why the tour was canceled . It was suspected that it was canceled due to extremely poor ticket sales , feuding between Gaga and West 's management teams , and Gaga 's desire to play in smaller venues . Gaga 's choreographer , Laurieann Gibson , said the tour was terminated due to " creative differences " between Gaga and West . West said that , among other consequences , the VMA incident led him to cancel a " tour with the number one pop star in the world . " Gaga claimed that the cancellation was a mutual decision , and added that she would soon embark on her own headlining tour , The Monster Ball Tour in the coming weeks , while West would be taking a break . In 2016 , West claimed that Gaga had been solely responsible for canceling the tour . 
 Gaga was scheduled to begin The Monster Ball Tour in March 2010 , but following the cancellation of Fame Kills , The Monster Ball Tour began in November 2009 . Gaga said that while she was inspired by what she and West had planned to do with the Fame Kills tour , she decided not to use any of the ideas and concepts they created together , citing integrity as her reason . 
 = = Scheduled tour dates = = 
 All tour dates were canceled . 
 = You 're Whole = 
 You 're Whole is an American satirical television series created by Michael Ian Black for Adult Swim . The show parodies self @-@ help infomercials and stars Black as the host , Randall Tyree Mandersohn . In it , Mandersohn advertises his systems of objects and actions designed to help people with their issues . It was the production of Abominable Pictures , with which Black originally consulted with the premise of the show in mind . Meanwhile , Michael Showalter , longtime collaborator of Black , served as the director . 
 The show originally ran from November 5 , 2012 to December 2 , 2013 , airing two seasons and totaling eight episodes . Both seasons were broadcast at 4 : 00 a.m. as part of DVR Theater on Adult Swim . On air , it was promoted as a series of genuine infomercials . Critical reception was positive , with many praising Black 's performance . A live performance was held at the 2014 SF Sketchfest , also positively received . 
 = = Synopsis and production = = 
 You 're Whole is presented as a parody of self @-@ help infomercials . Each episode is advertised as part of a larger DVD set , consisting of 27 discs . The show features Michael Ian Black as the host , Randall Tyree Mandersohn : a " totally blind " , volleyball @-@ obsessed , self @-@ help guru . Along with his wife , Pam ( Cathy Shim ) , Mandersohn aims to help people using his bizarre , convoluted systems of objects and actions . The show was directed by Michael Showalter , a longtime collaborator of Black . Actor Crista Flanagan indicated that the second season was filmed as recently as August 2013 . 
 In a June 2014 interview with the Detroit Metro Times , Black stated that no further seasons would be produced . Writing retrospectively the amount of research put into the show , Black stated that he " didn 't spend a lot of time thinking about it " , as it would have spoiled " some of the stupidity " , joking that " I 'm nothing if not stupid " . Abominable Pictures producer David <unk> later wrote that Black had come to the company with the idea in mind , and that , with their other parody infomercial Swords , Knives , Very Sharp Objects and Cutlery , " it was a happy marriage " between their company and Adult Swim . 
 = = = Live performance = = = 
 A live performance of the show was given at the 2014 SF Sketchfest on January 31 . In addition to acting , Black and Showalter interlaced it with clips from the show . Art <unk> of The Daily Californian observed Showalter to be the " straight man " to Black 's antics , with both frequently breaking character . He gave the performance a positive review , writing that " the result was a concise , lighthearted performance that was faithful to the show . " 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 The show premiered on November 5 , 2012 on Adult Swim ; two seasons have been broadcast , totaling eight episodes . Advertised as a series of genuine infomercials , both seasons were broadcast at 4 a.m. , as part of the network 's DVR Theater block . The early @-@ morning timeslot was chosen since infomercials usually air during such hours . The first episode was published on YouTube the day after its premiere . One critic — Eliot Glazer of Vulture — called the early morning time slot " terrible " , directing readers toward online distribution . Although the show premiered during a graveyard slot in U.S. <unk> , nearly one million viewers ( 993 @,@ 000 ) saw it on air . The second season premiere marked a slight increase in viewers ( 996 @,@ 000 ) , while both maintained a Nielsen rating of 0 @.@ 7 . 
 Critical reception was positive , with many reviewers praising Black 's performance and the satirizing of American self @-@ help gurus , as conveyed through his casual racism and cultural appropriation of foreign rituals . Erik Adams of The A.V. Club found that the show conveys itself " in a manner familiar to anyone who 's ever killed time before daylight by flipping through their cable package . " Britt Hayes of ScreenCrush called the show " absolutely fantastic " and Black 's portrayal " spot @-@ on " . Similarly , Aisha Harris of Slate wrote that Black 's performance was " wonderfully committed " , while the show " has pretty much every common trope of the self @-@ help craze covered " , citing the appropriation of foreign customs for Western audiences as " perhaps the most scathing treatment " . 
 Meanwhile , Kelly West of Television Blend highlighted some of the more surreal systems , calling the diet in the premiere episode " a winner " . For Splitsider , Bradford Evans dubbed the show " a more mainstream version " of Paid Programming , an unsuccessful pilot that was also pitched as a mock @-@ infomercial . He found that starring Black , " recognizable as a comedic actor , " would lead to its success , whereas the former preferred to use unknown actors instead . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = = Season 1 ( 2012 ) = = = 
 = = = Season 2 ( 2013 ) = = = 
 = Calvin and Hobbes = 
 Calvin and Hobbes is a daily comic strip by American cartoonist Bill Watterson that was syndicated from November 18 , 1985 to December 31 , 1995 . Commonly cited as " the last great newspaper comic , " Calvin and Hobbes has evinced broad and enduring popularity , influence , and academic interest . 
 Calvin and Hobbes follows the humorous antics of Calvin , a precocious , mischievous , and adventurous six @-@ year @-@ old boy , and Hobbes , his sardonic stuffed tiger . The pair is named after John Calvin , a 16th @-@ century French Reformation theologian , and Thomas Hobbes , a 17th @-@ century English political philosopher . Set in the contemporary , suburban United States , the strip depicts Calvin 's frequent flights of fancy and his friendship with Hobbes . It also examines Calvin 's relationships with family and classmates , especially the love / hate relationship between him and his classmate , Susie Derkins . Hobbes ' dual nature is a defining motif for the strip : to Calvin , Hobbes is a live anthropomorphic tiger ; all the other characters see Hobbes as an inanimate stuffed toy . Though the series does not mention specific political figures or current events , it does explore broad issues like environmentalism , public education , philosophical quandaries , and the flaws of opinion polls . 
 At the height of its popularity , Calvin and Hobbes was featured in over 2 @,@ 400 newspapers worldwide . In 2010 , reruns of the strip appeared in more than 50 countries , and nearly 45 million copies of the Calvin and Hobbes books had been sold . 
 = = History = = 
 Calvin and Hobbes was conceived when Bill Watterson , working in an advertising job he detested , began devoting his spare time to cartooning , his true love . He explored various strip ideas but all were rejected by the syndicates . United Feature Syndicate finally responded positively to one strip called <unk> , which featured a side character ( the main character 's little brother ) who had a stuffed tiger . Told that these characters were the strongest , Watterson began a new strip centered on them . Though United Feature rejected the new strip , Universal Press Syndicate eventually took it . 
 The first strip was published on November 18 , 1985 , and the series quickly became a hit . Within a year of syndication , the strip was published in roughly 250 newspapers . Before long the strip was in wide circulation outside the United States . By April 5 , 1987 , Watterson and his work were featured in an article in The Los Angeles Times . Calvin and Hobbes twice earned Watterson the Reuben Award from the National Cartoonists Society in the Outstanding Cartoonist of the Year category , first in 1986 and again in 1988 . He was nominated again in 1992 . The Society awarded him the Humor Comic Strip Award for 1988 . Calvin and Hobbes has also won several more awards . 
 Watterson took two extended breaks from writing new strips , from May 5 , 1991 , to February 1 , 1992 , and from April 3 through December 31 , 1994 . In 1995 , Watterson sent a letter via his syndicate to all editors whose newspapers carried his strip : 
 I will be stopping Calvin and Hobbes at the end of the year . This was not a recent or an easy decision , and I leave with some sadness . My interests have shifted however , and I believe I 've done what I can do within the constraints of daily deadlines and small panels . I am eager to work at a more thoughtful pace , with fewer artistic compromises . I have not yet decided on future projects , but my relationship with Universal Press Syndicate will continue . 
 That so many newspapers would carry Calvin and Hobbes is an honor I 'll long be proud of , and I 've greatly appreciated your support and indulgence over the last decade . Drawing this comic strip has been a privilege and a pleasure , and I thank you for giving me the opportunity . 
 The final strip ran on Sunday , December 31 , 1995 . It depicted Calvin and Hobbes outside in freshly fallen snow , reveling in the wonder and excitement of the winter scene . " It 's a magical world , Hobbes , ol ' buddy ... Let 's go exploring ! " Calvin exclaims as they zoom off over the snowy hills on their sled , leaving , according to one critic ten years later , " a hole in the comics page that no strip has been able to fill . " 
 = = = Syndication and formatting = = = 
 From the outset , Watterson found himself at odds with the syndicate , which urged him to begin merchandising the characters and touring the country to promote the first collections of comic strips . Watterson refused . To him , the integrity of the strip and its artist would be undermined by commercialization , which he saw as a major negative influence in the world of cartoon art . 
 Watterson also grew increasingly frustrated by the gradual shrinking of available space for comics in the newspapers . He lamented that without space for anything more than simple dialogue or sparse artwork , comics as an art form were becoming dilute , bland , and unoriginal . Watterson strove for a full @-@ page version of his strip , in contrast to the few cells allocated for most strips . He longed for the artistic freedom allotted to classic strips such as Little Nemo and Krazy Kat , and he gave a sample of what could be accomplished with such liberty in the opening pages of the Sunday strip compilation , The Calvin and Hobbes Lazy Sunday Book . 
 During Watterson 's first sabbatical from the strip , Universal Press Syndicate continued to charge newspapers full price to re @-@ run old Calvin and Hobbes strips . Few editors approved of the move , but the strip was so popular that they had little choice but to continue to run it for fear that competing newspapers might pick it up and draw its fans away . 
 Upon Watterson 's return , Universal Press announced that Watterson had decided to sell his Sunday strip as an unbreakable half of a newspaper or tabloid page . Many editors and even a few cartoonists criticized him for what they perceived as arrogance and an unwillingness to abide by the normal practices of the cartoon business . Watterson had negotiated the deal to allow himself more creative freedom in the Sunday comics : 
 I took a sabbatical after resolving a long and emotionally draining fight to prevent Calvin and Hobbes from being merchandised . Looking for a way to rekindle my enthusiasm for the duration of a new contract term , I proposed a redesigned Sunday format that would permit more panel flexibility . To my surprise and delight , Universal responded with an offer to market the strip as an unbreakable half page ( more space than I 'd dared to ask for ) , despite the expected resistance of editors . 
 To this day , my syndicate assures me that some editors liked the new format , appreciated the difference , and were happy to run the larger strip , but I think it 's fair to say that this was not the most common reaction . The syndicate had warned me to prepare for numerous cancellations of the Sunday feature , but after a few weeks of dealing with howling , purple @-@ faced editors , the syndicate suggested that papers could reduce the strip to the size tabloid newspapers used for their smaller sheets of paper . ... I focused on the bright side : I had complete freedom of design and there were virtually no cancellations . 
 For all the yelling and screaming by outraged editors , I remain convinced that the larger Sunday strip gave newspapers a better product and made the comics section more fun for readers . Comics are a visual medium . A strip with a lot of drawing can be exciting and add some variety . Proud as I am that I was able to draw a larger strip , I don 't expect to see it happen again any time soon . In the newspaper business , space is money , and I suspect most editors would still say that the difference is not worth the cost . Sadly , the situation is a vicious circle : because there 's no room for better artwork , the comics are simply drawn ; because they 're simply drawn , why should they have more room ? 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 Watterson did consider allowing Calvin and Hobbes to be animated , and has expressed admiration for the art form of animation . In a 1989 interview in The Comics Journal he said : 
 If you look at the old cartoons by Tex Avery and Chuck Jones , you 'll see that there are a lot of things single drawings just can 't do . Animators can get away with incredible distortion and exaggeration ... because the animator can control the length of time you see something . The bizarre exaggeration barely has time to register , and the viewer doesn 't ponder the incredible license he 's witnessed . 
 In a comic strip , you just show the highlights of action — you can 't show the buildup and release ... or at least not without slowing down the pace of everything to the point where it 's like looking at individual frames of a movie , in which case you 've probably lost the effect you were trying to achieve . In a comic strip , you can suggest motion and time , but it 's very crude compared to what an animator can do . I have a real awe for good animation . 
 After this he was asked if it was " a bit scary to think of hearing Calvin 's voice . " He responded that it was " very scary , " and that although he loved the visual possibilities of animation , the thought of casting voice actors to play his characters was uncomfortable . He was also unsure whether he wanted to work with an animation team , as he had done all previous work by himself . Ultimately , Calvin and Hobbes was never made into an animated series . Watterson later stated in The Calvin and Hobbes Tenth Anniversary Book that he liked the fact that his strip was a " low @-@ tech , one @-@ man operation , " and took great pride in the fact that he drew every line and wrote every word on his own . 
 = = Merchandising = = 
 Bill Watterson insists that cartoon strips should stand on their own as an art form , and has resisted the use of Calvin and Hobbes in merchandising of any sort . Watterson explained in a 2005 press release : 
 Actually , I wasn 't against all merchandising when I started the strip , but each product I considered seemed to violate the spirit of the strip , contradict its message , and take me away from the work I loved . If my syndicate had let it go at that , the decision would have taken maybe 30 seconds of my life . 
 Almost no legitimate Calvin and Hobbes merchandise exists outside the book collections . Exceptions produced during the strip 's original run include two 16 @-@ month calendars ( 1988 – 1989 and 1989 – 1990 ) , and the textbook Teaching with Calvin and Hobbes , which has been described as " perhaps the most difficult piece of official Calvin and Hobbes memorabilia to find . " 
 On July 16 , 2010 , the United States Postal Service released a set of postage stamps honoring five comic strips , one of them Calvin and Hobbes . 
 <unk> , the digital division of Andrews McMeel Universal , offers licensed prints of Calvin and Hobbes strips through its website . 
 The strip 's immense popularity has led to the appearance of various counterfeit items such as window decals and T @-@ shirts that often feature crude humor , binge drinking and other themes that are not found in Watterson 's work . Images from one strip in which Calvin and Hobbes dance to loud music at night were commonly used for copyright violations . After threat of a lawsuit alleging infringement of copyright and trademark , some sticker makers replaced Calvin with a different boy , while other makers made no changes . Watterson wryly commented , " I clearly miscalculated how popular it would be to show Calvin urinating on a Ford logo . " 
 = = Style and influences = = 
 The strip borrows several elements and themes from three major influences : Walt Kelly 's Pogo , George Herriman 's Krazy Kat , and Charles M. Schulz 's Peanuts . Schulz and Kelly particularly influenced Watterson 's outlook on comics during his formative years . 
 Notable elements of Watterson 's artistic style are his characters ' diverse and often exaggerated expressions ( particularly those of Calvin ) , elaborate and bizarre backgrounds for Calvin 's flights of imagination , expressions of motion , and frequent visual jokes and metaphors . In the later years of the strip , with more panel space available for his use , Watterson experimented more freely with different panel layouts , art styles , stories without dialogue , and greater use of whitespace . He also makes a point of not showing certain things explicitly : the " Noodle Incident " and the children 's book Hamster Huey and the <unk> <unk> are left to the reader 's imagination , where Watterson was sure they would be " more outrageous " than he could portray . 
 Watterson 's technique started with minimalist pencil sketches drawn with a light pencil ( though the larger Sunday strips often required more elaborate work ) on a piece of Bristol board , with his brand of choice being Strathmore because he felt it held the drawings better on the page as opposed to the cheaper brands ( Watterson said he would use any cheap pad of Bristol board his local supply store had , but switched to Strathmore after he found himself growing more and more displeased with the results ) . He would then use a small sable brush and India ink to fill in the rest of the drawing , saying that he did not want to simply trace over his penciling and thus make the inking more spontaneous . He lettered dialogue with a Rapidograph fountain pen , and he used a <unk> pen for odds and ends . Mistakes were covered with various forms of correction fluid , including the type used on typewriters . Watterson was careful in his use of color , often spending a great deal of time in choosing the right colors to employ for the weekly Sunday strip ; his technique was to cut the color tabs the syndicate sent him into individual squares , lay out the colors , and then paint a watercolor approximation of the strip on tracing paper over the Bristol board and then mark the strip accordingly before sending it on . When Calvin and Hobbes began there were 64 colors available for the Sunday strips . For the later Sunday strips Watterson had 125 colors as well as the ability to fade the colors into each other . 
 = = = Art and academia = = = 
 Watterson used the strip to poke fun at the art world , principally through Calvin 's unconventional creations of snowmen but also through other expressions of childhood art . When Miss Wormwood complains that he is wasting class time drawing impossible things ( a Stegosaurus in a rocket ship , for example ) , Calvin proclaims himself " on the cutting edge of the avant @-@ garde . " He begins exploring the medium of snow when a warm day melts his snowman . His next sculpture " speaks to the horror of our own mortality , inviting the viewer to contemplate the evanescence of life . " In later strips , Calvin 's creative instincts diversify to include sidewalk drawings ( or , as he terms them , examples of " suburban postmodernism " ) . 
 Watterson also lampooned the academic world . In one example , Calvin carefully crafts an " artist 's statement , " claiming that such essays convey more messages than artworks themselves ever do ( Hobbes blandly notes , " You misspelled <unk> " ) . He indulges in what Watterson calls " pop psychobabble " to justify his destructive rampages and shift blame to his parents , citing " toxic codependency . " In one instance , he pens a book report based on the theory that the purpose of academic writing is to " inflate weak ideas , obscure poor reasoning , and inhibit clarity , " entitled The Dynamics of <unk> and <unk> Imperatives in Dick and Jane : A Study in Psychic <unk> Gender Modes . Displaying his creation to Hobbes , he remarks , " Academia , here I come ! " Watterson explains that he adapted this jargon ( and similar examples from several other strips ) from an actual book of art criticism . 
 Overall , Watterson 's satirical essays serve to attack both sides , criticizing both the commercial mainstream and the artists who are supposed to be " outside " it . Not long after he began drawing his " Dinosaurs in Rocket Ships " series , Calvin tells Hobbes : 
 Calvin : The hard part for us avant @-@ garde post @-@ modern artists is deciding whether or not to embrace commercialism . Do we allow our work to be hyped and exploited by a market that 's simply hungry for the next new thing ? Do we participate in a system that turns high art into low art so it 's better suited for mass consumption ? 
 Of course , when an artist goes commercial , he makes a mockery of his status as an outsider and free thinker . He buys into the crass and shallow values art should transcend . He trades the integrity of his art for riches and fame . 
 ... 
 Oh , what the heck . I 'll do it . 
 ... 
 Hobbes ( rolling his eyes ) : That wasn 't so hard . 
 The strip for Sunday , June 21 , 1992 , criticized the naming of The Big Bang theory as not evocative of the wonders behind it , and coined the term " <unk> Space <unk> " , an alternative that achieved some informal popularity among scientists and was often shortened to " the <unk> . " The term has also been referred to in newspapers , books , and university courses . 
 = = Main characters = = 
 = = = Calvin = = = 
 Calvin , named after the 16th @-@ century theologian John Calvin , is a six @-@ year @-@ old , whose last name is never mentioned in the strip . Despite his poor grades in school , Calvin demonstrates his intelligence through his sophisticated vocabulary and a philosophical mind : 
 Calvin : " Dad , are you vicariously living through me in the hope that my accomplishments will validate your mediocre life and in some way compensate for all of the opportunities you botched ? " 
 Dad : " If I were , you can bet I 'd be re @-@ evaluating my strategy . " 
 Calvin ( later , to his mother ) : " Mom , Dad keeps insulting me . " 
 He commonly wears his distinctive red @-@ and @-@ black striped shirt , black pants , and white @-@ and @-@ magenta sneakers . He also wears a light blue jacket when going to school or when playing in the snow . He is an enthusiastic reader of comic books and has a tendency to order items marketed in comic books or on boxes of his favorite cereal , Chocolate Frosted Sugar Bombs . Watterson described Calvin : 
 Calvin is pretty easy to do because he is outgoing and rambunctious , and there 's not much of a filter between his brain and his mouth . 
 I guess he 's a little too intelligent for his age . The thing that I really enjoy about him is that he has no sense of restraint ; he doesn 't have the experience yet to know the things that you shouldn 't do . 
 Calvin also has a sensitive side as well . This is displayed , for example , when he finds a dying raccoon and tries to save it but fails . The scene is made even more poignant by Calvin asking Hobbes not to " go anywhere " while Hobbes hugs him and promises him he won 't . 
 = = = Hobbes = = = 
 From Calvin 's point of view , Hobbes is an anthropomorphic tiger , much larger than Calvin and full of independent attitudes and ideas . When the perspective shifts to any other character , readers again see merely a stuffed animal , usually seated at an off @-@ kilter angle and blankly staring into space . Watterson explains : 
 When Hobbes is a stuffed toy in one panel and alive in the next , I 'm juxtaposing the ' grown @-@ up ' version of reality with Calvin 's version , and inviting the reader to decide which is truer . 
 In more than one strip , Hobbes is shown being washed in a washing machine , a fact Calvin takes in stride and which Watterson has referred to as " one of the stranger <unk> of what Hobbes is . " 
 Hobbes is named after the 17th @-@ century philosopher Thomas Hobbes , who held what Watterson describes as " a dim view of human nature . " Hobbes ( the tiger ) is much more rational and aware of consequences than Calvin , but seldom interferes with Calvin 's troublemaking beyond a few oblique warnings . Hobbes is sarcastic when Calvin is being hypocritical about things he dislikes . 
 Although the debut strip shows Calvin capturing Hobbes by means of a snare ( with a tuna sandwich as the bait ) , a later comic ( August 1 , 1989 ) indicates that Hobbes has been with Calvin since Calvin was a baby : 
 Calvin : " The whole first half of my life is a complete blank ! What on earth did I know that someone wanted me to forget ? " 
 Hobbes : " I seem to recall you spent most of the time burping up . " 
 Another later strip featured Hobbes humorously claiming that Calvin 's mom " wanted another tiger " instead of Calvin , indicating that Hobbes was around before Calvin was born . Watterson eventually decided that it was not important to establish how Calvin and Hobbes met . 
 = = = Calvin 's parents = = = 
 Calvin 's unnamed mother and father are typical middle @-@ class parents . Like many other characters in the strip , they are relatively down @-@ to @-@ earth and their sensible attitudes serve as a foil for Calvin 's outlandish behavior . 
 Watterson says some fans were angered by the way Calvin 's parents thought of Calvin . This is shown by the fact that Calvin 's father claimed that he wanted a dachshund instead of Calvin , and often tries to " deny " that Calvin is his biological son : 
 Mom : You 're not sorry we had Calvin , are you ? 
 Dad : Are you ? 
 Mom : I asked first . Besides , it wasn 't all my decision . 
 Dad : All I know is , I offered to buy us a dachshund , but no , you said ... 
 Dad : Someday I 'm going to get my DNA checked to see if he 's really my kid . 
 Mom : Take my word for it . 
 Dad : I just know some nurse switched the bassinets . 
 Calvin 's parents are not above some outrageous behavior of their own . For example , Calvin asks for a cigarette and his mother gives him one to teach him a lesson . Calvin 's father tells Calvin sarcastic lies when asked a straight question , and Calvin often believes them : 
 Calvin : Dad , how do people make babies ? 
 Dad : Most people just go to Sears , buy the kit , and follow the assembly instructions . 
 Calvin : I <unk> FROM <unk> ? ? 
 Dad : No . You were a Blue Light Special at K @-@ Mart ; almost as good , and a lot cheaper . 
 Calvin : <unk> ! 
 Mom ( out of frame ) : Dear , what are you telling Calvin now ? ! 
 Watterson defends what Calvin 's parents do , remarking that in the case of parenting a kid like Calvin , " I think they do a better job than I would . " Calvin 's father is overly concerned with " character building " activities in a number of strips , either in the things he makes Calvin do or in the masochistic eccentricities of his own lifestyle . For example , Calvin 's father is shown coming home from an early morning run in the snow , which he follows with a bowl of plain oatmeal . 
 Calvin 's father is a patent attorney ( like Watterson 's own father ) and his mother is a stay @-@ at @-@ home mom . Both remain unnamed except as " Mom " and " Dad , " or pet names such as " honey " and " dear " between themselves . Watterson says , " As far as the strip is concerned , they are important only as Calvin 's mom and dad . " 
 Calvin 's father has a brother named Max , who lives out of state . Watterson introduced him in a week of strips but said he later regretted the idea . Although Watterson said the idea of having Max in the strip was to set up potential future storylines , he realized that his intent to have the parents remain nameless worked against him because Max could not refer to either one by name . This was cited as one of the main reasons Max never reappeared . 
 = = = Susie Derkins = = = 
 Susie Derkins , the only important character with both a first and last name , is a classmate of Calvin 's who lives on his street . Getting her last name from the pet beagle of Watterson 's wife 's family , she appeared early in the strip as a new student in Calvin 's class . She is polite and studious , and likes to play house or host tea parties with her stuffed animals . However , she is also depicted playing imaginary games with Calvin in which she is a high @-@ powered lawyer or politician and he is her househusband . Though both of them hate to admit it , Calvin and Susie have quite a bit in common . For example , Susie is shown on occasion with a stuffed bunny rabbit named " Mr. Bun . " Susie also has a mischievous ( and sometimes aggressive ) streak , which can be seen when she subverts Calvin 's attempts to cheat on school tests by feeding him incorrect answers , or <unk> Calvin when he attacks her with snowballs . Susie also regularly bests Calvin in confrontations such as their water balloon and snowball fights , employing guile or force . Hobbes often openly expresses romantic feelings for Susie , much to Calvin 's disgust . Calvin starts a " club " ( of which he and Hobbes are the only members ) that he calls G.R.O.S.S. ( Get Rid Of Slimy <unk> ) , and while holding " meetings " in Calvin 's treehouse or in the " box of secrecy " in Calvin 's room , they usually come up with some way to annoy or socially maim Susie , most of which backfire on them completely . In one instance , Calvin steals one of Susie 's dolls for ransom , only to have Susie retaliate by nabbing Hobbes . Watterson admits that Calvin and Susie have a nascent crush on each other , and that Susie is inspired by the type of woman whom Watterson himself found attractive and eventually married . 
 = = Secondary characters = = 
 Calvin also interacts with a handful of secondary characters . These include his babysitter , the school bully , his school teacher and the school principal . 
 = = = Rosalyn = = = 
 Rosalyn is Calvin 's babysitter . She takes advantage of his parents ' desperation to leave the house and the fact that no one else will babysit for Calvin by demanding advances and raises . She is also probably the only character in the strip whom Calvin really fears , as she does not mince words or actions to get Calvin to behave or go to bed on time . Watterson put her in a Sunday strip early on , never thinking of her as a regular character . But Rosalyn 's intimidation of Calvin surprised Watterson , so she came back several times . At one point she was Calvin 's swimming instructor , though he was only shown to attend one lesson . In Rosalyn 's last story , she is revealed to have in common with Calvin a sense of imagination , and the two of them play Calvinball with Hobbes . 
 = = = Moe = = = 
 Moe is , according to Calvin , a " six @-@ year @-@ old who shaves " and a stereotypical bully who picks on Calvin ( both physically and emotionally ) and calls him names . Moe is the only regular character whose speech is shown in an unusual font as his frequently monosyllabic dialogue is shown in crude , lower @-@ case letters . Watterson describes Moe as " every jerk I 've ever known . " 
 = = = Miss Wormwood = = = 
 Miss Wormwood is Calvin 's world @-@ weary teacher , named after the junior devil in C. S. Lewis ' The Screwtape Letters . She usually wears either a polka @-@ dotted dress or a brown dress , and is another character who serves as a foil to Calvin 's mischief . Calvin , when in his Spaceman Spiff persona , sees Miss Wormwood as a slimy , often dictatorial alien . Calvin refers to Miss Wormwood 's indigestion ( " It 's really gross how she drinks <unk> straight from the bottle " ) , her medication ( " I wonder if her doctor knows she mixes all those prescriptions " ) and her smoking habit ( " Rumor has it she 's up to two packs a day , unfiltered " ) . Miss Wormwood reacts to Calvin 's behavior by tightly shutting her eyes and thinking " Five years until retirement " repeatedly . Watterson describes her as " an unhappy person " due to her belief in the value of education . 
 = = = Mr. Spittle = = = 
 Mr. Spittle is the school principal to whose office Miss Wormwood threatens to send Calvin for his pranks . Susie also occasionally accompanies Calvin to the principal 's office . Though his name has only been shown in one story , he has appeared many times including the first story about Calvin 's duplicator . 
 = = = Uncle Max = = = 
 Uncle Max is Calvin 's paternal uncle . Uncle Max was originally meant as a character who could increase the possibilities of the strip : as Watterson noted , " Calvin could go visit Uncle Max ... " . However , Watterson dropped the character after finding it was awkward that Max could not address Calvin 's parents by name , and realizing that Max was redundant as far as the strip 's personality goes . 
 = = Recurring elements = = 
 There are many recurring gags in the strip , some in " reality " and others in Calvin 's imagination . These are as follows : 
 = = = Calvin 's roles = = = 
 Calvin imagines himself as a great many things , including dinosaurs , elephants , jungle @-@ <unk> and superheroes . Three of his alter egos are well @-@ defined and recurrent : 
 " Spaceman Spiff " is a heroic <unk> who narrates his experiences in the third person . As Spiff , Calvin battles aliens ( typically his parents or teacher , but also sometimes other kids his age ) with a ray gun known as a " <unk> " ( later " <unk> @-@ ray blaster " , " death ray blaster " or " atomic napalm <unk> " ) and travels to distant planets ( his house , school , or neighborhood ) , often crashing unhurt on a planet . Calvin 's self @-@ narration as Spaceman Spiff is frequently riddled with alliteration : " <unk> ! <unk> by <unk> , Spaceman Spiff 's crippled craft crashes on planet <unk> ! " 
 " Tracer Bullet " is a hardboiled private eye , who says he has eight slugs in him ( " One 's lead , and the rest are bourbon . " ) . In one story , Bullet is called to a case in which a " pushy dame " ( Calvin 's mother ) accuses him of destroying an expensive lamp ( broken during an indoor football game between Calvin and Hobbes ) . Later , he is snatched by the pushy dame 's " hired goon " ( Calvin 's father having a talk with him ) . He made his debut when Calvin donned a fedora to hide a haircut Hobbes had given him . These strips are drawn in elaborate , shadowy black @-@ and @-@ white that evoke film noir . Watterson did not attempt Tracer Bullet stories often , due the time @-@ consuming way the strip needed to be drawn and inked . 
 As " Stupendous Man " he pictures himself as a superhero in disguise , wearing a mask and a cape made by his mother , and narrating his own adventures . While in character as Stupendous Man , he refers to his alter ego as a mild @-@ mannered millionaire playboy . Stupendous Man almost always " suffers defeat " at the hands of his opponent . When Hobbes asks if Stupendous Man has ever won any battles , Calvin says all his battles are " moral victories . " Stupendous Man 's nemeses include " Mom @-@ Lady " ( Calvin 's mom ) , " Annoying Girl " ( Susie Derkins ) , " Crab Teacher " ( Miss Wormwood ) , and " Baby @-@ Sitter Girl " ( Rosalyn ) . Some of the " super powers " of the villains have been revealed : Mom @-@ Lady has a " mind scrambling eyeball ray " that wills the victim to " do her nefarious bidding , " and Baby Sitter Girl has a similar power of using a " psycho beam " which weakens " Stupendous Man 's stupendous will " . The " powers " of Annoying Girl and Crab Teacher are unknown . Calvin often tries to pretend he and " Stupendous Man " are two different people , but it never seems to work . Stupendous Man has multiple " superpowers " , including , but not limited to , super strength , the ability to fly , various vision powers ( such as " high @-@ speed vision " ) and a stomach of steel . 
 = = = Cardboard boxes = = = 
 Calvin has had several adventures involving corrugated cardboard boxes , which he adapts for many different uses . In one strip , during which Calvin shows off his <unk> , a device that transforms its user into any desired shape , Hobbes remarks , " It 's amazing what they do with corrugated cardboard these days . " Calvin is able to change the function of the boxes by rewriting the label and flipping the box onto another side . In this way , a cardboard box can be used not only for its conventional purposes ( a storage container for water balloons , for example ) , but also as a flying time machine , a duplicator or , with the attachment of a few wires and a colander , a " Cerebral Enhance @-@ o @-@ tron . " 
 In addition , Calvin uses a cardboard box as a desk when he is attempting to sell things . Often , Calvin 's merchandise is something that no one would want , such as " suicide drink " , " a swift kick in the butt " for one dollar , or a " frank appraisal of your looks " for fifty cents . In one strip , he sells " happiness " for ten cents ; if one bought it , Calvin hit the person in the face with a water balloon , then revealed that he meant his own happiness . In another strip , he sold " insurance " , firing a slingshot at those who refused to buy it . In some strips , he tried to sell " great ideas " , and in one earlier strip , he attempted to sell the family car to obtain money for a grenade launcher . 
 The box has also functioned as a secret meeting place for G.R.O.S.S. , as the " Box of Secrecy " . 
 = = = Calvinball = = = 
 Calvinball is a game played by Calvin and Hobbes as a rebellion against organized team sports ; according to Hobbes , " No sport is less organized than Calvinball ! " Calvinball was first introduced to the readers at the end of a 1990 storyline involving Calvin reluctantly joining recess baseball . It quickly became a staple of the comic afterwards . 
 The only hint at the true creation of the game ironically comes from the last Calvinball strip , in which a game of football quickly devolves into a game of Calvinball . Calvin remarks that " sooner or later , all our games turn into Calvinball " , suggesting a similar scenario that directly led to the creation of the sport . Calvin and Hobbes usually play by themselves , although in one storyline Rosalyn ( Calvin 's baby @-@ sitter ) plays in return for Calvin doing his homework , and plays very well once she realizes that the rules are made up on the spot . 
 The only consistent rule states that Calvinball may never be played with the same rules twice . Scoring is also arbitrary , with Hobbes at times reporting scores of " Q to 12 " and " <unk> to <unk> " . The only recognizable sports Calvinball resembles are the ones it emulates ( i.e. , a cross between croquet , polo , badminton , capture the flag , and volleyball ) . Equipment includes a volleyball ( the eponymous " Calvinball " ) , a croquet set , a badminton set , assorted flags , bags , signs , a hobby horse , and enigmatic and never @-@ pictured " time @-@ fracture wickets " . Other things appear as needed , such as a bucket of ice @-@ cold water , a water balloon , and various songs and poetry . Players also wear masks resembling blindfolds with holes for the eyes . When Rosalyn asks Calvin the reason for the requirement , Calvin responds : " Sorry , no one 's allowed to question the masks . " When asked how to play , Watterson states : " It 's pretty simple : you make up the rules as you go . " Calvinball is a <unk> or self @-@ modifying game , a contest of wits , skill and creativity rather than stamina or athletic skill , in which Hobbes ( and on one occasion , Rosalyn ) usually outwits Calvin , who takes it in stride , in contrast to his otherwise poor sportsmanship . 
 = = = Snow sculptures = = = 
 Calvin often creates horrendous / dark humor scenes with his snowmen . He uses the snowman for social commentary , revenge , or pure enjoyment . Examples include Snowman Calvin being yelled at by Snowman Dad to shovel the snow ; one snowman eating snow cones taken from a second snowman , who is lying on the ground with an ice @-@ cream scoop in his back ; a snowman house of horror ; and snowmen representing the people he hates . " The ones I really hate are small , so they 'll melt faster , " he says . There was even an occasion on which Calvin accidentally brought a snowman to life and it made itself and a small army into " deranged mutant killer monster snow goons . " 
 Calvin 's snow art is often used as a commentary on art in general . For example , Calvin has complained more than once about the lack of originality in other people 's snow art and compared it with his own grotesque snow sculptures . In one of these instances , Calvin and Hobbes claim to be the sole guardians of high culture ; in another , Hobbes admires Calvin 's willingness to put artistic integrity above marketability , causing Calvin to reconsider and make an ordinary snowman . 
 = = = Wagon and sled = = = 
 Calvin and Hobbes frequently ride downhill in a wagon , sled , or toboggan , depending on the season , as a device to add some physical comedy to the strip and because , according to Watterson , " it 's a lot more interesting ... than talking heads . " While the ride is sometimes the focus of the strip , it also frequently serves as a counterpoint or visual metaphor while Calvin ponders the meaning of life , death , God , philosophy or a variety of other weighty subjects . Many of their rides end in spectacular crashes which leave them battered and broken , a fact which convinces Hobbes to sometimes hop off before a ride even begins . In the final strip , Calvin and Hobbes depart on their toboggan to go exploring . This theme is similar ( perhaps even homage ) to scenarios in Walt Kelly 's Pogo . 
 = = = G.R.O.S.S. = = = 
 G.R.O.S.S. , which stands for Get Rid Of Slimy <unk> , is a club which consists of only two members : Calvin and Hobbes . The club was founded in the garage of their house . To clear space for its activities , Calvin and ( purportedly ) Hobbes push Calvin 's parents ' car , causing it to roll into a ditch ( but not suffer damage ) ; the incident necessitates changing the club 's location to Calvin 's treehouse . They hold meetings to attempt to annoy Susie Derkins . Notable actions include planting a fake secret tape near her in attempt to draw her in to a trap , trapping her in a closet at their house , and creating elaborate water balloon traps . Calvin gave himself and Hobbes important positions in the club , Calvin being " Dictator @-@ for @-@ Life " and Hobbes being " President @-@ and @-@ First @-@ Tiger " . They go into Calvin 's treehouse for their club meetings and often get into fights during them . The password to get into the treehouse is intentionally long and difficult , which has on at least one occasion ruined Calvin 's plans . ( Because Hobbes can climb the tree without the rope , he got to think up the password , which heaps praise upon tigers . ) An example of this can be seen in the comic strip where Calvin , rushing to get into the treehouse to throw things at a passing Susie Derkins , insults Hobbes , who is in the treehouse and thus has to let down the rope . Hobbes forces Calvin to say the password for insulting him . By the time Susie arrives , in time to hear Calvin saying some of the password , causing him to stumble , Calvin is on " Verse Seven : Tigers are perfect ! / The E @-@ pit @-@ o @-@ me / of good looks and grace / and quiet .. uh .. um .. dignity " . The opportunity to pelt Susie with something having passed , Calvin threatens to turn Hobbes into a <unk> is one of the most common adventures that Calvin has . 
 = = Books = = 
 There are 18 Calvin and Hobbes books , published from 1987 to 1997 . These include 11 collections , which form a complete archive of the newspaper strips , except for a single daily strip from November 25 , 1985 . ( The collections do contain a strip for this date , but it is not the same strip that appeared in some newspapers . Treasuries usually combine the two preceding collections with bonus material and include color reprints of Sunday comics . ) 
 Watterson included some new material in the treasuries . In The Essential Calvin and Hobbes , which includes cartoons from the collections Calvin and Hobbes and Something Under the Bed Is Drooling , the back cover features a scene of a giant Calvin rampaging through a town . The scene is based on Watterson 's home town of Chagrin Falls , Ohio , and Calvin is holding the Chagrin Falls Popcorn Shop , an iconic candy and ice cream shop overlooking the town 's namesake falls . Several of the treasuries incorporate additional poetry ; The Indispensable Calvin and Hobbes book features a set of poems , ranging from just a few lines to an entire page , that cover topics such as Calvin 's mother 's " hindsight " and exploring the woods . In The Essential Calvin and Hobbes , Watterson presents a long poem explaining a night 's battle against a monster from Calvin 's perspective . 
 A complete collection of Calvin and Hobbes strips , in three hardcover volumes totaling 1440 pages , was released on October 4 , 2005 , by Andrews McMeel Publishing . It includes color prints of the art used on paperback covers , the treasuries ' extra illustrated stories and poems , and a new introduction by Bill Watterson in which he talks about his inspirations and his story leading up to the publication of the strip . The alternate 1985 strip is still omitted , and two other strips ( January 7 , 1987 , and November 25 , 1988 ) have altered dialogue . A four @-@ volume paperback version was released November 13 , 2012 . 
 To celebrate the release ( which coincided with the strip 's 20th anniversary and the tenth anniversary of its absence from newspapers ) , Bill Watterson answered 15 questions submitted by readers . 
 Early books were printed in smaller format in black and white . These were later reproduced in twos in color in the " Treasuries " ( Essential , Authoritative , and Indispensable ) , except for the contents of Attack of the <unk> Mutant Killer Monster Snow Goons . Those Sunday strips were not reprinted in color until the Complete collection was finally published in 2005 . 
 Watterson claims he named the books the " Essential , Authoritative , and Indispensable " because , as he says in The Calvin and Hobbes Tenth Anniversary Book , the books are " obviously none of these things . " 
 = = = Teaching with Calvin and Hobbes = = = 
 An officially licensed children 's textbook entitled Teaching with Calvin and Hobbes was published in a single print run in Fargo , North Dakota , in 1993 . The book , which has been " highly recommend [ ed ] " as a teaching resource , includes five complete Calvin and Hobbes multi @-@ strip story arcs together with lessons and questions to follow , such as : 
 What do you think the principal meant when he said they had " quite a file " on Calvin ? 
 The book is rare , sought by collectors , and highly valued . Only eight libraries in the world hold a copy of the book . 
 = = Academic response = = 
 In 1993 , paleontologist and <unk> Gregory S. Paul praised Bill Watterson for the scientific accuracy of the dinosaurs appearing in Calvin and Hobbes . 
 In her 1994 book When Toys Come Alive , Lois Rostow Kuznets says that Hobbes serves both as a figure of Calvin 's childish fantasy life and as an outlet for the expression of libidinous desires more associated with adults . Kuznets also looks at Calvin 's other fantasies , suggesting that they are a second tier of fantasies utilized in places like school where transitional objects such as Hobbes would not be socially acceptable . 
 Political scientist James Q. Wilson , in a paean to Calvin and Hobbes upon Watterson 's decision to end the strip in 1995 , characterized it as " our only popular explication of the moral philosophy of Aristotle . " 
 Alisa White Coleman analyzed the strip 's underlying messages concerning ethics and values in " ' Calvin and Hobbes ' : A Critique of Society 's Values , " published in the Journal of Mass Media Ethics in 2000 . 
 A collection of original Sunday strips was exhibited at Ohio State University 's Billy Ireland Cartoon Library & Museum in 2001 . Watterson himself selected the strips and provided his own commentary for the exhibition catalog , which was later published by Andrews McMeel as Calvin and Hobbes : Sunday Pages 1985 – 1995 . 
 Since the discontinuation of Calvin and Hobbes , individual strips have been licensed for reprint in schoolbooks , including the Christian homeschooling book The Fallacy Detective in 2002 , and the university @-@ level philosophy reader Open Questions : Readings for Critical Thinking and Writing in 2005 ; in the latter , the ethical views of Watterson and his characters Calvin and Hobbes are discussed in relation to the views of professional philosophers . Since 2009 , Twitter users have indicated that Calvin and Hobbes strips have appeared in textbooks for subjects in the sciences , social sciences , mathematics , philosophy , and foreign language . 
 In a 2009 evaluation of the entire body of Calvin and Hobbes strips using grounded theory methodology , Christijan D. Draper found that : " Overall , Calvin and Hobbes suggests that meaningful time use is a key attribute of a life well lived , " and that " the strip suggests one way to assess the meaning associated with time use is through preemptive retrospection by which a person looks at current experiences through the lens of an anticipated future ... " 
 Jamey Heit 's Imagination and Meaning in Calvin and Hobbes , a critical , academic analysis of the strip , was published in 2012 . 
 Calvin and Hobbes strips were again exhibited at the Billy Ireland Cartoon Library & Museum at Ohio State University in 2014 , in an exhibition entitled Exploring Calvin and Hobbes . An exhibition catalog by the same title , which also contained an interview with Watterson conducted by Jenny Robb , the curator of the museum , was published by Andrews McMeel in 2015 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 " Since its concluding panel in 1995 , Calvin and Hobbes has remained one of the most influential and well @-@ loved comic strips of our time . " 
 – The Atlantic , " How Calvin and Hobbes Inspired a Generation , " October 25 , 2013 
 Years after its original newspaper run , Calvin and Hobbes has continued to exert influence in entertainment , art , and fandom . 
 In television , Calvin and Hobbes are depicted in stop motion animation in the 2006 Robot Chicken episode " Lust for Puppets , " and in traditional animation in the 2009 Family Guy episode " Not All Dogs Go to Heaven . " In the 2013 Community episode " Paranormal Parentage , " the characters Abed Nadir ( Danny Pudi ) and Troy Barnes ( Donald Glover ) dress as Calvin and Hobbes , respectively , for Halloween . 
 British artists , merchandisers , booksellers , and philosophers were interviewed for a 2009 BBC Radio 4 half @-@ hour programme about the abiding popularity of the comic strip , narrated by Phill Jupitus . 
 The first book @-@ length study of the strip , Looking for Calvin and Hobbes : The Unconventional Story of Bill Watterson and His Revolutionary Comic Strip by Nevin Martell , was first published in 2009 ; an expanded edition was published in 2010 . The book chronicles Martell 's quest to tell the story of Calvin and Hobbes and Watterson through research and interviews with people connected to the cartoonist and his work . The director of the later documentary Dear Mr. Watterson referenced Looking for Calvin and Hobbes in discussing the production of the movie , and Martell appears in the film . 
 The American documentary film Dear Mr. Watterson , released in 2013 , explores the impact and legacy of Calvin and Hobbes through interviews with authors , curators , historians , and numerous professional cartoonists . 
 The enduring significance of Calvin and Hobbes to international cartooning was recognized by the jury of the Angoulême International Comics Festival in 2014 by the awarding of its Grand Prix to Watterson , only the fourth American to ever receive the honor ( after Will Eisner , Robert Crumb , and Art Spiegelman ) . 
 = = = Grown @-@ up Calvin = = = 
 A number of artists and cartoonists have created works portraying Calvin as a teenager or an adult ; the concept has also inspired writers . 
 In 2011 , a comic strip appeared by cartoonists Dan and Tom <unk> called Hobbes and Bacon . The strip depicts Calvin as an adult , married to Susie Derkins , with a young daughter named after philosopher Francis Bacon , to whom Calvin gives Hobbes . Though consisting of only four strips originally , Hobbes and Bacon received considerable attention when it appeared and was continued by other cartoonists and artists . 
 A novel entitled Calvin by CLA Young Adult Book Award @-@ winning author Martine Leavitt was published in 2015 . The story tells of seventeen @-@ year @-@ old Calvin — who was born on the day that Calvin and Hobbes ended , and who has now been diagnosed with schizophrenia — and his hallucination of Hobbes , his childhood stuffed tiger . With his friend Susie , who might also be an hallucination , Calvin sets off to find Bill Watterson , in the hope that the cartoonist can provide aid for Calvin 's condition . 
 = Typhoon Lynn ( 1987 ) = 
 Typhoon Lynn , more commonly known in the Philippines as Typhoon Pepang , was responsible for the worst flooding in Taiwan in 40 years . Typhoon Lynn originated from an area of disturbed weather in the central north Pacific in mid @-@ October 1987 . On October 15 , the system was upgraded into a tropical storm . Moving west @-@ northwest , it slowly deepened over the next few days , though the intensification process briefly stopped on October 15 . Two days later , Lynn was upgraded into a typhoon , while passing northwest of Guam . Lynn maintained low @-@ end typhoon strength until October 19 , when the storm began to rapidly intensify . On October 21 , Lynn attained its peak intensity while tracking towards the west . Weakening then commenced soon after Lynn interacted with Luzon . However , the core of the typhoon remained well offshore both the Philippines and Taiwan . On October 25 , Lynn weakened to a severe tropical storm . Three days later , it dissipated , though its remains later brought rain to China . 
 While passing near Guam , power was knocked out and 40 residents were evacuated . Throughout the Mariana Islands , 15 families were rendered homeless and damage totaled $ 2 million ( 1987 USD ) . After brushing Luzon , seven people perished , over 30 @,@ 000 homes were damaged , 100 houses were destroyed , and 7 @,@ 000 individuals were left homeless . Damage in the Philippines totaled to $ 25 @.@ 3 million . Even though Lynn passed a bit south of Taiwan , the storm brought widespread damage to the nation . Nine children were swept away and killed on a field trip , while the other 72 survived and were evacuated . In Taipei , 13 persons perished and 2 @,@ 230 people were rescued . Lynn was considered the worst tropical cyclone to affect the city in four decades . Nationwide , 168 @,@ 000 people lost power and 42 casualties occurred . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Typhoon Lynn originated from a broad , poorly organized area of convection situated within the monsoon trough roughly 370 km ( 230 mi ) north @-@ northeast of the Marshall Islands in the middle of October 1987 . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) started monitoring the system on October 14 , and later that day , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) followed suit . Following an increase in convection and outflow , the JTWC issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert ( TCFA ) for the system at 0300 UTC on October 15 about 670 km ( 415 mi ) north @-@ northwest of Pohnpei of the eastern Carolina Islands at the time . Three hours later , the JTWC classified the system as Tropical Storm Lynn based on Dvorak estimates of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . At midday , the JMA followed suit and upgraded the system into a tropical storm . 
 Tracking along the southern periphery of a subtropical ridge , the cyclone decelerated . Lynn gradually intensified , though this process briefly halted on October 17 . Early the next day , the JMA reported that Lynn had deepened into a severe tropical storm . Shortly thereafter , radar data and satellite imagery revealed the formation of an eye 37 km ( 23 mi ) in diameter , and thus the JTWC upgraded Lynn into a typhoon , though post @-@ storm analysis noted that Lynn could have been a typhoon before then . Also around this time , the JMA designated Lynn as a typhoon . At midday , Lynn made its closest approach to Guam , passing around 150 km ( 95 mi ) northeast of the island . Three hours later , Lynn passed 28 km ( 17 mi ) southwest of Tinian before proceeding west @-@ northwest . 
 After moving away from the Mariana Islands , Lynn initially maintained its intensity , but on August 19 , it began to rapidly intensify . Later that day , the JTWC upgraded Lynn to a super typhoon and early on August 20 , Typhoon Lynn attained winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) according to the JMA . After leveling off in intensity for roughly 24 hours , the JMA estimates that Lynn reached its peak intensity of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 920 mbar ( 27 inHg ) . At 0000 UTC on August 21 , the JTWC indicated that Lynn reached its peak intensity of 255 km / h ( 160 mph ) , equivalent to a Category 5 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale . According to the JTWC , Typhoon Lynn was the third typhoon in 1987 to attain such intensity . Meanwhile , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) also monitored the storm and assigned it with the local name Pepang . 
 Shortly after attaining maximum intensity , Lynn began to track westward while steadily weakening . Initially , the JTWC predicted Lynn to take a more west @-@ northwesterly course , but the European Center for Medium @-@ Range Weather Forecasting ( ECMWF ) correctly predicted Lynn to move due west due to a subtropical ridge situated north of the cyclone . On October 22 , the JMA indicated that Lynn leveled off in intensity , though at 0000 UTC on October 23 , the cyclone deteriorated slightly . Roughly 24 hours later , the JMA reduced the intensity of Lynn to 145 km / h ( 90 mph ) ; by this time , the typhoon entered the Luzon Straits . Over the next two days , Lynn interacted with mountainous terrain of the Philippines ; however , at its closest approach , the core of the system remained over 200 km ( 120 mi ) offshore . Meanwhile , the weakening process accelerated , and on October 25 , the JMA reported that Lynn was no longer a typhoon . Furthermore , the storm exited PAGASA 's warning zone . Increased wind shear took toll on Lynn , and the next day , satellite imagery indicated that all of the storm 's deep convection was confined north @-@ northeast of the center . At 0000 UTC on October 27 , the JTWC ceased watching the system , though the JMA continued tracking it until the morning of August 28 . The remnants of the storm later brought showers to China . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Mariana Islands = = = 
 Although the eye of Lynn passed just offshore Guam , it brought violent conditions to the island . There , a maximum sustained wind speed of 67 km / h ( 42 mph ) and a peak wind gust of 105 km / h ( 65 mph ) was recorded in Agana . Moreover , 154 @.@ 4 mm ( 6 @.@ 08 in ) of rain fell at a nearby air force base . Power was briefly knocked out for the entire island , though by October 20 , electricity had been restored to most of the island . Around 40 residents were evacuated to shelter along low @-@ lying areas . Several homes sustained serious damages while many others suffered roof damage . The banana and papaya crops were largely destroyed by the typhoon , but damage to other crops was minimal . No one in Guam was injured by Lynn . 
 After passing near Saipan , winds of 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) and gusts of 121 km / h ( 75 mph ) were observed . All commercial flights to and from the island , as well as all schools and government offices , were cancelled on both October 19 and 20 . Both Saipan and Rota experienced island @-@ wide power outages on the evening of October 18 . Saipan bore the most significant effects from the cyclone ; four people were hurt and two homes were destroyed . Several homes and office buildings on the island were also damaged . Elsewhere , around 10 families fled to shelter as a result of strong winds . Although damage in Rota was minor , the island of Tinian received considerable damage and all of the island 's 2 @,@ 000 residents were briefly left without electricity . Heavy rains resulted in flooding that destroyed several dwellings and deluged many more . 
 Throughout the Mariana Islands , agriculture damage was estimated at $ 2 million ( 1987 USD ) and 15 families were displaced from their homes . Roughly 100 people sought help from the Red Cross . A few weeks later , the Northern Marianas Islands were declared a major disaster area by the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) . 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 On October 23 , most of Luzon was placed under weather alerts . Due to the threat of both storm surge and high waves , low @-@ lying residents were advised to evacuate their homes . A total of five towns flooded in the Cagayan and Ilocos Norte provinces , while Lynn triggered landslides in Benguet . In the mountain resort of Baguio City , communication and power lines sustained damage and many roads outside of Manila were destroyed ; over 200 homes were damaged and 100 others were demolished . Nationwide , 79 people were hurt and 31 @,@ 557 homes were partially damaged , while 18 @,@ 396 were " totally " damaged . Furthermore , around 6 @,@ 000 were rendered homeless and seven fatalities occurred . Damage totaled $ 25 @.@ 3 million , mostly due to public infrastructure and agriculture . 
 = = = Taiwan = = = 
 In preparation for Lynn , typhoon warnings were issued . Despite not striking the country directly , Typhoon Lynn brought torrential rains to much of the island , including a maximum of 1 @,@ 700 mm ( 67 in ) in Taipei . Two fourth graders and seven third graders were swept out to sea due to 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) waves while on a field trip in <unk> , a scenic spot in Kenting National Park . However , on October 24 , the bodies of two girls and a boy were found near <unk> while the remaining were presumed dead . The other 72 students on the trip were safely evacuated . Elsewhere , a 31 @-@ year @-@ old man was killed due to falling debris in Hualien . Two people were killed and four others were buried in Keelung , where several cargo containers were swept offshore . Damage in Keelung totaled $ 5 million . In Pingtung , 30 @,@ 000 houses were flooded . Across northern Taiwan , nine people were killed . In Taipei , torrential rains deluged the city and resulted in landslides that destroyed numerous dwellings and took 13 lives . City @-@ wide , 2 @,@ 230 people were rescued by police , while after supply in the capital was cut by 75 % . In all , Lynn was considered the worst system to affect Taipei in 40 years . 
 Throughout the island , domestic flights and train service was cancelled . At the northern port of Ilan , about 60 fishing boats were lost . Three fishermen were rescued after their boat capsized . A total of 168 @,@ 000 people lost power at some point during the storm 's passage , though by October 27 , power was restored to all but 88 @,@ 000 . Overall , 42 people were killed nationwide . 
 = Widnes = 
 Widnes is an industrial town in the unitary authority of Halton and the ceremonial county of Cheshire in Northwest England . In 2011 it had a population of 60 @,@ 221 . Historically in Lancashire , it is on the northern bank of the River Mersey where the estuary narrows to form the Runcorn Gap . Directly to the south across the Mersey is the town of Runcorn . Upstream and 8 miles ( 13 km ) to the east is the town of Warrington , and downstream to the west is Speke , part of the city of Liverpool . 
 Before the Industrial Revolution Widnes was made up of small settlements on marsh and moorland . In 1847 , the first chemical factory was established and the town rapidly became a major centre of the chemical industry . The demand for labour was met by large @-@ scale immigration from Ireland , Poland , Lithuania and Wales . The town continues to be a major manufacturer of chemicals . 
 Widnes and Hough Green railway stations are on the Liverpool to Manchester line . The main roads through the town are the A557 in a north – south direction and the A562 east – west . The disused Sankey Canal terminates in an area known as Spike Island . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Toponymy = = = 
 The most usual explanation for the origin of the name Widnes is that it comes from the Danish words vid , meaning wide , and <unk> , meaning nose and that it refers to the promontory projecting into the River Mersey . However , the Widnes promontory is not particularly wide and another possible explanation is the first part derives from the Danish ved , meaning a wood and possibly referring to a tree @-@ covered promontory . Earlier spellings of the name have been <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 There is little evidence of any early human occupation of the area although a flint arrowhead was discovered at <unk> Hill , suggesting there was some human presence in the Stone Age . <unk> Hill is a disused quarry , located to the north of the town . Roman roads by @-@ passed the area but some Roman coins were found where the Ditton railway station stands today . In the 9th century Vikings had invaded the country and Widnes was at the extreme south of the Danelaw . The River Mersey derives its name from the Anglo @-@ Saxon <unk> ea , which means boundary river , the boundary being that between the Danelaw and the Saxon kingdom of Mercia . At the beginning of the 20th century it was believed that some earthworks on <unk> Marsh had been constructed by the Vikings but an archaeological investigation in the 1930s found nothing to confirm this . 
 Following the Norman conquest , William the Conqueror granted the Earldom of Lancaster to Roger de Poictou who in turn granted the barony of Widnes to Yorfrid . Yorfrid had no sons and his elder daughter married William FitzNigel , the second Baron of Halton . On Yorfrid 's death the barony of Widnes passed to that of Halton . The current St. Luke 's , a Norman church , was built in Farnworth . Its date of origin is uncertain but it is likely to be around 1180 . In 1500 the South Chapel was added to the church and in 1507 a grammar school was established in Farnworth ; both were endowments from Bishop William Smyth . Until the middle of the 19th century the area consisted of the scattered hamlets of Farnworth , Appleton , Ditton , Upton and Woodend . Nearby were the villages of <unk> and <unk> . 
 In the 1750s the Sankey Canal was constructed . This linked the area of St Helens with the River Mersey at Sankey Bridges , near Warrington and was in operation by 1757 . It was extended to Fiddler 's Ferry in 1762 and then in 1833 a further extension to Woodend was opened . In the same year the St Helens and Runcorn Gap Railway was opened . The railway connected St Helens with an area in Woodend which was to become known as Spike Island . The termini of the canal and railway were adjacent and here Widnes Dock , the world 's first railway dock , was established . Despite these transport links and the emergence of the chemical industry at nearby Runcorn and elsewhere in the Mersey Valley , the Industrial Revolution did not arrive at Widnes until 14 years later , with the arrival at Spike Island of John Hutchinson . 
 = = = Coming of the chemical industry = = = 
 John Hutchinson built his first factory in 1847 on land between the Sankey Canal and the railway making alkali by the Leblanc process . This was an ideal site for the factory because all the raw materials could be transported there by the waterways and railway , and the finished products could similarly be transported anywhere else in the country or overseas . Further chemical factories were soon built nearby by entrepreneurs including John McClelland , William Gossage , Frederic Muspratt , Holbrook Gaskell and Henry Deacon . The town grew rapidly as housing and social provision was made for the factory workers . Soon the villages of Farnworth , Appleton , Ditton and Upton were subsumed within the developing town of Widnes . Woodend became known as West Bank . The substances produced included soap , borax , soda ash , salt cake and bleaching powder . Other industries developed including iron and copper works . The town became heavily polluted with smoke and the by @-@ products of the chemical processes . In 1888 the town was described as " the dirtiest , ugliest and most depressing town in England " and in 1905 as a " poisonous hell @-@ town " . 
 Their especial ugliness is , however , never more marked than when the spring is making beautiful every nook and corner of England , for the spring never comes hither . It never comes because , neither at Widnes nor St. Helens , is there any place in which it can manifest itself . The foul gases which , belched forth night and day from the many factories , rot the clothes , the teeth , and , in the end , the bodies or the workers , have killed every tree and every blade of grass for miles around . 
 The demand for workers meant that , in addition to people from other areas of the United Kingdom , large numbers of workers came from other countries . Initially these were Irish but from the late 1880s significant numbers arrived from Poland and Lithuania who were fleeing from persecution and poverty in their home countries . Immigrants also came from other areas , in particular Wales . In 1890 the chemical companies making alkali by the Leblanc process combined to form the United Alkali Company , later one of the constituent companies of ICI . This involved practically all of the chemical industries in Widnes , which was considered to be the principal centre of the new company . However , during the 1890s the chemical business in Widnes went into decline as more efficient methods of making alkali were developed elsewhere . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 During the early decades of the 20th century there was a revival in the local economy , particularly as the United Alkali Company began to manufacture new products . Improvements were being made to the structure of the town , in particular the opening of the Widnes – Runcorn Transporter Bridge in 1905 which gave the first direct link over the Mersey for road traffic . In 1909 the town became the first in Britain to have a regular covered @-@ top double @-@ decker bus service . 
 By 1919 the health of the residents of the town was improving . In the 1920s and 1930s there was further diversification of the chemical industry and the products it manufactured . Slums were being replaced by more and better homes . After the Second World War more slums were cleared and there was ongoing growth and variation in the chemical industry . By the 1950s the town had 45 major chemical factories . 
 In 1961 the Silver Jubilee Bridge replaced the outdated Transporter Bridge and in recent years many of the old heavy chemical factories have closed to be replaced by more modern factories . Much of the land previously polluted by the old dirty chemical processes has been reclaimed , and there have been improvements in the cleanliness and environment of the town . 
 = = Governance = = 
 From Saxon times Widnes was part of the hundred of West Derby in Lancashire . Modern local government in the town of Widnes commenced with the creation of the Widnes Local Board in 1865 , prior to which the town had been part of the administrative district of Prescot . In 1892 the town received a Charter of Incorporation giving it borough status . In 1974 , as part of the Local Government Act 1972 , Widnes Borough Council was abolished and its territory amalgamated with Runcorn to form the borough of Halton . This became a district of Cheshire , the outcome of local representation to avoid becoming part of the proposed metropolitan county of Merseyside . In 1998 the borough of Halton became a unitary authority . However , in 2009 the council entered into an agreement with the five metropolitan district councils of Merseyside to form the Liverpool City Region , in effect reversing its opposition to integration in the 1970s ; its unitary status is similar to that of the metropolitan boroughs . 
 In 1885 Widnes became a parliamentary constituency and elected its first Member of Parliament . The UK parliamentary constituency is Halton and the current Member of Parliament is Derek Twigg . The local authority is the borough of Halton and the town is divided into nine electoral wards . For elections to the European Parliament , Widnes lies in the North West England constituency . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Widnes is situated on the north bank of the River Mersey . The whole town is low @-@ lying with some slightly higher areas in Farnworth and Appleton . To the south of the town a spur projecting into the river forms the West Bank area of Widnes ; together with a spur projecting northwards from Runcorn these form Runcorn Gap , a narrowing of the River Mersey . Runcorn Gap is crossed by Runcorn Railway Bridge , carrying the Liverpool branch of the West Coast Main Line , and the Silver Jubilee Bridge , carrying the A533 road which then curves in a westerly direction towards Liverpool becoming the A562 . The density of housing is generally high but there are some open green areas , including Victoria Park in Appleton and two golf courses which are geographically near the centre of the urban development . Most of the chemical and other factories are close to the north bank of the River Mersey . A second crossing of the Mersey is planned , to be known as the Mersey Gateway . 
 Drainage of the Widnes area is into the Mersey via Ditton , Steward 's and Bower 's Brooks . The bedrock of the area is rock from the Sherwood sandstone group . There are a few outcrops of sandstone but elsewhere the bedrock is covered by drift . Most of this consists of till except near the bank of the Mersey where it is recent alluvium . Large areas are also covered by industrial waste . 
 When borings were made in the 1870s prior to the building of chemical works a deep gorge measuring around 100 feet ( 30 m ) was found in the bedrock which was filled with glacial deposits . From this it was concluded that before the Ice Age the Mersey had flowed in a more northerly course , and when it was blocked by glacial deposits it had made a new channel through Runcorn Gap . 
 Being close to the west coast and the Irish Sea , the climate is generally temperate with few extremes of temperature or weather . The mean average temperature in the years 1971 to 2000 was 9 @.@ 4 to 9 @.@ 7 ° C , which was slightly above the average for the United Kingdom as was the average amount of annual sunshine at 1391 to 1470 hours . The average annual rainfall was 741 to 870 mm , which was slightly below the average for the UK . The average number of days in the year when snow is on the ground is 0 to 6 , which is low for the United Kingdom . The average number of days of air frost is 2 to 39 , which is also low . 
 = = Demography = = 
 Since the borough of Halton became a unitary authority in 1998 , which resulted in its having one level of local government , demographic statistics have been collated for the authority as a whole , rather than separately for the towns of Runcorn and Widnes . While the two towns have different histories and come from different historic counties , their demographic features are similar . 
 The estimated population of Halton in 2010 was 119 @,@ 300 . The change in population during the 20th century is shown in the following table . 
 In 2003 Halton had the largest proportion of the population in Cheshire in the age groups under 5 , 5 to 15 and 16 to pension age and , at 16 @.@ 1 % the lowest proportion of people at pension age or older . At 1 @.@ 2 % the proportion of non @-@ white ethnic groups in 2001 equalled the lowest in all local authorities in Cheshire . At 11 @.@ 5 per 1 @,@ 000 population , the live birth rate in Halton and Warrington , is the highest in the county . At 121 the standardised mortality ratio and at 21 @.@ 5 % the percentage of persons with limiting long @-@ term illness are considerably the highest in Cheshire . 
 There has been an increase in the number of households from 47 @,@ 214 in 1991 to 52 @,@ 501 in 2006 . The average household size has reduced from 2 @.@ 70 in 1991 to 2 @.@ 44 in 2001 . 89 @.@ 8 % of houses had central heating in 2001 compared with 75 @.@ 8 % in 2001 . The type of housing has also changed with an increase from 15 @.@ 5 % to 19 @.@ 2 % in detached houses from 1991 to 2001 , an increase over the same years in semi @-@ detached houses from 30 @.@ 0 % to 33 @.@ 0 % and a corresponding decrease in terraced houses from 44 @.@ 0 % to 37 @.@ 5 % . The percentage of dwellings in council tax bands A @-@ B is , at 69 % the highest in any Cheshire local authority while the percentages in bands E @-@ F ( 8 % ) and G @-@ H ( 1 % ) are the lowest . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Widnes continues to be an industrial town and its major industry is still the manufacture of chemicals although there has been some diversification in recent years . In 2006 a new freight park , known as the <unk> Mersey <unk> Gateway , was opened in the West Bank area of the town . This provides a link for freight arriving by road , air or sea to be transferred to the rail network . It is expected to create up to 5 @,@ 000 new jobs . In 2010 the first phase of Stobart Park , a " multimodal logistics service for warehousing and distribution " , and part of the Stobart Group , was opened . This consists of a 520 @,@ 000 square feet ( 48 @,@ 000 m2 ) refrigerated warehouse for Tesco . 
 In 2014 work began on the new Mersey Gateway bridge and will be complete in 2017 , the project is to build a new six lane toll bridge over the River Mersey between the towns of Runcorn and Widnes that will relieve the congested and aging Silver Jubilee Bridge . It is foreseen that the new route will become a major strategic transport route linking the Liverpool city @-@ region and the north west to the rest of the country and will also support sustained growth at Liverpool Ports and Liverpool John Lennon Airport and improve business productivity throughout the Mersey corridor . 
 There has been considerable development of shopping areas in the town . The <unk> Centre , a mall which was opened in 1995 is adjacent to the long @-@ established Widnes Market which has both a market hall and an open market . Also adjacent is a Morrisons supermarket . In the Simms Cross area an Asda supermarket opened in 2004 . A new shopping development , known as Widnes Shopping Park , opened on 18 March 2010 , the flagship store being a Marks and Spencer shop . Other businesses involved in the development are Next , New Look , Boots , River Island and British Home Stores . The Outfit out @-@ of @-@ town chain outlet incorporates fashion brands , including Dorothy Perkins , Miss Selfridge , Topman , Wallis and Burton . Other businesses included in the development are Wilkinson , Costa Coffee , Halfords , Gala Bingo and KFC . 
 In Autumn 2011 construction began of a Tesco Extra 24 @-@ hour store . The glass fronted 120 @,@ 000 sq ft store has been built on the old B & Q site next to Ashley Way and was opened in March 2012 . The store was built on stilts allowing a car park to be built underneath the store for around 600 cars . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 As a town with a relatively short history , Widnes has few historical sites . However , reclamation of chemical factory sites and areas formerly polluted with chemical waste has given opportunities for developments . These include Victoria Promenade at West Bank , alongside the River Mersey , and Spike Island , now cleared of industry , which forms an open recreation area leading to footpaths along the former towpath of the Sankey Canal . Adjacent to Spike Island occupying John Hutchinson 's former Tower Building is the Catalyst Science Discovery Centre . 
 Much of the architecture of the town is undistinguished but there are a number of listed buildings , many of them in the more outlying areas but some are scattered throughout the town . The listed churches are the Anglican churches of St Luke 's , Farnworth ( and its adjacent bridewell ) , and St Mary 's , West Bank , the Roman Catholic churches of St Michael 's , St Marie 's and St Bede 's , and the two chapels in the cemetery . The railway stations of Widnes North and Hough Green are listed , as are the former town hall and the former power house of the transporter bridge . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Widnes is on the southern route of the Liverpool to Manchester railway line . There are two stations , Hough Green and Widnes from which services are operated by Northern Rail and East Midlands Trains . Northern Rail operate frequent services to Liverpool and Manchester city centre from Hough Green and Widnes . East Midlands Trains link Widnes station at hourly intervals throughout the day to Liverpool , Manchester , Stockport , Sheffield , Nottingham and Norwich . 
 However passengers to and from London , the Midlands and the South are likely to use Runcorn station and make the short journey across the Silver Jubilee Bridge by bus or taxi . 
 The two main bus operators providing local services are Halton Transport and Arriva . 
 The A562 road passes through Widnes linking Liverpool to the west with <unk> to the east . The A557 road passes though the town linking Runcorn to the south , via the Silver Jubilee Bridge , with the M62 motorway , some 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 km ) to the north . 
 Widnes is 6 miles ( 10 km ) from Liverpool John Lennon Airport and 25 miles ( 40 km ) from Manchester Airport . 
 = = Education = = 
 There are nineteen primary schools in the town and three nursery schools . The three secondary schools are Saints Peter & Paul Catholic College , Ormiston Chadwick Academy and Wade Deacon High School . The former colleges , Halton College and Widnes and Runcorn Sixth Form College , merged in 2006 to form Riverside College . There are three special schools . Also in Widnes is the <unk> Child Development Centre in Crow Wood Lane . Kingsway Learning Centre offers opportunities for Adult Learning , Basic Skills and Skills for Success . 
 As part of the Building Schools for the Future programme , Fairfield High School closed down in 2010 and merged with Wade Deacon High School . The school was founded in 1507 as Farnworth Grammar School by Bishop William Smyth and a school has been on the site since the 16th century . In the 1960s two separate @-@ sex secondary schools amalgamated and the school took the title Fairfield High School from 1974 up until its closure . When it closed in August 2010 , the schools pupils were transferred to Wade Deacon High School , though still operating from the same site , this continued until March 2013 when Wade Deacon High School 's new build was completed . Demolition of the school began in August 2013 and was completed by the end of 2013 , the site will be developed into a housing estate and a cemetery . 
 = = Religion = = 
 The 2001 census showed that of the people living in the borough of Halton , 83 @.@ 8 % declared themselves to be Christian , 8 @.@ 7 % stated that they had " no religion " and for 7 @.@ 0 % their religion was not stated . Those declaring other religions ( Buddhism , Hinduism , Jewish , Islam , Sikh and " other religions " ) amounted to 0 @.@ 5 % . 
 The Anglican churches are administered by the Diocese of Liverpool . The longest established church is St Luke 's , Farnworth . The other Anglican churches are St Mary 's in West Bank , St Paul 's in Victoria Square , St John 's in Greenway Road and St Ambrose in Halton View Road . The Anglicans share the building of St Michael 's in Ditchfield Road with Hough Green Methodist Church . The Anglicans also share the building of All Saints in Hough Green Road with the Catholic Church of St Basil 's . 
 The Roman Catholic churches in Widnes are part of the Archdiocese of Liverpool . There are eight churches in Widnes , namely St Bede 's in Appleton , Our Lady of Perpetual Succour in Mayfield Avenue , St John Fisher in Moorfield Road , St Marie 's in <unk> Road , St Michael 's in St Michael 's Road , St Pius X in Sefton Avenue and St Raphael 's in Liverpool Road . Owing to a shortage of Catholic Priests and the " Leaving Safe Harbours " project in effect throughout the Archdiocese St Marie 's was closed , the last Mass was celebrated on 6 January 2007 . The church is a listed building , but it has been placed on the Buildings at Risk list by the campaign group Save Britain 's Heritage and was identified by The Victorian Society on their 2008 annual list as being one of the ten most endangered Victorian buildings in Britain . 
 Trinity Methodist Church is in <unk> Lane and there are Methodist churches in Farnworth and <unk> . There is a Baptist church in Deacon Road and Evangelical Christian churches at The Foundry in <unk> Road and in Ditton . The Jehovah 's Witnesses have a Kingdom Hall in Moorfield Road and The Widnes National Spiritualist Church is in Lacey Street . 
 = = Sports = = 
 The major sporting body in the town is Widnes Vikings Rugby League Football Club . Cup kings of the 1970s and 1980s , they were World Club Champions in 1989 , after defeating Australian side Canberra Raiders at Old Trafford . More recently , they were winners of the Northern Rail Cup in <unk> 2009 . Their home ground is Select Security Stadium in Lowerhouse Lane , which is owned and run by Halton Borough Council . In addition to being a sporting ground it has facilities for conferences and banqueting . In October 2007 the club was defeated in the National League One Grand Final . Following this , and because of the club 's financial situation , its board decided to put it into administration . It was subsequently purchased by Steve O 'Connor , a local businessman . Stobart Stadium Halton was also the temporary home of St Helens RLFC , they were using the stadium for the 2011 season while their new stadium - <unk> Park - in St Helens was completed . 
 In Heath Road is a rugby union club , Widnes Rugby Union Football Club ( otherwise known as " the <unk> " ) , an amateur sports club which is managed and administered by volunteers . The players are all club members and pay subscriptions . The club welcomes and encourages the development of rugby within all sections of the local community by promoting links with local schools , local authorities and the Rugby Football Union constituency body . 
 Widnes Cricket Club ( <unk> <unk> ) was founded in 1865 and have its ground in Beaconsfield Road . Moorfield Sports & Social Club in Moorfield Road hosts sports including Football , rugby league , cricket and bowls . In Highfield Road is a private golf club . 
 Widnes Tennis Academy is located on Highfield Rd , <unk> <unk> , sharing an entrance with St Peter and Pauls School . This is a privately operated facility consisting of 3 in @-@ door courts , six floodlit outside courts and a gym . It is a Beacon facility and has many links with schools , the local authority and the LTA to promote and develop tennis in the area . It is the home of Lane Tennis Club ( Est 1876 ) which has a number of men 's , women 's and junior teams playing competitively in the Warrington District League . Other sports facilities are available . 
 In March 2012 it was announced that a new football club Widnes Vikings F.C. had been formed , after the club formerly known as Widnes Dragons joined the Vikings Sports Brand . The club currently plays in the North West Counties Football League . In June 2014 , the club became known as Widnes Football Club , after distancing themselves from the Vikings brand . 
 Since May 2013 there has been an Ice Hockey club Widnes Wild based at the Silver Blades ice rink which plays in the English National Hockey League <unk> Conference . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The Queens Hall opened in 1957 , it was originally Victoria Road Weslyan Methodist Chapel . It was in use as a theatre and concert hall until the opening of The Brindley in Runcorn in 2004 . The Queens Hall was demolished ( December 2011 – February 2012 ) . Adjacent to the hall , in Lacey Street , is the Queen 's Hall Studio , originally built as a Sunday School in 1879 . It was a venue for music and live performance but closed in 2004 . After years of campaigning by the volunteer group Loose , and with the support of the Community Assets Fund / Big Lottery Fund and WREN and other donors , it re @-@ opened on 17 April 2010 . 
 There is a tradition that the song Homeward Bound was written by Paul Simon at a Widnes station . A quote from Paul Simon reads as follows : " If you know Widnes , then you 'll understand how I was desperately trying to get back to London as quickly as possible . Homeward Bound came out of that feeling . " Also , the song " Stars of Track and Field " by Scottish indie rock band Belle and Sebastian , from the album If You 're Feeling Sinister makes reference to the town of Widnes in the lyrics , as does the song " Watch Your Step " by Elvis Costello from his album Trust . 
 = = Community facilities = = 
 The main library in Victoria Square has been refurbished . In addition to the normal services provided by a library , this library holds a large collection of material relating to railways . There is a branch library in the Ditton area of the town . 
 The Queens Hall Studio , now known as the Studio , is in Lacey Street and is a community venue . Live music and theatre events take place , and the <unk> ALL <unk> project is based there for young people interested in music and associated creative activities , funded by the Big Lottery Fund . 
 Victoria Park is in the Appleton area of the town and has a number of attractions , including a cafeteria and refreshment kiosk , a bandstand , model boating lake , tennis and basketball courts , bowling greens , a skateboarding facility , glasshouses with a pets ' corner and a butterfly house . Hough Green Park is in the Ditton area of the town . Crow Wood Park is in the eastern part of Widnes and Sunnybank is a large area of open ground also in the eastern part of the town . There are a number of nature reserves . Pickerings Pasture is an area of wildflower meadows overlooking the River Mersey which was built on the site of a former household and industrial landfill . The other nature reserves in the town are <unk> Wood and Hale Road Woodlands . 
 Kingsway Leisure Centre , Places for People , has a swimming pool and a gym in addition to a sports hall . There are a number of football , cricket and rugby league clubs in the town . St Michael 's Golf Course was a municipal golf course which was built on reclaimed industrial waste land but high levels of arsenic have been found in the soil and at present it is closed . There is a private golf club in Highfield Road . 
 In October 2011 the Hive Leisure Park opened in a new development as part of the Widnes Waterfront . Its facilities include Reel Cinema , a five @-@ screen multiplex cinema , a Frankie & Benny 's bar and restaurant , Super Bowl UK Widnes containing a 16 @-@ lane ten @-@ pin bowling centre , a children 's play area , licensed bar , a Nando 's restaurant , a Premier Inn , Brewers Fayre pub opened in February 2012 and also a brand new Ice Rink operated by <unk> opened on 21 December 2012 
 = = = Health = = = 
 There is no hospital in Widnes . For acute medical care patients go to Warrington Hospital which is run by Warrington & Halton Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust or to Whiston Hospital which is run by St Helens and Knowsley Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust . Halton Clinical Commissioning Group is responsible for NHS services in the area . They established the Widnes Urgent Care Centre in 2015 to ease pressure on local accident and emergency units . General practitioner services are provided in health centres and in separate medical practices . There are dental practices providing a mixture of National Health Service and private dental care . 
 See also Healthcare in Liverpool 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Three men born in or near the village of Farnworth achieved prominent positions in the Anglican church . They were William Smyth ( <unk> – 1514 ) who became Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield , then Bishop of Lincoln and who built the grammar school in the village , Richard Barnes ( 1532 – 1587 ) who became Bishop of Carlisle , then Bishop of Durham , and Richard Bancroft ( 1544 – 1610 ) who became Bishop of London and then Archbishop of Canterbury . 
 During the late 19th century a number of prominent chemists and industrialists lived in Widnes . Amongst these was Ludwig Mond , co @-@ founder of Brunner Mond & Company . He lived in The Hollies , Farnworth and there his two sons were born , both of whom became notable . Sir Robert Mond ( 1867 – 1938 ) became a chemist and archaeologist and his younger brother Alfred Mond , 1st Baron Melchett ( 1868 – 1930 ) became an industrialist , financier and politician . 
 Charles Glover Barkla ( 1877 – 1944 ) who was born in Widnes was the winner of the 1917 Nobel prize in physics . Born in the village of Farnworth was Roy Chadwick ( 1893 – 1947 ) , the designer of the Avro Lancaster bomber . Thomas <unk> ( 1893 – 1917 ) , also born in Widnes , joined the Royal Flying Corps during the First World War ; he was awarded the Victoria Cross and the Distinguished Conduct Medal posthumously for his gallantry . Another Widnes man , Thomas Wilkinson ( 1898 – 1942 ) of the Royal Naval Reserve , was awarded the Victoria Cross posthumously in the Second World War . 
 Jack Ashley ( 1922 – 2012 ) was born in Widnes and was a local councillor there . He was then a Member of Parliament for Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent for many years . He became a Companion of Honour in 1975 and was invested as a Privy Councillor in 1979 . In 1992 he was made a life peer as Baron Ashley of Stoke , of Widnes in the County of Cheshire . Gordon Oakes ( 1931 – 2005 ) who was born and educated in Widnes became a local Member of Parliament and a government minister . 
 Vince <unk> ( 1932 – 2008 ) , international rugby league player , was born in Widnes . Andrew Higginson ( b . 1977 ) is a professional snooker player from Widnes . Melanie Chisholm ( b . 1974 ) , who was born in Merseyside and went to school in Widnes , is a former Spice Girl known as Mel C or Sporty Spice . Actor David Dawson ( b . 1982 ) was born and raised in Widnes . The composer and multi @-@ instrumentalist Ian Finney ( b . 1966 ) is from Widnes . Former Tour de France rider Paul <unk> was born in Widnes . George Nicholls ( born 14 May 1944 ) born in Widnes , played rugby league for Great Britain and England , and in 1972 was in the team that won the Rugby League World Cup . The distinguished Victorian cricketer John Briggs , the only man to have taken a hat trick and scored a century in Ashes cricket , lived in the town from 1877 until the 1890s . John Bowles ( darts player ) is a professional darts player from Widnes . 
 The singer / musician Jane Weaver was brought up in the town . 
 = = Further bibliography = = 
 = Key Biscayne = 
 Key Biscayne is an island located in Miami @-@ Dade County , Florida , United States , between the Atlantic Ocean and Biscayne Bay . It is the southernmost of the barrier islands along the Atlantic coast of Florida , and lies south of Miami Beach and southeast of Miami . The key is connected to Miami via the Rickenbacker Causeway , originally built in 1947 . 
 The northern portion of Key Biscayne is home to Crandon Park , a county park . The middle section of the island consists of the incorporated Village of Key Biscayne . The southern part of the island is now protected as Bill Baggs Cape Florida State Park , adjacent to Biscayne National Park , one of the two national parks in Miami @-@ Dade County . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Key Biscayne , although named a " key " , is not geologically part of the Florida Keys , but is a barrier island composed of sand eroded from the Appalachian Mountains , carried to the coast by rivers and then moved along the coast from the north by coastal currents . There is no hard bedrock near the surface of the island , only layers of weak " shelly sandstone " to depths of 100 feet ( 30 m ) or more . The coastal transport of sand southward ends at Key Biscayne . In the 1850s Louis Agassiz noted that " [ s ] <unk> of Cape Florida no more <unk> sand is to be seen . " ( The beaches in the Florida Keys , by contrast , consist primarily of finely pulverized shells . ) Geologists believe that the island emerged around 2000 BCE , soon after the sea level stopped rising , as the sand built up to form new barrier islands on the southern Florida coast . 
 Key Biscayne is elongated in the north @-@ south direction , tapering to a point at each end . It is approximately 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) long and 1 to 2 miles ( 1 @.@ 6 to 3 @.@ 2 km ) wide . The northern end of the island is separated from another barrier island , Virginia Key , by Bear Cut . The southern end of the island is Cape Florida . The Cape Florida Channel separates the island from the Safety Valve , an expanse of shallow flats cut by tidal channels that extends southward about 9 miles ( 14 km ) to the Ragged Keys , at the northern end of the Florida Keys . Only Soldier Key , approximately 200 yards ( 180 m ) by 100 yards ( 91 m ) wide , lies between Key Biscayne and the Ragged Keys . The Cape Florida Channel ( ten to eleven feet [ three to three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half meters ] deep in 1849 ) and Bear Cut ( four feet [ a little more than one meter ] deep in 1849 ) are the deepest natural channels into Biscayne Bay . They provided the only access for ocean @-@ going vessels to Biscayne Bay until artificial channels were dredged starting early in the 20th century . In 1849 the island had a fine sandy beach on the east side , and mangroves and lagoons on the west side . The average elevation of the island is less than five feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) above sea level . 
 People from Key Biscayne are known as " Key Rats . " 
 Key Biscayne is located at 25 ° 41 ′ 25 ″ N 80 ° 9 ′ 54 ″ W ( 25 @.@ <unk> , <unk> ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The first known indigenous inhabitants of Key Biscayne were <unk> . Shells , bones and artifacts found on the island indicate extensive use of it by the Tequesta . A large community appeared to inhabit the island between 1 @,@ 500 and 2 @,@ 000 years ago . In 1992 Hurricane Andrew scoured much of the vegetation from the southern end of Key Biscayne . An archaeological survey of the exposed ground found evidence of extensive habitation . 
 Juan Ponce de León charted Key Biscayne on his first mission to the New World in 1513 . He christened the island Santa Marta and claimed it for the Spanish Crown . He reported that he found a fresh water spring on the island . Ponce de León called the bay behind the island ( Biscayne Bay ) Chequescha , a variant form of Tequesta . 
 The next European known to have visited the Key Biscayne area was Pedro Menéndez de Avilés . In 1565 his ship took refuge in Biscayne Bay from a storm . Relations were established with the Tequesta , and in 1567 a mission was established on the mainland across the bay from Key Biscayne . The mission was abandoned three years later in 1570 . No other mission was established on the mainland until 1743 , but it was withdrawn a few months later . 
 Hernando de Escalante Fontaneda related that a sailor from the Bay of Biscay , called the <unk> or <unk> , had lived on the lower east coast of Florida for a while after being shipwrecked . A 17th @-@ century map shows Cayo de <unk> , the probable origin of Key Biscayne . 
 The first known European settlers on Key Biscayne were Pedro Fornells , his family and household . Fornells and his wife Mariana were <unk> survivors of the New Smyrna colony in northern Florida . Pedro and Mariana had joined other <unk> in seeking refuge at St. Augustine after leaving New Smyrna . They stayed in the city after the Spanish regained Florida in 1783 . Fornells received a Royal Grant for 175 acres ( 71 ha ) on the southern end of Key Biscayne in 1805 . The grant required Fornells to live on the island and establish cultivation within six months . He moved his household to the island , but after six months , the family returned to St. Augustine , leaving a caretaker Vincent on the island . 
 = = = Territorial years = = = 
 Following the First Seminole War and a treaty with Spain , Florida became a U.S. territory in 1821 . Under pressure from US settlers , Seminole and Black Seminoles began to migrate into central and southern Florida . In the early nineteenth century , African @-@ American slaves and Black Seminoles escaped to the Bahamas from Cape Florida , including hundreds in the 1820s , to evade American slavers . 
 In 1824 Mary Ann <unk> Davis , who had moved to St. Augustine with her husband in 1821 , bought the Fornells claim to Key Biscayne from one of the Fornells ' heirs for US $ 100 . Mary and her husband William Davis , a deputy U.S. Marshal , probably were aware of plans to build a lighthouse on the Florida coast somewhere between St. Augustine and Key West , and knew that Key Biscayne was a likely location for it . Mary and William sold three acres ( about one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter hectares ) of their newly acquired land at the southern tip of the island ( Cape Florida ) to the U.S. government for US $ 225 . The federal government built the Cape Florida lighthouse on that land in 1825 . 
 During the early 1820s an estimated 300 Black Seminoles found passage from Key Biscayne to Andros Island in the Bahamas on seagoing canoes and Bahamian boats . In 1820 one traveler reported seeing 60 " Indians " , 60 " runaway slaves " , and 27 boats of Bahamian wreckers preparing to leave Cape Florida . Although Key Biscayne was less suitable as a departure point after the lighthouse was built , the Bahamas remained a haven for escaping slaves . In a notorious case in 1844 , Jonathan Walker was caught " within sight of Cape Florida " with seven runaway slaves on his boat . His punishment included having his hand branded with the initials " SS " ( for " slave stealer " ) . John Greenleaf Whittier 's poem The Branded Hand was inspired by this incident . 
 The first U.S. citizens to take up permanent residence on Key Biscayne were Captain John Dubose , his wife Margaret and their five children in 1825 , when Dubose became the first keeper for the new Cape Florida Light , a post he held until the lighthouse was burned in 1836 . The family was also accompanied by two former slaves of Margaret 's brother . The Dubose household grew during that time and was reported in 1833 to consist of " eleven whites and several negroes " . During his tenure as lighthouse keeper , Dubose received hundreds of plants and seeds from Dr. Henry Perrine , United States Consul in Campeche , Mexico , which he planted on the island . In 1835 a major hurricane struck the island , damaging the lighthouse and the keeper 's house , and putting the island under three feet of water , which killed almost all the plants that Dr. Perrine had sent from Mexico . 
 = = = War with the Seminoles = = = 
 In 1836 , during the Second Seminole War , Seminoles attacked and burned the Cape Florida lighthouse , severely wounding the assistant lighthouse keeper in charge ; his black assistant died of wounds . The lighthouse was not repaired and put back into commission until 1847 . 
 A military post was established on Key Biscayne in March 1838 . Its first commander was Lt. Col. James Bankhead . The fort was initially known as Fort Dallas or Fort Bankhead , but it was eventually renamed Fort Russell for Captain Samuel L. Russell . He was killed when the Seminoles ambushed two boats on the Miami River in February 1839 . In the summer of 1839 , a total of 143 soldiers and sailors were stationed at Fort Russell . Some of the Seminoles captured during the war were held at Fort Russell until they could be placed on ships to be removed to Indian Territory . 
 A hospital was established at Fort Russell for U.S. Army , Navy and Marine Corps personnel . In August 1840 , the Army surgeon at the hospital treated 103 patients , including 23 for fever and 26 for dysentery . Dysentery was the leading cause of death at the fort , followed by malaria , tuberculosis , gunshot wounds and alcoholism . 
 Colonel Bankhead was replaced by Lieutenant Colonel William S. Harney in 1839 . Colonel Harney had two earlier encounters with Seminoles , the first a battle in which Chief <unk> eluded capture , and a second in which Harney escaped in only his shirt and drawers from an early morning attack ( the Harney Massacre ) on his camp led by Chief Chakaika . In light of these experiences , Harney instituted an intensive training program in swamp and jungle warfare for his men . After Chakaika led the raid on Indian Key in August 1840 , Harney set out into the Everglades after Chakaika , and killed him in his own camp . The war quieted down after that , with active pursuit of the Seminoles ending in 1842 , although some of the Seminoles remained hidden in the Everglades . 
 While the war against the Seminoles continued , Mary and William Davis made plans to develop a town on Key Biscayne . They had a town plan printed in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . The island was touted as an ideal destination " for the recovery of the health " . When Indian Key had been named the seat for the newly created Dade County in 1836 , the county provided that the county court would meet annually on Key Biscayne . In late 1839 the United States Postmaster General approved a post office for Key Biscayne . The first two lots of the new town were sold to Lt. Col. Harney for a total of US $ 1 @,@ 000 . There is no evidence that the post office ever opened ; in 1842 the Postmaster General noted that the appointed postmaster had not completed any of the requirements for opening the post office . No further sales of town lots were made after Harney 's purchase . 
 A complication arose when Venancio Sanchez of St. Augustine purchased for US $ 400 a half share in the old Fornells grant from another surviving heir , who lived in Havana . A feud quickly developed between Sanchez and the Davises , with Sanchez demanding a division of the property , and the Davises refusing to acknowledge that Sanchez had any claim to the island . The Davises had hoped that a restored lighthouse would be the centerpiece of their town , but all attempts to repair the lighthouse failed while the war was on . Shortly after the end of the war , the Davises gave up on Key Biscayne and moved to Texas . Their older son Edmund J. Davis eventually was elected as governor there . 
 = = = Surveys and lighthouses = = = 
 The numerous ship wrecks that occurred along the southeast coast of Florida from Key Biscayne to the Dry Tortugas was a cause for concern . Between the late 1840s and the late 1850s , more than 500 ships were wrecked on the Florida Reef . The Assistant United States Coast Surveyor reported that in the period from 1845 through 1849 , almost one million ( United States ) dollars worth of vessels and cargoes were lost on the reef . 
 In 1849 the United States Board of Engineers conducted a preliminary survey of the coast of Florida . In a report written by Lieutenant Colonel Robert E. Lee , the Board recommended that Key Biscayne be made a military reservation , and the United States Secretary of War so ordered in March 1849 . Later that year , the United States Army Corps of Topographical Engineers set up a camp with an astronomical / magnetic station to serve as a datum base for a survey of the Florida Keys and the Great Florida Reef . 
 The triangulation survey was conducted by the U.S. Coast Survey with men detailed from the U.S. Army and U.S. Navy . Approximately forty men were based at Cape Florida working on the survey when Alexander Dallas Bache , Superintendent of the U.S. Coast Survey , went to Key Biscayne in 1855 to take charge of it . The survey eventually covered Key Biscayne , Biscayne Bay , the Florida Keys from south of Key Biscayne to the Marquesas Keys , and Florida Bay from the Keys to Cape Sable . The survey base marker at Cape Florida ended up under water , as the south end of the island eroded . It could be seen at low tide as late as 1913 . 
 In 1988 the Cape Florida base marker was recovered from under water and installed near the Cape Florida lighthouse . The north base marker for Key Biscayne was discovered in 1970 as workers were clearing land . It was at first mistaken as a gravestone for someone named A. D. Bache . 
 To learn more about the Great Florida Reef , Alexander Bache invited Louis Agassiz to study it . The U.S. Coast Survey sent Agassiz to Key Biscayne in 1851 . He wrote a detailed report for Bache on the reefs stretching from Key Biscayne to the Marquesas Keys . 
 In 1846 , US Congress appropriated $ 23 @,@ 000 to rebuild the Cape Florida lighthouse and work was completed in 1847 . In 1861 , Confederate militants sabotaged the lighthouse so that it could not guide Union sailors during the blockade of Confederate Florida . The lighthouse was repaired and re @-@ lit again in 1866 . In 1878 the Cape Florida Light was replaced by the Fowey Rocks Light , seven miles ( 11 km ) southeast of Cape Florida . 
 In 1898 , in response to the growing tension with Spain over Cuba , which led to the Spanish – American War , the Cape Florida lighthouse was briefly made U.S. Signal Station Number Four . It was one of 36 along the U.S. East Coast and Gulf Coast from Maine to Texas . The Signal Stations were established to provide an early warning of any approach of the Spanish fleet . 
 = = = Biscayne Bay Yacht Club = = = 
 From 1888 to 1893 , the Cape Florida lighthouse was leased by the United States Secretary of the Treasury for a total of US $ 1 @.@ 00 ( 20 cents per annum ) to the Biscayne Bay Yacht Club for use as its headquarters . It was listed as the southernmost yacht club in the United States , and the tallest in the world . After the lease expired , the yacht club moved to Coconut Grove , where it continues . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Key Biscayne was first developed for coconut cultivation . The earliest mention of coconuts on Key Biscayne is a Spanish account from 1568 , although the reference may be to <unk> rather than coconuts . Mature coconut trees were on Cape Florida by the 1830s , likely grown from coconuts sent from Mexico by Henry Perrine to the first lighthouse keeper , John Dubose . 
 In the 1880s Ezra Asher Osborn and <unk> T. Field of New Jersey started an enterprise to develop the Florida coast from Key Biscayne to Jupiter by clearing native vegetation , leveling Indian midden mounds and beach dunes , and planting coconuts . Osborn and Field imported 300 @,@ 000 unhusked coconuts from the Caribbean , of which 76 @,@ 000 were planted on Key Biscayne . Most of the shoots from the coconuts on Key Biscayne were eaten by rats and marsh rabbits ( Sylvilagus palustris ) . As a result of their efforts , in 1885 Osborn and Field were allowed to purchase Key Biscayne and other oceanfront land from the Florida Internal Improvement Trust Fund for 70 cents an acre . 
 Mary Ann Davis , who had bought the Fornells grant on Key Biscayne in 1821 , died in Galveston , Texas in 1885 . Her son Waters Smith Davis began taking steps to assert the family title to the island . In 1887 he purchased the rights of the other Davis heirs and received a new deed in his name . He could not get a clear title , however . Venancio Sanchez still claimed a half share of the Fornells Grant , two of the town lots had been sold to William Harney around 1840 , and Osborne and Field had their deed from the Florida Internal Improvement Fund . Davis received <unk> from Osborn and Field , and on the Harney lots , but was unable to settle with Sanchez . He finally received a patent from the United States government for his land in 1898 . In 1903 Davis bought the abandoned Cape Florida lighthouse from the United States Treasury for US $ 400 . 
 Davis started a pineapple plantation on Key Biscayne ; six acres ( two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hectares ) had been cleared and planted in pineapples in 1893 – 94 . Davis also directed his caretaker to plant one @-@ half to one acre ( two @-@ tenths to four @-@ tenths of a hectare ) of bananas . By 1898 , a great variety of tropical fruit trees had been planted on the island . Davis also had a large dwelling built for his use . It was a two @-@ story cottage with five bedrooms and verandas on three sides , raised ten feet above the ground on pilings to protect against storm surges . 
 In the late 1890s Davis hired Ralph Munroe to oversee his Key Biscayne property . Munroe had begun visiting Biscayne Bay in 1877 . He soon built a home , the Barnacle , on land on the mainland in Coconut Grove that he bought from John <unk> , keeper of the Cape Florida Light and Fowey Rocks Light . Munroe engaged in wrecking in the waters around Key Biscayne , built sailboats , worked as a pilot for the Cape Florida Channel and opened a pineapple cannery , to which Davis sent his pineapples . Before mail service to the Miami area improved , Munroe would camp out on Key Biscayne every Tuesday evening so that he could sail out to the edge of the Gulf Stream early Wednesday morning to retrieve a package of newspapers and magazines dropped for him in waterproof pouches by a passing steamship . Munroe was also one of the founding members of the Biscayne Bay Yacht Club . 
 In 1896 Henry Morrison Flagler brought the Florida East Coast Railway to Miami . Mary Ann and William Davis had dreamed of building a city on Key Biscayne . Now their son Waters was a retired millionaire , and interested only in preserving Key Biscayne as a quiet retreat for his family . For a while Flagler 's arrival did disturb their quiet , as Flagler brought in dredges to deepen the Cape Florida Channel and the approaches to the mouth of the Miami River , muddying the formerly clear waters of Biscayne Bay . Soon , however , a shorter route from the ocean to Miami was dredged through the southern end of what is now Miami Beach , at Government Cut , and the Cape Florida Channel was allowed to return to a natural state . 
 = = = Coconut plantation and would @-@ be resort = = = 
 In 1902 William John Matheson , who had made his fortune in the aniline dye business , visited Biscayne Bay on his yacht . He soon built a winter home in Coconut Grove overlooking the bay . In 1908 Matheson began buying up the property on Key Biscayne north of the Davis holdings , all the way to Bear Cut , over 1 @,@ 700 ( about 690 hectares ) acres . Matheson created a plantation community , employing 42 workers by 1915 , and 60 later . It included housing for the workers and their families , packing houses , docks , a school , a big barn , windmills , and 15 miles ( 24 km ) of ( unpaved ) roads . The plantation had 36 @,@ 000 coconut trees , and a variety of other tropical fruits . In 1921 Matheson introduced the Malay Dwarf coconut to the United States . This is now the most common variety of coconut found in Florida , after lethal yellowing killed off most of the Jamaican Tall coconut trees and many other varieties . The Matheson coconut plantation was at least twice as large as any other in the United States . By 1933 , the world price for coconut products had dropped to about two @-@ fifths of its 1925 level , and the plantation stopped shipping . 
 Waters Davis decided to sell his Key Biscayne property in 1913 ( he died the following year ) . He appointed Ralph Munroe to act as his broker . Although Matheson bid on the property , Munroe arranged a sale , for US $ 20 @,@ 000 , to James Deering , the International Harvester heir and owner of Vizcaya in Miami . In 1914 Deering decided to develop his new land on the island as a tropical resort . He felt that Cape Florida 's " future lies in making sales for homes . " To prepare , the land was cleared , with marshes and mangroves were filled in . Jetties were built on the ocean side , in the belief that they would protect the beaches from erosion . They have been found to aggravate erosion . 
 Waters Davis stipulated in his sale to Deering that the Cape Florida lighthouse be restored . Deering wrote to the U.S. government seeking specifications and guidelines for the lighthouse . Government officials were taken aback by the request , wondering how a federal lighthouse could have passed into private hands . An Act of Congress and two Executive Orders , in 1847 and 1897 , had reserved the island for the federal lighthouse and for military purposes . Patient legal work eventually convinced the U.S. Congress and President Woodrow Wilson to agree to recognize Matheson 's and Deering 's ownership of Key Biscayne . 
 In 1920 the heirs of Venancio Sanchez filed a lawsuit against James Deering , claiming an undivided half interest in his Cape Florida property . This brought development of the resort on Cape Florida to a halt . After many legal battles , the suit was finally decided in Deering 's favor by the United States Supreme Court in 1926 . The decision came too late for Deering ; he had died the previous year . 
 = = = 1920s to 1950s = = = 
 In February 1926 William Matheson entered into an agreement with D. P. Davis ( a land developer , not related to Waters Davis ) to develop and re @-@ sell the northern half of Key Biscayne , including all of what is now Crandon Park and about half the present Village of Key Biscayne . Davis had experience with turning submerged or partially submerged land into prime real estate , having created the Davis Islands in Tampa and Davis Shores near St. Augustine . Later in 1926 , the City of Coral Gables incorporated with Key Biscayne , which was included in its boundaries . There were dreams of a bridge to the island , making Key Biscayne the seaside resort for Coral Gables , as Miami Beach had become for Miami . 
 Obstacles to the project arose . In March 1926 the U.S. government auctioned off some lots on Key Biscayne that had been retained when the rest of the island was transferred to the State of Florida . The <unk> wanted to have clear title to all of their land , and determined to outbid other interested parties for it . They ended up paying US $ 58 @,@ 055 for a total of 6 @.@ 84 acres ( 2 @.@ 77 ha ) of land , a record price per acre for the auction of U.S. government land up to that date . On September 18 , 1926 , the Great Miami Hurricane crossed over Key Biscayne on its way to Miami . Although no lives were lost on the island , most of the buildings were destroyed or badly damaged . Many of the plantings were lost , including half of the coconut trees . The <unk> rushed to restore their plantation , replanting and buying new equipment to replace what was lost . They soon had 30 @,@ 000 coconut trees replanted on 900 acres ( 364 ha ) . D. P. Davis could not meet his contract ; he declared bankruptcy and disappeared en route to Europe by ship . 
 The Florida Land Boom was over . There was no bridge built and no development on Key Biscayne for the next two decades . William Matheson died in 1930 , leaving the island to his children . In 1939 , the U.S. Navy approved a proposal to develop Virginia Key as an air base and sea port . There was talk of putting an air base on the north end of Key Biscayne . 
 In 1940 William Matheson 's heirs donated 808 @.@ 8 acres ( 327 @.@ 3 ha ) of land ( including two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) of beach on the Atlantic Ocean ) on the northern end of Key Biscayne to Dade County to be used as a public park ( later named Crandon Park ) . The county commissioner who negotiated the gift , Charles H. Crandon , had offered to have the county build a causeway to Key Biscayne in exchange for the land donation . As planning for the air and sea complex on Virginia Key was proceeding , construction on a causeway to Virginia Key started in 1941 . 
 The Attack on Pearl Harbor and the entry of the United States into World War II stopped all work on the causeway and the development of Virginia Key . After the war , Crandon pushed on with the development project . He got financier Ed Ball to buy six million ( U.S. ) dollars worth of bonds financing construction of the causeway . The causeway was named for Eddie Rickenbacker , World War I flying ace , and founder and president of the Miami @-@ based Eastern Air Lines . Starting in 1951 , the <unk> Construction Company offered new homes on the island for US $ 9 @,@ 540 , with just US $ 500 down . A U.S. Post Office contract branch was opened , the Community Church started holding services , and the Key Biscayne Elementary School opened in 1952 . 
 = = = Cape Florida becomes a state park = = = 
 In 1948 José Manuel Áleman , who had fled Cuba in the wake of scandals surrounding his service as education minister under Ramón Grau San Martín , bought the Cape Florida property from the Deering estate . His offer to donate the lighthouse and ten acres ( four hectares ) of land around it to the National Park Service was not accepted . 
 In 1950 the Dade County Planning Board announced a plan to build a highway connecting Key Biscayne with the Overseas Highway on Key Largo . The project envisioned bridges connecting artificial islands , to be built on the Safety Valve and existing small keys to Elliott Key and on to Key Largo . Áleman was expected to donate the right @-@ of @-@ way for a road running down the middle of the island to the first bridge at Cape Florida . With the prospect of a major highway passing through his property , Áleman rushed to prepare it for development : he had it completely cleared , leveled and filled in . A seawall was constructed along the western ( Biscayne Bay ) side of the Cape Florida property . 
 Áleman died in 1951 , and the County soon backed down from its road and bridge plan . His widow , Elena <unk> Garcia , added to her Cape Florida property by buying an ocean @-@ to @-@ bay strip that had been part of the Matheson property . It included a canal dug by William Matheson in the 1920s , extending from the bay across most of the island . The land north of the canal was developed as part of the present @-@ day Village of Key Biscayne . Garcia sold the Cape Florida property in 1957 for US $ 9 @.@ 5 million , but the buyer defaulted and died the next year . Garcia sold the property again , for US $ 13 million . Development started on a model community ' of luxury homes and resort properties . By 1962 the new developers were in financial trouble , and the property reverted again to Garcia in 1963 . 
 Dade County began considering purchase of 50 acres ( 200 @,@ 000 m2 ) around the Cape Florida lighthouse for a park in 1964 . Bill Baggs , editor of The Miami News , campaigned for all the Cape Florida property to be preserved in a park . U.S. Interior Secretary Stewart Udall inspected the property and recommended that it be preserved , although not with Federal funds . In 1966 Baggs brokered a deal between Elena <unk> Garcia and the state of Florida , in which Florida bought the property for US $ 8 @.@ 5 million , of which US $ 2 @.@ 3 million came from the U.S. government . This land was named the Bill Baggs Cape Florida State Park , and opened January 1 , 1967 . In 2004 a sign was installed to commemorate the site as part of the National Underground Railroad Network to Freedom Trail , for the Black Seminoles who escaped to the Bahamas . 
 = = = = Demographic = = = = 
 Key Biscayne is a small , intimate community . The majority of families that live there have known each other for generations . The kids that grew up on the island are known as Key Rats . 
 = Second Generation ( advertisement ) = 
 " Second Generation " is a 2006 television advertisement introducing Nike 's Air Jordan XXI brand of basketball shoes . The ad depicts signature moves from Michael Jordan 's NBA career , recreated in the present day by twelve young basketball players around the world . Included are moments from the 1989 , 1991 , 1992 , and 1998 NBA playoffs and the iconic 1992 slam dunk . 
 The ad was produced by Smuggler and directed by Brian Beletic for the advertising agency Wieden + Kennedy . Casting began in November 2005 , filming took place in January 2006 , and the ad debuted on television that February . Advertising publications gave favorable reviews to " Second Generation " , although it did not win major awards . 
 The ad is also listed as " 2nd Generation " ; its tagline is " Let your game speak " . 
 = = Production = = 
 The ad was conceived by the agency Wieden + Kennedy . <unk> Derek Barnes and Paul Renner were in a shopping mall when they noticed many of the youths around them wearing Air Jordan shoes , despite Jordan having retired in 2003 : " Just one look around the food court , you knew kids still waved his flag . " The creative directors were Kevin Proudfoot and Todd Waterbury . Waterbury explained , " We thought of the fact that a version of him is alive in everyone that loves basketball . And there are moments in Jordan 's career where you just say the move , or the game , and people who love the man , and love the sport , immediately can imagine that scene . Here , we were just taking advantage of those incredible moments . " 
 Wieden + Kennedy hired Brian Beletic to direct the ad . W + K art director Jesse Coulter said of choosing Beletic , " He gets it . He brings the flavor . " The music was composed by Jonathan Elias and David Wittman of Elias Arts . 
 Casting calls were held in three U.S. cities . A November 2005 ad put out by Ulysses Terrero and T & T Casting asked for " [ <unk> ] All ethnicities , ages 13 @-@ 21 , with amazing basketball skills - amazing enough to recreate some of Michael Jordan 's greatest moments on the basketball court . " Some 350 young basketball players auditioned over eight days ; Beletic recalls the process as " an absurd amount of casting " . The main challenge was in finding players who could match Jordan 's jumping ability ; the toughest shots were cast for older players . Casting was also complicated by the amateurism rules of the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) : anyone who might play college basketball in the future couldn 't appear in the ad . 
 Filming took place in Los Angeles in January 2006 . The action is set in the present day , across the world ; various scenes take place in Africa , China , Chicago , and New York City . Each scene is a few seconds long , depicting a young basketball player recreating a famous Jordan moment in slow motion . The actors were not shown footage of the moves they were performing ; rather , their performances were based on their own memories . The staff then " fine @-@ tuned " the scenes for accuracy . 
 = = Sequence = = 
 The ad opens on a young man dribbling in place . The music starts with a simple ostinato C – G – B ♭ – C line played by a muted synth bass . At 0 : 05 , a young man wags his tongue while dribbling . This is a signature move of Jordan 's . At 0 : 09 , a player drives to the basket with his tongue hanging out . He recreates a moment from the 1991 NBA Finals , game 2 : Jordan scored a layup after switching hands in midair to avoid Sam Perkins of the Los Angeles Lakers . 
 The music starts growing in complexity , adding violins and a new bass line as a piano takes over the ostinato . At 0 : 13 , the camera shows a young man chewing gum . At 0 : 15 , a young man spreads his arms in a defensive stance . His jersey is colored red , yellow , and black to evoke Africa . At 0 : 21 , an Asian boy palms the basketball . At 0 : 22 , a young woman shoots a fall away jumper . 
 The music adds a second violin line and a snare drum cadence . At 0 : 25 , a young man performs a " rock the cradle " slam dunk . At 0 : 29 , a young man recreates Jordan 's free throw line dunk from the 1988 NBA All @-@ Star Game Slam Dunk Contest . This is the only shot where the original scenery is imitated . The set colors match the colors of the Chicago Stadium , and the crowd is spaced out in the same way as the crowd during Jordan 's dunk ; they nevertheless wear modern clothes , as the ad is set in the present . The intent is that by this point , the viewer is aware of the significance of each shot . Waterbury said , " We built the action in a way so that it created tension in the spot . As the commercial continues to build , the viewer will recognize scene after scene after scene . " 
 At 0 : 35 , the camera cuts to the aftermath of The Shot . A young man jumps in the air and pumps his fist as another young man in an opposing jersey sinks to the floor . The moment is from the 1989 NBA Playoffs , when Jordan hit a game @-@ winning jump shot over Cleveland Cavaliers guard Craig <unk> . At 0 : 38 is Jordan 's last shot with the Chicago Bulls , after a crossover dribble past Utah Jazz guard Bryon Russell at the end of Game 6 of the 1998 NBA Finals . These scenes are musically punctuated with a bass drum roll and a cymbal crash . Finally , at 0 : 44 a young man shrugs after hitting a shot , as Jordan shrugged after scoring six three @-@ point field goals in the first half of Game 1 of the 1992 NBA Finals against the Portland Trail Blazers . 
 The rhythm of the music pauses for two beats . It resumes at a calmer level as the camera shows Jordan in street clothes , watching from the sideline . Jordan is shown for just two seconds , smiling and nodding . Waterbury said of this shot , " We wanted to make sure that , through this commercial , people understood Michael 's role as a mentor and a coach . His nod of approval at the end is his way of saying , ' Go . ' " The camera cuts back to the young player ; the tagline " LET YOUR GAME <unk> " is shown , and the scene fades to black with the " XXI " logo and then the " Jumpman " logo . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The ad received positive reviews from advertising publications . It listed by Adweek as the " Ad of the Day " and as one of the " Best Spots of February 2006 " . SHOOT named the ad their " Top Spot of the Week " . ESPN 's Darren <unk> wrote that " it deserves to be considered at the top of the list " of Jordan 's more than 400 commercials . Creativity called the ad " impeccably executed " , and Boards called it " so rich in detail that it entices in an instant " . Second Generation did not win any major industry awards . Another Nike / W + K / Smuggler effort in August 2006 , Pretty starring Maria Sharapova , would fare much better in that category . 
 On February 27 , 2006 , an anonymous Jordan fan uploaded a breakdown of the ad on YouTube , showing it side @-@ by @-@ side with the original footage . In an interview , Beletic commented on this video : " It is pretty awesome to watch . " 
 = December to Dismember ( 2006 ) = 
 December to Dismember ( 2006 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) , which took place on December 3 , 2006 , at the James Brown Arena in Augusta , Georgia . Professional wrestling is a type of sports entertainment in which theatrical events are combined with a competitive sport . The buildup to the matches and the scenarios that took place before , during , and after the event , were planned by WWE 's script writers . The event starred wrestlers from the ECW brand : storyline expansions of the promotion where employees are assigned to wrestling brands under the WWE banner . Despite it being an ECW brand pay @-@ per @-@ view , wrestlers from the Raw and SmackDown ! brands also worked on the pay @-@ per @-@ view . Its name was derived from the December to Dismember event held by the original Extreme Championship Wrestling in 1995 . 
 The main attraction on the event card was an Extreme Elimination Chamber match for the ECW World Championship . It featured wrestlers fighting in a ring surrounded by a steel structure of chain and girders . The six participants were defending champion Big Show , Bobby Lashley , Rob Van Dam , Hardcore Holly , CM Punk and Test . Lashley won the match and the ECW World Championship after pinning Big Show following a spear . The featured bout on the undercard was a tag team bout between The Hardys ( real @-@ life brothers Matt and Jeff ) and MNM ( Joey Mercury and Johnny Nitro ) , in which The Hardys were victorious . 
 The event had an attendance of 4 @,@ 800 and received about 90 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys , with 55 @,@ 000 of them domestic buys — the lowest buyrate in WWE history until the introduction of the WWE Network in 2014 . Although it was scheduled to be held again in 2007 , the show was canceled after all pay @-@ per @-@ view events became tri @-@ branded , which meant that there would be pay @-@ per @-@ view events with the entire roster on two consecutive weeks . 
 = = Background = = 
 Outside of the weekly ECW on Sci Fi broadcast , one of WWE 's primary television programs , the pay @-@ per @-@ view received little buildup on both Raw and SmackDown ! television shows , as WWE concentrated more on advertising the Survivor Series pay @-@ per @-@ view that aired one week prior to December to Dismember . At this time , the main storyline on the Raw brand featured tag teams , D @-@ Generation X and Rated @-@ RKO , and the SmackDown ! brand 's main storyline featured Batista and World Heavyweight Champion King Booker . The buildup for December to Dismember began in the middle of October . ( six weeks before the event occurred ) This was the only ECW brand exclusive pay @-@ per @-@ view WWE produced before the decision was made to have all three brands featured on future pay @-@ per @-@ views . 
 The main event at December to Dismember featured an Extreme Elimination Chamber match for the ECW Championship . On the October 24 , 2006 episode of ECW , Rob Van Dam defeated the ECW World Champion , Big Show for the second consecutive time . Per the stipulation , if Van Dam were to defeat the Big Show again , in a ladder match , he could then choose a time to face the Big Show for the ECW Championship . Van Dam chose to have his title shot at the December to Dismember pay @-@ per @-@ view . Authority figure , Paul Heyman , authorized Van Dam 's decision and added him to the Extreme Elimination Chamber contest for the ECW Championship along with Big Show and four other ECW superstars . The remaining four participants for the Extreme Elimination Chamber match were decided through standard singles matches . The first person to qualify for the match was Sabu , who defeated Kevin Thorn on the October 31 , 2006 episode of ECW . The following week , CM Punk and Test qualified by defeating Mike Knox and Tommy Dreamer , respectively . The final place was to be given to Hardcore Holly in a contract signing segment on the November 14 , 2006 episode of ECW . As Holly was making his way to the ring , Bobby Lashley , a wrestler from the SmackDown ! brand , attacked Holly and signed his contract himself to gain the sixth and final place in the Extreme Elimination Chamber . Although the six spots in the bout were filled , Heyman announced a Extreme Rules match , between Van Dam and Holly , on the November 21 , 2006 episode of ECW . If Holly were to defeat Van Dam he would take his place in the Extreme Elimination Chamber ; Van Dam however , won the match and cemented his place in the Extreme Elimination Chamber . Van Dam continued gaining momentum going into December to Dismember pay @-@ per @-@ view , as he , along with team members Sabu , Lashley , John Cena and Kane defeated the team of Big Show , Test , Umaga , Finlay and Montel Vontavious Porter in a 5 @-@ on @-@ 5 , elimination tag team match , at the Survivor Series pay @-@ per @-@ view . On the final episode of ECW , before December to Dismember , Van Dam defeated Sabu . Later in the show , CM Punk faced Test , but both men were counted out in their bout . In the main event , Big Show was disqualified in his match against Lashley as Test and Heyman 's Security Force ( Doug and Danny Basham ) assaulted Lashley . 
 The other main rivalry heading into December to Dismember was between the Hardy Boyz and MNM ( Joey Mercury , Johnny Nitro and Melina ) . Unlike the Extreme Elimination Chamber rivalry , this one did not include ECW superstars and only featured members of the Raw and SmackDown ! brands , making the pay @-@ per @-@ view non @-@ exclusive to ECW , spanning all three WWE brands . The buildup to the match between them began when Nitro and Jeff Hardy started to feud over the Intercontinental Championship on Raw . The two competed in several different types of matches , including a ladder match . The Hardy Boyz had just teamed up for the first time since 2002 , when they defeated Tony Mamaluke and Little Guido Maritato on an episode of ECW . At Survivor Series , The Hardy Boyz , along with D @-@ Generation X and CM Punk defeated the team of Nitro , Rated @-@ RKO ( Edge and Randy Orton ) , Mike Knox and Gregory Helms in a traditional Survivor Series team elimination match . The next day at the December to Dismember press conference , The Hardy Boyz announced an open challenge for the pay @-@ per @-@ view . Later that night on Raw , Nitro accepted the challenge , announcing the return of Mercury and the " one night only " reformation of MNM . On the following episode of ECW , MNM attacked The Hardy Boyz after they defeated Elijah Burke and Sylvester Terkay . Meanwhile , Voodoo Kin Mafia , a tag team from the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) promotion , issued a statement via the TNA website stating that they had accepted The Hardy Boyz open challenge for December to Dismember . However , Voodoo Kin Mafia did not turn up at the event , and WWE never acknowledged their challenge . Only two matches were officially announced for the pay @-@ per @-@ view before it aired . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the event went live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , Stevie Richards defeated René Duprée in a dark match , a non @-@ televised match used to generate excitement in the crowd . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first match that aired was the tag team encounter between MNM and The Hardy Boyz . After a back and forth match , which lasted over 20 minutes , MNM performed a flapjack DDT on Jeff , a move that sees an opponent get pushed upwards in air by the tag team and then is driven into the mat onto his own head . During a pinfall attempt , Matt Hardy made the save and performed a double neckbreaker on both members of MNM . Jeff then performed a Swanton bomb onto Nitro and made the winning pin . Next was Matt Striker versus Balls Mahoney in a " Striker 's Rules " match , a match with " no gouging of the eyes , no pulling of the hair , no maneuvers off the top rope and , most importantly , no foul language " . Mahoney won the match after he performed a spinebuster and pinned Striker for the victory . 
 After the match between Balls Mahoney and Matt Striker , Sabu was depicted as being injured backstage and unable to compete in the Extreme Elimination Chamber match . In reality , however , it was rumored that Sabu had animosity surrounding him backstage and was said to be uninterested at television tapings . Rumors evolved stating that WWE viewed Sabu as being " useless " in normal matches and that he could only perform in matches that included " stunts and tables and they [ WWE ] don 't respect him because of that " . This was reportedly part of the reason he had been scripted to be easily defeated by Umaga on an episode of Raw a few weeks earlier . WWE chairman Vince McMahon wanted to put Holly in Sabu 's place , so Lashley would have more villains to overcome . Heyman was legitimately unhappy with the decision , saying that Sabu 's high @-@ flying wrestling would be " the ideal showcase " inside the Extreme Elimination Chamber . The fans inside the James Brown Arena chanted " bullshit " during the segment . 
 In the second tag @-@ team match of the night , Elijah Burke and Sylvester Terkay defeated F.B.I. members Little Guido Maritato and Tony Mamaluke . Burke pinned Mamaluke after performing a Forward Russian legsweep on him and gaining the pinfall . After the match , Terkay performed a Muscle Buster on Maritato . During this match , the fans inside the James Brown Arena chanted " TNA , TNA " ( a reference to WWE 's rival professional wrestling promotion , as well as two of their performers utilizing moves used by TNA wrestlers , Jeff Jarrett and Samoa Joe , respectively ) . A standard match between Daivari and Tommy Dreamer followed with The Great Khali accompanying Daivari to the ring but was ejected from ringside early on for interfering . After Daivari won the match using a roll @-@ up , Khali came back out to the ring and grabbed Dreamer by the neck and gave him a <unk> . EMTs came out to help Dreamer get up , but he ended up getting up on his own and headed backstage . 
 The next match of the night was an intergender tag team match , with Kevin Thorn and Ariel against Mike Knox and Kelly Kelly . Before the match began , Kelly Kelly was shown wishing CM Punk , her on @-@ screen crush , luck for the main event . The end of the match came when Knox abandoned Kelly Kelly in the ring and Ariel performed a legsweep , a variation of a takedown , on Kelly Kelly before covering her for the win . Following the match , Ariel and Thorn attempted to attack Kelly Kelly , before The Sandman interrupted and hit Thorn repeatedly with a kendo stick . 
 = = = Main event match = = = 
 The main event was the Extreme Elimination Chamber for the ECW World Championship . After a segment earlier in the event showed an injured Sabu was unable to compete in the match , it was decided that Hardcore Holly would take his spot in the ECW Championship match . Before the match began , Paul Heyman announced the rules of the match and explained that each superstar had a weapon with them in each of their pods . Before entering the ring , Heyman had a conversation backstage with Big Show , that was unseen by television viewers , with him revealing that for the first time in his professional career he was not motivated to give the promo . Rob Van Dam and Hardcore Holly were the first superstars to begin the match and one of the other four competitors were then released from their pod every five minutes afterward . The first person to be released from his pod was CM Punk , who entered the match with a steel chair in hand . Test then followed , five minutes after him , with a crowbar . Punk was the first eliminated from the match , after Van Dam performed a Five Star Frog Splash from the top turnbuckle and covered him for the 3 @-@ count . Moments later , Test charged and hit Holly in the head with a big boot and eliminated him with a pin . Van Dam was the third person eliminated , after Test delivered a diving elbow drop from the top of a pod and pinned him . When it was Bobby Lashley 's turn his pod wouldn 't open , he could not exit it because Heyman 's Security Force had bolted the door shut . Lashley then used the table that was with him to smash through the pod , allowing him to escape . He then hit Test with a spear and then eliminated him with a pinfall . The defending ECW Champion , Big Show , was the final man to exit his pod and had a baseball bat wrapped in barbed wire in tow . Lashley was able to block Big Show 's swing of the barbed wire bat with a folding chair and then threw him into the pod , causing him to bleed . Lashley managed to reverse a chokeslam from the Big Show into a DDT and then landed a spear and gained the last pinfall to win the match and become the new ECW Champion . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Not long after December to Dismember , Big Show was offered a long @-@ term contract extension by WWE , reported to be around $ 1 million a year . He declined the offer , however , reasoning he was burned out and hurting physically . On the first episode of ECW to air after December to Dismember , Show and Lashley would compete in a rematch for the ECW Championship . The Big Show lost , thus ending their storyline feud , and he announced his retirement from wrestling . 
 After the storyline feud with Big Show ended , Lashley entered a short program with Rob Van Dam , which led to Van Dam earning a title match on the January 2 , 2007 episode of ECW . The match between the two ended in a No Contest after Test interfered during the bout . Test 's interference led to a storyline with the champion , leading to a title match at the Royal Rumble , which Lashley won . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Less than 24 hours after the pay @-@ per @-@ view , WWE announced on their official website that Vince McMahon had sent Heyman home , citing " slumping television ratings and a disgruntled talent roster as causes for Mr. Heyman 's dismissal " . Heyman and McMahon clashed on the plane to the North Charleston Coliseum and after a producers ' meeting , Heyman was escorted from the Coliseum and sent home . He was also immediately pulled from ECW 's creative team after the altercation . McMahon was attempting to put the blame on Heyman for the poorly received pay @-@ per @-@ view , and after a meeting with Vince and Stephanie McMahon , Heyman legitimately left World Wrestling Entertainment but remained under contract . Heyman was against the decision of Lashley being booked to win the ECW Championship , and instead wanted to have CM Punk win it , a decision McMahon disliked . This situation was cited by Punk in his controversial shoot promo in 2011 , in which he referred to the idea as one in which " Heyman saw something in [ Punk ] that nobody else wanted to admit . " In an early 2008 interview with The Sun , Heyman gave more details on how he would have booked the Extreme Elimination Chamber main @-@ event , which included having Punk enter first and quickly eliminating Big Show via submission . According to the interview , McMahon nixed the idea , but Big Show liked the direction Heyman was heading , and was eager for the opportunity to " make " a rising star like Punk . He also stated that he kept going to McMahon on the night of the pay @-@ per @-@ view to say that " The people are going to throw this back in our face " . Upset at how the event turned out , Tommy Dreamer and Stevie Richards both asked after the event to be released from their contracts . Both requests were refused by McMahon and WWE 's Vice President of Talent Relations John Laurinaitis . 
 Balls Mahoney gave an interview in 2015 to The Pay @-@ per @-@ <unk> and said that he was not allowed to use his finisher which he pitched to use from the second rope so as the bend the " Strikers rules ' stipulation . He also said that the match was so bad that he lost any desire to watch wrestling as a fan . 
 Critics had a negative reaction to the pay @-@ per @-@ view , with the only match that received praise being the Hardy Boyz versus MNM tag team match . Slam ! Sports rated the pay @-@ per @-@ view 4 out of 10 stars , stating , " the two matches that were promoted saved this thing from being a debacle " . In the 2006 Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards , the event was voted the " worst major wrestling show of the year " . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Elimination Chamber entrances and eliminations = = = 
 = Human Nature ( Michael Jackson song ) = 
 " Human Nature " is a song performed by American recording artist Michael Jackson . The lyrics describe a passer @-@ by in New York City . It was written and composed by Steve Porcaro and John Bettis , and produced by Quincy Jones . It is the fifth single from the singer 's sixth solo album , Thriller ( 1982 ) . Initially , Porcaro had recorded a rough demo of the song on a cassette , which was then given to Jones . Enjoying the demo , Jones brought in Bettis to finish the lyrics and had the ballad included on the " Thriller " album . The song was the last selected for the album , removing " Carousel " from the final track listing . 
 " Human Nature " was released on July 3 , 1983 , as the album 's fifth single . Although not released in the UK , the song achieved chart success in the US . Reaching number two on Billboard 's Hot Adult Contemporary chart and number seven on the Hot 100 , the song became Jackson 's fifth Top 10 hit from " Thriller " . In New Zealand the single reached number 11 . The ballad garnered many positive reviews from music critics . " Human Nature " has been covered and sampled by numerous artists , including Stevie Wonder , Vijay Iyer , John Mayer , Miles Davis , SWV , <unk> , Nas , 2Cellos , Jason Nevins , Danny Chan , David Mead and Chris Brown . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Human Nature " was written and composed by Steve Porcaro of Toto and John Bettis for Michael Jackson 's Thriller album . Initially , Porcaro recorded a rough demo of the song on a cassette . He had written the song after his first grade daughter came home crying because a boy pushed her off the slide . He blurted out three reasons for the incident to comfort her : one the boy liked her , two people can be strange and three it 's human nature . Fellow Toto band member David Paich gave the demo , along with two songs written by Paich , to producer Quincy Jones , hoping they would be included on Thriller . Jones did not think Paich 's songs were right for the album , but enjoyed the rough demo of " Human Nature " at the end of the cassette . Jones explained , " All of a sudden , at the end , there was all this silence , there was : ' why , why , dah dah da @-@ dum dah dah , why , why ' . Just a dummy lyric and a very skeletal thing — I get goosebumps talking about it . I said , ' This is where we wanna go , because it 's got such a wonderful flavor ' " . However , Jones was dissatisfied with the original lyrics and so Bettis , who had written lyrics for hits by The Carpenters and The Pointer Sisters , among others , was asked to add lyrics to the song . He completed the song in two days . The producer asked if the song could be included on Jackson 's album , to which Porcaro and Bettis agreed . " Human Nature " was the last song selected for Thriller , ousting " Carousel " from the final track listing . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Human Nature " was released on July 3 , 1983 , as the fifth single from Thriller . Although not released in the UK , the song achieved moderate chart success in the US . Reaching number two on Billboard 's Hot Adult Contemporary chart and number seven on the Hot 100 , the song became Jackson 's fifth Top 10 hit from Thriller . " Human Nature " charted at number 27 on the R & B singles chart . In the Netherlands the single reached number 11 . 
 John Rockwell , of The New York Times , stated that " Human Nature " was a " haunting , brooding ballad " with an " irresistible " chorus . Allmusic noted that the " gentle and lovely " " Human Nature " coexisted comfortably with the " tough , scared " " Beat It " . They later added that the song was a " soft rocker " . Reflecting on Thriller , Slant expressed their fondness of the song , stating that it was " probably the best musical composition on the album and surely one of the only A / C ballads of its era worth remembering " . The magazine added that the track 's " buttery harmonies " were powerful . Stylus also praised the song , describing it as " the smoothest of ballads " . They further added that the music " does little to embody the song ’ s message " and that it couches Jackson 's " glazed voice " in " bubble synths and drum pillows " . 
 About.com 's Bill Lamb looked back on the track 25 years after its release . He felt that the song " set down a blueprint for what would become known as adult R & B " . Kelefa Sanneh of Blender described the " soft @-@ serve balladry " of the song as a " silk @-@ sheets masterstroke " . In a 2008 IGN review , Todd Gilchrist explained that the elements of " Human Nature " worked better today than they did before . He added that it may be because modern R & B " sucks " . Tom Ewing , reviewer for Pitchfork Media , described the song as " meltingly tender " , with MTV adding that it was an " airy ballad " . Rolling Stone claimed that the " most beautifully fragile " " Human Nature " was so open and brave it made " She 's Out of My Life " seem phony . The Los Angeles Times concluded that it was Jackson 's delivery that made the " middling ballad " take off . 
 Vogue cites the poster for starting one of the hottest trends in costume jewelry that year . “ Several years back he borrowed three heraldic @-@ style brooches <unk> crests , crowns , and Maltese <unk> for a poster he was shooting , and the minute that poster came out , everybody wanted brooches , ” says Connie Parente in the Vogue interview . Connie Parente is the popular Los Angeles jewelry collector who gave the pieces for the shoot , close to the photographers and Michael Jackson 's personal stylist at the time <unk> Klein . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The song was first performed during The Jacksons ' Victory Tour . Michael started to sing " Ben " , but stopped and proceeded to sing " Human Nature " . It was also performed during Michael 's Bad World Tour and Dangerous World Tour . Jackson performed the song live for the last time during his 1996 Royal Brunei concert . It was going to be performed for Jackson 's This Is It concerts , but they were cancelled due to his death , however it was included on the posthumous album to coincide with the concerts . Live versions of the song are available on the DVDs Live at Wembley July 16 , 1988 and Live in Bucharest : The Dangerous Tour . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Track listing = = 
 45 RPM : 
 " Human Nature " ( 7 " remix ) – 3 : 47 ( <unk> as 4 : 06 ) 
 " Baby Be Mine " – 4 : 20 
 = = Official remixes = = 
 Album version – 4 : 06 
 7 " remix – 3 : 47 ( This version features an alternate synth before the bridge and several bars are cut after the final verse . The only digital source is the 3 " CD single for " Thriller " released in Japan in 1987 . ) 
 Edit – 3 : 46 ( This edit from the Essential Collection is an attempt at re @-@ creating the original 7 " version , however it does not match the instrumentation . ) 
 Live – 4 : 29 ( This version is taken from Live at Wembley July 16 , 1988 and included in the deluxe edition of Bad 25 . ) 
 " Speechless " / " Human Nature " – 3 : 18 ( Immortal version ) 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 In 1984 , the song was first covered by Philadelphia saxophonist George Howard in his album Steppin ' Out . 
 In 1985 , American jazz artist Miles Davis included a cover version of the song on his album You 're Under Arrest . At the time , Rolling Stone described the track 's inclusion on the album as " glorified filler " . The Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer disagreed , stating it was " particularly good " . In extended and reworked versions , the song would soon become a staple of Davis ' concerts during his last years , with Kenny Garrett soloing on saxophone . There are several recorded live takes , notably an impassioned version on the Miles in Paris video and album , recorded in 1989 . 
 In 1991 , Hong Kong singer Danny Chan covered this song in Cantonese 
 In 2003 , Brass band Youngblood Brass Band ( from Oregon , Wisconsin , U.S. ) recorded a Riot Jazz version of the song under the name " Human Nature Pt . 2 " on their album Center : Level : Roar . 
 In 2004 , Boyz II Men included a Latin @-@ style cover of the song on their Throwback , Vol . 1 album . 
 In 2004 , Filipina pop singer Kyla covered the song from her album , Not Your Ordinary Girl . 
 In 2004 , Nashville singer @-@ songwriter David Mead also recorded a version of " Human Nature " for his release , Indiana , which featured Butterfly Boucher . 
 In 2008 , jazz fusion / contemporary jazz pianist David Benoit covered the song from his renditions album Heroes . 
 In 2009 , on July 7 John Mayer performed an instrumental version of the song at Jackson 's public memorial service . 
 In 2009 , Mario covered the song in memory of Michael Jackson . 
 In 2010 , Jazz pianist Vijay Iyer included a solo piano version of the song in his album Solo ; in 2012 , he included a trio version of it in his album Accelerando . 
 In 2010 , Brazilian star Ivete Sangalo recorded the song for their DVD live at Madison Square Garden . 
 In 2010 , Heather Peace covered the song on her acoustic album This Is Me . 
 In 2010 , singer Craig David sang an acoustic cover of the song . 
 In 2011 , Toto ( whose band members wrote the song and performed the background music on Michael Jackson 's original version ) performed the song in memory of Jackson and a dedication to Mike Porcaro during their 2011 tour . Joseph Williams was the lead vocalist . Toto continued to perform this as a cover on their 2012 tour . 
 In 2011 , at the induction of John Bettis into the Songwriter 's Hall of Fame , Skylar Grey performed the song using a lap dulcimer . 
 In 2011 , Marcus Miller covered the song on his album Tutu Revisited – Live 2010 . 
 In 2012 , Amber Riley and Chord Overstreet ( respectively as their characters Mercedes Jones and Sam Evans ) covered this song in Glee 's episode " Michael " ( aired on January 31 ) . This cover debuted and peaked at number 56 at Billboard Hot 100 , number 31 at Billboard Hot Digital Songs , and number 62 at Billboard Canadian Hot 100 chart at the week of February 18 , 2012 . 
 In 2013 , Australian singer Taylor Henderson recorded a version for his album Taylor Henderson . 
 In 2014 , Tori Amos performed a cover , in a live mash @-@ up with " Torn " by <unk> / covered by Natalie Imbruglia , at the Britt Festival in Jacksonville , OR . 
 In 2014 , Justin Timberlake covered this song during his The 20 / 20 Experience World Tour , almost every concert of the tour . 
 In 2015 , the Cincinnati Pops Orchestra performed an instrumental version during their " Unforgettable : An Evening with Natalie Cole " concert at Music Hall in Cincinnati , Ohio . 
 = = = Sampling = = = 
 In 1992 , " Human Nature " was sampled by R & B group SWV . Titled " Right Here / Human Nature " , the song was a remix of the group 's " Right Here " . The song was later included on the soundtrack album of Free Willy , alongside Jackson 's " Will You Be There " . 
 In 1997 , " Human Nature " was sampled by R & B singer Aaliyah for the pop / R & B version of the song titled " Journey to the Past " for the 1997 animated film Anastasia soundtrack . 
 SWV 's remix was sampled by the late American rapper Tupac Shakur on " Thug Nature " , from the 2001 posthumous album Too Gangsta for Radio . 
 In 1994 , New York @-@ based rapper Nas sampled the song for his track " It Ain 't Hard to Tell " from his debut album Illmatic . 
 Jason Nevins , a DJ from New York City , sampled Jackson 's track on " I 'm in Heaven " , which also featured vocals by Holly James . 
 In 2003 , American R & B group <unk> 's " Why , Why " also sampled " Human Nature " . The song appeared on the album Level II . 
 In 2006 , R & B / pop artist Ne @-@ Yo used a sample of " Human Nature " for his remix version of " So Sick " , which also featured rapper LL Cool J. The remix released later on LL Cool J 's album Todd Smith . 
 In 2006 , " Human Nature " was remixed by Japanese drum and bass producer Makoto together with The Specialist . 
 In 2007 , singer Tyra B ( Tyra Bolling ) sampled and did a remix version including parts of Jackson 's " Human Nature " with her song " <unk> ' Me a Rush " as well as Paula Abdul 's " Rush Rush " . 
 In 2009 , following Jackson 's death on June 25 , the American rappers Yung Berg and Lil Wayne sampled " Human Nature " on their tribute song " We Miss You " . 
 In 2011 , English singer and musician , Floetry 's Marsha Ambrosius briefly sampled the song on the track " I Want You to Stay " from her debut album Late Nights & Early Mornings . 
 In 2011 , American pop singer Chris Brown sampled " Human Nature " and SWV 's remix version for the fourth single " She Ain 't You " from his album F.A.M.E .. 
 In 2013 , Eurovision 2011 winners Ell & Nikki sampled " Human Nature " on their tribute song " Music Still Alive " 
 In 2015 , " Human Nature " was sampled by American rapper Ludacris on " This Has Been My World " , from the album <unk> . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Written and composed by Steve Porcaro and John Bettis 
 Produced by Quincy Jones 
 Michael Jackson : vocals 
 David Paich : synthesizer 
 Steve Porcaro : synthesizer , synthesizer programming 
 Steve Lukather : guitar 
 Jeff Porcaro : drums 
 Paulinho Da Costa : percussion 
 Michael Boddicker : E @-@ mu Emulator 
 Arrangement by David Paich , Steve Porcaro and Steve Lukather 
 = Viva Piñata ( video game ) = 
 Viva Piñata is a 2006 life simulation game developed by Rare and published by Microsoft Game Studios for the Xbox 360 . The game revolves around the player tending to a neglected garden in Piñata Island , in which different variations of piñatas must be bred whilst fending off disruptive interlopers . The project was headed by Gregg Mayles and the team behind the Banjo @-@ Kazooie series , based on an idea from Rare co @-@ founder Tim Stamper . Microsoft wanted the game to become a key franchise for the platform , and developed a tie @-@ in television show to accompany the series . Viva Piñata released in November 2006 . 
 The game received positive reviews from critics , who praised the graphics , color palette , and numerous types of piñatas . They disliked the disruption caused by frequent autosaving . A Windows version was released in November 2007 . The game started the Viva Piñata series , with a direct sequel and a portable version both released in 2008 . Viva Piñata is included in Rare 's 2015 Rare Replay , a compilation of 30 games for the Xbox One . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Viva Piñata is a first @-@ person life simulation game in which the player restores and tends to a neglected garden on Piñata Island . The player uses gardening tools , such as shovels and watering cans , to plough their garden , sow seeds , create ponds , and sculpt the garden to their liking . When certain requirements are fulfilled , the garden will attract a black @-@ and @-@ white outline of a given piñata species . After fulfilling additional requirements , the piñata will become a resident , changing into a full @-@ color version . 
 Once two piñatas of the same species are residents and their mating requirements are met , they can perform a " romance " dance . If the player successfully completes a maze minigame , the romance results in a baby piñata egg , which is delivered by a stork . The piñatas are not gendered , and hence any two piñatas of the same species can mate . Once a piñata species has successfully romanced , the player can use a candy shortcut to bypass their original romance requirements . The player can hatch the egg or send it to another player over Xbox Live . The game 's antagonists include the " Ruffians " led by Professor Pester and " sour piñatas " who occasionally enter the player 's garden with the sole intent of wreaking havoc : eating seeds , dropping poisonous piñata candies , and destroying objects . The player may tame sour piñatas by constructing fences around them . Weeds may occasionally sprout in the player 's garden and will quickly spread to destroy vegetable rows if the player does not kill them in time . 
 The game features sixty types of piñatas . Certain animals are " <unk> " , and must eat other piñatas to become residents or reproduce . A food chain ( referred to as the doughnut of life ) exists , with a number of piñata species having one or two others that are considered prey . When such piñatas are visiting the garden , they devour garden residents to satisfy their residency requirements . Once piñatas are residents , they will not eat each other unless instructed to do so by the player , although fights can break out between residents who do not share the predator – prey relationship . <unk> die when they are broken open , either from another piñata 's <unk> , the hit of the player 's or Professor Pester 's shovel , or following an extended illness . Dead piñatas forfeit their equipped accessories . 
 = = Development = = 
 Rare co @-@ founder Tim Stamper conceptualized a gardening game for the handheld Pocket PC platform in 2002 . A three @-@ person team began work on a simple prototype while the company was still affiliated with Nintendo , prior to its Microsoft acquisition . Development transferred to the original Xbox and , ultimately , to the Xbox 360 for its enhanced graphical capabilities . The development team wanted its animals to have a unified style , which was how the concept artist arrived at the piñata conceit . The idea was exciting for the team , as piñatas were not commonplace in the United Kingdom . The connection between piñatas and candy @-@ filled insides led to new gameplay directions . 
 The Viva Piñata team was a model for productivity and regular output within Rare and Microsoft Studios . Though compared to the 12 @-@ person teams behind earlier Rare games , the company 's Xbox 360 development teams consisted of 50 to 60 people . The Viva Piñata team included about 50 people at its zenith . Microsoft transitioned its development teams to use its XNA package to streamline and reduce duplication in engineering efforts . Microsoft pressured the Viva Piñata development team to keep the game 's themes children @-@ friendly , as the parent company planned for the game and resulting franchise to increase the market appeal of their Xbox 360 . In 2006 , a Microsoft Games executive called the game its most important franchise . But its reception was tepid . 
 Viva Piñata was planned as a larger intellectual property . 4Kids TV had agreed to make a Viva Piñata cartoon before the game was released . 4Kids selected the series out of several Microsoft properties offered . 4Kids also handled the series merchandising . The cartoon is tied very closely to the game , and its animations are based on the game 's own 3D character models . Its episodes are approved by Rare 's Gregg Mayles for their applicability to the game . The cartoon was also designed to give viewers tips on how to interact with the in @-@ game piñatas . The animated series ' storyline later influenced the plot of Trouble in Paradise . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 After the release of Viva Piñata in 2006 , its development team saw it as incomplete . The developers cut partial ideas from the release to meet their deadlines . Rare 's Gregg Mayles said that the game sold well and steadily on par with their expectations and Xbox executive Phil Spencer added that the game was considered a success inside the company . The team incorporated player feedback and worked towards a " more definitive version " of the original . 
 During the Microsoft press conference at E3 2007 , a Microsoft Windows port of Viva Piñata was announced . The conversion was handled by Climax Group . The game is part of the Games for Windows programme which offers easier installation and support for Windows Vista 's Games Explorer , Xbox 360 Controller for Windows , Parental Controls , and the use of Games For Windows - Live . 
 In 2007 , Microsoft collaborated with amusement park Six Flags Mexico to promote the Xbox 360 as well as Viva Piñata . To accomplish this , a 48 feet ( 15 m ) tall , 52 feet ( 16 m ) long piñata , specifically a <unk> , was constructed at the park . At the time , it was the largest recorded piñata ever built . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Viva Piñata received " generally favorable " reviews , according to video game review aggregator Metacritic . Nearly a year after its release , Rare 's Justin Cook said that the game had sold about 500 @,@ 000 copies . 
 The graphics were unanimously praised by critics . Justin Calvert of GameSpot stated the attention to detail was " uniformly impressive " , and asserted that the visuals were cohesive . Erik Brudvig of IGN found that the game 's graphical slowdown during its frequent autosaving to be startling , although he praised the presentation overall . Andrew Taylor of the Official Xbox Magazine praised the vibrant use of colors and attention to detail . Will Tuttle of Team Xbox similarly stated the colors were " vividly vibrant " and the design aesthetics " remarkably appealing " , although he also found the autosaving slowdown frustrating . Gerald Villoria of GameSpy stated the graphics were " breathtaking " , and noted the color palettes of the piñatas themselves gave the appearance that they were " stripped directly from an animated show " . 
 Critics commended various aspects of the gameplay . Calvert enjoyed the wide customization options and large number of piñata variations , stating that the gameplay itself was " silky smooth " . Brudvig noted that there was a " ton to do " ; he praised the encouragement of discovery and stated that it was " constantly filled with moments where you find something new to do " . Tuttle commended the large number of piñatas , stating that finding managing all of the resources is " a lot of work " . Villoria praised the " surprisingly deep " strategic gameplay , saying that it was one of the most " entertaining and fulfilling " experiences for the Xbox 360 . 
 Viva Piñata was nominated for six awards by the Academy of Interactive Arts and Sciences for its 10th annual awards covering 2006 . The music score by Grant Kirkhope was nominated for Original Score at the 2007 BAFTA awards . The game was nominated for the " Best Original Game " in X @-@ Play 's " Best Video Games of 2006 " awards . Other accolades include a Parents ' Choice Award from the Parents ' Choice <unk> and GameSpot included the title as one of their ten nominees for their " 2006 Game of the Year " award , although it received only 3 % of the total votes . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 A sequel , Viva Piñata : Trouble in Paradise was announced in May 2008 and released in September of that year . The sequel adds more than 30 new piñata species , a " Just for Fun " sandbox mode , and new co @-@ operative modes , as well as new desert and arctic environments . 
 Rare announced plans to release a Nintendo DS version of the game at Comic @-@ Con 2007 . It was later revealed to be titled Viva Piñata : Pocket Paradise and was subsequently released in September 2008 . Key changes include a control scheme which makes use of the stylus , as well as the presence of additional context @-@ sensitive information on the second screen . On October 30 , 2007 , a party game spin @-@ off , Viva Piñata : Party Animals was released for the Xbox 360 . Developed by Krome Studios , the game features the TV show piñata characters competing in races and close to 50 party mini @-@ games . 
 = The Springfield Files = 
 " The Springfield Files " is the tenth episode of The Simpsons ' eighth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 12 , 1997 . The episode sees Homer believe he has discovered an alien in Springfield . It was written by Reid Harrison and directed by Steven Dean Moore . Leonard Nimoy guest stars as himself and David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson guest star as Agents Fox Mulder and Dana Scully , their characters on The X @-@ Files . The episode serves as a crossover with The X @-@ Files and features numerous references to the series . The story came from former showrunners Al Jean and Mike Reiss , who returned to produce this episode while under contract at Disney . It received mostly positive reviews from critics ; Jean and Reiss won an Annie Award for producing it . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Leonard Nimoy begins the episode hosting a show about alien encounters . He talks about an encounter in a town called Springfield . 
 At Moe 's on a Friday night , Homer drinks ten beers , and after insisting he takes a breathalyzer test where Homer reaches " Boris Yeltsin " level , Moe declares that he is drunk and will not let him drive . Homer decides to walk home , but takes a wrong path and ends up in the woods . In a clearing , he sees a glowing thin @-@ boned alien . Although the alien says " Don 't be afraid " , Homer panics and runs home screaming . 
 The rest of the family do not believe Homer 's story , believing it to be a drunken hallucination , and his attempts to report the alien sighting to the local police are dismissed . Agents Fox Mulder and Dana Scully of the FBI hear of the sighting and go to investigate . After receiving no results from their psychological tests of him ( which involved Homer making a polygraph explode and jogging on a treadmill ( which served no purpose other than Scully wanting Homer to lose weight ) , Homer fails to provide any proof that he actually did see an alien , including bringing the agents to the clearing where he saw the alien , which only succeeds in coming across a lost and confused Grampa . Homer is ridiculed by most of the neighborhood ; even Marge refuses to believe in his claims and demands he forget about it , but Bart admits that he does believe what Homer is saying . The next Friday night , the pair camp out in the forest . The alien arrives and promises peace , but Homer scares it away when he accidentally steps on their camp fire and screams in pain . Fortunately , Bart captured the entire incident on tape , and Homer thanks him , cheering for the evidence of the alien in their hands . 
 Leonard Nimoy tells the viewers goodnight . He is then reminded that the show still has ten minutes left by an off @-@ screen Squeaky Voiced Teen , at which point he runs to his car and leaves . The Squeaky Voiced Teen takes over the narrating duties . 
 Following the successful capture of the alien 's existence , Homer and Bart present it to the media . Although Bart 's tape is only three seconds long and is mostly static , everyone in town finally believes Homer , including Marge , who apologizes to Homer for doubting him . Lisa , on the other hand , refuses to believe this and maintains that there should be a more logical explanation . Friday comes again and everyone , including Leonard Nimoy and Agent Scully , goes to the forest . Sure enough , the alien appears again , promising love . The townspeople begin to riot , and charge at the alien . Lisa and Waylon Smithers stop them just in time , showing that the " alien " is actually Mr. Burns . Smithers explains that Burns receives longevity treatment once a week in order to cheat death for a further seven days ; this leaves him twisted and disoriented , as well as giving him a soft , high pitched voice as a result of a vocal cord scraping . Back to his normal self , Burns reveals that his green glow is due to many years of working in his nuclear plant , and then renounces his promises of peace and love and instead says that he now intends to bring fear , famine and pestilence , shortly before receiving another booster injection from Dr. Nick . He instantly reverts to his " alien " self ; he begins to sing " Good Morning Starshine " , with the entire crowd ( including Mulder , Scully , and Chewbacca ) joining in as the sun rises over the clearing . Squeaky @-@ voiced Teen closes the episode by telling the viewers to watch the skies ( he momentarily mispronounced it as skis ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was produced by Al Jean and Mike Reiss , who had served as showrunners of seasons three and four . They returned to the show to produce this and several other episodes while under contract at The Walt Disney Company . The episode was written by Reid Harrison and directed by Steven Dean Moore . It had one of the longest episode gaps between its conception to the time it was finished . The idea was first conceived at a story retreat . Jean found a copy of TV Guide while in the bathroom , with The X @-@ Files on the cover . Feeling a crossover would be a good idea , he came back into the room , told Reiss his idea , and the pair pitched it . None of the other staff wanted to do it , so Reiss and Jean decided to do it themselves . Before the episode was produced the script was sent to Chris Carter , the creator of The X @-@ Files , who said that it was an " honor " to be satirized by The Simpsons . Al Jean was worried that the episode was not funny , as at the table reading there were only a few of the writers present and as such , the script got no laughs at all . It took a long time to come up with an ending , and an explanation for the alien . Originally it was just going to be left as a mystery . Mulder and Scully 's office was designed to be exactly the same as the one used in The X @-@ Files . After it had been finished , Fox sent the episode out for a critical review , which was " really great " . The scene with the " Homer is a dope " T @-@ shirts originally had an extra line : " I told you , we 're sold out ! " , thus filling in the plot error in the actual episode in which Homer asks for some T @-@ shirts , despite just being told that they were sold out . The scene after Homer 's first encounter with the alien , in which he runs through a field writing " <unk> ! " in the grass was written by David M. Stern , and added in after the original read through . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The Leonard Nimoy segments are a send @-@ up of the paranormal documentary series In Search Of ... , which Nimoy hosted . 
 In addition to the appearances of Mulder and Scully , the episode features several other references to The X @-@ Files . 
 Mulder 's FBI badge has a picture of himself only wearing a speedo on it ; this is a reference to a scene in The X @-@ Files episode " Duane Barry " in which David Duchovny wore just a speedo . 
 Also , in the scene where Scully gives Homer a lie detector test , The Smoking Man is in the background . 
 At one point , Mulder begins a lengthy monologue ( leading Scully to roll her eyes and walk away ) including a reference to " the unsolved mysteries of Unsolved Mysteries . " 
 The Budweiser Frogs appear in the swamp , chanting their names , " Bud ... Weis ... Er . " They are then eaten by an alligator who growls " Coors ! " 
 Homer 's suggestion that he and Bart fake an alien encounter and sell it to the Fox network is an allusion to the Alien Autopsy <unk> Homer recounts his experience to Chief Wiggum , he recalls the alien having a sweet , heavenly voice and appearing every Friday night " like Urkel " , from the ABC / CBS sitcom Family Matters . 
 Homer , when asked by the agents about his pre @-@ sighting activities , falsely describes an evening in which he with members of the gentlemen 's club played a game of backgammon while discussing Wittgenstein . Such reference alludes to the Cambridge Moral Sciences Club , an elite club where Wittgenstein dominated in discussions to the extent of provoking fellow philosopher , Karl Popper , by brandishing a red @-@ hot poker at him ( according to Popper ) . 
 There are also numerous film references . 
 Marvin the Martian , Gort from The Day the Earth Stood Still ( 1951 ) , Chewbacca , ALF , and one of the Kang and Kodos siblings make up the FBI line @-@ up . 
 The music played by the Springfield Philharmonic comes from Psycho ( 1960 ) . 
 The narration sequences are based on Plan 9 from Outer Space ( 1959 ) . 
 In one chapter title , the phrase " All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy " being printed out ad infinitum is a reference to The Shining ( 1980 ) . 
 Mr. Largo conducts five of his students in playing the famous five @-@ note tones from Close Encounters of the Third Kind ( 1977 ) with marching band instruments . 
 Homer recounts seeing Speed ( 1994 ) , but believes it was called " The Bus That Couldn 't Slow Down " . 
 Milhouse plays a Kevin Costner 's Waterworld arcade game , moving just a few steps before having to insert another forty quarters , a reference to the budget overrun on Kevin Costner 's 1995 film Waterworld . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " The Springfield Files " finished 26th in ratings for the week of January 6 – 12 , 1997 , with a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 7 , equivalent to approximately 11 @.@ 3 million viewing households . It was the third @-@ highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files and the series premiere of King of the Hill . 
 Al Jean and Mike Reiss won the Annie Award for Best Individual Achievement : Producing in a TV Production for their work on the episode . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , said that it was " a very clever episode , with the line @-@ up one of the best visual gags in ages . " IGN.com ranked Leonard Nimoy 's performance in this episode , and " Marge vs. the Monorail " , as the 11th @-@ best guest appearance in the show 's history . Total Film 's Nathan Ditum ranked Duchovny and Anderson 's performances as the fourth @-@ best guest appearances in the show 's history . Skeptical Inquirer reviewed the episode positively , stating that " It 's rare that a popular , prime @-@ time network television show turns out to be a " slam dunk " for skeptics . " Critic Chris Knight speculated that if The X @-@ Files is one day forgotten , those who see this episode will probably still appreciate the scene with ALF , Chewbacca , and Marvin the Martian . 
 = Scream ( 1996 film ) = 
 Scream is a 1996 American slasher film written by Kevin Williamson and directed by Wes Craven . The film stars David Arquette , Neve Campbell , Courteney Cox , Matthew Lillard , Rose McGowan , Skeet Ulrich , and Drew Barrymore . Released on December 20 , 1996 , Scream follows the character of Sidney Prescott ( Campbell ) , a high school student in the fictional town of Woodsboro , California , who becomes the target of a mysterious killer known as Ghostface . Other main characters include Sidney 's best friend Tatum Riley ( McGowan ) , Sidney 's boyfriend Billy Loomis ( Ulrich ) , Billy 's best friend Stu Macher ( Lillard ) , film geek Randy Meeks ( Jamie Kennedy ) , deputy sheriff Dewey Riley ( Arquette ) , and news reporter Gale Weathers ( Cox ) . The film combined comedy and " whodunit " mystery with the violence of the slasher genre to satirize the cliché of the horror genre popularized in films such as Halloween and Friday the 13th . The film was considered unique at the time of its release for featuring characters who were aware of real world horror films and openly discussed the cliché that Scream attempted to subvert . 
 Based partly on the real @-@ life case of the Gainesville Ripper , Scream was inspired by Williamson 's passion for horror films , especially Halloween ( 1978 ) . The script , originally titled Scary Movie , was bought by Dimension Films and was retitled by the Weinstein Brothers just before filming was complete . The production faced censorship issues with the Motion Picture Association of America and obstacles from locals while filming on location . The film went on to financial and critical acclaim , earning $ 173 million worldwide , and became the highest @-@ grossing slasher film in the US in unadjusted dollars . It received several awards and award nominations . The soundtrack by Marco Beltrami was also acclaimed , and was cited as " [ one ] of the most intriguing horror scores composed in years . " It has since earned " cult status . " Scream marked a change in the genre as it cast already @-@ established and successful actors , which was considered to have helped it find a wider audience , including a significant female viewership . 
 Scream was credited with revitalizing the horror genre in the 1990s , which was considered to be almost dead following an influx of direct @-@ to @-@ video titles and numerous sequels to established horror franchises of the 1970s and 1980s . These sequels drew decreasing financial and critical success , as they exploited clichés upon which films in the genre had become reliant . Scream 's success spawned a series of sequels , though only Scream 2 , released in 1997 , achieved a level of commercial and critical success equal to the original film . In the years following the release of Scream , the film was accused of inspiring and even inducing violent crimes and murders . 
 = = Plot = = 
 High school student Casey Becker receives a flirtatious phone call from an unknown person , asking her , " What 's your favorite scary movie ? " The situation quickly escalates as the caller turns sadistic and threatens her life . He reveals that her boyfriend Steve Orth is being held hostage . After Casey fails to answer a question correctly about horror films , Steve is murdered . When Casey refuses to cooperate with the caller , she is attacked and murdered by a masked killer . Her parents come home to find her body hanging from a tree . 
 The following day , the news media descend on the town and a police investigation begins . Meanwhile , Sidney Prescott struggles with the impending one @-@ year anniversary of her mother 's murder by Cotton Weary . While waiting at home for her friend , Tatum Riley , Sidney receives a threatening phone call . After she hangs up she is attacked by the killer . Sidney 's boyfriend , Billy Loomis , arrives shortly after , but after he drops his cell phone , Sidney suspects him of making the call and flees . Billy is arrested and Sidney spends the night at Tatum 's house . 
 Billy is released the next day . Suspicion has shifted to Sidney 's father , Neil Prescott , as the calls have been traced to his phone . School is suspended in the wake of the murders . After the students have left the school , Principal Himbry is stabbed to death in his office . Tatum 's boyfriend , Stu Macher throws a party to celebrate the school 's closure . The party is attended by Sidney , Tatum , their friend Randy Meeks , and multiple other students . Reporter Gale Weathers attends uninvited to cover the situation , as she expects the killer to strike . Tatum 's brother deputy sheriff Dewey Riley also looks out for the murderer at the party . Tatum is killed during the party after having her head crushed by the garage door . Billy arrives to speak to Sidney privately , and the two ultimately consummate their relationship . Dewey and Gale investigate a nearby abandoned car . Many party attendees are drawn away after hearing news of Himbry 's death ; Sidney , Billy , Randy , Stu , and Gale 's cameraman Kenny remain . 
 After having sex , Sidney and Billy are attacked by the killer , who seemingly murders Billy . Sidney escapes the killer and seeks help from Kenny , but he gets his throat slit by the killer . Sidney again flees . Gale and Dewey , having discovered that the car belongs to Neil Prescott , return to the house . They believe Neil is the killer and has come to the party to continue his spree . Gale attempts to leave the scene in her van but drives off the road and crashes to avoid hitting Sidney . Meanwhile , Dewey is stabbed in the back while investigating in the house , and Sidney takes Dewey 's gun . Stu and Randy appear and accuse each other of being the killer . Sidney retreats into the house , where she finds Billy wounded but still alive . She gives Billy the gun ; he lets Randy into the house and shoots him . Billy reveals he has feigned his injuries and is actually the killer ; Stu is his accomplice . 
 Billy and Stu discuss their plan to kill Sidney and frame her father , whom they have taken hostage , for their murder spree . The pair also admits to killing her mother , Maureen . Billy says he was motivated to seek revenge on Maureen because she was having an affair with Billy 's father , which drove his mother away . Gale , thought dead by the killers , intervenes , and Sidney takes advantage of this to turn the tables on her attackers , killing Stu . Randy is revealed to be wounded but alive . Billy attacks Sidney but she shoots him through the head , killing him . As the sun rises and police arrive , a badly injured Dewey is taken away by ambulance and Gale makes an impromptu news report about the night 's events . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Scream was originally developed under the title Scary Movie by Kevin Williamson , an aspiring screenwriter . Influenced by a news story he was watching about a series of grisly murders by the Gainesville Ripper , Williamson became concerned about intruders upon finding an open window in the house where he was staying . He was inspired to draft an 18 @-@ page script treatment about a young woman , alone in a house , who is taunted over the phone and then attacked by a masked killer . The treatment remained as a short story while Williamson worked on another script , Teaching Mrs. Tingle , a thriller that he would eventually sell but that would languish in development hell for many years . Struggling to pay his bills , Williamson secluded himself in Palm Springs and focused on the development of his Scary Movie treatment , hoping for a quick sale to meet his financial needs . Over the course of three days , Williamson developed a full @-@ length script as well as two separate five @-@ page outlines for potential sequels — Scary Movie 2 and Scary Movie 3 . He hoped to entice buyers with the potential for a franchise . In an interview , Williamson said that one reason he focused on the Scary Movie script was because it was a film he wanted to watch , born of his childhood love of horror films such as Halloween , but " nobody else [ was ] making it " . His appreciation for previous horror films became evident in the script , which features inspiration from and references to films such as Halloween , Friday the 13th , A Nightmare on Elm Street , When a Stranger Calls , and Prom Night . Williamson listened to the soundtrack for Halloween for inspiration while writing the script . Excerpts from the soundtrack appear in the film . 
 By June 1995 Williamson brought the Scary Movie script to his agent , Rob Paris , to put out for sale . Paris warned him that the level of violence and gore in his script would make it " impossible " to sell . Following the script 's purchase by Miramax , Williamson was required to remove much of the <unk> content , such as graphic depictions of the internal organs of gutted murder victims " rolling " down their legs . However , once Craven was secured as director , he was able to bring much of the excised content back . Williamson was going to remove a scene in the school bathroom featuring Sidney , as he felt it was awkward and out of place in the film . Craven insisted the scene should remain , as he felt it developed the character and her relationship with her deceased mother . Williamson later confirmed that he was glad that Craven proved him wrong about the scene . Dimension Films head Bob Weinstein realized while reviewing the script that there were thirty pages ( approximately thirty on @-@ screen minutes ) without a murder , so he instructed Williamson to have another character killed . 
 Williamson included the death of the character Principal Himbry ( Winkler ) based on this input and in doing so inadvertently resolved a problem in the script 's finale . Williamson had struggled to find a reason for several extraneous characters to leave a party scene so that the killer could attack , finally determining that the announcement of the discovery of Himbry 's corpse would serve to remove the non @-@ essential characters who are so upset that they leave the party before ( and enabling ) the start of the murders . Concerning the killer 's motive , Williamson felt it was essential for the audience to learn why the antagonists had become killers , but he also felt it was potentially scarier if they had no motivation . Opinions at the studio were split between those who believed a motive was needed for resolution and those who felt the action was scarier without one . As there were two killers , Williamson decided to do both : Billy Loomis had the motive of maternal abandonment , while the second killer , Stu Macher , jokingly suggests " peer pressure " as his motive when prompted . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The script for what was then known as Scary Movie went on sale on a Friday in June 1995 , but received no bids . By the following Monday , the script had become the subject of a significant bidding war among a host of established studios , including Paramount Pictures , Universal Pictures , and Morgan Creek Productions . Producer Cathy Konrad read the script and felt it was exactly what the Weinstein brothers of the fledgling Dimension Films — then a part of Miramax — were looking for . Dimension had previously released several horror films and intended to focus on that genre . Konrad brought the script to Bob Weinstein 's assistant , Richard Potter . Believing it had potential , he brought it to Weinstein 's attention . Studios began to drop out of the bidding as the price of the script increased , and the final two bidders were Oliver Stone , who was at the time working under <unk> Pictures , and the Weinsteins of Dimension Films . Williamson agreed to a bid of $ 400 @,@ 000 from Miramax , plus a contract for two sequels and a possible fourth unrelated film . Williamson said he chose Dimension because he believed they would produce Scary Movie immediately and without significantly censoring the violence in the script . Craven read the script before he became involved in the production , and considered convincing a studio to buy it for him to direct . However , by the time Craven read the script , it had already been sold . 
