 As a captain , Jardine inspired great loyalty in his players , even if they did not approve of his tactics . Christopher Douglas judges that Jardine did very well to keep the team united and loyal on the Bodyline tour . He points out that team spirit was always excellent and the players showed great determination and resolve . Jardine particularly impressed Yorkshiremen who played under him , as they believed he thought about cricket in a similar way to their county colleagues . He became close to Herbert Sutcliffe during the Bodyline tour , even though Sutcliffe was sceptical about Jardine on the previous Australian tour in 1928 – 29 . Hedley Verity was impressed by Jardine 's tactical understanding and named his younger son Douglas after the captain . Bill Bowes expressed approval of his leadership after initial misgivings , and went on to call him England 's greatest captain . Nevertheless , some players such as Arthur Mitchell who played under Jardine believed he was intolerant and unsupportive of players of lesser talent , expecting everyone to perform at world @-@ class standards . 
 Jardine insisted on strict discipline from his players but in return he went to great lengths to look after them , such as organising dental treatment or providing champagne for his tired bowlers . Critics praised his skill in field placing , which was sometimes interpreted as panic when he made frequent changes if the batsmen were on top . He also displayed great physical courage , such as when he was struck by a ball hard enough to draw blood on the Bodyline tour , but refused to show pain before reaching the dressing room . On the same tour , he instructed his men not to be friendly or to socialise with the Australian players ; Gubby Allen even claimed that Jardine instructed the team to hate the Australians . Robertson @-@ Glasgow wrote that Jardine made thorough preparation for games in which he was captain , studying individual batsmen at great length to find weaknesses . He had very clear plans , judged the strengths and weaknesses of his teams and knew how to get the best out of individual players . However , Robertson @-@ Glasgow considered it a grave misjudgement to make Jardine captain of England , particularly given his known antipathy towards Australia . Pelham Warner described how Jardine " was a master of tactics and strategy , and was especially adept in managing fast bowlers and thereby preserving their energy . He possessed a great capacity for taking pains , which , it has been said , is the mark of a genius ... As a field tactician and selector of teams he was , I consider , surpassed by no one and equalled by few , if any . " 
 Laurence Le Quesne argues that one of Jardine 's greatest talents , and at the same time greatest weaknesses , was his ability to formulate a winning strategy without consideration of wider contexts such as the social aspect of the game . On the Bodyline tour , he ignored the diplomacy required of an M.C.C. delegation . Instead , he embarked , according to Le Quesne , to win the Tests and settle personal scores with the Australians . Jardine was personally incapable of reacting to the crowds or responding to the controversy in a way that would have eased tensions , and so was not a good choice as captain given what the selectors already knew of him . Nevertheless , Le Quesne believed that when trouble arose , Jardine conducted himself with " great moral courage and an impressive degree of dignity and restraint . " 
 In his Wisden obituary , Jardine was described as one of England 's best captains , while Jack Hobbs rated him the second best captain after Percy Fender . Warner also said that he was a fine captain on and off the field , and in dealing with administrators . In fact , he stated that , " If ever there was a cricket match between England and the rest of the world and the fate of England depended upon its result , I would pick Jardine as England captain every time . " 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 Jardine divided opinion among those with whom he played . He could be charming and witty or ruthless and harsh , while many people who knew him believed him to be innately shy . David Frith describes him as a complex figure who could change moods quickly . Although he could be friendly off the field , he became hostile and determined once he stepped onto the field . At his memorial service , he was described by Hubert Ashton as being " provocative , austere , brusque , shy , humble , thoughtful , kindly , proud , sensitive , single @-@ minded and possessed of immense moral and physical courage , " and Frith argues that these varied qualities are easily proven by what was said about him . 
 Harold Larwood maintained great respect for Jardine , <unk> a gift his captain gave him after the Bodyline tour and believing him to be a great man . Jardine showed affection for Larwood in return even after both of their retirements ; he expressed his concern for the way Larwood was treated , hosted a lunch for the former fast bowler shortly before he emigrated to Australia and met him there in 1954 . On the other hand , Donald Bradman would never speak to journalists about Bodyline or Jardine , and refused to give a tribute when Jardine died in 1958 . Jack Fingleton admitted that he had liked Jardine and stated that he and Larwood had each done their job on the Bodyline tour , and expressed regret at the way both left cricket in acrimonious circumstances . Fingleton also described Jardine as an aloof individual who preferred to take his time in judging a person before befriending them , a quality that caused problems in Australia . Bill O 'Reilly stated that he disliked Jardine at the time of Bodyline , but on meeting him later found him agreeable and even charming . 
 Alan Gibson said that Jardine had " irony rather than humour " . He sent Herbert Sutcliffe an umbrella as a joke on the day of his benefit match , when rain would have ruined the match and lost Sutcliffe a considerable amount of money . Many people who knew Jardine later in his life described him as having a sense of humour . Robertson @-@ Glasgow noted that while he could curse very eloquently , Jardine displayed " dislike of waste in material or words . " He also commented that " if he has sometimes been a fierce enemy , he has also been a wonderful friend . " 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = Career after cricket = = = 
 Shortly before the tour of India in 1933 – 34 , Jardine became engaged and on 14 September 1934 , married Irene " Isla " Margaret Peat in London . She had met Jardine at shooting parties at her father 's Norfolk home . According to Gerald Howat , Jardine 's marriage was the probable reason for his giving up playing first @-@ class cricket . Jardine 's father @-@ in @-@ law was keen for him to pursue his law career but he instead continued as a bank clerk and began to work as a journalist . He reported on the 1934 Ashes for the Evening Standard . His writing for the press , and in a follow @-@ up book on the series , was critical of selectors but less so of the players . In 1936 , he penned Cricket : how to succeed , which was written as an instruction book for the National Union of Teachers . There was a possibility of his going to Australia as a journalist to cover the M.C.C. tour of 1936 – 37 , to the dismay of Hore @-@ Ruthven , but nothing came of this . With alterations to the law in 1935 , changing the lbw law and preventing Bodyline bowling , Jardine became increasingly disillusioned with top @-@ level cricket . He had grown uncomfortable with the nationalism stirred up by Tests , the greed of clubs and the large public following of individual players , particularly Bradman . At the same time , Jardine seemed to be ostracised by cricket writers and commentators , who simply ignored him . For example , Wisden made no mention of his retirement . Christopher Douglas believes that Jardine was used as a scapegoat for Bodyline once the M.C.C. stopped supporting the tactic and that a stigma was attached to him for the rest of his life and beyond . 
 Although Jardine had retired from regular first @-@ class competition , he continued to play club cricket . Jardine and his wife initially lived in Kensington but moved to Reading after the birth of their first child , daughter <unk> . A second daughter , Marion , followed but the family suffered from financial worries . Jardine , as well as working in journalism , earned money from playing bridge . The family also tried unsuccessfully to engage in market gardening . To make more money , Jardine became a salesman with Cable & Wireless before working for a coal mining company in the late 1930s . In 1939 , he returned to cricket journalism and according to Christopher Douglas , achieved his highest standard as a writer . 
 = = = Career in the Second World War = = = 
 Jardine joined the Territorial Army in August 1939 . Once World War II began , he was commissioned into the Royal Berkshire Regiment and went with the British Expeditionary Force to France . He served at Dunkirk , where he was fortunate to escape but suffered some injuries . After serving as staff captain at St. Albans , he was posted to India for the remainder of the war . He served in Quetta , then Simla as a major in the Central Provisions Directorate . He became fluent in the Hindustani language and although friendly , never formed close relationships with other officers . He gave lectures and played some cricket while in India . He left the army in 1945 only to find his job with the coal mining company was no longer available . 
 In the meantime , his wife had moved to Somerset . In 1940 , she gave birth to a son , Euan , who had many medical problems , and in 1943 she bore a third daughter , Iona . The pressure of running the household and caring for Euan led Isla to have a nervous breakdown after Iona 's birth . When Jardine returned from the war , the family moved to Radlett to be closer to London . Isla recovered and Jardine found a job with paper manufacturers Wiggins <unk> . In 1946 , Jardine was chosen to play for Old England in a popular and successful fund raising match against Surrey . He displayed much of his old batting skill but did not show much involvement with his team @-@ mates . By 1948 , Jardine was more accepted in the cricket world . This was partly due to English perception of the short @-@ pitched fast bowling of Australian pairing Ray Lindwall and Keith Miller as being hostile . England 's poor performance in the 1946 – 47 and 1948 Ashes also caused writers to remember Jardine more fondly as an icon of past English success . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 In 1953 , Jardine resumed journalism for the Ashes series and expressed a high opinion of Len Hutton 's captaincy . He also did some broadcasting and wrote short stories to supplement his income ; Isla was in poor health and her medical care was expensive . In the same year , he became the first President of the Umpires Association , while from 1955 to 1957 he was President of the Oxford University Cricket Club . In 1953 , he travelled , with some trepidation , as a board member of the Scottish Australian Company to inspect some land in Australia . While there , he struck up a friendship with Fingleton and was surprised to be well received in the country , in his own words , as " an old so @-@ and @-@ so who got away with it . " 
 In 1957 , Jardine travelled to Rhodesia , again to inspect some land , with his daughter Marion . While there , he became ill with tick fever . He showed no improvement upon his return to England and further tests revealed that he had advanced lung cancer . After some treatment , he travelled with his wife to a clinic in Switzerland but it was discovered that the cancer had spread and was incurable . He died in Switzerland on 18 June 1958 and his ashes were scattered over the top of <unk> Cross mountain in Perthshire , Scotland . His family had enquired about having his ashes dispersed at Lord 's , but this honour was restricted to war dead . When he died , his estate was valued at just over £ 71 @,@ 000 , which would have been worth around £ 1 ¼ million in 2008 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Jardine is inextricably associated with Bodyline . John Arlott wrote in 1989 that " It is no exaggeration to say that , among Australians , Douglas Jardine is probably the most disliked of cricketers . " In the view of Christopher Douglas , his name " stands for the legendary British qualities of cool @-@ headed determination , implacable resolve , patrician disdain for crowds and critics alike – if you 're English that is . To Australians the name is synonymous with the legendary British qualities of snobbishness , cynicism and downright <unk> arrogance . " He also argues that Bodyline , which was legal at the time , was a necessary step to overcome the unfair advantage which batsmen of the time enjoyed . 
 After the Bodyline tour , according to cricket writer Gideon Haigh , Jardine was seen as " the most reviled man in sport . " This perception faded from the 1950s onwards , and in more recent times , Jardine has been viewed more sympathetically . In 2002 , the England captain Nasser Hussain was compared to Jardine as a compliment when he displayed ruthlessness against the opposition . 
 = Maniac Mansion = 
 Maniac Mansion is a 1987 graphic adventure video game developed and published by Lucasfilm Games . It follows teenage protagonist Dave Miller as he attempts to rescue his girlfriend from a mad scientist , whose mind has been enslaved by a sentient meteor . The player uses a point @-@ and @-@ click interface to guide Dave and two of his six playable friends through the scientist 's mansion while solving puzzles and avoiding dangers . Gameplay is nonlinear , and the game must be completed in different ways based on the player 's choice of characters . Initially released for the Commodore 64 and Apple II , Maniac Mansion was Lucasfilm Games ' first self @-@ published product . 
 The game was conceived in 1985 by Ron Gilbert and Gary Winnick , who sought to tell a comedic story based on horror film and B movie clichés . They mapped out the project as a paper @-@ and @-@ pencil game before coding commenced . While earlier adventure titles had relied on command lines , Gilbert disliked such systems , and he developed Maniac Mansion 's simpler point @-@ and @-@ click interface as a replacement . To speed up production , he created a game engine called SCUMM , which was used in many later LucasArts titles . After its release , Maniac Mansion was ported to several platforms . A port for the Nintendo Entertainment System had to be reworked heavily , in response to complaints by Nintendo of America that the game was inappropriate for children . 
 Maniac Mansion was critically acclaimed : reviewers lauded its graphics , cutscenes , animation and humor . Writer Orson Scott Card praised it as a step toward " computer games [ becoming ] a valid storytelling art . " It influenced numerous graphic adventure titles , and its point @-@ and @-@ click interface became a standard feature in the genre . The game 's success solidified Lucasfilm as a serious rival to adventure game studios such as Sierra On @-@ Line . In 1990 , Maniac Mansion was adapted into a three @-@ season television series of the same name , written by Eugene Levy and starring Joe Flaherty . A sequel to the game , entitled Day of the Tentacle , was released in 1993 . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Maniac Mansion is a graphic adventure game in which the player uses a point @-@ and @-@ click interface to guide characters through a two @-@ dimensional game world and to solve puzzles . Fifteen action commands , such as " Walk To " and " <unk> " , may be selected by the player from a menu on the screen 's lower half . The player starts the game by choosing two out of six characters to accompany protagonist Dave Miller . Each character possesses unique abilities : for example , Syd and Razor can play musical instruments , while Bernard can repair appliances . The game may be completed with any combination of characters ; but , since many puzzles are solvable only by certain characters , different paths must be taken based on the group 's composition . Maniac Mansion features cutscenes , a word coined by Ron Gilbert , that interrupt gameplay to advance the story and inform the player about offscreen events . 
 The game takes place in the mansion of the fictional Edison family : Dr. Fred , a mad scientist ; Nurse Edna , his wife ; and their son Weird Ed . Living with the <unk> are two large , disembodied tentacles , one purple and the other green . The intro sequence shows that a sentient meteor crashed near the mansion twenty years earlier ; it brainwashed the <unk> and directed Dr. Fred to obtain human brains for use in experiments . The game begins as Dave Miller prepares to enter the mansion to rescue his girlfriend , Sandy <unk> , who was kidnapped by Dr. Fred . With the exception of the green tentacle , the mansion 's inhabitants are hostile , and will throw the player characters into the dungeon — or , in some situations , kill them — if they see them . When a character dies , the player must choose a replacement from the unselected characters ; and the game ends if all characters are killed . Maniac Mansion has five possible endings , based on which characters are chosen , which survive , and what the characters accomplish . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Maniac Mansion was conceived in 1985 , when Lucasfilm Games employees Ron Gilbert and Gary Winnick were assigned to create an original game . Gilbert had been hired the previous year as a programmer for the game Koronis Rift . He befriended Winnick over their similar tastes in humor , film and television . Company management provided little oversight in the creation of Maniac Mansion , a trend to which Gilbert credited the success of several of his games for Lucasfilm . 
 Gilbert and Winnick co @-@ wrote and co @-@ designed the project , but they worked separately as well : Gilbert on programming and Winnick on visuals . As both of them enjoyed B horror films , they decided to make a comedy @-@ horror game set in a haunted house . They drew inspiration from a film whose name Winnick could not recall . He described it as " a ridiculous teen horror movie " , in which teenagers inside a building were killed one by one without any thought of leaving . This film , combined with clichés from popular horror movies such as Friday the 13th and A Nightmare on Elm Street , became the basis for the game 's setting . Early work on the game progressed organically : according to Gilbert , " Very little was written down . Gary and I just talked and laughed a lot , and out it came . " Lucasfilm Games relocated to the Stable House at Skywalker Ranch during Maniac Mansion 's conception period , and the ranch 's Main House was used as a model for the mansion . Several rooms from the Main House received exact reproductions in the game , such as a library with a spiral staircase and a media room with a large @-@ screen TV and grand piano . 
 Story and characters were a primary concern for Gilbert and Winnick . The pair based the game 's cast on friends , family members , acquaintances and stereotypes . For example , Winnick 's girlfriend Ray was the inspiration for Razor , while Dave and Wendy were based , respectively , on Gilbert and a fellow Lucasfilm employee named Wendy . According to Winnick , the Edison family was shaped after characters from EC Comics and Warren Publishing magazines . The sentient meteor that brainwashes Dr. Fred was inspired by a segment from the 1982 anthology film Creepshow . A man @-@ eating plant , similar to that of Little Shop of Horrors , was included as well . The developers sought to strike a balance between tension and humor with the game 's story . 
 Initially , Gilbert and Winnick struggled to choose a gameplay genre for Maniac Mansion . While visiting relatives over Christmas , Gilbert saw his cousin play King 's Quest : Quest for the Crown , an adventure game by Sierra On @-@ Line . Although he was a fan of text adventures , this was Gilbert 's first experience with a graphic adventure , and he used the holiday to play the game and familiarize himself with the format . As a result , he decided to develop his and Winnick 's ideas into a graphic adventure game . 
 Maniac Mansion 's story and structure were designed before coding commenced . The project 's earliest incarnation was a simple paper @-@ and @-@ pencil board game , in which the mansion 's floor plan was used as a game board , and cards represented events and characters . Lines connected the rooms to illustrate pathways by which characters could travel . Strips of cellulose acetate were used to map out the game 's puzzles by tracking which items worked together when used by certain characters . Impressed by the map 's complexity , Winnick included it in the final game as a poster hung on a wall . Because each character contributes different skills and resources , the pair spent months working on the event combinations that could occur . This extended the game 's production time beyond that of previous Lucasfilm Games projects , which almost led to Gilbert 's firing . The game 's dialogue , written by David Fox , was not created until after programming had begun . 
 = = = Production and SCUMM = = = 
 Gilbert started programming Maniac Mansion in 6502 assembly language , but he quickly decided that the project was too large and complex for this method . He decided that a new game engine would have to be created . Its coding language was initially planned to be LISP @-@ inspired , but Gilbert opted for one similar to C. Lucasfilm employee Chip Morningstar contributed the base code for the engine , which Gilbert then built on . Gilbert hoped to create a " system that could be used on many adventure games , cutting down the time it took to make them " . Maniac Mansion 's first six @-@ to @-@ nine months of production were dedicated largely to engine development . The game was developed around the Commodore 64 home computer , an 8 @-@ bit system with only 64 KB of memory . The team wanted to include scrolling screens , but as it was normally impossible to scroll bitmap graphics on the Commodore 64 , they had to utilize lower @-@ detail tile graphics . Winnick gave each character a large head made of three stacked sprites to make them recognizable . 
 Although Gilbert wrote much of the foundational code for Maniac Mansion , the majority of the game 's events were programmed by Lucasfilm employee David Fox . Fox was between projects and planned to work on the game only for a month , but he remained with the team for six months . With Gilbert , he wrote the characters ' dialog and choreographed the action . Winnick 's concept art inspired him to add new elements to the game : for example , Fox allowed the player to place a hamster inside the kitchen 's microwave . 
 The team wanted to avoid punishing the player for applying everyday logic in Maniac Mansion . Fox noted that one Sierra game features a scene in which the player , without prior warning , may encounter a game over screen simply by picking up a shard of glass . He characterized such game design as " sadistic " , and he commented , " I know that in the real world I can successfully pick up a broken piece of mirror without dying " . Because of the project 's nonlinear puzzle design , the team struggled to prevent no @-@ win scenarios , in which the player unexpectedly became unable to complete the game . As a result of this problem , Gilbert later explained , " We were constantly fighting against the desire just to rip out all the endings and just go with three characters , or even sometimes just one character " . Lucasfilm Games had only one playtester , and many dead @-@ ends went undetected as a result . Further playtesting was provided by Gilbert 's uncle , to whom Gilbert mailed a floppy disk of the game 's latest version each week . 
 The Maniac Mansion team wanted to retain the structure of a text @-@ based adventure game , but without the standard command @-@ line interface . Gilbert and Winnick were frustrated by the genre 's text parsers and frequent game over screens . While in college , Gilbert had enjoyed Colossal Cave Adventure and the games of <unk> , but he disliked their lack of visuals . He found the inclusion of graphics in Sierra On @-@ Line games , such as King 's Quest , to be a step in the right direction . However , these games still require the player to type , and to guess which commands must be input . In response , Gilbert programmed a point @-@ and @-@ click graphical user interface that displays every possible command . Fox had made a similar attempt to streamline Lucasfilm 's earlier Labyrinth : The Computer Game , and he conceived the entirety of Maniac Mansion 's interface , according to Gilbert . Forty input commands were planned at first , but the number was gradually reduced to 12 . Gilbert finished the Maniac Mansion engine — which he later named " Script Creation Utility for Maniac Mansion " ( SCUMM ) — after roughly one year of work . Although the game was designed for the Commodore 64 , the SCUMM engine allowed it to be ported easily to other platforms . 
 After 18 to 24 months of development , Maniac Mansion debuted at the 1987 Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago . The game was released for the Commodore 64 and Apple II in October 1987 . While previous Lucasfilm Games products had been published by outside companies , Maniac Mansion was self @-@ published . This became a trend at Lucasfilm . The company hired Ken Macklin , an acquaintance of Winnick 's , to design the game 's packaging artwork . Gilbert and Winnick collaborated with the marketing department to design the back cover . The two also created an insert that includes hints , a backstory and jokes . An MS @-@ DOS port was released in early 1988 , developed in part by Lucasfilm employees Aric Wilmunder and Brad Taylor . Ports for the Amiga , Atari ST and Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) followed , with the Amiga and Atari ST ports in 1989 and the NES port in 1990 . The 16 @-@ bit versions of Maniac Mansion featured a copy protection system requiring the user to enter graphical symbols out of a code book include with the game . This was not present in the Commodore 64 and Apple versions due to lack of disk space , so those instead used an on @-@ disk copy protection . 
 = = Nintendo Entertainment System version = = 
 There were two separate versions of the game developed for the NES . The first port was handled and published by Jaleco only in Japan . Released in 1989 it featured characters redrawn in a cute art style and generally shrunken rooms . No scrolling is present , leading to rooms larger than a single screen to be displayed via flip @-@ screens . Many of the background details are missing , and instead of a save feature an over 100 character long password is required to save progress . In September 1990 Jaleco released an American version of Maniac Mansion as the first NES title developed by Lucasfilm Games in cooperation with Realtime Associates . Generally , this port is regarded as being far closer to the original game than the Japanese effort . Company management was occupied with other projects , and so the port received little attention until employee Douglas Crockford volunteered to direct it . The team used a modified version of the SCUMM engine called " NES SCUMM " for the port . According to Crockford , " [ One ] of the main differences between the NES and PCs is that the NES can do certain things much faster " . The graphics had to be entirely redrawn to match the NES 's display resolution . Tim Schafer , who later designed Maniac Mansion 's sequel Day of the Tentacle , received his first professional credit as a playtester for the NES version of Maniac Mansion . 
 During Maniac Mansion 's development for the Commodore 64 , Lucasfilm had censored profanity in the script : for instance , the early line of dialogue " Don 't be a shit head " became " Don 't be a tuna head " . However , additional content was removed from the NES version to make it suitable for a younger audience , and to conform with Nintendo 's policies . Jaleco USA president Howie Rubin warned Crockford about content to which Nintendo might object , such as the word " kill " . After reading the NES Game Standards Policy for himself , Crockford suspected that further elements of Maniac Mansion could be problematic , and he sent a list of questionable content to Jaleco . When the company replied that the content was reasonable , Lucasfilm Games submitted Maniac Mansion for approval . 
 One month later , Nintendo of America contacted Lucasfilm Games to request the removal of offensive text and nude graphics . Crockford censored this content but attempted to leave the game 's essence intact . For example , Nintendo wanted graffiti in one room — which provided an important hint to players — removed from the game . Unable to comply without simultaneously removing the hint , the team simply shortened it . Sexually suggestive and otherwise " graphic " dialogue was edited , including a remark from Dr. Fred about " pretty brains [ being ] sucked out " . The nudity described by Nintendo encompassed a swimsuit calendar , a classical sculpture and a poster of a mummy in a Playmate pose . After a brief fight to keep the sculpture , the team ultimately removed all three . The phrase " NES SCUMM " in the credits sequence was censored as well . 
 Lucasfilm Games re @-@ submitted the edited version of Maniac Mansion to Nintendo , which then manufactured 250 @,@ 000 cartridges . Each cartridge was fitted with a battery @-@ powered back @-@ up to save data . Nintendo announced the port through its official magazine in early 1990 , and it provided further coverage later that year . The ability to microwave a hamster remained in the game , which Crockford cited as an example of the censors ' contradictory criteria . However , Nintendo later noticed it , and after the first batch of cartridges was sold , Jaleco was forced to remove the content from future shipments . 
 Late in development , Jaleco commissioned Realtime Associates to provide background music , which no previous version of Maniac Mansion had featured . Realtime Associates ' founder and president David Warhol noted that " video games at that time had to have ' wall to wall ' music " . He brought in George " The Fat Man " Sanger and his band , along with David Hayes , to compose the score . Their goal was to create songs that suited each character , such as a punk rock theme for Razor , an electronic rock theme for Bernard and a version of Thin Lizzy 's " The Boys Are Back in Town " for Dave Miller . Warhol translated their work into NES chiptune music . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Keith Farrell of Compute ! ' s Gazette was struck by Maniac Mansion 's similarity to film , particularly in its use of cutscenes to impart " information or urgency " . He lauded the game 's graphics , animation and high level of detail . Commodore User 's Bill <unk> and three reviewers from Zzap ! 64 compared the game to The Rocky Horror Picture Show . Further comparisons were drawn to Psycho , Friday the 13th , The Texas Chain Saw Massacre , The Addams Family and Scooby @-@ Doo . Russ <unk> of Commodore Magazine found the cutscenes to be creative and well made , and he commented that the " characters are distinctively Lucasfilm 's , bringing facial expressions and personality to each individual character " . In Compute ! , Orson Scott Card praised the game 's humor , cinematic storytelling and lack of violence . He called it " compellingly good " and evidence of Lucasfilm 's push " to make computer games a valid storytelling art " . 
 German magazine Happy @-@ Computer commended the point @-@ and @-@ click interface and likened it to that of Uninvited by <unk> Simulations . The publication highlighted Maniac Mansion 's graphics , originality and overall enjoyability : one of the writers called it the best adventure title yet released . Happy @-@ Computer later reported that Maniac Mansion was the highest @-@ selling video game in West Germany for three consecutive months . The game 's humor received praise from Zzap ! 64 , whose reviewers called the point @-@ and @-@ click controls " tremendous " and the total package " innovative and polished " . Shay Addams of <unk> : The Adventurer 's Newsletter preferred Maniac Mansion 's interface to that of Labyrinth : The Computer Game . He considered the game to be Lucasfilm 's best , and he recommended it to Commodore 64 and Apple II users unable to run titles with better visuals , such as those from Sierra On @-@ Line . A writer for ACE enjoyed the game 's animation and depth , but he noted that fans of text @-@ based adventures would dislike the game 's simplicity . 
 = = = Ports = = = 
 Reviewing the MS @-@ DOS and Atari ST ports , a critic from The Games Machine called Maniac Mansion " an enjoyable romp " that was structurally superior to later LucasArts adventure games . However , the writer noticed poor pathfinding and disliked the limited audio . Reviewers for The Deseret News lauded the audiovisuals and considered the product " wonderful fun " . Computer Gaming World 's Charles Ardai praised the game for attaining " the necessary and precarious balance between laughs and suspense that so many comic horror films and novels lack " . Although he faulted the control system 's limited options , he hailed it as " one of the most comfortable ever devised " . Writing for VideoGames & Computer Entertainment , Bill Kunkel and Joyce Worley stated that the game 's plot and premise were typical of the horror genre ; but they praised the interface and execution . 
 Reviewing Maniac Mansion 's Amiga version four years after its release , Simon Byron of The One Amiga praised the game for retaining " charm and humour " , but suggested that its art direction had become " tacky " compared to more recent titles . Stephen Bradly of Amiga Format found the game derivative , but he encountered " loads of visual humour " in it ; and he added , " Strangely , it 's quite compelling after a while . " Michael <unk> of Germany 's Amiga Joker considered Maniac Mansion to be one of the best adventure games for the system . He noted minor graphical flaws , such as a limited color palette , but he argued that the gameplay made up for such shortcomings . Writing for Datormagazin in Sweden , <unk> <unk> commented that the Amiga and Commodore 64 versions of Maniac Mansion were nearly identical . She criticized the graphics and gameplay of both releases , but felt the game to be highly enjoyable regardless . 
 Reviewing the NES release , British magazine Mean Machines commended the game 's presentation , playability and replay value . However , the publication noted undetailed graphics and " ear @-@ bashing tunes " . The magazine 's Julian Rignall compared Maniac Mansion to the title <unk> , but he preferred the former 's controls and lack of " death @-@ without @-@ warning situations " . Writers for Germany 's Video Games referred to the NES version as a " classic " . Co @-@ reviewer Heinrich <unk> stated that Maniac Mansion was unlike any other NES adventure game , and that it was no less enjoyable than its home computer releases . Co @-@ reviewer Winnie Forster found it to be " one of the most original representatives of the [ adventure game ] genre " . In retrospective features , Edge magazine called the NES version " somewhat neutered " and GamesTM referred to it as " infamous " and " heavily censored " . 
 = = TV adaptation and game sequel = = 
 Lucasfilm conceived the idea for a television adaptation of Maniac Mansion , the rights to which were purchased by The Family Channel in 1990 . The two companies collaborated with Atlantis Films to produce a sitcom named after the game , which debuted in September of that year . It aired on YTV in Canada and The Family Channel in the United States . Based in part on the video game , the series focuses on the Edison family 's life and stars Joe Flaherty as Dr. Fred . Its writing staff was led by Eugene Levy . Gilbert later said that the premise of the series changed during production , until it differed heavily from the game 's original plot . Upon its debut , the adaptation received positive reviews from Variety , Entertainment Weekly and the Los Angeles Times . Time named it one of the year 's best new series . However , Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly questioned the decision to air the series on The Family Channel , given Flaherty 's subversive humor . Discussing the series in retrospect , Richard Cobbett of PC Gamer criticized its generic storylines and lack of relevance to the game . The series lasted for three seasons ; sixty @-@ six episodes were filmed . 
 In the early 1990s , LucasArts tasked Dave Grossman and Tim Schafer , both of whom had worked on the Monkey Island series , with designing a sequel to Maniac Mansion . Gilbert and Winnick initially assisted with the project 's writing . The team included voice acting and more detailed graphics , which Gilbert had originally envisioned for Maniac Mansion . The first game 's nonlinear design was discarded , and the team implemented a Chuck Jones @-@ inspired visual style , alongside numerous puzzles based on time travel . Bernard and the Edison family were retained . The sequel , entitled Day of the Tentacle , was released in 1993 . 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 In 2010 , the staff of GamesTM dubbed Maniac Mansion a " seminal " title that overhauled the gameplay of the graphic adventure genre . Removing the need to guess syntax allowed players to concentrate on the story and puzzles , which created a smoother and more enjoyable experience , according to the magazine . Eurogamer 's Kristan Reed agreed : he believed that the design was " infinitely more elegant and intuitive " than its predecessors , and that it freed players from " guessing @-@ game frustration " . Designer Dave Grossman , who worked on Lucasfilm Games ' later Day of the Tentacle and The Secret of Monkey Island , felt that Maniac Mansion had revolutionized the adventure game genre . Although 1985 's Uninvited had featured a point @-@ and @-@ click interface , it was not influential . Maniac Mansion 's implementation of the concept was widely imitated in other adventure titles . Writing in the game studies journal <unk> , Jonathan Lessard argued that Maniac Mansion led a " Casual Revolution " in the late 1980s , which opened the adventure genre to a wider audience . Similarly , Christopher Buecheler of GameSpy called the game a contributor to its genre 's subsequent critical adoration and commercial success . 
 Reed highlighted the " wonderfully ambitious " design of Maniac Mansion , in reference to its writing , interface and cast of characters . Game designer Sheri Graner Ray believed the game to challenge " damsel in distress " stereotypes through its inclusion of female protagonists . Conversely , writer Mark Dery argued that the goal of rescuing a kidnapped cheerleader reinforced negative gender roles . The Lucasfilm team built on their experiences from Maniac Mansion and became increasingly ambitious in subsequent titles . Gilbert admitted to making mistakes — such as the inclusion of no @-@ win situations — in Maniac Mansion , and he applied these lessons to future projects . For example , the game relies on timers rather than events to trigger cutscenes , which occasionally results in awkward transitions : Gilbert worked to avoid this flaw with the Monkey Island series . Because of Maniac Mansion 's imperfections , however , Gilbert considers it his favorite of his games . 
 According to writers Mike and Sandie Morrison , Lucasfilm Games became " serious competition " in the adventure genre after the release of Maniac Mansion . The game 's success solidified Lucasfilm as one of the leading producers of adventure games : authors <unk> DeMaria and Johnny Wilson described it as a " landmark title " for the company . In their view , Maniac Mansion — along with Space Quest : The <unk> Encounter and Leisure Suit Larry in the Land of the Lounge Lizards — inaugurated a " new era of humor @-@ based adventure games " . This belief was shared by Reed , who wrote that Maniac Mansion " set in motion a captivating chapter in the history of gaming " that encompassed wit , invention and style . The SCUMM engine was reused by Lucasfilm in eleven later titles ; improvements were made to its code with each game . Over time , rival adventure game developers adopted this paradigm in their own software . GamesTM attributed the change to a desire to streamline production and create enjoyable games . Following his 1992 departure from LucasArts — a conglomeration of Lucasfilm Games , ILM and Skywalker Sound formed in 1990 — Gilbert used SCUMM to create adventure games and Backyard Sports titles for Humongous Entertainment . 
 In 2011 , Richard Cobbett summarized Maniac Mansion as " one of the most intricate and important adventure games ever made " . Retro Gamer ranked it as one of the ten best Commodore 64 games in 2006 , and IGN later named it one of the ten best LucasArts adventure game . Seven years after the NES version 's debut , Nintendo Power named it the 61st best game ever . The publication dubbed it the 16th best NES title in 2008 . The game 's uniqueness and clever writing were praised by Nintendo Power : in 2010 , the magazine 's Chris Hoffman stated that the game is " unlike anything else out there — a point @-@ and @-@ click adventure with an awesome sense of humor and multiple solutions to almost every puzzle . " In its retrospective coverage , Nintendo Power several times noted the ability to microwave a hamster , which the staff considered to be an iconic scene . In March 2012 , Retro Gamer listed the hamster incident as one of the " 100 Classic Gaming Moments " . 
 Maniac Mansion enthusiasts have drawn fan art of its characters , participated in tentacle @-@ themed cosplay and produced a trailer for a fictitious film adaptation of the game . German fan Sascha <unk> created a fangame remake , entitled Maniac Mansion Deluxe , with enhanced audio and visuals . He used the Adventure Game Studio engine to develop the project , which he distributed free of charge on the Internet . By the end of 2004 , the remake had over 200 @,@ 000 downloads . A remake with three @-@ dimensional graphics called Meteor Mess was created by the German developer Vampyr Games , and , as of 2011 , another group in Germany is producing one with art direction similar to that of Day of the Tentacle . Fans have created an episodic series of games based on Maniac Mansion as well . Gilbert has said that he would like to see an official remake , similar in its graphics and gameplay to The Secret of Monkey Island : Special Edition and Monkey Island 2 Special Edition : LeChuck 's Revenge . However , he expressed doubts about its potential quality , in light of George Lucas ' enhanced remakes of the original Star Wars trilogy . 
 = East Carolina University = 
 East Carolina University is a public , doctoral / research university in Greenville , North Carolina , United States . Named East Carolina University by statute and commonly known as ECU or East Carolina , the university is the third @-@ largest in North Carolina . The Association of Public and Land Grant Universities designates East Carolina as a Sea Grant university and an Innovation and Economic Prosperity campus . 
 Founded on March 8 , 1907 as a teacher training school , East Carolina has grown from 43 acres ( 17 ha ) to almost 1 @,@ 600 acres ( 647 ha ) today . The university 's academic facilities are located on five properties : Main Campus , Health Sciences Campus , West Research Campus , the Field Station for Coastal Studies in New Holland , North Carolina and the Millennial Research and Innovation Campus in Greenville 's warehouse district . The nine undergraduate colleges , graduate school , and four professional schools are located on these four properties . All of the non @-@ health sciences majors are located on the main campus . The College of Nursing , College of Allied Health Sciences , The Brody School of Medicine , and School of Dental Medicine are located on the health science campus . There are ten social sororities , 16 social fraternities , four historically black sororities , five historically black fraternities , one Native American fraternity , and one Native American sorority . There are over 300 registered clubs on campus including fraternities and sororities . 
 = = History = = 
 Public Laws of North Carolina , 1907 , Chapter 820 titled An Act to <unk> High School Instruction in the Public Schools of the State and Teacher Training is the official law chartering East Carolina Teachers Training School ( ECTTS ) on March 8 , 1907 by the North Carolina General Assembly . The chairman of its original Board of Trustees , Thomas Jordan Jarvis , a former Governor of North Carolina now known as the " Father of ECU " , participated in groundbreaking ceremonies for the first buildings on July 2 , 1908 in Greenville , North Carolina and ECTTS opened its doors on October 5 , 1909 . Although its purpose was to train " young white men and women " , there were no male graduates until 1932 . In 1920 , ECTTS became a four – year institution and renamed East Carolina Teachers College ( ECTC ) ; its first bachelor 's degrees were awarded the following year in education . A master 's degree program was authorized in 1929 ; the first such degree granted by ECTC was in 1933 . Progress toward full college status was made in 1948 with the designation of the bachelor of arts as a liberal arts degree , and the bachelor of science as a teaching degree . A change of name to East Carolina College in 1951 reflected this expanded mission . Over the objections of Governor Dan K. Moore , who opposed the creation of a university system separate from the Consolidated University of North Carolina , ECC was made a regional university effective July 1 , 1967 , and assumed its present name , East Carolina University . The university did not remain independent for long ; on July 1 , 1972 , it was incorporated into the University of North Carolina System , the successor to the Consolidated University . Today , ECU is the third – largest university in North Carolina with 21 @,@ 589 undergraduate and 5 @,@ 797 graduate students , including the 308 medicine and 52 dental students . 
 = = Campus = = 
 East Carolina is separated into three distinct campuses : Main Campus , Health Sciences Campus , and West Research Campus . It owns two sports complexes : Blount Recreational Sports Complex and North Recreational Complex . It owns a field station in New Holland , North Carolina . 
 = = = Main = = = 
 The main campus , also known as the east campus , is about 530 acres ( 2 km2 ) in an urban residential area of downtown Greenville . The 158 buildings on main campus comprise more than 4 @.@ 6 million square feet ( 325 @,@ 000 m ² ) of academic , research , and residential space . Many of the Main Campus buildings feature the Spanish – Mission style architecture ; inspiration drawn from Thomas Jarvis ' time as an ambassador to Brazil . He wanted to bring the unique architecture to eastern North Carolina . On the main campus , there are five districts : Campus Core , Downtown District , Warehouse District , Athletic fields and the South Academic District . On the Campus Core , there are 15 residence halls which are divided into three separate neighborhoods . The distinct feature of the main campus is the mall , which is a large tree – laden grassy area where many students go to relax . In the middle of the mall is the replica of the cupola on the original Austin building . 
 = = = = Athletic fields = = = = 
 The varsity athletics fields are located south of the College Hill residential neighborhood . Fourteenth Street divides College Hill to the north , with the athletic fields to the south . Charles Boulevard borders the fields to the west and Greenville Boulevard borders it to the south . A residential neighborhood and Elmhurst Elementary School are the eastern borders . The northern portion of the area sits Dowdy @-@ Ficklen Stadium , Minges Coliseum , and Minges Natatorium , along with parking . The Murphy Center , which is the primary strength and conditioning , and banquet building , is located between Dowdy @-@ Ficklen and Minges Coliseum . The Tennis Complex , Ward Sports Medicine Building , Scales Field House , and the Pirate Club Building also surround Dowdy @-@ Ficklen . The Ward Sports Medicine Building houses offices for football and basketball , Pirate Club , media relations , and the director of athletics . The Scales Field House provides locker rooms , offices and equipment storage . The Pirate Club Building houses a ticket office , other offices , and an area for Pirate Club members . South of those facilities is the Cliff Moore Practice Facility which has a pair of natural grass fields and one FieldTurf field designed exclusively for the football team . On the southern border of the practice facility is Clark @-@ LeClair Stadium , which is the men 's baseball stadium . It opened in 2005 and seats 3 @,@ 000 in permanent seating with another 2 @,@ 000 located in the outfield . At the southern end of the fields is the Olympic Sports Complex , which include women 's soccer stadium , softball stadium , track and field facility , and Olympic Sports Team building . The Olympic Sports Complex was completed in 2011 with a price of $ 23 @.@ 4 million . The Smith @-@ Williams Center is a $ 17 million basketball development and practice facility , opened in 2013 . The football stadium is planning for a $ 40 million upgrade . The upgrades will include a new press , club , and suite areas , and upper deck , all located on the south side . This addition will increase the capacity from 50 @,@ 000 to 60 @,@ 000 . 
 East Carolina has spent $ 92 million on athletic projects from 1998 @-@ 2011 . Including the proposed projects , this is increased to $ 145 million . 
 = = = Health Sciences = = = 
 The Health Sciences campus is situated beside <unk> Medical Center ( VMC ) . VMC was originally Pitt County Memorial Hospital . After becoming a private non @-@ profit hospital , the renaming occurred . VMC , an 861 – bed flagship Level I Trauma Center , serves as the academic medical center for The Brody School of Medicine . <unk> Health owns VMC , leases or owns six and manages one . The area is about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of Main Campus on 206 acres ( 0 @.@ 8 km2 ) with nearly 1 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 square feet ( 121 @,@ 000 m2 ) of academic and research space in 62 buildings . Other buildings besides VMC include Brody Medicine Science Building , the East Carolina Heart Institute , Leo Jenkins Cancer Center , and the Allied Health building composed of the College of Nursing , Laupus Medical Library and College of Allied Health Sciences . The 117 @,@ 000 square feet ( 11 @,@ 000 m2 ) Family Medicine Center opened in the fall of 2011 . Ross Hall , which will house the School of Dental Medicine , will be just under 200 @,@ 000 square feet is currently being built . 
 = = = West Research = = = 
 West Research Campus lies on approximately 600 acres ( 2 @.@ 4 km2 ) 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) west of the Health Sciences Campus . It consists of four buildings with 36 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 3 @,@ 300 m2 ) on the former Voice of America site . Approximately 367 acres ( 1 @.@ 49 km2 ) are designated wetlands and large areas of biology , botany and other sciences field study sites . It has an environmental health onsite wastewater demonstration facility which is open to the public and all educators . It is also the home of the North Carolina Institute for Health and Safety in Agriculture , Forestry , and Fisheries with an administrative and several support buildings . 
 = = = = Institutes and centers = = = = 
 The Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University 
 East Carolina Heart Institute 
 Leo W. Jenkins Cancer Center 
 Innovation Design Lab 
 Family Medicine Center 
 UNC Coastal Studies Institute 
 Center for Epidemiology and Outcomes Research 
 Small Business Institute 
 Institute for Coastal Science and Policy 
 Pediatric Healthy Weight Research and Treatment Center 
 Center for Sustainable Tourism 
 Center for Sustainability 
 Center for Natural Hazards 
 Center for Geographic Information Science 
 Center for <unk> 
 Center for Applied Computational Studies 
 Center for Science , Technology , Engineering and Mathematics Education 
 Center for Survey Research 
 Lost Colony Center for Science & Research 
 East Carolina Diabetes and Obesity Institute 
 <unk> Arts Riverside Lodge 
 NC <unk> Institute 
 Golden LEAF Educational Consortium 
 = = = Community Service Learning Centers = = = 
 The School of Dental Medicine proposes to create 10 community service learning centers to be located in rural and underserved areas throughout the state of North Carolina . The fourth @-@ year students will be learning and providing care for the community for one year in these community centers . Five community centers have been announced . They are located in <unk> , Elizabeth City , Lillington , Spruce Pine , and Sylva . The other locations will be announced at a future time . 
 = = = Field Station for Coastal Studies = = = 
 The field station is located in New Holland , North Carolina . The area serves as a field station for the coastal studies , coastal resource management , and biology programs . The main goal of the field station is economic development into the region through both environmental education and eco – tourism . It also serves as a facility for small retreats and as a base for research on coastal issues . It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1980 . It is adjacent to the 49 @,@ 925 @-@ acre ( 202 km2 ) <unk> Wildlife Refuge . 
 = = = North Recreational Complex = = = 
 North Recreational Complex ( NRC ) is an athletic complex located on a 129 @-@ acre ( 522 @,@ 044 @.@ 5 m2 ) parcel of land north of East Carolina University 's main campus . The NRC is one of the Nation 's largest recreational complexes . It will augment the Blount Intramural Sports Fields located behind the Carol Belk Building on Charles Boulevard . The first of three phases of the complex opened on September 2 , 2008 . Phase one includes eight lighted fields , a 5 @.@ 6 acres ( 0 km2 ) lake with a beach , walking trails / areas , and a field house . The complex is located near the intersection of the North Carolina Highway 33 and U.S. Route 264 . 
 Phase II opened in August 2011 , with the grand opening occurring on September 15 , 2011 . This phase includes a 5 @.@ 6 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 0 km2 ) lake on with a 51 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 4 @,@ 700 m2 ) beach . A 2 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 190 m2 ) boat house is also located there . Canoes and kayaks can be rented at the boathouse for use in the lake . Other amenities include sand volleyball courts , horseshoes , grills , fitness equipment , six walking / running trails , a disc golf course , and an Odyssey Course which includes a 300 @-@ foot zip line . 
 = = = UNC Coastal Studies Institute = = = 
 Main page : UNC Coastal Studies Institute 
 ECU houses and manages the UNC Coastal Studies Institute ( UNC @-@ CSI ) which is an inter @-@ university , marine research institute located on Roanoke Island in Manteo along the Croatan Sound on the Outer Banks , established in 2003 focusing on Estuarine Ecology and Human Health , Coastal Processes and Engineering , Public Policy and Coastal Sustainability , and Maritime Heritage . 
 = = Colleges and schools = = 
 ECU is home to nine undergraduate colleges , a graduate school , and four professional schools . The oldest school is the modern day College of Education . The University offers 16 doctoral degree programs , 4 first professional degree programs , 76 master 's degree programs , and 102 bachelor 's degree programs . 
 ECU 's liberal arts college is the Thomas Harriot College of Arts and Sciences . It consists of 16 departments , making it the third largest College . The liberal arts college has its roots in the beginning of the University . 
 The College of Business is a professional school consisting of six departments with undergraduate concentrations in each , plus the Miller School of Entrepreneurship and a Master of Business Administration and Master of Science in Accounting program . The College 's beginnings came in 1936 when the Department of Commerce was organized . It later changed to the Department of Business Education , and then to the Department of Business . Finally , in 1960 , the School of Business was formed . The college undergraduate program was accredited in 1967 , and the graduate program was accredited in 1976 by The Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business . The college is a governing school of the Graduate Management Admission Council . The college runs a Small Business Institute to advise small business owners on how to succeed . 
 The College of Education is the oldest and largest college at ECU . It houses and administers all of the education majors and an international open access journal , the Journal of Curriculum and Instruction . There are 17 undergraduate degree programs , 22 graduate degree programs , six advanced certifications , and the Doctor of Education program . The College prepares more professionals for North Carolina schools than any other university in the state . The College scored higher than other North Carolina universities when the state board evaluated teacher education programs in 2006 . In addition , the Institution of Higher Education Performance Report showed ECU was first in the number of graduates who were employed in public schools across the state . The college is considered one of the exemplary professional preparation programs according to the North Carolina State Board of Education 's Higher Education Performance Report . 
 The College of Fine Arts and Communication comprises four schools that range from dance to design and broadcast journalism . The college officially opened on July 1 , 2003 , but can trace its roots to ECU founding ; the school hired art and music professionals in 1907 to train teachers . 
 The College of Health and Human Performance is made up of three departments and handles all of the recreational and exercise degrees at East Carolina University . It took on its name in 2003 , but traces its legacy to the Department of Physical Education in 1930 . It was the 1930 East Carolina Teachers College Planning Document number two priority . In 1938 , the Department of Physical Education was established and Physical education became a specialty area for high school teachers . 
 The College of Human Ecology houses four departments and one school along with two institutes . It was first incorporated in 1968 and started to admit students in 1971 . " The Carolyn Freeze Baynes Institute for Social Justice is an international forum for addressing questions , presenting ideas , and developing innovations . The Institute 's focus in these activities is the identification of injustices and development of more just alternatives through systematic professional research , scholarship , and public presentation of findings and ideas . " 
 The College of Engineering and Technology comprises four departments . The college offers nine degrees including engineering , computer science , construction management , design , distribution and logistics , industrial engineering technology , information and computer technology , and industrial technology . 
 The College of Allied Health Sciences encompasses the health science majors outside of nursing . The school offers over 15 majors . All of the health sciences majors are located in the Allied Health Sciences building which is on the Health Sciences Campus beside The Brody School of Medicine . It was established in the 1967 – 68 school year . 
 The College of Nursing is a professional school that offers one undergraduate degree , Bachelor of Science in Nursing . The school was created in 1959 and now offers Bachelor of Science , Masters , and Ph.D programs . The college has over 100 faculty teaching the students everything about the nursing field while practicing in the under @-@ served Eastern North Carolina . There are three departments within this school : Department of Undergraduate Nursing Science Junior Division , Department of Undergraduate Nursing Science Senior Division , and the Department of Graduate Nursing Science . On October 12 , 2007 , the University of North Carolina Board of Governors permitted the re – designation of the School of Nursing to the College of Nursing . The National League for Nursing named the college a Center of Excellence . The college produces more nurses than any other school in the Mid @-@ Atlantic region . 
 The Graduate School consist of 85 master 's degree , 21 doctoral programs and 62 certificates . It coordinates the graduate offerings of all departments in the nine colleges . The School also runs the non – professional degree programs of the professional School of Medicine . The school offers 17 master 's degree in Accounting , Arts , Business Administration , Construction Management , Education , Environmental Health , Fine Arts , Library Science , Music , Nursing , Occupational Therapy , Public Administration , Public Health , School <unk> , Social Work and Teaching . It also offers four doctoral degrees in <unk> , Education , Philosophy , and Physical Therapy . 
 The Brody School of Medicine is a professional school at the university . It consists of seven graduate majors , plus the Doctor of Medicine , all located on the Health Sciences Campus . The first appropriations were approved in 1974 , with the first medical students arriving in 1977 . The medical school is one of five in North Carolina . 
 The School of Dental Medicine is a professional school at the university . The school graduates one degree , Doctor of Dental Medicine . It will also have two residencies in Advanced Education in General Dentistry and Dental General Practice . The school also will offer a specialty program in <unk> . It was founded on February 24 , 2006 at the East Carolina Board of Trustees meeting . The dental school was unanimously approved by the UNC System Board of Governors as well . The facilities are located on the Health Sciences Campus and will house the first three years of education . Dental students will complete their final year at ECU Community Service Learning Centers to be located throughout the state . The School of Dental Medicine is one of two dental schools in the state . 
 = = Research = = 
 Randolph Chitwood , a cardiothoracic surgeon with East Carolina , performed the first minimally invasive robotic @-@ assisted mitral @-@ valve heart surgery in the United States . East Carolina researchers also developed an electronic fluency device called <unk> ; the device is designed to improve the fluency of a person who stutters by changing the sound of the user 's voice in his or her ear . Walter <unk> , a faculty member at The Brody School of Medicine developed the standard procedure for gastric bypass surgery . Researchers here also first discovered that 80 % of obese / type 2 diabetic patients who underwent this surgical procedure had a reversal of the disease . The Biofeedback Lab is currently developing techniques to help service members recover from posttraumatic stress disorders and traumatic brain injuries they received in Afghanistan and Iraq . The in vitro fertilization program is ranked first in North Carolina and fourth overall in the United States . Jason Bond , a former scientist in the Department of Biology , discovered many new species of spiders , including <unk> <unk> and Aptostichus <unk> . 
 During an archaeological dig on Hatteras Island in 1998 , archaeologists discovered a 10 @-@ carat gold English signet ring from the 16th century , among other artifacts . The discovered ring was the first material connection between The Lost Colony on Roanoke Island and the Algonquian peoples on Croatan Island . In 2011 , underwater archaeologists raised the anchors of the Queen Anne 's Revenge , the flagship vessel of Blackbeard , near Beaufort . 
 = = = Libraries = = = 
 <unk> Joyner Library is the main library located beside the Mall on the main campus . It holds nearly 1 @.@ 9 million bound volumes , 2 @.@ 1 million pieces of microform , 532 @,@ 000 government documents , and more than 24 @,@ 000 journal subscriptions . The library , which houses the East Carolina manuscript collection , is the largest library east of Raleigh . It is one of the leading repositories in the nation for modern naval and maritime history . It also holds materials related to North Carolina , the tobacco industry , worldwide missionary activities , and American military history . The library is the official repository of the records of the United States Coast Guard Auxiliary . The J. Edgar Hoover Collection on International Communism contains many items dealing with communism worldwide . The Rare Book Collections has items dating from 1589 , including a 1733 Edward Moseley map , the first to comprehensively map the colony of North Carolina and the only original copy in the United States . 
 The Music Library is a branch of Joyner Library located on the first floor of A.J. Fletcher Music Center . It houses approximately 93 @,@ 000 items , including the entire audio recording collection . It is the largest music collection east of Raleigh . The primary users of the library are faculty and students within the School of Music and the School of Theatre and Dance , but anyone can use its resources . It began in 1958 @-@ 59 academic year when a small library was created . Today a staff of five oversee the library duties . 
 The William E. Laupus Library is the medical and health library for East Carolina . It is the primary library for the Brody School of Medicine , the College of Nursing , the College of Allied Health Sciences , and the School of Dental Medicine . It holds approximately 160 @,@ 000 volumes ( print and non – print ) and 10 @,@ 000 current print , non – print , and electronic serial titles . In 2006 , it moved to the Health Sciences Building on the Health Sciences campus . The library is named for Dr. Laupus , a former Dean of Brody School of Medicine . 
 = = Student life = = 
 = = = Greek life = = = 
 There are ten social sororities at the East Carolina Campus , most of which own a house located at or near 5th or 10th Street . There are currently 17 social fraternities at East Carolina . The majority are located off or near 5th Street or 10th Street . Of the 17 social fraternities , seven currently do own a house . Greek life started in 1958 with the introduction of four social fraternities : Kappa Alpha Order , Lambda Chi Alpha , Pi Kappa Alpha , and Theta Chi . Two years later , eight of the ten social sororities were founded . 
 National Pan @-@ Hellenic Council ( NPHC ) has a presence on campus , as well . There are four historically black sororities and five historically black fraternities . There are over 18 honor and 13 service or religious fraternities or sororities at ECU . 
 = = = Athletics = = = 
 ECU 's sports teams , nicknamed the Pirates , compete in NCAA Division FBS as a full – member of the American Athletic Conference ( The American ) . The Pirates joined The American on July 1 , 2014 . Jeff <unk> is the Athletic Director . The football team is supported by world @-@ class spirit groups , such as the East Carolina University Marching Pirates , National Award winning Cheerleading squads , and spirit teams . Facilities include the 50 @,@ 000 seat Dowdy @-@ Ficklen Stadium for football , the 8 @,@ 000 – seat Williams Arena at Minges Coliseum for men 's and women 's basketball , and Clark @-@ LeClair Stadium , with a seating capacity of 3 @,@ 000 ( max capacity of 6 @,@ 000 + when including outfield " Jungle " areas ) for baseball . The Ward Sports Medicine building comprises 82 @,@ 095 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 7 @,@ 600 m2 ) and houses the athletic department , Pirate Club offices and the Human Performance Laboratory . Athletes train in the Murphy Center a 52 @,@ 475 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 4 @,@ 875 m2 ) edifice , housing the strength and conditioning facilities , along with banquet rooms , sport memorabilia , and an academic enhancement center . The Murphy Center was built for approximately $ 13 million and opened its doors to ECU student – athletes in June 2002 . 
 = = = Diversity = = = 
 The EDC Mini @-@ grant Project @-@ The Office of Equity , Diversity , and Community Relations developed this project to improve East Carolina University 's number of diversity studies , programs , and groups . This project intends to supply resources and funds towards diversity proposals offered by students , campus organizations , faculty , and staff . These programs include monitoring cultural awareness educational seminars , to improve departmental climate , to recruit diverse students , for research for curriculum improvement , among others . 
 = = Administration = = 
 There have been six presidents and seven Chancellors in the university 's history . Robert Herring Wright was inaugurated as the first president of ECTTS on November 13 , 1909 . The chief administrator changed names after ECU joined the UNC System in 1972 . The chancellor is chosen by the University of North Carolina Board of Governors on the recommendation of the board 's president , and he reports to the 12 – member Board of Trustees at ECU . Four of the twelve trustees are picked by the Governor of North Carolina , while the other eight are picked by the Board of Governors . The ECU student body president is an ex officio member of the Board of Trustees . The current chancellor , Cecil Pope Staton , Jr . , has held that post since replacing chancellor Steve Ballard on July 1 . 2016 
 The University of North Carolina Board of Governors are the policy @-@ making body legally charged with " the general determination , control , supervision , management , and governance of all affairs of the constituent institutions . " It has 32 voting members who are elected by the General Assembly for four @-@ year terms . 
 = = Rankings = = 
 In 2012 , East Carolina was classified by U.S. News & World Report as a National University in its second @-@ tier rankings . In 2010 , Forbes ranked the school 36th in its America 's Best College Buys story . 
 In the 2012 edition of U.S. News & World Report , The Brody School of Medicine is ranked 10th in the country for primary care physician preparation , 13th in the rural medicine specialty and 14th in family medicine . In 2010 , Brody was ranked seventh on the social mission scale . 
 The College of Business is named one of the best business schools according to The Princeton Review for the fifth year in a row . The College of Business is also named by <unk> as the third best buy for affordability and quality in the Online Masters of Business Administration ( AACSB @-@ accredited ) category . 
 In 2009 , the university was awarded the Patriot Award . The Patriot Award recognizes employers who go above and beyond what the law requires in supporting their employees who serve in the National Guard or reserves . In 2010 , the university was awarded the Secretary of Defense Employer Support Freedom Award . It is the highest recognition given by the U.S. Government to employers for their outstanding support of their employees who serve in the Guard and Reserve . 
 = = Songs = = 
 " Hail to Thy Name So Fair " is the alma mater at East Carolina University . It first appeared in the 1940 @-@ 41 East Carolina Teachers College ( ECTC ) Student Handbook . It was written by Harold A. <unk> ( ' 44 ) who became a part @-@ time instructor in the Music Department from 1946 @-@ 47 . The Marching Pirates perform the song during all home football and basketball games . At every home football game , after the National Anthem is played by the band , the Alma Mater is played followed by the E.C. Victory song . At the end of football games , the football team walks to the student section to sing the Alma Mater and E.C. Victory song in unison . 
 = = Notable alumni = = 
 Pirate graduates have been influential in teaching , business , and the arts . Actress Emily Procter , Beth Grant , and screenwriter Kevin Williamson , creator of Scream and Dawson 's Creek , graduated from East Carolina . Acclaimed screen actress Sandra Bullock attended , but graduated later after leaving to pursue her acting career . Marcus Crandell ( born June 1 , 1974 , in Charlotte , North Carolina ) is a former quarterback and current coach in professional Canadian football ; he played 11 seasons for the Edmonton Eskimos , Calgary Stampeders and Saskatchewan Roughriders from 1997 to 2008 while also spending time in NFL Europe and the XFL . Crandell was named the Grey Cup Most Valuable Player after the Stampeders won the 89th Grey Cup in 2001 . Class of 1974 Alumnus Rick Atkinson , wrote An Army at Dawn : The War in North Africa , 1942 – 1943 followed by " The Day of Battle , The War in Sicily , 1943 – 1944 " and Dan Neil wrote criticism on automobiles ; both received Pulitzer Prizes . The most notable teaching alumnus is Ron Clark , a teacher , author , and founder of the Ron Clark Academy in Atlanta , Georgia . James Maynard graduated with a degree in psychology and founded the Golden Corral restaurant chain . Kelly King is the current chief executive officer for BB & T and graduated with an undergraduate degree in business accounting and a master 's of business administration . Former Jacksonville Jaguars quarterback David Garrard attended where he majored in Construction Management . Chris Johnson was drafted by the Tennessee Titans in the first round of the 2008 NFL Draft . WWE Chairman and CEO Vincent K. McMahon and his wife Linda McMahon both graduated with a degree in business administration as well . Scott Avett of the folk @-@ rock band The Avett Brothers earned degrees in 1999 and 2000 . Henry " Gizmo " Williams , Canadian Football League inductee , graduated from East Carolina University . 
 = We Are the World 25 for Haiti = 
 " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " is a charity single recorded by the supergroup Artists for Haiti in 2010 . It is a remake of the 1985 hit song " We Are the World " , which was written by American musicians Michael Jackson and Lionel Richie , and was recorded by USA for Africa to benefit famine relief in Africa . Initially , in late 2009 , it had been suggested to Richie and Quincy Jones — producer of the original " We Are the World " — that a re @-@ cut version of the song be re @-@ released under the title " Live 25 " . Following the magnitude 7 @.@ 0 Mw earthquake in Haiti , which devastated the area and killed thousands of people , it was agreed that the song would be re @-@ recorded by new artists , in the hope that it would reach a new generation and help benefit the people of Haiti . 
 The song was recorded in fourteen and a half hours by over eighty artists on February 1 , 2010 . It was produced by Quincy Jones , and executively produced by Lionel Richie , and Haitian @-@ American musician Wyclef Jean . A music video directed by Paul Haggis was released to accompany and promote the song . The song was also recorded in Spanish by a Latin supergroup and was named Somos el Mundo . The song was directed by Emilio Estefan and his wife , Gloria Estefan . 
 " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " is musically structured similar to " We Are the World " , but includes a rap verse which was written by some of the song 's hip hop artists . Michael Jackson died months before the song 's release , but his material from the 1985 recording sessions was incorporated into the song and music video , as per the request of his mother , Katherine . His sister Janet duets with him on the song , and his nephews Taj , TJ , and Taryll — collectively known as 3T — feature on the track 's chorus . 
 " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " was released on February 12 , 2010 , during the opening ceremony of the 2010 Winter Olympics , as a CD single and a music download . Critically , " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " received generally negative reviews by contemporary music reviewers , with criticism focused on the song 's new musical additions , as well as the choice of artists who appear on the track . Some critics have even named it one of the worst songs of all time . However , the song was commercially successful worldwide , charting within the top 20 in multiple countries . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1985 , " We Are the World " , a song and charity single originally recorded by USA for Africa was released . It was written by American musicians Michael Jackson and Lionel Richie , and produced by Quincy Jones and Michael Omartian for the album We Are the World . The song was well received by music critics and was the recipient of several awards . The song was a worldwide commercial success , as it topped music charts throughout the world and became the fastest @-@ selling American pop single in history , as well as the first single to be certified multi @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . " We Are the World " was the best selling pop single of all time until it was eclipsed by Elton John 's 1997 version of " Candle in the Wind " . 
 On January 12 , 2010 , Haiti was struck by a magnitude 7 @.@ 0 Mw earthquake . It was the country 's most severe earthquake in over 200 years and caused widespread damage . The epicenter of the quake was just outside the Haitian capital Port @-@ au @-@ Prince . It has been estimated that the death toll could reach 200 @,@ 000 . Before the earthquake , Jones and Richie had planned to organize a re @-@ recording of " We Are the World " on January 28 , 2010 — the 25th anniversary of the original recording of the song . Randy Phillips , who was a key figure in the song being re @-@ issued , said that " We Are The World " producer Ken Kragen had suggested to re @-@ cut " We Are the World " and title it " Live 25 " . However , Lionel Richie and Jones were " very lukewarm " about the idea . Phillips commented that , 
 " [ They felt ] that what happened 25 years ago was iconic and they did everything they could for Africa at that time , and they didn 't feel re @-@ cutting the song really made any sense . Basically , Lionel didn 't really want to do it , and we kind of let it die by not issuing the publishing license , because Lionel owns the copyright along with Michael Jackson 's estate . That was in November / December [ 2009 ] . They had gotten Visa on board as an underwriter of that effort , and I think they were going to try and premiere it at the World Cup . " 
 However , because of the devastation caused in Haiti , these plans were postponed . Phillips said that Jones had called Lionel and said , " this is what this song is written for , as a fundraising vehicle for causes , tragedies , catastrophes like this . Why don 't we take over the process , call our friends , and actually do this ? " Lionel understood the urgency of Haiti , and in January 2010 , it was agreed that " We Are the World " would be re @-@ recorded to help benefit Haiti , similar to how the original recording helped famine relief in Africa . Richie commented , " Unfortunately , sometimes it takes a hit record to make someone decide to save a life . I want this song to be the battle cry again . Every once in a while , you have to wake the world up . We slept right through Katrina . If we are not a socially aware culture , we 're going to fail . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 The new version of the song was recorded on February 1 , 2010 , in a session lasting 14 hours . Eighty @-@ five musicians were reportedly involved in the song 's recording , which was held in the same place as the original , at Henson Recording Studio on Beverly Boulevard in Los Angeles , California . Also similar to the 1985 process , some of the participating musicians were already in Los Angeles to attend an awards ceremony : the 52nd Grammy Awards . Jones said of the recording session , " It was a big challenge . It takes a serious army and serious emotional architecture . I 've never seen such a diverse group of people , and they came for the right reasons . " The recording process brought together diverse artists , with the oldest being 83 @-@ year @-@ old Tony Bennett and the youngest being 9 @-@ year @-@ old Ethan <unk> . 
 The new version features updated lyrics and music , such as a rap segment including LL Cool J , will.i.am , Snoop Dogg & 7 others pertaining to Haiti , described as a " Greek chorus extension " , which was written by will.i.am. Other writers included Kanye West , Jones and LL Cool J. Lionel Richie and Jones revealed that Michael Jackson 's sister Janet duets with her late brother , as per a request from their mother , Katherine . In the official video , there is archive footage of Michael Jackson from the original 1985 recording . Richie said that he agreed with Katherine 's request , commenting , " It made me feel more secure about this . We definitely felt a void . He 's the other parent [ to the song ] . " The production team for the song included Humberto Gatica , RedOne , Mervyn Warren , Patti Austin and Rickey Minor . RedOne said that it took a week to create the new arrangement for " We Are The World 25 For Haiti " . He commented that he wanted to keep the " class of the original one " and did not want to " mess it up , because it 's too good . " He noted that he wanted to make the song " sound more now and current " while keeping the originals " whole chord progressions , the feeling and the vibe , but brought fresher sounds that are more now . " 
 Haitian @-@ American musician Wyclef Jean also serves as a producer . In addition , Wyclef Jean sings the first line of the second chorus in Haitian Creole . Richie said new artists were selected for the song so the song could be aimed at a new audience , commenting , " We have a familiar song that kids learn in school . Why not bring in Miley Cyrus and the Jonas Brothers and let them address the issues ? " adding that " It was designed so that we wouldn 't have any of the originals there , so that we could pass on the baton to the next generation " . Phillips said that the producers received 80 percent of the people they wanted as recording artists for the song . In addition to Jean , Haitian actor Jimmy Jean @-@ Louis , most famous for playing The Haitian on Heroes , appears in the chorus . 
 At the time of the recording , numerous artists commented on the process , the 1985 version of the song and co @-@ writer Michael Jackson . R & B singer Jordin Sparks revealed that , despite having been born after the release of the original , the song had a " huge impact " on her . Celine Dion said that the release of the song would not only benefit the Haitian people , but also serve as a remembrance of " the passion [ Michael ] Jackson had for helping those in need " . Lionel Richie and Quincy Jones echoed Dion 's sentiments and further stated that if the singer were alive , he would have wanted to be just as involved as he had been a quarter of a century ago . According to Phillips , there was a " handful " of musicians who either declined or could not rearrange their schedules for the song 's recording , including country singer Taylor Swift , who was going to be touring in Australia . 
 = = Artists for Haiti = = 
 Conductors 
 Quincy Jones 
 Lionel Richie 
 Mervyn Warren 
 Soloists ( in order of appearance ) 
 Chorus 
 = = Release , promotion , proceeds = = 
 The 2010 version of " We Are the World " , released under the name Artists for Haiti , debuted on the NBC television network on February 12 during their coverage of the 2010 Winter Olympics opening ceremony . When the song premiered in its paid time spot , the video was edited in length , due in part to the time spent introducing the song . However , the full @-@ length music video was shown on NBC the following day during daytime Olympic coverage . 
 Similar to marketing of " We Are the World " , a music video of the song was filmed and released . The music video was directed by Academy Award @-@ winning film director Paul Haggis . Haggis said that he finished the video 12 hours early . Haitian film students were involved in the video as part of the production crew . The official video for the song was formatted similar to the original ; the video opens with the song 's title with the recording artists ' signatures surrounding it , as well as clips of the artists performing their parts in the recording studio and included archive footage of Michael Jackson performing his part of the song . The video was intercut with clips showing people in Haiti following the earthquake . 
 = = Critical reviews and responses = = 
 " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " received extremely negative reviews from contemporary music critics . The song was criticized for its use of Auto @-@ Tune , the choice of recording artists , and for the song 's rap . Chris Richards , a writer for The Washington Post , described the song as being " horribly <unk> " . Richards commented that the most " disappointing " thing about the song was that " there were too few voices from the country , rock and Latin music communities . " He also noted that " nobody can argue with its worthy cause " because of the song 's proceeds to relief in Haiti , but remarked that the song did not have " We Are the World " ' s " original thrill " due to the song 's " panoply of voices " . Jon Pareles , a writer for The New York Times , remarked that while the song 's " Hollywood gloss " was " durable " , the song has " all the pitfalls of a Hollywood remake " . Parales commented that the quality of the song and performance " rises or falls on its talent pool " and criticized the choice of male musicians compared to " We Are the World " ' s original male artists . 
 US Magazine mentioned that " this version features second @-@ by @-@ second unexplainable absurdities , including Justin Bieber being given the opening verse , Nicole Scherzinger and other Z @-@ listers assigned more than one prime slot , and Wyclef Jean 's incomprehensible yodeling " . Maura Johnston , a writer for MTV , wrote more positively about the song , commenting favorably on the contemporary artists ' performances in living up to their predecessors . " Despite the different faces , the overall feel is similar to the original 's , " Johnston wrote . Simon Vozick @-@ Levinson , a writer for Entertainment Weekly , gave the song a mixed review , noting that We Are the World 25 for Haiti was not as good as the original : " All in all , I can ’ t say this new ' We Are the World ' measured up to the 1985 version . " 
 Eight days after the Artists for Haiti 2010 celebrity remake was released , a " video response " to the song 's official YouTube video was posted by Internet personality and singer @-@ songwriter Lisa Lavie , and was " <unk> " on the YouTube channel of the We Are The World Foundation . Lavie 's " We Are the World 25 for Haiti ( YouTube Edition ) " excluded the rap segment and minimized the Auto @-@ tune that were the subject of critical reviews of the celebrity version . Lavie 's video , an Internet collaboration of 57 unsigned or independent YouTube musicians geographically distributed around the world , received positive reception from media , including CNN ( " certainly is a sign of the times " ) and ABC World News with Diane Sawyer ( " Persons of the Week " ... " in effect saying , We are the world , too ... who proved that anthem is not just for glittering names . " ) Both videos link to the We Are the World Foundation for donations . 
 Rolling Stone said its readers " mostly agreed " with the assessment of a February 27 , 2010 Saturday Night Live parody : " Recently , the music world came together to record ' We Are the World 2 , ' a song to raise awareness of the Haiti earthquake disaster ; sadly , the song itself was a disaster , " with several impersonators dubbing the parody " We Are the World 3 : Raising Awareness of the ' We Are the World 2 ' Disaster . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " debuted within the top 30 in multiple territories . " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " charted at number 27 on the Spanish Singles Chart on the charts issue date February 14 , 2010 . The song debuted at number 17 in New Zealand on the charts issue date of February 15 , 2010 . " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " peaked within the top five , charting at number three in Norway on the charts issue date of February 16 , 2010 ; the chart 's position is currently the song 's highest charting international territory since its release . The song debuted at number 25 in France on the issue date of February 13 . 
 " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " charted at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 , behind Kesha 's " Tik Tok " . " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " charted higher in its debut week than the original version , which entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 21 . According to Billboard , the song 's charting position stemmed mainly from download sales , with a reported 96 % of the song 's charting being from such sales . Following the song 's debut during the Olympics , 246 radio stations sampled the song in the United States . Radio stations in New York expressed that they would play the song frequently to raise awareness of Haitian citizens in need . Other radio stations throughout the United States echoed similar responses on the song getting airplay . 
 The song also sold over 267 @,@ 000 downloads in three days . " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " debuted at number eight on the Canadian Hot 100 dated for February 27 . The song also debuted at number six in Belgium Wallonia and Flanders , as well at debuting at number 17 in Sweden . The song also charted at number 28 in Denmark . The song entered Irish charts at number nine . In the song 's second week of release in Norway , " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " moved up two spaces , topping the chart . Unlike the song 's chart performance in territories like Norway , the song dropped four places on the Billboard Hot 100 to sixth place and stayed in the charts for only five weeks more . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly = = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end = = = 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Short version " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " - 3 : 25 
 Long version " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " - 6 : 57 
 = Gethsemane ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Gethsemane " is the twenty @-@ fourth and final episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on May 18 , 1997 . It was directed by R.W. Goodwin , and written by series creator Chris Carter . " Gethsemane " featured guest appearances by Charles Cioffi , Sheila Larken and Pat Skipper , and introduced John Finn as recurring character Michael Kritschgau . The episode helped to explore the overarching mythology , or fictional history of The X @-@ Files . " Gethsemane " earned a Nielsen household rating of 13 @.@ 2 , being watched by 19 @.@ 85 million people in its initial broadcast . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In the episode , Mulder is shown evidence of alien life which may actually be part of a huge government hoax designed to deflect attention from secret military programs . Meanwhile , Scully struggles with her cancer in the face of hostility from her brother , who believes she should no longer be working . 
 " Gethsemane " was filmed on one of the series ' most elaborate and costly sets , replicating an icy mountaintop inside a refrigerated building using real snow and ice . Shooting for exterior scenes took place on Vancouver 's Mount Seymour , occurring just a week before Duchovny 's wedding . The episode , which has been described by Carter as pondering " the existence of God " , has received mixed responses from critics , with its cliffhanger ending frequently being cited as its main failing . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens in medias res to police investigating a dead body in the apartment of FBI agent Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) . Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) confirms the unseen body 's identity and leaves . She subsequently appears before an FBI panel led by Section Chief Scott Blevins ( Charles Cioffi ) , reviewing her work with Mulder on the X @-@ Files . 
 In Canada 's St. Elias Mountains , a frozen extraterrestrial body is discovered by an expedition team . Professor Arlinsky , the team 's leader , sends ice core samples containing presumably alien DNA to Mulder . Scully has the samples tested and confirms the DNA 's non @-@ terrestrial origin , but is attacked by a man who steals the samples . Scully learns that her attacker is Michael Kritschgau ( John Finn ) , a Defense Department employee . When she tracks down Kritschgau and holds him at gunpoint , he reveals that he might be killed . 
 Meanwhile , Mulder and Arlinsky return to the mountains , but finds that most of the expedition members have been shot dead . The sole survivor is a man named Babcock , who reveals that he has saved the alien corpse from theft by burying it . Together , the three men bring the corpse to the United States . There , Mulder and Arlinsky perform an autopsy on the corpse , believing it belongs to a genuine extraterrestrial . After Mulder leaves to meet with Scully , a mysterious assassin , Scott Ostelhoff , arrives and kills Arlinsky . 
 Scully introduces Mulder to Kritschgau , who claims that everything Mulder thinks he knows about aliens is a lie . He tells him that his sister 's abduction was fabricated , that all evidence of alien biology are merely scientific anomalies , and that the alien body he has just examined was fake . Kritschgau claims that the entire alien mythos is a hoax perpetrated by the U.S. government as a cover for the activities of the military – industrial complex . Mulder dismisses these claims until Scully tells him Kritschgau told her that she was given cancer to make him believe . 
 Mulder finds Arlinsky and Babcock dead , with the alien body missing . Mulder , distraught , sits in his apartment watching a conference about extraterrestrial life on television . The narrative returns to the present , where Scully reveals to the panel that Mulder died the previous night of an apparent self @-@ inflicted gunshot wound to the head . 
 = = Production = = 
 The icy caverns featured in the episode were constructed inside a warehouse which had previously been used for cold storage ; and required the use of truckloads of lumber and 10 @,@ 000 square feet ( 930 m2 ) of Styrofoam . The set would become one of the most expensive and elaborate built during the series ' history . The set required a constant temperature of − 21 ° F ( − 29 ° C ) in order to maintain the real snow and ice used to decorate it . This refrigeration allowed the actors ' breath to visibly fog up , and allowed the cast to " have a place that feels real " to aid their acting . 
 The outdoor scenes were filmed around Vancouver 's Mount Seymour , with weather conditions making shooting difficult enough to require an extra day of work . The episode 's production took place just a week before David Duchovny 's wedding , with his fiancée Téa Leoni visiting the set during filming . The first cut of the episode was twelve minutes too long , resulting in some of the scenes in the mountains being removed . Series creator Chris Carter re @-@ edited the entire episode two days before it aired . 
 Carter has described " Gethsemane " as a " big ideas episode " , noting that its main concern is debating " the existence of God " . The title of the episode is an allusion to the biblical garden of Gethsemane where Jesus was betrayed by Judas Iscariot . The character Michael Kritschgau was named after a former drama teacher of Gillian Anderson . The tagline for this episode is " Believe the lie " , changed from the usual " The truth is out there " . This episode marks the first appearance of one of Scully 's brothers since a flashback in the season two episode " One Breath " . Section Chief Scott Blevins makes his first appearance since the fourth episode of the first season , " Conduit " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Gethsemane " premiered on the Fox network on May 18 , 1997 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on Sky One on July 13th 1997 and on free to air BBC One on March 4 , 1998 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 12 @.@ 7 with a 19 share , meaning that roughly 12 @.@ 7 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 19 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . A total of 19 @.@ 85 million viewers watched this episode during its original airing . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Gethsemane " received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Lon Grahnke of Chicago Sun @-@ Times reacted positively toward the episode , calling it a " stunning " season finale . Paula Vitaris , writing for Cinefantastique , rated " Gethsemane " two stars out of four , noting that it " withholds so much information that it barely qualifies as a complete episode " . Vitaris felt that the large degree of ambiguity in the episode 's script left the actors ' performances " curiously neutral " , adding that the cast " struggle manfully " with the material . Writing for The A.V. Club , Zack Handlen rated the episode a B + , noting that " everything here has a ring of familiarity to it " . Handlen felt that the episode 's premise and ending were poorly executed , as " trying to balance possible truths while maintaining the plausibility of both is incredibly difficult to pull off on a long @-@ running show " , adding that the episode " comes down on the only side of the fence it really could " given that " there 've been too many scenes of shape @-@ changing bounty hunters and mystical alien healers to really let this idea play out know [ sic ] in any real way " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five , noting that while it " attempts to do too much " , it " has a passion behind it which makes it gripping " . Shearman and Pearson felt that the episode 's cliffhanger ending , centering on the apparent death of Mulder , was too unbelievable , noting that it would be out of character for him to grow so disillusioned as to take his own life . In the 1999 FX Thanksgiving Marathon , containing fan @-@ selected episodes , " Gethsemane " ( along with " Redux " and " Redux II " ) was presented as the " Best Mythology Episode " . 
 The episode created speculation about whether or not Mulder was actually dead . An article in the Wall Street Journal discussed fan theories behind Mulder 's madness while a cartoon ran in The New Yorker a few weeks later surrounding Mulder 's " death " . Series creator Chris Carter noted that " the whole plot line of ' Gethsemane ' revolved around a hoax , but there are actually huge revelations in this show . And it 's an amazing thing that we could get people to believe that Mulder could actually kill himself because his belief system was stolen from him " . UGO Networks listed the episode at number 21 in a countdown of " TV 's Best Season Finales " , noting that it " rocked the core of the series ' entire mythology " . Den of Geek 's John Moore felt that the episode was " one of the finest season @-@ enders " of the series , noting that it " ended by completely pulling the carpet out from under the fans " . Moore listed the character of Michael Kritschgau as the seventh @-@ best villain of the series , adding that he shook " what we knew about the show to its core " by " provid [ ing ] nourishment to a seed of doubt that had been playing on Mulder 's mind for the entire season " . 
 = Cultura Profética = 
 Cultura Profética ( in English , Prophetic Culture ) is a Puerto Rican reggae band formed in 1996 . The band has undergone several lineup changes , but founding members Willy Rodríguez ( bass guitar , vocals ) , Boris Bilbraut ( drums , vocals ) , Eliut González ( guitar ) , and Omar Silva ( guitar , bass guitar ) have remained in the group throughout its history . Despite primarily performing reggae music , Cultura Profética has experimented with genres such as bossa nova , tango , jazz , and salsa . Lyrically , the group discusses socio @-@ political and ecological issues including Latin American identity and environmental concerns , as well as interpersonal relationships and love . 
 After gaining popularity in Puerto Rico as a cover band , Cultura Profética began performing original music and released its debut album , Canción de Alerta , in 1998 . The group followed up with Ideas Nuevas in 2000 , which featured further musical experimentation with a wider variety of musical styles , and then Diario in 2004 . After relocating to Mexico , the band released M.O.T.A. in 2005 , which peaked at number 12 on the Billboard Hot Latin Albums chart . In 2010 , La Dulzura was released , which took a more romantic lyrical focus and produced the radio hit " La Complicidad " . Cultura Profética released its most recent single , " <unk> , <unk> y <unk> " in 2014 , and is reported to be working on a new album . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1996 – 99 : Formation and Canción de Alerta = = = 
 Cultura Profética originally began as a cover band , performing popular reggae songs in small bars and clubs before beginning to perform original music in Spanish . Shortly after transitioning to perform original music , the group adopted the name Cultura Profética , which was inspired by the view that " music is a voice of culture and is prophetic because the reggae music that we love , and that influenced us , is from the ’ 70s with themes of what 's happening now that can affect our future " , according to guitarist / bassist Omar Silva . 
 Many of the original members of the group attended the Escuela Elemental and the Escuela <unk> of the University of Puerto Rico , an institution noted for its progressive and experimental teaching approaches . Vocalist / bassist Willy Rodriguez commented , " It is a school in which you are allowed to decide a few things on your own , you have free time between classes [ when ] you can do your own things , and there is a lot of musical culture in the school . It tends to allow you to explore your artistic interests ... There was always an air of liberation , of thinking on your own . I think that influenced a lot in what we do today musically and ideologically . " Group members Boris Bilbraut , Willy Rodríguez , Eliut González , Juan Costa , and Ivan <unk> began jamming together in 1996 , bonding over a shared interest in reggae music , particularly Bob Marley . These rehearsal sessions took place in El Hoyo , a neighborhood in the San Juan metropolitan area . 
 After transitioning away from being a cover band , the group quickly gained popularity in the Puerto Rican reggae scene . Cultura Profética began performing in major reggae festivals and opening for Jamaican reggae musician Don Carlos . The band 's first album , Canción de Alerta ( 1998 ) , was recorded in the Tuff Gong studios at Jamaica with Errol Brown , frontman of Hot Chocolate and Bob Marley 's sound engineer . The group was the first Spanish @-@ language act to record in Marley 's studios . The record discusses a number of social issues in Puerto Rico , including the importance of acknowledging the island 's African influence . 
 = = = 1998 – 2009 : Ideas Nuevas , Diario , and M.O.T.A. = = = 
 The group returned to Tuff Gong studios in 1999 to record its second album , Ideas Nuevas , which was released in May 2000 . On this record , the band began experimenting with a variety of rhythms such as bossa nova , salsa , ska , and jazz . The album was dedicated to a music instructor at the University of Puerto Rico . The band performed in Tito Puente 's amphitheater on May 12 , 2000 , later releasing a recording of the performance in the form of the live album Cultura en Vivo . In 2002 , the band released its third studio album , Diario . On this album , the band aimed to produce a record that represents Puerto Rican daily life , occasionally introducing songs with interludes of casual conversations and background noise , exemplified by songs such as " De Antes " and " Pa 'l <unk> " . 
 In 2004 , Cultura <unk> began to focus on the international stage , eventually moving temporarily to Mexico . Their fourth studio album , M.O.T.A. , was released in October 2005 after a tour through Mexico . <unk> peaked at number 12 on the Billboard Hot Latin Albums chart , remaining at the position for two weeks . Also in 2005 , the group collaborated with Puerto Rican rapper Vico C on his song " Te Me Puedo <unk> " from his album <unk> . In January 2006 , the song " Ritmo Que Pesa " from <unk> peaked at number 35 on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart . In 2007 , the group released Tribute to the Legend : Bob Marley , a live recording of the group performing Bob Marley songs . After the release of the tribute album , Cultura Profética toured extensively through Latin America and expanded its fan base , particularly in Argentina . A DVD covering their performance at Jose Miguel Agrelot Coliseum was released in late summer of 2008 . 
 = = = 2010 – present : La Dulzura and upcoming album = = = 
 In 2010 , Cultura Profética released La Dulzura , the group 's first album on its own record label , La <unk> . While discussing the decision to create an independent record label , Rodríguez explained " I can 't deny we spoke with different labels , but we didn 't find anything favorable . Labels are going through tough times and we decided to brave it on our own . " Many of the songs on the album were written and performed during the band 's extensive touring beginning in 2007 , and the songs went through numerous transformations during this time . Before the album 's official release , the band posted songs on the internet , including " La Complicidad " , which became a radio hit in Puerto Rico . La Dulzura debuted at number five on Billboard 's Top Latin Albums Chart . 
 La Dulzura represented a stylistic departure for the group , both musically and lyrically . The song " Del Tope al Fondo " is influenced by Argentine music , especially the genre of tango . Lyrically , the band discusses more romantic themes as opposed to the political emphasis of the group 's previous records . Guitarist Eliut Gonzalez remarked that the band aimed to shift discussion to " the good things in the world " , explaining that " We know that people need help , and that behind every revolution or movement , there is love . We wanted to document that in our music , but without doing it in a cheesy or typical way . " The singles " Baja la <unk> " , " La Complicidad " , " Para Estar " and " <unk> " all charted on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart . In 2011 , the group collaborated with Dominican musician Vicente García on his single " Mi <unk> " . 
 The group 's most recent single , " <unk> , <unk> y <unk> " , released in 2014 , pays homage to Jamaican deejay and rapper Super Cat and advocates for the legalization of marijuana . Gonzalez describes the band 's upcoming record as " very different " from La Dulzura , noting that the group began working on new material while on tour approximately a year after the album 's release . 
 = = Style and lyrical themes = = 
 Cultura Profética has been described as roots reggae . The group has often made use of the moog synthesizer , an instrument commonly used in traditional reggae but is generally rare in contemporary reggae . Despite primarily performing reggae music , the group incorporates various other rhythms into its compositions , including those of Caribbean genres such as salsa . The song " Reggae <unk> " from Ideas Nuevas includes an extended <unk> , an improvised call @-@ and @-@ response section common in the salsa genre , at its closing , calling for unity in reggae music . Additionally , the band 's music features a strong emphasis on improvisation and polyrhythmic patterns . Rodríguez notes that " We 've developed what I think is our own genre . We don 't consider ourselves a pop act but we do make popular music in the sense that we are supported by many people . People have finally understood what we do . " Leila Cobo of Billboard observed elements of jazz in the single " La Complicidad , " additionally describing it as " more mellow rock than reggae . " 
 Lyrically , the group addresses social issues including corruption , environmentalism , personal liberty , and Latin American identity . Canción de Alerta contains the song " Por qué <unk> , " an adaptation of Uruguayan writer Mario Benedetti 's poem of the same name . Author Eunice Rojas cites this as an example of the group using " the power of music to advance social causes . " The song " <unk> Los <unk> " from Ideas Nuevas discourages listeners from using violence to advance a political cause . However , the lyrics on La Dulzura place more emphasis on interpersonal relationships and love . Silva notes that the group refrains from writing " romantic " lyrics , noting that " romanticism has a connotation of suffering for love . We are talking about the love that elevates and purifies your soul . We are talking in the sense of the love that sets you free . " 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 Canción de Alerta ( 1998 ) 
 Ideas Nuevas ( 1999 ) 
 Diario ( 2002 ) 
 M.O.T.A. ( 2005 ) 
 La Dulzura ( 2010 ) 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = = Current members = = = 
 Willy Rodríguez — Bass Guitar , Vocals 
 Boris Bilbraut — Drums , Vocals 
 Omar Silva — Guitar , Bass Guitar 
 <unk> <unk> — Piano , Keyboards 
 Eliut González — Guitar 
 <unk> Santiago — Organ , Keyboards 
 Ernesto Rodriguez — Percussion 
 Patricia Lewis — Vocals 
 Adrianna Betancourt — Vocals 
 Victor Vazquez — Trombone 
 Kalani Trinidad — Flute & Saxophone 
 <unk> Garcia — Trumpet 
 = = = Former members = = = 
 Iván Gutiérrez — piano , brass arrangements 
 Sergio Orellana — keyboards , organ 
 Melvin Villanueva — piano 
 Juan Costa — rhythm guitar 
 Raúl Gaztambide — organ 
 Eduardo Fernández — trombone 
 Javier Joglar — tenor saxophone , flute 
 Luis Rafael Torres — tenor saxophone , alto saxophone , flute 
 Juan José " Cheo " Quiñones — trumpet 
 María Soledad Gaztambide — vocals 
 <unk> <unk> , better known professionally as Mima — vocals 
 Eduardo " Edo " Sanz — drums , percussion 
 Omar Cruz — percussion 
 Beto Torrens , <unk> — percussion 
 <unk> Jimenez — piano , keyboards 
 = Bridgewater Canal = 
 The Bridgewater Canal connects Runcorn , Manchester and Leigh , in North West England . It was commissioned by Francis Egerton , 3rd Duke of Bridgewater , to transport coal from his mines in Worsley to Manchester . It was opened in 1761 from Worsley to Manchester , and later extended from Manchester to Runcorn , and then from Worsley to Leigh . 
 The canal is connected to the Manchester Ship Canal via a lock at Cornbrook ; to the Rochdale Canal in Manchester ; to the Trent and Mersey Canal at Preston Brook , southeast of Runcorn ; and to the Leeds and Liverpool Canal at Leigh . It once connected with the River Mersey at Runcorn but has since been cut off by a slip road to the Silver Jubilee Bridge . 
 Often considered to be the first " true " canal in England , it required the construction of an aqueduct to cross the River Irwell , one of the first of its kind . Its success helped inspire a period of intense canal building in Britain , known as " canal mania " . It later faced intense competition from the Liverpool and Manchester Railway and the Macclesfield Canal . Navigable throughout its history , it is one of the few canals in Britain not to have been nationalised , and remains privately owned . Pleasure craft now use the canal which forms part of the Cheshire Ring network of canals . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Francis Egerton , 3rd Duke of Bridgewater , owned some of the coal mines dug to supply north west England with fuel for the steam engines instrumental in powering England 's industrial revolution . The duke transported his coal along the Mersey and Irwell Navigation and also by packhorse , but each method was inefficient and expensive ; river transport was subject to the vagaries of river navigation , and the amount of coal packhorses could carry was limited by its relative weight . The duke 's underground mines also suffered from persistent flooding , caused by the geology of the Middle Coal Measures , where the coal seam lies beneath a layer of permeable sandstone . 
 Having visited the Canal du Midi in France and watched the construction of the Sankey Canal in England , the duke 's solution to these problems was to build an underground canal at Worsley , connected to a surface canal between Worsley and Salford . In addition to easing overland transport difficulties and providing drainage for his mines , an underground canal would provide a reliable source of water for the surface canal , and also eliminate the need to lift the coal to the surface ( an expensive and difficult proposition ) . The canal boats would carry 30 long tons ( 30 t ) at a time , pulled by only one horse – more than ten times the amount of cargo per horse that was possible with a cart . The duke and his estate manager John Gilbert produced a plan of the canal , and in 1759 obtained an Act of Parliament , enabling its construction . 
 James Brindley was brought in for his technical expertise ( having previously installed a pumping system at the nearby Wet Earth Colliery ) , and after a six @-@ day visit suggested varying the route of the proposed canal away from Salford , instead taking it across the River Irwell to Stretford and thereon into Manchester . This route would make connecting to any future canals much easier , and would also increase competition with the Mersey and Irwell Navigation company . Brindley moved into Worsley Old Hall and spent 46 days surveying the proposed route , which to cross the Irwell would require the construction of an aqueduct at Barton @-@ upon @-@ Irwell . At the duke 's behest , in January 1760 Brindley also travelled to London to give evidence before a parliamentary committee . The duke therefore gained a second Act of Parliament , which superseded the original . 
 Brindley 's planned route began at Worsley and passed southeast through Eccles , before turning south to cross the River Irwell on the Barton Aqueduct . From there it continued southeast along the edge of Trafford Park , and then east into Manchester . Although a connection with the Mersey and Irwell Navigation was included in the new Act , at Hulme Locks in Castlefield ( on land previously occupied by Hulme Hall ) , this was not completed until 1838 . The terminus would be at Castlefield Basin , where the nearby River Medlock was to help supply the canal with water . Boats would unload their cargoes inside the duke 's purpose @-@ built warehouse . There were no locks in Brindley 's design , demonstrating his ability as a competent engineer . The Barton Aqueduct was built relatively quickly for the time ; work commenced in September 1760 and the first boat crossed on 17 July 1761 . 
 The duke invested a large sum of money in the scheme . From Worsley to Manchester its construction cost £ 168 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 23 @,@ 348 @,@ 370 in 2015 ) , but its advantages over land and river transport meant that within a year of its opening in 1761 , the price of coal in Manchester fell by about half . This success helped inspire a period of intense canal building , known as Canal Mania . Along with its stone aqueduct at Barton @-@ upon @-@ Irwell , the Bridgewater Canal was considered a major engineering achievement . One commentator wrote that when finished , " [ the canal ] will be the most extraordinary thing in the Kingdom , if not in Europe . The boats in some places are to go underground , and in other places over a navigable river , without communicating with its waters " . 
 In addition to the duke 's warehouse at Manchester , more buildings were built by Brindley and extended to Alport Street ( now called Deansgate ) . The warehouses were of timber @-@ frame design , with load @-@ bearing hand @-@ made brick walls , supported on cast iron posts . The duke 's warehouse was badly damaged by fire in 1789 but was rebuilt . 
 = = = Manchester to Runcorn extension = = = 
 In September 1761 , with his assistant Hugh Oldham , Brindley surveyed an extension from Longford Bridge to <unk> , near Halton , Cheshire . He assisted in obtaining Parliamentary approval for the Bridgewater Canal Extension Act of 1762 which allowed the construction of an extension to the canal , from Manchester , to the River Mersey at Runcorn . Despite objections from the Mersey and Irwell Navigation Company , Royal assent was given on 24 March 1762 . A junction , Waters Meeting , was created in Trafford Park , at which the new extension branched south through Stretford , Sale , Altrincham , Lymm and finally to Runcorn . 
 In December 1761 Brindley undertook a survey of the route at Runcorn . His initial plan was to make the terminus at <unk> , east of Runcorn Gap , but following a study of the tides and depth of water there , he decided instead to build the terminus west of Runcorn Gap . This change was designed to accommodate Mersey flats , although the low fixed bridges required that traffic on the canal be able to lower or <unk> their masts . Runcorn basin was almost 90 feet ( 27 m ) above the Mersey , so a flight of ten locks , described as " the wonder of their time " , was built to connect the two . Nine locks had a fall of 2 metres ( 7 ft ) , with a fall at the river lock of more than 6 metres ( 20 ft ) at low water . It allowed vessels to enter and leave the canal on any tide . The connection to the Mersey was made on 1 January 1773 . The river 's tidal action tended to deposit silt around the lower entrance to the locks , so to counteract this a channel , equipped with gates at each end and known as the Duke 's Gut , was cut through the marshes upriver from the locks . At high tide the gates were closed , and with the ebb of the tide were opened to release water , which scoured the silt from the entrance to the locks . The cut created an island , known as Runcorn Island , crossed by Castle Bridge . 
 The connection to Manchester was delayed by Sir Richard Brooke of Norton Priory . Concerned that boatmen might poach his game and wildfowl , Brooke did not want the canal to pass through his land . The Act included several stipulations : the canal should not come within 325 metres ( 1 @,@ 066 ft ) of his house ; the towpath should be on the south side of the canal , furthest away from Brooke 's house ; there should be no quays , buildings , hedges or fences to obstruct the view ; no vessels were to be moored within 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 281 ft ) of the house , other than during construction . Eventually , though , a compromise was reached . This included the construction of a link to the Trent and Mersey Canal at Preston Brook ( permitted by the Trent and Mersey Canal Act of 1766 ) , and the building of the canal 's terminus to the west of Runcorn Gap . The Trent and Mersey link gave the Duke access to the Midlands , and forestalled the Weaver Trustees from making their own junction with the canal . The new extension also met with opposition from the Mersey and Irwell Navigation , until the duke purchased a controlling interest in the company . The first part of the new extension was opened in 1767 , and completed in full by March 1776 , but Brindley did not live to see its completion ; it was continued by his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Hugh Henshall . 
 The total cost of the canal , from Worsley to Manchester and from Longford Bridge to the Mersey at Runcorn , was £ 220 @,@ 000 . Alongside the Mersey , the duke built Runcorn Dock , several warehouses , and Bridgewater House , a temporary home from which he could supervise operations at the Runcorn end . Two locks up from the tideway was a small dry dock . 
 = = = Sale to Stockport branch = = = 
 In 1766 the Duke gained a fourth act of parliament for a branch canal between Sale Moor and Stockport which was to follow the valley of the Mersey . The Act was applied for to counter a proposed canal that would give the towns of Stockport and Macclesfield access to the Mersey , via the River Weaver . The work was not done , the Act lapsed and this section of canal was never built . 
 Over two decades later , the nearby Manchester Bolton & Bury Canal had sought a connection to other waterways , and it appears that the Duke had planned to limit the activities of the new company . On 15 December 1792 the Duke purchased a portion of the <unk> estate in Salford which blocked the MB & BC 's plans to build a riverside basin and wharfs there . 
 = = = Worsley to Leigh extension = = = 
 In 1795 the duke secured a fifth Act which enabled him to extend the canal a further 5 miles ( 8 km ) from Worsley via Boothstown , Astley Green and Bedford to Leigh . The new extension enabled the supply to Manchester of coal from Leigh and the surrounding districts . On 21 June 1819 an Act of Parliament was enacted to create a link between this extension and the Wigan branch of the Leeds and Liverpool Canal . 
 Access to the canal brought about a rapid development in coal mining on the Manchester Coalfield west of Worsley . Chaddock pits in the east of Tyldesley were connected to an underground level from Worsley . In 1820 , to ease congestion at the Delph in Worsley , Chaddock Pit was connected to the canal at Boothstown basin by an underground canal , the Chaddock Level which ran in a north west direction from the canal at Boothstown to the pit . Sometime after 1840 Samuel Jackson built a narrow gauge tramroad worked by horses from his Gin Pit Colliery to Marsland Green where he installed cranes and <unk> to load barges at a wharf . The tramroad was later worked by locomotives . In 1867 the Fletchers built a private railway line and the Bedford Basin with facilities for loading coal from Howe Bridge onto barges . Astley Green Colliery began winding coal on the north bank of the canal in 1912 . In the 1940s and 50s coal was sent to Barton Power Station and Runcorn Gas Works . 
 = = = Connection to Rochdale Canal = = = 
 Upon completion of the Rochdale Canal in 1804 , the two canals were joined at Castlefield . This connection may have been a factor in the failure of the Manchester Bolton & Bury Canal Company 's rival scheme to build a canal between Bury and Sladen . The River Medlock , a major source of water for the canal and which was almost as badly polluted as the nearby Irwell , was diverted through a tunnel under the canal at Castlefield by Charles Edward Cawley , a civil engineer for the Salford Corporation and later MP for Salford . The canal was from that point supplied by the much purer water of the Rochdale Canal . 
 = = = Mines = = = 
 Worsley Delph , in Worsley , originally a centuries @-@ old sandstone quarry near Worsley Brook , was the entrance to the Navigable Levels . It is now a Scheduled Monument . Two entrances , built years apart , allow access to the specially built M @-@ boats ( also known as <unk> ) , the largest of which could carry 12 long tons ( 12 t ) of coal . Inside the mines 46 miles ( 74 km ) of underground canal on four levels , linked by inclined planes , were constructed . The mines ceased production in 1887 . As the canal passes through Worsley , iron oxide from the mines has , for many years , stained the water bright orange . The removal of this colouration is currently the subject of a £ 2 @.@ 5 million remedial scheme . 
 = = = Traffic = = = 
 In 1791 the mines at Worsley produced 100 @,@ 282 long tons ( 101 @,@ 891 t ) of coal , 60 @,@ 461 long tons ( 61 @,@ 431 t ) of which were " sold down the navigation " ; 12 @,@ 000 long tons ( 12 @,@ 000 t ) of rocksalt was also transported from Cheshire . Sales of coal were £ 19 @,@ 455 , and nearly £ 30 @,@ 000 was earned from other cargoes . Passenger traffic in 1791 brought in receipts of £ 3 @,@ 781 . 
 The canal also carried passengers and was in keen competition with the Mersey and Irwell Navigation Company ( M & IN ) . The journey down river by the latter route took eight hours ( nine hours in the up direction ) while the journey on the Bridgewater canal took nine hours each way . Fares were similar but the Bridgewater route was said to be " more picturesque " . Boating men also used the canal . They lifted their small lightweight boats out of the M & IN at Runcorn , and carried them a short distance up the steep streets onto the Bridgewater Canal . 
 Barges on the canal continued to be towed by horses until the middle of the 19th century , when they were replaced by steam @-@ powered boats after a fatal epidemic spread through the horse population . The " dense smoke " produced by the steam barges and their " harsh unnecessary whistling " proved unpopular with some local residents , who also began to suffer from a condition known as canal throat , " no doubt caused by the foul emanations given off by its [ the Bridgewater Canal 's ] horribly filthy water " . 
 The canal carried commercial freight traffic until 1975 ; the last regular cargo was grain from Liverpool to Manchester for <unk> . It is now used mainly by pleasure craft and hosts two rowing clubs – Trafford Rowing Club and Manchester University Boat Club . 
 = = Bridgewater Trustees = = 
 The Duke of Bridgewater died on 8 March 1803 . By his will the income from the canal was to be paid to his nephew George Leveson @-@ Gower , the Marquess of Stafford ( later the 1st Duke of Sutherland ) . On his death it was to go to Stafford 's second son Francis , provided he changed his name to Egerton ; and then to his heirs and successors . The management of the company was placed in the hands of three trustees . These were Sir Archibald Macdonald , who was Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer , Edward Venables @-@ Vernon @-@ Harcourt , at the time the Bishop of Carlisle and later the Archbishop of York , and , as Superintendent , Robert Haldane Bradshaw , the Duke 's agent . Bradshaw managed the estate , for which he received a salary of £ 2 @,@ 000 a year and the use of the duke 's mansions at Worsley and Runcorn . The other two trustees had each married nieces of the duke and were " dummy trustees " . 
 During the time the canal was administered by the Bridgewater Trustees , it made a profit every year . Until his retirement in 1834 , the administration was carried out entirely by Bradshaw . It has been calculated that the average annual profit between 1806 and 1826 was of the order of 13 per cent , and in 1824 , the best year , it was 23 per cent . Bradshaw found it difficult to delegate , and complained of being over @-@ worked , but he was also regarded as being a " formidable <unk> " . In 1805 he was approached by the proprietors of the nearby Manchester Bolton & Bury Canal to resolve a dispute with a Salford landowner , but his response was delayed . In 1810 there was a general agreement with the Mersey and Irwell Navigation Company ( M & IN ) to simultaneously raise freight charges . However any cooperation between the two companies was short @-@ lived and by 1812 the Mersey and Irwell had reduced their charges . Further competition was to come from other carriers who used the canal ; in 1824 the traffic carried by private companies exceeded that carried by the Trustees for the first time . However , in time more profit came from " tonnage traffic " ( that carried by private companies ) than from the Bridgewater 's own carriage of freight . Bradshaw 's administration saw increased deterioration of the fabric of the canal , the locks , docks and warehouses . The undertakings were starved of capital largely owing to inadequate provision for it in the duke 's will . There were also problems caused by silting around the entrance to the Mersey and by the changing channels of the river itself . 
 During the 1820s there was increased dissatisfaction with the canals . They did not cope well with increasing volumes of cargo , and they were perceived as monopolistic , and the preserve of the landed gentry class . There was increased interest in the possibility of railway construction . The possible construction of a railway between Liverpool and Manchester was vigorously opposed by Bradshaw , who refused railway surveyors access to land owned by the Trustees . When the first bill was presented to parliament in 1825 , the Trustees opposed and it was overthrown . However , later in the year Lord Stafford , possibly persuaded to do so by William Huskisson , invested £ 100 @,@ 000 ( one @-@ fifth of the required capital ) , in the Liverpool and Manchester Railway . Following this the Trustees withdrew their opposition to the construction of the railway ; they did not petition against the second bill , which was passed in 1826 . At the same time as he made his investment in the railway , Lord Stafford advanced £ 40 @,@ 000 for improvements to the canal . This was spent mainly on a second line of locks at Runcorn , which were completed in 1828 , plus new warehouses at Manchester and Liverpool . The additional line of locks cost £ 35 @,@ 000 and was used for traffic heading to Manchester , while the old line was used for traffic passing down to the Mersey . 
 In 1830 the new railway opened and by the end of the year was carrying freight . Bradshaw immediately went into competition by lowering the rates of carriage on the canal and by offering improved terms to the private carriers . By so doing he managed to maintain the volume of traffic carried by the canal , both freight and passengers , at a time when the country was suffering a trade depression . However Bradshaw 's tactics led to a sharp decline in profits . At the same time costs were rising , partly due to the use of steamboats on the Mersey . Further competition came with the opening of the Macclesfield Canal in 1831 which gave separate access to Manchester from the Midlands . In November 1831 Bradshaw suffered a stroke , as a result of which he lost the use of his left arm and leg , and there is evidence that it also impaired his judgement . 
 Matters came to a head in 1833 , the year in which the canal made its lowest profit since the death of the Duke . On 19 July the Marquess of Stafford ( now the 1st Duke of Sutherland ) died and the profits from the canal passed to Francis Egerton . On 25 September Bradshaw 's son , Captain James Bradshaw , who had been acting as a deputy superintendent to the Trustees , and who had been expected to succeed his father as Superintendent , committed suicide . The agent for both Francis Egerton and his older brother , who was now the 2nd Duke of Sutherland , was James Loch . The events that followed were " stage @-@ managed by Loch " . He reported to Francis Egerton that Bradshaw was no longer fit to be Superintendent , and then persuaded Bradshaw to retire on his full salary . It had been expected that he would appoint his other son , William Rigby Bradshaw , as his successor , but Loch persuaded him to appoint James Sothern in the position ; Sothern had been the principal agent of the Trust since December 1832 . He took over the position of Superintendent on 3 February 1834 . The appointment of Sothern was not a success . Charges were made against him of dishonesty and of nepotism . He entered into disputes and disagreements with Loch , with Francis Egerton , and with the other two trustees . ( Sir Archibald Macdonald had died in 1826 ; by this time his place had been taken by the 10th Earl of Devon ) . To avoid a costly lawsuit , at the end of 1836 Sothern agreed to retire on various conditions which included receipt of £ 45 @,@ 000 . On 1 March 1837 , he was succeeded as Superintendent by James Loch . 
 Loch was extremely busy and did not have time to deal with the detailed administration of the Trust . He therefore looked for a deputy to take on these duties . His first choice was Richard Smith who was the mine agent to the Trustees of the 1st Earl of Dudley . However this was perceived as poaching and it led to such controversy that Smith declined the offer and recommended his son , George Samuel Fereday Smith for the post . Fereday Smith was appointed as Deputy Superintendent in March 1837 on a salary of £ 600 a year , half of the salary which had been offered to his father . Loch immediately undertook a reorganisation of the administration and efficiency of the business , restored the agreement with the Old Quay Company to raise freight charges , and improved the facilities for passengers , including the introduction of " swift boats " . By 1837 , the Trustees employed around 3 @,@ 000 people ( including those working in the colliery and in Worsley Yard ) , making it one of the largest employers in the country at the time . Since the death of the Duke the amount of freight carried by the canal had almost trebled ; in 1803 it carried 334 @,@ 495 long tons ( 339 @,@ 863 t ) of goods and in 1836 968 @,@ 795 long tons ( 984 @,@ 341 t ) . 
 In 1843 a new dock , the Francis Dock , was opened at Runcorn . The late 1830s and early 1840s had seen increased competition between the Bridgewater Canal on the one hand , and other canal companies and the railways on the other . The most dangerous of the rivals was the Mersey and Irwell Navigation Company who started to reduce their rates again in 1840 . This led to a price war between the two canal companies and the Liverpool and Manchester Railway , who had previously cooperated on rates . Eventually , in desperation , the Bridgewater Trustees bought the Mersey and Irwell and took over its ownership on 1 January 1844 . During the same year competition with other canals was further reduced by agreements made with the Ellesmere and Chester Canal Company and with the Anderton Carrying Company . In 1844 the canal made a profit of £ 76 @,@ 410 , the second highest during the time it was administered by the Trustees . 
 Having seen off competition from other canal companies , the next major threat was to come from the railways . This was the period in the mid @-@ 1840s known as the Railway Mania . The railways competed with the canals in three ways ; by building , or threatening to build , new lines which would be in direct competition with the canals ; by amalgamation into giant companies ( such as the Midland and the London and North Western companies ) , which gave them more political power ; and by taking over ownership of canal companies . On 13 April 1844 The Times newspaper reported that the canal was to be emptied of water , and converted into a railway , although nothing came of this scheme . In 1845 , in return for concessions , the Trustees supported the Grand Junction Railway in its campaign to build a more direct line to Liverpool , which crossed the Mersey over a bridge at Runcorn Gap . However the bill was overthrown in the House of Lords . Competition from the railways and other canals led to a decline in the trading and the profits between 1845 and 1848 , but there was no " disastrous collapse " . During this time the Trustees and their representatives were engaged in vigorous campaigns in Parliament to protect their interests . 
 By October 1844 a bonding warehouse had been built in Manchester and the first cargo to arrive was announced in a letter to the Manchester Guardian , later printed in The Times : 
 FIRST <unk> IN THE <unk> OF <unk> OF A <unk> OF <unk> FOR <unk> 
 We have great pleasure in recording the first arrival in the Port of Manchester of a vessel , with an entire cargo of wines and spirits removed in bond , and for bonding in Manchester . The vessel , a flat named the Express , was wholly laden with a valuable cargo of wines and spirits , in all about 40 tons weight , belonging to Mr. William Gibb , spirit merchant , of this town , whose active and long @-@ continued exertions in the struggle to obtain the privilege of bonding for this great and important borough are about to be acknowledged in the form of a substantial mark of respect and gratitude by his fellow @-@ townsmen . The Express arrived from Liverpool on Saturday evening ; but it was yesterday morning before she began to unload . She is lying in the Bridgewater Canal , Knott Mill where the Duke 's trustees have constructed a large bonding vault , which Mr. Gibb has taken and had licensed for the purpose , and we believe he is now removing his stock of wine and spirits from other ports to Manchester , for the greater convenience of sampling and sale . The lockers , <unk> , and other officers of Customs were in attendance , superintending the unloading of the vessel and thus have commenced the operations of the Manchester Custom @-@ house . It is a gratifying circumstance that a gentleman who took so prominent a part in the struggle to obtain the boon of bonding for Manchester should be the first to enjoy the fruits of its success . We hope ere long to record the general operation of the system ; though it will require a little time , perhaps , as it must have a beginning . - Manchester Guardian 
 However , this venture was less successful than expected , as is evidenced by a letter to The Observer later that year , also printed in The Times : 
 <unk> A <unk> <unk> 
 After the pressing demands which have been made by some of our principal manufacturing towns for the privileges of inland bonded warehouses for goods subject to Customs duties , it would naturally be supposed that the formation of a Custom @-@ house establishment at Manchester would have occasioned a vast quantity of business in that extensive seat of British manufacturers ; but we are informed that the result is very different from what had been expected . Although the system has been introduced into Manchester only as an experiment and a large establishment has been formed entirely of old and experienced officers ; under the impression that the extent of business there would require the constant services of well tried men , we believe that , up to the present period , little trade has passed through the Manchester Custom @-@ house and the officers ' duties are nearly approaching to a sinecure . The total annual expense of this establishment , exclusive of that for the Custom @-@ house and warehouse is £ 2 @,@ 620 . The town council of the borough of Manchester , however , are made liable , under the act of the 7th and 8th of Victoria cap 81 , to the charges of maintaining this establishment , and the public are thereby exonerated from the expense . 
 - Observer 
 Between 1849 and 1851 the competition between the Trustees and the railway companies intensified . Agreements and alliances were made and broken . Their major opponents were the London and North Western Railway and the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway who reduced tariffs and took business away from the canals . For the first time the railways carried more trade between Liverpool and the towns of central Lancashire than the canals . The value of the traffic carried by the Bridgewater Canal in 1851 was the lowest in the time it was administered by the Trustees . In 1851 the Earl of Ellesmere hosted a visit to Manchester by Queen Victoria and Prince Albert . They stayed at Worsley Hall , with a view of the canal , and were given a trip between Patricroft railway station and Worsley Hall , on state barges . Large crowds had gathered to cheer the royal party , which apparently frightened the horses drawing the barge so much that they fell into the canal . 
 The Trustees spent much time between 1851 and 1855 in negotiations to ease the competition , especially that from the London and North Western Railway . The most likely allies seemed to be other railway companies , including the Shrewsbury and Birmingham and the Shrewsbury and Chester railway companies , and the Great Western Railway . Of these , the most likely seemed to be the Great Western Railway who , in their concern to expand northwards were willing to help the Trustees with the carriage of their traffic to the south . However years of negotiations came to no agreement and , in the end , the Trustees ' railway deal was done with the London and North Western Railway , who agreed to cooperate with the onward passage of the Trustees ' traffic . 
 On 28 June 1855 James Loch , the Superintendent , died and was succeeded by Hon. Algernon Fulke Egerton , Lord Ellesmere 's third son . He was then aged 29 , and had been educated at Harrow and Christ Church , Oxford ; he had been destined for a political life and had no experience of managing coal mines or canals . Since James Loch had been appointed , he had been mainly in control of the management of the Trustees , assisted by his son George Loch . During this time the role of Fereday Smith had been diminished ; initially appointed as Deputy Superintendent , his position was reduced to that of Principal Agent in 1845 . With the arrival of the inexperienced Algernon Egerton , Fereday Smith had a much greater say in the management . During the previous four years the Lochs had been reluctant to invest in improvements to the canal or Runcorn Dock , despite the increasing demand for the passage of goods through the dock , and the profits made during these years became stagnant . Fereday Smith had been keen on expansion and now his opportunity came . He first reduced the top @-@ heavy administration of the Trust , and then took on the planning of the expansion of the business . The steamers owned by the Trustees had been neglected and were in a poor state ; these were repaired or sold . 
 George Loch , who had been opposed to using the Trustees ' investments for improvements to the canals or docks , died in 1857 . Between 1857 and 1872 the Trustees provided more capital for improvements from their own resources than at any previous time . The Runcorn and Weston Canal was built in 1858 – 59 , providing a connection between Runcorn Docks and the Weaver Navigation . A new half tide dock , the Alfred Dock was opened at Runcorn in 1860 . Electric telegraph was installed in 1861 – 62 . 
 In 1862 the 2nd Earl of Ellesmere died and his son and heir , the 3rd Earl was a minor , aged 15 . This gave Algernon Egerton even more power to invest the profits of the company in developments . Negotiations were made to increase sea @-@ borne trade , both British and foreign , through the canal . Building started on a new dock at Runcorn in 1867 . Work was carried out in the Mersey estuary around the docks to improve access for vessels . Some of this was carried out in conjunction with the London and North Western Railway who were building a bridge across Runcorn Gap to take their line from Weaver Junction to Liverpool ; the railway paid half the cost of the improvements , amounting to about £ 20 @,@ 000 ( £ 1 @.@ 6 million today ) . Improvements were made to the Trustees ' facilities at Liverpool , to the Mersey and Irwell Navigation and to the Bridgewater Canal itself . Agreements were made with the railway companies to cooperate on the transit of goods and the rates of carriage and " the Trustees ' fortunes entered a calmer phase " . 
 = = Subsequent owners = = 
 In 1872 the Bridgewater Navigation Company Ltd was formed , and on Monday 9 September the canal was purchased in the names of Sir Edward William Watkin and William Philip Price , respectively chairmen of the Manchester , Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway and the Midland Railway for £ 1 @,@ 120 @,@ 000 . The canal was sold again in 1885 , when the Manchester Ship Canal Company paid the Bridgewater Navigation Company £ 1 @,@ 710 @,@ 000 for all their property . The construction of the ship canal forced the removal of Barton Aqueduct and the construction of Barton Swing Aqueduct , as the former was too low for the vessels which would use the new canal . In 1907 The Manchester Ship Canal ( Bridgewater Canal ) Act 1907 was passed , permitting coal mining near the canal between Monton Bridge and Leigh , in exchange for which the mine owners were obliged to pay the associated costs of keeping the canal open and navigable . 
 In 1923 Bridgewater Estates Ltd was formed to acquire the Ellesmere family estate in Worsley . In 1984 Bridgewater Estates Ltd was purchased by a subsidiary of Peel Holdings . In 1987 <unk> acquired a majority shareholding of the Manchester Ship Canal Company ( subsequently the shares held by <unk> were transferred to Peel Holdings ) . In 1994 the Manchester Ship Canal Company became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Peel Holdings group . In 2004 ownership of the Manchester Ship Canal Company was transferred to the Peel Ports group . 
 = = Current status = = 
 The Bridgewater is often considered to be the first true canal in Britain , as it relied upon existing watercourses as sources of water rather than as navigable routes . It now terminates in Runcorn basin , just before the disused flight of 10 locks which ( before the approach road to the Silver Jubilee Bridge was built ) used to lower the canal to the Runcorn Docks on the River Mersey and later , to the Manchester Ship Canal . The old line of locks in Runcorn fell into disuse in the late 1930s , and they were closed under the Ship Canal Act of 1949 and filled in . The Ship Canal Act of 1966 allowed the closure and filling in of the newer line of locks . The gates from this flight of locks were removed and installed at Devizes on the Kennet and Avon Canal . The Duke 's warehouse in Manchester was demolished in 1960 . 
 The canal has suffered three breaches ; one soon after opening , another in 1971 near the River Bollin aqueduct , and another in the summer of 2005 when a sluice gate failed in Manchester . Cranes are located at intervals along the canal 's length to allow boards to be dropped into slots in the banks . These allow sections of the canal to be isolated in the event of a leak . 
 The canal now forms an integral part of the Cheshire Ring network of canals . Pleasure craft have been allowed on the canal since 1952 . 
 The new road crossing of the Mersey now under construction may allow a realignment of the Bridge approach road and the complete restoration of the original flight of locks – thus re @-@ opening the link to Runcorn Docks , the Runcorn and Weston Canal , the River Mersey , the Manchester Ship Canal , and the River Weaver . This would create a new ring route for leisure boats involving the Trent and Mersey Canal , the Anderton Boat Lift and the River Weaver . 
 The Hulme Locks Branch Canal in Manchester is now disused , and on 26 May 1995 was replaced by the nearby Pomona Lock . 
 = = = Bridgewater Way = = = 
 The Bridgewater Way is a scheme to redevelop the canal and make it more accessible to users , particularly cyclists . The 40 @-@ mile development , which includes a new towpath , will form part of the National Cycle and Footpath Network as Regional Route number 82 . 
 = Jules Massenet = 
 Jules Émile Frédéric Massenet ( French : [ <unk> emil <unk> <unk> ] ; 12 May 1842 – 13 August 1912 ) was a French composer of the Romantic era best known for his operas , of which he wrote more than thirty . The two most frequently staged are Manon ( 1884 ) and Werther ( 1892 ) . He also composed oratorios , ballets , orchestral works , incidental music , piano pieces , songs and other music . 
 While still a schoolboy , Massenet was admitted to France 's principal music college , the Paris Conservatoire . There he studied under Ambroise Thomas , whom he greatly admired . After winning the country 's top musical prize , the Prix de Rome , in 1863 , he composed prolifically in many genres , but quickly became best known for his operas . Between 1867 and his death forty @-@ five years later he wrote more than forty stage works in a wide variety of styles , from opéra @-@ comique to grand @-@ scale depictions of classical myths , romantic comedies , lyric dramas , as well as oratorios , cantatas and ballets . Massenet had a good sense of the theatre and of what would succeed with the Parisian public . Despite some miscalculations , he produced a series of successes that made him the leading composer of opera in France in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . 
 Like many prominent French composers of the period , Massenet became a professor at the Conservatoire . He taught composition there from 1878 until 1896 , when he resigned after the death of the director , Ambroise Thomas . Among his students were Gustave Charpentier , Ernest Chausson , Reynaldo Hahn and Gabriel Pierné . 
 By the time of his death , Massenet was regarded by many critics as old @-@ fashioned and unadventurous although his two best @-@ known operas remained popular in France and abroad . After a few decades of neglect , his works began to be favourably reassessed during the mid @-@ 20th century , and many of them have since been staged and recorded . Although critics do not rank him among the handful of outstanding operatic geniuses such as Mozart , Verdi and Wagner , his operas are now widely accepted as well @-@ crafted and intelligent products of the Belle Époque . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Massenet was born at <unk> , then an outlying hamlet and now a part of the city of Saint @-@ Étienne , in the Loire . He was the youngest of the four children of Alexis Massenet ( 1788 – 1863 ) and his second wife Eléonore @-@ <unk> née Royer de <unk> ( 1809 – 1875 ) ; the elder children were Julie , Léon and Edmond . Massenet senior was a prosperous ironmonger ; his wife was a talented amateur musician who gave Jules his first piano lessons . By early 1848 the family had moved to Paris , where they settled in a flat in Saint @-@ Germain @-@ des @-@ Prés . Massenet was educated at the Lycée Saint @-@ Louis and , from either 1851 or 1853 , the Paris Conservatoire . According to his colourful but unreliable memoirs , Massenet auditioned in October 1851 , when he was nine , before a judging panel comprising Daniel Auber , Fromental Halévy , Ambroise Thomas and Michele Carafa , and was admitted at once . His biographer Demar Irvine dates the audition and admission as January 1853 . Both sources agree that Massenet continued his general education at the lycée in tandem with his musical studies . 
 At the Conservatoire Massenet studied solfège with Augustin Savard and the piano with François Laurent . He pursued his studies , with modest distinction , until the beginning of 1855 , when family concerns disrupted his education . Alexis Massenet 's health was poor , and on medical advice he moved from Paris to Chambéry in the south of France ; the family , including Massenet , moved with him . Again , Massenet 's own memoirs and the researches of his biographers are at variance : the composer recalled his exile in Chambéry as lasting for two years ; Henry Finck and Irvine record that the young man returned to Paris and the Conservatoire in October 1855 . On his return he lodged with relations in Montmartre and resumed his studies ; by 1859 he had progressed so far as to win the Conservatoire 's top prize for pianists . The family 's finances were no longer comfortable , and to support himself Massenet took private piano students and played as a percussionist in theatre orchestras . His work in the orchestra pit gave him a good working knowledge of the operas of Gounod and other composers , classic and contemporary . Traditionally , many students at the Conservatoire went on to substantial careers as church organists ; with that in mind Massenet enrolled for organ classes , but they were not a success and he quickly abandoned the instrument . He gained some work as a piano accompanist , in the course of which he met Wagner who , along with Berlioz , was one of his two musical heroes . 
 In 1861 Massenet 's music was published for the first time , the Grande Fantasie de Concert sur le Pardon de <unk> de Meyerbeer , a virtuoso piano work in nine sections . Having graduated to the composition class under Ambroise Thomas , Massenet was entered for the Conservatoire 's top musical honour , the Prix de Rome , previous winners of which included Berlioz , Thomas , Gounod and Bizet . The first two of these were on the judging panel for the 1863 competition . All the competitors had to set the same text by Gustave <unk> , a cantata about David Rizzio ; after all the settings had been performed Massenet came face to face with the judges . He recalled : 
 Ambroise Thomas , my beloved master , came towards me and said , " Embrace Berlioz , you owe him a great deal for your prize . " " The prize , " I cried , bewildered , my face shining with joy . " I have the prize ! ! ! " I was deeply moved and I embraced Berlioz , then my master , and finally Monsieur Auber . Monsieur Auber comforted me . Did I need comforting ? Then he said to Berlioz pointing to me , " He 'll go far , the young rascal , when he 's had less experience ! " 
 The prize brought a well @-@ subsidised three @-@ year period of study , two @-@ thirds of which was spent at the French Academy in Rome , based at the Villa Medici . At that time the academy was dominated by painters rather than musicians ; Massenet enjoyed his time there , and made lifelong friendships with , among others , the sculptor Alexandre <unk> and the painter Carolus @-@ Duran , but the musical benefit he derived was largely self @-@ taught . He absorbed the music at St Peter 's , and closely studied the works of the great German masters , from Handel and Bach to contemporary composers . During his time in Rome , Massenet met Franz Liszt , at whose request he gave piano lessons to Louise @-@ Constance " Ninon " de <unk> , the daughter of one of Liszt 's rich patrons . Massenet and Ninon fell in love , but marriage was out of the question while he was a student with modest means . 
 = = = Early works = = = 
 Massenet returned to Paris in 1866 . He made a living by teaching the piano and publishing songs , piano pieces and orchestral suites , all in the popular style of the day . Prix de Rome winners were sometimes invited by the Opéra @-@ Comique in Paris to compose a work for performance there . At Thomas 's instigation , Massenet was commissioned to write a one @-@ act opéra comique , La grand <unk> , presented in April 1867 . At around the same time he composed a Requiem , which has not survived . In 1868 he met Georges Hartmann , who became his publisher and was his mentor for twenty @-@ five years ; Hartmann 's journalistic contacts did much to promote his protégé 's reputation . 
 In October 1866 Massenet and Ninon were married ; their only child , Juliette , was born in 1868 . Massenet 's musical career was briefly interrupted by the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 – 71 , during which he served as a volunteer in the National Guard alongside his friend Bizet . He found the war so " utterly terrible " that he refused to write about it in his memoirs . He and his family were trapped in the Siege of Paris but managed to get out before the horrors of the Paris Commune began ; the family stayed for some months in Bayonne , in southwestern France . 
 After order was restored , Massenet returned to Paris where he completed his first large @-@ scale stage work , an opéra comique in four acts , Don César de Bazan ( Paris , 1872 ) . It was a failure , but in 1873 he succeeded with his incidental music to Leconte de Lisle 's tragedy Les <unk> and with the dramatic oratorio , Marie @-@ Magdeleine , both of which were performed at the Théâtre de l <unk> . His reputation as a composer was growing , but at this stage he earned most of his income from teaching , giving lessons for six hours a day . 
 Massenet was a prolific composer ; he put this down to his way of working , rising early and composing from four o 'clock in the morning until midday , a practice he maintained all his life . In general he worked fluently , seldom revising , although Le roi de Lahore , his nearest approach to a traditional grand opera , took him several years to complete to his own satisfaction . It was finished in 1877 and was one of the first new works to be staged at the Palais Garnier , opened two years previously . The opera , with a story taken from the Mahabharata , was an immense success and was quickly taken up by the opera houses of eight Italian cities . It was also performed at the Hungarian State Opera House , the Bavarian State Opera , the <unk> , Dresden , the Teatro Real in Madrid , and the Royal Opera House , Covent Garden , in London . After the first Covent Garden performance , The Times summed the piece up in a way that was frequently to be applied to the composer 's operas : " M. Massenet 's opera , although not a work of genius proper , is one of more than common merit , and contains all the elements of at least temporary success . " 
 This period was an early high point in Massenet 's career . He had been made a chevalier of the Legion of Honour in 1876 , and in 1878 he was appointed professor of counterpoint , fugue and composition at the Conservatoire under Thomas , who was now the director . In the same year he was elected to the Institut de France , a prestigious honour , rare for a man in his thirties . Camille Saint @-@ Saëns , whom Massenet beat in the election for the vacancy , was resentful at being passed over for a younger composer . When the result of the election was announced , Massenet sent Saint @-@ Saëns a courteous telegram : " My dear colleague : the Institut has just committed a great injustice " . Saint @-@ Saëns cabled back , " I quite agree . " He was elected three years later , but his relations with Massenet remained cool . 
 Massenet was a popular and respected teacher at the Conservatoire . His pupils included Bruneau , Charpentier , Chausson , Hahn , Leroux , Pierné , Rabaud and Vidal . He was known for the care he took in drawing out his pupils ' ideas , never trying to impose his own . One of his last students , Charles Koechlin , recalled Massenet as a voluble professor , dispensing " a teaching active , living , vibrant , and moreover comprehensive " . According to some writers , Massenet 's influence extended beyond his own students . In the view of the critic Rodney Milnes , " In word @-@ setting alone , all French musicians profited from the freedom he won from earlier restrictions . " Romain Rolland and Francis Poulenc have both considered Massenet an influence on Debussy 's Pelléas et Mélisande ; Debussy was a student at the Conservatoire during Massenet 's professorship but did not study under him . 
 = = = Operatic successes and failures , 1879 – 96 = = = 
 Massenet 's growing reputation did not prevent a contretemps with the Paris Opéra in 1879 . Auguste <unk> , director of the Opéra , refused to stage the composer 's new piece , Hérodiade , judging the libretto either improper or inadequate . Édouard @-@ <unk> <unk> , joint director of the Théâtre de la Monnaie , Brussels , immediately offered to present the work , and its première , lavishly staged , was given in December 1881 . It ran for fifty @-@ five performances in Brussels , and had its Italian premiere two months later at La Scala . The work finally reached Paris in February 1884 , by which time Massenet had established himself as the leading French opera composer of his generation . 
 Manon , first given at the Opéra @-@ Comique in January 1884 , was a prodigious success and was followed by productions at major opera houses in Europe and the United States . Together with Gounod 's Faust and Bizet 's Carmen it became , and has remained , one of the cornerstones of the French operatic repertoire . After the intimate drama of Manon , Massenet once more turned to opera on the grand scale with Le Cid in 1885 , which marked his return to the Opéra . The Paris correspondent of The New York Times wrote that with this new work Massenet " has resolutely declared himself a melodist of undoubted consistency and of remarkable inspiration . " After these two triumphs , Massenet entered a period of mixed fortunes . He worked on Werther intermittently for several years , but it was rejected by the Opéra @-@ Comique as too gloomy . In 1887 he met the American soprano Sibyl Sanderson . He developed passionate feelings for her , which remained platonic , although it was widely believed in Paris that she was his mistress , as caricatures in the journals hinted with varying degrees of subtlety . For her , the composer revised Manon and wrote Esclarmonde ( 1889 ) . The latter was a success , but it was followed by Le mage ( 1891 ) , which failed . Massenet did not complete his next project , Amadis , and it was not until 1892 that he recovered his earlier successful form . Werther finally received its first performance in February 1892 , when the Vienna Hofoper asked for a new piece , following the enthusiastic reception of the Austrian premiere of Manon . 
 Though in the view of some writers Werther is the composer 's masterpiece , it was not immediately taken up with the same keenness as Manon . The first performance in Paris was in January 1893 by the Opéra @-@ Comique company at the Théâtre Lyrique , and there were performances in the United States , Italy and Britain , but it met with a muted response . The New York Times said of it , " If M. Massenet 's opera does not have lasting success it will be because it has no genuine depth . Perhaps M. Massenet is not capable of achieving profound depths of tragic passion ; but certainly he will never do so in a work like Werther " . It was not until a revival by the Opéra @-@ Comique in 1903 that the work became an established favourite . 
 Thaïs ( 1894 ) , composed for Sanderson , was moderately received . Like Werther , it did not gain widespread popularity among French opera @-@ goers until its first revival , which was four years after the premiere , by when the composer 's association with Sanderson was over . In the same year he had a modest success in Paris with the one @-@ act Le portrait de Manon at the Opéra @-@ Comique , and a much greater one in London with La Navarraise at Covent Garden . The Times commented that in this piece Massenet had adopted the verismo style of such works as Mascagni 's Cavalleria rusticana to great effect . The audience clamoured for the composer to acknowledge the applause , but Massenet , always a shy man , declined to take even a single curtain call . 
 = = = Later years , 1896 – 1912 = = = 
 The death of Ambroise Thomas in February 1896 made vacant the post of director of the Conservatoire . The French government announced on 6 May that Massenet had been offered the position and had refused it . The following day it was announced that another faculty member , Théodore Dubois , had been appointed director , and Massenet had resigned as professor of composition . Two explanations have been advanced for this sequence of events . Massenet wrote in 1910 that he had remained in post as professor out of loyalty to Thomas , and was eager to abandon all academic work in favour of composing , a statement repeated by his biographers Hugh Macdonald and Demar Irvine . Other writers on French music have written that Massenet was intensely ambitious to succeed Thomas , but resigned in pique after three months of manoeuvring , once the authorities finally rejected his insistence on being appointed director for life , as Thomas had been . He was succeeded as professor by Gabriel Fauré , who was doubtful of Massenet 's credentials , considering his popular style to be " based on a generally cynical view of art " . 
 With Grisélidis and Cendrillon complete , though still awaiting performance , Massenet began work on Sapho , based on a novel by Daudet about the love of an innocent young man from the country for a worldly @-@ wise Parisienne . It was given at the Opéra @-@ Comique in November 1897 , with great success , though it has been neglected since the composer 's death . His next work staged there was Cendrillon , his version of the Cinderella story , which was well received in May 1899 . 
 Macdonald comments that at the start of the 20th century Massenet was in the enviable position of having his works included in every season of the Opéra and the Opéra @-@ Comique , and in opera houses around the world . From 1900 to his death he led a life of steady work and , generally , success . According to his memoirs , he declined a second offer of the directorship of the Conservatoire in 1905 . Apart from composition , his main concern was his home life in the rue de Vaugirard , Paris , and at his country house in Égreville . He was uninterested in Parisian society , and so shunned the limelight that in later life he preferred not to attend his own first nights . He described himself as " a fireside man , a bourgeois artist " . The main biographical detail of note of his latter years was his second <unk> amoureuse with one of his leading ladies , Lucy Arbell , who created roles in his last operas . Milnes describes Arbell as " gold @-@ digging " : her blatant exploitation of the composer 's honourable affections caused his wife considerable distress and even strained Massenet 's devotion ( or infatuation as Milnes characterises it ) . After the composer 's death Arbell pursued his widow and publishers through the law courts , seeking to secure herself a monopoly of the leading roles in several of his late operas . 
 A rare excursion from the opera house came in 1903 with Massenet 's only piano concerto , on which he had begun work while still a student . The work was performed by Louis <unk> at the Conservatoire , but made little impression compared with his operas . In 1905 Massenet composed <unk> , a light comedy about the later career of the sex @-@ mad pageboy Cherubino from Mozart 's The Marriage of Figaro . Then came two serious operas , Ariane , on the Greek legend of Theseus and Ariadne , and Thérèse , a terse drama set in the French Revolution . His last major success was Don Quichotte ( 1910 ) , which L 'Etoile called " a very Parisian evening and , naturally , a very Parisian triumph " . Even with his creative powers seemingly in decline he wrote four other operas in his later years – Bacchus , Roma , Panurge and Cléopâtre . The last two , like Amadis , which he had been unable to finish in the 1890s , were premiered after the composer 's death and then lapsed into oblivion . 
 In August 1912 Massenet went to Paris from his house at Égreville to see his doctor . The composer had been suffering from abdominal cancer for some months , but his symptoms did not seem imminently life @-@ threatening . Within a few days his condition deteriorated sharply . His wife and family hastened to Paris , and were with him when he died , aged seventy . By his own wish his funeral , with no music , was held privately at Égreville , where he is buried in the churchyard . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In the view of his biographer Hugh Macdonald , Massenet 's main influences were Gounod and Thomas , with Meyerbeer and Berlioz also important to his style . From beyond France he absorbed some traits from Verdi , and possibly Mascagni , and above all Wagner . Unlike some other French composers of the period , Massenet never fell fully under Wagner 's spell , but he took from the earlier composer a richness of orchestration and a fluency in treatment of musical themes . 
 Although when he chose Massenet could write noisy and dissonant scenes – in 1885 Bernard Shaw called him " one of the loudest of modern composers " – much of his music is soft and delicate . Hostile critics have seized on this characteristic , but the article on Massenet in the 2001 edition of Grove 's Dictionary of Music and Musicians observes that in the best of his operas this sensual side " is balanced by strong dramatic tension ( as in Werther ) , theatrical action ( as in Thérèse ) , scenic diversion ( as in Esclarmonde ) , or humour ( as in Le portrait de Manon ) . " 
 Massenet 's Parisian audiences were greatly attracted by the exotic in music , and Massenet willingly obliged , with musical evocations of far @-@ flung places or times long past . Macdonald lists a great number of locales depicted in the operas , from ancient Egypt , mythical Greece and biblical Galilee to Renaissance Spain , India and Revolutionary Paris . Massenet 's practical experience in orchestra pits as a young man and his careful training at the Conservatoire equipped him to make such effects without much recourse to unusual instruments . He understood the capabilities of his singers , and composed with close , detailed regard for their voices . 
 = = = Operas = = = 
 Massenet wrote more than thirty operas . Authorities differ on the exact total because some of the works , particularly from his early years , are lost and others were left incomplete . Still others , such as Don César de Bazan and Le roi de Lahore , were substantially recomposed after their first productions and exist in two or more versions . Grove 's Dictionary of Music and Musicians lists forty Massenet operas in all , of which nine are shown as lost or destroyed . The " <unk> " website of Stanford University shows revised versions as premieres , and The New Grove Dictionary of Opera , does not : their totals are forty @-@ four and thirty @-@ six respectively . 
 Having honed his personal style as a young man , and sticking broadly with it for the rest of his career , Massenet does not , as some other composers do , lend himself to classification into clearly defined early , middle and late periods . Moreover , his versatility means that there is no plot or locale that can be regarded as typical Massenet . Another respect in which he differed from many opera composers is that he did not work regularly with the same librettists : Grove lists more than thirty writers who provided him with librettos . 
 The 1954 ( fifth ) edition of Grove said of Massenet , " to have heard Manon is to have heard the whole of him " . In 1994 Andrew Porter called this view preposterous . He countered , " Who knows Manon , Werther and Don Quichotte knows the best of Massenet , but not his range from heroic romance to steamy verismo . " Massenet 's output covered most of the different subgenres of opera , from opérette ( L <unk> Bel ' <unk> and L <unk> du <unk> – both early , lost pieces ) and opéra @-@ comique such as Manon , to grand opera – Grove categorises Le roi de Lahore as " the last grand opera to have a great and widespread success " . Many of the elements of traditional grand opera are written into later large @-@ scale works such as Le mage and Hérodiade . Massenet 's operas consist of anything from one to five acts , and although many of them are described on the title pages of their scores as " opéra " or " opéra comique " , others have carefully nuanced descriptions such as " comédie <unk> " , " comédie lyrique " , " comédie @-@ <unk> " , " conte de <unk> " , " drame <unk> " , " <unk> farce musicale " , " opéra <unk> " , " opéra romanesque " and " opéra tragique " . 
 In some of his operas , such as Esclarmonde and Le mage , Massenet moved away from the traditional French pattern of free @-@ standing arias and duets . Solos meld from declamatory passages into more melodic form , in a way that many contemporary critics thought Wagnerian . Shaw was not among them : in 1885 he wrote of Manon : 
 Of Wagnerism there is not the faintest suggestion . A phrase which occurs in the first love duet breaks out once or twice in subsequent amorous episodes , and has been seized on by a few unwary critics as a Wagnerian <unk> motif . But if Wagner had never existed , Manon would have been composed much as it stands now , whereas if Meyerbeer and Gounod had not made a path for M. Massenet , it is impossible to say whither he might have wandered , or how far he could have pushed his way . 
 The 21st @-@ century critic Anne Feeney comments , " Massenet rarely repeated musical phrases , let alone used recurrent themes , so the resemblance [ to Wagner ] lies solely in the declamatory lyricism and enthusiastic use of the brass and percussion . " Massenet enjoyed introducing comedy into his serious works , and writing some mainly comic operas . In Macdonald 's view of the comic works , Cendrillon and Don Quichotte succeed , but Don César de Bazan and Panurge are less satisfying than " the more delicately tuned operas such as Manon , Le portrait de Manon and Le jongleur de Notre @-@ Dame , where comedy serves a more complex purpose . " 
 According to Operabase , analysis of productions around the world in 2012 – 13 shows Massenet as the twentieth most popular of all opera composers , and the fourth most popular French one , after Bizet , Offenbach and Gounod . The most often performed of his operas in the period are shown as Werther ( 63 productions in all countries ) , followed by Manon ( 47 ) , Don Quichotte ( 22 ) , Thaïs ( 21 ) , Cendrillon ( 17 ) , La Navarraise ( 4 ) , Cléopâtre ( 3 ) , Thérèse ( 2 ) , Le Cid ( 2 ) , Hérodiade ( 2 ) , Esclarmonde ( 2 ) , <unk> ( 2 ) and Le mage ( 1 ) . 
 = = = Other vocal music = = = 
 Between 1862 and 1900 Massenet composed eight oratorios and cantatas , mostly on religious subjects . There is a degree of overlap between his operatic style and his choral works for church or concert hall performance . Vincent d 'Indy wrote that there was " a discreet and semi @-@ religious eroticism " in Massenet 's music . The religious element was a regular theme in his secular as well as sacred works : this derived not from any strong personal faith , but from his response to the dramatic aspects of Roman Catholic ritual . The mingling of operatic and religious elements in his works was such that one of his oratorios , Marie @-@ Magdeleine , was staged as an opera during the composer 's lifetime . Elements of the erotic and some implicit sympathy for sinners were controversial , and may have prevented his church works establishing themselves more securely . Arthur Hervey , a contemporary critic not unsympathetic to Massenet , commented that Marie @-@ Magdeleine and the later oratorio Ève ( 1875 ) were " the Bible doctored up in a manner suitable to the taste of impressionable Parisian ladies – utterly inadequate for the theme , at the same time very charming and effective . " Of the four works categorised by Irvine and Grove as oratorios , only one , La terre promise ( 1900 ) , was written for church performance . Massenet used the term " oratorio " for that work , but he called Marie @-@ Magdeleine a " drame <unk> " , Ève a " mystère " , and La Vierge ( 1880 ) a " légende sacrée " . 
 Massenet composed many other smaller @-@ scale choral works , and more than two hundred songs . His early collections of songs were particularly popular and helped establish his reputation . His choice of lyrics ranged widely . Most were verses by poets such as Musset , Maupassant , Hugo , Gautier and many lesser @-@ known French writers , with occasional poems from overseas , including Tennyson in English and Shelley in French translation . Grove comments that Massenet 's songs , though pleasing and impeccable in craftsmanship , are less inventive than those of Bizet and less distinctive than those of Duparc and Fauré . 
 = = = Orchestral and chamber music = = = 
 Massenet was a fluent and skilful orchestrator , and willingly provided ballet episodes for his operas , incidental music for plays , and a one @-@ act stand @-@ alone ballet for Vienna ( Le carillon , 1892 ) . Macdonald remarks that Massenet 's orchestral style resembled that of Delibes , " with its graceful movement and bewitching colour " , which was highly suited to classical French ballet . The <unk> for solo violin and orchestra , from Thaïs , is possibly the best known non @-@ vocal piece by Massenet , and appears on many recordings . Another popular stand @-@ alone orchestral piece from the operas is Le <unk> sommeil de la Vierge from La Vierge , which has featured on numerous discs since the middle of the 20th century . 
 A Parisian critic , after seeing La grand ' <unk> , declared that Massenet was a symphonist rather than a theatre composer . At the time of the British premiere of Manon in 1885 , the critic in The Manchester Guardian , reviewing the work enthusiastically , nevertheless echoed his French <unk> 's view that the composer was really a symphonist , whose music was at its best when purely orchestral . Massenet took a wholly opposite view of his talents . He was temperamentally unsuited to writing symphonically : the constraints of sonata form bored him . He wrote , in the early 1870s , " What I have to say , musically , I have to say rapidly , forcefully , concisely ; my discourse is tight and nervous , and if I wanted to express myself otherwise I would not be myself . " His efforts in the concertante field made little mark , but his orchestral suites , colourful and picturesque according to Grove , have survived on the fringes of the repertoire . Other works for orchestra are a symphonic poem , Visions ( 1891 ) , an Ouverture de Concert ( 1863 ) and Ouverture de <unk> ( 1873 ) . After early attempts at chamber music as a student , he wrote little more in the genre . Most of his early chamber pieces are now lost ; three pieces for cello and piano survive . 
 = = = Recordings = = = 
 The only known recording made by Massenet is an excerpt from Sapho , " Pendant un an je <unk> ta femme " , in which he plays a piano accompaniment for the soprano Georgette Leblanc . It was recorded in 1903 , and was not intended for publication . It has been released on compact disc ( 2008 ) , together with contemporary recordings by Grieg , Saint @-@ Saëns , Debussy and others . 
 In Massenet 's later years , and in the decade after his death , many of his songs and opera extracts were recorded . Some of the performers were the original creators of the roles , such as Ernest van Dyck ( Werther ) , Emma Calvé ( Sapho ) , Hector <unk> ( Grisélidis ) , and Vanni Marcoux ( Panurge ) . Complete French recordings of Manon and Werther , conducted by Élie Cohen , were issued in 1932 and 1933 and have been republished on CD . The critic Alan Blyth comments that they embody the original , intimate Opéra @-@ Comique style of performing Massenet . 
 Of Massenet 's operas , the two best known , Manon and Werther , have been recorded many times , and studio or live recordings have been issued of many of the others , including Cendrillon , Le Cid , Don Quichotte , Esclarmonde , Hérodiade , Le jongleur de Notre @-@ Dame , Le mage , La Navarraise and Thaïs . Conductors on these discs include Sir Thomas Beecham , Richard Bonynge , Riccardo <unk> , Sir Colin Davis , Patrick <unk> , Sir Charles Mackerras , Pierre Monteux , Sir Antonio Pappano and Michel <unk> . Among the sopranos and <unk> are Dame Janet Baker , Victoria de los Ángeles , Natalie <unk> , Renée Fleming , Angela Gheorghiu and Dame Joan Sutherland . Leading men in recordings of Massenet operas include Roberto <unk> , Gabriel <unk> , Plácido Domingo , Thomas Hampson , José van Dam , Alain Vanzo and Rolando <unk> . 
 In addition to the operas , recordings have been issued of several orchestral works , including the ballet Le carillon , the piano concerto in E ♭ , the Fantaisie for cello and orchestra , and orchestral suites . Many individual mélodies by Massenet were included in mixed recitals on record during the 20th century , and more have been committed to disc since then , including , for the first time , a CD in 2012 , exclusively devoted to his songs for soprano and piano . 
 = = Reputation = = 
 By the time of the composer 's death in 1912 his reputation had declined , especially outside his native country . In the second edition ( 1907 ) of Grove , J A Fuller Maitland accused the composer of pandering to the fashionable Parisian taste of the moment , and disguising a uniformly " weak and sugary " style with superficial effects . Fuller Maitland contended that to discerning music lovers such as himself the operas of Massenet were " inexpressibly monotonous " , and he predicted that they would all be forgotten after the composer 's death . Similar views were expressed in an obituary in The Musical Times 
 His early scores are , for the greater part , his best ... Later , and for the plain reason that he never attempted to renovate his style , he sank into sheer mannerism . Indeed , one can but marvel that so gifted a musician , who lacked neither individuality nor skill , should have so utterly succeeded in throwing away his gifts . Success spoiled him ... the actual progress of musical art during the past forty years left Massenet unmoved ... he has taken no part in the evolution of modern music . 
 Massenet was never entirely without supporters . In the 1930s Sir Thomas Beecham told the critic Neville Cardus , " I would give the whole of Bach 's Brandenburg Concertos for Massenet 's Manon , and would think I had vastly profited by the exchange . " By the 1950s critics were reappraising Massenet 's works . In 1951 Martin Cooper of The Daily Telegraph wrote that Massenet 's detractors , including some fellow composers , were on the whole idealistic , even puritanical , " but few of them have in practice achieved anything so near perfection in any genre , however humble , as Massenet achieved in his best works . " In 1955 Edward Sackville @-@ West and Desmond Shawe @-@ Taylor commented in The Record Guide that , although usually dismissed as an inferior Gounod , Massenet wrote music with a distinct flavour of its own . " He had a gift for melody of a suave , voluptuous and eminently singable kind , and the intelligence and dramatic sense to make the most of it . " The writers called for revivals of Grisélidis , Le jongleur de Notre @-@ Dame , Don Quichotte and Cendrillon , all then neglected . By the 1990s , Massenet 's reputation had been considerably rehabilitated . In The Penguin Opera Guide ( 1993 ) , Hugh Macdonald wrote that though Massenet 's operas never equalled the grandeur of Berlioz 's Les Troyens , the genius of Bizet 's Carmen or the profundity of Debussy 's Pelléas et Mélisande , from the 1860s until the years before the First World War , the composer gave the French lyric stage a remarkable series of works , two of which – Manon and Werther – are " masterpieces that will always grace the repertoire " . In Macdonald 's view , Massenet " embodies many enduring aspects of the belle époque , one of the richest cultural periods in history " . In France , Massenet 's 20th @-@ century eclipse was less complete than elsewhere , but his oeuvre has been revalued in recent years . In 2003 Piotr Kaminsky wrote in Mille et un <unk> of Massenet 's skill in translating French text into flexible melodic phrases , his exceptional orchestral virtuosity , combining sparkle and clarity , and his unerring theatrical instinct . 
 Rodney Milnes , in The New Grove Dictionary of Opera ( 1992 ) , agrees that Manon and Werther have a secure place in the international repertoire ; he counts three others as " re @-@ establishing a toehold " ( Cendrillon , Thaïs and Don Quichotte ) , with many more due for re @-@ evaluation or rediscovery . He concludes that comparing Massenet with the handful of composers of great genius , " It would be absurd to claim that he was anything more than a second @-@ rate composer ; he nevertheless deserves to be seen , like Richard Strauss , at least as a first @-@ class second @-@ rate one . " 
 = Everything in Time = 
 Everything in Time ( B @-@ sides , Rarities , Remixes ) is a compilation album comprising B @-@ sides , remixes , and rare songs by the American third wave ska band No Doubt , first released on November 23 , 2003 as disc three of No Doubt 's box set , Boom Box , which also contained The Singles 1992 – 2003 , The Videos 1992 – 2003 and Live in the Tragic Kingdom . Everything in Time was later released separately on October 12 , 2004 . 
 The album 's B @-@ sides and rarities originate in recording sessions for the band 's fourth studio album , Return of Saturn . The first six tracks were used as B @-@ sides for three of the singles released off the album , " Ex @-@ Girlfriend " , " Simple Kind of Life " and " Bathwater " . Everything in Time also includes a remix of the song " New " , also from Return of Saturn , and two remixes of " Rock Steady " , the title track from No Doubt 's fifth studio album , Rock Steady . 
 The album received little coverage , not being a studio album , although the publications that did cover it gave average or good reviews , both in the box set Boom Box and its in solo release . It charted on the U.S. Billboard 200 album chart at number 182 . 
 = = Background = = 
 No Doubt 's fourth studio album , Return of Saturn was recorded between 1998 and 1999 and released on April 11 , 2000 . Over 40 demo tracks were recorded for Return of Saturn , but the list was whittled down to the fourteen for the album 's final composition , four of which were released as singles : " New " , " Ex @-@ Girlfriend " , " Simple Kind of Life " and " Bathwater " . No Doubt released their fifth studio album , Rock Steady , in December 2001 and from it released four singles , " Hey Baby " , " Hella Good " , " Underneath It All " and " Running " between 2001 and 2003 . The album sold 3 million copies and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . 
 Later , in April 2003 , No Doubt went into hiatus to take a break to spend time with their families before starting to compile Everything in Time ; The Singles 1992 – 2003 , a greatest hits album featuring songs from their previous studio albums ; and Boom Box , a box set compiling The Singles 1992 – 2003 , Everything in Time , The Videos 1992 – 2003 and Live in the Tragic Kingdom , which would all be released on the same date . The main reason to go into hiatus was that , in early 2003 , lead singer Gwen Stefani started work on her 1980s @-@ inspired new wave / dance @-@ pop music side project , under which she released two solo albums : Love . Angel . Music . Baby. on November 22 , 2004 and The Sweet Escape on December 4 , 2006 . 
 = = Music = = 
 The first six tracks on the album are B @-@ sides from No Doubt 's fourth album , Return of Saturn . " Big Distraction " is a B @-@ side to the British CD single release of " Ex @-@ Girlfriend " and appears on the Australian and Japanese versions of Return of Saturn . " Leftovers " is a B @-@ side to the European enhanced and Australian CD single releases of " Ex @-@ Girlfriend " . " Full Circle " is a B @-@ side to the European , European enhanced , and Australian CD single releases of " Ex @-@ Girlfriend " and " Simple Kind of Life " and appears on the Japanese version of Return of Saturn . " Cellophane Boy " is a B @-@ side to the CD single release of " Simple Kind of Life " . " Beauty Contest " is a B @-@ side to the British and German CD single releases of " Simple Kind of Life " and " Bathwater " . " Under Construction " is a B @-@ side to the British CD single releases of " Simple Kind of Life " and " Bathwater " . 
 " Everything in Time " , " You 're So Foxy " , and " Panic " are outtakes from recording sessions of Return of Saturn , while " New Friend " is a leftover from the Rock Steady recordings . " Sailin ' On " is a cover of the song by Bad Brains , an American hardcore punk band , from their debut album Bad Brains . " Oi to the World " is a cover of the original version by The Vandals , a Californian punk rock band , from their album Oi to the World ! . " I Throw My Toys Around " is a song from the soundtrack of The Rugrats Movie , performed by No Doubt and Elvis Costello . 
 " New and Approved " is a remix of the song " New " from Return of Saturn . It was a B @-@ side to many of the single releases of " New " . " A Real Love <unk> " and " A Rock Steady Vibe " are remixes of the song " Rock Steady " on the album Rock Steady . " A Real Love <unk> " features British rapper Ms. Dynamite and " A Rock Steady Vibe " features Sweetie Irie . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 In its 2003 release as part of Boom Box , Everything in Time was described as " certainly worth having " by Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic in a review for the box set . <unk> called the song " Full Circle " , from Everything in Time , one of the highlights of Boom Box . In its 2004 solo release , few critics reviewed Everything in Time because it was not a studio album . However , Laura Sinagra for Blender magazine gave it three stars out of five , saying it contained " endearing , younger examples of the marriage @-@ minded tomboy [ Gwen Stefani ] agonizing over the task of taming restless playboys " . She complimented " New Friend " , " Under Construction " and both versions of " Everything in Time " as " satisfying laments " with " truth @-@ serum lyrics " , and praised Stefani 's " just @-@ a @-@ girl sass " in " Oi to the World " . However , she criticized " Big Distraction " and " Leftovers " , which in her opinion were " pale beside the singles [ The Singles 1992 – 2003 ] " . Both Allmusic and Artistdirect gave the album three stars out of five but neither gave an actual review . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits = = 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Tom Driberg = 
 Thomas Edward Neil Driberg , Baron Bradwell ( 22 May 1905 – 12 August 1976 ) was a British journalist , politician and High Anglican churchman who served as a Member of Parliament ( MP ) from 1942 to 1955 and from 1959 to 1974 . A member of the British Communist Party for more than 20 years , he was first elected to parliament as an Independent , and joined the Labour Party in 1945 . He never held any ministerial office , but rose to senior positions within the Labour Party and was a popular and influential figure in left @-@ wing politics for many years . 
 The son of a retired colonial officer , Driberg was educated at Lancing and Christ Church , Oxford . After leaving the university without a degree , he attempted to establish himself as a poet before joining the Daily Express as a reporter , later becoming a columnist . In 1933 he began the " William Hickey " society column , which he continued to write until 1943 . He was later a regular columnist for the Co @-@ operative Group newspaper Reynold 's News and for other left @-@ leaning journals . He wrote several books , including biographies of the press baron Lord Beaverbrook and the fugitive British diplomat Guy Burgess . He retired from the House of Commons in 1974 , and was subsequently raised to the peerage as Baron Bradwell , of Bradwell juxta Mare in the County of Essex . 
 Driberg made no secret of his homosexuality , which he practised throughout his life despite it being a criminal offence in Britain until 1967 ; his ability to avoid any consequences for his risky and often brazen behaviour baffled his friends and colleagues . Always in search of bizarre experiences , Driberg befriended at various times the occultist Aleister Crowley and the Kray twins , along with honoured and respected figures in the worlds of literature and politics . He combined this lifestyle with an unvarying devotion to Anglo @-@ Catholicism . After his death , allegations were published about his role over many years as an MI5 informant , a KGB agent , or both . The extent and nature of Driberg 's involvement with these agencies remain uncertain . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Family background and childhood = = = 
 Driberg was born on 22 May 1905 in Crowborough , a small dormitory town about 40 miles ( 64 km ) south of London . He was the third and youngest of three sons born to John James Street Driberg , a former officer in the Indian Civil Service , and his wife Amy Mary Irving Driberg ( née Bell ) . The Driberg family had immigrated from Holland about 200 years previously ; the Bells were lowland Scots from Dumfriesshire . John Driberg had retired in 1896 after 35 years in Assam , latterly as head of the state 's police , and was 65 years old when his youngest son was born . For Driberg , growing up mostly alone with his elderly parents was a stifling experience ; he would later describe Crowborough as " a place which I can never revisit , or think of , without a feeling of sick horror " . 
 At the age of eight Driberg began as a day @-@ boy at the Grange school in Crowborough . In his autobiography he mentions in particular two aspects of his time there : learning the " facts of life " from other boys , with extensive experimentation , and his discovery of what he calls " exotic " religion — High Anglicanism . These experiences formed what he called two " conflicting compulsions " , soon to be joined by a third — left @-@ wing politics — to shape the ruling passions of his life . 
 = = = Lancing = = = 
 In 1918 , when he was 13 , Driberg left the Grange for Lancing College , the public school on the south coast where , after some initial bullying and humiliation , he was befriended by fellow @-@ pupil Evelyn Waugh . Under Waugh 's sponsorship Driberg joined an intellectual society , the <unk> , which promoted literary and artistic activities alongside political debate . He began to write poetry ; his aesthetic education was further assisted by the charismatic J. F. Roxburgh , " a magnetically brilliant teacher " who later became headmaster of Stowe School . Lancing 's Gothic chapel gave Driberg the religious atmosphere he sought , though he found the services disappointingly " moderate " . By 1920 he was inclining to the political left and was in rebellion against his conservative upbringing . Finding the Labour Party too dull and respectable for his radical tastes , he joined the Brighton branch of the newly formed British Communist Party . 
 After Driberg had risen to responsible positions within the school ( deputy head boy , head librarian , and chief sacristan , among others ) , his Lancing career ended suddenly in the autumn of 1923 , when two boys complained about his sexual overtures . To avoid distressing the widowed Amy Driberg ( John Driberg had died in 1919 ) , the headmaster allowed him to remain in the school for the remainder of the term , stripped of his offices and segregated from all social contact with other boys . At the end of the term he was required to leave , on the pretext that he needed private tuition to pass his Oxford entrance examination which he had failed the previous summer . Back in Crowborough , after several months ' hard application under the guidance of his tutor , the future Lord Justice Pearson , Driberg won a classics scholarship to Christ Church , Oxford . 
 = = Oxford = = 
 Oxford in 1924 featured an avant @-@ garde aesthetic movement in which personalities such as Harold Acton , Brian Howard , Cyril Connolly and , a little later , W. H. Auden were leading lights . Driberg was soon immersed in a world of art , politics , poetry and parties : " There was just no time for any academic work " , he wrote later . With Auden , he discovered T. S. Eliot 's The Waste Land , which they read again and again , " with growing awe " . A poem of Driberg 's in the style of Edith Sitwell was published in Oxford Poetry 1926 ; when Sitwell came to Oxford to deliver a lecture , Driberg invited her to have tea with him , and she accepted . After her lecture he found an opportunity to recite one of his own poems , and was rewarded when Sitwell declared him " the hope of English poetry " . 
 Meanwhile , together with the future historian A. J. P. Taylor , Driberg formed the membership of the Oxford University Communist Party . During the General Strike of May 1926 , most Oxford students supported the government and enrolled as special constables and strike @-@ breakers . A minority , which included the future Labour Party leader Hugh Gaitskell and the future Poet Laureate John Betjeman , sided with the strikers , while Driberg and Taylor offered their services at the British Communist Party 's headquarters in London . The Party showed no urgency to employ them , and Taylor soon left . Driberg , given a job distributing strike bulletins , was arrested by the police before he could begin and was detained for several hours . This ended his active role in the strike . Notwithstanding his extreme left @-@ wing associations , he secured 75 votes ( against the winner 's 152 ) in the 1927 elections for the presidency of the Oxford Union . 
 Throughout his time at Oxford , Driberg followed his passion for Anglican rituals by regularly attending Mass at Pusey House , an independent religious institution with a mission to " [ restore ] the Church of England 's Catholic life and witness " . In spite of the prevalent Oxford homoerotic ethos , his sexual energies were largely devoted to casual encounters with working @-@ class men , rather than to relationships with his fellow undergraduates . He experienced sexual relations with only one don , whom he met outside the university , unaware of the latter 's identity . 
 One of Driberg 's elaborate hoaxes was a concert called " Homage to Beethoven " , which featured megaphones , typewriters and a flushing lavatory . Newspaper accounts of this event raised the interest of the occultist Aleister Crowley . Driberg accepted an invitation to lunch with Crowley for the first of several meetings between them , at one of which Crowley nominated Driberg as his successor as World Teacher . Nothing came of the proposal , though the two continued to meet ; Driberg received from Crowley manuscripts and books that he later sold for sizeable sums . The consequence of these various extracurricular involvements was neglect of his academic work ; failure in his final examinations was inevitable , and in the summer of 1927 he left Oxford without a degree . 
 = = Daily Express columnist = = 
 = = = " The Talk of London " = = = 
 After leaving Oxford , Driberg lived precariously in London , attempting to establish himself as a poet while doing odd jobs and pawning his few valuables . Occasionally he had chance encounters with Oxford acquaintances ; Evelyn Waugh 's diary entry for 30 October 1927 records : " I went to church in Margaret Street where I was <unk> to observe Tom Driberg 's satanic face in the congregation " . Driberg had maintained his contact with Edith Sitwell , and attended regular literary tea parties at her Bayswater flat . When Sitwell discovered her protégé 's impoverished circumstances she arranged an interview for him with the Daily Express . After his submission of an article on London 's nightlife , he was engaged in January 1928 for a six @-@ week trial as a reporter ; coincidentally , Waugh had undergone an unsuccessful trial with the same newspaper a few months earlier . 
 Within a month of beginning his duties , Driberg achieved a scoop with the first national newspaper reports of the activities in Oxford of the American evangelist Frank Buchman , whose movement would in time be known as Moral Re @-@ Armament . Driberg 's reports were generally abrasive , even mocking in tone , and drew complaints from Buchman 's organisation about news bias . The trial period at the Express was extended , and in July 1928 Driberg filed an exclusive report on a society party at the swimming baths in Buckingham Palace Road , where the guests included Lytton Strachey and Tallulah Bankhead . This evidence of Driberg 's social contacts led to a permanent contract with the Express , as assistant to Percy Sewell who , under the name " The <unk> " , wrote a daily feature called " The Talk of London " . Driberg later defended his association with an inconsequential society column by arguing that his approach was satirical , and that he deliberately exaggerated the doings of the idle rich as a way of enraging working @-@ class opinion and helping the Communist Party . 
 Driberg used the column to introduce readers to up @-@ and @-@ coming socialites and literary figures , Acton , Betjeman , Nancy Mitford and Peter Quennell among them . Sometimes he introduced more serious causes : capital punishment , modern architecture , the works of D. H. Lawrence and Jacob Epstein , and the lesbian novel The Well of Loneliness by Radclyffe Hall , which had been denounced in the Express editorial columns as " infamous " . By prior arrangement with Waugh , the column included a discreet announcement in September 1930 of Waugh 's conversion to Roman Catholicism ; Driberg was his only guest at the service . He further assisted Waugh in 1932 by giving him space in the column to attack the editor of the Catholic journal The Tablet , after it had described Waugh 's Black Mischief as blasphemous . 
 = = = As William Hickey = = = 
 Sewell retired in 1932 , leaving Driberg in sole charge of " The Talk of London " column . He grew increasingly frustrated with the trivial nature of his work . Following the intervention of Express proprietor Lord Beaverbrook , the column was relaunched in May 1933 as " These Names Make News " , and its by @-@ line changed to " William Hickey " , after the 18th century diarist and rake . Driberg described the new feature as " ... an intimate biographical column about ... men and women who matter . Artists , statesmen , airmen , writers , financiers , explorers ... " Historian David Kynaston calls Driberg the " founder of the modern gossip column " , although it soon began to move decisively away from chit @-@ chat and towards social and political issues . The tone of the column was described by Driberg 's ODNB biographer Richard Davenport @-@ Hines as " wry , compassionate , and brimm [ ing ] with ... open @-@ minded intelligence " . 
 Beaverbrook , who had developed a fondness for Driberg , was amused by the disparity between his columnist 's professed left @-@ wing sympathies and bon vivant lifestyle . The proprietor knew of Driberg 's persistent mismanagement of his personal finances , and on various occasions helped out with loans and gifts . During his time in London , Driberg had continued to indulge his taste for rough , casual sex ; his memoir records many such instances . In the autumn of 1935 he was charged with indecent assault , after an incident in which he had shared his bed with two Scotsmen picked up late one night , in the bohemian district of London which Driberg had christened " Fitzrovia " in the Hickey column . Beaverbrook paid for a leading counsel , J. D. Cassels , and two unimpeachable character witnesses were recruited by the defence . Driberg was acquitted , and Beaverbrook 's influence ensured that the case went unreported by the press . This was the first known instance of what writer Kingsley Amis called the " baffling immunity [ Driberg ] enjoyed from the law and the Press to the end of his days " . 
 In the latter part of the 1930s Driberg travelled widely : twice to Spain , to observe the Spanish Civil War , to Germany after the Munich Agreement of 1938 , to Rome for the coronation of Pope Pius XII and to New York for the 1939 New York World 's Fair . After the Nazi @-@ Soviet Pact was announced in August 1939 , he informed his readers that there would be " no war this crisis " . Nine days later , after the German invasion of Poland precipitated the Second World War , he apologised for his mistake , and ended his first wartime column with the words " We 're all in it " . His opposition to the Nazi @-@ Soviet Pact and his support for the war in September 1939 may have been the reason for his expulsion from the Communist Party in 1941 . An alternative explanation , proffered later , is that he was reported by Anthony Blunt for passing information on the Party to Maxwell Knight of MI5 . Driberg and Knight were long @-@ standing acquaintances who met frequently and , among other things , shared a mutual interest in the works of Aleister Crowley . 
 Driberg 's mother had died in July 1939 . With his share of her money and the help of a substantial mortgage , he bought and renovated Bradwell Lodge , a country house in Bradwell @-@ on @-@ Sea on the Essex coast , where he lived and entertained until the house was requisitioned by the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) in 1940 . He continued to write the Hickey column , not always to his editor 's satisfaction ; his protestations against indiscriminate bombing of German civilians were particularly frowned on . In November 1941 he went to America and was in Washington on Monday 8 December , after the attack on Pearl Harbor , to report President Roosevelt 's speech to Congress announcing America 's entry into the war . 
 = = Early parliamentary career = = 
 = = = Independent Member for Maldon , 1942 – 45 = = = 
 When Driberg returned to Britain in March 1942 he found widespread public dissatisfaction with the government 's conduct of the war . This mood was reflected in a series of parliamentary by @-@ elections in which candidates supporting the wartime coalition government were defeated by Independents — the major parties had agreed to a pact under which they would not contest by @-@ elections in seats held by their respective parties . Driberg , in his column , generally welcomed this trend , while questioning " the merit of some of the candidates likely to get in if the reaction against the Party machines continues " . On 12 May 1942 the death was announced of Sir Edward Ruggles @-@ Brise , the Conservative member for Maldon — the constituency in which Bradwell Lodge was situated . Next day , Driberg requested three weeks ' leave from his column to fight the by @-@ election . Contrary to the belief of prime minister Winston Churchill and others that Driberg was being " run " by Beaverbrook , the Express proprietor was unenthusiastic ; an editorial on 25 May drew attention to Driberg 's individual viewpoint and stated that " The Daily Express does not support his candidature " . 
 Driberg 's campaign slogan was " A Candid Friend For Churchill " , personally supportive but critical of many of the prime minister 's circle . The lacklustre campaign of his right @-@ wing Conservative opponent helped to secure Driberg a wide range of support , from moderate Conservatives , Liberals and socialists . His fame as " William Hickey " , and his stance as the only candidate with a home in the constituency , gave him a strong local profile . His previous Communist Party associations were not revealed . At the poll , on 25 June , he overturned a previous Conservative majority of 8 @,@ 000 to finish 6 @,@ 000 votes ahead of his opponent . In his war memoirs , Churchill called the result " one of the by @-@ products of Tobruk " — which had fallen to Rommel on 21 June . Waugh , in his diary , remarked that the presentation of Driberg during the by @-@ election merely as a journalist and churchwarden gave " a very imperfect picture of that sinister character " . 
 On 2 July 1942 Driberg cast his first vote in the House of Commons , in support of Churchill against a rebel motion of censure on the government 's conduct of the war . The rebels ' case was put incompetently , which ensured that the motion gained only 25 votes , as against 477 cast for the government . Driberg delivered his maiden speech on 7 July , in a debate on the use of propaganda . He called for the lifting of the ban on the Communist Party 's newspaper , the Daily Worker , which he saw as a potentially valuable weapon of home propaganda . 
 In the following months he tabled questions and intervened in debates on behalf of various progressive causes . For example , on 29 September 1942 he asked the prime minister to " make friendly representations to the American military authorities asking them to instruct their men that the colour bar is not a custom in this country " . He continued to write the Hickey column , and used his parliamentary salary to fund a constituency office in Maldon . 
 In January 1943 , while in Edinburgh to campaign in another by @-@ election , Driberg was caught by a policeman while in the act of fellating a Norwegian sailor . In his own account of the incident Driberg records that he escaped arrest by identifying himself as " William Hickey " and as a member of parliament . These disclosures evidently overawed the constable , who took no further action ; indeed , Driberg says , the incident began a chaste friendship with the officer that endured for more than 10 years . Meanwhile , Beaverbrook had become disenchanted with him , and did not intervene when Arthur Christiansen , the Express editor , sacked the columnist in June 1943 over a story detrimental to a government minister , Andrew Rae Duncan . Driberg subsequently signed up with Reynolds News , a Sunday newspaper owned by the Co @-@ operative Group , and undertook a regular parliamentary column for the New Statesman . He also contributed to a weekly BBC European Service broadcast until , in October 1943 , he was banned after government pressure . He reported the post @-@ D @-@ Day allied advances in France and Belgium as a war correspondent for Reynolds News , and as a member of a parliamentary delegation witnessed the aftermath of the liberation of Buchenwald concentration camp in April 1945 . 
 = = = Labour Member , 1945 – 55 = = = 
 In the General election of July 1945 Driberg increased his majority at Maldon to 7 @,@ 727 . Before the election he had joined the Labour Party and had been welcomed by the local constituency party as their candidate . He was thus one of the 393 Labour MPs in the landslide election victory that replaced Churchill as prime minister with Clement Attlee . 
 Within a few days of his victory , Driberg left for the Far East , to report on the conditions of the allied troops in Burma . The Supreme Allied Commander , Lord Mountbatten , knew him slightly and made him an unofficial temporary special adviser . In this role he met the Patriotic Burmese Forces leader , Aung San , who impressed him as honest and incorruptible , " unlike some of the older Burmese politicians " . Later , he visited Saigon and offered to mediate with Ho Chi Minh , who had recently declared an independent Vietnam state . Driberg later maintained that , had his offer been taken up , he might have prevented the Vietnam War . 
 Because of his journalism , Driberg was a well @-@ known figure within the Labour Party generally , and in 1949 was elected to the party 's National Executive Committee ( NEC ) . In the February 1950 General Election he was again elected at Maldon , while nationally Labour lost 68 seats , reducing its parliamentary majority to six . With so small a majority , members ' regular attendance in the Commons chamber became important ; however , in August 1950 Driberg left the country for Korea , where Britain had joined the United States in a United Nations military expedition to repel the North Korean invasion of the South . Driberg and a few other left @-@ wing MPs had objected to British involvement ; In his Reynolds News column , Driberg had written of " Tories ( Conservatives ) who ... cannot help <unk> their delight at the smell of blood in the air " , a comment that caused outrage in parliament among the Conservative members . Whatever his reservations , Driberg 's war dispatches to Reynolds News were strongly supportive of the British troops . He participated in several night operations , and won respect from many of the soldiers for his courage despite , as one Marine put it " being a bit bent " . He was away from parliament for three months , missing many critical House of Commons divisions , and on his return was severely censured by his fellow Labour MPs for neglecting his duties . His general standing in the party was unaffected ; he had been re @-@ elected in absentia to the NEC in September 1950 . 
 In April 1951 the Labour government was hit by the resignations of three ministers — Aneurin Bevan , the future prime minister Harold Wilson , and John Freeman — over the imposition of prescription charges to pay for an increased armaments programme . Driberg was sympathetic to the rebels , though he tried to find a basis for compromise that would avoid resignations . The former ministers strengthened the small Labour group known as " Keep Left " , in which Driberg was prominent ; the group would henceforth be known as " <unk> " . In the October 1951 General Election the Labour Party was defeated , and Churchill resumed office ; Driberg held on to his Maldon seat by 704 votes . Through the years of Labour government he had neither received nor sought office , having what historian Kenneth O. Morgan called a " backbench mindset " . He still enjoyed aspects of his parliamentary life , such as in 1953 when he showed the American singing sensation Johnnie Ray round the House of Commons ; his attempts to seduce the singer were politely resisted . However , he needed to earn more money , and in the spring of 1952 responded to a suggestion that he should write a biography of Beaverbrook . The press lord was amenable , and work began in the summer of 1953 . The project extended over several years , by which time Driberg was no longer in parliament ; he had announced in March 1954 that he was standing down from Maldon , which at the General Election of May 1955 fell , as he had expected , to the Conservatives . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 On 16 February 1951 Driberg surprised his friends by announcing his engagement to Ena Mary <unk> ( née Lyttelton ) . A former Suffolk county councillor , she worked as an administrator at the Marie Curie Hospital in London and was well known in senior Labour circles ; she had met Driberg in 1949 , at a weekend party given by the government minister George Strauss . According to her son , she was fully aware of Driberg 's sexual preferences , but looked forward to some political excitement , and " thought they could do a useful job as Mr. and Mrs. " Driberg 's motives are less clear , but he told his friend John Freeman that he needed someone to run Bradwell Lodge , to which he had returned in 1946 after its release by the RAF . 
 At Driberg 's insistence , Ena , a non @-@ practising Jew , was baptised into the Church of England before the wedding at St Mary the Virgin , Pimlico , on 30 June 1951 . The bride entered the church to a chorale arranged from the Labour Party anthem " The Red Flag " ; this was followed by a nuptial mass described by Driberg 's biographer Francis Wheen as " outrageously ornate " . Four hundred guests then attended an elaborate reception at the House of Commons . 
 In the ensuing years Ena tried hard to adapt to Driberg 's way of life and to control his wayward finances , but with little success . He continued his frequent travels and casual homosexual liaisons , and was hostile to her efforts to control or change any aspect of his life . In 1961 she wrote to him : " I have tried for ten years to make a compromise with you in your extraordinary mode of life and have now given up . " Thereafter they often lived apart , though they never formally separated . Even after a final breach in 1971 , they remained legally married . 
 = = Later career = = 
 = = = Out of parliament = = = 
 On leaving parliament in 1955 , Driberg 's main task was to complete the Beaverbrook biography . Although Beaverbrook had initially promised no interference with the text , he changed his mind when he began to read Driberg 's drafts . In the course of a prolonged disagreement , Beaverbrook accused his biographer of being driven by " malice and hatred " . When the manuscript was finally cleared for publication , much of the objectionable material had been removed ; nevertheless , Beaverbrook used the Daily Express to campaign against the book and denounce its hostile tone . Evelyn Waugh , to whom Driberg sent a copy , expressed disappointment that the work was in fact " a honeyed eulogy " . 
 In an effort to build his post @-@ parliamentary career , Driberg turned briefly to creative writing , but without success . In his more familiar field of journalism he caused a sensation by flying to Moscow in August 1956 to interview Guy Burgess , the former British diplomat who in 1951 had defected to Russia with his colleague Donald Maclean . The pair had emerged in Moscow in March 1956 , to give a brief press conference . Driberg had known Burgess in the 1940s , and the two shared similar homosexual inclinations ; this acquaintance was sufficient to secure the Moscow interview . On his return home Driberg rapidly wrote a book from the interview material , the serial rights of which were sold to the Daily Mail . Critics drew attention to the book 's relatively sympathetic portrayal of Burgess ; some believed the book had been vetted by the KGB , while others saw it as part of an MI5 plot to trap Burgess into revealing secret information for which he could be prosecuted should he ever return to Britain . 
 In 1956 Driberg convened a group of Christian socialists that met regularly at the Lamb public house in Bloomsbury to discuss issues such as imperialism , colonialism , immigration and nuclear disarmament . The group 's dispatches , Papers from the Lamb , led to the foundation in 1960 of the Christian Socialist Movement . Although no longer an MP , Driberg remained a member of the Labour Party 's NEC and was active in party affairs . In 1957 , in the face of antagonism from trade union leaders repelled by his lifestyle , he became Labour Party chairman , a largely ceremonial role . He travelled widely during his year in office , generally as a Reynolds News correspondent but using the party title to advantage whenever he could . Thus , in a 1958 visit to Moscow to interview space scientists , he obtained two meetings with Nikita Khrushchev . 
 In his final speech as chairman , to the party conference in 1958 , Driberg angered the Conservatives and their press supporters by referring to the Tory ideology as not essentially different from the German Herrenvolk philosophy . He had been contemplating for some time a return to the House of Commons , and in February 1959 was adopted as a candidate by the safe Barking constituency . In the General Election of October 1959 , which delivered a 100 @-@ seat majority to Harold Macmillan 's Conservative government , he won at Barking with a majority of exactly 12 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Member for Barking , 1959 – 74 = = = 
 A dominant issue when Driberg returned to Westminster was that of the use or outlawing of nuclear weapons . The Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament ( CND ) had been launched on 17 February 1958 , though Driberg 's involvement with the issue predated CND by three years . On 2 March 1955 , in an amendment to a House of Commons motion , he had called for Great Britain to " regain the moral leadership of the world by taking an initiative ... that may lead to the outlawing of ... thermo @-@ nuclear weapons " . 
 In October 1960 he supported the unilateralist motions passed at the Labour Party conference , and fought unsuccessfully in the NEC for them to be adopted as party policy . The conference motion was reversed the following year , but he continued to pursue the matter in parliament . On 29 May 1962 he urged that Britain not be a party to the renewal of nuclear tests , and in a speech on 23 July he said : " The unilateral abandonment of testing — or , better still , a test ban agreement — would be the most valuable first step towards general and complete disarmament . " 
 According to his colleague Ian Mikardo , Driberg was less than enthusiastic about his duties in Barking — " a very , very bad constituency MP " . Even his strongest supporters acknowledged that he attended as few local events as possible . In the Commons chamber he was a regular speaker on issues that concerned him , in particular disarmament , church affairs and racial discrimination . He supported the lowering of the voting age to 18 , and the broadcasting of parliamentary debates ; he opposed increases to judges ' salaries , and the extension of Stansted Airport . After the General Election of 1964 , which narrowly returned Labour to power under Harold Wilson , he was not offered a place in the new government , and soon found himself in opposition to Wilson 's policies on Vietnam , the Common Market , immigration and other major issues . He joined with Mikardo and other dissidents to form the " Tribune Group " , with the aim of promoting more left @-@ wing policies . The group 's influence lessened after March 1966 , when in another General Election Wilson increased his majority to 98 . 
 Driberg embraced enthusiastically the climate of the 1960s and the social and cultural freedoms that the decade introduced . In 1963 he met the Kray twins , prominent London gangland figures , and began a lengthy friendship with them and their associates . In July 1964 two backbench Conservative MPs reported to their Chief Whip that Driberg and Lord Boothby ( a well @-@ known Conservative peer ) had been importuning males at a dog track , and were involved with gangs of thugs . 
 At parties which Driberg and Boothby attended at the Krays ' flat , " rough but compliant East End lads were served like so many <unk> " , according to Wheen . While Driberg avoided publicity , Boothby was hounded by the press and forced to issue a series of denials . After the twins had been convicted of murder in 1969 , Driberg frequently lobbied the Home Office about their prison conditions , requesting that they be given more visits and allowed regular reunions . Driberg was impressed with Mick Jagger , to whom he was introduced in 1965 , and tried hard over a number of years to persuade the singer to take up active Labour politics . He also began a long association with the satirical magazine Private Eye , supplying it with political gossip and , under the pseudonym " Tiresias " , compiling a regular , highly risqué prize cryptic crossword puzzle which on one occasion was won by the wife of the Archbishop of Canterbury . 
 In 1964 Driberg published a critical study of Moral Re @-@ armament , which brought him attacks from the movement on the basis of his homosexuality and communist past . Although he made money from this book , throughout the 1960s he was beset by financial problems . When Reynolds News , which had evolved into the Sunday Citizen , finally folded in 1967 , he became fully dependent on his parliamentary salary and casual journalism . He had long considered selling Bradwell Lodge , preferably to the National Trust on a basis that would allow him to continue living there . However , the Trust required the property to be mortgage @-@ free and endowed with a substantial fund to cover future repairs , neither of which terms could be arranged . In the event the house remained unsold until 1971 . As the 1970 election approached , Driberg wished to retire from parliament , and asked Wilson to appoint him as ambassador to the Vatican . Wilson refused , citing Driberg 's age — at 65 he was beyond the retirement age for senior diplomats . Against his will , but with few other sources of income available to him , Driberg fought the June 1970 General Election . He was returned for Barking with a comfortable though reduced majority ; nationally , Wilson 's government was defeated by Edward Heath 's Conservatives . 
 = = Retirement , ennoblement and death = = 
 Hampered by age and declining health , Driberg became less active politically , and in 1972 was voted off Labour 's NEC . The sale of Bradwell Lodge to a private buyer removed his main burden of debt , and he rented a small flat in the Barbican development in the City of London . In February 1974 , at the age of 68 , he retired from the House of Commons with the intention of writing his memoirs . Still short of income , he first completed a biography of his fellow @-@ journalist Hannen <unk> , which was indifferently received — " a feeble potboiler " , according to Davenport @-@ Hines . Friends organised an elaborate 70th birthday party for him on 21 May 1975 ; " one duke , two dukes ' daughters , sundry lords , a bishop , a poet laureate — not bad for an old left @-@ wing MP " , Driberg observed to a guest . 
 In November 1975 he was granted a life peerage , and on 21 January 1976 was introduced to the House of Lords as Baron Bradwell of Bradwell juxta Mare . On 14 April he tabled a motion in the Lords calling on the government to consider the withdrawal of troops from Northern Ireland , but won little support . His health was failing , though he continued to work on his memoirs . His final contribution to the House of Lords was on 22 July , in a debate on entry vouchers for the dependents of immigrants . 
 Three weeks later , on 12 August 1976 , while travelling by taxi from Paddington to his Barbican flat , he suffered a fatal heart attack . The funeral was held on 19 August at St Matthew 's , Westminster ; he was buried in the cemetery attached to St Thomas 's Church , Bradwell . 
 = = Allegations of treachery = = 
 After the publication of his relatively sympathetic portrait of Burgess in 1956 , Driberg had been denounced as a " dupe of Moscow " by some elements of the press . Two years after Driberg 's death , the veteran investigative reporter Chapman Pincher alleged that he had been " a Kremlin agent of sympathy " and a supporter of Communist front organisations . In 1979 Andrew Boyle published The Climate of Treason , which exposed Anthony Blunt and led to a period of " spy mania " in Britain . Boyle 's exhaustive account of the Burgess – Maclean – Philby – Blunt circle mentioned Driberg as a friend of Burgess , " of much the same background , tastes and views " , but made no allegations that he was part of any espionage ring . 
 In this atmosphere , Pincher published Their Trade is Treachery ( 1981 ) , in which he maintained that Driberg had been recruited by MI5 to spy on the Communist Party while still a schoolboy at Lancing , and that he was later " in the KGB 's pay as a double agent " . Other writers added further details ; the former British Intelligence officer Peter Wright , in <unk> ( 1987 ) , alleged that Driberg had been " providing material to a Czech controller for money " . The former Kremlin archivist Vasili Mitrokhin asserted that the Soviets had blackmailed Driberg into working for the KGB by threatening to expose his homosexuality . 
 The weight of information , and its constant repetition , made an apparently strong case against Driberg , and former friends such as Mervyn Stockwood , the Bishop of Southwark , became convinced that he had indeed betrayed his country . Other friends and colleagues were more sceptical . According to ex @-@ Labour MP Reginald Paget , not even the security services were " lunatic enough to recruit a man like Driberg " , who was famously indiscreet and could never keep a secret . Mitrokhin 's " blackmail " story is questioned by historian Jeff <unk> , on the grounds that by the 1950s and 1960s Driberg 's homosexuality had been an open secret in British political circles for many years ; he frequently boasted of his " rough trade " conquests to his colleagues . The journalist A. N. Wilson quotes Churchill commenting years before that " Tom Driberg is the sort of person who gives sodomy a bad name " . 
 Pincher , however , argued that as homosexual acts were criminal offences in Britain until 1967 , Driberg was still vulnerable to blackmail , although he also asserted that the MI5 connection secured Driberg a lifelong immunity from prosecution . Driberg 's colleague Michael Foot denied Pincher 's claim that Margaret Thatcher , when prime minister , had made a secret agreement with Foot to protect Driberg if Foot , in turn , would remain silent about the supposed treachery of Roger Hollis , another of Pincher 's recently dead targets . 
 Wheen asserts that Pincher was not an objective commentator ; the Labour Party , and its supposed infiltration by Communist agents , had been his target over many years . Pincher 's verdict on Driberg is that " in journalism , in politics and intelligence ... eventually he betrayed everybody " . Wheen argues that Driberg 's greatest vice was indiscretion ; he gossiped about everyone , but " indiscretion is not synonymous with betrayal " . Driberg 's Labour Party colleague , Leo Abse , offers a more complex explanation : Driberg was an adventurer who loved taking risks and played many parts . " Driberg could have played the part of the spy with superb skill , and if the officers of MI5 were indeed inept enough to have attempted to recruit him , then , in turn , Tom Driberg would have gained special pleasure in fooling and betraying them " . 
 = = Appraisal = = 
 In his will Driberg had stipulated that at his funeral his friend Gerald Irvine should deliver an " anti @-@ panegyric " in place of the normal eulogy . Irvine obliged , with a detailed assessment of Driberg against the Seven Deadly Sins , finding him guilty of Gluttony , Lust and Wrath , but relatively free from Avarice and Envy and entirely untouched by Sloth . Pride , Irvine maintained , was in Driberg 's case mitigated by " the contrary virtue of humility " . Ena did not attend the funeral ; she gave a single press interview in which she expressed " huge respect for Tom 's journalistic skills , political power and championship of the underdog " . She added that if her admiration for him did not extend to their personal life together , that was a private matter . 
 Driberg prided himself on being an exception to a rule propounded by Cyril Connolly , that the war between the generations is the one war in which everyone changes sides eventually . Mervyn Stockwood , in his address at the funeral service , praised Driberg as " a searcher for truth " , whose loyalty to the socialist cause was beyond question . This verdict was echoed by Michael Foot , who in a postscript to Driberg 's memoir wrote of Driberg 's " great services " to the Labour Party in the various offices that he occupied . Foot believed that Driberg 's homosexual passion , rather than bringing him fulfilment , had " condemned him to a lifetime of deep loneliness " The Times obituarist described Driberg as " A journalist , an intellectual , a drinking man , a gossip , a high churchman , a <unk> , a homosexual " , the first time , according to journalist Christopher Hitchens , that the newspaper had ever defined a public figure specifically as homosexual . 
 Nevertheless , Driberg 's incomplete memoir Ruling Passions , when published in June 1977 , was a shock to the public and to some of his erstwhile associates , despite advance hints of the book 's scandalous content . Driberg 's candid revelations of his " cottaging " and his descriptions of casual oral sex were called by one commentator " the biggest outpouring of literary dung a public figure has ever flung into print . " The comedians Peter Cook and Dudley Moore depicted Driberg as a sexual predator , wearing " fine fishnet stockings " and cavorting with a rent boy , in a sketch , " Back of the Cab " , which they recorded in 1977 . 
 More vituperation followed when Pincher 's allegations of Driberg 's links with the Russian secret service were published in 1981 ; Pincher christened him " Lord of the Spies " . However , Foot dismissed these accusations as typical of the " fantasies of the secret service world that seem to have taken possession of Pincher 's mind " . Foot added that Driberg " had always been much too ready to look <unk> on Communist misdeeds , but this attitude was combined with an absolutely genuine devotion to the cause of peace " . 
 In his 2004 biographical sketch Davenport @-@ Hines describes Driberg as " a sincere if eccentric Christian socialist who detested racism and colonialism " , who at the same time " could be pompous , mannered , wayward , self @-@ indulgent , ungrateful , bullying and indiscreet " . As to the apparent contradiction between sincere Christianity and promiscuous homosexuality , Wheen argues that " there had been a recognisable male homosexual subculture in the Anglo @-@ Catholic movement since the late nineteenth century " . This theme is explored in a paper by David Hilliard of Flinders University , who maintains that " the [ 19th century ] conflict between Protestantism and Anglo @-@ Catholicism within the Church of England was ... regularly depicted by Protestant propagandists as a struggle between masculine and feminine styles of religion " . 
 Driberg throughout his life was a devout Anglo @-@ Catholic ; Wheen suggests that Evelyn Waugh , in Brideshead Revisited , may have had Driberg in mind when the novel 's protagonist Charles Ryder is warned on arrival at Oxford to " beware of Anglo @-@ Catholics — they 're all sodomites with unpleasant accents . " 
 Driberg was the subject of a play , Tom and Clem , which was staged at London 's Aldwych Theatre in April 1997 . The action takes place during Driberg 's brief visit to the Potsdam Conference in July 1945 , and deals with the contrast of compromise , represented by the pragmatic Clement Attlee , and post @-@ war idealism , personified by Driberg . Michael Gambon 's portrayal of Driberg , as " a slovenly , paunchy Bacchus with a mouth that can suddenly gape like a painfully @-@ hooked fish " , won special praise from The Times critic Benedict Nightingale . 
 = SMS Pommern = 
 SMS Pommern was one of five Deutschland @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the Kaiserliche Marine between 1904 and 1906 . Named after the Prussian province of Pomerania , she was built at the AG Vulcan yard at Stettin , where she was laid down on 22 March 1904 and launched on 2 December 1905 . She was commissioned into the navy on 6 August 1907 . The ships of her class were already outdated by the time they entered the service , being inferior in size , armor , firepower , and speed to the revolutionary new battleship HMS Dreadnought . 
 After commissioning , Pommern was assigned to the II Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet , where she served throughout her peacetime career and the first two years of World War I. During this period , Pommern participated in several fruitless sorties into the North Sea in attempts to lure out and destroy a portion of the British Grand Fleet . The ship was present at the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 . She and her sisters briefly engaged the British battlecruisers commanded by David Beatty ; Pommern was hit once by a 12 in ( 30 @.@ 5 cm ) shell from the battlecruiser HMS Indomitable . During the confused night actions in the early hours of 1 June , she was hit by one , or possibly two , torpedoes from the British destroyer HMS Onslaught , which detonated one of Pommern 's 17 @-@ centimeter ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) gun magazines . The resulting explosion broke the ship in half and killed the entire crew . Pommern was the only battleship of either side sunk during the battle . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Pommern was ordered under the contract name " O " . She was laid down on 22 March 1904 at the AG Vulcan dockyard in Stettin . She was originally scheduled to be launched on 19 November 1905 , but the water level in the harbor was too low . As a result , the ship could not be launched until 2 December . The <unk> of Pommern , Helmuth von <unk> , gave the launching speech . In July 1907 Pommern was transferred to Kiel where she had her main battery of four 28 cm ( 11 in ) guns installed . She was commissioned for trials on 6 August ; during her speed run , she made 18 @.@ 7 knots ( 34 @.@ 6 km / h ; 21 @.@ 5 mph ) , which made her the fastest pre @-@ dreadnought battleship in the world . 
 The ship was 127 @.@ 6 m ( 418 ft 8 in ) long and had a beam of 22 @.@ 2 m ( 72 ft 10 in ) , and a draft of 8 @.@ 21 m ( 26 ft 11 in ) . Her full @-@ load displacement was 14 @,@ 218 metric tons ( 13 @,@ 993 long tons ) . She was equipped with triple expansion engines that were rated at 17 @,@ 453 indicated horsepower ( 13 @,@ 015 kW ) and a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . Steam was provided by twelve Schulz @-@ Thornycroft boilers . In addition to being the fastest ship of her class , Pommern was the most fuel efficient . At a cruising speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) , she could steam for 5 @,@ 830 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 800 km ; 6 @,@ 710 mi ) . The ship had a peacetime crew of 35 officers and 708 enlisted men , though during military operations , the size of the crew expanded . 
 Pommern 's primary armament consisted of four 28 cm ( 11 in ) SK L / 40 guns in two twin turrets . She was equipped with fourteen 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) guns mounted in casemates and twenty 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) guns in pivot mounts . The ship was also armed with six 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes , all submerged in the hull . One was in the bow , one in the stern , and four on the broadside . Her armored belt was 240 mm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) thick amidships and she had a 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick armored deck . The main battery turrets had 280 mm ( 11 in ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Pommern was assigned to the II Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet alongside her sisters . She took part in the annual training cruises and maneuvers with the rest of the High Seas Fleet between 1908 and 1914 . This included fleet training in the Baltic in 1908 and a cruise into the Atlantic the following year . In May 1910 Pommern took part in fleet training in the Kattegat between Denmark and Norway , followed by a cruise to Norway in the summer . At the end of 1910 , the fleet conducted another cruise into the Baltic . The next two years followed a similar pattern , though the summer cruise in 1912 was interrupted by the Agadir Crisis . As a result , the cruise was only into the Baltic . Later in the year Pommern took part in maneuvers off the island of Helgoland in the North Sea . 
 In July 1914 , about two weeks after the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo , Pommern was with the High Seas Fleet during its annual summer cruise to Norway . As a result of rising international tensions , the cruise was cut short and the German fleet was back in Wilhelmshaven by 29 July . At midnight on 4 August , the United Kingdom declared war on Germany . Pommern remained with the High Seas Fleet throughout the first two years of the naval war . At the outbreak of war , the ship and her sisters in the II Battle Squadron were deployed to the mouth of the Elbe River to guard the area from possible British incursions . 
 Pommern and the rest of the II Battle Squadron then rejoined the High Seas Fleet as part of the battleship support for the battlecruisers in the I Scouting Group that bombarded Scarborough , Hartlepool , and Whitby on 15 – 16 December 1914 . During the operation , the German battle fleet of some twelve dreadnoughts and eight pre @-@ dreadnoughts came to within 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) of an isolated squadron of six British battleships . However , skirmishes between the rival destroyer screens convinced Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl that he was confronted with the entire Grand Fleet , and so he broke off the engagement and turned for home . Two fruitless fleet advances followed on 17 – 18 and 21 – 23 April 1915 . A third took place on 17 – 18 May , and a fourth occurred on 23 – 24 October . 
 On 24 – 25 April 1916 , Pommern and her sisters joined the dreadnoughts of the High Seas Fleet to support the battlecruisers , which were again tasked with conducting a raid of the English coast . While en route to the target , the battlecruiser Seydlitz was damaged by a mine . Seydlitz was detached to return home , and the rest of the ships continued with the mission . Due to poor visibility , the battlecruisers conducted a brief bombardment of the ports of Yarmouth and Lowestoft . The operation was quickly called off , which prevented the British fleet from being able to intervene . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 Vice Admiral Reinhard Scheer , the new commander of the High Seas Fleet , immediately planned another foray into the North Sea , but the damage to Seydlitz delayed the operation until the end of May . Pommern remained assigned to the II Battle Squadron , now under the command of Rear Admiral Franz Mauve . The squadron was positioned at the rear of the German line . During the " Run to the North , " Scheer ordered the fleet to pursue the British V Battle Squadron at top speed . The slower Deutschland @-@ class ships could not keep up with the faster dreadnoughts and quickly fell behind . 
 Later in the evening of the first day of the battle , the hard @-@ pressed battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group were being pursued by their British opponents . Pommern and the other so @-@ called " five @-@ minute ships " came to their aid by steaming in between the opposing battlecruiser squadrons . Pommern could not make out a target in the darkness , though her several of her sisters could . Despite this , their shooting was ineffective . The British battlecruisers scored several hits on the German ships , including one on Pommern by a 12 in ( 30 @.@ 5 cm ) shell fired by Indomitable , forcing her to haul out of line . Admiral Mauve ordered an 8 @-@ point turn to the south to disengage from the British , and they did not follow . 
 At 3 : 10 on the morning of 1 June , Pommern was torpedoed by the British destroyer Onslaught . At least one torpedo , and possibly a second , struck the ship , detonating one of the 17 cm ammunition magazines . A tremendous explosion broke the ship in half . The stern capsized and remained afloat for at least 20 minutes with her propellers jutting into the air . Hannover , the ship directly astern of Pommern , was forced to haul out of line to avoid the wreck . Pommern 's entire crew of 839 officers and enlisted men were killed when the ship sank . She was the only battleship , pre @-@ dreadnought or dreadnought , in either fleet to be sunk at Jutland ; her loss , coupled with the vulnerabilities of the surviving pre @-@ dreadnoughts , prompted Scheer to leave them behind during the sortie of 18 – 19 August 1916 . 
 = Sleaford = 
 Sleaford is a market town and civil parish in the North Kesteven district of Lincolnshire , a non @-@ metropolitan county in the east of England . It is on the edge of the fertile Fenlands , about 11 miles ( 18 km ) north @-@ east of Grantham , 16 miles ( 26 km ) west of Boston , and 17 miles ( 27 km ) south of the city and county town of Lincoln . With an estimated resident population of 17 @,@ 671 at the time of the 2011 Census , the town is the largest settlement in North Kesteven , and makes up roughly 15 % of its total population . <unk> by the A17 and the A15 , it is connected to Lincoln , Newark , Peterborough and King 's Lynn . Sleaford railway station is on the Nottingham to Skegness ( via Grantham ) and Peterborough to Lincoln Lines . 
 The first settlement formed during the Iron Age where a prehistoric track crossed the River Slea . It was a tribal centre and home to a mint for the Corieltauvi during the 1st centuries BC and AD . Evidence of Roman and Anglo @-@ Saxon settlement has been uncovered , and by the late Saxon period the town was an economic and jurisdictional centre with a court and market . During the medieval period , records differentiate between Old and New Sleaford , the latter emerging in the areas around the present day market place and St Denys ' Church . Sleaford Castle was constructed in the 12th century for the Bishops of Lincoln , who owned the manor . Granted the right to hold a market in the mid @-@ 12th century , New Sleaford developed into a market town and became locally important in the wool trade , while Old Sleaford declined . 
 From the 16th century , the landowners were the Carre family , who operated tight control over the town , and it grew little in the early modern period . The manor passed from the Carre family to the Hervey family by the marriage of Isabella Carre to John Hervey , 1st Earl of Bristol , in 1688 . The town 's common land and fields were legally enclosed by 1794 , giving ownership mostly to the Hervey family ; this coincided with making the Slea into a canal , and heralded the first steps towards modern industry . The Sleaford Navigation brought economic growth until it was superseded by the railways in the mid @-@ 1850s . In the 20th century , the sale of farmland around Sleaford by Bristol Estates led to the development of large housing estates . The subsequent availability of affordable housing combined with the town 's educational facilities and low crime rates made it an attractive destination for home @-@ buyers . As a result , the town 's population underwent the fastest growth of any town in the county during the 1990s . 
 Sleaford was primarily an agricultural town until the 20th century , supporting a cattle market , with seed companies , such as Hubbard and Phillips , and <unk> International Seeds , being established in the late 19th century . The arrival of the railway made the town favourable for malting . Industry has declined , and in 2011 the most common occupations are in wholesale and retail trade , health and social care , public administration and defence and manufacturing . Regeneration of the town centre has led to the redevelopment of the old industrial areas , including the construction of the National Centre for Craft & Design on an old wharf . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The earliest records of the place @-@ name Sleaford are found in a charter of 852 as <unk> and in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle as <unk> . In the Domesday Book ( 1086 ) , it is recorded as Eslaforde and in the early 13th century as <unk> . In the 13th century Book of Fees the name appears as Lafford . The name is formed from the Old English words <unk> and ford , which together mean ' ford over a muddy or slimy river ' . 
 = = = Early = = = 
 Archaeological material from the Bronze Age and earlier has been recovered and excavations have shown that there was unsustained late @-@ Neolithic and Bronze Age human activity in the vicinity . The earliest known permanent settlement dates from the Iron Age and began where a track running northwards from Bourne crossed the River Slea . Although only sparse pottery evidence has been found for the middle Iron Age period , 4 @,@ 290 pellet mould fragments , likely used for minting and dated to 50 BC – AD 50 , have been uncovered south east of the modern town centre , south of a crossing of the River Slea and near Mareham Lane in Old Sleaford . The largest of its kind in Europe , the deposit has led archaeologists to consider that the site in Old Sleaford was probably one of the largest <unk> settlements during this period and may have been a tribal centre . 
 During the Roman occupation of Britain ( AD 43 – 409 ) , the settlement was " extensive and of considerable importance . " Its location along the fen @-@ edge may have made it economically and administratively significant as a centre for managers and owners of fenland estates . There is evidence to suggest that a road connected Old Sleaford to Heckington ( about 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) east ) , where Roman tile kilns have been uncovered and may imply the presence of a market at Sleaford . When the first roads were constructed by the Romans , Sleaford was bypassed due to it being " less conveniently located " and more " geared to native needs " . A smaller road , Mareham Lane , which the Romans renewed , ran through Old Sleaford , and southwards along the fen edge , towards Bourne . Where it passed through Old Sleaford , excavations have revealed a large stone @-@ built domestic residence , associated farm buildings , corn @-@ <unk> , ovens and field systems , all from the Roman period , and a number of burials . Other Roman remains , including a burial , have been excavated in the town . 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 There is little evidence of continuous settlement between the late Roman and Anglo @-@ Saxon periods but the Saxons did establish themselves eventually . South of the modern town , a 6th – 7th century cemetery has been uncovered containing an estimated 600 burials , many showing signs of pagan burial rites . It is possible that the Anglo @-@ Saxon inhabitants were foederati first brought over by the Romano @-@ Britons to defend settlements from other Saxon invaders . The now ruined Church of St Giles / All Saints at Old Sleaford has been discovered and excavations of the Market Place in 1979 uncovered Anglo @-@ Saxon remains from the 8th – 9th centuries , indicating some form of enclosure with domestic features . The earliest documentary reference to Sleaford is in a charter from the 9th century , when it was owned by <unk> Abbey in Peterborough , a Mercian royal foundation . There is little evidence of estate structure until the late Saxon period , but there may have been a market and court in pre @-@ Conquest Sleaford and it was probably an economic and jurisdictional centre for surrounding settlements . The Slea played an important role in the town 's economy : it never ran dry nor froze , and by the 11th century a dozen watermills lined its banks . The mills and others in nearby Quarrington and the lost hamlet of <unk> , constituted the " most important mill cluster in Lincolnshire " . 
 Later in the Middle Ages , the Romano @-@ British settlement became known as " Old Sleaford " , while " New Sleaford " was used to describe the settlement centred on St Denys ' Church and the Market Place . The Domesday Book ( 1086 ) has two entries under Eslaforde ( Sleaford ) recording land held by Ramsey Abbey and the Bishop of Lincoln . The location of the manors recorded in Domesday is not made clear in the text . One theory endorsed by Maurice Beresford is that they focused on the settlement at Old Sleaford because of evidence that New Sleaford was planted in the 12th century by the bishop to increase his income , which was associated with the construction of Sleaford Castle between 1123 and 1139 . Beresford 's theory has been criticised by the local historians Christine Mahany and David Roffe who have reinterpreted the Domesday material and argued that by 1086 the Bishop 's manor included a church and associated settlement in what became New Sleaford . 
 The right to hold a fair on the feast day of St Denis was granted by a charter of King Stephen to Alexander , Bishop of Lincoln , in 1136 – 40 . Between 1154 and 1165 , Henry II granted the bishop of Lincoln the right to hold a market at Sleaford ; bishop Oliver Sutton argued in 1281 that his right to hold a market and fair had existed since time immemorial . In 1329 , Edward III confirmed the market and , in 1401 , Henry IV granted the bishop fairs on the feast days of St Denis and St Peter 's Chains . A survey of 1258 is the first to mention burgage tenure ; tenants in the nearby hamlet of Holdingham held <unk> with other land , while those in New Sleaford held only <unk> , indicating that demesne farming centred on the hamlet . The town later had at least two guilds comparable to those found in developed towns . However , there was no formal charter outlining the town 's freedoms ; it was not a centre of trade and tight control by the bishops meant the economy was primarily geared to serve them . Hence , it retained a strong tradition of demesne farming well into the 14th century . As the economic initiative fell more to the burgesses and middlemen who formed connections with nearby towns , such as Boston , evidence suggests that Sleaford developed a locally important role in the wool trade . In the Lay Subsidy of 1334 , New Sleaford was the wealthiest settlement in the Flaxwell wapentake , with a value of £ 16 0s . 81 / 4d . Meanwhile , Old Sleaford , an " insignificant " place since the end of the Roman period , declined and may have been deserted by the 16th century . 
 = = = Early modern = = = 
 During the late 15th and early 16th centuries , the Hussey family owned the manor of Old Sleaford . John Hussey , 1st Baron Hussey of Sleaford was executed for treason for his part in the Lincolnshire Rising . The manor and his residence at Old Place reverted to the Crown and were later sold to Robert Carre . George Carre or Carr from Northumberland had settled in Sleaford by 1522 when he was described as a wool merchant . His son Robert bought Hussey 's land and the castle and manor of New Sleaford from Edward Clinton , 1st Earl of Lincoln . His eldest surviving son Robert , founded Carre 's Grammar School in 1604 , and his youngest son Edward was created a baronet ; his son founded Sleaford Hospital in 1636 . The last male descendent died in 1683 and the heiress , Isabella Carre , married John Hervey , Earl of Bristol , in whose family the estates remained until the 1970s . The <unk> and <unk> had a strong influence : in addition to extracting dues from their tenants , they took leading tradesmen to the Exchequer Court to gain legal force behind their monopoly on charging tolls on market and cattle traders and for driving animals through the town . 
 Industry was slow to take hold , and by the second half of the 18th century , Cogglesford Mill was the only working corn mill in the town . An old mill at the junction of Westgate and Castle Causeway supplied hemp to the growing rope @-@ making business of the Foster and Hill families . As local historian Simon Pawley wrote , " in many respects , things had changed little [ by 1783 ] since the survey of 1692 " , with few of the buildings or infrastructure being improved . Major changes to agriculture and industry took place in the last decade of that century . From the Middle Ages , Sleaford was surrounded by three open fields : North , West and Sleaford Fields . At the enclosure of the open fields in 1794 more than 90 % of the 1 @,@ 096 acres of open land was owned by Lord Bristol . Despite the costs of fencing and re @-@ organising the fields , the system was easier to farm , and cottages were built closer to fields , while the landowner could charge more rent owing to the increased profitability of the land ; those who lost out were the cottagers , who could no longer keep a few animals grazing on the common land at no cost . The process allowed the land boundaries and pathways to be tidied up ; Drove Lane , which ran to Rauceby , was shifted north and straightened . 
 = = = Industrial = = = 
 <unk> of the River Slea began in the 1790s . Canals in England were constructed from the 1760s to make inland trade easier ; Sleaford 's businessmen were keen to benefit from the improved communication they allowed . The Sleaford Navigation opened in 1794 . It facilitated the export of agricultural produce to the Midlands , and the import of coal and oil . Mills along the Slea benefited and wharves were constructed around Carre Street . Between 1829 and 1836 the navigation 's toll rights increased in value by 27 times . The railways emerged in the 19th century as an alternative to canals and arrived at the town in 1857 , when a line from Grantham to Sleaford opened . It made agricultural trade easier and improved communication , but led to the decline of the Navigation Company . Income from tolls decreased by 80 % between 1858 and 1868 ; it made its first loss in 1873 and was abandoned in 1878 . The town 's rural location and transport links meant that the late 19th century saw the rise of two local seed merchants : Hubbard and Phillips , and Charles Sharpe ; the former took over the Navigation Wharves , and the latter was trading in the US and Europe by the 1880s . The railway , Sleaford 's rural location and its artesian wells , were key factors in the development of the 13 @-@ acre Bass & Co maltings complex at Mareham Lane ( 1892 – 1905 ) . 
 In the first half of the 19th century , Sleaford 's population more than doubled from 1 @,@ 596 in 1801 to 3 @,@ 539 in 1851 . Coinciding with this is the construction or extension of public buildings , often by the local contractors Charles Kirk and Thomas Parry . The gasworks opened in 1839 to provide gas lighting in the town . Sleaford 's Poor Law Union was formed in 1836 to cater for the town and the surrounding 54 parishes . The workhouse was constructed by 1838 and could house 181 inmates . Despite these advances , the slums around Westgate were over @-@ crowded , lacking sanitation and disease @-@ ridden ; the local administration failed to deal with the matter until 1850 , when a report on the town 's public health by the General Board of Health heavily criticised the situation and set up a Local Board of Health to undertake public works . By the 1880s , Lord Bristol had allowed clean water to be pumped into the town , but engineering problems and a reluctance to sell land to house the turbines had delayed the introduction of sewers . 
 = = = Post @-@ industrial = = = 
 Although largely undamaged in the First and Second World Wars , Sleaford has close links with the Royal Air Force due to its proximity to several RAF bases , including RAF Cranwell and RAF Waddington . Lincolnshire 's topography — flat and open countryside — and its location on the east of the country made it ideal for the development of Britain 's airfields , constructed in the First World War . Work began on Cranwell in late 1915 ; it was designated an RAF base in 1918 and the RAF College opened in 1920 as he world 's first air academy . The Cranwell branch railway linking Sleaford station to the RAF base opened in 1917 and closed in 1956 . During the Second World War , Lincolnshire was " the most significant location for bomber command " and Rauceby Hospital , south @-@ west of Sleaford , was requisitioned by the RAF as a specialist burns unit which plastic surgeon Archibald <unk> regularly visited . 
 In the inter @-@ war period , Sleaford 's population remained static , but the Great Depression in the 1930s caused unemployment to rise . Council @-@ housing developments along Drove Lane proved insufficient to house low @-@ income families after the Westgate slums were cleared in the 1930s so Jubilee Grove opened in that decade to meet the demand . In the post @-@ war period , there were new housing developments at St Giles Avenue , the <unk> , Russell Crescent , Jubilee Grove , and Grantham Road . Parts of the town were redeveloped : in 1958 , the Bristol Arms Arcade opened , the Corn Exchange was demolished in the 1960s , and the Waterside Shopping Precinct opened in 1973 , as did Flaxwell House , designed to house a department store , though later becoming the national headquarters for <unk> . 
 By 1979 , the major landowner , Victor Hervey , 6th Marquess of Bristol , heavily in debt , had sold most of his estates in Sleaford and Quarrington and the estate 's office closed in 1989 . Much of the land was sold to property developers and in the following decades saw the construction of residential buildings and a considerable population increase . According to a council report , " the quality of life , low crime rates , relatively low house prices and good @-@ quality education " attracted people to the town . From 1981 to 2011 , Sleaford 's population rose from 8 @,@ 000 to 18 @,@ 000 ; the growth rate from 1991 to 2001 was the fastest of any town in the county . Its infrastructure struggled to cope , especially with increased traffic congestion ; two bypasses around the town and a one @-@ way system were introduced , a process which Simon Pawley argues accelerated the decline of the High Street . In the early 2000s , the Single Regeneration Budget of £ 15 million granted to Sleaford improved the town centre and funded development of the Hub ( since 2011 , the National Centre for Craft & Design ) in the old Navigation wharves area . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Topography = = = 
 Sleaford is the principal market town in the North Kesteven district of Lincolnshire . The civil parish includes the hamlet of Holdingham to the north east and the village of Quarrington to the south east , both of which merge with the town . The County Council 's State of the Environment Report ( 1994 ) found that roughly three @-@ quarters of Lincolnshire is low @-@ lying , with much of it near sea @-@ level ; Sleaford lies approximately 43 feet ( 13 m ) above sea level close to Lincoln Cliff , a Limestone scarp running north – south through Lindsey and Kesteven . The bedrock under the western half of the town belongs to the Great Oolite Group of Jurassic Sandstone , Limestone and <unk> rocks formed 168 − 165 million years ago ; <unk> and Oxford Clay formations , dated to 165 – 156 million years ago , underlie the eastern half . Alluvium deposits are found along the Slea 's course , and Fen sand and gravel are found to the east and south . The county 's agricultural land is generally of " very good " quality ; as a result , intensive arable and vegetable farming is predominant and pastoral farming declined over the course of the 20th century . Sleaford is on the edge of the Fens , a low @-@ lying region of the East of England which , before drainage from the 17th to the 20th centuries , were marshy and liable to flooding . Draining has revealed nutrient @-@ rich soils and enabled 88 % of the land to be cultivated , especially for arable farming , and most of it is graded amongst the most productive farmland in the country . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 According to the Köppen classification , the British Isles experience a maritime climate characterised by relatively cool summers and mild winters . Lincolnshire 's position on the east of the Isles allows for a sunnier and warmer climate relative to the national average , and it is one of the driest counties in the United Kingdom . Although it may vary depending on altitude and proximity to the coast , the mean average temperature for the East of England is approximately 9 ° C to 10 @.@ 5 ° C ; the highest temperature recorded in the region was 37 @.@ 3 ° C at Cavendish on 10 August 2003 . On average , the region experiences 30 days of rainfall in winter and 25 in summer , with 15 days of thunder and 6 – 8 days of hail per year ; on 25 August 2001 , hail the size of golf balls were reported in Sleaford and other parts of central Lincolnshire . Wind tends to affect the north and west of the country more than the East , and Lincolnshire tends to receive no more than 2 days of gale per year ( where gale is a gust of wind at > 34 knots , sustained for at least 10 minutes ) . Despite this , tornadoes form more often in the East of England than elsewhere in the country ; Sleaford experienced tornadoes in 2006 and 2012 , both of which caused damage to property . 
 = = Governance = = 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 Before 1832 , Sleaford was in the Lincolnshire parliamentary constituency , which encompassed all of the county except for four boroughs . In the 1818 election , 49 of the 2 @,@ 000 people living in New and Old Sleaford and Quarrington qualified to vote . In 1832 , the Reform Act widened the franchise and divided Lincolnshire . Sleaford was in the South Lincolnshire constituency that elected two members to parliament . Following the 1867 reforms , the South Lincolnshire constituency 's borders were redrawn , but Sleaford remained within it . The franchise was widened by the reforms so that roughly 15 % ( 202 ) of males in Sleaford and Quarrington could vote in 1868 . The constituency was abolished in 1885 and the Sleaford constituency was formed . It merged with the Grantham seat in 1918 . In 1997 , Sleaford was reorganised into Sleaford and North Hykeham . 
 The member returned in 2010 for Sleaford and North Hykeham was the Conservative candidate Stephen Phillips , who replaced Douglas Hogg . Lincolnshire elected a Member of the European Parliament from 1974 until 1994 , and then became part of the Lincolnshire and Humberside South constituency until 1999 ; since then , it has elected members as part of the East Midlands constituency ; from 1999 , there were six members for the East Midlands , but the number was reduced to five in 2009 . 
 = = = Local government = = = 
 From the early medieval period , New Sleaford was in the Flaxwell Wapentake and Old Sleaford in the <unk> Wapentake . Sleaford Poor Law Union , overseen by a Board of Guardians , was established in 1836 . A Local Board of Health was formed in 1851 . Public health was reorganised by the Public Health Act 1872 , which established Urban and Rural Sanitary Districts ( USD or RSD ) ; Sleaford USD covered New and Old Sleaford , Holdingham and Quarrington , while the Sleaford RSD included all other parishes in the Poor Law Union . The Local Government Act 1894 converted the Board of Health and USD into the Sleaford Urban District Council and , in 1899 , the town became the administrative base of Kesteven County Council . A rural district formed in 1894 was abolished in 1931 . In 1973 , Sleaford Urban District merged with the North and East Kesteven districts to form North Kesteven , a district of Lincolnshire ; by statutory instrument , Sleaford civil parish became the urban district 's successor , thus merging Quarrington , New Sleaford , Old Sleaford and Holdingham civil parishes . 
 Sleaford Town Council , the parish @-@ level local government body beneath the district council is composed of 18 councillors from six wards : Castle , Holdingham , Mareham , Navigation , Quarrington , and Westholme . The Chairman of the Town Council is also the Mayor of Sleaford ; Cllr Keith Dolby is Mayor for 2014 – 15 . The six wards are also represented on North Kesteven District Council , although Mareham and Quarrington are merged into a single ward . Sleaford sends one councillor to Lincolnshire County Council . Sleaford Town Council has offices on Carre Street and the District Council offices are in the Lafford Terrace building on Eastgate , which was purchased by the council in 1934 . 
 Sleaford Urban District Council was granted a coat of arms on 26 October 1950 and after it was abolished the arms were used by its successor , Sleaford Town Council . The arms are blazoned : Gules on a Chevron Or three <unk> Sable on a Chief Argent as many <unk> slipped Vert . The trefoils in the chief are from the arms of the Marquess or Bristol , while the lower portion of the shield is the arms of the Carre family . Its crest is blazoned : On a Wreath of the Colours an Eagle wings extended and head downwards and to the sinister proper holding in the beak an Ear of Wheat stalked and leaved Or , the eagle symbolises Sleaford 's links with the Royal Air Force and the ear of wheat represents agriculture . 
 = = Public services = = 
 Policing is provided by the Lincolnshire Police , and fire @-@ fighting by the Lincolnshire Fire and Rescue Service . The police station is on Boston Road , although older premises on Kesteven Street were erected in 1845 and reconstructed in 1912 . The fire station is on Church Lane although plans to move it to East Road by 2016 were approved in 2014 . East Midlands Ambulance Service ( <unk> ) operates from Kesteven Street . The United Lincolnshire Hospitals NHS Trust provides services at three hospitals , Pilgrim Hospital in Boston , Grantham and District Hospital , and Lincoln County Hospital , all of which have 24 @-@ hour accident and emergency departments as of January 2015 . 
 Mains water and sewerage services are provided by Anglian Water , a former nationalised industry and natural monopoly , privatised in 1989 and regulated by the Water Services Regulation Authority ( <unk> ) . In 1879 , an Act of Parliament was passed to set up a water company for the town ; pumping machinery was installed and works constructed in 1880 to provide a clean water supply to the town . In 1948 , the council took over the company and in 1962 its operation was handed to the Kesteven Water Board , which was absorbed by the Anglian Water Authority in 1973 . 
 Lincolnshire County Council promoted a Bill to Parliament to build an electricity generating station which passed in 1900 . It was built at the cost of £ 6 @,@ 700 in 1901 on Castle Causeway and remained there until nationalisation in 1948 . Following nationalisation , electricity was provided by the East Midlands Electricity Board until it was privatised in 1990 ; in 1998 , East Midlands Electricity , the privately owned predecessor company , was purchased by <unk> . A " virtually carbon neutral " straw @-@ burning power @-@ station at Sleaford opened in 2013 ; capable of supplying electricity to 65 @,@ 000 homes , it is powered by straw bales from farms within a 50 @-@ mile radius . Most electricity generated is fed into the National Grid and the facility provides free heat to public buildings in the town . 
 Natural Gas was supplied by British Gas , which was privatised in 1986 . Distribution of gas and electricity is the responsibility of the National Grid . The energy markets are regulated by the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets ( <unk> ) . The Sleaford Gas Light Company was formed in 1838 and the following year , gas lighting was provided and a gasworks was constructed on Eastgate . In 1866 , the company was incorporated ; in 1895 – 96 , the works were rebuilt and lit the town until the company was nationalised in 1948 . Gas ceased to be made here in the 1960s and the original buildings were retained although later extensions were demolished from 1966 to 1968 . 
 Sleaford Library houses a local and family history section and microfiche machine . It was refurbished in 2010 , but , as of 2014 , was listed by the county council as " undersized " . 
 = = Economy = = 
 = = = Employment = = = 
 Sleaford served the surrounding agricultural communities and the town maintained a weekly market throughout the 19th century and a livestock market on Northgate from 1874 until 1984 . According to a 2010 council report , the public sector was the town 's main employer , along with agriculture and manufacturing . Unemployment was lower than the national average as were wages reflecting pay in the food processing and agricultural industries . At the 2011 Census , the largest group of working @-@ age persons by economic activity are those in full @-@ time employment , who make up 43 @.@ 8 % of this section of the population , while 15 % are part @-@ time employees and 7 @.@ 7 % are self @-@ employed ; 15 % of the working @-@ age population are retired . 4 @.@ 2 % were unemployed , with 40 % of those in long @-@ term unemployment and roughly one third were aged 16 to 24 . The largest socio @-@ economic grouping is those working in lower @-@ tier managerial or administrative roles ( 21 @.@ 9 % ) , followed by semi @-@ routine ( 17 @.@ 8 % ) , routine ( 15 % ) and intermediate ( 12 @.@ 5 % ) occupations ; no other group comprised 10 % or more . In terms of industry , the most common , based on those working in the sector , are wholesale and retail trade ( including automotive repairs ) at 16 @.@ 9 % , health and social care ( 13 @.@ 4 % ) , public administration and defence ( 13 @.@ 3 % ) and manufacturing ( 10 @.@ 9 % ) , with no other groups representing 10 % or more . An unemployment survey of Lincolnshire in 2014 found that the county experienced a decline in unemployment ( based on Jobseekers Allowance claimants ) by 29 % over the preceding 12 months , while the county 's unemployment rate was marginally below the national average . 
 = = = Regeneration = = = 
 In 2011 North Kesteven District Council produced a 25 @-@ year strategy to regenerate the town because its rapid growth since the 1990s had outgrown improvements to its infrastructure . It plans future residential developments and outlines ways of improving the town centre . It suggests developing more parking around the centre and reverting parts the one @-@ way system , developing southern Southgate and turning Money 's Yard into an attraction to link with the National Centre for Craft and Design . North Kesteven District Council granted planning permission for a £ 56 m project to redevelop the derelict Bass Maltings site by converting it into residential and retail space and creating about 500 permanent jobs . The development including a supermarket was delayed when the town council opposed a link road through part of the recreation ground . Tesco , who had pledged to invest in a £ 20 million store in the development withdrew in January 2015 following financial set @-@ backs . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The A17 road from Newark @-@ on @-@ Trent to King 's Lynn bypasses Sleaford from Holdingham Roundabout to Kirkby la Thorpe . It ran through the town until the bypass opened in 1975 . The Holdingham roundabout connects the A17 to the A15 road from Peterborough to <unk> . It also passed through Sleaford until 1993 , when its bypass was completed . Three roads meet at Sleaford 's market place : Northgate ( <unk> ) , Southgate and Eastgate ( B1517 ) . A one @-@ way system set up in 1994 creates a circuit around the town centre . 
 The railways arrived in the 19th century . Early proposals to bring a line to Sleaford failed , but in 1852 plans were made to build the Boston , Sleaford and Midland Counties Railway and its Act of Parliament passed in 1853 . The line from Grantham opened in 1857 ; Boston was connected in 1859 , Bourne in 1871 and Ruskington on Great Northern and Great Eastern Joint Railway in 1882 . 
 Sleaford is a stop on the Peterborough to Lincoln Line and the Poacher Line , from Grantham to Skegness . Grantham , roughly 14 @.@ 8 miles ( 23 @.@ 8 km ) away by road and two stops on the Poacher Line , is a major stop on the East Coast Main Line . Trains from Grantham to London King 's Cross take approximately 1 hour 15 minutes . 
 The River Slea through the town was converted into use as a canal for much of the 19th century . Plans to <unk> it were drawn up in 1773 , but faced opposition from land @-@ owners who feared it might affect the drainage of fens . Plans were approved in 1791 with the support of Brownlow Bertie , 5th Duke of Ancaster and Kesteven who owned estates and quarries that he hoped would benefit . An Act of Parliament passed in 1792 , establishing the Sleaford Navigation , which opened two years later . After falling revenues due to competition from the railways , the navigation company closed in 1878 . The river , although no longer navigable , passes under Carre Street and Southgate . The Nine Foot Drain , also unnavigable , meets the Slea just before Southgate . 
 = = Demography = = 
 The resident population at the 2011 Census was 17 @,@ 671 , which accounts for roughly 15 % of the population of the North Kesteven District ; the urban area contained 8 @,@ 690 houses . The town 's population grew by 39 % between 1991 and 2001 , the fastest growth rate of any town in Lincolnshire . The district population is predicted to rise by 29 % between 2008 and 2033 , compared with a national average of 18 % ; in 2013 , county councillors approved plans to build 4 @,@ 500 new homes . A joint planning strategy report found that " This growth has largely been the result of people moving to the area attracted by the quality of life , low crime rates , relatively low house prices and good @-@ quality education . " 
 The 2011 Census revealed that approximately 93 @.@ 6 % of the town 's resident population were White British ; the second largest ethnic group was White Irish at approximately 3 @.@ 4 % , followed by Asian ( including Asian British ) at 1 @.@ 09 % ; no other ethnic group represented 1 % or more of the population . 88 @.@ 5 % of residents were born in England and 4 @.@ 41 % in other parts of the United Kingdom ; 4 @.@ 3 % were from EU countries , with 2 @.@ 5 % coming from EU member states which joined after 2001 . 
 Between December 2013 and November 2014 , 1 @,@ 289 criminal acts were reported , of which 43 @.@ 9 % were classed as anti @-@ social behaviour , making it the largest portion of reported crimes . In 2010 , recorded crime levels were amongst the lowest in the country and , for the year ending June 2014 , the crime rate in the North Kesteven district is the lowest in Lincolnshire at 24 @.@ 38 crimes per thousand residents . 
 = = Religion = = 
 = = = Population = = = 
 Most people in the town identify as Christian , although the proportion has declined between the last two censuses . At the 2011 Census , 70 @.@ 3 % of residents identified as Christian , while 21 @.@ 8 % reported no religion , and 6 @.@ 6 % did not state a religion ; no other religious group comprised 1 % or more of the population . The 2001 Census recorded that 81 @.@ 6 % of Sleaford residents identified as Christian , nearly ten percentage points higher than the national figure ( 71 @.@ 8 % ) ; 11 @.@ 5 % of the town 's residents had no religion and 6 % did not disclose a religion . 
 In the Compton Census ( 1676 ) , New Sleaford had a <unk> population of 576 people , no " Papists " , and 6 Non @-@ conformists . In the 19th century , it had a sizeable Non @-@ conformist population and a large Anglican congregation ; at the 1851 Census of Religious Worship , an estimated 2 @,@ 000 people attended Non @-@ conformist places of worship , while an estimated 600 – 700 people attended Anglican services in the parish . The Wesleyans met in Westgate in the early 19th century ; by 1848 , the congregation had set up in Northgate , an area known for its taverns and poor tenements . 
 = = = Ecclesiastical history = = = 
 New Sleaford had a church and priest by the time of the Domesday Book ( 1086 ) and the vicarage was founded in 1274 . During the Commonwealth ( 1649 – 1660 ) , the vicar was expelled and replaced by Puritan ministers , the last of whom was removed following the Restoration in 1660 and replaced with an Anglican clergyman . In 1616 , the vicarage was valued at £ 8 and in 1872 at £ 180 . As of 2015 , the ecclesiastical parish of St Denys , Sleaford , encloses the town of Sleaford and hamlet of Holdingham north of the railway line and does not include Quarrington . It falls within the Lafford Deanery , the Lincoln Archdeaconry and the Diocese of Lincoln . The patron is the Bishop of Lincoln and the incumbent vicar is the Rev. Philip Anthony Johnson , who was instituted in 2013 . 
 Old Sleaford was in the possession of Ramsey Abbey at the time of Domesday and later Haverholme Priory , and was eventually served by a vicar ; the church was dedicated either to St Giles or to All Saints . At the Dissolution of the Monasteries ( 1536 – 1541 ) , the king took over collection of the tithes , eventually leasing them to Thomas Horseman and then selling them to Robert Carre . In the 17th century , the rectory of Quarrington and the vicarage were combined to form the parish of Quarrington with Old Sleaford ; the current rector of Quarrington is the Rev. Sandra Benham . The parish boundaries of New Sleaford and Quarrington with Old Sleaford were last altered in 1928 . 
 The prebendary of New Sleaford or Lafford had a seat in the Lincoln Cathedral ; it existed before 1274 and was in the patronage of the bishop . Sleaford 's tithes paid to the prebendary were valued at £ 11 19s . 7d . ( £ 11 @.@ 98 ) in 1616 . After the enclosure of Sleaford 's fields , a farm at Holdingham Anna was allotted to the prebendary in place of the tithes . The <unk> Court of Sleaford had jurisdiction over New and Old Sleaford and Holdingham to grant administration and probate . The parishes of New and Old Sleaford were in the peculiar jurisdiction of the <unk> until 1846 , when they became part of Aswardhurn and Lafford Rural Deanery . In 1866 they were placed in Aswardhurn and Lafford No. 2 Rural Deanery , from 1884 in the Lafford No. 2 Rural Deanery , the Lafford South Rural Deanery from 1910 , and since 1968 , in the Lafford Rural Deanery . 
 = = = Places of worship = = = 
 The Anglican parish church is dedicated to St. Denys . The oldest parts date to the late @-@ 12th century and the broach @-@ spire , built around 1220 , is one of the oldest in England . Regular Sunday services are held at the parish church . 
 Non @-@ conformist meetings took place on Hen Lane ( later Jermyn Street ) from about 1776 . The Congregationalists who met there constructed a chapel on Southgate in 1867 – 68 ; in 1972 , it became Sleaford Reformed Church . Wesleyans first met in the 1790s at the house of Thomas Fawcett on Westgate . They built a chapel nearby in 1802 , which was replaced in 1823 ; it housed the congregation until 1848 when a larger one was built on North Street . It was demolished and replaced by another on the same site in 1972 . A Baptist chapel was built in Old Sleaford in 1811 to house a congregation of 250 , it served the Strict Baptists until possibly the mid @-@ 20th century . The premises have been converted into a house . A Wesleyan Reform Methodist chapel opened in West Banks in 1864 , but since 1896 has been occupied by the Salvation Army . 
 The Fens were increasingly cultivated after the Napoleonic Wars , prompting migrant Catholic Irish farm @-@ workers to move to the area . By 1879 a Roman Catholic missionary , Father Hermann <unk> , was conducting services in the town . A Catholic school and chapel were built in 1881 on land in Jermyn Street and in 1888 , Our Lady of Good Counsel Roman Catholic Church , opened beside it . The incumbent priest is Father Michael John Bell , who was appointed in 2001 . Mass is held on Sundays and throughout the week . 
 The Sleaford Muslim Community Association has met in St Deny 's Church Hall since the early 2000s . Plans to build a prayer hall on Station Road were approved in November 2013 . Protests were planned by the English Defence League , but were cancelled . 
 Sleaford Spiritualist Church opened in about 1956 on Westgate . 
 = = Education = = 
 = = = Primary = = = 
 Sleaford has four primary schools . In 1726 William Alvey bequeathed land to fund teaching children in Sleaford . The school and master 's house for Alvey 's Endowed School , a national school , was built in 1851 . New buildings for the infants ' school were constructed in 1888 . William Alvey Church of England School is housed in the same buildings . It became an academy in 2012 . St Botolph 's School is a Church of England Primary School , which opened at its current site in 2002 . Church Lane School is housed in buildings constructed in 2002 , when the original school house was demolished ; in 2013 , it had c . 201 children on roll . Our Lady of Good Counsel Roman Catholic School had 155 pupils on roll in 2011 . 
 In 1835 , there were eight day schools and three Sunday schools in New Sleaford and two daily schools in Old Sleaford . An infant school in the old playhouse on Westgate opened in 1855 ; Wesleyan schools attached to the chapel on North Street accommodated up to 200 pupils . In addition to private girls ' schools , short @-@ lived private schools for boys were established by Mr Herring and Charles Boyer in 1851 , Henry Carruthers , and Edwin Reginald Dibben in 1870 in competition with the grammar school . Charles Kirk built a school and chapel at Quarrington in 1867 . It became St Botolph 's Primary School and in 2002 moved to a new site . In 1879 , an art school was established in Duke Street in connection with the Science and Art Department ; by 1896 , two Wesleyan schools and a Catholic school were also in operation . 
 = = = Secondary = = = 
 The town has three secondary schools with sixth forms : Carre 's Grammar School , a boys ' grammar school , Kesteven and Sleaford High School , a selective academy girls ' grammar school , and St George 's Academy , formerly St George 's College of Technology , and before that Sleaford ( County ) Secondary Modern School ( mixed non @-@ selective secondary school ) . The grammar schools are selective and pupils are required to pass the Eleven plus exam . St George 's is not selective . The co @-@ educational Joint Sixth Form consortium between Carre 's and St George 's allows pupils to choose subjects taught at either school . 
 Carre 's Grammar School was founded in 1604 by a bequest of Robert Carre of Aswarby . It has received Specialist Sports and Science statuses , became an academy in 2011 and was judged to be " good " by Ofsted in 2013 , at which time it had 817 pupils , including the co @-@ educational sixth form . Sleaford and Kesteven High School for Girls was established in 1902 . It has specialist art status , became an academy in 2011 and was judged to be " good " by Ofsted in 2013 , at which time there were 825 pupils on roll , including those in the co @-@ educational sixth form . St George 's opened in 1908 as Sleaford Council School . It has received specialist technology college status , converted to an academy in 2010 and operates a satellite school at Ruskington . St George 's had 2 @,@ 247 pupils on roll in 2012 , across both sites and including the sixth form ; when assessed by Ofsted in that year , was judged to be " good " . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The National Centre for Craft & Design opened as The Hub in 2003 with support from a Single Regeneration Budget grant . It attracts 90 @,@ 000 visitors on average each year and houses exhibitions of applied and contemporary art . The Playhouse theatre on Westgate was constructed in 1825 , and sold in 1856 to be converted into an infants school and later a library and offices . In 1994 , Sleaford Little Theatre bought and restored it and in 2000 it opened to the public . The Sleaford Picturedrome opened in 1920 ; the cinema closed in 2000 and the building became a snooker hall and then a nightclub that closed in 2008 . 
 Sleaford Museum Trust was formed in the 1970s to collect and preserve historical artefacts from the town 's history . A Heritage Lottery Fund grant of more than £ 94 @,@ 000 in December 2013 allowed the trust to establish a museum on Southgate , which opened in April 2015 . Sleaford and District Civic Trust was founded in 1972 to " preserve the best features " of the town . 
 There is a volunteer twinning association , the Sleaford and District Town Twinning Association , which was founded in 1999 . The association has created and maintains links and annual visits with Marquette @-@ lez @-@ Lille in France since 1999 , and with <unk> @-@ <unk> in Germany since 2009 . 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 Sleaford Town F.C. played in the United Counties League Premier Division for the 2014 – 15 season . Formed as Sleaford Amateurs F.C. in 1920 , the club was renamed Sleaford Town in 1968 . In 2007 it moved to its present grounds at Eslaforde Park . Sleaford Rugby FC 's clubhouse opened in 1999 off the <unk> . Sleaford Golf Club was founded in 1905 and had roughly 100 members the following year , which increased to 193 in 1911 . The original golf course has been altered . In 2014 , the club had roughly 600 members . Sleaford Cricket Club has grounds at London Road ; the earliest record of the club is in 1803 . The town is also home to Bristol Bowls Club , an all @-@ discipline gymnastics club founded in 1996 . An outdoor lido opened in 1872 on riverside land owned by the Bristol estate but handed over to the community as public baths . Indoor facilities were built in the 20th century and the old lido became Sleaford Leisure Centre . In 2011 Kesteven District Council received a grant of £ 2 @.@ 85 million , to fund reconstruction of the centre and its gym . 
 = = = Local media = = = 
 The main radio stations for the county are BBC Radio Lincolnshire , broadcasting on 94 @.@ 9 FM and 104 @.@ 7 FM frequencies , and the commercial station Lincs FM , on 102 @.@ 2 , 96 @.@ 7 and 97 @.@ 6 FM . The town 's local newspapers are the Sleaford Standard ( founded in 1924 ) , the Sleaford Advertiser ( founded in 1980 ) and the Sleaford Target ( founded in 1984 ) . Historically , the Sleaford Gazette operated between 1854 and 1960 ; the Sleaford Journal from at least 1884 until it was incorporated into the Gazette in December 1929 , the Sleaford Telegraph ran from 1888 to 1889 and the Sleaford Guardian was in print for a year from 1945 to 1946 . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 A small number of medieval buildings remain standing in the town . St Denys ' Church and St Botolph 's in Quarrington date to the 12th and 13th centuries respectively , while Sleaford 's half @-@ timbered vicarage is 15th century . St Denys ' Church is noted for its tracery and its stone broach spire is one of the oldest in England . Cogglesford Mill is the only remaining watermill in town and is a testament to the economic importance of the River Slea from the late @-@ Saxon period onwards . The Bishops of Lincoln used the medieval town as a base , constructing the now @-@ ruined Sleaford Castle , and as a means of extracting produce and wealth through demesne farming and by granting a market and limited freedoms to the town . As a result , the oldest areas are the market place and the four roads which meet there : Northgate , Southgate , Eastgate and Westgate ; many 18th and 19th century buildings are found in this area . 
 Buildings dating from these centuries include William Alvey 's baroque house on Northgate , the Manor House on Northgate inset with medieval masonry , and Sessions House on the Market Place . The Carre family founded the grammar school which was rebuilt in 1834 , the hospital , rebuilt in 1830 , and the almshouses , rebuilt 1857 , while the Victorian builders Charles Kirk and Thomas Parry constructed or added to numerous public buildings and private residences , including Lafford Terrace and their own houses on Southgate and at Westholme . 
 During the Industrial Revolution , the Slea was canalised in 1794 and the Sleaford Navigation Company constructed offices and wharves along Carre Street . The canal brought trade , while the Gothic @-@ fronted gasworks on Eastgate lit the town from 1839 . Benjamin Handley and Anthony Peacock financed and benefited from the navigation and founded the bank that took over Alvey 's House on Northgate and later added a Baroque extension ; Henry Handley , a Member of Parliament , is commemorated by the Handley Memorial on Southgate , a Gothic monument in the style of an Eleanor Cross . During the 1850s , the railways arrived and the station was built in a Gothic style . Sleaford 's agricultural location and its new transport links encouraged seed trading and malting in the late 19th century : the seed merchant Charles Sharpe 's house , The Pines , is on Boston Road . The massive Bass and Company maltings complex , constructed in brick off Mareham Lane between 1892 and 1905 , is grade II * listed and has a frontage more than 1 @,@ 000 feet long . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The Handley family were well @-@ connected with business ; Benjamin Handley was a lawyer , prominent in the Navigation Company and partner in the local bank Peacock , Handley and Kirton . His son , Henry was M.P. for South Lincolnshire ; after his death , the residents erected a monument to him on Southgate . Robert Armstrong Yerburgh the son of Rev Richard Yerburgh , vicar of New Sleaford was twice M.P. for Chester . Sir Thomas Meres , politician was educated at the grammar school . Sir Robert Pattinson was also educated at the grammar was M.P. for Grantham and Sleaford . 
 The religious controversialist Henry <unk> was born in New Sleaford and challenged the opponent of Quakerism Francis Bugg to an open debate at Sleaford . John Austin , a religious writer , was educated at the grammar school . William <unk> served as the town 's Presbyterian minister and preached there for more than forty years , while Benjamin Fawcett , Presbyterian minister , was born and educated at Sleaford . Andrew <unk> , the Presbyterian minister , biographer and Fellow of the Royal Society , attended the Grammar School . 
 Richard Banister , the oculist , practised for 14 years in Sleaford where he trained in couching cataracts . Henry Andrews astronomer and astrologer , worked in Sleaford during his youth . 
 The royalist poet Thomas Shipman was educated at Carre 's Grammar School , as was novelist Henry Jackson ; Joseph Smedley , the actor and comedian , built the theatre in 1824 , before settling in the town in 1842 , establishing a printing business and dying in North Street ; and Charles <unk> Shannon , the artist , was born in the town . The actress and comedian Jennifer Saunders was born in Sleaford . In popular culture , the singer Lois Wilkinson of the <unk> was born in the town ; glamour model Abi <unk> grew up in Ruskington and was educated at Kesteven and Sleaford High School ; and Bernie Taupin , Elton John 's songwriter , was born in the town . Eric Thompson who narrated The Magic Roundabout television series , was born in a house on Jermyn Street . In sport , the professional footballer Mark Wallington who played for Leicester City , Derby County and Lincoln City , grew up in Sleaford and , after retiring taught Physical Education at St George 's Academy . 
 = Tsugaru clan = 
 The Tsugaru clan ( <unk> , Tsugaru @-@ shi ) was a Japanese samurai clan originating in northern Japan , specifically Mutsu Province ( the northeast coast of Honshū ) . A branch of the local Nanbu clan , the Tsugaru rose to power during the Azuchi @-@ Momoyama period . It was on the winning side of the Battle of Sekigahara , and entered the Edo period as a family of lords ( daimyo ) ruling the Hirosaki Domain . A second branch of the family was later established , which ruled the Kuroishi Domain . The Tsugaru survived as a daimyo family until the Meiji Restoration , when Tsugaru Tsuguakira of Hirosaki and Tsugaru Tsugumichi of Kuroishi were relieved of office . Their extended family then became part of the new nobility in the Meiji era . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins through 1599 = = = 
 The Tsugaru clan initially claimed descent from the Kawachi Genji branch of the Minamoto clan ; in later years , this claim of origin would change to the Konoe family , which was a branch of the Fujiwara clan . It was first known as the Ōura clan ( <unk> , Ōura @-@ shi ) , a branch family of the Nanbu clan , which ruled sections of northern Mutsu Province . Relations between the two families soured after the Ōura declared their independence from the Nanbu in 1571 , during the headship of Ōura Tamenobu . He had been vice @-@ district magistrate ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) under the Nanbu clan 's local magistrate Ishikawa Takanobu ; however , he attacked and killed Ishikawa and began taking the Nanbu clan 's castles . Tamenobu also attacked Kitabatake <unk> ( another local power figure ) and took his castle at <unk> . The Ōura clan 's fight against the Nanbu clan , under Nanbu Nobunao , would continue in the ensuing years . In 1590 , Tamenobu pledged fealty to Toyotomi Hideyoshi ; Hideyoshi confirmed Tamenobu in his holdings . As the Ōura fief had been in the Tsugaru region on the northern tip of Honshū , the family then changed its name to Tsugaru . 
 = = = The Tsugaru in the Edo era = = = 
 The Tsugaru clan sided with Tokugawa Ieyasu 's Eastern Army during the Battle of Sekigahara in 1600 . Its immediate neighbors also all supported the Eastern Army . After the Tokugawa victory at Sekigahara , the Tsugaru clan was granted an increase in territory , along with permission to keep its existing domain of Hirosaki ( named for the family 's castle town ) . The domain started out small at 45 @,@ 000 koku , before being increased in size to 100 @,@ 000 koku . Tamenobu remained politically active in the early years of the Edo era , mainly in the Kansai area ; he died in Kyoto in 1608 . 
 The early years of the Edo era were marked by a series of major O @-@ Ie <unk> disturbances that shook the Tsugaru family : the Tsugaru Disturbance ( <unk> , Tsugaru @-@ sōdō ) of 1607 , <unk> <unk> 's Riot ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> no ran ) of 1612 , the Funabashi Disturbance ( <unk> , Funabashi @-@ sōdō ) of 1634 , and the Shōhō Disturbance ( <unk> , Shōhō @-@ sōdō ) of 1647 . In 1821 , there was a foiled plot by Sōma Daisaku , a former retainer of the Nanbu clan , to assassinate the Tsugaru lord ; this stemmed from the old enmity between the two clans . 
 A major branch of the Tsugaru clan was founded in 1656 , which was first given hatamoto rank , before being promoted to daimyo status in 1809 ; this became the ruling family of the Kuroishi Domain , which immediately bordered its parent family 's domain . A lesser branch was founded by Tsugaru <unk> , the son of the first Kuroishi @-@ Tsugaru family head ; this branch remained hatamoto through the end of the Edo period . The main Tsugaru family 's funerary temple in Hirosaki was located at <unk> @-@ ji . Though neither Tsugaru daimyo family ever held shogunate office , the Tsugaru of Hirosaki ( together with many of the other domains of northern Honshū ) assisted the shogunate in policing the frontier region of Ezochi ( now Hokkaido ) . In the late Edo period , during the headship of Tsugaru Tsuguakira , the Hirosaki domain 's forces were modernized along western lines . 
 = = = The Tsugaru clan in the Boshin War = = = 
 During the Boshin War of 1868 @-@ 69 , the Tsugaru clan first sided with the imperial government , and attacked the forces of the nearby Shōnai Domain . However , it soon switched course , and was briefly a signatory to the pact that created the Ōuetsu Reppan Dōmei , before backing out , once again in favor of the imperial government . It did not take part in any of the major military action against the imperial army . The Kuroishi branch joined the Hirosaki @-@ Tsugaru in siding with the imperial government . As a result , the entire clan was able to evade the punishment meted out by the government on the northern domains . After northern Honshū was pacified , Tsugaru forces joined the imperial army in attacking the Republic of Ezo at Hakodate . In return for its assistance , the Meiji government granted the Tsugaru family of Hirosaki a 10 @,@ 000 koku increase to its fief . Both branches of Tsugaru daimyo were made imperial governors ( <unk> , han chiji ) of their domains in 1869 . Two years later , as with all other daimyo , both Tsugaru lines were relieved of their offices by the abolition of the han system . 
 = = = Meiji and beyond = = = 
 In the Meiji era , Tsugaru Tsuguakira , who had been the last daimyo of the main Tsugaru family , was ennobled with the title of count ( <unk> ) . Tsugaru Tsugumichi , the last daimyo of the Kuroishi @-@ Tsugaru , became a viscount ( shishaku ) . Tsuguakira later worked as a supervisor in the Number 15 National Bank ( <unk> , Dai <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , and Tsugumichi became a member of the House of Peers in 1890 . As Tsuguakira was heirless , he adopted Konoe Hidemaro , the son of court noble Konoe <unk> , as his heir ; Hidemaro succeeded to headship upon Tsuguakira 's death in 1916 . 
 Princess Hitachi is a present @-@ day descendant of the main Tsugaru line . 
 = = Family heads = = 
 = = = Main line ( Hirosaki ) = = = 
 = = = Branch line ( Kuroishi ) = = = 
 = = Notable retainers = = 
 = = = Hirosaki = = = 
 = Neptunium = 
 Neptunium is a chemical element with symbol Np and atomic number 93 . A radioactive actinide metal , neptunium is the first transuranic element . Its position in the periodic table just after uranium , named after the planet Uranus , led to it being named after Neptune , the next planet beyond Uranus . A neptunium atom has 93 protons and 93 electrons , of which seven are valence electrons . Neptunium metal is silvery and tarnishes when exposed to air . The element occurs in three allotropic forms and it normally exhibits five oxidation states , ranging from + 3 to + 7 . It is radioactive , poisonous , pyrophoric , and can accumulate in bones , which makes the handling of neptunium dangerous . 
 Although many false claims of its discovery were made over the years , the element was first synthesized by Edwin McMillan and Philip H. Abelson at the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory in 1940 . Since then , most neptunium has been and still is produced by neutron irradiation of uranium in nuclear reactors . The vast majority is generated as a by @-@ product in conventional nuclear power reactors . While neptunium itself has no commercial uses at present , it is widely used as a precursor for the formation of plutonium @-@ 238 , used in radioisotope thermal generators to provide electricity for spacecraft . Neptunium has also been used in detectors of high @-@ energy neutrons . 
 The most stable isotope of neptunium , neptunium @-@ 237 , is a by @-@ product of nuclear reactors and plutonium production . It , and the isotope neptunium @-@ 239 , are also found in trace amounts in uranium ores due to neutron capture reactions and beta decay . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Physical = = = 
 Neptunium is a hard , silvery , ductile , radioactive actinide metal . In the periodic table , it is located to the right of the actinide uranium , to the left of the actinide plutonium and below the lanthanide promethium . Neptunium is a hard metal , having a bulk modulus of 118 GPa , comparable to that of manganese . Neptunium metal is similar to uranium in terms of physical workability . When exposed to air at normal temperatures , it forms a thin oxide layer . This reaction proceeds more rapidly as the temperature increases . Neptunium has been determined to melt at 639 ± 3 ° C : this low melting point , a property the metal shares with the neighboring element plutonium ( which has melting point 639 @.@ 4 ° C ) , is due to the hybridization of the 5f and 6d orbitals and the formation of directional bonds in the metal . The boiling point of neptunium is not empirically known and the usually given value of <unk> ° C is extrapolated from the vapor pressure of the element . If accurate , this would give neptunium the largest liquid range of any element ( <unk> K passes between its melting and boiling points ) . 
 Neptunium is found in at least three allotropes . Some claims of a fourth allotrope have been made , but they are so far not proven . This multiplicity of allotropes is common among the actinides . The crystal structures of neptunium , protactinium , uranium , and plutonium do not have clear analogs among the lanthanides and are more similar to those of the 3d transition metals . 
 α @-@ neptunium takes on an orthorhombic structure , resembling a highly distorted body @-@ centered cubic structure . Each neptunium atom is coordinated to four others and the Np – Np bond lengths are 260 pm . It is the densest of all the actinides and the fifth @-@ densest of all naturally occurring elements , behind only rhenium , platinum , iridium , and <unk> α @-@ neptunium has semimetallic properties , such as strong covalent bonding and a high electrical resistivity , and its metallic physical properties are closer to those of the metalloids than the true metals . Some allotropes of the other actinides also exhibit similar behaviour , though to a lesser degree . The densities of different isotopes of neptunium in the alpha phase are expected to be <unk> different : α @-@ 235Np should have density 20 @.@ 303 g / cm3 ; α @-@ 236Np , density 20 @.@ 389 g / cm3 ; α @-@ 237Np , density 20 @.@ 476 g / cm3 . 
 β @-@ neptunium takes on a distorted tetragonal close @-@ packed structure . Four atoms of neptunium make up a unit cell , and the Np – Np bond lengths are 276 pm. γ @-@ neptunium has a body @-@ centered cubic structure and has Np – Np bond length of 297 pm . The γ form becomes less stable with increased pressure , though the melting point of neptunium also increases with pressure . The β @-@ Np / γ @-@ Np / liquid triple point occurs at 725 ° C and 3200 MPa . 
 = = = = Alloys = = = = 
 Due to the presence of valence 5f electrons , neptunium and its alloys exhibit very interesting magnetic behavior , like many other actinides . These can range from the itinerant band @-@ like character characteristic of the transition metals to the local moment behavior typical of scandium , yttrium , and the lanthanides . This stems from 5f @-@ orbital hybridization with the orbitals of the metal ligands , and the fact that the 5f orbital is relativistically destabilized and extends outwards . For example , pure neptunium is paramagnetic , <unk> is ferromagnetic , <unk> has no magnetic ordering , and <unk> behaves <unk> . Investigations are underway regarding alloys of neptunium with uranium , americium , plutonium , zirconium , and iron , so as to recycle long @-@ lived waste isotopes such as neptunium @-@ 237 into shorter @-@ lived isotopes more useful as nuclear fuel . 
 One neptunium @-@ based superconductor alloy has been discovered with formula <unk> . This occurrence in neptunium compounds is somewhat surprising because they often exhibit strong magnetism , which usually destroys superconductivity . The alloy has a tetragonal structure with a superconductivity transition temperature of − 268 @.@ 3 ° C ( 4 @.@ 9 K ) . 
 = = = Chemical = = = 
 Neptunium has five ionic oxidation states ranging from + 3 to + 7 when forming chemical compounds , which can be simultaneously observed in solutions . It is the heaviest actinide that can lose all its valence electrons in a stable compound . The most stable state in solution is + 5 , but the valence + 4 is preferred in solid neptunium compounds . Neptunium metal is very reactive . Ions of neptunium are prone to hydrolysis and formation of coordination compounds . 
 = = = Atomic = = = 
 A neptunium atom has 93 electrons , arranged in the configuration [ Rn ] <unk> . This differs from the configuration expected by the Aufbau principle in that one electron is in the 6d subshell instead of being as expected in the 5f subshell . This is because of the similarity of the electron energies of the 5f , 6d , and 7s subshells . In forming compounds and ions , all the valence electrons may be lost , leaving behind an inert core of inner electrons with the electron configuration of the noble gas radon ; more commonly , only some of the valence electrons will be lost . The electron configuration for the tripositive ion Np3 + is [ Rn ] <unk> , with the outermost 7s and 6d electrons lost first : this is exactly analogous to neptunium 's lanthanide homolog promethium , and conforms to the trend set by the other actinides with their [ Rn ] 5fn electron configurations in the tripositive state . The first ionization potential of neptunium was measured to be at most ( 6 @.@ 19 ± 0 @.@ 12 ) eV in 1974 , based on the assumption that the 7s electrons would ionize before 5f and 6d ; more recent measurements have refined this to 6 @.@ <unk> eV . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 20 neptunium radioisotopes have been characterized with the most stable being 237Np with a half @-@ life of 2 @.@ 14 million years , 236Np with a half @-@ life of 154 @,@ 000 years , and 235Np with a half @-@ life of 396 @.@ 1 days . All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half @-@ lives that are less than 4 @.@ 5 days , and the majority of these have half @-@ lives that are less than 50 minutes . This element also has at least four meta states , with the most stable being <unk> with a half @-@ life of 22 @.@ 5 hours . 
 The isotopes of neptunium range in atomic weight from 225 @.@ <unk> u ( <unk> ) to 244 @.@ 068 u ( <unk> ) . Most of the isotopes that are lighter than the most stable one , 237Np , decay primarily by electron capture although a sizable number , most notably <unk> and <unk> , also exhibit various levels of decay via alpha emission to become protactinium . 237Np itself , being the beta @-@ stable isobar of mass number 237 , decays almost exclusively by alpha emission into 233Pa . All of the known isotopes except one that are heavier than this decay exclusively via beta emission . The lone exception , <unk> , exhibits a rare ( > 0 @.@ 12 % ) decay by isomeric transition in addition to the beta emission . 237Np eventually decays to form bismuth @-@ 209 and thallium @-@ 205 , unlike most other common heavy nuclei which decay into isotopes of lead . This decay chain is known as the neptunium series . 
 The isotopes neptunium @-@ 235 , <unk> , and <unk> are predicted to be fissile ; only neptunium @-@ 237 's <unk> has been experimentally shown , with the critical mass being about 60 kg , only about 10 kg more than that of the commonly used uranium @-@ 235 . Calculated values of the critical masses of neptunium @-@ 235 , <unk> , and <unk> respectively are 66 @.@ 2 kg , 6 @.@ 79 kg , and 63 @.@ 6 kg : the neptunium @-@ 236 value is even lower than that of plutonium @-@ 239 . In particular 236Np also has a low neutron cross section . Despite this , a neptunium atomic bomb has never been built : uranium and plutonium have lower critical masses than 235Np and 237Np , and 236Np is difficult to purify as it is not found in quantity in spent nuclear fuel and is nearly impossible to separate in any significant quantities from its parent 237Np . 
 = = = Occurrence = = = 
 Since all isotopes of neptunium have half @-@ lives that are many times shorter than the age of the Earth , any primordial neptunium should have decayed by now . After only about 80 million years , the concentration of even the longest lived isotope , 237Np , would have been reduced to less than one @-@ <unk> ( 10 − 12 ) of its original amount ; and even if the whole Earth had initially been made of pure 237Np ( and ignoring that this would be well over its critical mass of 60 kg ) , 2100 half @-@ lives would have passed since the formation of the Solar System , and thus all of it would have decayed . Thus neptunium is present in nature only in negligible amounts produced as intermediate decay products of other isotopes . 
 Trace amounts of the neptunium isotopes neptunium @-@ 237 , <unk> , and -240 are found naturally as decay products from transmutation reactions in uranium ores . In particular , 239Np and 237Np are the most common of these isotopes ; they are directly formed from neutron capture by uranium @-@ 238 atoms . These neutrons come from the spontaneous fission of uranium @-@ 238 , naturally neutron @-@ induced fission of uranium @-@ 235 , cosmic ray spallation of nuclei , and light elements absorbing alpha particles and emitting a neutron . The half @-@ life of 239Np is very short , although the detection of its much longer @-@ lived daughter 239Pu in nature in 1951 definitively established its natural occurrence . In 1952 , 237Np was identified and isolated from concentrates of uranium ore from the Belgian Congo : in these minerals , the ratio of neptunium @-@ 237 to uranium is less than or equal to about 10 − 12 to 1 . Finally , the short @-@ lived <unk> occurs as an intermediate in the decay chain of primordial 244Pu . 
 Most neptunium ( and plutonium ) now encountered in the environment is due to atmospheric nuclear explosions that took place between the detonation of the first atomic bomb in 1945 and the ratification of the Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in 1963 . The total amount of neptunium released by these explosions and the few atmospheric tests that have been carried out since 1963 is estimated to be around 2500 kg . The overwhelming majority of this is composed of the long @-@ lived isotopes 236Np and 237Np since even the moderately long @-@ lived 235Np ( half @-@ life 396 days ) would have decayed to less than one @-@ billionth ( 10 − 9 ) its original concentration over the intervening decades . An additional very small amount of neptunium , created by neutron irradiation of natural uranium in nuclear reactor cooling water , is released when the water is discharged into rivers or lakes . The concentration of 237Np in seawater is approximately 6 @.@ 5 × 10 − 5 <unk> per liter : this concentration is between 0 @.@ 1 % and 1 % that of plutonium . 
 Once in the environment , neptunium generally oxidizes fairly quickly , usually to the + 4 or + 5 state . Regardless of its oxidation state , the element exhibits a much greater mobility than the other actinides , largely due to its ability to readily form aqueous solutions with various other elements . In one study comparing the diffusion rates of neptunium ( V ) , plutonium ( IV ) , and americium ( III ) in sandstone and limestone , neptunium penetrated more than ten times as well as the other elements . Np ( V ) will also react efficiently in pH levels greater than 5 @.@ 5 if there are no carbonates present and in these conditions it has also been observed to readily bond with quartz . It has also been observed to bond well with goethite , ferric oxide colloids , and several clays including kaolinite and smectite . Np ( V ) does not bond as readily to soil particles in mildly acidic conditions as its fellow actinides americium and curium by nearly an order of magnitude . This behavior enables it to migrate rapidly through the soil while in solution without becoming fixed in place , contributing further to its mobility . Np ( V ) is also readily absorbed by concrete , which because of the element 's radioactivity is a consideration that must be addressed when building nuclear waste storage facilities . When absorbed in concrete , it is reduced to Np ( IV ) in a relatively short period of time . Np ( V ) is also reduced by humic acid if it is present on the surface of goethite , hematite , and magnetite . Np ( IV ) is absorbed efficiently by tuff , granodiorite , and bentonite ; although uptake by the latter is most pronounced in mildly acidic conditions . It also exhibits a strong tendency to bind to colloidal particulates , an effect that is enhanced when in soil with a high clay content . The behavior provides an additional aid in the element 's observed high mobility . 
 = = History = = 
