 Bob Weinstein approached Craven early in the planning stages , because he felt Craven 's previous work in the genre that combined horror and comedy would make him the perfect person to bring Williamson 's script to screen . Craven was already busy developing a remake of The Haunting and was considering distancing himself from the horror genre . He was growing weary of the inherent misogyny and violence . Weinstein approached other directors , including Robert Rodriguez , Danny Boyle , George A. Romero , and Sam Raimi . Williamson said that they " didn 't get it " ; he was concerned that having read the script , many of the directors believed the film to be purely a comedy . Craven was approached again but continued to pass in spite of repeated requests . When production of The Haunting collapsed , Craven was freed from that commitment and found himself in need of a project . Meanwhile , Drew Barrymore had signed on to the film at her own request . When he heard an established actress wanted to be involved , Craven reasoned that Scary Movie might be different from other films of the genre he had previously undertaken , and he contacted Weinstein to accept the job . 
 As the film neared completion , the Weinstein brothers changed the film 's title from Scary Movie to Scream . They were inspired by the Michael Jackson song of the same name . Bob Weinstein considered Scary Movie to be an unsuitable title as , in addition to the horror and violence , the film contained elements of satire and comedy ; Weinstein wished for that to be better conveyed by the title . The change was effected so late into production that congratulatory gifts bore the original name . Williamson and Craven immediately disliked the new title , and considered it " stupid " . Both later remarked that the change turned out to be positive , and that Weinstein had been wise to pick the new title . Following a highly successful screening of the film in front of a test audience and Miramax executives , Craven was offered a two @-@ picture contract for sequels to Scream . 
 Sony Pictures filed a lawsuit against Dimension Films and Miramax , claiming that the title " Scream " infringed on the copyright of Sony 's own Screamers ( 1995 ) , released the previous year . After the case was settled out of court — the details remain confidential — Scream 2 producer Marianne Maddalena considered that the case was a result of other issues between the two companies and did not truly pertain to the film 's moniker . Maddalena confirmed that the studio was free to use the Scream brand for future films . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Scream was a turning point in terms of casting for the horror genre , which normally involved relatively unknown actors . The genre was considered unsuitable for bigger names as the films had lower budgets and often attained negative critical response . Drew Barrymore read the script and was interested in being involved . She approached the production team herself to request a role . Barrymore , a member of the Barrymore family of actors and granddaughter of actor John Barrymore , had become a star in her own right following her appearance in E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial ( 1982 ) . The producers were quick to take advantage of her unexpected interest , and signed her to play the lead role of Sidney Prescott . Her involvement was believed to be instrumental in attracting other popular actors to the film in spite of its smaller budget , and in causing Craven to reconsider his decision to direct the film . Before filming began , Barrymore was faced with unexpected commitments that meant she would no longer be available to play the demanding lead role . She instead played the smaller role of Casey Becker , which allowed her to remain involved and still gave the production the advantage of her stature . Killing off one of their biggest stars early in the film was considered a calculated risk , but it was believed that it would be so shocking and unexpected that the audience would then believe that any character could die . Actresses including Alicia Witt and Brittany Murphy auditioned for the lead role of Sidney ; the producers also approached Reese Witherspoon , though she never auditioned . Craven had seen Neve Campbell in the TV show Party of Five and asked her to audition for the part . He believed she could portray a character who was " innocent " , but who could also realistically handle herself while dealing with the physical conflict and emotions required by the role . Campbell was initially reluctant to perform in another horror film so soon after her supporting role in The Craft . After a successful audition , Campbell accepted an offer to play the lead character . She accepted because Scream would be her first leading role , and because she adored the character , saying " She 's a fantastic character for any kind of movie . " 
 For the character of news reporter Gale Weathers , the studio wanted a recognizable actress . They auditioned Brooke Shields and Janeane Garofalo . Courteney Cox , who was starring in the sitcom Friends at the time , approached the production herself to pursue the role . She was interested in playing a " bitch " character to offset her " nice " Friends image . This image was the main reason why the producers initially refused to consider Cox for the part . Cox continued to lobby the studio as she felt she could believably play the character ; her efforts ultimately succeeded . Actresses Melinda Clarke and Rebecca Gayheart auditioned for the role of Tatum Riley , before Rose McGowan was cast . The casting director believed she best embodied the " spunky " , " cynical " but " innocent " nature of the character . The studio felt the strong female cast of Campbell , Barrymore , Cox , and McGowan would help draw a significant female audience to the film . Gayheart would later land a role in Scream 2 . 
 Kevin Patrick Walls and Justin <unk> were among the final candidates for the key role of Sidney 's boyfriend Billy Loomis . <unk> took part in auditions with Campbell . Skeet Ulrich ultimately secured the role . The producers viewed him as " perfect " for the part and noted his resemblance to a young Johnny Depp as he appeared in A Nightmare on Elm Street , one of the many films Scream references . Ulrich and Campbell had worked together on The Craft shortly before Scream . They believed the experience helped them be more comfortable with each other , which allowed a more natural portrayal of the relationship between their characters . Though he failed to win the Loomis role , Walls remained in the film in the minor role of Steve Orth , boyfriend of Barrymore 's Casey Becker . David Arquette was also approached for the role of Billy Loomis but he asked to read for the part of Dewey Riley after reading the script . The role , described as " hunky " , was considered ill @-@ fitting for Arquette 's lean , slender appearance and approach but Arquette was still allowed to audition for the part . Craven appreciated his softer , funnier approach to the character , and gave him the role . Matthew Lillard was cast as Billy 's equally sadistic friend Stu Macher by chance after accompanying his then @-@ girlfriend to an unrelated audition taking place elsewhere in the same building . Casting director Lisa Beach saw Lillard in the hallway and asked him to audition for the part . He got into the role with " incredible ferocity " . The role of Randy Meeks was contested between Jamie Kennedy and Breckin Meyer . The producers favored Kennedy , believing him to best embody the role . As he had no major roles prior to Scream , the studio wanted a more prominent actor than Kennedy to play the character . The producers were adamant that he was the best choice and successfully fought to keep him . Roger L. Jackson , voice of the character Ghostface , was picked at the end of several weeks of local casting in Santa Rosa , where parts of Scream were filmed . The producers had originally intended to use his voice only as a placeholder , dubbing over it during post @-@ production . They decided that Jackson 's contribution was perfect and kept it . Craven described it as an " intelligent " and " evil " voice that would become irreplaceable to the series . To aid their performance , Jackson was never allowed to meet the other actors , preventing them from associating a face with the menacing voice . Jackson was present on the set and spoke to actors by phone to help aid their performance . 
 The cast was rounded out by W. Earl Brown , who played Gale Weather 's cameraman Kenny ; Joseph Whipp , who portrayed Sheriff Burke ; Lawrence Hecht as Neil Prescott ( Sidney 's father ) ; and C.W. Morgan as Hank Loomis ( Billy 's father ) . Liev Schreiber appeared in a minor role as Cotton Weary , the framed killer of Sidney 's mother and Linda Blair made a brief cameo as a TV reporter outside the school . Henry Winkler appeared as Principal Himbry , an aggressive school principal . He remained uncredited so as to not draw attention away from the young main cast . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography for Scream took place over eight weeks between April 15 and June 8 , 1996 , on a budget of $ 15 million . The Weinsteins wanted to film in Vancouver as it was estimated that they could save $ 1 million in costs compared to shooting in the United States . Craven was adamant about filming in the United States , and making a film that looked " truly American " . The argument over where to film almost led to Craven being removed from the project , but the Weinsteins eventually agreed to keep the production in America . Location scouts looked at North Carolina as a possibility , but found that sites that seemed appropriate for the film 's requirements would have required extensive building , repairs , or modification , which would have inflated costs . 
 Attention was next turned towards California ; scouts discovered Sonoma County and the cities of Santa Rosa , Healdsburg , and the nearby Tomales Bay . The house of Barrymore 's character is situated southeast of Santa Rosa on Sonoma Mountain Road , directly facing the house used in the horror film Cujo ( 1983 ) . The home of Sidney Prescott is located near Calistoga , north of Santa Rosa . Tatum 's home is situated on McDonald Avenue in Santa Rosa , next to the houses used in Pollyanna ( 1960 ) and Shadow of a Doubt ( 1943 ) . The home of Lillard 's character , which is the location for the entire third act , is a house on Tomales Road east of Tomales Bay that had only recently become available after the death of its owners . The Woodsboro town square , including the fountain where many of the cast sit in an early scene , is represented by the Healdsburg town square . For the Woodsboro high school , Craven desired a building that looked " American " , and the producers approached Santa Rosa High School . The school board insisted on seeing the script and immediately objected to the violence against teenage children and the cynical , dark dialogue , including that of the fictional school principal . Local newspapers criticized the project , and irate parents objected to such a film taking place at their children 's school . Comparisons were made between film violence and the kidnap and murder of Polly Klaas three years prior , which had left the area sensitized toward violence . The producers received support from the school 's students and some local residents , who recognized that economic benefits would be generated by the film 's presence . Others argued for the film 's First Amendment rights . The dispute resulted in a three @-@ hour debate scheduled for April 16 , one day after filming was to begin . Unwilling to be delayed , Craven began filming as scheduled on the 15th . He started with the opening scene of the film , which features Barrymore ; the scene took five days to complete . The result of the Santa Rosa debate was that permission would be denied . The production was forced to find another location for the school , and ended up filming at the Sonoma Community Center , southeast of Santa Rosa . 
 The progress of filming was criticized early on . Bob Weinstein disliked the Ghostface mask , believing it was not " scary " . Upon reviewing the dailies footage of the opening scene , the studio was concerned that the film was progressing in an unwanted direction . They considered replacing Craven . To assuage their concerns , Craven and editor Patrick Lussier , developed a rough , workprint version of the opening 13 minutes of the film to demonstrate how the completed film might turn out . After viewing the new footage , the studio was content to let Craven continue as director . Weinstein , having seen the mask in action , was satisfied that it could be scary . The third and final act of the film , over forty minutes long , is set at a house party where Ghostface strikes . It was shot at a vacant property in Tomales over 21 nights . The scene , labelled " Scene 118 " , was considered the most difficult to shoot as it took place entirely in one location yet featured the individual stories and deaths of multiple characters . Actors spent weeks undertaking intense emotional and physical scenes while coated in fake blood and wounds . As the scene was set during the evening , production had no choice but to halt at dawn . 
 Director of photography Mark Irwin was fired during filming of Scream 's finale , a week before principal photography was to be completed . Upon review of the dailies , Craven found the footage was out of focus and unusable . Irwin was initially ordered to fire his camera crew . He retorted that if his crew were to be fired , they would also have to fire him . The producers fired him and replaced him with Peter Deming , who finished the film . 
 = = = Special effects and design = = = 
 To produce the many grisly effects for the film , the producers recruited KNB Effects team Howard Berger , Robert Kurtzman , and Gregory Nicotero . One of their first tasks was the production of a mask for the film 's killer . In his script , Williamson had only described the antagonist as a " masked killer " , which gave Craven no specific information on what type of mask to use or how to conceal the body . While location scouting , Maddalena discovered the Ghostface mask hanging from a post inside the house previously used for the film Shadow of a Doubt . Craven wanted to use it , but the mask design was owned by Fun World , a costume company . He was told to create one that the production could own . KNB developed multiple design sketches varying from deformed faces to monstrous visages riddled with fangs . Craven found nothing like the Ghostface design , so he had KNB develop a mask that was based on it , with enough differences to avoid any claim of copyright . The team developed several molds based on the Ghostface design , but Craven found none were as suitable as the mask he wanted to use . Desperate to use the design , Craven finally convinced the studio to approach Fun World and gained permission to use the mask . While negotiations were in progress , he had KNB make a mask that was very similar to the original mask , but was appropriate for use in filming . The mask they produced , made of a thin foam , was used in two scenes of the film : the opening scene with Barrymore 's character and the murder of Principal Himbry . Craven disliked the mask due to its slight differences from the original , and thus used the Fun World design for the rest of filming . 
 KNB Effects created over 50 gallons of fake blood , normally composed of corn syrup and food dye , to create the special effect of severe wounds . For the penetrating effect of knives , the production used collapsible blades to prevent injury . An umbrella with a retractable tip is used as a stabbing weapon in the finale . Ulrich wore a protective vest beneath his shirt to help prevent harm while a stuntwoman attacked him with it . The second thrust missed the vest and stabbed Ulrich on his chest , impacting a wound from an open heart surgery operation . Ulrich 's genuine pain was captured on film and used in the release version of Scream . 
 Two of the most complex special effects in the film were the corpses of Barrymore 's and Walls ' characters , Casey Becker and Steve Orth . Their deaths involved the character being gutted from ribcage to pelvis , essentially hollowing out the torso of internal organs , with the guts " rolling " from the wound . To allow Walls to continue to move and feign death while displaying the wound , KNB designed a chair with no back . The actor would kneel behind it while his upper body , head , and arms were positioned within the chair 's seating area . An anatomical model representing the character 's torso and legs was positioned in the chair and disguised so that the actor 's upper body and the model appeared to be one piece . The fake abdomen was filled with rubber , latex , and gelatin pieces smeared in fake blood — the " internal organs " — which could then fall free . The other effect involved Barrymore 's character being gutted and hung by the neck from a tree . The team utilized a similar approach , but replicated Barrymore 's entire body , as it would be impossible to conceal her real body and display the special effect of her character having been gutted . 
 = = = Post production = = = 
 After filming was completed in June 1996 , Craven spent two months editing the final product . He encountered repeated conflicts with the Motion Picture Association of America film rating system ( MPAA ) concerning the content of scenes . He was forced to tone down or obscure the more intense scenes and overall violence to avoid an NC @-@ 17 rating , which is considered " box office suicide " — cinemas and retail chains often refused to stock NC @-@ 17 titles . Though Dimension had previously released NC @-@ 17 @-@ rated films , the rating made those films difficult to market and attract an audience . Dimension was desperate for a less @-@ restrictive R rating , but the producers felt the demanded cuts would remove key elements from the film and reduce its quality . The opening scene featuring Barrymore was one of the most difficult parts to process through the MPAA , who required cuts based on its " intensity " . Craven lied to the MPAA , claiming he had only one take of the scene and could not replace it with something less intense ; the MPAA allowed the scene . 
 Craven sent eight different cuts of the film to deal with complaints . Problematic scenes included the gutting death of Steve Orth ( Walls ) , where he was required to remove any movement of the character 's internal organs ; the throat @-@ cutting of Kenny , where he had to trim the end of the scene , as the MPAA felt the actor 's pained expression was too " disturbing " ; and they had to shorten the length of time spent viewing the crushed head of Tatum Riley . The MPAA still held issue with a scene from the finale , where the killers ( Ulrich and Lillard ) stab each other , creating large amounts of visible blood . The MPAA required that the blood could not be seen in motion — falling to the floor from the body . It seemed unlikely that the film would be able to achieve an R rating without further significant cuts . With the film 's release date drawing closer , Bob Weinstein intervened and personally contacted the MPAA . He believed they misunderstood the film and to which genre Scream really belonged , and were focusing too much on the horror elements . Weinstein explained that although he agreed with their assessment that the film was " intense " , the film also had comedic elements and satire ; it was not just a horror film glorifying violence . The MPAA reviewed their decision ; shortly thereafter the film was granted an R rating . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The Scream score was provided by fledgling composer Marco Beltrami , his first time scoring a feature film . Craven 's assistant Julie <unk> had requested input on composers who were " new " , " fresh " , and " wonderful " , and was given Beltrami 's name by several people . Beltrami was contacted for samples of his work . Craven , impressed by what he heard , requested Beltrami come to the set to view the opening thirteen minutes of the film containing the introduction and the death of Barrymore 's character . Beltrami was tasked with scoring a piece of music for this scene , which would be reviewed by the producers and the Weinstein brothers . Beltrami was hired to score the entire film on the basis of this sample . Beltrami had no prior experience scoring a work of horror . Craven and editor Patrick Lussier advised him on how to deliver music that would raise the tension and how to use stings to punctuate the more intense moments . Craven wanted the music to intentionally raise tension during scenes where audience expectations were already raised by their experience of previous horror films . The volume would be raised to indicate that the killer is hiding behind a door , but nothing would be present upon its opening . 
 Beltrami decided to intentionally disregard conventional horror score styles . He approached the film as a western , taking influence from Ennio Morricone , a prolific composer for many westerns . When scoring a theme for the character of Dewey ( Arquette ) , Beltrami approached him as a " quirky " wild west sheriff , using a Morricone @-@ style guitar accompaniment . Sidney Prescott 's theme , titled " Sidney 's Lament " , features a female choral arrangement expressing " sorrow " concerning the character 's situation . Beltrami states that the voice " spoke " for the character , " lamenting " the loss of her mother . Christian Clemmensen of Filmtracks called the " haunting " vocals of the track the " voice of the franchise " . The song was used throughout the film 's sequels . 
 = = Release = = 
 Scream held its premiere on December 18 , 1996 at the AMC Avco theater in Westwood , Los Angeles , California . Bob Weinstein ordered that the film be released on December 20 , 1996 , a date others were critical of as it was the Christmas period where seasonal and family films were more prevalent . Weinstein argued this fact was in the film 's favor as it meant that horror fans and teenagers had nothing interesting to watch during the December period . When Scream 's first weekend takings amounted to only $ 6 million , it was considered that this release date gamble had failed , but the following week , takings did not drop but increased and continued to increase in the following weeks leading to a total U.S. gross of over $ 100 million and high critical praise . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film opened in 1 @,@ 413 theaters , taking $ 6 @,@ 354 @,@ 586 in its opening weekend , opening in second against Beavis and Butt @-@ head Do America , and almost $ 87 million in its initial release . It was re @-@ released to theatres on April 11 , 1997 , and accrued a further $ 16 @.@ 2 million , for a total domestic gross of $ 103 @,@ 046 @,@ 663 , and a worldwide lifetime gross of $ 173 @,@ 046 @,@ 663 . Scream remains the most successful of the Scream film series , receiving a largely positive critical reception . Scream 2 generated a worldwide gross of $ 172 @,@ 363 @,@ 301 , less than $ 1 million below that of the first film and $ 11 million more than Scream 3 . As of 2013 , Scream is currently the <unk> highest grossing movie worldwide . In the United States , without adjusting for inflation , the film is the twentieth highest @-@ grossing horror film , and remains the highest @-@ grossing slasher genre film , directly followed by Scream 2 and Scream 3 . 
 Despite competition from other box office fare such as Tom Cruise 's Jerry Maguire and Tim Burton 's Mars Attacks ! , its release during the Christmas season , and Variety labeling it " D.O.A. " before it was even released , Scream became the fifteenth highest @-@ grossing film of 1996 , well placed amongst big @-@ budget blockbusters released that year such as Independence Day and Mission : Impossible . It was shown in cinemas for nearly eight months after its release . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The film holds a 79 % approval rating on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes based on 66 reviews . On review @-@ aggregate site Metacritic , the film holds a score of 65 out of 100 based on 25 reviews , indicating " generally favorable " reviews . Peter Stack of the San Francisco Chronicle appreciated the shift from the teen slasher films of the 1980s and their " endless series of laborious , half @-@ baked sequels . " Kevin Thomas of The Los Angeles Times called Scream " a bravura , provocative sendup of horror pictures " and complimented the film for being " scary and gruesome " while avoiding a sense of " morbidity " . Empire 's Adam Smith called it " Clever , quick and bloody funny . " Williamson 's script was praised as containing a " fiendishly clever , complicated plot " which " deftly mixes irony , self @-@ reference and wry social commentary with chills and blood spills . " Time Out London lauded the film 's intelligence and scares , while praising the casting , saying " at last , a horror movie to shout about ! " Film4 cited Craven 's own Wes Craven 's New Nightmare ( 1994 ) and its cast of self @-@ aware characters as inspiration for Scream , but declared that while New Nightmare was a " noble failure – pretty smart , but crucially not very scary " that Scream was " not merely clever ... it is , from its breathtaking opening sequence ( with Barrymore as the woman in peril ) onwards , simply terrifying . " 
 Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film a positive review of 3 out of 4 stars , appreciating " the in @-@ jokes and the self @-@ aware characters " , but was confused over whether the level of violence was " defused by the ironic way the film uses it and comments on it . " The New York Times ' Janet Maslin was not as appreciative , saying " not much of ' Scream ' is that gruesome " . She wrote that Craven " wants things both ways , capitalizing on lurid material while undermining it with mocking humor . Not even horror fans who can answer all this film 's knowing trivia questions may be fully comfortable with such an exploitative mix . " Despite being critical of the film itself , calling it " one experiment that needed more lab time " , Variety complimented the " strong " ensemble cast , singling out the performances of Campbell and Ulrich as " charismatic " . The BBC claimed that the film had promise , saying " It appeared to be clever , dangerous , witty , and fresh " but went on to label it as derivative of the films it satirized : " Scream runs out of humour , and in turn robs itself of the chance to get the audience to take the thrills and gut @-@ spills it offers seriously . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Scream received several awards and award nominations following its release , including the Saturn Award for Best Actress for Campbell , Best Writing for Kevin Williamson , and Best Horror Film ; it received Saturn nominations for Best Director for Wes Craven and Best Supporting Actor for Ulrich and Barrymore . Craven was awarded the Grand Prize at the <unk> Film Festival . The film was awarded the 1997 Best Movie by the MTV Movie Awards , while Campbell received a nomination for Best Female Performance . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Scream was released in the United States on AC3 Laserdisc ( uncut ) on July 2 , 1997 , VHS on December 2 , 1997 , and on DVD on December 3 , 1997 . A DTS Laserdisc ( uncut ) was released on August 26 , 1998 followed by a Collector 's Edition DVD of the film on December 8 , 1998 , containing the film , the theatrical trailer , cast interviews , a director 's commentary , and behind the scenes information . These releases were all undertaken by Buena Vista Home Entertainment . Following the release of Scream 3 , Scream and its first two sequels were collected in " The Ultimate Scream Collection " by Dimension Films on September 26 , 2000 , a boxset containing the three films and a bonus disc containing " Behind the Scream " , a 30 minute documentary about the production of the three films , and additional material , including <unk> and outtakes . 
 Scream was also released on Laserdisc in France , Hong Kong , Japan , and the United Kingdom in 1997 ; Germany and a Japanese Special Edition in 1998 . 
 Scream remained unreleased on DVD in some foreign territories , including Europe , until 2001 . The Japanese DVD released in 1998 contained both the R @-@ rated version of the film , plus the original " Director 's Cut " , which restored the gore / violence removed by the MPAA . Scream was released in Europe with Scream 2 and Scream 3 on February 26 by Buena Vista Home Entertainment . Each package contained additional content found in the Collector 's Edition version of the US release , including deleted scenes , outtakes , theatrical trailers , music videos , and crew commentary . The three films were also sold as a collection called the " Scream Trilogy " , released on February 26 , 2001 . 
 On March 29 , 2011 , two weeks prior to the release of Scream 4 , Scream was released in US territories on Blu @-@ ray by Lionsgate Home Entertainment . The Blu @-@ rays present the films in 1080p high definition . The releases contain all the additional materials found on the Collector 's Edition DVD , including outtakes and deleted scenes . 
 = = Albums = = 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 The Scream original soundtrack was released on December 17 , 1996 , by TVT Records . The soundtrack features 11 songs — most of which appeared in various scenes in the film — plus a piece from the film 's score , " Trouble In Woodsboro " / " Sidney 's Lament " , by Beltrami . The Alice Cooper version of " School 's Out " appeared in the film following the closure of Woodsboro high school , but it was replaced with a cover version of the song by The Last Hard Men on the album . An acoustic cover of Blue Öyster Cult 's " Don 't Fear the Reaper " , performed by Gus Black , plays softly in the background while Sidney and Billy discuss their relationship . Analyst Jeff Smith describes the musical choice as : 
 An ironic comment on the brutality we have just seen in the opening sequence . More importantly , however , the allusion to the Blue Öyster Cult classic recasts the song 's title by <unk> its meaning . While the title itself invokes the Reaper as a popular symbol for death , the film presents us with an actual person , who not only dresses as the Grim Reaper but also unleashes homicidal vengeance on the other characters of the film . The irony here , of course , is that Billy himself proves to be one of the film 's dual slashers and is , in fact , the " Reaper " to be feared . 
 The song " Red Right Hand " by Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds , heard in the first film , is also used in Scream 2 and Scream 3 . Nick Cave performs a version of the track written specifically for Scream 3 in that film . An alternate version of the music video " Drop Dead Gorgeous " by Republica , featuring clips from the film , was shown on music networks such as MTV . Although the song can be heard in the film , it is not included on the soundtrack album . The song was also used in one of the film 's television commercials . The soundtrack album was not considered a success , failing to chart on the Billboard 200 . AllMusic awarded the album 3 stars out of 5 . 
 = = = Score = = = 
 The Scream score by Marco Beltrami was released by Varèse Sarabande on July 14 , 1998 , on a CD titled " Scream / Scream 2 " , which also contained tracks from the score of Scream 2 . The release consisted of only six tracks — " Sidney 's Lament " , " Altered Ego " , " A Cruel World " , " Trouble in Woodsboro " , " Chasing Sidney " , and " NC @-@ 17 " — with a runtime of only 12 minutes , compared to over an hour of music made for the film and the more common 30 – 45 minutes of music found in other original scores . Some reviewers felt the restricted runtime was a result of the high cost of releasing a composer 's music commercially , combined with Varèse Sarabande 's unwillingness to pay . 
 The score to Scream received generally positive reviews , with Mikael Carlsson labeling it as " some of the most intriguing horror scores composed in years " . Filmtracks.com claimed the scores had " cult status " , awarding it 3 stars out of 5 . AllMusic said that the score " perfectly captured the post @-@ modern , hip scare @-@ ride of the Scream movies " , also giving it 3 stars out of 5 . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 Williamson had attached five @-@ page proposals for potential sequels to Scream when he originally sold the script , hoping to entice prospective buyers into buying a film and a franchise . When Dimension Films bought the script , they secured Williamson for two future Scream films , should the original prove successful . After a highly positive test screening of Scream at which executives from Dimension Films and Miramax were present , Craven was signed to direct the two future sequels . After the film 's box office and critical success , the first sequel was greenlit and sent into production while Scream was still in theaters . The second picture was given an increased budget . The surviving cast — Campbell , Cox , Arquette , Kennedy , and Schreiber — all returned , as well as much of the original crew , including editor Patrick Lussier and composer Marco Beltrami . A third film followed shortly after , again with the crew and surviving cast returning to create what was , at the time , the concluding film in the Scream trilogy . The three original films , released in a five @-@ year period , followed the story of Sidney Prescott 's encounters with a succession of killers adopting the Ghostface disguise . The films also analyze her relationship with her deceased mother , who inadvertently initiates the events depicted in the films . Scream 2 fared as well financially and critically as its predecessor , while Scream 3 fared significantly worse on both counts , with critics deriding the film as having become what the original had so deftly satirized . 
 Fifteen years after the release of Scream and eleven years after the release of the last film in the series , The Weinstein Company released a new sequel , Scream 4 , on April 15 , 2011 . Campbell , Cox and Arquette all return to their roles , and Craven , Williamson , and Beltrami return to the production side . The Weinstein Company stated that the success of Scream 4 could lead to potential sequels and a new Scream trilogy , with Campbell , Arquette , Craven , and Williamson all having been contracted or expressed interest in appearing in future installments . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 In the years following the release of Scream , the film has been accused of inspiring copycat crimes and inducing violent acts . 
 In January 1998 , 16 @-@ year @-@ old Mario Padilla and his 14 @-@ year @-@ old cousin , Samuel Ramirez stabbed Mario 's mother , Gina Castillo , 45 times , killing her . The case became known as the " Scream murder " and fell under intense media scrutiny after the boys claimed they were inspired by Scream and Scream 2 . The pair confessed to needing the money acquired from Gina 's murder to fund a killing spree , purchase two Ghostface costumes , and a voice @-@ changer used by the character in the film . During their trial , psychologist Madeline Levine who studied the effect of violence on children , stated , " There were a whole bunch of reasons why they acted out that way . But did the movie provide a blueprint ? Absolutely . " The case was expected to highlight the effect of violent films on teenagers . However , presiding judge John <unk> ordered that evidence pertaining to Scream be barred and that the case not be referred to as the " Scream murder " , refusing media access to the courtroom , intending that the case was tried as murder and nothing else . 
 On January 17 , 1999 , 13 @-@ year @-@ old Ashley Murray was stabbed multiple times in the head and back before being left for dead by his then @-@ friends Daniel Gill , 14 , and Robert Fuller , 15 . He was later found and saved by an elderly man walking his dog . The pair were dubbed the " Scream attackers " after it emerged that they had watched Scream shortly before the attack and drawings of the Ghostface mask were found among their possessions . Their actions were additionally blamed on physical abuse , drugs and exposure to black magic in their home life . Murray , who later testified against the pair , stated that he believed the film may have influenced the pair to attack him . 
 On May 4 , 1999 , following the Columbine High School massacre and increasing news media reports on the effects on violent films , games , and other media on society , the United States Senate Commerce committee held a hearing about Hollywood 's marketing of films to youths . The committee focused specifically on horror films . The opening scene of Scream featuring the murder of Barrymore 's character was shown to the committee as an example of negative media which may be viewed by children . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Prior to Scream 's release the popularity of the horror genre had been considered to be in decline with many films released straight to video while those released in cinemas were sequels to popular and established franchises , such as Halloween , Friday the 13th , A Nightmare on Elm Street , and The Texas Chainsaw Massacre , capable of drawing audiences despite decreasing budgets and diminishing critical reception . The glut of sequels contributed to audience familiarity with the icons of the late 1970s and early 1980s such as Freddy Krueger and Jason Voorhees that they were considered to have lost their ability to instill scares or interest in their audience . Scream , utilizing a popular and attractive cast and an innovative script that mocked and embraced the conventions of horror which had become considered clichéd , was credited with changing the status of the genre , becoming both a financial and critical success , and launching the careers of many of its actors . Such was the film 's impact that some commentators considered its legacy as the creation of a distinct era of " post @-@ Scream " horror films . Following its release many studios , including Scream 's own Dimension Films , rushed to capitalize on its unexpected success with the release of films such as I Know What You Did Last Summer ( 1997 ) and Urban Legend ( 1998 ) as well as sequels to popular , but diminishing , franchises such as Halloween H20 and Bride of Chucky . 
 In June 2001 , as part of the American Film Institute ' ' s ( AFI ) AFI 100 Years ... series , Scream became one of the 400 nominees in the 100 Years ... 100 Thrills category . In 2003 , the character Ghostface was nominated in the category 100 Heroes and Villains . In 2005 , " Do you like scary movies " , as spoken by Roger Jackson , was nominated for AFI 's 100 Years … 100 Movie Quotes , a list of the greatest cinematic quotes . 
 Scream ranks # 32 on Entertainment Weekly 's list of the " 50 Best High School Movies " , and the opening scene featuring the death of Barrymore 's character ranked # 13 on Bravo 's 100 Scariest Movie Moments . In 2008 , Entertainment Weekly dubbed the film a " New Classic " by ranking it # 60 in their list of the " 100 Best Films of the Last 13 years " . In 2008 Empire ranked the film # 482 on their list of " The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time " . 
 = Hannah Montana : The Movie ( soundtrack ) = 
 Hannah Montana : The Movie is the soundtrack for the film of the same name . The film is an adaptation of the popular Disney Channel original series Hannah Montana , which first aired in 2006 . In the television series and film , American singer – songwriter and actress Miley Cyrus portrays Miley Stewart , a girl with a secret double life as the popstar Hannah Montana . Cyrus performs twelve of the songs on the album , seven of which are credited to Hannah Montana . American recording artists Billy Ray Cyrus , Taylor Swift , and Rascal Flatts and English recording artist Steve Rushton also have songs on the soundtrack . 
 This album was released on March 23 , 2009 by Walt Disney Records . All of the songs in the album were approved by the film 's director Peter Chelsom . He felt the film needed music that was tightly woven into the film 's plot and the character 's background . Several producers worked on the album , mainly John Shanks and Matthew Gerrard . Shanks was more involved with Cyrus than the other artists . Meanwhile , Gerrard produced Cyrus ' songs as Montana ; he previously wrote her hit song " The Best of Both Worlds " ( 2006 ) . A remix of " The Best of Both Worlds " is featured as the album 's closing track . Musically , the album merges heavy influences from pop and country . Songwriters include Cyrus , Gerrard and Swift , among others . The songs ' lyrics primarily discuss the film 's themes of fame , family , and love . 
 Contemporary critics were pleased with the album . Cyrus was praised for being natural and reflected while performing as herself . They also complimented Swift 's performance and debated if she or Cyrus were more dominant . The soundtrack received a nomination for a 2009 American Music Award for Favorite Soundtrack , but lost to the Twilight soundtrack . Hannah Montana : The Movie reached the top ten in many nations , and topped charts in countries such as Austria , Canada , and New Zealand . In the United States , it peaked at number one on the Billboard 200 and the Billboard Top Country Albums chart . By May 2009 , the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified the album platinum . 
 The lead single released from the album was " The Climb " . It became Cyrus ' best @-@ charting single in the United States at the time and topped Billboard 's Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks . Cyrus ' " Hoedown Throwdown " was released in March 10 , 2009 and reached the top ten on the Irish Singles Chart . The album was promoted through exclusive releases to Radio Disney and live performances at numerous venues . Cyrus performed four songs from the album on her first worldwide concert tour , the Wonder World Tour . 
 = = Writing and development = = 
 Most of the songs on the soundtrack were offered to Peter Chelsom , the film 's director , for inclusion on the film . Producer Alfred Gough said , " Peter Chelsom describes the Stewart family [ Cyrus ' character 's family in the film ] as a bilingual family whose second language is music , and that 's very true in this movie . " Chelsom says the film 's numerous songs are tightly woven into the fabric of the story and the characters , which is why he believes the film will feel like a musical without being one . " We continuously dance very close to the convention of a musical but are more integrated . Songs are going to sit within the film , not apart from the film . At times , you won 't notice the music is happening ; it 'll just move the story along . " 
 In regards to Cyrus ' songs , Chelsom said , " We realized this was an opportunity to move forward with the music , to update it and make it more sophisticated , to move with Miley ’ s age . I ’ ve never had a better musical experience on any film . " Cyrus noted that most of the songs included on the soundtrack were inspired by the return of Cyrus ' character , Miley Stewart / Hannah Montana , to her Nashville roots . She explained , " The soundtrack is all about Nashville , and that 's where I 'm from , that 's my roots . I think that 's a lot of the reason I am who I am . " Cyrus co @-@ wrote " Don 't Walk Away " because it was to be included on her own studio album Breakout ( 2008 ) . " Hoedown Throwdown " , a song in which Cyrus calls dance steps , took much time to write . It became an ongoing collaboration between Chelsom , Cyrus , choreographer Jamal Sims , and the song 's writers , Adam Anders and Nikki <unk> . 
 " Dream " is a cover of the Diana DeGarmo song " Dream , Dream , Dream " from DeGarmo 's debut album , Blue Skies . Jessi Alexander said she was inspired to write " The Climb " while driving to the home of her songwriting partner , Jon Mabe . Once she arrived , they decided to write a song about overcoming obstacles . Alexander referred to the process as a form of " therapy " . It had initially been passed over by several artists until Chelsom chose it and offered it to Cyrus . Under the name Hannah Montana , Cyrus performs the song " Let 's Do This " , which was originally written and recorded by American country singer Adam <unk> . The last track is a remixed version of Cyrus ' hit " The Best of Both Worlds " ( 2006 ) . The song is used as the theme song of the Disney Channel television show Hannah Montana , the basis of the film , and was originally released on the television series ' first soundtrack . 
 Several other artists appear on the soundtrack . Billy Ray Cyrus ' song on the album , " Back to Tennessee " , is the title track of his eleventh studio album . Written by Cyrus , Tamara Dunn and Matthew Wilder , the song reflects the desire of both Cyrus and his character in the film , Robbie Ray Stewart , to return to their roots . Disney artist Steve Rushton sings " Everything I Want " and " Game Over " . Rascal Flatts perform acoustic versions of previous efforts originally released on Feels Like Today ( 2004 ) and Me and My Gang ( 2006 ) . When approached about participating in the soundtrack , Taylor Swift sent her ballad " Crazier " because it " was perfect to fall in love to " . Swift also shares a writing credit with Martin Johnson of Boys Like Girls on the opening track " You 'll Always Find Your Way Back Home " . 
 = = Music structure and lyrics = = 
 Musically , the album is country heavy , but merges adult contemporary music , country pop , country rock , and teen pop styles . According to About.com , each of Cyrus ' songs incorporate her " husky twang " . The up @-@ tempo songs are mainly performed by Montana and ballads are kept at a minimum . Songs like " You 'll Always Find Your Way Back Home " , " Let 's Get Crazy " , and " Spotlight " are the most true to pop . " Let 's Get Crazy " carries a groove and creates a beat from paparazzi flashbulbs . Cyrus ' songs are more mid @-@ tempo . " Hoedown Throwdown " is an instructional dance song that mixes the album 's country style with R & B and hip @-@ hop . " The Climb " has solid , clear vocals and is a standard @-@ issue power ballad that places piano solos between chiming electric guitars . " Crazier " is a waltzing ballad that has Swift in relaxed soprano vocals . 
 Lyrically , the album explores a variety of concepts . With the exception of " You 'll Always Find Your Way Back Home " , which speaks about staying grounded and relying on family , Montana 's songs describe the " glitzy @-@ world " and privileges of a celebrity . " Let 's Get Crazy " centers on having fun at a party . " The Good Life " is a " sugar @-@ coated celebration of Gucci handbags and Prada shoes " . " The Best of Both Worlds " explicitly alludes to Cyrus ' character 's double life as Montana : regular adolescent that moved from Nashville , Tennessee to Malibu , California by day and pop star by night . In the song , Montana talks about the privileges and advantages that are faced in leading in two lives with references to Orlando Bloom , concerts , friendship and film premieres . The songs Cyrus performs as herself are more reflective , personal , and sentimental . " Hoedown Throwdown " is a tribute to down @-@ home fun . " The Climb " describes life as a difficult but rewarding journey . " Butterfly Fly Away " is a father @-@ daughter duet by Miley and Billy Ray Cyrus about the coming of age . In " Back to Tennessee " Billy Ray Cyrus laments leaving Tennessee . Country group Rascal Flatts provide an acoustic version of " Backwards " and " Bless the Broken Road " with Williamson County Youth Orchestra . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " The Climb " was released as the lead single from the album on March 5 , 2009 through digital distribution . The song was critically appreciated for its lyrical content and Cyrus ' strong vocals . It achieved commercial success and reached the top ten on charts in the United States , Australia , Canada , and Norway , as well as reaching the top twenty in many other countries . In the United States , the song topped Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks for fifteen consecutive weeks . 
 " Hoedown Throwdown " was released on March 10 , 2009 . The song managed to make commercial success by reaching the top ten of the Irish Singles Chart and top twenty in numerous regions . After the release of the soundtrack , Disney still kept sending promotional songs . 
 " Crazier " was premiered on Radio Disney and Disney Channel , the latter promoting the home release of the film . The song charting at number seventeen on the Billboard Hot 100 , sixty @-@ four in the Australian Singles Chart , sixty @-@ seven in the Canadian Hot 100 , and one @-@ hundred on the UK Singles Chart . 
 Other charted songs 
 " You 'll Always Find Your Way Back Home " peaked at number seventy @-@ six on the Canadian Hot and at number eighty @-@ one in the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 On October 10 , 2008 , Cyrus performed " Let 's Get Crazy " , " Let 's Do This " , and the 2009 Movie Mix of " The Best of Both Worlds " as Montana for the taping of third season of Hannah Montana at the Verizon Wireless Amphitheatre in Irvine California . On January 19 , 2009 , Cyrus premiered " The Climb " at the Kids ' Inaugural : " We Are the Future " event in celebration of Barack Obama 's inauguration . Cyrus and her father performed in London in an Apple Store ; the taped performance was sold exclusively by the United Kingdom iTunes Store as an extended play titled iTunes : Live from London . Cyrus has performed songs from the album on the Academy of Country Music , The Tonight Show with Jay Leno , American Idol , Good Morning America , Live with Regis and Kelly , the AOL Sessions , the twentieth annual A Time for Heroes Celebrity Carnival , The Today Show , and the first D23 Expo . 
 Promotional songs from Hannah Montana : The Movie were premiered on Radio Disney and Disney Channel . " Let 's Do This " was first to premiere on Radio Disney and Disney Channel on December 13 , 2008 , the video being taken from the taping in Irvine . Due to digital downloads , the song peaked at number twenty @-@ three on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles Chart ( Hot 100 – 123 ) ; the song charted in the Hot Canadian Digital Singles at number sixty @-@ nine , but failed to reach the Canadian Hot 100 . " Let 's Get Crazy " was then premiered on January 19 , 2009 . The music video is an excerpt from Hannah Montana : The Movie in which Miley Stewart , portrayed by Cyrus , is forced to enter Lilly Truscott 's , portrayed by Emily Osment , Sweet Sixteen as Montana . The song peaked at number fifty @-@ seven in the Billboard Hot 100 and twenty @-@ six in the Canadian Hot 100 , therefore becoming Montana 's highest chart effort in Canada . " Back to Tennessee " was premiered only on Disney Channel with a video that interspersed scenes from the film . The song peaked at number forty @-@ seven on Hot Country Songs . 
 Radio Disney premiered the entire soundtrack on March 21 , 2009 , with a rebroadcast the next day . The Miley Sessions , a series of promotional music videos that featured Cyrus singing in a recording studio were released to Disney.com in March 2009 . The videos feature Cyrus in a recording studio singing . Disney Channel aired a series of commercial segments entitled Hannah Montana : The Movie Playback , in which Cyrus is in the same setting describing the music of the album . Cyrus also embarked for a five city acoustic radio promo tour that reached over two @-@ hundred @-@ fifty for six days to promote the album . In addition , Cyrus performed four songs from the album on her first worldwide concert tour , the Wonder World Tour . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The album received generally positive reviews from critics . Warren Truitt of About.com described the album as Cyrus ' attempt to gradually capture a more mature audience by sharing the album with artists like the Rascal Flatts and Swift . Truitt also made musical comparisons to Shania Twain in " Dream " , Kelly Clarkson in " Don 't Walk Away " , Avril Lavigne in " The Good Life " , and Gwen Stefani in " Spotlight " and " Let 's Get Crazy " . Heather Phares of Allmusic noted the presence of many drastically different genres makes the album " a little weird " . She stated that Cyrus ' songs which were performed as herself were " the best songs " , and also compared Cyrus to Twain . Phares also noted that Swift 's " Crazier " was " the best song on Hannah Montana : The Movie " . Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly stated , " the distance between tween and twang isn 't actually all that far ; think of this [ ... ] as a sort of country @-@ lite starter kit for her legion of young Disney @-@ fed fans " . In the end , she said Hannah Montana : The Movie was " the Miley show — whether it broadcasts from Nashville or Hollywood " , despite appearances by other artists . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Hannah Montana : The Movie debuted on the Billboard 200 at number two with 139 @,@ 000 copies sold on the issue date April 11 , 2009 . After four weeks of ascending and descending the chart , the album reached the number one position , becoming the first soundtrack of the year to top the Billboard 200 . In its fourth week the album sold 133 @,@ 000 copies , a decline of 32 percent compared to previous week 's haul of 196 @,@ 000 . It also topped Billboard Top Country Albums for nine non @-@ consecutive weeks and Top Soundtracks for nineteen non @-@ consecutive weeks . After two months , the album became certified platinum for shipments of one million copies by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . The album has sold 2 @,@ 085 @,@ 000 copies in the US as of April 2014 and 3 million worldwide . In Canada , the album debuted at number two , and peaked at number one for two consecutive weeks . 
 Hannah Montana : The Movie made its debut in the New Zealand RIANZ Album Chart at number eleven and eventually topped the chart for a week . It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for the shipment of 15 @,@ 000 copies . In Australia , the soundtrack peaked at number six and was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , selling more than 70 @,@ 000 copies . In Spain , the album debuted at number eighteen and peaked at the top spot for four weeks . The album was later certified platinum by the Productores de Música de España for the shipment of 80 @,@ 000 copies . In Austria , the soundtrack peaked at number one for one week and was eventually certified gold for sales above 10 @,@ 000 . Hannah Montana : The Movie also topped the Portuguese chart and reached the top twenty of charts in Belgium , Denmark , Mexico , Norway , Poland , Sweden , and Switzerland . 
 = = Awards and accolades = = 
 Hannah Montana : The Movie was nominated for " Choice Music : Album Soundtrack " and " Favorite Soundtrack " at the Teen Choice Awards and 2009 American Music Awards but lost to the Twilight soundtrack , respectively . Five of the songs , " Back to Tennessee " , " Butterfly Fly Away " , " Don 't Walk Away " , " Hoedown Throwdown " , and " You 'll Always Find Your Way Back Home " are included on the short list for the Academy Award for Best Original Song at the 82nd Annual Academy Awards . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Karaoke series Disney 's Karaoke Series : Hannah Montana The Movie was released to selected countries . The artwork underwent minor changes , the background are yellow stripes , the Hannah Montana logo was placed at the bottom left corner , and in the top right corner letters spell " Karaoke Series " . It features eight karaoke instrumental versions of tracks from the original soundtrack . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Second Northern War = 
 The Second Northern War ( 1655 – 60 , also First or Little Northern War ) was fought between Sweden and its adversaries the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth ( 1655 – 60 ) , Russia ( 1656 – 58 ) , Brandenburg @-@ Prussia ( 1657 – 60 ) , the Habsburg Monarchy ( 1657 – 60 ) and Denmark – Norway ( 1657 – 58 and 1658 – 60 ) . The Dutch Republic often intervened against Sweden . 
 In 1655 , Charles X Gustav of Sweden invaded and occupied western Poland – Lithuania , the eastern half of which was already occupied by Russia . The rapid Swedish advance became known in Poland as the Swedish Deluge . The Grand Duchy of Lithuania became a Swedish fief , the Polish – Lithuanian regular armies surrendered and the Polish king John II Casimir Vasa fled to the Habsburgs . Frederick William , Elector of Brandenburg and Duke of Prussia initially supported the estates in Royal Prussia , but allied with Sweden in return for receiving the Duchy of Prussia as a Swedish fief . Exploiting the hurt religious feelings of the Roman Catholic population under Protestant occupation and organizing Polish – Lithuanian military leaders in the <unk> Confederation , John II Casimir Vasa managed to regain ground in 1656 . Russia took advantage of the Swedish setback , declared war on Sweden and pushed into Lithuania and Swedish Livonia . 
 Charles X Gustav then granted Frederick William full sovereignty in the Duchy of Prussia in return for military aid , and in the Treaty of Radnot allied himself with the Transylvanian George II Rákóczi who invaded Poland – Lithuania from the southeast . John II Vasa found an ally in Leopold I of Habsburg , whose armies crossed into Poland – Lithuania from the southwest . This triggered Frederick III of Denmark 's invasion of the Swedish mainland in the spring of 1657 , in an attempt to settle old scores from the Torstenson War while Sweden was busy elsewhere . Brandenburg left the alliance with Sweden when granted full sovereignty in the Duchy of Prussia by the Polish king in the treaties of Wehlau and Bromberg . 
 Frederick III 's war on Sweden gave Charles X Gustav a reason to abandon the Polish – Lithuanian deadlock and fight Denmark instead . After marching his army to the west and making a dangerous crossing of the frozen straits in the winter of 1657 / 58 , he surprised the unprepared Frederick III on the Danish isles and forced him into surrender . In the Treaty of Roskilde , Denmark had to abandon all Danish provinces in what is now Southern Sweden . The anti @-@ Swedish allies meanwhile neutralized the Transylvanian army and Polish forces ravaged Swedish Pomerania . 
 In 1658 Charles X Gustav decided that instead of returning to the remaining Swedish strongholds in Poland – Lithuania , he would rather attack Denmark again . This time , Denmark withstood the attack and the anti @-@ Swedish allies pursued Charles X Gustav to Jutland and Swedish Pomerania . Throughout 1659 , Sweden was defending her strongholds in Denmark and on the southern Baltic shore , while little was gained by the allies and a peace was negotiated . When Charles X Gustav died in February 1660 , his successor settled for the Treaty of Oliva with Poland – Lithuania , Habsburg and Brandenburg in April and the Treaty of Copenhagen with Denmark in May . Sweden was to keep most of her gains from Roskilde , the Duchy of Prussia became a sovereign state , and otherwise the parties largely returned to the status quo ante bellum . Sweden had already concluded a truce with Russia in 1658 , which gave way to a final settlement in the Treaty of <unk> in 1661 . 
 = = Terminology = = 
 In English language , German , Russian and Scandinavian historiography , these conflicts were traditionally referred to as First Northern War . The term " Second Northern War " , coined in Polish historiography ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , has lately been increasingly adopted by German and English language historiography . Another ambiguous term referring to the Second Northern War is the Little Northern War , which however might also refer to the 1741 @-@ 43 war . In Poland , the term " The Deluge " is also ambiguous , as it is sometimes used for a broader series of wars against Sweden , Brandenburg , Russia , Transylvania and the Cossacks . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 In 1648 , the Peace of Westphalia had ended the Thirty Years ' War , during which the Swedish Empire emerged as a major European power . In the Torstenson War , a theater of the Thirty Years ' War , Sweden had defeated the former Baltic great power Denmark . Sweden had been at peace with Russia since the Treaty of <unk> had ended the Ingrian War in 1617 . Sweden had remained in a state of war with the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth since the Polish – Swedish War ( 1626 – 29 ) , which was concluded by the repeatedly renewed truce ( Altmark , Stuhmsdorf ) . 
 On the other hand , the Commonwealth , under king John II Casimir Vasa since 1648 , experienced a crisis resulting both from the Cossack Khmelnytsky Uprising in the southeast and from the paralysis of the administration due to the internal quarrels of the nobility , including feuds between the king and the Lithuanian hetman Janusz Radziwiłł and feuds among disagreeing sejmiks who had been able to stall each other 's ambitions with the liberum veto since 1652 . As a consequence , the Commonwealth lacked a sufficient defense . 
 In January 1654 , the anti @-@ Polish alliance of <unk> was concluded between the rebellious Cossack Hetman Bohdan Khmelnytsky and Alexis of Russia , who was in control of a well @-@ equipped army that was undergoing modernization . In 1654 , when Charles X Gustav succeeded his cousin Christina on the Swedish throne , Russian forces were advancing into the unprotected Commonwealth , and by focusing on the northeast these drew close to the Swedish sphere of interest at the Baltic coast . Seeing the great success on the Russian side , Sweden also decided to intervene , among other reasons using the explanation that it was to protect the Protestant population in Poland . Having a close relationships with the Prince of Transylvania , Sweden had intentions to defeat the Catholic Poland . Sweden also drew the rising Cossack Hetmanate to its side that stood in the strong opposition to the Polish government and promised military support if the Cossacks will break with the Russians . Bohdan Khmelnytsky sent an expedition headed by the Kiev colonel to <unk> which soon turned back due to mutiny within its ranks . The leader of Hetmanate did not participate in actions due to poor health conditions . 
 Sweden , at that time an expansionist empire with an army designed to be maintained by the revenues of occupied territory , was conscious that a direct attack on her main adversary Russia could well result in a Dano @-@ Polish – Russian alliance . Also , Sweden was prevented from forming a Swedish – Polish alliance by the refusal of John II Casimir to drop his claims to the Swedish crown and the unwillingness of the Polish – Lithuanian nobility to make the territorial and political concessions an alliance with Sweden would eventually cost , final negotiations in Lübeck during February 1655 ended without a result . Thus , Sweden opted for a preemptive attack on the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth to occupy its yet available territories before the Russians . 
 = = Swedish campaigns in the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth = = 
 Swedish forces entered Poland – Lithuania from Swedish Pomerania in the west , and Livonia in the north . The division on the western flank consisted of 13 @,@ 650 men and 72 artillery pieces commanded by Arvid Wittenberg who entered Poland on 21 July 1655 and another 12 @,@ 700 to 15 @,@ 000 commanded by Charles X Gustav who followed in August , while the division on the northern flank consisted of 7 @,@ 200 men commanded by Magnus de la Gardie who had already seized Dünaburg with them on 12 July . 
 On the western front , Wittenberg was opposed by a Polish levy of 13 @,@ 000 and an additional 1 @,@ 400 peasant infantry . Aware of the military superiority of the well @-@ trained Swedish army , the nobles of Greater Poland surrendered to Wittenberg on 25 July in <unk> after the Battle of <unk> , and then pledged loyalty to the Swedish king . Wittenberg established a garrison in Poznań ( Posen ) . 
 On the northern front , Prince Janusz Radziwiłł signed the Treaty of Kėdainiai with Sweden on 17 August 1655 , placing the Grand Duchy of Lithuania under Swedish protection . Though Radziwiłł had been negotiating with Sweden before , during his dispute with the Polish king , Kėdainiai provided a clause stipulating that the two parts of the Commonwealth , Poland and Lithuania , need not fight each other . Part of the Lithuanian army opposed the treaty however , forming a confederation led by the magnate and Polish @-@ Lithuanian hetman Paweł Jan Sapieha at <unk> . 
 On 24 August , Charles X Gustav joined Wittenberg 's forces . The Polish king John II Casimir left Warsaw the same month to confront the Swedish army in the west , but after some skirmishes with the Swedish vanguard retreated southwards to Kraków . On 8 September Charles X Gustav occupied Warsaw , then turned south to confront the retreating Polish king . The kings met at the Battle of <unk> on 16 September , which like the next encounter at the Battle of <unk> on 3 October was decided for Sweden . John II Casimir was exiled to Silesia while Kraków surrendered to Charles X Gustav on 19 October . 
 On 20 October , a second treaty was ratified at Kėdainiai in the north . The Union of Kėdainiai unified Lithuania with Sweden , with Radziwiłł recognizing Charles X Gustav as Grand Duke of Lithuania . Over the following days , most of the Polish army surrendered to Sweden : on 26 October Koniecpolski surrendered with 5 @,@ 385 men near Kraków , on 28 October Field Crown Hetman Stanisław Lanckoroński and Great Crown Hetman Stanisław " <unk> " Potocki surrendered with 10 @,@ 000 men , and on 31 October the levy of Mazovia surrendered after the Battle of Nowy Dwór . 
 = = Occupation of Poland @-@ Lithuania and the Brandenburgian intervention = = 
 Meanwhile , Russian and Cossack forces had occupied the east of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth as far as Lublin , with only Lwow ( Lviv , Lemberg ) remaining under Polish – Lithuanian control . In late October , Charles X Gustav headed northwards and left Wittenberg in Kraków with a mobile force of 3 @,@ 000 Swedish and 2 @,@ 000 Polish troops , and an additional number scattered in garrisons , to control the southern part of the Swedish @-@ occupied commonwealth . 
 In the north , the Royal Prussian nobles concluded a defensive alliance with the Electorate of Brandenburg on 12 November in the Treaty of <unk> , permitting Brandenburgian garrisons . Danzig ( Gdansk ) , Thorn ( <unk> ) and Elbing ( <unk> ) had not participated in the treaty , with Thorn and Elbing surrendering to Sweden . In the Treaty of Königsberg on 17 January 1656 , Frederick William , Elector of Brandenburg and Duke of Prussia , took the Duchy of Prussia , formerly a Polish fief , as a fief from Charles X Gustav . The Brandenburgian garrisons in Royal Prussia were withdrawn , and when Marienburg ( Malbork ) surrendered in March , Danzig remained the only town not under Swedish control . 
 The rapid Swedish invasion and occupation of the Polish – Lithuanian territories became known in Poland as the " ( Swedish ) deluge . " 
 = = Polish – Lithuanian recovery = = 
 The " deluge " and religious differences between the primarily Protestant Swedes and the primarily Catholic Poles , resulting in cases of maltreatment and murder of Catholic clergy and monks as well as cases of looting of Catholic churches and monasteries , gave rise to some partisan movements in the Swedish @-@ occupied territory . A guerilla force attacked a small Swedish garrison at <unk> in October 1655 and killed Frederick of Hesse , brother @-@ in @-@ law of the Swedish king . The Pauline monastery Jasna Góra in Częstochowa successfully resisted a Swedish siege throughout November 1655 to January 1656 . On 20 November a manifesto was issued in Opole ( Oppeln ) calling for public resistance and the return of John II Casimir , and in December a peasant force took Nowy Sącz . On 29 December , the partisan <unk> Confederation was constituted under participation of Lanckoroński and Potocki , and on 1 January 1656 John II Casimir returned from exile . Later in January , Stefan Czarniecki joined in , and by February most Polish soldiers who were in Swedish service since October 1655 , had switched sides to that of the confederation . 
 Charles X Gustav , with a force of 11 @,@ 000 horse , reacted by pursuing Czarniecki 's force of 2 @,@ 400 men , confronting and defeating him in the Battle of <unk> in February 1656 . Charles X Gustav then intended to take Lwow , but his advance was halted in the Battle of Zamość , when he was nearly encircled by the growing Polish – Lithuanian armies under Sapieha and Czarniecki , and barely escaped on 5 and 6 April breaking through Sapieha 's lines during the Battle of Sandomierz at the cost of his artillery and baggage . A Swedish relief force under Frederick of Baden was destroyed by Czarniecki on 7 April in the Battle of Warka . In the same month , John II Casimir with the Lwów Oath proclaimed Virgin Mary queen of Poland , and promised to lift the burdens inflicted on the peasantry if he regained control . 
 = = Brandenburgian @-@ Swedish alliance and Russia 's war on Sweden = = 
 On 25 June 1656 , Charles X Gustav signed an alliance with Brandenburg : the Treaty of Marienburg granted Greater Poland to Frederick William in return for military aid . While the Brandenburgian elector was free of Swedish vassalage in Greater Poland , he remained a Swedish vassal for the Duchy of Prussia . Brandenburgian garrisons then replaced the Swedish ones in Greater Poland , who went to reinforce Charles X Gustav 's army . On 29 June however , Warsaw was stormed by John II Casimir , who had drawn up to Charles X Gustav with a force of 28 @,@ 500 regulars and a noble levy of 18 @,@ 000 to 20 @,@ 000 . Thereupon , Brandenburg actively participated in the war on the Swedish side , prompting John II Casimir Vasa to state that while his Tartars already had the Swedes for breakfast , he would now take Frederick William into custody , where neither sun nor moon would shine . 
 Already in May 1656 , Alexis of Russia had declared war on Sweden , taking advantage of Charles being bound in Poland , and Livonia , Estonia and Ingria secured only by a Livonian army of 2 @,@ 200 infantry and 400 dragoons , Magnus de la Gardie 's 7 @,@ 000 men in Prussia , and 6 @,@ 933 men dispersed in garrisons along the Eastern Baltic coast . Alexis invaded Livonia in July with 35 @,@ 000 men and took Dünaburg . 
 In late July , Danzig was re @-@ <unk> by a Dutch garrison , and a combined Danish and Dutch fleet broke the naval blockage imposed on Danzig by Charles X Gustav . On 28 – 30 July , a combined Brandenburgian @-@ Swedish army was able to defeat the Polish – Lithuanian army in the Battle of Warsaw , forcing John II Casimir to retreat to Lublin . In August , Alexis ' army took Livonian Kokenhausen ( Koknese ) , laid siege to Riga and Dorpat ( Tartu ) and raided Estonia , Ingria and Kexholm . 
 On 4 October , John II Casimir stormed Łęczyca in Greater Poland before heading for Royal Prussia , and on 8 October , Wincenty Korwin Gosiewski with 12 @,@ 000 to 13 @,@ 000 Lithuanian and Crimean Tartar cavalry overran a Brandenburgian @-@ Swedish force in the Battle of <unk> in Ducal Prussia . Gosiewski then ravaged Ducal Prussia , burning 13 towns and 250 villages , in a campaign that entered folklore because of the high death toll and the high number of captives deported to the Crimea . 
 On 22 October , Gosiewski was defeated by Swedish forces in the Battle of <unk> and turned to Lithuania . Also on 22 October , besieged Dorpat surrendered to Alexis , while the Russian siege of Swedish @-@ held Riga was lifted . John II Casimir meanwhile took Bromberg ( Bydgoszcz ) and Konitz in Royal Prussia , and from 15 November 1656 until February 1657 stayed in Danzig , where a Swedish siege had to be lifted due to Dutch intervention , just 55 kilometers away from Charles X Gustav 's quarters in Elbing . 
 = = Swedish – Brandenburgian – Transylvanian – Romanian alliance and the truces with Russia = = 
 In the Treaty of <unk> on 20 November , Charles X Gustav of Sweden granted Frederick William of Brandenburg full sovereignty in the Duchy of Prussia in turn for a more active participation in the war . In the Treaty of Radnot on 6 December , Charles X Gustav promised to accept George II Rákóczi of Transylvania as king of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania in return for his entrance into the war . Rákóczi entered the war in January 1657 , crossing into the commonwealth with a force of 25 @,@ 000 Transylvanian @-@ Wallachian @-@ Moldavian men and 20 @,@ 000 Cossacks who broke the Polish siege of Kraków before they met with Charles X Gustav , who had led a Swedish @-@ Brandenburgian army southwards . The following month saw the <unk> @-@ Brandenburg @-@ Transylvanian @-@ Romanian @-@ Cossack forces play cat and mouse with the Polish – Lithuanian forces , moving about all of the commonwealth without any major engagements , except the capture of Brest by Charles X Gustav in May , and the sack of Warsaw by Rákóczi and Gustaf Otto Stenbock on 17 June . 
 Due to internal conflicts within the Cossacks practically there was no participation of Cossack Hetmanate in that war . Worn out from previous campaigns and requesting Bohdan Khmelnytsky to break with Sweden , Alexis of Russia eventually signed the Truce of Vilna or <unk> with the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , and did not engage the Swedish army in any major battle throughout 1657 even though he still reinforced his armies in Livonia . On 18 June , a Swedish force defeated a Russian army of 8 @,@ 000 men commanded by <unk> V. Sheremetev in the Battle of Walk at Walk ( Valga ) . In early 1658 , Sweden and Russia agreed on a truce , resulting in the Treaty of <unk> ( <unk> , 1658 ) and the Treaty of <unk> ( <unk> , 1661 ) . The Russian war with Poland – Lithuania on the other hand resumed in 1658 . 
 = = Austro – Brandenburgian – Polish alliance , Danish campaigns in Sweden = = 
 Like Sweden , John II Casimir was also looking for allies to break the deadlock of the war . On 1 December 1656 , he signed an alliance with Ferdinand III of Habsburg in Vienna , essentially a declaration of Ferdinand III 's intend to mediate a peace rather than provide military aid , which did not come into effect until Ferdinand 's death on 2 April 1657 . The treaty was however renewed and amended on 27 May by Ferdinand 's successor Leopold I of Habsburg , who agreed in Vienna to provide John II Casimir with 12 @,@ 000 troops maintained at Polish expense ; in return , Leopold received Kraków and Posen in pawn . Receiving the news , Frederick III of Denmark promptly declared war on Sweden , and by June the Austrian army entered the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth from the south , <unk> stabilizing the situation in southern Poland , while Denmark attacked Swedish Bremen @-@ Verden and turned to Jämtland and Västergötland in July . 
 When Charles X Gustav left the Commonwealth and headed westwards for an anti @-@ Danish counterstrike , the Swedish – Brandenburgian – Transylvanian alliance broke apart . Rákóczi of Transylvania was unable to withstand the combined Austrian and Polish – Lithuanian forces without Swedish support , and after a pursuit into Ukraine he was encircled and forced to capitulate , with the rest of the Transylvanian army defeated by the Tartars . 
 Brandenburg changed sides in return for Polish withdrawal of claims to Ducal Prussia , declaring Frederick William the sole sovereign in the Duchy with the treaties of Wehlau on 19 September and Bromberg on 6 November . In addition , the aforementioned treaties secured Brandenburg the Lands of Lauenburg and Bütow at the border of Brandenburgian Pomerania , while the Bishopric of <unk> was returned to Poland . 
 = = Denmark and Pomerania = = 
 The attack of Frederick III of Denmark in June 1657 , aimed at regaining the territories lost in 1645 , provided an opportunity for Charles X Gustav to abandon the unfortunate Polish – Lithuanian battlefields . With 9 @,@ 950 horse and 2 @,@ 800 foot , he marched through Pomerania and Mecklenburg . In Holstein , the Swedish force was split with Carl Gustaf Wrangel heading west to clear Bremen @-@ Verden and Charles X Gustav heading north to clear Jutland . When these aims were achieved , Charles X Gustav in September moved to the Swedish port of Wismar and ordered his navy into the inconclusive Battle of Møn . 
 Meanwhile , Polish forces led by general Stefan Czarniecki ravaged southern Swedish Pomerania , and destroyed and plundered <unk> , Gartz ( Oder ) and <unk> . The Habsburg and Brandenburg allies however were reluctant to join Czarniecki , and against John II Casimir 's wish decided against taking the war to the Holy Roman Empire fearing the start of a new Thirty Years ' War . 
 The harsh winter of 1657 / 58 had forced the Dano @-@ Norwegian fleet in port , and the Great and Little Belts separating the Danish isles from the mainland were frozen . After entering Jutland from the south , a Swedish army of 7 @,@ 000 veterans undertook the March across the Belts ; on 9 February 1658 , the Little Belt was crossed and the island Funen ( <unk> ) captured within a few days , and soon thereafter Langeland , Lolland and <unk> . On 25 February , the Swedish army continued across the Great Belt to Zealand with the Danish capital Copenhagen . Although only 5 @,@ 000 men made it across the belts , the Swedish attack was completely unexpected ; Frederick III was compelled to surrender and signed the disadvantageous Treaty of Roskilde on 26 February 1658 . 
 Sweden had won its most prestigious victory , and Denmark had suffered its most costly defeat . Denmark was forced to yield the provinces of Scania , Halland , Blekinge and the island of Bornholm . Halland had already been under Swedish control since the signing of the Treaty of Brömsebro in 1645 , but they now became Swedish territory indefinitely . Denmark also had to surrender the Norwegian province Trøndelag to Sweden . 
 Yet , Swedish @-@ held territory in Poland had been reduced to some towns in Royal Prussia , most notably Elbing , Marienburg and Thorn . With Transylvania neutralized and Brandenburg defected , Charles X Gustav 's position in the region was not strong enough to force his stated aim , the permanent gain of Royal Prussia . He was further pressed militarily when an Austro @-@ Polish army laid siege to Thorn in July 1658 , and diplomatically when he was urged by France to settle . France was unwilling to intervene militarily , and Sweden could not afford to violate the Peace of Westphalia by attacking the Habsburg and Brandenburgian possessions in the Holy Roman Empire , which would likely have driven several Germans into the anti @-@ Swedish alliance . Thus , Charles X Gustav opted to instead attack Denmark again . 
 When the Danes stalled and prolonged the fulfillment of some provisions of the Treaty of Roskilde by postponing payments and not blocking foreign fleets from access to the Baltic Sea , and with half of the 2 @,@ 000 Danish soldiers that were obliged by Roskilde to enter Swedish service deserting , the Swedish king embarked from Kiel with a force of 10 @,@ 000 men on 16 August . While everyone expected him to head for Royal Prussia , he disembarked on Zealand on 17 August , and headed for Copenhagen , which was defended by 10 @,@ 650 Danes and 2 @,@ 000 Dutch . This time however , the town did not surrender , and a long siege ensued . When Swedish forces took Kronborg in September , they controlled both sides of the Øresund , yet in November a Dutch fleet broke the Swedish naval blockade of Copenhagen in the Battle of the Sound . 
 Meanwhile , the anti @-@ Swedish alliance had deployed an army to Denmark , to confront Charles X Gustav with a force of 14 @,@ 500 Brandenburgers commanded by Frederick William , 10 @,@ 600 Austrians commanded by Raimondo Montecuccoli , and 4 @,@ 500 Poles commanded by Czarniecki . By January 1659 , the allied forces stood at <unk> , Kolding and Als . Charles X Gustav then tried a decisive assault on Copenhagen on 21 and 22 February , but was repelled . 
 = = Sweden entrenched = = 
 In 1659 , the war was characterized by Swedish forces defending their strongholds on the southern Baltic coast against allied assaults . A combined force of 17 @,@ 000 Austrians and 13 @,@ 000 Brandenburgers led by general Jean @-@ Louis <unk> de <unk> invaded Swedish Pomerania , took and burned <unk> , took <unk> island and Damm , besieged Stettin and Greifswald without success , but took Demmin on 9 November . Counterattacks were mounted by general Müller von der <unk> , who lifted the siege laid on Greifswald by the Brandenburgian prince elector , and major general Paul Wirtz , who from besieged Stettin managed to capture the Brandenburgian ammunition depot at <unk> and took it to Stralsund . The <unk> withdrew ravaging the countryside while retreating . 
 In the occupied and annexed Danish provinces , guerilla movements pressed Swedish garrisons . After an uprising , Norwegians took Trondheim in late 1658 . In Scania and Zealand , the " <unk> " led by Lorenz Tuxen and Svend Poulsen ( " <unk> " ) ambushed Swedish forces . The Swedish garrison of Bornholm was forced to surrender to Danish insurgents , with the commander killed . 
 In Royal Prussia ( Eastern Pomerania in contemporary Poland ) , Thorn had fallen already in December 1658 , but Elbing and <unk> withstood . On 24 November , Sweden had to abandon Funen and Langeland after the defeat in the Battle of Nyborg . In January 1660 , Sweden lost the Livonian fortress Mitau . 
 Meanwhile , conflicts arose within the anti @-@ Swedish alliance between Habsburg and Poland @-@ Lithuania when Habsburg demanded ever more contributions while not showing the war efforts Poland @-@ Lithuania had expected . With the Russo @-@ Polish War ongoing , most Polish – Lithuanian forces were bound in Ukraine . England , France and the Dutch Republic had agreed on a petition in the First Concert of the Hague , urging Sweden to settle for peace with Denmark on the terms of Roskilde , and peace talks mediated by France were taking place throughout 1659 . 
 = = New Sweden = = 
 In New Sweden , in May 1654 , the Dutch Fort Casimir was captured by soldiers from the New Sweden colony led by governor Johan <unk> . Fort Casimir was renamed Fort Trinity ( in Swedish , <unk> ) . Soon after Sweden opened the Second Northern War in the Baltic by attacking the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth , the Dutch moved to take advantage and an armed squadron of ships under the direction of Director @-@ General Peter Stuyvesant seized New Sweden . The Dutch moved an army to the Delaware River in the summer of 1655 , easily capturing Fort Trinity and Fort Christina . The Swedish settlement was incorporated into Dutch New Netherland on September 15 , 1655 . At first the Swedish and Finnish settlers continued to enjoy local autonomy . They kept their own militia , religion , court , and lands . 
 = = Peace = = 
 Charles X Gustav fell ill in early 1660 and died on 23 February of that year . With his death , one of the major obstacles to peace was gone and the Treaty of Oliwa was signed on 23 April . Sweden was accepted as sovereign in Swedish Livonia , Brandenburg was accepted as sovereign in Ducal Prussia , and John II Casimir withdrew his claims to the Swedish throne , though he was to retain the title for life . All occupied territories were restored to their pre @-@ war sovereigns . 
 However , Denmark was not keen on peace after their recent successes and witnessing the weakness of the Swedish efforts . The Netherlands withdrew their blockade , but were soon convinced by the Denmark to support them again . France and England intervened for Sweden and the situation was again teetering on the edge of a major conflict . However , the Danish statesman Hannibal <unk> negotiated a peace treaty without any direct involvement by foreign powers . The conflict was resolved with the Treaty of Copenhagen ( 1660 ) . Sweden returned Bornholm and Trøndelag to Denmark . The treaty of 1660 established political borders between Denmark , Sweden and Norway which have lasted to the present day , and secured the Swedish dominium maris baltici . 
 Russia , still engaged in the Russo @-@ Polish War ( 1654 – 67 ) , settled her dispute with Sweden in the Treaty of <unk> , which restored Russian @-@ occupied Swedish territory to Sweden . 
 = = = List of peace treaties = = = 
 Treaty of Königsberg : Sweden and Brandenburg @-@ Prussia ( 1656 , superseded by Bromberg and Oliva ) 
 Treaty of Bromberg : Brandenburg @-@ Prussia and Poland @-@ Lithuania 
 Treaty of Roskilde : Sweden and Denmark ( 1658 , superseded by Copenhagen ) 
 Treaty of Oliwa : Sweden and Brandenburg @-@ Prussia , Austria and Poland @-@ Lithuania ( 1660 ) 
 Treaty of Copenhagen : Sweden and Denmark ( 1660 ) 
 Treaty of <unk> : Sweden and Russia ( 1661 ) 
 = Greater yellow @-@ headed vulture = 
 The greater yellow @-@ headed vulture ( Cathartes <unk> ) , also known as the forest vulture , is a species of bird in the New World vulture family Cathartidae . It was considered to be the same species as the lesser yellow @-@ headed vulture until they were split in 1964 . It is found in South America in tropical moist lowland forests . It is a fairly large bird , with a wingspan of 166 – 178 cm ( 65 – 70 in ) , a weight of 1 @.@ 65 kilograms ( 3 @.@ 6 lb ) and a body length of 64 – 75 cm ( 25 – 30 in ) . The body plumage is black , and the head and neck , which are featherless , range in color from deep yellow to pale orange . It lacks a syrinx , and its vocalizations are therefore limited to grunts or low hisses . 
 The greater yellow @-@ headed vulture feeds on carrion and locates carcasses by sight and by smell , an ability which is rare in birds . It is dependent on larger vultures , such as the king vulture , to open the hides of larger animal carcasses , as its bill is not strong enough to do this . Like other New World vultures , the greater yellow @-@ headed vulture utilizes thermals to stay aloft with minimal effort . It lays its eggs on flat surfaces , such as the floors of caves , or in the hollows of stumps . It feeds its young by regurgitation . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The greater yellow @-@ headed and the lesser yellow @-@ headed vulture were distinguished as separate species and described in 1964 by Alexander Wetmore ; both species had earlier been known as yellow @-@ headed vultures . The greater yellow @-@ headed vulture 's genus is Cathartes , which means " purifier " , and is Latinized from the Greek kathartēs / καθαρτης . The common name , vulture , is derived from the Latin word vulturus , meaning " tearer , " in reference to its feeding habits . 
 The exact taxonomic placement of the greater yellow @-@ headed vulture and the remaining six species of New World vultures remains unclear . Although they are similar in appearance and have similar ecological roles , the New World and Old World vultures evolved from different ancestors in different parts of the world . Just how different the two are is currently under debate , with some earlier authorities suggesting that the New World vultures are more closely related to storks . More recent authorities assert their overall position in the order Falconiformes along with the Old World vultures or place them in their own order , Cathartiformes . The South American Classification Committee has removed the New World vultures from Ciconiiformes and instead placed them in Incertae sedis , but notes that a move to Falconiformes or Cathartiformes is possible . 
 = = Description = = 
 The greater yellow @-@ headed vulture is 64 – 75 centimetres ( 25 – 30 in ) in length , with a wingspan of 166 – 178 centimetres ( 65 – 70 in ) , a tail length of 25 – 29 centimetres ( 9 @.@ 8 – 11 @.@ 4 in ) and a weight averaging 1 @.@ 65 kilograms ( 3 @.@ 6 lb ) . Its plumage is black with a green or purple sheen . The throat and the sides of the head are featherless . The skin on the head ranges in color from deep yellow to pale orange with a blue crown . The nape and the area near the nostrils are pale pinkish . The undersides of the wings are black , while the flight feathers are a lighter shade . The quills of the eleven primary feathers appear to be white when seen from above . The tail is rounded and long for a vulture , extending to or slightly beyond the tip of the closed wing . The sexes are outwardly similar . The head is dull greyish in juveniles , which otherwise resemble adults . 
 The irises of its eyes are red , its feet are black , and its beak is flesh @-@ colored . The eye has a single incomplete row of eyelashes on the upper lid and two rows on the lower lid . Its beak is thick , rounded , and hooked at the tip . Because of its habit of urohidrosis , the scaly portions of its legs are often streaked white with uric acid . The front toes are long with small webs at their bases and are not adapted to grasping . The opening of the nostril is longitudinal and set in a soft cere , and the nostril lack a septum . Like all New World vultures , the greater yellow @-@ headed vulture lacks a syrinx , and is therefore unable to make any sound other than grunts or a low hiss . 
 It differs in appearance from the similar lesser yellow @-@ headed vulture in several ways . It is larger than the lesser yellow @-@ headed vulture , with a longer , broader tail . The plumage is a dark , glossy black in contrast to the lesser yellow @-@ headed vulture 's browner plumage . Its legs are darker in color and its head is more yellow and less orange / pink than that of the lesser yellow @-@ headed vulture . Its wings are broader and its flight is also steadier . Unlike the other members of the genus Cathartes , the greater yellow @-@ headed vulture has relatively dark inner primaries , which contrast slightly with the paler secondaries and outer primaries . The greater yellow @-@ headed vulture prefers to live in forests while the lesser yellow @-@ headed vulture prefers to inhabit savannas , and it is more heavily built than the lesser yellow @-@ headed vulture . The greater yellow @-@ headed vulture is also somewhat larger than the turkey vulture . It can be distinguished from that species only at relatively close range by the differing head coloration . The underwing coloration is similar to the turkey vulture but the greater yellow @-@ headed usually has a faint but broad and dark band vertically down the middle of the wings . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The greater yellow @-@ headed vulture is found in the Amazon Basin of tropical South America ; specifically in south @-@ eastern Colombia , southern and eastern Venezuela , Guyana , French Guiana , Suriname , northern and western Brazil , northern Bolivia , eastern Peru and eastern Ecuador . It is not found in the Andes , in the lowlands west or north of the Andes , in the relatively open regions of northern South America , eastern South America , or in the southern subtropical regions . It has a large range , with an estimated global extent of occurrence of 6 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 square kilometers ( 2 @,@ 586 @,@ 884 @.@ 5 sq mi ) . Its natural habitat is tropical moist lowland forests . It is not generally found in high @-@ altitude regions . It is common in heavily forested regions . It may wander over grasslands , but rarely strays far from forested areas , which provide shelter and nesting areas . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 The greater yellow @-@ headed vulture roosts on high , exposed dead trees to observe surrounding terrain . When flying , it travels in pairs or alone and is rarely found in groups . Flight is heavy and steady . It flies with its wings held flat or very slightly above horizontal , in what is called the dihedral position . The flight of the greater yellow @-@ headed is an example of static soaring flight , which uses thermals to maintain altitude without the need to flap its wings . The greater yellow @-@ headed vulture also has the unusual habit of urohidrosis , in which it urinates or defecates on its legs to cool them evaporatively . This behavior is exhibited by storks and New World vultures . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The greater yellow @-@ headed vulture is a scavenger and subsists entirely on carrion . It will eat roadkill or other animal carcasses . It prefers fresh meat , but often cannot make the first cut into the carcass of a larger animal as its beak is not strong enough to tear into the tough hide . After a few days , the greater yellow @-@ headed vulture will no longer feed on a piece of carrion , as the meat will begin to decay and become contaminated with microbial toxins . It will drink water from a pool , pond , or any receptacle provided . Like other vultures , they play an important role in the ecosystem by disposing off carrion which could otherwise be a breeding ground for disease . 
 The greater yellow @-@ headed vulture forages using its keen eyesight to locate carrion on the ground , but also uses its sense of smell , an ability which is uncommon in the avian world . It locates carrion by detecting the scent of ethyl mercaptan , a gas produced by the beginnings of decay in dead animals . The olfactory lobe of its brain responsible for processing smells is particularly large compared to other animals . This characteristic of New World vultures has been used by humans : ethyl mercaptan is injected into pipelines , and engineers looking for leaks then follow the vultures . 
 King vultures , which lack the ability to smell carrion , follow the greater yellow @-@ headed vultures to carcasses , where the king vulture tears open the skin of the dead animal . This allows the smaller greater yellow @-@ headed vulture access to food , as it does not have a bill strong enough to tear the hide of larger animals . This is an example of mutual dependence between species . It is generally displaced from carcasses by both turkey vultures and king vultures , due to their larger size . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Greater yellow @-@ headed vultures do not build nests , but rather lay their eggs directly on cliffs , the floors of caves , the ground , or in the hollows of stumps . Eggs are cream @-@ colored and blotched with brown spots , particularly around the larger end . Clutch size ranges from one to three , though two is the norm . The chicks are altricial — blind , naked and relatively immobile upon hatching , and grow down feathers later . The parents feed their young by regurgitating pre @-@ digested food into their beak , where the chicks then drink it . Young fledge after two to three months . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 The greater yellow @-@ headed vulture is listed as a species of Least Concern by the World Conservation Union ( IUCN ) . It has an estimated global range of 6 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 square kilometers ( 2 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 sq mi ) and a population of between 100 @,@ 000 and 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 individuals . There is evidence that suggests a decline in the species ' population , but it is not significant enough to warrant an upgrade in conservation status . 
 = Texas Park Road 30 = 
 Park Road 30 ( PR 30 ) , also known as Balmorhea State Park Road , is a short Park Road located in the western region of the U.S. state of Texas . The route is 0 @.@ 277 miles ( 0 @.@ 446 km ) long , and connects Balmorhea State Park to State Highway 17 ( SH 17 ) in <unk> in southwestern Reeves County . The route is made up of several individual drives within the park . The route was first built by the CCC in the mid @-@ 1930s , and was designated as PR 30 in 1941 . The highway is maintained by the Texas Department of Transportation ( TxDOT ) . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The main roadway of PR 30 begins at the circulating drive around the parking lot in front of the concession building of the swimming pool at San Solomon Springs . The route proceeds to the north with a spur branching off to the east to the San Solomon Springs Courts before passing the park headquarters near the terminus of the road at SH 17 . 
 An extension of PR 30 begins at the entrance to the San Solomon Springs parking lot and proceeds to the east to the park campground . At the campground , the route ends as a circular drive accessing individual camping spaces and a viewing exhibit for a reconstructed desert wetland . The circular drive is bisected by another drive with bath facilities and campsites for recreational vehicles . 
 = = History = = 
 The main portion of PR 30 from the parking lot at the swimming pool to SH 17 including the spur to the San Solomon Springs Courts was constructed between 1935 and 1940 by Company 1856 of the Civilian Conservation Corps . An 0 @.@ 66 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 06 km ) long stretch of the spur was designated as PR 30 on April 23 , 1941 . On May 30 , 1961 , the modern routing of PR 30 was designated , including the eastward extension toward the campgrounds . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 This entire route is located in Balmorhea State Park , Reeves County . 
 = Hurricane Inez = 
 Hurricane Inez was a major hurricane that affected the Caribbean , Bahamas , Florida , and Mexico in 1966 . It was the first storm on record to affect all of those areas . It originated from a tropical wave over Africa , and became a tropical depression by September 21 . It moved slowly westward , initially failing to intensify much ; it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Inez on September 24 . The storm strengthened into a hurricane and was quickly intensifying when it struck the French overseas region of Guadeloupe on September 27 . Inez severely damaged the island 's banana and sugar crops , and thousands of homes were damaged , leaving 10 @,@ 000 people homeless . Damage on Guadeloupe was estimated at $ 50 million , and there were 40 deaths . After entering the Caribbean , Inez briefly weakened before restrengthening , attaining peak sustained winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) on September 28 . That day a Hurricane Hunters flight reported a gust of 197 mph ( 317 km / h ) , which was the highest recorded at the time . 
 Continuing westward , Inez made landfall as a small hurricane on the Barahona Peninsula of the Dominican Republic . There , the storm flooded many rivers and destroyed over 800 houses . Nationwide , there were about 100 deaths and $ 12 million in damage . After affecting the country , Inez struck southwestern Haiti , where it was considered the worst hurricane since the 1920s . As many as 1 @,@ 000 people were killed , and 60 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . Damage totaled $ 20 @.@ 35 million in Haiti , prompting the United States government to send aid for the first time in nearly ten years due to previous mishandling of funds . Inez weakened quickly over Hispaniola , although it reintensified into a major hurricane before striking southeastern Cuba on September 30 . In the country , 125 @,@ 000 people were forced to evacuate , and there were three deaths and $ 20 million in damage . 
 The hurricane moved slowly over Cuba for two days before emerging into the Atlantic Ocean near the Bahamas . It was expected to continue out to sea , although it stalled and resumed its previous westward path . In the Bahamas , heavy rainfall and high tides caused flooding , which killed five people and left $ 15 @.@ 5 million in damage . Hurricane @-@ force winds occurred throughout the Florida Keys , where 160 homes and 190 trailers were damaged . Salt spray damaged crops in the region , and there was $ 5 million in damage and four deaths . In the Straits of Florida , Inez capsized a boat of Cuban refugees , killing 45 people . In the northern Gulf of Mexico , a helicopter crashed after carrying evacuees from an oil rig , killing 11 people . The hurricane threatened the northern Yucatán Peninsula , and although it remained offshore , Inez produced flooding and caused some power outages . At its final landfall , Inez flooded portions of Tamaulipas and cut off roads to Tampico . About 84 @,@ 000 people were left homeless , and the hurricane destroyed at least 2 @,@ 500 houses . Damage was estimated at $ 104 million , and there were 74 deaths in Mexico . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Inez were from a tropical wave that formed over the Sahara in central Africa on September 15 from the monsoon . It moved westward in the prevailing winds , exiting the west coast of Africa on September 18 . The precursor to Inez was a disturbance along the northern portion of the wave , which was considered a tropical depression by September 18 in the annual tropical cyclone summary . Tracked by satellites , the system moved to the west @-@ southwest , and was officially classified a tropical depression on September 21 about halfway between the Lesser Antilles and Africa . The system remained weak as it turned toward the west @-@ northwest . A Hurricane Hunters flight indicated some intensification in the system , prompting the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) to initiate advisories on Tropical Storm Inez , located about 800 mi ( 1 @,@ 300 km ) east of Martinique . With warm water temperatures , the storm developed a circular area of convection over its center . Inez slowed while curving westward around a ridge to its north and quickly intensified , reaching hurricane status on September 26 . 
 On September 27 , Inez strengthened to reach winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) , making it a Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . Later that day , it moved directly over the island of Guadeloupe . At the time , Inez was a small cyclone , with hurricane @-@ force winds extending 50 mi ( 80 km ) from the center ; meteorologists labeled it as a " micro @-@ hurricane ... because of its characteristic small , tight cloud structure and strong maximum surface wind . " Its structure became disrupted by the island , and the central pressure rose from 961 mbar ( 28 @.@ 4 inHg ) to 970 mbar ( 29 inHg ) , indicative of weakening . However , Inez re @-@ intensified after entering the eastern Caribbean Sea , reaching a minimum pressure of 927 mbar ( 27 @.@ 4 inHg ) south of Puerto Rico on September 28 . The Hurricane Hunters reported sustained winds of 197 mph ( 317 km / h ) at a height of 8 @,@ 000 ft ( 2 @,@ 400 m ) , the strongest winds recorded for the storm . The same flight estimated surface winds between 150 to 175 mph ( 241 to 282 km / h ) near the center . The peak intensity listed in the Atlantic hurricane database is 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) , making Inez a strong Category 4 hurricane . 
 While near peak intensity , Inez was located about 160 mi ( 260 km ) southwest of San Juan , Puerto Rico , and the eye was tracked by radar from the island . Its increasing outflow caused Tropical Storm Judith to the east over the central Atlantic to dissipate . On September 29 , the small but powerful hurricane made landfall on the Barahona Peninsula , and quickly weakened over land . It briefly moved offshore and struck the southern peninsula of Haiti near Jacmel . The eye emerged into the Windward Passage near Léogâne , although severely weakened . The pressure rose to 987 mbar ( 29 @.@ 1 inHg ) , and the winds decreased to 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) over land . However , Inez quickly re @-@ intensified over water , reaching winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) on September 30 before striking southeastern Cuba near Guantánamo Bay . When Inez was over Cuba , forecasters had difficulty in predicting the storm 's future ; it was expected that the hurricane would move to the north off the east coast of the United States due to a weakness in the ridge to the north . The hurricane drifted west @-@ northwestward within light steering currents , weakening over the high terrain but later moving offshore the southern coast of Cuba . While over water , the eye reorganized , and the cyclone maintained hurricane intensity . Inez eventually turned to a northward drift over central Cuba and emerged into the Atlantic Ocean on October 2 . 
 Shortly after exiting Cuba into the Atlantic , Inez weakened into a tropical storm , and was moving northeastward through the Bahamas about 24 hours later than forecast . At the time , the storm was expected to continue to the northeast around the Bermuda high . With little outflow and a large , diffuse circulation , Inez did not restrengthen much despite otherwise favorable conditions , potentially due to a nearby trough . The movement slowed , and the 1966 hurricane summary remarked that " Inez probably became nearly stationary closer to the United States mainland than any other storm . " On October 3 , Inez turned to the west @-@ southwest as another ridge strengthened over the western Gulf of Mexico . Over the subsequent few days , the eye moved directly over the Florida Keys from Key Largo to Key West and continued through the Gulf of Mexico while slowly intensifying . On October 7 , Inez brushed the northern coast of the Yucatán Peninsula with hurricane @-@ force winds . By then , the ridge had begun to weaken , allowing the hurricane to turn more west @-@ northwestward . On October 8 , Inez attained a secondary peak intensity of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) , with a pressure of 948 mbar ( 28 @.@ 0 inHg ) . Briefly threatening the coastline of Texas , Inez turned to the southwest after the ridge again strengthened . On October 10 , the hurricane made its final landfall near Tampico , Tamaulipas , in northeastern Mexico . It weakened rapidly over the region 's high terrain , dissipating on October 11 . 
 The unusual track of Inez marked the first time on record that a tropical cyclone affected the Lesser and Greater Antilles , Bahamas , Florida , and Mexico . The Associated Press described Inez as the " first to strike the Yucatán Peninsula in many years . " It was also the first to move across the Gulf of Mexico without turning to the north so late in the season , and the 65 advisories issued by the NHC was the highest number at the time . The path taken by Inez was compared to Hurricane Betsy in 1965 , which also slowed and moved erratically due to a strong ridge . Forecasters had difficulty with the hurricane because of its unusual path , as well as the inability to fly the Hurricane Hunters into Inez while it was over Cuba . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 In Guadeloupe , which was the first area the hurricane affected , residents evacuated to schools set up as shelters . Pan American World Airways canceled flights to the region . When Inez was near peak intensity , the NHC warned residents in southern Haiti and the Dominican Republic of the danger posed by the hurricane . The agency emphasized that the eye was visible on radar to calm tension of an unexpected change in track . In general , hurricane warnings were issued 24 hours in advance , with the exception of southeastern Florida due to the hurricane 's slowing track . Overall , 250 @,@ 000 people evacuated along the path of Inez . At Guantánamo Bay , officials ordered residents at the naval base to evacuate to storm shelters . Large ships at the port there were moved to Jamaica before the storm struck . Throughout eastern Cuba , Premier Fidel Castro ordered about 125 @,@ 000 people to evacuate in low @-@ lying areas , mostly in Oriente Province . United States Air Force tracking stations in the Bahamas were secured or moved to safer locations . Residents in the Florida Keys boarded up windows and store fronts , and hundreds of people evacuated to a shelter in Key West . In southeastern Florida , government offices and schools closed . 
 Along the Yucatán peninsula , about 15 @,@ 000 people were evacuated from the coastal city of Progreso , in a region that seldom experiences hurricanes . In the northern Gulf of Mexico , a helicopter crashed after evacuating workers from an oil platform about 65 mi ( 105 km ) south @-@ southwest of Morgan City , Louisiana , in otherwise calm conditions ; 11 people died , including the pilot . When Inez was approaching its final landfall , the United States Weather Bureau issued hurricane warnings from Brownsville to Port Isabel , Texas , with gale warnings northward to Corpus Christi . At least 2 @,@ 000 people evacuated from Port Isabel alone , and many shrimp boats were secured . In the Tampico area where Inez made its final landfall , over 31 @,@ 000 people evacuated to higher grounds . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Overall , Hurricane Inez killed about 1 @,@ 000 people , mostly on Hispaniola , and caused over $ 200 million in damage . Crop damage was less than other storms of similar magnitude , due to Inez 's small size and its occurrence late in the season . 
 = = = Caribbean and Bahamas = = = 
 When Inez struck Guadeloupe , a station on the island reported sustained winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) , with gusts to 94 mph ( 151 km / h ) , before communications failed . Rain on the island reached 6 @.@ 5 in ( 170 mm ) . The high winds destroyed the roofs of thousands of houses , leaving 10 @,@ 000 people homeless . There was heavy damage to both the banana and sugar crops , described as " flattened " by the St. Petersburg Times . The storm flooded a power plant in Pointe @-@ à @-@ Pitre and downed many power lines , causing power outages . The Associated Press described the hurricane as having " virtually leveled a whole district of Pointe @-@ à @-@ Pitre " . Hundreds of people were injured , although because of damaged hospitals and the power outage , most only received makeshift treatment . Inez left 40 people dead and $ 50 million in damage on the island . Strong winds also affected nearby Antigua , and damage was reported from that island to Dominica . 
 In the United States Virgin Islands , a station on St. Croix reported 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) gusts . When Inez passed south of Puerto Rico , its rainbands produced gusty winds along the island 's southern coast , reaching 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) in Peñuelas . On Isla de Mona , wind gusts were estimated at 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Flooding occurred in southern Puerto Rico , and high winds damaged 20 houses . 
 Hurricane Inez struck the Dominican Republic near peak intensity . Along the Barahona Peninsula , more than 800 homes were destroyed , and nationwide about 5 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . There was heavy damage to the country 's cotton industry , as well as the coffee , sugar cane , and cocoa crops along the Barahona Peninsula . In the capital city of Santo Domingo , heavy rains flooded hundreds of homes along the <unk> River , forcing thousands to evacuate . High seas there damaged a portion of a seawall . Many rivers along the Barahona Peninsula were also flooded . Throughout the country , Inez killed about 100 people , including 55 in <unk> , and left $ 12 million in damage . 
 In neighboring Haiti , high winds downed power lines and radio towers , which cut outside communication . High rainfall led to flash flooding between mountain ranges , in a location nicknamed the " valley of death " ; there , the Weather Bureau remarked that " local winds ... may well have exceeded 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) " . Thousands of homes were either destroyed or lost their roof . The Haitian government reported over 1 @,@ 000 deaths in the weeks after the storm . The United States government reported that the hurricane " killed no more than 50 " in Haiti , and " nor was there a real emergency , " due to president François Duvalier misusing previous aid . The U.S. assessment was incorrect , as the 1966 annual tropical cyclone summary in the Monthly Weather Review indicated 750 deaths in Haiti , mostly in Jacmel . President Duvalier considered the hurricane the " worst storm ... since the 1920s . " In the country , 1 @,@ 000 people were injured and 60 @,@ 000 were left homeless , and damage was estimated at $ 20 @.@ 35 million . Throughout Hispaniola , about 1 @,@ 500 people were seriously injured , and many people were still recovering from Hurricane Flora in 1963 . 
 A station at Guantánamo Bay reported winds of 138 mph ( 222 km / h ) when Inez moved ashore in Cuba , and rainfall reached 12 in ( 300 mm ) . Tides were 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) above normal there . The hurricane knocked down trees and power lines , and many roofs were damaged on the naval base . In the city of Guantánamo , the hurricane destroyed 500 houses . High winds heavily damaged the country 's sugar and coffee crops . When Inez re @-@ entered the Gulf of Mexico , it threatened northwestern Cuba and produced 12 in ( 300 mm ) of rainfall . High waves and strong winds affected the coastline . In La Habana Province , flooding forced 21 @,@ 000 people to evacuate , mostly in low @-@ lying areas . One building was destroyed in Havana . Nationwide , Inez injured at least 38 people , and caused five deaths , three of which occurred after Inez moved southwestward from the Florida Keys . Damage totaled $ 20 million . 
 In the Bahamas , the hurricane dropped heavy rainfall over three days , reaching 14 @.@ 31 in ( 363 mm ) in Nassau . There , Inez spawned a small tornado that produced winds of over 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , killing one person and injuring three . High tides flooded portions of Nassau . Two waterspouts were reported in Freeport . Wind gusts in the archipelago reached 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) at West End , Grand Bahama , and sustained winds reached 64 mph ( 103 km / h ) in Freeport . Five people died throughout the country , and damage was estimated at $ 15 @.@ 5 million . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 In the Straits of Florida , high waves from Inez overturned a 24 ft ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) blockade runner carrying Cuban exiles to Miami . Ten of the passengers escaped on a damaged raft , but the only survivor was the captain ; 45 people died due to the boat capsizing . High waves also disabled three ships and beached a Coast Guard boat near Miami ; a lifeguard and people on the beach assisted in rescuing the crew of nine Coast Guardsmen amid rough seas . 
 When the hurricane moved across the Florida Keys , it dropped light rainfall , reaching 4 @.@ 80 in ( 122 mm ) near Kendall . Inez was considered a " dry hurricane " , and about 1 in ( 25 mm ) of the precipitation that fell was largely in the form of sea water spray . Light rainfall occurred in Miami , where strong winds damaged crops due to salt spray onto local vegetation . During its passage , Inez produced above normal tides , reaching 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) above normal on Big Pine Key . Inez produced strong winds while it was intensifying , and the strongest winds occurred after the passage of the eye . The highest sustained winds were 98 mph ( 158 km / h ) on Plantation Key , and peak gusts were 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) in the Dry Tortugas . On Big Pine Key , sustained winds were estimated at 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) , with gusts to 165 mph ( 266 km / h ) . On the Florida mainland , the highest gusts were 92 mph ( 148 km / h ) at Flamingo . The winds damaged smaller tree limbs and uprooted some trees . About 20 % of the local avocado crop was blown off trees , although most was salvageable . Winds and salt spray severely damaged vegetables in southern Dade County , including up to 80 % losses of tomatoes in some farms . Power outages were reported in Key West . In the Florida Keys , the hurricane damaged 160 homes and 190 trailers . Statewide , damage totaled $ 5 million , and there were four deaths ; three were elderly people who died of heart attacks while installing shutters , and the fourth was a teenager who was swept by large surf . Inez was the last hurricane to threaten the Miami metropolitan area until Hurricane David in 1979 , and the last hurricane to strike the Florida Keys until Hurricane Kate in 1985 . 
 When Inez was making its final landfall in Mexico , its outer circulation reached southern Texas , producing winds of 22 mph ( 35 km / h ) and trace rainfall . Tides reached 3 @.@ 1 ft ( 0 @.@ 94 m ) above normal in Corpus Christi , and 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) waves caused $ 5 @,@ 000 in damage to piers . 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 While the hurricane was off the north coast of the Yucatán peninsula , Inez produced sustained winds of 69 mph ( 111 km / h ) , with gusts to 81 mph ( 130 km / h ) , in Mérida . The winds cut power and knocked down trees in Progreso , as well as nearby cities . High waves destroyed a dock in Telchac Puerto . Heavy rainfall flooded streets in Mérida , although damage was not severe . 
 At the hurricane 's final landfall , a station in Tampico reported sustained winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) , with gusts to 127 mph ( 204 km / h ) before communications were cut . Inez dropped heavy rainfall upon moving ashore , causing flooding . In Soto la Marina , Tamaulipas , rainfall totaled 10 @.@ 12 in ( 257 mm ) . In northeastern Mexico , more than 3 @,@ 000 people were stranded by flooding after dozens of rivers and streams rose above their banks , forcing some families to hold onto trees . The floods washed out roads around Tampico and cut communications and the water supply . In Tamaulipas , 15 people died while trying to deliver supplies to residents along the <unk> River . Throughout the country , the hurricane left about 84 @,@ 000 people homeless , and destroyed at least 2 @,@ 500 houses . Agricultural damage totaled over $ 80 million , and property damage was estimated at $ 24 million in Tampico and Ciudad Madero alone . Overall , Inez killed 74 people in Mexico . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the days after the storm struck Guadeloupe , there was a food shortage . Officials quickly cleared roads and worked to restore the damaged banana crop . Charles de Gaulle visited the island , and the French population unified to provide assistance to the island . In late October 1966 , the French government set up a relief fund for Guadeloupe totaling $ 34 million ( ₣ 170 million francs ) . The government initiated plans to rebuild the island to withstand the winds of strong hurricanes . The United States Agency for International Development flew 20 @,@ 000 pounds of blankets and clothing to the island . Due to the heavy damage in Hispaniola , VMM @-@ 365 , a United States Marine Corps helicopter division , spent 454 hours and flew 740 sorties to provide 186 @,@ 676 tons of relief supplies to Haiti and the Dominican Republic . The division also helped evacuate 142 hospital patients . The Dominican Air Force also assisted in transporting injured people from outlying areas to Santo Domingo . The country deployed 5 @,@ 000 troops to send food , medicine , and clothing to the storm @-@ damaged areas in the interior , as well as Barahona Peninsula . The Holy See sent $ 2 @,@ 000 to assist the residents affected by the storm in Haiti . After a nearly ten year boycott due to the actions of Haitian president François Duvalier , the United States provided a $ 1 @.@ 3 million loan to the country to help rebuild infrastructure and provide education . Industrialist Clint Murchison gave $ 50 @,@ 000 in flour and food from a mill he owned in the country . The United States also sent vaccines and 4 @,@ 360 pounds of food . 
 In Cuba , sailors on the USS America ( CV @-@ 66 ) spent about 1 @,@ 700 hours to assist Guantánamo Bay in recovery . The sole survivor of the sinking boat carrying Cuban exiles was tried in a military tribunal . The man was held responsible for the 44 boat deaths and was quickly executed . The United States Coast Guard deployed boats , helicopters , and airplanes to find victims of the boat capsized in the Straits of Florida . In the United States , the price for lettuce and tomatoes rose due to Inez 's crop damage in Florida and reduced crop output in California . The country 's military sent helicopters and planes to join the Mexican Air Force , as well as trucks by land , to deliver tons of supplies , including food , clothing , and medicine to flood @-@ affected areas in Tamaulipas . In the weeks after the storm , many residents had minimal food access , and some areas remained flooded . Conditions in Tampico , located near where the storm moved ashore , gradually returned to normal . Heavy rainfall in Mexico restored reservoirs , which assisted future crop growing . 
 The name Inez was retired and will never again be used for an Atlantic hurricane name . 
 = Yannis Makriyannis = 
 General Yannis Makriyannis ( Greek : <unk> or <unk> <unk> , <unk> or <unk> <unk> ; 1797 – 1864 ) , born Ioannis <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , was a Greek merchant , military officer , politician and author , best known today for his Memoirs . Starting from humble origins , he joined the Greek struggle for independence , achieving the rank of general and leading his men to notable victories . Following Greek independence , he had a tumultuous public career , playing a prominent part in the granting of the first Constitution of the Kingdom of Greece and later being sentenced to death and pardoned . 
 Despite his important contributions to the political life of the early Greek state , general Makriyannis is mostly remembered for his Memoirs . Aside from being a source of historical and cultural information about the period , this work has also been called a " monument of Modern Greek literature " , as it is written in pure Demotic Greek . Indeed , its literary quality led Nobel laureate Giorgos Seferis to call Makriyannis one of the greatest masters of Modern Greek prose . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Yannis Makriyannis was born to a poor family in the village of <unk> , in the vicinity of Doris . " Makriyannis " was a nickname he acquired because of his height . His father , Dimitris <unk> , was killed in a clash with the forces of Ali Pasha . His family was forced to flee to <unk> , where Makriyannis spent his childhood up to 1811 . At age seven , he was given as a foster son to a wealthy man from <unk> , but the menial labour and beatings he endured were , in his own words , " his death " . Thus , in 1811 he left for Arta to stay with an acquaintance who maintained close relations with Ali Pasha . There , still a teenager , he was involved in trade and , according to his memoirs , became a wealthy man . His property amounted to 40 @,@ 000 piastres . According to Sphyroeras , he probably joined the Filiki Etaireia , a secret anti @-@ Ottoman society , in 1820 . In March 1821 he left for Patras , in the Peloponnese , supposedly on business . His actual assignment , however , was to inform local members of the Filiki Etaireia of the state of affairs in his native <unk> . Having met with <unk> <unk> , he returned to Arta two days before the revolution broke out in Patras and was promptly arrested by the Ottoman authorities and placed under arrest in the local fortress . He was held captive for 90 days but managed to escape and , in August 1821 , first took up arms against the Ottomans under chieftain <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Activity during the War of Independence = = = 
 Under the command of <unk> <unk> , in September 1821 he took part in the battle of Stavros , near <unk> , and in the battle of Peta , where he sustained a light leg injury . A few days later he took part in the siege of Arta that temporarily brought the city under Greek control . In late 1821 , he left for <unk> , but there , according to his memoirs , he fell seriously ill , only recovering in March 1822 . Having spent his recovery in the village of <unk> , near Salona , he resumed military action , assuming the leadership of a band of warriors from four villages in the vicinity . He fought alongside several other chieftains during the successful siege of <unk> , which had been fortified with considerable Ottoman forces . 
 After the Acropolis of Athens was surrendered by the Ottomans in June 1822 , Makriyannis was appointed Supervisor of Public Order in the city by the executive authority of <unk> on 1 January 1823 . In that office , he took severe measures aimed at stopping arbitrary oppression of the populace and thievery . In the summer of 1823 , he fought alongside <unk> in the eastern part of Central Greece . In October 1823 , he led a force of <unk> in the Peloponnese , and fought alongside the government of Georgios Kountouriotis against the rebels in the civil war . For his actions during that conflict , he was rewarded with the rank of brigadier , promoted to lieutenant general in August 1824 and full general in late 1824 . 
 In March 1825 , after the Peloponnese had been invaded by Egyptian forces , he was appointed <unk> ( head of public order ) of <unk> and took part in the defence of <unk> . After the fortress fell on 11 May 1825 , he hurried to <unk> , near Nafplio , arriving with one hundred men on 10 June . He ordered the construction of makeshift fortifications , as well as the gathering of provisions . More chieftains soon arrived in <unk> and Ibrahim Pasha , the commander of the Egyptian forces , was unable to take the position , despite numerical superiority and the launching of fierce attacks on 12 and 14 June . Makriyannis was injured during the battle and was carried to Nafplio . 
 Soon after the battle , he married the daughter of a prominent Athenian , and his activities were thereafter inextricably linked with that city until his death . After Athens was captured by Ibrahim Pasha in June 1826 , Makriyannis helped organise the defence of the Acropolis , and became the provisional commander of the garrison after the death of the commander , Yannis <unk> . He managed to repel a fierce assault against the Odeon of Herodes Atticus on 7 October , and during the defence of the Acropolis , he sustained heavy injures three times , to the head and to the neck . These wounds troubled him for the remainder of his life , but they did not dissuade him from taking part in the last phase of the war : in the spring of 1827 he took part in the battles of Piraeus and the battle of <unk> . 
 = = = Activity after Greek Independence = = = 
 = = = = Governorship of Kapodistrias = = = = 
 Makriyannis 's activity did not cease with the achievement of Greek independence . After Governor Ioannis Kapodistrias arrived in Greece , he appointed Makriyannis " General Leader of the Executive Authority of the Peloponnese " , based in Argos , in 1828 . It was during this period , and more specifically on 26 February 1829 , that he started writing his Memoirs . After Kapodistrias restructured the military in 1830 , Makriyannis was given the rank of brigadier . However , he slowly came to oppose the Governor 's policies and eventually broke with him . He opposed what he considered Kapodistrias 's personal authoritarianism and , on a more personal level , was concerned about whether his home region would be included or not in the liberated Greek state . Influenced by Ioannis <unk> , he even tried to force the Governor into accepting a constitutional form of government , using the troops under his command , but had no success . Finally , in August 1831 , the government forced all civil servants and military personnel to sign an oath stating they were not part of secret organizations and that they were loyal servants of the government 's commands . Makriyannis considered this to be degrading , and tried to author his own version of an oath instead . This , however , was not accepted by the government , and he was consequently stripped of his positions . His opposition to the existing regime did not cease with the Governor 's assassination on 9 October 1831 . He took the side of the " <unk> " and fought against the governor 's brother and successor <unk> Kapodistrias . He did , however , condemn the assassination itself in the strongest terms . 
 = = = = Reign of King Otto = = = = 
 Otto , Prince of Bavaria , was chosen as the first King of Greece in 1832 , under the name Othon . His arrival in Nafplio , then the Greek capital , was hailed enthusiastically by Makriyannis . This attitude is exemplified in his Memoirs : 
 Today the fatherland is reborn , that for so long was lost and extinguished . Today are raised from the dead the fighters , political , religious , as well as military , for our King has come , that we begot with the power of God . Praised be your most virtuous name , omnipotent and most merciful Lord . 
 The hopes he had for the new regime , however , were soon to be dispelled . King Otho was underage and Bavarian regents were named to rule on his behalf during the first months of his rule . During the regency , Makriyannis came into conflict with the War Minister , the Bavarian <unk> , due to the latter 's attitude towards the veterans of the War of Independence . In the newly restructured Greek Army , there was little place left for the irregular bands of klephts . These guerilla @-@ styled fighters had formed the backbone of the Greek forces during the war , and Makriyannis considered their exclusion from the newly formed army disrespectful . Furthermore , most of these men had been left with no resources after their exclusion from the military , and found themselves in a dire financial situation . Makriyannis also believed that the Prime Minister , the Bavarian von Armansperg , was personally responsible for the serious problems faced by the newly formed state . As a consequence , Makriyannis briefly retired from active politics . 
 After municipalities were first instituted by Royal decree on 27 December 1833 , Makriyannis was elected to the city council of Athens ( the city becoming the new capital in 1834 ) . In that capacity he harshly criticised , to the extent that it was possible , what he perceived as omissions and authoritarianism by the royal administration and Palace Cabinet . He often voiced his demand for constitutional rule , even though the royal administration had initially held him in high esteem and given him the rank of colonel . During the King 's absence from Greece on the occasion of his marriage to Queen Amalia ( late 1836 – early 1837 ) , public discontent with von Armansperg was at its peak . The newspapers Athena and Elpis criticized him severely , and some politicians called for his removal . Makriyannis , in his capacity as President of the Athens city council , proposed , in January 1837 , the adoption of a resolution to be handed to the King upon his return requesting the granting of a Constitution . Not long before that , at a banquet attended by former fighters of the War of Independence , such as Kountouriotis , Kolokotronis and others , Makriyannis had toasted the health of the royal couple , adding " may God enlighten them to rule us through constitutional laws , in accordance with the fatherland 's sacrifices " . Von Armansperg immediately dissolved the city council , fired Mayor <unk> and had Makriyannis placed under house arrest . Sometime during this period , Makriyannis commissioned 25 engravings from the painter and veteran of the War of Independence , <unk> <unk> . The profits from the sales were used to the benefit of veterans of the war . 
 Meanwhile , the demand for constitutional liberties was becoming widespread , as was discontent with King Otto 's Bavarian administration . The situation escalated in the 3 September 1843 Revolution that led to the granting of the first Constitution . Makriyannis was one of the three leaders of the movement . He played a crucial part in paving the way for this , having started as early as 1840 . After its granting , he also played an important part in the forming of the new cabinet . He was elected as a representative of Athens to the National ( Constitutional ) Assembly , and headed an informal group of 63 representatives loyal to him . He personally proposed various recommendations during the course of the proceedings . Soon after the conclusion of the Assembly 's work , however , he retired from politics . For his leading role in the creation of the first Greek Constitution , Makriyannis was depicted on the reverse of the Greek 50 drachmas commemorative coin issued in 1994 for the 150th anniversary of this historic document . There are three versions of the coin , each featuring one of the three leaders of the 3 September movement : one features Makriyannis , one colonel Dimitrios Kallergis , and one minister ( and later prime minister ) Andreas Metaxas . 
 Makriyannis stopped working on his memoirs in 1850 , so information about the rest of his life , including his trial , comes from other sources . He was always outspoken about his views , and as a result he stirred negative reactions among his opponents . He opposed what he perceived as a continued degradation of the veterans of the War of Independence , and had repeatedly been considered suspect of plotting against King Otho . Furthermore , the King never quite forgave him for his part in the 3 September movement . When summoned to the palace and asked to denounce all the conspirators of 1843 , Makriyannis refused , saying " I am not a slave " . Eventually , in 1852 , he was accused of planning to " overthrow the establishments and assassinate the King " . On 13 April 1852 he was placed under house arrest , heavily guarded and with an officer posted in the room next to his own . On 16 March 1853 he was sentenced to death , in what has been called a " pre @-@ fabricated trial " . According to Vidal @-@ Naquet , the prosecution brought up false testimonies and false evidence . Furthermore , the president of the tribunal , <unk> <unk> , was a personal enemy of Makriyannis . Five out of the six judges voted for the death sentence , and requested the King to extend royal clemency . His sentence was commuted to life imprisonment by the King , but he only spent 18 months in prison . King Otho reduced the sentence first to twenty , and later to ten years . He was finally pardoned and released on 2 September 1854 , thanks to the Crimean War . The blockade of <unk> by the French and British fleets also led to the imposition of Kallergis as Minister of War , despite his previous attempts at overthrowing the King . Thus , Kallergis used his newly acquired influence to have Makriyannis released . Makriyannis suffered greatly in prison , and after his release suffered from hallucinations . His condition did not improve with the death of one of his younger sons in the cholera epidemic that struck Athens . 
 On 10 October 1862 a revolution broke out , which led to the eviction of King Otho I from the country . Makriyannis 's son , the future general Othon Makriyannis , reportedly presented his father with the King 's golden crown . Makriyannis was restored to the ranks he had been stripped of as a result of his trial , and was re @-@ elected as a representative of Athens to the new National ( Constitutional ) Assembly of 1864 . He was promoted to the rank of general on 20 April 1864 , and died on 27 April . 
 = = Literary work = = 
 = = = Assessment and significance = = = 
 Makriyannis concluded work on his Memoirs in the years before his imprisonment ; the last entries seem to be from September or October 1850 , as evinced by his references to the events of that period . In the text of the Memoirs , one can see not only the personal adventures and disappointments of his long public career , but , more significantly , his views on people , situations and events , phrased clearly and quite often passionately . They were first published in 1907 by Yannis Vlahogiannis , while some fragments of them had earlier been published in the newspaper Acropolis in 1904 . Spyridon <unk> , in 1908 , noted his straightforwardness and slight egotism , along with his holding firm to his own opinion ( as quoted by Sphyroeras ) . Kostis Palamas , in 1911 , called his work " incomparable in its kind , a masterpiece of his illiterate , but strong and autonomous mind " ( ibid ) . It should be noted that Makriyannis had received only the most basic and fragmentary education , and , according to his own testimony , mastered writing shortly before he started writing his Memoirs , while he was stationed in Argos . 
 Makriyannis , having been ignored by history , and hardly mentioned by chroniclers of the War of Independence , had renewed interest in the revolution by offering a significant personal testimony to historical research . Despite this , after the initial interest in the newly published Memoirs , they were hardly cited for almost 40 years . One could say that Makriyannis was forgotten , not only as a fighter , but also as the author of a text written in Demotic Greek ; a text that , besides reproducing the heroic atmosphere of the War of Independence , is also a treasure @-@ house of linguistic knowledge concerning the common Greek tongue of the time . 
 Makriyannis 's reputation was revived during the German occupation of Greece . In 1941 , <unk> <unk> published an article on the general , calling his Memoirs " a monument of Modern Greek literature " because they were written in pure Demotic Greek . Two years later , in 1943 , the Greek Nobel laureate Giorgos Seferis gave a lecture on him , saying : 
 In our times , ... when people seek to find in other people something clear and stable and compassionate , it is appropriate to speak of people such as Makriyannis . 
 According to the National Book Centre of Greece , Seferis also stated that Makriyannis , along with Alexandros <unk> , is one of the two greatest masters of modern Greek prose . 
 Since then hundreds of essays have been written on the subject of his Memoirs , and it would be fair to say that the chronicler has overshadowed the fighter , and with good reason , according to Sphyroeras . Spyros <unk> has noted that : 
 The fact that an illiterate man managed to use the Demotic speech ... to achieve an expressive density and dynamism entirely unusual of Greek prose made a terrific impression on people . 
 The general 's objectivity , however , has often been questioned . Vlahogiannis , in his preface to the Memoirs , praises his honesty and contrasts it to his lack of objectivity and impartiality . While always straightforward , Makriyannis clearly holds a grudge against people he had come into conflict with . He often uses disparaging language against people like Kolokotronis , while staying silent about the more questionable deeds of people he had a favourable opinion of . According to Sphyroeras , however , his judgements do not stem from selfishness , but rather from his severity against those he considered were defaming the cause of Greece . 
 A few months after completing his Memoirs , on New Year 's Eve in 1851 , Makriyannis started to write another " history " , as he called it , which he interrupted rather abruptly in late March 1852 , when he was under house arrest . This text was acquired in 1936 or 1937 by Vlahogiannis , and was finally published in 1983 by Angelos <unk> , aptly titled Visions and Wonders . It has , according to <unk> , far less historical significance than the Memoirs . The events described therein are given briefly , and are used only as an excuse for his meditations and the interpretation of his Visions , on which he particularly insists . Vlahogiannis , according to Sphyroeras , considered the manuscript to be an overzealous work of a deranged mind , and that is the reason he did not publish it . The work , however , is also the product of a physically and mentally tormented soul , who , being isolated at the age of 54 , instead converses with God , the Panagia , and the saints . It also shows Makriyannis 's deep religious feeling ; he turns away from guns , instead seeking the nation 's salvation through divine intervention . Furthermore , as Sphyroeras points out , the work is unique in Modern Greek literature in its subject matter , and is , as the Memoirs , a significant source of linguistic and cultural information . 
 = = = Works = = = 
 <unk> ( Memoirs ) first published : Athens : 1907 
 <unk> καὶ <unk> ( Visions and Wonders ) first published : Athens : 1983 
 = Common cold = 
 Common cold , also known simply as a cold , is a viral infectious disease of the upper respiratory tract that primarily affects the nose . The throat , sinuses , and voice box may also be affected . Signs and symptoms may begin less than two days following exposure . They include coughing , sore throat , runny nose , sneezing , headache , and fever . People usually recover in seven to ten days . Some symptoms may last up to three weeks . In those with other health problems , pneumonia may occasionally develop . 
 Well over 200 virus strains are implicated in the cause of the common cold ; the rhinoviruses are the most common . They spread through the air during close contact with infected people and indirectly through contact with objects in the environment followed by transfer to the mouth or nose . Risk factors include going to daycare , not sleeping well , and psychological stress . Symptoms are mostly due to the body 's immune response to the infection rather than to tissue destruction by the viruses themselves . People with influenza often show similar symptoms as people with a cold , though symptoms are usually more severe in the former . 
 There is no vaccine for the common cold . The primary methods of prevention are hand washing ; not touching the eyes , nose or mouth with unwashed hands ; and staying away from other sick people . Some evidence supports the use of face masks . No cure for the common cold exists , but the symptoms can be treated . <unk> anti @-@ inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ) such as ibuprofen may help with pain . Antibiotics should not be used . Evidence does not support a benefit from cough medicines . 
 The common cold is the most frequent infectious disease in humans . The average adult gets two to four colds a year , while the average child may get six to eight . They occur more commonly during the winter . These infections have been with humanity since ancient times . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 The typical symptoms of a cold include a cough , a runny nose , nasal congestion and a sore throat , sometimes accompanied by muscle ache , fatigue , headache , and loss of appetite . A sore throat is present in about 40 % of the cases and a cough in about 50 % , while muscle ache occurs in about half . In adults , a fever is generally not present but it is common in infants and young children . The cough is usually mild compared to that accompanying influenza . While a cough and a fever indicate a higher likelihood of influenza in adults , a great deal of similarity exists between these two conditions . A number of the viruses that cause the common cold may also result in asymptomatic infections . 
 The color of the sputum or nasal secretion may vary from clear to yellow to green and does not indicate the class of agent causing the infection . 
 = = = Progression = = = 
 A cold usually begins with fatigue , a feeling of being chilled , sneezing , and a headache , followed in a couple of days by a runny nose and cough . Symptoms may begin within sixteen hours of exposure and typically peak two to four days after onset . They usually resolve in seven to ten days , but some can last for up to three weeks . The average duration of cough is eighteen days and in some cases people develop a post @-@ viral cough which can linger after the infection is gone . In children , the cough lasts for more than ten days in 35 % – 40 % of the cases and continues for more than 25 days in 10 % . 
 = = Cause = = 
 = = = Viruses = = = 
 The common cold is a viral infection of the upper respiratory tract . The most commonly implicated virus is a rhinovirus ( 30 % – 80 % ) , a type of <unk> with 99 known serotypes . Other commonly implicated viruses include human coronavirus ( ≈ 15 % ) , influenza viruses ( 10 % – 15 % ) , adenoviruses ( 5 % ) , human respiratory syncytial virus , enteroviruses other than rhinoviruses , human parainfluenza viruses , and <unk> . Frequently more than one virus is present . In total over 200 different viral types are associated with colds . 
 = = = Transmission = = = 
 The common cold virus is typically transmitted via airborne droplets ( aerosols ) , direct contact with infected nasal secretions , or fomites ( contaminated objects ) . Which of these routes is of primary importance has not been determined ; however , hand @-@ to @-@ hand and hand @-@ to @-@ surface @-@ to @-@ hand contact seems of more importance than transmission via aerosols . The viruses may survive for prolonged periods in the environment ( over 18 hours for rhinoviruses ) and can be picked up by people 's hands and subsequently carried to their eyes or nose where infection occurs . Transmission is common in daycare and at school due to the proximity of many children with little immunity and frequently poor hygiene . These infections are then brought home to other members of the family . There is no evidence that recirculated air during commercial flight is a method of transmission . People sitting in close proximity appear to be at greater risk of infection . 
 <unk> @-@ caused colds are most infectious during the first three days of symptoms ; they are much less infectious afterwards . 
 = = = Weather = = = 
 The traditional theory is that a cold can be " caught " by prolonged exposure to cold weather such as rain or winter conditions , which is how the disease got its name . Some of the viruses that cause the common colds are seasonal , occurring more frequently during cold or wet weather . The reason for the seasonality has not been conclusively determined . Possible explanations may include cold temperature @-@ induced changes in the respiratory system , decreased immune response , and low humidity causing an increase in viral transmission rates , perhaps due to dry air allowing small viral droplets to disperse farther and stay in the air longer . 
 The apparent seasonality may also be due to social factors , such as people spending more time indoors , near infected people , and specifically children at school . There is some controversy over the role of low body temperature as a risk factor for the common cold ; the majority of the evidence suggests that it may result in greater susceptibility to infection . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Herd immunity , generated from previous exposure to cold viruses , plays an important role in limiting viral spread , as seen with younger populations that have greater rates of respiratory infections . Poor immune function is a risk factor for disease . Insufficient sleep and malnutrition have been associated with a greater risk of developing infection following rhinovirus exposure ; this is believed to be due to their effects on immune function . Breast feeding decreases the risk of acute otitis media and lower respiratory tract infections among other diseases , and it is recommended that breast feeding be continued when an infant has a cold . In the developed world breast feeding may not be protective against the common cold in and of itself . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 The symptoms of the common cold are believed to be primarily related to the immune response to the virus . The mechanism of this immune response is virus specific . For example , the rhinovirus is typically acquired by direct contact ; it binds to human ICAM @-@ 1 receptors through unknown mechanisms to trigger the release of inflammatory mediators . These inflammatory mediators then produce the symptoms . It does not generally cause damage to the nasal epithelium . The respiratory syncytial virus ( RSV ) , on the other hand , is contracted by direct contact and airborne droplets . It then replicates in the nose and throat before frequently spreading to the lower respiratory tract . RSV does cause epithelium damage . Human parainfluenza virus typically results in inflammation of the nose , throat , and bronchi . In young children when it affects the trachea it may produce the symptoms of croup due to the small size of their airways . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 The distinction between viral upper respiratory tract infections is loosely based on the location of symptoms with the common cold affecting primarily the nose , pharyngitis the throat , and bronchitis the lungs . However , there can be significant overlap and multiple areas can be affected . The common cold is frequently defined as nasal inflammation with varying amount of throat inflammation . Self @-@ diagnosis is frequent . Isolation of the viral agent involved is rarely performed , and it is generally not possible to identify the virus type through symptoms . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 The only useful ways to reduce the spread of cold viruses are physical measures such as hand washing and face masks ; in the healthcare environment , gowns and disposable gloves are also used . Isolation or quarantine is not used as the disease is so widespread and symptoms are non @-@ specific . Vaccination has proved difficult as there are many viruses involved and they mutate rapidly . Creation of a broadly effective vaccine is , thus , highly improbable . 
 Regular hand washing appears to be effective in reducing the transmission of cold viruses , especially among children . Whether the addition of antivirals or antibacterials to normal hand washing provides greater benefit is unknown . Wearing face masks when around people who are infected may be beneficial ; however , there is insufficient evidence for maintaining a greater social distance . 
 Zinc supplements may help to reduce the prevalence of colds . Routine vitamin C supplements do not reduce the risk or severity of the common cold , though they may reduce its duration . <unk> with water was found useful in one small trial . 
 = = Management = = 
 No medications or herbal remedies have been conclusively demonstrated to shorten the duration of infection . Treatment thus comprises symptomatic relief . Getting plenty of rest , drinking fluids to maintain hydration , and <unk> with warm salt water are reasonable conservative measures . Much of the benefit from treatment is , however , attributed to the placebo effect . 
 = = = Symptomatic = = = 
 Treatments that help alleviate symptoms include simple analgesics and <unk> such as ibuprofen and acetaminophen / paracetamol . There is not good evidence for cough medicines . They are not recommended for use in children due to a lack of evidence supporting effectiveness and the potential for harm . In 2009 , Canada restricted the use of over @-@ the @-@ counter cough and cold medication in children six years and under due to concerns regarding risks and unproven benefits . The misuse of <unk> ( an over @-@ the @-@ counter cough medicine ) has led to its ban in a number of countries . 
 In adults antihistamines may improve symptoms in the first day or two ; however , there is no longer @-@ term benefit and they have adverse effects such as drowsiness . Other decongestants such as pseudoephedrine are effective in adults . <unk> nasal spray may reduce the symptoms of a runny nose but has little effect on stuffiness . 
 Due to lack of studies , it is not known whether increased fluid intake improves symptoms or shortens respiratory illness , and there is a similar lack of data for the use of heated humidified air . One study has found chest vapor rub to provide some relief of nocturnal cough , congestion , and sleep difficulty . 
 = = = Antibiotics and antivirals = = = 
 Antibiotics have no effect against viral infections or against the viruses that cause the common cold . Due to their side effects , antibiotics cause overall harm but are still frequently prescribed . Some of the reasons that antibiotics are so commonly prescribed include people 's expectations for them , physicians ' desire to help , and the difficulty in excluding complications that may be amenable to antibiotics . There are no effective antiviral drugs for the common cold even though some preliminary research has shown benefits . 
 = = = Alternative medicine = = = 
 While there are many alternative treatments used for the common cold , there is insufficient scientific evidence to support the use of most . As of 2014 there is insufficient evidence to recommend for or against honey . As of 2015 there is tentative evidence to support nasal irrigation . Zinc has been used to treat symptoms , with studies suggesting that zinc , if taken within 24 hours of the onset of symptoms , reduces the duration and severity of the common cold in otherwise healthy people . Due to wide differences between the studies , further research may be needed to determine how and when zinc may be effective . Whereas zinc lozenges may produce side effects , there is only a weak rationale for physicians to recommend zinc for the treatment of the common cold . Some zinc remedies directly applied to the inside of the nose have led to the loss of the sense of smell . 
 Vitamin C 's effect on the common cold , while extensively researched , is disappointing , except in limited circumstances : specifically , individuals exercising vigorously in cold environments . There is no firm evidence that <unk> products provide any meaningful benefit in treating or preventing colds . It is unknown if garlic is effective . A single trial of vitamin D did not find benefit . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 The common cold is generally mild and self @-@ limiting with most symptoms generally improving in a week . Half of cases go away in 10 days and 90 % in 15 days . Severe complications , if they occur , are usually in the very old , the very young , or those who are immunosuppressed . Secondary bacterial infections may occur resulting in sinusitis , pharyngitis , or an ear infection . It is estimated that sinusitis occurs in 8 % and ear infection in 30 % of cases . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 The common cold is the most common human disease and affects people all over the globe . Adults typically have two to five infections annually , and children may have six to ten colds a year ( and up to twelve colds a year for school children ) . Rates of symptomatic infections increase in the elderly due to declining immunity . 
 Native Americans and Inuit are more likely to be infected with colds and develop complications such as otitis media than Caucasians . This may be explained by issues such as poverty and overcrowding rather than by ethnicity . 
 = = History = = 
 While the cause of the common cold has only been identified since the 1950s , the disease has been with humanity since ancient times . Its symptoms and treatment are described in the Egyptian Ebers papyrus , the oldest existing medical text , written before the 16th century BCE . The name " cold " came into use in the 16th century , due to the similarity between its symptoms and those of exposure to cold weather . 
 In the United Kingdom , the Common Cold Unit was set up by the Medical Research Council in 1946 and it was where the rhinovirus was discovered in 1956 . In the 1970s , the CCU demonstrated that treatment with interferon during the incubation phase of rhinovirus infection protects somewhat against the disease , but no practical treatment could be developed . The unit was closed in 1989 , two years after it completed research of zinc gluconate lozenges in the prophylaxis and treatment of rhinovirus colds , the only successful treatment in the history of the unit . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 The economic impact of the common cold is not well understood in much of the world . In the United States , the common cold leads to 75 – 100 million physician visits annually at a conservative cost estimate of $ 7 @.@ 7 billion per year . Americans spend $ 2 @.@ 9 billion on over @-@ the @-@ counter drugs and another $ 400 million on prescription medicines for symptom relief . More than one @-@ third of people who saw a doctor received an antibiotic prescription , which has implications for antibiotic resistance . An estimated 22 – 189 million school days are missed annually due to a cold . As a result , parents missed 126 million workdays to stay home to care for their children . When added to the 150 million workdays missed by employees suffering from a cold , the total economic impact of cold @-@ related work loss exceeds $ 20 billion per year . This accounts for 40 % of time lost from work in the United States . 
 = = Research directions = = 
 Antivirals have been tested for effectiveness in the common cold ; as of 2009 , none had been both found effective and licensed for use . There are ongoing trials of the anti @-@ viral drug <unk> which shows promise against picornaviruses as well as trials of BTA @-@ 798 . The oral form of <unk> had safety issues and an aerosol form is being studied . <unk> , a broad @-@ spectrum antiviral therapy , has shown preliminary effectiveness in treating rhinovirus , as well as other infectious viruses . 
 The genomes for all known human rhinovirus strains have been sequenced . 
 = Battle of Short Hills = 
 The Battle of Short Hills ( also known as the Battle of Metuchen Meetinghouse and other names ) was a conflict between a Continental Army force commanded by Brigadier General William Alexander ( " Lord Stirling " ) , and an opposing British force commanded by Lieutenant General William Howe . The battle took place on June 26 , 1777 , at Scotch Plains and Metuchen , New Jersey , during the American Revolutionary War . Despite the name , no fighting occurred in modern @-@ day Short Hills , a section of Millburn . 
 In mid @-@ June General Howe marched most of his army into central New Jersey in an attempt to lure George Washington 's Continental Army to a place where it might be better attacked than its defensive position in the Watchung Mountains . When Washington refused to abandon his position Howe returned to Amboy on June 22 . Washington 's forward divisions , including that of Lord Stirling , shadowed this British movement , and Washington moved his main army out of the hills . Howe seized this opportunity , and on June 26 marched two columns of troops out in an attempt to cut Washington off from the high ground . These troops skirmished with Lord Stirling 's troops , and eventually engaged in a pitched battle in Scotch Plains . Stirling 's outnumbered force retreated , but Washington , alerted to the British movement , had by then retreated back into the hills . 
 = = Background = = 
 In March 1776 the British forces of Lieutenant General William Howe withdrew from Boston after Major General George Washington fortified high ground threatening the city and its harbor . With this army augmented by reinforcements from Europe , General Howe captured New York City , forcing Washington to retreat all the way across New Jersey . At the end of 1776 , Washington crossed the Delaware River and surprised German troops at Trenton , New Jersey , and eventually regained control of most of the state . The two armies then settled into winter quarters , and engaged in a war of skirmishes during the winter months . 
 General Howe spent the winter planning a campaign to capture the seat of the rebel Congress , Philadelphia . The constant skirmishing throughout the winter had taken its toll on his troops stationed in New Jersey , and even a major attack on the Continental Army outpost at Bound Brook in April had not been entirely successful . Howe apparently did not divulge his plans or his intended route to Philadelphia to many people , and General Washington did not know what his intentions were , although Philadelphia was one target he suspected Howe was interested in . On May 29 , Washington moved most of his army from its winter quarters near Morristown to a strong position at Middlebrook in the Watchung Mountains from which he could observe and interfere with British moves toward Philadelphia . 
 Historians who mention this battle only occasionally give it a name . It is often called " Short Hills " , even though the battle took place primarily in present @-@ day Edison and Scotch Plains , New Jersey . Historians also give the battle other names ; David Martin calls it " Flat Hills " or " Metuchen Meeting House " ; one British regimental history refers to it by " Westfield " . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 On June 9 , Howe began moving troops from Staten Island to Perth Amboy . On June 11 , almost his entire army moved up the roads along the Raritan River to New Brunswick . Washington 's intelligence reports indicated that Howe had left behind equipment needed for crossing the Delaware River and was unlikely to be heading for Philadelphia ; Washington , as a precautionary measure , called out the militia in southern New Jersey . On June 14 , Howe 's army marched again , its destination Somerset Court House ( present @-@ day Millstone ) . Apparently seeking to draw Washington into battle on open terrain , Howe remained there five days . Washington refused to move out of the hills , and on June 19 , Howe began the march back to Perth Amboy , which he reached on June 22 , having completely evacuated New Brunswick . 
 After refusing to fall for Howe 's trap , Washington followed the retreating British , bringing his army down from Middlebrook to <unk> , and sent a strong forward detachment under Brigadier General William Alexander ( aka " Lord Stirling " ) to the Scotch Plains area north of New Brunswick , to cover his left flank and to harass the British . Stirling 's command , numbering about 2 @,@ 500 , comprised William Maxwell 's New Jersey brigade , Thomas Conway 's Pennsylvania brigade , Daniel Morgan 's Corps of Riflemen and Ottendorf 's Corps . Maxwell 's brigade consisted of the 1st through 4th New Jersey Continentals and Oliver Spencer 's Additional Regiment , while Conway 's consisted of the 3rd , 6th , 9th , and 12th Pennsylvania Continentals . Ottendorf 's Corps , although it was named for its principal recruiter , a German mercenary named Nicholas Dietrich , Baron de Ottendorf , was commanded by Charles Armand , a French soldier of fortune who was given its command in May 1777 after Ottendorf abruptly left the army . 
 Howe took advantage of Washington 's movement , and launched a sudden attack against Lord Stirling 's position , meant to devastate Stirling 's forces , cut off Washington 's retreat back to Middlebrook , and engage the Americans in a pitched battle on relatively open terrain . At 1 : 00 am on the morning on June 26 Howe marched two columns of troops out of Perth Amboy . The first column , under the command of Lieutenant General Charles Cornwallis , consisted of several companies of Hessian jägers , three battalions of Hessian grenadiers and one British , mounted Hessian chasseurs and some British dragoons from the 16th Light Dragoons , a battalion from the Brigade of Guards , and the Loyalist provincial unit of Queen 's Rangers . The second column was under the command of Major General John Vaughan and accompanied by General Howe . It consisted of jäger companies from Hesse @-@ Kassel and Ansbach @-@ Bayreuth , and battalions of British light infantry and grenadiers . 
 = = The battle = = 
 The column of General Cornwallis marched for Woodbridge , while Vaughan 's marched toward <unk> . As the two columns moved on roughly parallel paths through the Short Hills area , they came into contact with Stirling 's guards , and a running skirmish began , with the Americans firing on the British from the underbrush as they fell back . The retreating Americans lead both of the armies into the Ash Swamp and Scotch Plains areas , where Stirling prepared a defensive position . Severe cannon fire and strength of British numbers forced Stirling , as determined as he was to stand against them , to retreat even further back , toward Westfield . There the British , suffering under the extreme heat of the day , ended the pursuit , and Stirling was able to fall back in good order toward the post at Middlebrook . A messenger had alerted Washington to Howe 's proximity , prompting Washington to precipitately withdraw to a more secure position further in the hills . Later in the day , Howe arrived to inspect Washington 's lines and adjudged them too strong to attack . Because Stirling 's resistance may have provided Washington with enough time to manage his withdrawal to more secure ground , the battle is considered a strategic victory for the Americans . The British , after spending the night at Westfield , returned to their post at Perth Amboy , and completely evacuated New Jersey by June 30 . In mid @-@ July , Howe embarked much of his army on transports , and sailed off toward Philadelphia , destination unknown to Washington . 
 A local tale arose in Westfield about an encounter between General Cornwallis and " Aunt Betty " Frazee , a local resident who had been baking bread for the Americans . When Cornwallis arrived , he requested a loaf of bread from her . When she offered it to him , saying " I give this not in love but in fear " , Cornwallis graciously declined the offer , responding " Not a man of my command shall touch a single loaf . " 
 = = Casualties = = 
 A British officer recorded the British and Hessian casualties as 5 killed and 30 wounded . The only officer casualty was Captain The Honourable John Finch of the Guards Light Infantry . He had been to the forefront of the attack and , at one point , called out to Lord Stirling , " Come here , you damned rebel , and I will do for you ! " Stirling 's response was to instruct four marksmen to concentrate their fire upon the captain . Finch soon received a wound , from which he died three days later . 
 The American casualties are not fully known ; the British claimed the Americans suffered 100 killed and wounded , and both sides acknowledged the American loss of three cannons , and the capture of 70 men . Ottendorf 's Corps , who had formed Stirling 's advance guard appear to have been hardest hit : out of 80 men , 32 were killed or captured . Colonel Israel Shreve , commander of the 2nd New Jersey Regiment wrote on July 6 , 1777 that Maxwell 's Brigade " had 12 killed and about 20 wounded and as many taken prisoners ... " ; he also noted in his journal , " We had between 20 & 30 Wounded ... mostly slightly Except 3 or 4 ... " Two officers are recorded as having been lost in the 2nd New Jersey : Captain Ephraim Anderson , killed , and Captain James Lawrie , captured . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 An area of the battlefield , encompassing about 300 acres ( 120 ha ) in Edison Township , was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2014 . The area includes portions of the municipal land , as well as a part of the Plainfield Country Club . Edison 's Oak Tree Pond Park is used as a reenactment site of the battle . 
 = Commercial Import Program = 
 The Commercial Import Program , sometimes known as the Commodity Import Program ( CIP ) , was an economic aid arrangement between South Vietnam and its main supporter , the United States . It lasted from January 1955 until the Fall of Saigon in 1975 and the dissolution of South Vietnam following the invasion by North Vietnam after US forces had withdrawn from the country due to the 1973 cease @-@ fire agreement . The initiative was a trading plan that was designed to inject large amounts of American capital into the South Vietnamese economy to help fuel its industrialisation , growth and self @-@ sufficiency , without incurring the high levels of inflation that would normally occur in such a drastic injection of money . 
 The CIP was a scheme whereby US dollars were given to the South Vietnamese government treasury . Selected businesspeople were given import licenses that allowed them to purchase US dollars with South Vietnamese currency at a rate far below the market value . The importers then used their American currency to buy US goods , while the Saigon government kept the South Vietnamese currency paid by the businessmen to fund the military and public service . The objective of the mechanism was to inject large amounts of money into the economy in an indirect way , through material goods , so that inflation would be avoided . However , the initiative failed to generate much economic development , as <unk> spent most of their funds on consumer goods . 
 The main effect of the aid package was to fuel a rapid expansion in the urban middle and upper class , while life remained mostly unchanged for South Vietnam 's rural majority . This served to increase anti @-@ government resentment among peasants , while solidifying urban support for the Saigon government . US officials were aware of the failure of the program to propel economic development , but did not try and divert the spending to investment as they regarded the solidification of urban support for the government to be very important . They also used the dependence of the urban class on the CIP to achieve political changes in South Vietnam . In 1963 , when the US sought to pressure the government of Ngo Dinh Diem after the alliance began to falter , they cut off funding as a gesture to the urban civil servant and military officer class that they disapproved of Diem . Following the South Vietnamese leader 's overthrow and assassination in a US @-@ backed coup , the CIP resumed . 
 = = History = = 
 During World War II , Imperial Japan attacked Indochina and wrested control from France , but when they were defeated by the Allies in 1945 , a power vacuum resulted . The communist @-@ dominated Vietminh of Ho Chi Minh fought for Vietnamese independence , while the French attempted to regain control of their colony by creating the French Union @-@ allied State of Vietnam . Up until 1954 , the First Indochina War raged . In 1954 , the French lost the Battle of Dien Bien Phu and the Geneva Conference was held to determine the future of French Indochina . The Vietminh were given control of North Vietnam , while the State of Vietnam controlled the territory south of the 17th parallel . The Geneva agreements , which the State of Vietnam did not sign , called for reunification elections to be held in 1956 . The State of Vietnam received support from the US and other anti @-@ communist countries in the midst of the Cold War , which saw it as a partner in a fight against the spread of communism . 
 The Commercial Import Program was created in January 1955 , immediately upon the transfer of France 's remaining direct influence over the State of Vietnam to the chief of state , former Emperor Bảo Đại and his Prime Minister Ngo Dinh Diem . The Americans and Diem feared a communist electoral victory and national polls never took place . In October , Diem proclaimed himself the president of the newly formed Republic of Vietnam after he won a fraudulent referendum , and the aid continued as the US wanted to build a strong and stable anti @-@ communist state in Southeast Asia . When the program was first introduced , it generated turbulence for merchant importers in Vietnam . As a large proportion of the imports up to that point had been from France , traders who were dependent on selling French products found themselves in difficulties as their wares would now be more expensive than those of import <unk> who now had access to cheaper American alternatives . The suppliers of French goods threatened to organize a strike , but this never materialized . At the time , South Vietnam was also suffering from a lack of foreign currency reserves and the CIP was seen as an urgent mechanism of remedying this . The introduction of the CIP brought an unprecedented new level of economic liberalism and capitalism , and at first , the entrepreneurial class struggled to meet the challenges of a deregulated market , leading to a series of significant shortages and surpluses of various goods due to their inexperience in judging market forces and resultant imbalances in the economy . Initially 25 @,@ 000 applications for import licenses were received , many from speculators . In the early years of the initiative , a proportion of the US funding for the CIP came through the proceeds of the sale of surplus American agricultural products to France . 
 Upon the inception of the program in 1955 , around 20 @,@ 000 CIP licenses were granted , but it was determined that the progress was too unwieldy to manage , so the number of licenses was decreased and people were obliged to assemble into conglomerates to access the scheme . At first , inflation was regarded as such a pressing concern that there were very few limitations on what could be imported , the most notable restrictions being alcohol and jewellery . It was reasoned that more restrictions on imports would cause a lack of supply of goods , causing price increases . However , restrictions were increased in the next three years to an average of 75 . 
 In 1955 , Washington pumped <unk> million into South Vietnam , and the historian George McTurnan Kahin calculated that 87 % of this came through the CIP . From the end of 1955 , when Diem took full control of the country after ousting Bảo Đại and declaring himself president , until 1961 , the US provided Saigon with <unk> billion in aid , mostly through the CIP . In addition , <unk> million of loans were given . In 1958 and 1959 , the CIP accounted for around 80 % of economic assistance . By 1960 , Diem had accumulated <unk> million in reserves . The amount of CIP aid peaked at <unk> million in 1966 and began dropping thereafter , reaching <unk> million by 1973 . 
 = = Economic method = = 
 The program used import subsidies to pump US dollars into the South Vietnamese treasury . The regimes sold these dollars to business people who held licenses to import American goods . The businessmen bought the US dollars from the Saigon treasury with their South Vietnamese piasters at half the official exchange rate ; they then used this cheaply acquired American currency to import US goods . This meant that American manufacturers would still get the same amount of US currency they would have received for selling their goods on the free market , while South Vietnamese importers could get twice as much goods for the same money . The piasters that the Saigon government collected from selling the US aid dollars were to be placed in a fund held by the National Bank of Vietnam , which was to be used to fund the expansion and training of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam , national police and civil service . 
 During the rule of Diem , the majority of the cost of military , police and public service was paid by the US through the CIP . As the extra money was not actually circulating in the South Vietnamese economy and competing for the same supply of goods and services , inflation was not stimulated . A similar fiscal device was employed in the Marshall Plan aid package for the rebuilding of Western Europe following the destruction caused during World War II . One American economist described the CIP as the " greatest invention since the wheel " . 
 = = Operation = = 
 Although the plan was theoretically sound , it was ineffective in stimulating economic growth . During Diem 's time , there was little meaningful economic investment or development of infrastructure . The businessmen mostly used the import subsidies to purchase consumer goods such as boats , motorbikes , refrigerators , radios , music systems and other similar goods , which were luxuries at the time . The program was thus effective in expanding the size of the urban middle class , but it did not generate much economic investment . Only a minority of the purchases were of capital goods such as manufacturing equipment and supplies for factory production . As a result , not much of the subsidies created more economic production . The government funds generated from selling importing licenses also became a problem , with corruption and explicit theft <unk> its effectiveness as a means of bankrolling the military and civil service . In addition , some government officials would not sell the coveted licenses to the businessmen until a bribe was paid . Another criticism of the CIP was that the funds collected by the government were not used for any significant amount of government @-@ sector economic investment but mainly to fund the army . Diem defended this by stating that national security was paramount . 
 In time , the ineffectiveness of the CIP began to concern the Eisenhower administration , who were worried about the lack of industrialization . The corruption that permeated the initiative remained a problem . The rural peasants of Vietnam , who comprised more than 80 % of the population , were unaffected by the aid package except for the resentment that it instilled in them when they observed the relative affluence of their city counterparts compared to their own impoverished state . However , the program was credited with transforming the textile industry , as 25 @,@ 000 sewing machines were imported in the first year of its operation . 
 Phan Quang Dan , an anti @-@ communist opposition politician who was Diem 's most prominent opponent , and one of only two dissidents to win a seat at the 1959 legislative election but was imprisoned by Diem and barred from taking up his position , said that " The U.S. Commercial Import Program — which costs us nothing — brings in on a massive scale luxury goods of all kinds , which give us an artificial society — enhanced material conditions that don 't amount to anything , and no sacrifice ; it brings luxury to our ruling group and middle class , and luxury means corruption . " 
 One of the political impacts of the massive infusion into the South Vietnamese economy was to expand the urban middle @-@ class and ease the pressure on the government to collect taxes . This was because the government had set high import duties , which were effectively 50 % of the cut @-@ price exchange rate used under the CIP ; these funds were also part of normal revenue , and were not subject to American oversight , unlike the proceeds of the counterpart fund . As a result of the proceeds of the import duty , income tax was very low , and without the progressive income tax rate in most countries , the upper @-@ class were not affected by taxation as much as their peers in other nations , and thus supported Diem strongly . The effective income taxation rate was no more than 5 % , and the South Vietnamese president privately told an adviser from the Michigan State University Group that he was happy that the CIP had allowed him to build a large support base among the newly created middle and upper class . American economic aid administrators were also aware of the effects of the CIP on urban political support for Diem and his successors . They were aware that the CIP had not been yielding substantial gains in economic development , and noted this in their reports , but said that the program should be continued regardless , as it was effective in enriching the urban middle class and ensuring their political support , thereby gaining loyalty from military officers , business leaders and public servants . A 1959 report concluded that if the CIP was absent or diluted to equilibrium economic levels , the resulting fall in living standards would create " serious political problems " due to erosion of the government 's support among the urban minority . 
 As the CIP allowed licensees to import goods at half price , it was regarded as a virtual guarantee of business success , regardless of entrepreneurial skill . As a result , the licenses were highly prized . For those who were not confident in their sales ability , a healthy profit was usually made by selling their license to other willing businessmen , especially as demand far outstripped supply . A 1966 US Government report concluded that it was possible to guarantee a 100 % domestic profit on piasters , and that a 50 % profit could be safely achieved by using black market exchange rates and depositing one 's money in an American bank . 
 Despite its shorter term political benefits , the South Vietnamese government also had complaints about the way the Americans set up the CIP . Diem and Nhu claimed that the paperwork involved in the applications for imports made the process was too slow and hindered the development of an emerging economy where the market situation changed rapidly . In particular , any investment in capital goods by importers that cost more than <unk> needed a formal American review before approval . Nhu also publicly criticized the review policy on several occasions , citing several private infrastructure investments that were blocked by American administrators . Nhu and Diem felt that the regulations that the Americans put on the use of the <unk> fund obtained from Vietnamese importers were stifling their ability to accelerate development , especially as the planning and approval reviews took a long time . 
 Despite the fact the CIP had the effect of building an urban middle class base for his regime through the proliferation of consumer goods , Diem was unhappy with the situation , fearing the long @-@ term detrimental effects that the lack of investment in capital goods would have on his country . He was particularly opposed to the clause in the importation regulations that restricted the purchase of capital goods to businesses that were entirely private . This proved to be a large hindrance in several areas , as the South Vietnamese government had a policy of having majority ownership of any industry deemed to be of vital national importance , as well as banning foreigners from having a stake in such ventures . South Vietnam 's Ambassador to the US , Tran Van <unk> protested to the Americans about this clause , without success . <unk> wrote that the American restriction on the importation of capital goods " perpetuates dependence on this aid " , and that " American aid would be most valuable if it were partly devoted to promoting [ the ] country 's industrial capacities " . 
 Over time , the economists in the Eisenhower administration became frustrated with Diem 's refusal to <unk> the <unk> once the Republic of Vietnam had become a stable nation . Diem refused to make the CIP exchange rate equivalent to the free market exchange rate for the two currencies . Although the fixed exchange rate meant that Americans were heavily funding the South Vietnamese economy and that the importing firms could obtain more goods for their money , the rate also meant that South Vietnam goods would not be economically competitive on the export market . Diem was reluctant to cut the currency rate , arguing that it would diminish the value of US aid to South Vietnam and undermine the urban middle class support for his regime as they would resent the loss of their cheap consumer and luxury goods . In 1963 , the US Ambassador Frederick Nolting and his economic advisers exhorted Diem to spend more of the CIP funds on rural development in an attempt to shore up peasant support in the face of increasing communist pressure , but were rebuffed . 
 On October 5 , 1963 , the CIP was briefly suspended by the United States in the wake of the McNamara Taylor mission , a fact @-@ finding expedition to South Vietnam conducted by Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Maxwell D. Taylor to investigate the progress of the fight against the communist Vietcong insurgency . The report concluded that Diem was not concentrating on fighting the insurrection but was instead preoccupied with quelling Buddhist protests for religious equality , such as raiding pagodas and firing on Buddhist dissidents . One of the reasons for the CIP suspension was to give military officers a signal that Washington was unhappy with Diem and therefore increase the prospects of a coup , as well as to try and foster urban resentment towards Diem among those that had previously benefited from the CIP . Another was that Diem might change his policy direction in accordance with US wishes , although they considered this to be unlikely . Funding was restored in early November 1963 , about a month later , after the deposal and assassination of Diem in a military coup . 
 The CIP continued until the dissolution of South Vietnam in April 1975 when the communists overran South Vietnam following the withdrawal of US forces following the 1973 cease @-@ fire agreement . Kahin said that " together with other elements of U.S. economic support ... substantially expanded South Vietnam 's middle class and helped purchase its political loyalty to both the Saigon regime and its American sponsor " and that it " provided the means for a way of life that was as artificial as the economy upon which it rested " . Kahin said that the initiative had the opposite effect of its stated aims , in that it promoted increasing economic dependency . 
 = Dhondup Wangchen = 
 Dhondup Wangchen ( born 17 October 1974 ) is a Tibetan filmmaker imprisoned by the Chinese government in 2008 on charges related to his documentary Leaving Fear Behind . Made with senior Tibetan monk Jigme Gyatso , the documentary consists of interviews with ordinary Tibetan people discussing the 14th Dalai Lama , the Chinese government , the 2008 Beijing Olympics , and Han Chinese migrants to the region . After smuggling the tapes of the interviews out of Tibet , however , Dhondup Wangchen and Jigme Gyatso were detained during the 2008 Tibetan unrest . 
 Dhondup Wangchen was sentenced to six years ' imprisonment for subversion . Numerous international human rights organizations protested his detention , including Amnesty International , which named him a prisoner of conscience . In 2012 , he was awarded the International Press Freedom Award of the US @-@ based Committee to Protect Journalists . 
 He served his full six @-@ year sentence and was released from prison on 5 June 2014 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Dhondup Wangchen was born in 1974 , in <unk> in the <unk> region of Amdo . His family were farmers . He later moved to the capital of Lhasa . There Dhondup Wangchen witnessed a pro @-@ independence demonstration repressed by security authorities , an experience that a relative would later describe as critical to his " political awareness " . In 1993 , he and a cousin crossed the Himalayas into India to receive the blessing of Tibet 's exiled spiritual leader , the Dalai Lama . Dhondup returned to Tibet shortly after to act as an activist for the Tibetan cause . 
 = = Leaving Fear Behind = = 
 In 2006 , Dhondup Wangchen and friend Jigme Gyatso , a senior Tibetan monk , conceived of a documentary interviewing ordinary Tibetan people on their views of the Dalai Lama and the Chinese government in the year leading up to the 2008 Beijing Olympics . The documentary was to be called Leaving Fear Behind . The pair coordinated their efforts with a Dhondup Wangchen 's cousin <unk> <unk> , who remained in Switzerland . In preparation for likely reprisals by the Chinese government , Dhondup Wangchen moved his wife , <unk> Tso , and their four children to Dharamsala , India . 
 Between August 2007 to March 2008 , Dhondup Wangchen and Jigme Gyatso gathered interviews from 108 Tibetan individuals discussing the political situation , all of whom agreed to have their faces shown on camera . The pair gathered 40 hours of interview footage shot by a single camera . They had completed filming and just smuggled the tapes out of Lhasa , the Tibetan capital , when riots erupted and began to spread through Tibetan @-@ majority areas of China . As part of the government response that followed , both Jigme Gyatso and Dhondup Wangchen were detained on 28 March in Tong De , Qinghai Province . 
 The footage were taken to Switzerland , where colleagues at Dhondup Wangchen 's production company , Filming for Tibet , assembled it into Leaving Fear Behind . The 25 @-@ minute documentary constructed from Dhondup Wangchen and Jigme Gyatso 's footage showed ethnic Tibetans criticizing the choice of China to host the 2008 Summer Olympics , praising the Dalai Lama , and expressing dislike of ethnic Han migrants . The result was described by The New York Times as " an unadorned indictment of the Chinese government " . Dhondup Wangchen states in the documentary that " My aim for this film is not to make a famous or particularly entertaining film . This film is about the plight of the Tibetan people — helpless and frustrated . " The film premiered on the opening day of the Olympics and was clandestinely screened for foreign reporters in Beijing . 
 = = Trial and imprisonment = = 
 Following Dhondup Wangchen 's March 2008 arrest , he was held for several days in unofficial detention at <unk> Hotel . Amnesty International reported that while there , Chinese security forces beat him and deprived him of food , water , and sleep . 
 He was later moved to Xining City No. 1 Detention Centre , where he was held incommunicado until April 2009 , when he was allowed to meet with his lawyer , Li Dunyong . Three months later , however , Li Dunyong dropped his case , reporting that he had been ordered to do so by judicial authorities . Another lawyer was reportedly threatened with the closing of his law firm if he chose to defend Dhondup Wangchen . 
 On 28 December 2009 , Dhondup Wangchen was sentenced to six year 's imprisonment for subversion , following a secret trial in Xining . On 7 January 2010 , Filming for Tibet reported that he had been unable to appeal his sentence because he had been denied access to his lawyer until his right to appeal expired . 
 His family stated that he has contracted Hepatitis B while imprisoned , and his health was said to be failing . In April 2010 , he was transferred to <unk> Labour Camp in Qinghai Province , where prisoners ' work reportedly includes the manufacture of bricks , concrete , and aluminum @-@ alloy windows . On 6 April 2012 , Amnesty International issued another appeal on Wangchen 's behalf warning that he was being denied needed medical treatment . 
 = = International response = = 
 Jigme Gyatso and Dhondup Wangchen 's arrests were condemned by numerous human rights groups . Amnesty International protested the arrests of both men , noting Jigme Gyatso to be at risk of further torture and naming Dhondup Wangchen a prisoner of conscience . Human Rights Watch , Front Line , The Committee to Protect Journalists , Reporters Without Borders , and the Tibetan Center for Human Rights and Democracy also advocated on Dhondup Wangchen 's behalf . 
 On 10 March 2011 , former Speaker of the United States House of Representatives Nancy Pelosi called for Dhondup Wangchen 's release in honor of Tibetan Uprising Day . Also in early 2011 , Boston 's American Repertory Theater and System of a Down 's Serj Tankian dedicated their production of Prometheus Bound to him and seven other activists , stating in program notes that " by singing the story of Prometheus , the God who defied the tyrant Zeus by giving the human race both fire and art , this production hopes to give a voice to those currently being silenced or endangered by modern @-@ day oppressors " . 
 A coalition of human rights and Tibetan activist groups calling for Dhondup Wangchen 's release held a rally in New York City 's Times Square on 9 March 2012 , the day before Tibetan Uprising Day . Speakers included Dhondup Wangchen 's wife Lhamo Tso as well as poet @-@ activist Tenzin <unk> . Excerpts from Leaving Fear Behind were shown on a twelve @-@ foot video screen beneath the Xinhua Jumbotron . 
 In 2012 , Dhondup Wangchen won the International Press Freedom Award of the Committee to Protect Journalists . The award recognizes journalists who show courage in defending press freedom despite facing attacks , threats , or imprisonment . He was honored in absentia at the organization 's November 2012 banquet due to his ongoing imprisonment . 
 In 2014 , he receives the Václav Havel Prize for Creative Dissent . 
 = Buddha ( album ) = 
 Buddha is the third demo by the American rock band Blink @-@ 182 . Recorded and released in January 1994 under the name Blink , it was the band 's first recording to be sold and distributed . Blink @-@ 182 was formed in Poway , California , a suburb outside of San Diego , in August 1992 . Guitarist Tom DeLonge and Mark Hoppus were introduced to one another by Hoppus ' sister . The duo recruited drummer Scott Raynor and began to practice together in his bedroom , spending hours together writing music , attending punk shows and movies and playing practical jokes . The band had recorded two previous demos in Raynor 's bedroom — Flyswatter and Demo No.2 — using a four track recorder . Most of the tracks from the demo were re @-@ recorded for their debut album Cheshire Cat . 
 Pat Secor , Hoppus ' boss at music store The Wherehouse , was attempting to start his own record label , named Filter Records . Secor pulled money from his savings and helped finance and produce the demo recording . Buddha was recorded live at local Santee studio Doubletime , compiling a collection that represented nearly all of the songs the band had written up to that point . Hoppus and friends Cam Jones and Kerry Key created the cassette artwork , and the original cassette packaging was compiled by the band and Hoppus ' family . Locally distributed to several San Diego record stores and available for purchase at early concerts , Buddha helped the trio cement an audience and was a deciding factor in their signing to local label Cargo in 1993 . 
 The recording became the subject of a legal dispute between the band and Secor in later years . The band accused Secor of selling the tape without paying royalties , and attempted to put a stop to his distribution with help of lawyer Joe Escalante of The Vandals , who also owned independent record label Kung Fu Records . Kung Fu digitally remixed and remastered the demo and commercially re @-@ released it in October 1998 , deleting two original tracks for other recordings from the original session . Kung Fu has since reportedly sold 300 @,@ 000 copies of Buddha . It is currently the only commercially available demo by Blink @-@ 182 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Blink @-@ 182 was formed in Poway , California , a suburb outside of San Diego , in August 1992 . After Mark Hoppus graduated from high school in Ridgecrest , he relocated to San Diego to work at a record store and attend college . Tom DeLonge was kicked out of Poway High for attending a basketball game drunk and was forced to attend another local school for one semester . At Rancho Bernardo High School , he befriended Kerry Key , also interested in punk music . Key 's girlfriend , Anne Hoppus , introduced her brother Mark to DeLonge on August 2 , 1992 . The two clicked instantly and played for hours in DeLonge 's garage , exchanging lyrics and co @-@ writing songs — one of which became " Carousel " . DeLonge recruited friend Scott Raynor for drums , whom he met at a Rancho <unk> Battle of the Bands competition . Raynor was by far the youngest member of the trio at 14 , and his event account differs significantly : he claims he and DeLonge formed the group after meeting at the Battle of the Bands and worked through a variety of bassists before meeting Hoppus . 
 The trio began to practice together in Raynor 's bedroom , spending hours together writing music , attending punk shows and movies , and playing practical jokes . Hoppus and DeLonge would alternate singing vocal parts . The trio first operated under a variety of names , including Duck Tape and Figure 8 , until DeLonge rechristened the band " Blink " . Hoppus ' girlfriend was angered by her boyfriend 's constant attention for the band and demanded him to make a choice between the band and her , which resulted in Hoppus leaving the band shortly after formation . Shortly thereafter , DeLonge and Raynor borrowed a four track recorder from friend and collaborator Cam Jones and were preparing to record a demo tape , with Jones on bass . Hoppus promptly broke up with his girlfriend and returned to the band . Flyswatter — a combination of original songs and punk covers — was recorded in Raynor 's bedroom in May 1993 . Southern California had a large punk population in the early 1990s , aided by an avid surfing , skating and snowboarding scene . In contrast to East Coast punk music , the West Coast wave of groups , Blink included , typically introduced more melodic aspects to their music . " New York is gloomy , dark and cold . It makes different music . The Californian middle @-@ class suburbs have nothing to be that bummed about , " said DeLonge . San Diego at this time was " hardly a hotbed of [ musical ] activity " , but the band 's popularity grew as did California punk rock concurrently in the mainstream . 
 The band 's first performance was at a local high school during lunch , and soon the trio graduated to San Diego 's Spirit Club and influential local shop Alley Kat Records . DeLonge called clubs constantly in San Diego asking for a spot to play , as well as calling up local high schools convincing them that Blink was a " motivational band with a strong anti @-@ drug message " in hopes to play at an assembly or lunch . The band soon became part of a circuit that also included the likes of Ten Foot Pole and Unwritten Law , and they found their way onto the bill as the opening band for local acts at SOMA , a local all @-@ ages venue which they longed to headline . The band 's equipment was piled into a blue station wagon for touring purposes and they first began to play shows outside San Diego . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Buddha was financed by Pat Secor , Hoppus ' boss at Wherehouse Music in San Diego . Secor was wanting to start his own record label and offered to help pay for costs . " He was like , hey , I 'll front you the money , and we 'll split the profits until you pay me back , " recalled Hoppus in 2001 . The two had met when Secor transferred from a north San Diego location . The two became friends quickly , despite Secor 's seniority of post . " At that point they 'd played around enough to get their chops up so I took all the money I had in savings and we went into the studio for two days , " said Secor . 
 The recording sessions at Doubletime Studios in Santee , California took place in January 1994 , and were scheduled around work and school commitments . Hoppus was sick at the time of recording . Despite this , the band carried on and the demo was complete within two days . " Buddha was cut live then we added the vocals . Two days and they were done — including the mix . It 's quite standard for a young punk band to do that , " said engineer Jeff Forrest . Despite this , the liner notes for the cassette claim it was recorded in twelve hours , while the later remaster of Buddha contend it was recorded " over three rainy nights . " The trio were " super stoked " about a sound effects tape they found at the studio , and took time out to add in applause and laughter tracks because they deemed it humorous . 
 Hoppus and DeLonge took the songwriting for their first legitimate release very seriously . The two strove for perfection writing songs that they felt would be relatable . Blink also recorded joke tracks , as they felt that , in addition to the serious songs , " it was almost as important to make people laugh . " DeLonge recalled that the band spent more time at the end of production on Buddha trying to perfect the joke songs rather than their serious tracks . The band 's main influence on Buddha , according to DeLonge , was the Descendents . " I was trying to emulate that band . Really punchy guitars , fast , simple and formulaic nursery rhyme love songs , " he said in 2012 . 
 = = Packaging and release = = 
 The photographs in the original cassette release of Buddha were photographs taken by friend of the band Cam Jones . Kerry Key , drummer for the <unk> and friend of the band , also is credited with artwork in the original cassette . To produce the artwork , Hoppus and Jones spent an afternoon together taking " artsy " photographs in and around Raynor 's backyard . The cover art is a picture of a Buddha statue , which was a present from Hoppus ' stepfather that the bassist grabbed on the way to Raynor 's for the photos . After developing the photos , they took them to a copy shop to run off color copies . Afterwards , they cut , pasted and rearranged them until they found something suitable . The lyric sheets were handwritten and photocopied . Hoppus and his family in Ridgecrest would spend hours folding and combining pieces of artwork to compile the Buddha cassette . When this was complete , Hoppus would load the cassettes into his car and deliver them to local record stores around town . 
 " I totally remember driving around to all the record stores to drop off tapes to sell . I 'd go to Lou 's Records , and Off the Record , and Music Trader . It was so cool because the tapes were actually selling , that 's why I had to keep going back every week . Music Trader would have sold one copy , Off the Record sold two , or whatever . But that meant people were actually walking into a music store and buying something we had written and recorded . It was awesome . " 
 The demo tape , which was originally untitled , came to be known by the name Buddha , and was released by Filter Records in 1994 . Cassette copies of Buddha were also sold at early Blink concerts , alongside homemade T @-@ shirts . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic called Buddha a " promising debut , " considering it " a solid <unk> record that illustrates the group 's flair for speedy , catchy hooks and irreverent humor . " Rolling Stone viewed it , alongside proper debut album Cheshire Cat ( 1995 ) as " slapped together lilting melodies and racing beats in an attempt to connect emo and skate punk , a sort of pop hardcore . " " This fast and furious beauty may have been recorded in two days , but it soon had the labels knocking at DeLonge and co ’ s door , " said Total Guitar in 2012 . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 The rights to Buddha and its associated recordings were the subject of a legal dispute between the band and Secor in later years . According to Secor , he and the band had a gentleman 's agreement : he would pay for the costs of recording and manufacturing the tape , and in exchange would receive half of all the profits from it . Raynor contends that the oral agreement was that Secor would invest $ 1 @,@ 000 and when that money was recouped , the band would have complete ownership of the work product . Secor helped the band sign to Cargo Music in 1994 , as he had connections at the label ; he felt that by helping the briskly growing band sign a deal he could build his own label , Filter , in the wake of Blink 's success . According to Secor , he attempted to contact the band to discuss the rights to the tape , but would only receive comments such as " Oh , let me call my manager and I 'll call you right back . " Secor asserted he should have the rights to the master tapes , as he financed the entire production . Cargo Music began calling and making threats , and Secor had no money to fight back with , as they had no written contract . In 1996 , the band signed a joint @-@ venture deal with major label MCA Records , who also began making calls to Secor . " Try going up against that , " Secor remarked in 2001 . 
 The band began to grow suspicious that Secor was keeping the money from selling the tape , and contacted their lawyer — Joe Escalante of The Vandals , who also owned independent record label Kung Fu Records . The group informed as Escalante that they believed " someone 's bootlegging it , " and requested his legal help to stop Secor . In exchange for legal fees , Blink @-@ 182 would allow Escalante 's label , Kung Fu , to re @-@ release Buddha on compact disc . The band had told Secor to not sell any more copies of the tape , but they held suspicions that he had anyway . <unk> , Escalante ordered a tape from Secor , and Secor sold it to him . The band asserted that they were not receiving royalties for these sales . " I paid off all of the royalties for the remaining stash of tapes that I had of Buddha , " said Secor in 2001 . " It was about 25 . The tapes sold for five bucks , and I gave them half of what their profit would be . I wanted to have a few to give to people and to have on hand . " Secor felt it was his right to sell his stock of the tape , as the band " had been paid royalties for that already . " 
 Kung Fu re @-@ released Buddha on CD and cassette in November 1998 , and has since re @-@ released the recording on vinyl and retains digital distribution . The remaster cleans and sharpens the sound of tracks , and contains a slightly different track listing . " They 'd already sold 60 @,@ 000 copies of Cheshire Cat , and I thought , ' Man , if I can sell just 10 % of that that would be great for the label , ' and of course it sold a lot more because they went on to be superstars , " said Escalante . In 2001 , the label had reportedly sold 300 @,@ 000 copies of Buddha . " At this point it 's not even the money , " Secor said at the time . " It 's the fact that there is no mention of my work anywhere ; no credit has been given to me . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Mark Hoppus , Tom DeLonge , and Scott Raynor , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded – The Re @-@ Up = 
 Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded – The Re @-@ Up is the reissue of Trinidadian @-@ American recording artist Nicki Minaj 's second studio album Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded ( 2012 ) . It was released on November 19 , 2012 , by Young Money , Cash Money , and Republic Records . Released seven months after the original , The Re @-@ Up features seven newly recorded songs and an exclusive behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage DVD . The new material incorporates hip hop and R & B styles . As co @-@ executive producer , Minaj enlisted collaborators Boi @-@ 1da , Juicy J and T @-@ Minus . 
 Upon its release , Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded – The Re @-@ Up received generally positive reviews from music critics , who complimented the balanced variety of genres . Its three singles " The Boys " , " Freedom " , and " High School " peaked at numbers 41 , 31 , and 20 on the US Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart respectively , and the latter peaked at number 64 on the Billboard Hot 100 . The album was additionally promoted through the Pink Friday : Reloaded Tour and Minaj 's performance of " Freedom " at the 2012 American Music Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 In April 2012 , Minaj released her second studio album Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded . She recorded the album between 2011 and early 2012 . For the album 's production , Minaj worked with collaborators including Alex da Kid , David Guetta , Dr. Luke , Hit @-@ Boy , and RedOne . Following its release , Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded became a commercial success . It peaked at number one on the UK Albums Chart . It also peaked at number one the US Billboard 200 . It was met with a generally mixed response from music critics , receiving an average score of 60 , based on 30 reviews on Metacritic , indicating " generally mixed or average reviews " . The album 's lead single " Starships " became Minaj 's most successful and certified single to date , becoming one of the best @-@ selling singles of all time and making US Billboard history after debuting in the top ten and then spending a total of 21 consecutive weeks in the top ten of the Hot 100 . 
 At the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards , Minaj announced the reissue of Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded , subtitled The Re @-@ Up , commenting " I 'm putting lots of new songs on there and I 'm actually going to drop my new single like next week . <unk> , you are gonna spaz . You are gonna love it . You are gonna go crazy ! " Its artwork was released the following month , featuring an image of Minaj from the music video of her song " I Am Your Leader " . In November , she added that the expanded album would contain an additional disc with seven newly recorded songs and an exclusive behind @-@ the @-@ scenes DVD to supplement the standard edition of the original album . The project served as the main focus of her three @-@ part E ! special Nicki Minaj : My Truth . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Minaj commented on On Air with Ryan Seacrest that " I feel like the music is such a better representation of me where I am now as an artist in my career . As long as people can hear the music , I 'm good . " Much of the new material incorporates hip hop and R & B styles previously seen in Minaj 's earlier mixtapes . The opening track " Up in Flames " incorporates a " slow , heavy and melodramatic beat " , where Minaj addresses her wealth and delivers negative remarks directed towards her adversaries . The second song " Freedom " was compared to material from her debut studio album Pink Friday ( 2010 ) ; it utilizes minimal production and reflects on Minaj 's rise to prominence . The third song " Hell Yeah " features Parker and further criticizes Minaj 's opponents . She references her much @-@ publicized on @-@ set tension with fellow American Idol judge Mariah Carey in the line " But I 'm quick to check a bitch if she ’ s outta line " and references the series ' personnel in the line " Shout out Mike Darnell and Nigel [ Lythgoe ] / Why these bums so mad that the queen on Idol " . 
 The fourth track " High School " features Lil Wayne and discusses sexual desires with a man who had been in prison . The fifth song " I 'm Legit " features Ciara and was characterized by having " snappy flows " and being " primed for the streets and clubs " . The sixth track " I <unk> These <unk> " features Tyga and <unk> ; its lyrics were described by Sal Cinquemani of Slant as " less clever than inexcusably archaic " . The seventh song " The Boys " features American recording artist Cassie . It incorporates both hip hop and electropop influences , and has been described as a " girls ' night anthem " . The final track " Va Va Voom " was previously included on the original deluxe version of Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded , and also contains prominent electropop styles . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " The Boys " , a collaboration with Cassie , was released as the lead single from The Re @-@ Up on September 13 , 2012 . The song peaked at number 41 on the US Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . Its music video premiered through Vevo on October 18 , 2012 . 
 " Freedom " was released as the second single digitally through iTunes on November 2 , 2012 . The song peaked at number 31 on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . Its music video premiered on 106 and Park on November 19 , 2012 . 
 The third single " High School " features Lil Wayne and was released on April 16 , 2013 . The song peaked at number 64 on the Billboard Hot 100 , and at number 20 on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . Its music video was released by MTV on April 2 , 2013 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded - The Re @-@ Up received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 72 , based on eight reviews . David Jeffries of Allmusic opined that " the too @-@ pop Roman Reloaded now feels more balanced once this eight @-@ track EP worth of material tips the scales " , adding that the additional tracks and DVD is " the better deal and bigger picture " than the original . Dan Weiss of the Boston Phoenix complimented Minaj 's rapping , commenting that " the rapper who rhymes " <unk> @-@ vo @-@ <unk> " with " po @-@ ly @-@ ga @-@ mist " is X @-@ Acto sharp as ever " . The Los Angeles Times ' Gerrick D. Kennedy noted the variety of genres incorporated in the reissue , stating " Sure , she flirts with dance pop and R & B balladry , but you can forgive her for wanting to satisfy different tastes . Here , it actually works " . Andy Gill of The Independent provided a mixed review , feeling that the material was generic and " does not add much to the Minaj experience " . Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani criticized the lyrical content and featured guests , adding that " as long as [ Minaj ] keeps comparing herself to Jesus , we probably shouldn 't hold our breath " . Kyle Anderson of Entertainment Weekly placed the album at number two on his list of The Worst Albums Of The Year , writing that the album was " soul @-@ less , lazy , and totally unnecessary . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Charting together with the original Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded ( according to the rules by Billboard ) , The Re @-@ Up sold 36 @,@ 000 copies in first @-@ week sales and rose eighty spots on the US Billboard 200 , from number 107 to number 27 , with a 591 % sales gain . An associate from Billboard commented on the commercial performance of The Re @-@ Up stating that " expanded reissues aren 't always guaranteed big sellers . It really depends on the extra content and timing of the release ... Nicki 's reissue was seemingly timed to profit from holiday shopping " , also adding that the sales of The Re @-@ Up were actually better than similar reissues by Minaj 's contemporaries . In New Zealand , the album charted within Roman Reloaded release and debuted at twenty @-@ one . 
 Minaj commented that of the album 's limited availability , " it 's hard to get the album because the stores basically said that the last few re @-@ releases [ stores ] had put out did not do well and they didn 't want to take a chance . Target and Wal @-@ Mart are not selling the album , and Target is actually my biggest retailer . Best Buy only took limited [ stock ] because they wanted to play it safe . It kinda sets you up to fail . " Walmart responded that they do not issue albums with the Parental Advisory label , while Target sold the record on their website anyway . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ( * ) Denotes co @-@ producer . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Allmusic . 
 Performance 
 Producers 
 Technical 
 Miscellaneous 
 Joshua Berkman – A & R 
 Safaree " SB " Samuels – A & R 
 Hype Williams – photography 
 <unk> Wilson – cover design 
 = = Charts = = 
 Notes 
 A ^ In these territories , The Re @-@ Up was combined with the original chart entry for Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded , and thus re @-@ entered the chart as one release . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = SMS Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse = 
 SMS Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse ( " HMS Emperor William the Great " ) was a German pre @-@ dreadnought battleship of the Kaiser Friedrich III class , built around the turn of the 20th century . The ship was one of the first battleships built by the German Imperial Navy ( Kaiserliche Marine ) as part of a program of naval expansion under Kaiser Wilhelm II . Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse was built in Kiel at the Germaniawerft shipyard . She was laid down in January 1898 , launched in June 1899 , and completed in May 1901 . The ship was armed with a main battery of four 24 @-@ centimeter ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) guns in two twin gun turrets . 
 Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse served in the main fleet — the Heimatflotte ( Home Fleet ) and later the Hochseeflotte ( High Seas Fleet ) — for the first seven years of her career . She participated in several of the fleet 's training cruises and maneuvers , primarily in the North and Baltic Seas . Her peacetime career was relatively uneventful and she suffered no accidents . She was decommissioned for a major reconstruction in 1908 – 10 , after which she was assigned to the Reserve Division with her four sister ships . 
 At the outbreak of World War I in 1914 , the battleship and her sisters were placed back in active service as the V Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet and tasked with coastal defense in the North Sea . They were also deployed briefly to the Baltic but saw no action . In 1915 , the ships were again withdrawn from service and relegated to secondary duties . Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse was used as a depot ship in Kiel and eventually a torpedo target ship . After the war , the Treaty of Versailles greatly reduced the size of the German Navy . The vessel was sold for scrapping to a German company and broken up in 1920 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse was 125 @.@ 3 m ( 411 ft 1 in ) long overall and had a beam of 20 @.@ 4 m ( 66 ft 11 in ) and a draft of 7 @.@ 89 m ( 25 ft 11 in ) forward and 8 @.@ 25 m ( 27 ft 1 in ) aft . She displaced 11 @,@ 097 t ( 10 @,@ 922 long tons ) normally and up to 11 @,@ 785 t ( 11 @,@ 599 long tons ) at full load . The ship was powered by three 3 @-@ cylinder vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines that drove three screw propellers . Steam was provided by four Marine @-@ type and eight cylindrical boilers , all of which burned coal . Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse 's powerplant was rated at 13 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 12 @,@ 822 ihp ; 9 @,@ 561 kW ) , which generated a top speed of 17 @.@ 5 knots ( 32 @.@ 4 km / h ; 20 @.@ 1 mph ) . 
 The ship 's armament consisted of a main battery of four 24 cm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) SK L / 40 guns in twin gun turrets , one fore and one aft of the central superstructure . Her secondary armament consisted of eighteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 inch ) SK L / 40 guns and twelve 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 45 in ) SK L / 30 quick @-@ firing guns . She also carried twelve 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) machine cannon . Six 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes were mounted in above @-@ water swivel mounts . The ship 's belt armor was 300 mm ( 11 @.@ 8 in ) thick , and the deck was 65 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) thick . The conning tower and main battery turrets were protected with 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) of armor , and the secondary casemates received 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) of protection . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Construction and early service = = = 
 Kaiser Wilhelm II , the emperor of Germany , believed that a strong navy was necessary for the country to expand its influence outside continental Europe . He initiated a program of naval expansion in the late 1880s ; the first battleships built under this program were the four Brandenburg @-@ class ships . These were immediately followed by the five Kaiser Friedrich III @-@ class battleships , of which Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse was the third . Her keel was laid on 22 January 1898 at the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel , as construction number 22 . She was ordered under the contract name Ersatz König Wilhelm , to replace the obsolete armored frigate König Wilhelm . Her scheduled launching on 29 April 1899 was delayed to 1 June after a large fire at the shipyard damaged the slipway . Louise , the Grand Duchess of Baden , christened the ship after her father Wilhelm I of Germany , the ship 's namesake . Wilhelm II gave the launching speech for the ship commemorating his grandfather . After completing fitting @-@ out work , dockyard sea trials began on 19 February 1901 , followed by acceptance trials that started on 18 March . These were completed by May , and she was formally commissioned on 5 May . That year , Erich Raeder — who went on to command the Kriegsmarine in World War II — was promoted to serve as a watch officer aboard her . 
 After commissioning in 1901 , Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse joined her sister ships in the I Squadron of the Heimatflotte ( Home Fleet ) . After her sister Kaiser Friedrich III ran aground and had to be docked for repairs , Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse replaced her as the I Squadron flagship , which was commanded by Prince Heinrich , the brother of Wilhelm II . She held this post until 24 October , when Kaiser Friedrich III returned to service . In the meantime , Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse was present for the Kiel Week sailing regatta in June and the dedication of a monument at the <unk> ( Naval Academy ) in Kiel . At the end of July , she led the squadron on a cruise to Spanish waters , and while docked in Cádiz , they rendezvoused with the Brandenburg @-@ class battleships returning from East Asian waters . The I Squadron was back in Kiel by 11 August , though the late arrival of the Brandenburgs delayed the participation of the I Squadron in the annual autumn fleet training . The maneuvers began with exercises in the German Bight , followed by a mock attack on the fortifications in the lower Elbe . Gunnery drills took place in Kiel Bay before the fleet steamed to Danzig Bay , where the maneuvers concluded on 15 September . Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse and the rest of I Squadron went on their normal winter cruise to Norway in December , which included a stop at Oslo from 7 to 12 December . 
 In 1902 , the new battleship Wittelsbach ran aground off <unk> ; Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse took her under tow back to port . The I Squadron went on a short cruise in the western Baltic then embarked on a major cruise around the British Isles , which lasted from 25 April to 28 May . Individual and squadron maneuvers took place from June to August , interrupted only by a cruise to Norway in July . The annual fleet maneuvers began in August in the Baltic and concluded in the North Sea with a fleet review in the Jade . During the exercises , Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse was assigned to the " hostile " force , as were several of her sister ships . The " hostile " force was first tasked with preventing the " German " squadron from passing through the Great Belt in the Baltic . Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse and several other battleships were then tasked with forcing an entry into the mouth of the Elbe River , where the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal and Hamburg could be seized . The " hostile " flotilla accomplished these tasks within three days . The regular winter cruise followed during 1 – 12 December . 
 In 1903 , the fleet , which was composed of only one squadron of battleships , was reorganized as the " Active Battle Fleet " . Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse remained in the I Squadron along with her sister ships and the newest Wittelsbach @-@ class battleships , while the older Brandenburg @-@ class ships were placed in reserve to be rebuilt . The first quarter of 1903 followed the usual pattern of training exercises . The squadron went on a training cruise in the Baltic , followed by a voyage to Spain from 7 May to 10 June . In July , the I Squadron went on its annual cruise to Norway . The autumn maneuvers consisted of a blockade exercise in the North Sea , a cruise of the entire fleet first to Norwegian waters and then to Kiel in early September , and finally a mock attack on Kiel . The exercises concluded on 12 September . The winter cruise began on 23 November in the eastern Baltic and continued into the Skagerrak on 1 December . 
 = = = 1904 – 14 = = = 
 The I Squadron held its first exercise of 1904 in the Skagerrak from 11 to 21 January . Further squadron exercises followed from 8 to 17 March . A major fleet exercise took place in the North Sea in May , and in July the I Squadron and the I Scouting Group visited Britain , stopping at Plymouth on 10 July . The German fleet departed on 13 July , bound for the Netherlands ; the I Squadron anchored in Vlissingen the following day . There , the ships were visited by Queen Wilhelmina . The I Squadron remained in Vlissingen until 20 July , when it departed for a cruise in the northern North Sea with the rest of the fleet . The squadron stopped in Molde , Norway , on 29 July , while the other units went to other ports . The fleet reassembled on 6 August and steamed back to Kiel , where it conducted a mock attack on the harbor on 12 August . The fleet then began preparations for the autumn maneuvers , which began on 29 August in the Baltic . The fleet moved to the North Sea on 3 September , where it took part in a major landing operation , after which the ships took the ground troops from the IX Corps that participated in the exercises to Altona for a parade for Wilhelm II . The ships then conducted their own parade for the Kaiser off the island of Helgoland on 6 September . Three days later , the fleet returned to the Baltic via the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal , where it participated in further landing operations with the IX Corps and the Guards Corps . On 15 September , the maneuvers came to an end . The I Squadron went on its winter training cruise , this time to the eastern Baltic , from 22 November to 2 December . 
 The ships of the I Squadron went on a pair of training cruises during 9 – 19 January and 27 February – 16 March 1905 . Individual and squadron training followed , with an emphasis on gunnery drills . On 12 July , the fleet began a major training exercise in the North Sea . The fleet then cruised through the Kattegat and stopped in Copenhagen and Stockholm . The summer cruise ended on 9 August ; the autumn maneuvers that would normally have begun shortly thereafter were delayed by a visit from the British Channel Fleet that month . The British fleet stopped in Danzig , Swinemünde , and Flensburg , where it was greeted by units of the German Navy ; Kaiser Wilhelm II and the main German fleet were anchored at Swinemünde for the occasion . The visit 's impact was lessened by the ongoing Anglo @-@ German naval arms race . As a result of the British visit , the 1905 autumn maneuvers were shortened considerably , from 6 to 13 September , and consisted only of exercises in the North Sea . The first exercise presumed a naval blockade in the German Bight , and the second envisioned a hostile fleet attempting to force the defenses of the Elbe . During the exercises , Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse won the Kaiser 's Schiesspreis ( Shooting Prize ) for excellent gunnery in the I Squadron . In October , the ship was reassigned to the I Division of the II Squadron . In early December , the I and II Squadrons went on their regular winter cruise , this time to Danzig , where they arrived on 12 December . On the return trip to Kiel , the fleet conducted tactical exercises . 
 Over the winter of 1906 – 07 , Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse underwent a major overhaul in Kiel , which was completed by the end of April . By this time , the newest Deutschland @-@ class battleships were coming into service ; along with the Braunschweig @-@ class battleships , these provided enough modern battleships to create two full battle squadrons . As a result , the Heimatflotte was renamed the Hochseeflotte ( High Seas Fleet ) . Starting on 13 May , major fleet exercises took place in the North Sea and lasted until 8 June with a cruise around the Skagen into the Baltic . The fleet began its usual summer cruise to Norway in mid @-@ July . The fleet was present for the birthday of Norwegian King Haakon VII on 3 August . The German ships departed the following day for Helgoland , to join exercises being conducted there . The fleet was back in Kiel by 15 August , where preparations for the autumn maneuvers began . On 22 – 24 August , the fleet took part in landing exercises in Eckernförde Bay outside Kiel . The maneuvers were paused from 31 August to 3 September when the fleet hosted vessels from Denmark and Sweden , along with a Russian squadron from 3 to 9 September in Kiel . The maneuvers resumed on 8 September and lasted five more days . 
 A shorter period of dockyard work took place from 7 December to 27 January 1908 . She returned to the fleet for the normal peacetime routine of training exercises , and after the conclusion of the autumn maneuvers , Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse was decommissioned in Kiel on 21 September . She was taken into the Kaiserliche Werft shipyard in Kiel for an extensive modernization that lasted until 1910 . During the refit , four of the ship 's 15 cm guns and the stern @-@ mounted torpedo tube were removed . Two 8 @.@ 8 cm guns were added and the arrangement of the 8 @.@ 8 cm battery was modified . Her superstructure was also cut down to reduce the ship 's tendency to roll excessively , and the ship 's funnels were lengthened . After reconstruction , the ship was assigned to the Reserve Division in the Baltic , along with her sister ships . She was reactivated on 31 July 1911 and assigned to the III Squadron during the annual fleet exercises , then returned on 15 September to the Reserve Division . She remained there for the rest of her peacetime career . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 As a result of the outbreak of World War I , Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse and her sisters were brought out of reserve and mobilized as the V Battle Squadron on 5 August 1914 . The ships were prepared for war very slowly , and were not ready for service in the North Sea until the end of August . They were initially tasked with coastal defense , but they served in this capacity for a very short time . In mid @-@ September , the V Squadron was transferred to the Baltic , under the command of Prince Heinrich . He initially planned to launch a major amphibious assault against the Russians at Windau , but a shortage of transports forced a revision of the plan . Instead , the V Squadron was to carry the landing force , but this too was cancelled after Heinrich received false reports of British warships having entered the Baltic on 25 September . Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse and her sisters returned to Kiel the following day , disembarked the landing force , and then proceeded to the North Sea , where they resumed guard ship duties . Before the end of the year , the V Squadron was once again transferred to the Baltic . 
 Prince Heinrich ordered a foray toward Gotland . On 26 December 1914 , the battleships rendezvoused with the Baltic cruiser division in the Bay of Pomerania and then departed on the sortie . Two days later , the fleet arrived off Gotland to show the German flag , and was back in Kiel by 30 December . The squadron returned to the North Sea for guard duties , but was withdrawn from front @-@ line service in February 1915 . Shortages of trained crews in the High Seas Fleet , coupled with the risk of operating older ships in wartime , necessitated the deactivation of Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse and her sisters . Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse first went to Hamburg , where her crew was reduced on 5 March . She was moved to Kiel on 30 April , where the rest of her crew were removed . She was disarmed and thereafter used as a depot ship . The following year , the ship was used as a torpedo target ship . In November 1918 , Germany surrendered and signed the Armistice at Compiègne that ended the fighting . According to Article 181 of the Treaty of Versailles , signed on 28 June 1919 , that formally ended the war , Germany was permitted to retain only six battleships of the " Deutschland or Lothringen types " . On 6 December 1919 , the vessel was struck from the naval list and sold to a shipbreaking firm based in Berlin . The following year , Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse was broken up for scrap metal in Kiel @-@ Nordmole . 
 = Death of John Lennon = 
 John Lennon was an English musician who gained worldwide fame as one of the members of the Beatles , for his subsequent solo career , and for his political activism and pacifism . On 8 December 1980 , Lennon was shot by Mark David Chapman in the archway of the Dakota , his residence in New York City . Lennon had just returned from Record Plant Studio with his wife , Yoko Ono . 
 After sustaining four major gunshot wounds , Lennon was pronounced dead on arrival at Roosevelt Hospital . At the hospital , it was stated that nobody could have lived for more than a few minutes after sustaining such injuries . Shortly after local news stations reported Lennon 's death , crowds gathered at Roosevelt Hospital and in front of the Dakota . Lennon was cremated at the Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale , New York two days after his death ; the ashes were given to Ono , who chose not to hold a funeral for him . The first media report of Lennon 's death to a US national audience was announced by Howard Cosell , on ABC 's Monday Night Football . 
 = = Events preceding his death = = 
 = = = 8 December 1980 = = = 
 Photographer Annie Leibovitz went to the Lennons ' apartment to do a photo shoot for Rolling Stone magazine . Leibovitz promised Lennon that a photo with Ono would make the front cover of the magazine , even though she initially tried to get a picture with Lennon by himself . Leibovitz said , " Nobody wanted [ Ono ] on the cover " . Lennon insisted that both he and his wife be on the cover , and after taking the pictures , Leibovitz left their apartment at 3 : 30 p.m. After the photo shoot , Lennon gave what would be his last interview , to San Francisco DJ Dave <unk> , for a music show to be broadcast on the RKO Radio Network . At 5 : 40 p.m. , Lennon and Ono , delayed by a late limousine , left their apartment to mix the song " Walking on Thin Ice " ( an Ono song featuring Lennon on lead guitar ) at the Record Plant Studio . 
 = = = Mark David Chapman = = = 
 As Lennon and Ono walked to a limousine , shared with the RKO Radio crew , they were approached by several people seeking autographs . Among them was Mark David Chapman . It was common for fans to wait outside the Dakota to meet Lennon and ask for his autograph . Chapman , a 25 @-@ year @-@ old security guard from Honolulu , Hawaii , had previously travelled to New York to murder Lennon in October ( before the release of Double Fantasy ) , but had changed his mind and returned home . Chapman silently handed Lennon a copy of Double Fantasy , and Lennon obliged with an autograph . After signing the album , Lennon asked , " Is this all you want ? " Chapman smiled and nodded in agreement . Photographer and Lennon fan Paul <unk> took a photo of the encounter . Chapman had been waiting for Lennon outside the Dakota since mid @-@ morning , and had even approached the Lennons ' five @-@ year @-@ old son , Sean , who was with the family nanny , Helen Seaman , when they returned home in the afternoon . According to Chapman , he briefly touched the boy 's hand . 
 The Lennons spent several hours at the Record Plant studio before returning to the Dakota , at approximately 10 : 50 pm . Lennon had decided against dining out so he could be home in time to say goodnight to his son , before going on to the Stage Deli restaurant with Ono . Lennon liked to oblige any fans who had been waiting for long periods of time to meet him with autographs or pictures , once saying during an interview with BBC Radio 's Andy Peebles on 6 December 1980 : " People come and ask for autographs , or say ' Hi ' , but they don 't bug you . " The Lennons exited their limousine on 72nd Street instead of driving into the more secure courtyard of the Dakota . 
 = = Murder = = 
 The Dakota 's doorman , Jose Perdomo , and a nearby cab driver saw Chapman standing in the shadows by the archway . As Lennon passed by , he glanced briefly at Chapman , appearing to recognize him from earlier . Seconds later , Chapman took aim directly at the center of Lennon 's back and fired five hollow @-@ point bullets at him from a Charter Arms .38 Special revolver in rapid succession from a range of about nine or ten feet ( about 3 m ) away . Based on statements made that night by NYPD Chief of Detectives James Sullivan , numerous radio , television , and newspaper reports claimed at the time that , before firing , Chapman called out " Mr. Lennon " and dropped into a combat stance . Later court hearings and witness interviews did not include either " Mr. Lennon " or the " combat stance " description . Chapman has said he does not remember calling out to Lennon before he fired , but he claimed to have taken a " combat stance " in a 1992 interview with Barbara Walters . The first bullet missed , passing over Lennon 's head and hitting a window of the Dakota building . Two of the next bullets struck Lennon in the left side of his back , and two more penetrated his left shoulder . 
 Lennon , bleeding profusely from external wounds and also from his mouth , staggered up five steps to the security / reception area , saying , " I 'm shot , I 'm shot " . He then fell to the floor , scattering cassettes that he had been carrying . The concierge , Jay Hastings , first started to make a tourniquet , but upon ripping open Lennon 's blood @-@ stained shirt and realizing the severity of his multiple injuries , he covered Lennon 's chest with his uniform jacket , removed his blood @-@ covered glasses , and summoned the police . 
 Outside , doorman Perdomo shook the gun out of Chapman 's hand then kicked it across the sidewalk . Chapman then removed his coat and hat in preparation for the arrival of police — to show he was not carrying any concealed weapons — and sat down on the sidewalk . Perdomo shouted at Chapman , " Do you know what you 've just done ? " to which Chapman calmly replied , " Yes , I just shot John Lennon . " The first policemen to arrive were Steven Spiro and Peter Cullen , who were at 72nd Street and Broadway when they heard a report of shots fired at the Dakota . The officers arrived around two minutes later and found Chapman sitting " very calmly " on the sidewalk . They reported that Chapman had dropped the revolver to the ground and was holding a paperback book , J. D. Salinger 's The Catcher in the Rye . They immediately put Chapman in handcuffs and placed him in the back seat of their squad car . Chapman made no attempt to flee or resist arrest . 
 The second team , officers Herb <unk> and his partner , Tony Palma , arrived a few minutes later . They found Lennon lying face down on the floor of the reception area with Hastings attending to him , blood pouring from his mouth and his clothing already soaked with blood . Realizing the extent of his injuries , the policemen decided not to wait for an ambulance and immediately carried Lennon into their squad car and rushed him to St Luke 's @-@ Roosevelt Hospital Center . Officer James Moran said they placed Lennon in the back seat . Reportedly , Moran asked , " Are you John Lennon ? " to which Lennon nodded and replied " Yes . " There are conflicting accounts of this , however . According to another account by officer Bill Gamble , Lennon nodded slightly and tried to speak , but could only manage to make a gurgling sound , and lost consciousness shortly thereafter . 
 Dr. Stephan Lynn , head of the Emergency Department , who had been called in again after having just returned home after a 13 @-@ hour @-@ long work shift , received Lennon in the emergency room at Roosevelt Hospital a few minutes before 11 : 00 pm when Officers <unk> and Moran arrived , with Moran carrying Lennon on his back from their squad car and onto a gurney , into the emergency room demanding a doctor for a multiple gunshot wound victim . When Lennon arrived , he had no pulse and was not breathing . Dr. Lynn , two other doctors , a nurse and two or three other medical attendants worked on Lennon for ten to 15 minutes in a desperate attempt to resuscitate him . As a last resort , Dr. Lynn cut open Lennon 's chest and attempted manual heart massage to restore circulation , but he quickly discovered that the damage to the blood vessels above and around Lennon 's heart from the multiple bullet wounds was too great . Lennon was pronounced dead on arrival in the emergency room at the Roosevelt Hospital at 11 : 15 pm by Dr. Lynn , but the time of 11 : 07 pm has also been reported . Lennon 's body was then taken to the city morgue at 520 First Avenue and autopsied . The cause of death was reported as " hypovolemic shock , caused by the loss of more than 80 % of blood volume due to multiple through @-@ and @-@ through gunshot wounds to the chest and aortic arch " . The pathologist who performed the autopsy on Lennon also stated in his report that even with prompt medical treatment , no person could have lived for more than a few minutes with such multiple bullet injuries to all of the major arteries and veins around the heart . 
 The surgeon also noted — as did other witnesses — that , at the moment Lennon was pronounced dead , a Beatles song ( " All My Loving " ) came over the hospital 's sound system . 
 Three of the four bullets that struck Lennon 's back passed completely through his body and out of his chest , one of which hit and became lodged in his upper left arm , while the fourth lodged itself in his aorta beside his heart ; nearly all of them would have been fatal by themselves as each bullet hit vital arteries around the heart . As Lennon had been shot four times at close range with hollow @-@ point bullets , Lennon 's affected organs ( particularly his left lung ) and major blood vessels above his heart were virtually destroyed upon impact . Lynn later stated to reporters on the extent of Lennon 's injuries : " If he [ Lennon ] had been shot this way in the middle of the operating room with a whole team of surgeons ready to work on him ... he still wouldn 't have survived his injuries " . 
 When told by Dr. Lynn of her husband 's death , Ono started sobbing and said , " Oh no , no , no , no ... tell me it 's not true ! " Dr. Lynn remembers that Ono lay down and began hitting her head against the floor , but calmed down when a nurse gave Lennon 's wedding ring to her . She was led away from Roosevelt Hospital by Geffen Records ' president , David Geffen , in a state of shock . 
 = = Announcements = = 
 = = = Monday Night Football = = = 
 Ono asked the hospital not to report to the media that her husband was dead until she had informed their five @-@ year @-@ old son Sean , who was at home . Ono said he was probably watching television and did not want him to learn of his father 's death from a TV announcement . 
 Meanwhile , news producer Alan J. Weiss from WABC @-@ TV had been waiting to be treated in the emergency room at Roosevelt Hospital due to having been involved in an accident earlier that evening while riding his motorcycle . Weiss recalled in an interview for the CNN series Crimes of the Century in 2013 that he had seen Lennon being wheeled into the room surrounded by several police officers . After he learned what happened , Weiss called back to the station to relay the information . Eventually , word made its way through the chain of command to ABC News president Roone Arledge , who was tasked with finding a way to bring this major development to the viewing audience . 
 While all of this was happening Arledge , who was also the president of the network 's sports division , was presiding over ABC 's telecast of Monday Night Football in his capacity as its executive producer . At the exact moment he received word of Lennon 's death , the game between the New England Patriots and the Miami Dolphins was tied with less than a minute left in the fourth quarter and the Patriots were driving toward the potential winning score . 
 As the Patriots tried to put themselves in position for a field goal , Arledge informed Frank Gifford and Howard Cosell of the shooting and suggested that they be the ones to report on the murder . Cosell , who had previously interviewed Lennon on a 1974 broadcast , was chosen to do so but was apprehensive of it at first , as he felt the game should take precedence and that it was not their place to break such a big story . Gifford convinced Cosell otherwise , saying that he should not " hang on to ( the news ) " as the significance of the event was much greater than the finish of the game . 
 The following exchange begins with thirty seconds left in the fourth quarter , shortly after Gifford and Cosell were informed of what had transpired . 
 Cosell : ... but ( the game ) ' s suddenly been placed in total perspective for us ; I 'll finish this , they 're in the hurry @-@ up <unk> : Third down , four . ( Chuck ) Foreman ... it 'll be fourth down . ( Matt ) Cavanaugh will let it run down for one final attempt , he 'll let the seconds tick off to give Miami no opportunity whatsoever . ( Whistle blows . ) Timeout is called with three seconds remaining , John Smith is on the line . And I don 't care what 's on the line , Howard , you have got to say what we know in the <unk> : Yes , we have to say it . Remember this is just a football game , no matter who wins or loses . An unspeakable tragedy confirmed to us by ABC News in New York City : John Lennon , outside of his apartment building on the West Side of New York City , the most famous perhaps , of all of the Beatles , shot twice in the back , rushed to Roosevelt Hospital , dead on arrival . Hard to go back to the game after that news flash , which , in duty bound , we have to take . Frank ? Gifford : ( after a pause ) Indeed , it is . 
 = = = Other announcements = = = 
 It has been claimed that the first nationally @-@ telecast bulletin about the shooting was made by Kathleen Sullivan as part of a standard newscast on Cable News Network ; Sullivan reported that Lennon had been shot but his condition was not known at the time of the bulletin . NBC @-@ TV momentarily broke into its East Coast feed of The Best of Carson for its bulletin of Lennon 's death before returning in the middle of a comedy piece being performed by Johnny Carson . 
 New York rock station WNEW @-@ FM 102 @.@ 7 immediately suspended all programming and opened its lines to calls from listeners . Stations throughout the country switched to special programming devoted to Lennon and / or Beatles music . 
 The following day , Ono issued a statement : " There is no funeral for John . John loved and prayed for the human race . Please do the same for him . Love , Yoko and Sean . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Lennon 's murder triggered an outpouring of grief around the world on an unprecedented scale . Lennon 's remains were cremated at Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale , Westchester County , N.Y. ; no funeral was held . Ono sent word to the chanting crowd outside the Dakota that their singing had kept her awake ; she asked that they re @-@ convene at Central Park 's Naumburg Bandshell the following Sunday for ten minutes of silent prayer . On 14 December 1980 , millions of people around the world responded to Ono 's request to pause for ten minutes of silence to remember Lennon . Thirty thousand gathered in Liverpool , and the largest group — over 225 @,@ 000 — converged on New York 's Central Park , close to the scene of the shooting . For those ten minutes , every radio station in New York City went off the air . 
 At least three Beatles fans committed suicide after the murder , leading Ono to make a public appeal asking mourners not to give in to despair . Ono released a solo album , Season of Glass , in 1981 . The cover of the album is a photograph of Lennon 's blood @-@ spattered glasses . That same year she also released " Walking on Thin Ice " , the song the Lennons had mixed at the Record Plant less than an hour before he was murdered , as a single . Chapman pleaded guilty in 1981 to murdering Lennon . Under the terms of his guilty plea , Chapman was sentenced to 20 @-@ years @-@ to @-@ life and later automatically became eligible for parole up until 2000 . However , Chapman has been denied parole eight times and remains incarcerated at the Wende Correctional Facility . 
 = = Memorials and tributes = = 
 Annie Leibovitz 's photo of a naked Lennon embracing his wife , taken on the day of the murder , was the cover of Rolling Stone 's 22 January 1981 issue , most of which was dedicated to articles , letters and photographs commemorating Lennon 's life and death . In 2005 the American Society of Magazine Editors ranked it as the top magazine cover of the last 40 years . 
 George Harrison released a tribute song , " All Those Years Ago " , which featured Ringo Starr and Paul McCartney , in 1981 . McCartney released his tribute , " Here Today " , on his 1982 album , Tug of War . Elton John , who had recorded the number @-@ one hit " Whatever Gets You thru the Night " with Lennon , teamed up with his lyricist Bernie Taupin and recorded a tribute to Lennon , entitled " Empty Garden ( Hey Hey Johnny ) . " It appeared on his 1982 album , Jump Up ! , and peaked at # 13 on the US Singles Chart that year . When he performed the song at a sold @-@ out concert in Madison Square Garden in August 1982 , he was joined on stage by Ono and Sean . Queen , during their Game Tour , performed a cover of Lennon 's solo song " Imagine " at concerts after Lennon 's death . Queen also performed the song " Life Is Real " , from the album Hot Space ( 1982 ) , in his honour . It was written by singer Freddie Mercury . 
 Roxy Music added a cover version of the song " Jealous Guy " to their set while touring in Germany , which they recorded and released in March 1981 . The song was their only UK # 1 hit , topping the charts for two weeks . It features on many Bryan Ferry / Roxy Music collections , though not always in its full @-@ length version . 
 Paul Simon 's homage to Lennon , " The Late Great Johnny Ace " , initially sings of the rhythm and blues singer Johnny Ace , who is said to have shot himself in 1954 , then goes on to reference John Lennon , as well as President John F. Kennedy who was assassinated in 1963 , the year Beatlemania started . Simon had actually premiered the song during Simon & Garfunkel 's reunion Concert in Central Park in 1981 ; near the end of the song , a fan ran onto the stage , possibly in response to Simon mentioning Lennon in the lyrics . The man was dragged offstage by Simon 's personnel , saying to Simon , " I have to talk to you " ; all of which can be seen in the DVD of the concert . The song also appears on Simon 's 1983 Hearts and Bones album . 
 David Bowie , who befriended Lennon in the mid @-@ 1970s ( Lennon co @-@ wrote and performed on Bowie 's US # 1 hit " Fame " in 1975 ) , performed a tribute to Lennon in the final show of his Serious Moonlight Tour at the Hong Kong Coliseum on 8 December 1983 — the third anniversary of Lennon 's death . Bowie announced that the last time he saw Lennon was in Hong Kong , and after announcing " On this day , December the 8th 1980 , John Lennon was shot and killed outside of his New York apartment , " he performed Lennon 's " Imagine " . 
 David Gilmour of Pink Floyd wrote and recorded the song " Murder " in response to Lennon 's death ; the song was released on Gilmour 's solo album , About Face ( 1984 ) . 
 In 1985 , New York City dedicated an area of Central Park directly across from the Dakota as Strawberry Fields , where Lennon had frequently walked . In a symbolic show of unity , countries from around the world donated trees and the city of Naples , Italy , donated the Imagine mosaic centerpiece . A symbolic grave for Lennon was erected in Prague 's Mala <unk> square , which hosted demonstrations during the fall of the communist regime in Czechoslovakia . 
 Lennon was honoured with a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 1991 . In 1994 , the breakaway autonomous republic of Georgia , Republic of Abkhazia , issued two postage stamps featuring the faces of Lennon and Groucho Marx , rather than portraits of Vladimir Lenin and Karl Marx , spoofing Abkhazia 's Communist past . On 8 December 2000 , Cuba 's President Fidel Castro unveiled a bronze statue of Lennon in a park in Havana . In 2000 , the John Lennon Museum was opened at the Saitama Super Arena in the city of Saitama , Japan ( but closed on 30 September 2010 ) , and Liverpool renamed its airport Liverpool John Lennon Airport , adopting the motto , " Above us only sky " , in 2002 . The minor planet <unk> Lennon , discovered 12 January 1983 by B. A. Skiff at the Anderson Mesa Station of the Lowell Observatory , was named in memory of Lennon . On 9 December 2006 , in the city of Puebla , Mexico , a plaque was revealed , honouring Lennon 's contribution to music , culture and peace . On 9 October 2007 , Ono dedicated a new memorial called the Imagine Peace Tower , located on the island of Viðey , off the coast of Reykjavík , Iceland . Each year , between 9 October and 8 December , it projects a vertical beam of light high into the sky in Lennon 's memory . In 1990 a group of citizens came forward with an initiative to rename one of the streets of Warsaw in honour of John Lennon . The petition had approximately 5000 supporting signatures and passed through city council unchallenged . 
 Every 8 December a memorial ceremony is held in front of the Capitol Records building on Vine Street in Hollywood , California . People also light candles in front of Lennon 's Hollywood Walk of Fame star , outside the Capitol Building . From 28 to 30 September 2007 , Durness held the John Lennon Northern Lights Festival which was attended by Julia Baird ( Lennon 's half @-@ sister ) , who read from Lennon 's writings and her own books , and Stanley Parkes , Lennon 's Scottish cousin . Parkes said , " Me and Julia [ Baird ] are going to be going to the old family croft to tell stories " . Musicians , painters and poets from across the UK performed at the festival . 
 In 2009 , the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 's New York City annexe hosted a special John Lennon exhibit , which included many mementos and personal effects from Lennon 's life , as well as the clothes he was wearing when he was murdered , still in the brown paper bag from Roosevelt Hospital . Ono still places a lit candle in the window of Lennon 's room in the Dakota on 8 December . In 2012 , Bob Dylan released the Lennon tribute " Roll on John " on his Tempest album . 
 = = On film = = 
 Two films depicting the murder of Lennon were released close together more than 25 years after the event . The first of the two , The Killing of John Lennon , was released on 7 December 2007 . Directed by Andrew Piddington , the movie had Jonas Ball play Mark David Chapman . The second film was Chapter 27 , released on 28 March 2008 . Directed by J. P. Schaefer , Mark David Chapman was played by Jared Leto . Lennon was portrayed by actor Mark Lindsay Chapman , who coincidentally has the same first and last name as the person who killed Lennon . Lindsay Chapman had previously been cast ( and billed then as ' Mark Lindsay ' ) in NBC Television 's John & Yoko : A Love Story in 1985 , but the role of Lennon was re @-@ cast when it was revealed that the actor 's real surname was Chapman . 
 = Ability ( Fringe ) = 
 " Ability " is the fourteenth episode of the first season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe . The plot follows the Fringe team 's investigation into ZFT and David Robert Jones , who claims that Olivia is a soldier equipped with abilities to fight in an upcoming war between two parallel universes . A skeptical Olivia must discover a way to avoid unleashing an attack that causes fatal accelerated cellular growth in its victims . 
 The episode 's teleplay was written by co @-@ executive producer David H. Goodman from a story by executive story editors Glen Whitman and Robert Chiappetta . It was directed by Norberto Barba , his only contribution to the series . Jared Harris guest starred as Jones , alongside actors Clark Middleton , Michael Gaston , Noah Bean , and Chance Kelly . 
 It first aired in the United States on February 10 , 2009 on the Fox network to an estimated 9 @.@ 83 million viewers , placing second in its timeslot . The episode earned a 4 @.@ 1 / 10 ratings share among adults aged 18 to 49 , meaning that it was seen by 4 @.@ 1 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 10 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of broadcast . " Ability " received mixed reviews from television critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A newspaper vendor dies by suffocation after receiving a two @-@ dollar bill coated in a chemical substance that causes all his orifices to close up . Walter analyzes the chemical agent as a catalyst that speeds up the protein production in scar tissue and accelerating cell growth . Meanwhile , Olivia postulates that the initials " ZFT " may not be of a terrorist organization but of a book , and discovers the German name , " <unk> durch <unk> der Technologie " , roughly " Destruction by Advancement of Technology " . Peter takes Olivia to a rare book storekeeper , Edward <unk> ( Clark Middleton ) who gets a copy of the ZFT from another collector . Peter returns with it to Walter 's lab , learning that it is a typewritten manifesto preparing " soldiers " for an upcoming war between two universes . 
 Concurrently , David Robert Jones ( Jared Harris ) turns himself in at the FBI headquarters . Suffering from effects of being teleported out of his German prison cell by Walter 's technology , he insists on only speaking to Olivia , warning that she is the only one that can stop a bomb from going off in 36 hours . Sanford Harris ( Michael Gaston ) instead orders Olivia to join other agents in raiding a warehouse which they believe Jones and his men used . Evidence confirms Jones had been there , but an agent dies from suffocation after finding another two @-@ dollar bill . 
 Olivia convinces Harris to let her see Jones alone , attributing the agent 's death to his misfire . In the interrogation room , Olivia discovers that Jones believes she is one of the soldiers in his war , having been a test subject on a Massive Dynamic nootropic drug known as " Cortexiphan " when she was a child . Jones claims that she is special , and instructs her to a remote site with a key in his possession to retrieve a package . Olivia follows his instructions , finding a package full of strange puzzles . The first puzzle is a light box containing a number of lights which Jones ' instructions require her to disable with her thoughts only . Olivia , having learned from Nina Sharp that the only Cortexiphan trials were done in Ohio , far from her childhood Jacksonville , Florida home , is confident Jones is mistaken . 
 As Jones ' condition worsens and he is brought to Walter 's lab , Peter rigs the lightbox to make the lights go off automatically . Olivia performs the test in front of Jones , and he supplies her the address of the bomb . When Olivia and the FBI arrive , they find that the bomb is set to release the deadly agent across the city but can only be defused if Olivia turns off a similar array of lights as were on the puzzle . Despite faking the earlier test , Olivia is successful at disabling the lights and the bomb with her thoughts . 
 In the episode 's epilogue , Jones , having been transferred to secured hospital , is rescued by his men , leaving a message on the wall telling Olivia she passed . Meanwhile , Walter , who has also started reading the ZFT , recognizes a unique offset letter , and finds that his own lab typewriter produces the same offset . Olivia receives a call from Nina who had further looked into the Cortexiphan trials and discovered a smaller case study that occurred at Jacksonville . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode 's teleplay was written by co @-@ executive producer David H. Goodman based on a story by executive story editors and scientists Glen Whitman and Robert Chiappetta . It was Goodman 's fifth contribution to the series and Whitman and Chiappetta 's first . The episode was directed by Norberto Barba , his only directional credit with the series . 
 Noah Bean noted that his character Officer Kemp " meets pretty gruesome , unbelievable ends , " as Kemp 's face becomes covered with skin and scar tissue . To create the effect of Kemp 's orifices closing , the crew used a combination of make @-@ up and computer graphic effects . They created casts of Bean , including the front of his face , ears , back , and torso . They applied make @-@ up over parts of his face at different stages as the scene demanded . For Olivia 's unsuccessful emergency tracheotomy , the actress cut into a fake neck that Bean wore . 
 Guest actor Jared Harris made his third appearance of the season in " Ability " . At the time , the actor had not heard whether his character would be returning , though he later appeared in the first season finale and five fourth season episodes . Harris described his character as an " anti @-@ hero who is fighting for the just cause " and the episode as " a page @-@ turner ... When I read it , I said , ' Ah , this is a fantastic one . I can 't wait to see it . ' It 's directed with a lot of energy , a lot of tension . It 's a good one , a really good one " . 
 The episode featured the first of many guest appearances by actor Clark Middleton as the rare bookseller Edward Markham . In addition to Bean and Harris , the episode 's guest stars included Michael Gaston as Sanford Harris , Chance Kelly as Mitchell Loeb , Kenneth Tigar as Johan Lennox , Philip <unk> as Thomas Avery , and Michael Cerveris as the Observer . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Ability " was watched by an estimated 9 @.@ 83 million viewers on its initial broadcast in the United States , placing in second in its timeslot behind CBS ' The Mentalist . Fringe was the Fox network 's fourth most watched show for the week , and received a 5 @.@ 9 / 9 rating share among all American households . Among adults aged 18 to 49 , the episode finished in fourteenth place for the week by earning a 4 @.@ 1 / 10 ratings share , meaning that it was seen by 4 @.@ 1 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 10 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of broadcast . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Den of Geek viewed the episode positively , observing that in contrast to the previous installment , " Ability " " progresses the main plot arc in a substantial way ... I ’ m now really interested to see what happens next , whereas last week I wasn ’ t that bothered . " IGN 's Ramsey Isler was a little more critical and rated the episode 7 @.@ 8 / 10 . He noted that though the ending with Walter " was as good as you could ask for " and enjoyed David Robert Jones as a villain , the episode had a " number of rough patches , " as the middle was " paced slowly " and lacking in suspense , Peter 's " <unk> was again reduced to ... ' that guy with connections ' " , and the audience was " once again subjected to the torture that is Sanford Harris " . After describing the Olivia @-@ Peter scene near the end as " tense and cleverly written , " Isler concluded his review by noting references to The X @-@ Files and hoping Jones would appear again soon . 
 Noel Murray from The A.V. Club graded the episode an A- , explaining he thought it must have been " satisfying " for those viewers tired of the " monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week " storylines . Murray also enjoyed two twists : that Olivia had to shut off the lights for real , and that Walter discovers he wrote the ZFT manual at the end . Jane Boursaw of AOL TV ( previously TV Squad ) opined that it was a " really great episode that 's probably worth another viewing to pick up more clues , " while the Los Angeles Times ' Andrew Hanson thought it " managed to have a couple good twists to it . " Annalee Newitz of io9 praised " Ability " , remarking that " overall , this was a terrific episode , and a great way to go into a show hiatus . We got a lot of payoff when we discovered why Olivia was being stalked by the ZFT weirdos , and we learned more about the Pattern than we had in a really long time . " 
 = Danny Higginbotham = 
 Daniel John " Danny " Higginbotham ( born 29 December 1978 ) is a former professional footballer who played as a defender . 
 Born in Manchester , Higginbotham started his career at his local club Manchester United . He made seven appearances at Old Trafford as well as a loan spell with Belgian side Royal Antwerp before joining Derby County in order to play more matches . He spent three years at Derby but handed in a transfer request when the club was relegated from the Premier League . Southampton signed Higginbotham for a £ 1 @.@ 5 million fee in February 2003 , and he helped them reach the 2003 FA Cup Final . When Southampton were relegated in 2005 , Higginbotham rejected a new contract and was placed on the transfer list . 
 He joined fellow Championship side Stoke City for a £ 225 @,@ 000 fee in August 2006 . He was made captain when Michael Duberry left in January 2007 and Stoke went on to narrowly miss out on a play @-@ off place . With Stoke not being promoted Higginbotham again decided to hand in a transfer request to help force through a move to Sunderland . He spent one season at the Stadium of Light before returning to Stoke in 2008 . He became a vital member of Tony Pulis ' squad as Stoke established themselves in the Premier League . He scored the winning goal in the FA Cup quarter @-@ final against West Ham United but missed out on both the semi @-@ final and the final due to a knee injury . After his recovery he struggled to force his way back into the side and spent time out on loan to Nottingham Forest and Ipswich Town before joining Sheffield United on a free transfer in January 2013 . After eight months at Bramall Lane , he left to join Conference Premier side Chester before ending his career with a short spell at Altrincham . 
 Higginbotham made his international debut for the Gibraltar national team in a friendly against Slovakia in November 2013 at the age of 34 , qualifying through his maternal grandmother . In January 2014 , Higginbotham retired from club football after a 14 @-@ year career , but made two more international appearances for Gibraltar until his international retirement in March . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Manchester , Higginbotham grew up in nearby Altrincham . Despite passing his eleven plus exam he was denied entry into Altrincham Grammar School for Boys . His elder brother , Paul , played non @-@ League football for Witton Albion . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Manchester United = = = 
 Higginbotham started his career at his local club Manchester United , but was not highly rated during the first year of his apprenticeship and his career was almost ended when he broke his femur in a B team match . However , he recovered well from the injury and was given a two @-@ year professional contract in 1998 . He made his Premier League debut on 10 May 1998 , coming on for Michael Clegg 60 minutes into a 2 – 0 win over Barnsley at Oakwell . 
 He was sent to Belgian Second Division side Royal Antwerp on a loan spell . He got off to a bad start at the club and asked to return to Old Trafford after being abused by Antwerp supporters outside the <unk> , and had to be talked into staying by manager <unk> Van Acker . Following this start the club then won 15 matches in a row and Higginbotham become popular with the fans . However , the season ended with defeat in a play @-@ off game , and after the final whistle there was an alleged attack on referee Amand Ancion by teammate Ronnie Wallwork . Higginbotham was subsequently banned from football for a year for his involvement . In September 1999 , a Belgian court reduced Higginbotham 's ban to four months . Ancion maintained that Wallwork had grabbed him by the throat and that Higginbotham had headbutted him . Higginbotham always maintained his innocence , stating that he had tried to intervene peacefully after Wallwork had confronted Ancion in an aggressive manner . Alex Ferguson believed the player 's innocence and handed both players four @-@ year contracts as the club appealed their suspensions . 
 Higginbotham played six games for United during the 1999 – 2000 season , including appearances in the UEFA Champions League and at the Maracanã Stadium in the FIFA Club World Championship . He made his full debut in a 3 – 0 defeat to Aston Villa at Villa Park on 13 October 1999 , in what was described as a blow to the credibility of the League Cup as United had fielded a number of young players . He suffered with concussion during the match after a clash of heads with Dion Dublin . He failed to break into the first team on a regular basis as Denis Irwin , Phil Neville and Mikaël Silvestre were all preferred ahead of him at left @-@ back . 
 = = = Derby County = = = 
 Higginbotham 's desire to play regular first @-@ team football led to him joining Derby County for a £ 2 million fee – a large sum for a young player with just four top @-@ flight appearances to his name . His decision to leave Manchester United was praised by the player he failed to displace , Denis Irwin . Higginbotham made his debut in a 2 – 2 draw with Southampton , and had a good start to his Derby career until he was substituted at half @-@ time during his third appearance after struggling to contain Everton 's Niclas Alexandersson . Manager Jim Smith soon switched to a new system without any full @-@ backs but Higginbotham adapted well to playing on the left @-@ side of a three @-@ man defence . Derby avoid relegation out of the Premier League on the penultimate day of 2000 – 01 with a 1 – 0 victory over former his club Manchester United at Old Trafford . 
 He began 2001 – 02 on the left @-@ side of central defence despite Smith reverting to a 4 – 4 – 2 formation . Smith was sacked after a poor start , but his replacement Colin Todd failed to improve the club 's form , and Todd was sacked and replaced with John Gregory , with similarly poor results . Higginbotham scored his first goal in English football on 16 March 2002 , converting a penalty to secure a 3 – 1 victory over Bolton Wanderers after striker Fabrizio Ravanelli backed out of taking the penalty . This would prove to be the last win of a relegation campaign , with the only remaining positive to the season for Higginbotham coming when he was voted as the fans ' Player of the Year . 
 On 17 August 2002 , he collided badly with Grimsby Town forward Steve Livingstone and knocked Livingstone unconscious ; this left Livingstone with a skull fracture injury that would see him out of action for two months . It was expected that Higginbotham would eventually move unless Derby did well enough to gain promotion back to the Premier League , and so in January 2003 , with Derby struggling in the First Division , he moved to Southampton on loan , joining permanently in February . 
 = = = Southampton = = = 
 Following Derby 's relegation from the Premier League , Higginbotham moved to Southampton in January 2003 on loan until the end of 2002 – 03 . The move was made permanent in February 2003 for a £ 1 @.@ 5 million fee . He featured in Southampton 's FA Cup run in 2002 – 03 , playing once in the fifth round against Norwich City , but was an unused substitute for the final against Arsenal . 
 The 2003 – 04 season was difficult for the club , and Gordon Strachan resigned in March . Higginbotham felt that his replacement , Paul Sturrock , was unable to handle the pressure at St Mary 's , but denied press rumours that Sturrock had lost the confidence of the players . Steve Wigley took charge for 2004 – 05 and the club 's decline continued . Wigley demoted Higginbotham to the reserves after following a falling out between the pair , though he soon reversed the decision and returned him to the first team . Harry Redknapp replaced Wigley as manager in <unk> but failed to arrest the decline , and Southampton were relegated in last place . Higginbotham had scored the equalising goal in the penultimate match of the season at Crystal Palace , but a final day defeat to Manchester United left Southampton two points from safety . 
 George Burley took over from Redknapp in December 2005 , though neither manager was unable to put together an effective promotion campaign and Southampton ended the season 12th in the Championship . Higginbotham rejected a new contract and as a result was placed on the transfer list in July 2006 . He told the local press that he felt disrespected the way Southampton chairman Rupert Lowe had handled his contract – he had taken a pay cut to move from Derby , a 40 % pay cut following relegation , and then the new contract offer was lower still than his current contract . 
 = = = Stoke City = = = 
 Higginbotham joined Southampton 's Championship rivals Stoke City on 3 August 2006 for an initial £ 225 @,@ 000 fee , and quickly cemented a regular place in Tony Pulis 's starting line @-@ up . He began 2006 – 07 at left @-@ back , but soon established himself at centre @-@ back after initially filling in for Clint Hill following Hill 's sending off at Wolverhampton Wanderers on 23 September 2006 . Pulis gave Stoke a reputation as a " Battersea Dogs Home " club , and Higginbotham proved to be a typical signing in this regard as he felt unwanted at Southampton and said that his career had been reinvigorated by the move to the Britannia Stadium . Stoke went seven games without conceding a goal , and during this run Higginbotham scored the only goal of the game against local rivals West Bromwich Albion after deposing Carl <unk> as the club 's penalty taker . In February 2007 , he was awarded the club captaincy following Michael Duberry 's departure to Reading . Over the course of the season he scored a career @-@ high seven goals in his 46 appearances . Though Stoke narrowly missed out on the play @-@ offs , a successful personal campaign culminated in Higginbotham being voted the club 's Player of the Year . 
 = = = Sunderland = = = 
 On 28 August 2007 , it was announced that a bid from Sunderland had been accepted by Stoke , after Higginbotham had handed a transfer request to the club . Higginbotham wrote in his autobiography that Pulis would only authorise the deal if he handed in a transfer request . Higginbotham signed a four @-@ year deal with Sunderland the following day , moving for a £ 2 @.@ 5 million fee , possibly rising to £ 3 million dependent on appearances . He said that the chance to play Premier League football under Roy Keane was too good to refuse . On 10 November 2007 , Higginbotham scored the opening goal for Sunderland which was believed to come off his ear in a 1 – 1 draw with their Tyne @-@ Wear rivals Newcastle United at the Stadium of Light . He was only a bit @-@ part player by the start of 2008 – 09 , and Keane allowed him to return to Stoke for the same fee that he had paid to Stoke . 
 = = = Return to Stoke City = = = 
 Higginbotham re @-@ joined Stoke , now in the Premier League , in September 2008 for a £ 2 @.@ 5 million fee . On 19 October 2008 , Higginbotham scored the first goal of his second spell , with a penalty in a 2 – 1 win over Tottenham Hotspur . He was the first choice at left @-@ back for manager Tony Pulis , playing in 28 league matches as the team successfully fought for survival . However , he missed the final five matches of the season due to a slipped disc . He later underwent surgery . 
 With the summer signing of Danny Collins , Higginbotham was dropped to the bench before regaining his place in the team , mainly being utilised in his more natural position in the centre of defence , and scored the first goal in a 3 – 0 win over Blackburn Rovers on 8 February 2010 . He was praised by first @-@ team coach Mark O 'Connor for reclaiming his place in the side . 
 He started the first match of 2010 – 11 away at Wolverhampton Wanderers , but was dropped for the next match in favour of Collins . Higginbotham signed a contract extension in October 2010 for a further 12 months , keeping him at Stoke until the summer of 2013 . He made his 200th top @-@ flight appearance against Manchester United on 24 October 2010 . He struggled with injury for the rest of the first half of the season , and was in and out of the first team . 
 " We wanted to cement Danny 's future with the club because he is such a good professional and it is important we look after certain players at the football club who started all this off . I 've got a lot of time for Danny because he is one who falls into that category . He may not be in the side on a regular basis at the moment , but he still has a crucial role to play , as do a number of other players in a similar situation . The fabric of a football club is made up of the whole cloth , not bits and pieces , so we are delighted Danny will remain a part of that . " 
 After signing his contract extension , Higginbotham stated that he wanted to end his career at Stoke . He scored a rare league goal in January 2011 against Bolton Wanderers . He scored the first FA Cup goal of his career in a quarter @-@ final win against West Ham United in March 2011 . It proved to be the winning goal , thus earning Stoke their first semi @-@ final appearance in 39 years . He scored an identical goal against Newcastle United the following week . However , in the next league match against Chelsea , Higginbotham sustained a cruciate knee ligament injury that ruled him out for six months . Pulis spoke of his disappointment at losing Higginbotham but also stressed he would play a key role in the final few matches of the season due to his influence in the dressing room . Higginbotham later admitted that missing the FA Cup final made him " jealous " of his teammates . 
 Higginbotham targeted to return from his knee injury by October 2011 . He marked his return from his knee injury by scoring the only goal in a 1 – 0 reserve team win over Sheffield United on 11 October 2011 . However , after failing to force his way back into the first team , Higginbotham joined Championship team Nottingham Forest on loan until the end of the season on 31 January 2012 . Upon signing for Forest , Higginbotham admitted that he was unsure of his future at Stoke . He was backed by Thomas Sørensen to make a return to Stoke 's first team . On 10 March 2012 , Higginbotham scored his first goal for a year when he scored the second for Forest in a 3 – 1 home win over Millwall . His loan spell with Forest was ended early in April 2012 due to injury . 
 Higginbotham joined Championship club Ipswich Town on a one @-@ month loan on 21 September 2012 , which was later extended until January 2013 . He was expected to extend his loan until the end of the season but Higginbotham rejected the deal saying he wanted to be based closer to his home , and left Portman Road having played 12 matches . After his move to Sheffield United , Higginbotham has stated that his six @-@ year spell at Stoke was ' the best years of his career ' . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 On 1 January 2013 , Higginbotham signed for Sheffield United on a six @-@ month contract , and made his debut for the club against their South Yorkshire rivals Doncaster Rovers the same day . Former Stoke teammate and current Sheffield United teammate Dave Kitson played a part in Higginbotham 's move to Bramall Lane , Higginbotham stated on his move to the club : " I was getting ready to go back to Ipswich on Sunday but after speaking to Dave I was optimistic something would be sorted here and thankfully it was ... I was very surprised and very happy when I got a phone call on Sunday to say that something could be happening here [ Sheffield United ] ... Dropping into League One isn 't a worry for me because this is a club on the up and I didn 't want to be stuck at Stoke just picking my money up because that isn 't me " On 18 June 2013 , having made sufficient first @-@ team appearances for Sheffield United , Higginbotham activated a clause in his contract to extend it for the following season . 
 On 29 August 2013 , Higginbotham joined Conference Premier club Chester on a one @-@ year deal after falling out of the Sheffield United first team . After making 17 appearances for Chester , Higginbotham left the club in order to forge a media career . After leaving Chester , Higginbotham signed for Altrincham of the Conference North , as he wished to continue playing on a part @-@ time basis with fewer travel commitments . Higginbotham had previously stated it was an ambition of his to play for Altrincham , as he had supported them as a boy . He announced his retirement from football on 8 January 2014 . 
 = = International career = = 
 Born and raised in England , Higginbotham was eligible to play for the Gibraltar national team through his maternal grandmother . The former Gibraltar manager , Allen Bula , is his uncle . Higginbotham made his international debut in Gibraltar 's first ever match as a UEFA member , a 0 – 0 draw in a friendly against Slovakia , on 19 November 2013 . He was praised for his performance and was named man of the match . He announced his retirement from international football in March 2014 , having earned three caps for Gibraltar . 
 = = Media career = = 
 In February 2013 Higginbotham began to write his own column in The Sentinel , a local newspaper in the North Staffordshire and South Cheshire area . Higginbotham also has a regular sports column in The Independent . He released his autobiography in April 2015 , entitled : Rise of the Underdog . He has appeared on several television and radio stations , including Talksport , BBC Radio 5 Live , BT Sport and Sky Sports . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 His first child , Jak , was born in 2001 . His second child , Jessica , was born on 12 October 2003 . His first marriage ended in 2008 . 
 In 2010 he married Nicole , an American woman , who gave birth to his third child , Joshua , in 2011 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 Derby County Player of the Year : 2001 – 02 
 Stoke City Player of the Year : 2006 – 07 
 = Jaws ( film ) = 
 Jaws is a 1975 American thriller film directed by Steven Spielberg and based on Peter Benchley 's 1974 novel of the same name . In the story , a giant man @-@ eating great white shark attacks beachgoers on Amity Island , a fictional New England summer resort town , prompting the local police chief to hunt it with the help of a marine biologist and a professional shark hunter . The film stars Roy Scheider as police chief Martin Brody , Robert Shaw as shark hunter Quint , Richard Dreyfuss as oceanographer Matt Hooper , Murray Hamilton as Larry Vaughn , the mayor of Amity Island , and Lorraine Gary as Brody 's wife , Ellen . The screenplay is credited to both Benchley , who wrote the first drafts , and actor @-@ writer Carl Gottlieb , who rewrote the script during principal photography . 
 Shot mostly on location on Martha 's Vineyard in Massachusetts , the film had a troubled production , going over budget and past schedule . As the art department 's mechanical sharks suffered many malfunctions , Spielberg decided to mostly suggest the animal 's presence , employing an ominous , minimalistic theme created by composer John Williams to indicate the shark 's impending appearances . Spielberg and others have compared this suggestive approach to that of classic thriller director Alfred Hitchcock . Universal Pictures gave the film what was then an exceptionally wide release for a major studio picture , over 450 screens , accompanied by an extensive marketing campaign with a heavy emphasis on television spots and tie @-@ in merchandise . 
 Now considered one of the greatest films ever made , Jaws was the prototypical summer blockbuster , with its release regarded as a watershed moment in motion picture history . Jaws became the highest @-@ grossing film of all time until the release of Star Wars ( 1977 ) . It won several awards for its soundtrack and editing . Along with Star Wars , Jaws was pivotal in establishing the modern Hollywood business model , which revolves around high box @-@ office returns from action and adventure pictures with simple " high @-@ concept " premises that are released during the summer in thousands of theaters and supported by heavy advertising . It was followed by three sequels , none with the participation of Spielberg or Benchley , and many imitative thrillers . The film ranks fifth on Empire magazine 's 2008 list of the 500 greatest movies of all time . In 2001 , Jaws was selected by the Library of Congress for preservation in the United States National Film Registry , being deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During a late @-@ night beach party on Amity Island , a young woman goes swimming in the ocean . While treading water , she is violently pulled under . The next morning , her partial remains are found on shore . The medical examiner ruling the death a shark attack leads Police Chief Martin Brody to close the beaches . Mayor Larry Vaughn overrides him , fearing it will ruin the town 's summer economy . The coroner now concurs with the mayor 's theory that the girl was killed in a boating accident . 
 Brody reluctantly accepts their conclusion until another fatal shark attack occurs shortly after . Amid an amateur shark @-@ hunting frenzy , local professional shark hunter Quint offers his services for $ 10 @,@ 000 . Meanwhile , Matt Hooper , a consulting oceanographer , examines the first victim 's remains and concludes the death was from a shark attack . 
 When local fishermen catch a large tiger shark , the mayor proclaims the beaches safe . Hooper disputes it being the same predator , confirming this after no human remains are found inside it . Hooper and Brody find a half @-@ sunken boat while searching the night waters in Hooper 's boat . Hooper examines it underwater and retrieves a sizable great white shark 's tooth embedded in the hull . He drops it after finding a partial corpse . Vaughn discounts Brody and Hooper 's claims that a huge great white shark is responsible and refuses to close the beaches , allowing only added safety precautions . On the Fourth of July weekend , tourists pack the beaches . Following a juvenile prank , the real shark enters a nearby estuary , killing a boater . Brody convinces Vaughn to hire Quint . 
 Quint , Brody and Hooper set out on Quint 's boat , the Orca , to hunt the shark . While Brody lays down a chum line , Quint waits for an opportunity to hook the shark . Without warning , it appears behind the boat . Quint , estimating its length at 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) , harpoons it with a line attached to a flotation barrel , but the shark pulls the barrel underwater and disappears . 
 At nightfall , the three retire to the boat 's cabin and swap stories . The great white returns unexpectedly , ramming the boat 's hull and killing the power . The men work through the night repairing the engine . In the morning , Brody attempts to call the Coast Guard , but Quint smashes the radio , enraging Brody . After a long chase , Quint harpoons another barrel into the shark . The line is tied to the stern , but the shark drags the boat backwards , swamping the deck and flooding the engine compartment . Quint severs the line to prevent the transom from being pulled out . He heads toward shore to draw the shark into shallower waters , but the overtaxed engine quits , immobilizing the boat . 
 With the Orca slowly sinking , the trio attempt a riskier approach : Hooper dons scuba gear and enters the water in a shark @-@ proof cage , intending to lethally inject the shark with strychnine using a hypodermic spear . The shark demolishes the cage before Hooper can inject it , and he escapes to the seabed . The shark attacks the boat directly , killing Quint . Brody , trapped on the sinking vessel , stuffs a pressurized scuba tank into the shark 's mouth , and , climbing the mast , shoots the tank with a rifle . The resulting explosion obliterates the shark . Hooper surfaces , and he and Brody paddle to Amity Island clinging to boat wreckage . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Richard D. Zanuck and David Brown , producers at Universal Pictures , independently heard about Peter Benchley 's novel Jaws . Brown came across it in the literature section of lifestyle magazine Cosmopolitan , then edited by his wife , Helen Gurley Brown . A small card written by the magazine 's book editor gave a detailed description of the plot , concluding with the comment " might make a good movie " . The producers each read the book over the course of a single night and agreed the next morning that it was " the most exciting thing that they had ever read " and that they wanted to produce a film version , although they were unsure how it would be accomplished . They purchased the movie rights in 1973 , before the book 's publication , for approximately $ 175 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 0 @.@ 93 million in 2015 ) . Brown claimed that had they read the book twice , they would never have made the film because they would have realized how difficult it would be to execute certain sequences . 
 To direct , Zanuck and Brown first considered veteran filmmaker John Sturges — whose résumé included another maritime adventure , The Old Man and the Sea — before offering the job to Dick Richards , whose directorial debut , The Culpepper Cattle Co. had come out the previous year . However , they grew irritated by Richards 's habit of describing the shark as a whale and soon dropped him from the project . Meanwhile , Steven Spielberg very much wanted the job . The 26 @-@ year @-@ old had just directed his first theatrical film , The Sugarland Express , for Zanuck and Brown . At the end of a meeting in their office , Spielberg noticed their copy of the still @-@ unpublished Benchley novel , and after reading it was immediately captivated . He later observed that it was similar to his 1971 television film Duel in that both deal with " these leviathans targeting <unk> " . After Richards 's departure , the producers signed Spielberg to direct in June 1973 , before the release of The Sugarland Express . 
 Before production began , however , Spielberg grew reluctant to continue with Jaws , in fear of becoming typecast as the " truck and shark director " . He wanted to move over to 20th Century Fox 's Lucky Lady instead , but Universal exercised its right under its contract with the director to veto his departure . Brown helped convince Spielberg to stick with the project , saying that " after [ Jaws ] , you can make all the films you want " . The film was given an estimated budget of $ 3 @.@ 5 million and a shooting schedule of 55 days . Principal photography was set to begin in May 1974 . Universal wanted the shoot to finish by the end of June , when the major studios ' contract with the Screen Actors Guild was due to expire , to avoid any disruptions due to a potential strike . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 For the screen adaptation , Spielberg wanted to stay with the novel 's basic plot , while omitting Benchley 's many subplots . He declared that his favorite part of the book was the shark hunt on the last 120 pages , and told Zanuck when he accepted the job , " I 'd like to do the picture if I could change the first two acts and base the first two acts on original screenplay material , and then be very true to the book for the last third . " When the producers purchased the rights to his novel , they promised Benchley that he could write the first draft of the screenplay . The intent was to make sure a script could be done despite an impending threat of a Writer 's Guild strike , given Benchley was not unionized . Overall , he wrote three drafts before the script was turned over to other writers ; delivering his final version to Spielberg , he declared , " I 'm written out on this , and that 's the best I can do . " Benchley would later describe his contribution to the finished film as " the storyline and the ocean stuff – basically , the mechanics " , given he " didn 't know how to put the character texture into a screenplay . " One of his changes was to remove the novel 's adulterous affair between Ellen Brody and Matt Hooper , at the suggestion of Spielberg , who feared it would compromise the camaraderie between the men on the Orca . During the film 's production , Benchley agreed to return and play a small onscreen role as a reporter . 
 Spielberg , who felt that the characters in Benchley 's script were still unlikable , invited the young screenwriter John <unk> to do a rewrite , but he declined the offer . Columbo creators William Link and Richard Levinson also declined Spielberg 's invitation . Tony and Pulitzer Prize – winning playwright Howard Sackler was in Los Angeles when the filmmakers began looking for another writer and offered to do an uncredited rewrite ; since the producers and Spielberg were unhappy with Benchley 's drafts , they quickly agreed . At the suggestion of Spielberg , Brody 's characterization made him afraid of water , " coming from an urban jungle to find something more terrifying off this placid island near Massachusetts . " 
 Spielberg wanted " some levity " in Jaws , humor that would avoid making it " a dark sea hunt " , so he turned to his friend Carl Gottlieb , a comedy writer @-@ actor then working on the sitcom The Odd Couple . Spielberg sent Gottlieb a script , asking what the writer would change and if there was a role he would be interested in performing . Gottlieb sent Spielberg three pages of notes , and picked the part of Meadows , the politically connected editor of the local paper . He passed the audition one week before Spielberg took him to meet the producers regarding a writing job . 
 While the deal was initially for a " one @-@ week dialogue polish " , Gottlieb eventually became the primary screenwriter , rewriting the entire script during a nine @-@ week period of principal photography . The script for each scene was typically finished the night before it was shot , after Gottlieb had dinner with Spielberg and members of the cast and crew to decide what would go into the film . Many pieces of dialogue originated from the actors ' improvisations during these meals ; a few were created on set , most notably Roy Scheider 's ad @-@ lib of the line " You 're gonna need a bigger boat . " John Milius contributed dialogue polishes , and Sugarland Express writers Matthew Robbins and Hal Barwood also made uncredited contributions . Spielberg has claimed that he prepared his own draft , although it is unclear to what degree the other screenwriters drew on his material . One specific alteration he called for in the story was to change the cause of the shark 's death from extensive wounds to a scuba tank explosion , as he felt audiences would respond better to a " big rousing ending " . The director estimated the final script had a total of 27 scenes that were not in the book . 
 Benchley had written Jaws after reading about sport fisherman Frank Mundus 's capture of an enormous shark in 1964 . According to Gottlieb , Quint was loosely based on Mundus , whose book <unk> for Sharks he read for research . Sackler came up with the backstory of Quint as a survivor of the World War II USS Indianapolis disaster . The question of who deserves the most credit for writing Quint 's monologue about the Indianapolis has caused substantial controversy . Spielberg described it as a collaboration between Sackler , Milius , and actor Robert Shaw , who was also a playwright . According to the director , Milius turned Sackler 's " three @-@ quarters of a page " speech into a monologue , and that was then rewritten by Shaw . Gottlieb gives primary credit to Shaw , downplaying Milius 's contribution . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Though Spielberg complied with a request from Zanuck and Brown to cast known actors , he wanted to avoid hiring any big stars . He felt that " somewhat anonymous " performers would help the audience " believe this was happening to people like you and me " , whereas " stars bring a lot of memories along with them , and those memories can sometimes ... corrupt the story . " The director added that in his plans " the superstar was gonna be the shark " . The first actors cast were Lorraine Gary , the wife of then @-@ president of Universal Sid Sheinberg , as Ellen Brody , and Murray Hamilton as the mayor of Amity Island . <unk> @-@ turned @-@ actress Susan <unk> was cast as Chrissie ( the first victim ) as she knew how to swim and was willing to perform nude . Most minor roles were played by residents of Martha 's Vineyard , where the film was shot . One example was Deputy Hendricks , played by future television producer Jeffrey Kramer . 
 The role of Brody was offered to Robert Duvall , but the actor was interested only in portraying Quint . Charlton Heston expressed a desire for the role , but Spielberg felt that Heston would bring a screen persona too grand for the part of a police chief of a modest community . Roy Scheider became interested in the project after overhearing Spielberg at a party talk with a screenwriter about having the shark jump up onto a boat . Spielberg was initially apprehensive about hiring Scheider , fearing he would portray a " tough guy " , similar to his role in The French Connection . 
 Nine days before the start of production , neither Quint nor Hooper had been cast . The role of Quint was originally offered to actors Lee Marvin and Sterling Hayden , both of whom passed . Zanuck and Brown had just finished working with Robert Shaw on The Sting , and suggested him to Spielberg . Shaw was reluctant to take the role since he did not like the book , but decided to accept at the urging of both his wife , actress Mary Ure , and his secretary — " The last time they were that enthusiastic was From Russia with Love . And they were right . " Shaw based his performance on fellow cast member Craig Kingsbury , a local fisherman , farmer , and legendary eccentric , who was playing fisherman Ben Gardner . Spielberg described Kingsbury as " the purest version of who , in my mind , Quint was " , and some of his offscreen utterances were incorporated into the script as lines of Gardner and Quint . Another source for some of Quint 's dialogue and mannerisms , especially in the third act at sea , was Vineyard mechanic and boat @-@ owner Lynn Murphy . 
 For the role of Hooper , Spielberg initially wanted Jon Voight . Timothy Bottoms , Joel Grey , and Jeff Bridges were also considered for the part . Spielberg 's friend George Lucas suggested Richard Dreyfuss , whom he had directed in American Graffiti . The actor initially passed , but changed his decision after he attended a pre @-@ release screening of The Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz , which he had just completed . Disappointed in his performance and fearing that no one would want to hire him once Kravitz was released , he immediately called Spielberg and accepted the role in Jaws . Because the film the director envisioned was so dissimilar to Benchley 's novel , Spielberg asked Dreyfuss not to read it . As a result of the casting , Hooper was rewritten to better suit the actor , as well as to be more representative of Spielberg , who came to view Dreyfuss as his " alter ego " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began May 2 , 1974 , on the island of Martha 's Vineyard , Massachusetts , selected after consideration was given to eastern Long Island . Brown explained later that the production " needed a vacation area that was lower middle class enough so that an appearance of a shark would destroy the tourist business . " Martha 's Vineyard was also chosen because the surrounding ocean had a sandy bottom that never dropped below 35 feet ( 11 m ) for 12 miles ( 19 km ) out from shore , which allowed the mechanical sharks to operate while also beyond sight of land . As Spielberg wanted to film the aquatic sequences relatively close @-@ up to resemble what people see while swimming , cinematographer Bill Butler devised new equipment to facilitate marine and underwater shooting , including a rig to keep the camera stable regardless of tide and a sealed submersible camera box . Spielberg asked the art department to avoid red in both scenery and wardrobe , so that the blood from the attacks would be the only red element and cause a bigger shock . 
 Three full @-@ size pneumatically powered prop sharks — which the film crew nicknamed " Bruce " after Spielberg 's lawyer , Bruce <unk> — were made for the production : a " sea @-@ sled shark " , a full @-@ body prop with its belly missing that was towed with a 300 feet ( 91 m ) line , and two " platform sharks " , one that moved from camera @-@ left to <unk> ( with its hidden left side exposing an array of pneumatic hoses ) , and an opposite model with its right flank uncovered . The sharks were designed by art director Joe Alves during the third quarter of 1973 . Between November 1973 and April 1974 , the sharks were fabricated at Rolly Harper 's Motion Picture & Equipment Rental in Sun Valley , California . Their construction involved a team of as many as 40 effects technicians , supervised by mechanical effects supervisor Bob Mattey , best known for creating the giant squid in 20 @,@ 000 Leagues Under the Sea . After the sharks were completed , they were trucked to the shooting location . In early July , the platform used to tow the two side @-@ view sharks capsized as it was being lowered to the ocean floor , forcing a team of divers to retrieve it . The model required 14 operators to control all of the moving parts . 
 The film had a troubled shoot and went far over budget . David Brown said that the budget " was $ 4 million and the picture wound up costing $ 9 million " ; the effects outlays alone grew to $ 3 million due to the problems with the mechanical sharks . Disgruntled crew members gave the film the nickname " Flaws " . Spielberg attributed many problems to his perfectionism and his inexperience . The former was epitomized by his insistence on shooting at sea with a life @-@ sized shark ; " I could have shot the movie in the tank or even in a protected lake somewhere , but it would not have looked the same , " he said . As for his lack of experience : " I was naive about the ocean , basically . I was pretty naive about mother nature and the hubris of a filmmaker who thinks he can conquer the elements was foolhardy , but I was too young to know I was being foolhardy when I demanded that we shoot the film in the Atlantic Ocean and not in a North Hollywood tank . " Gottlieb said that " there was nothing to do except make the movie " , so everyone kept overworking , and while as a writer he did not have to attend the ocean set every day , once the crewmen returned they arrived " ravaged and sunburnt , windblown and covered with salt water " . 
 Shooting at sea led to many delays : unwanted sailboats drifted into frame , cameras got soaked , and the Orca once began to sink with the actors on board . The prop sharks frequently malfunctioned owing to a series of problems including bad weather , pneumatic hoses taking on salt water , frames fracturing due to water resistance , corroding skin , and electrolysis . From the first water test onward , the " non @-@ absorbent " neoprene foam that made up the sharks ' skin soaked up liquid , causing the sharks to balloon , and the sea @-@ sled model frequently got entangled among forests of seaweed . Spielberg later calculated that during the 12 @-@ hour daily work schedule , on average only four hours were actually spent filming . Gottlieb was nearly decapitated by the boat 's propellers , and Dreyfuss was almost imprisoned in the steel cage . The actors were frequently seasick . Shaw also fled to Canada whenever he could due to tax problems , engaged in binge drinking , and developed a grudge against Dreyfuss , who was getting rave reviews for his performance in Duddy Kravitz . Editor Verna Fields rarely had material to work with during principal photography , as according to Spielberg " we would shoot five scenes in a good day , three in an average day , and none in a bad day . " 
 The delays proved beneficial in some regards . The script was refined during production , and the unreliable mechanical sharks forced Spielberg to shoot many scenes so that the shark was only hinted at . For example , for much of the shark hunt , its location is indicated by the floating yellow barrels . The opening had the shark devouring Chrissie , but it was rewritten so that it would be shot with <unk> being dragged and yanked by cables to simulate an attack . Spielberg also included multiple shots of just the dorsal fin . This forced restraint is widely thought to have added to the film 's suspense . As Spielberg put it years later , " The film went from a Japanese Saturday matinee horror flick to more of a Hitchcock , the less @-@ you @-@ see @-@ the @-@ more @-@ you @-@ get thriller . " In another interview , he similarly declared , " The shark not working was a godsend . It made me become more like Alfred Hitchcock than like Ray Harryhausen . " The acting became crucial for making audiences believe in such a big shark : " The more fake the shark looked in the water , the more my anxiety told me to heighten the naturalism of the performances . " 
 Footage of real sharks was shot by Ron and Valerie Taylor in the waters off Dangerous Reef in South Australia , with a short actor in a miniature shark cage to create the illusion that the sharks were enormous . During the Taylors ' shoot , a great white attacked the boat and cage . The footage of the cage attack was so stunning that Spielberg was eager to incorporate it in the film . No one had been in the cage at the time , however , and the script , following the novel , originally had the shark killing Hooper in it . The storyline was consequently altered to have Hooper escape from the cage , which allowed the footage to be used . As production executive Bill Gilmore put it , " The shark down in Australia rewrote the script and saved Dreyfuss 's character . " 
 Although principal photography was scheduled to take 55 days , it did not wrap until October 6 , 1974 , after 159 days . Spielberg , reflecting on the protracted shoot , stated , " I thought my career as a filmmaker was over . I heard rumors ... that I would never work again because no one had ever taken a film 100 days over schedule . " Spielberg himself was not present for the shooting of the final scene in which the shark explodes , as he believed that the crew were planning to throw him in the water when the scene was done . It has since become a tradition for Spielberg to be absent when the final scene of one of his films is being shot . Afterward , underwater scenes were shot at the Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer water tank in Culver City , with stuntmen Dick Warlock and Frank James Sparks as stand @-@ ins for Dreyfuss in the scene where the shark attacks the cage , as well as near Santa Catalina Island , California . Fields , who had completed a rough cut of the first two @-@ thirds of the film , up until the shark hunt , finished the editing and reworked some of the material . According to Zanuck , " She actually came in and reconstructed some scenes that Steven had constructed for comedy and made them terrifying , and some scenes he shot to be terrifying and made them comedy scenes . " The ship used for the Orca was brought to Los Angeles so the sound effects team could record sounds for both the ship and the underwater scenes . 
 Two scenes were altered following test screenings . As the audience 's screams had covered up Scheider 's " bigger boat " one @-@ liner , Brody 's reaction after the shark jumps behind him was extended , and the volume of the line was raised . Spielberg also decided that he was greedy for " one more scream " , and reshot the scene in which Hooper discovers Ben Gardner 's body , using $ 3 @,@ 000 of his own money after Universal refused to pay for the reshoot . The underwater scene was shot in Fields 's swimming pool in Encino , California , using a <unk> latex model of Craig Kingsbury 's head attached to a fake body , which was placed in the wrecked boat 's hull . To simulate the murky waters of Martha 's Vineyard , powdered milk was poured into the pool , which was then covered with a tarpaulin . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 John Williams composed the film 's score , which earned him an Academy Award and was later ranked the sixth @-@ greatest score by the American Film Institute . The main " shark " theme , a simple alternating pattern of two notes — variously identified as " E and F " or " F and F sharp " — became a classic piece of suspense music , synonymous with approaching danger ( see leading @-@ tone ) . Williams described the theme as " grinding away at you , just as a shark would do , instinctual , relentless , unstoppable . " The piece was performed by tuba player Tommy Johnson . When asked by Johnson why the melody was written in such a high register and not played by the more appropriate French horn , Williams responded that he wanted it to sound " a little more threatening " . When Williams first demonstrated his idea to Spielberg , playing just the two notes on a piano , Spielberg was said to have laughed , thinking that it was a joke . As Williams saw similarities between Jaws and pirate movies , at other points in the score he evoked " pirate music " , which he called " primal , but fun and entertaining " . Calling for rapid , percussive string playing , the score contains echoes of La mer by Claude Debussy as well of Igor Stravinsky 's The Rite of Spring . Williams also interpolated the naval tune " Spanish Ladies " , which is sung repeatedly by Quint , in the score . 
 There are various interpretations of the meaning and effectiveness of the primary music theme , which is widely described as one of the most recognizable cinematic themes of all time . Music scholar Joseph <unk> proposes that the two @-@ note expression mimics the shark 's heartbeat . According to Alexandre <unk> , like themes Bernard Herrmann wrote for Taxi Driver , North by Northwest , and particularly Mysterious Island , it suggests human respiration . He further argues that the score 's strongest motif is actually " the split , the rupture " — when it dramatically cuts off , as after Chrissie 's death . The relationship between sound and silence is also taken advantage of in the way the audience is conditioned to associate the shark with its theme , which is exploited toward the film 's climax when the shark suddenly appears with no musical introduction . 
 Spielberg later said that without Williams 's score the film would have been only half as successful , and according to Williams it <unk> his career . He had previously scored Spielberg 's debut feature , The Sugarland Express , and went on to collaborate with the director on almost all of his films . The original soundtrack for Jaws was released by MCA Records on LP in 1975 , and as a CD in 1992 , including roughly a half hour of music that Williams <unk> for the album . In 2000 , two versions of the score were released : Decca / Universal reissued the soundtrack album to coincide with the release of the 25th @-@ anniversary DVD , featuring the entire 51 minutes of the original score , and Varèse Sarabande put out a rerecording of the score performed by the Royal Scottish National Orchestra , conducted by Joel McNeely . 
 = = Inspirations and themes = = 
 Herman Melville 's Moby @-@ Dick is the most notable artistic antecedent to Jaws . The character of Quint strongly resembles Captain Ahab , the obsessed captain of the <unk> who devotes his life to hunting a sperm whale . Quint 's monologue reveals a similar obsession with sharks ; even his boat , the Orca , is named after the only natural enemy of the white shark . In the novel and original screenplay , Quint dies after being dragged under the ocean by a harpoon tied to his leg , similar to the death of Ahab in Melville 's novel . A direct reference to these similarities may be found in Spielberg 's draft of the screenplay , which introduces Quint watching the film version of Moby @-@ Dick ; his continuous laughter prompts other audience members to get up and leave the theater ( Wesley Strick 's screenplay for the 1991 remake of Cape Fear features a similar scene ) . However , the scene from Moby @-@ Dick could not be licensed from the film 's star , Gregory Peck , its copyright holder . Screenwriter Carl Gottlieb also drew comparisons to Ernest Hemingway 's The Old Man and the Sea : " Jaws is ... a titanic struggle , like Melville or Hemingway . " 
 The underwater scenes shot from the shark 's point of view have been compared with passages in two 1950s horror films , The Creature from the Black Lagoon and The Monster That Challenged the World . Gottlieb named two science fiction productions from the same era as influences on how the shark was depicted , or not : The Thing from Another World , which Gottlieb described as " a great horror film where you only see the monster in the last reel " ; and It Came From Outer Space , where " the suspense was built up because the creature was always off @-@ camera " . Those precedents helped Spielberg and Gottlieb to " concentrate on showing the ' effects ' of the shark rather than the shark itself " . Scholars such as Thomas Schatz described how Jaws melds various genres while essentially being an action film and a thriller . Most is taken from horror , with the core of a nature @-@ based monster movie while adding elements of a slasher film . The second half provides a buddy film in the interaction between the crew of the Orca , and a supernatural horror based on the shark 's depiction of a nearly Satanic menace . 
 Critics such as Neil Sinyard have described similarities to Henrik Ibsen 's play An Enemy of the People . Gottlieb himself said he and Spielberg referred to Jaws as " Moby @-@ Dick meets Enemy of the People " . The Ibsen work features a doctor who discovers that a seaside town 's medicinal hot springs , a major tourist attraction and revenue source , are contaminated . When the doctor attempts to convince the townspeople of the danger , he loses his job and is shunned . This plotline is paralleled in Jaws by Brody 's conflict with Mayor Vaughn , who refuses to acknowledge the presence of a shark that may dissuade summer beachgoers from coming to Amity . Brody is vindicated when more shark attacks occur at the crowded beach in broad daylight . Sinyard calls the film a " deft combination of Watergate and Ibsen 's play " . 
 = = = Scholarly criticism = = = 
 Jaws has received attention from academic critics . Stephen Heath relates the film 's ideological meanings to the then @-@ recent Watergate scandal . He argues that Brody represents the " white male middle class — [ there is ] not a single black and , very quickly , not a single woman in the film " , who restores public order " with an ordinary @-@ guy kind of heroism born of fear @-@ and @-@ decency " . Yet Heath moves beyond ideological content analysis to examine Jaws as a signal example of the film as " industrial product " that sells on the basis of " the pleasure of cinema , thus yielding the perpetuation of the industry ( which is why part of the meaning of Jaws is to be the most profitable movie ) " . 
 Andrew Britton contrasts the film to the novel 's post @-@ Watergate cynicism , suggesting that its narrative alterations from the book ( Hooper 's survival , the shark 's explosive death ) help make it " a communal exorcism , a ceremony for the restoration of ideological confidence . " He suggests that the experience of the film is " inconceivable " without the mass audience 's jubilation when the shark is annihilated , signifying the obliteration of evil itself . In his view , Brody serves to demonstrate that " individual action by the one just man is still a viable source for social change " . Peter Biskind argues that the film does maintain post @-@ Watergate cynicism concerning politics and politicians insofar as the sole villain beside the shark is the town 's venal mayor . Yet he observes that , far from the narrative formulas so often employed by New Hollywood filmmakers of the era — involving Us vs. Them , hip counterculture figures vs. " The Man " — the overarching conflict in Jaws does not pit the heroes against authority figures , but against a menace that targets everyone regardless of socioeconomic position . 
 Whereas Britton states that the film avoids the novel 's theme of social class conflicts on Amity Island , Biskind detects class divisions in the screen version and argues for their significance . " Authority must be restored " , he writes , " but not by Quint " . The seaman 's " working class toughness and bourgeois independence is alien and frightening ... irrational and out of control " . Hooper , meanwhile , is " associated with technology rather than experience , inherited wealth rather than self @-@ made sufficiency " ; he is marginalized from the conclusive action , if less terminally than Quint . Britton sees the film more as concerned with the " vulnerability of children and the need to protect and guard them " , which in turn helps generate a " pervasive sense of the supreme value of family life : a value clearly related to [ ideological ] stability and cultural continuity " . 
 Fredric Jameson 's Marxist analysis highlights the polysemy of the shark and the multiple ways in which it can be and has been read — from representing alien menaces such as communism or the Third World to more intimate dreads concerning the unreality of contemporary American life and the vain efforts to sanitize and suppress the knowledge of death . He asserts that its symbolic function is to be found in this very " <unk> which is profoundly ideological , insofar as it allows essentially social and historical anxieties to be folded back into apparently ' natural ' ones ... to be <unk> in what looks like a conflict with other forms of biological existence . " He views Quint 's demise as the symbolic overthrow of an old , populist , New Deal America and Brody and Hooper 's partnership as an " allegory of an alliance between the forces of law @-@ and @-@ order and the new technocracy of the multinational corporations ... in which the viewer rejoices without understanding that he or she is excluded from it . " 
 Neal Gabler analyzed the film as showing three different approaches to solving an obstacle : science ( represented by Hooper ) , spiritualism ( represented by Quint ) , and the common man ( represented by Brody ) . The last of the three is the one which succeeds and is in that way endorsed by the film . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 Universal spent $ 1 @.@ 8 million promoting Jaws , including an unprecedented $ 700 @,@ 000 on national television spot advertising . The media blitz included about two dozen 30 @-@ second advertisements airing each night on prime @-@ time network TV between June 18 , 1975 , and the film 's opening two days later . Beyond that , in the description of film industry scholar Searle <unk> , Universal " devised and co @-@ ordinated a highly innovative plan " for the picture 's marketing . As early as October 1974 , Zanuck , Brown , and Benchley hit the television and radio talk show circuit to promote the paperback edition of the novel and the forthcoming film . The studio and publisher Bantam agreed on a title logo that would appear on both the paperback and in all of the advertising for the film . The centerpieces of the joint promotion strategy were John Williams 's theme and the poster image featuring the shark approaching a lone female swimmer . The poster was based on the paperback 's cover , and had the same artist , Bantam employee Roger Kastel . The Seiniger Advertising agency spent six months designing the poster ; principal Tony Seiniger explained that " no matter what we did , it didn 't look scary enough " . Seiniger ultimately decided that " you had to actually go underneath the shark so you could see his teeth . " 
 More merchandise was created to take advantage of the film 's release . In 1999 , Graeme Turner wrote that Jaws was accompanied by what was still " probably the most elaborate array of tie @-@ ins " of any film to date : " This included a sound @-@ track album , T @-@ shirts , plastic tumblers , a book about the making of the movie , the book the movie was based on , beach towels , blankets , shark costumes , toy sharks , hobby kits , iron @-@ transfers , games , posters , shark 's tooth necklaces , sleepwear , water pistols , and more . " The Ideal Toy Company , for instance , produced a game in which the player had to use a hook to fish out items from the shark 's mouth before the jaws closed . 
 = = = Theatrical run = = = 
