 The glowing audience response to a rough cut of the film at two test screenings in Dallas on March 26 , 1975 , and one in Long Beach , on March 28 , along with the success of Benchley 's novel and the early stages of Universal 's marketing campaign , generated great interest among theater owners , facilitating the studio 's plan to debut Jaws at hundreds of cinemas simultaneously . A third and final preview screening , of a cut incorporating changes inspired by the previous presentations , was held in Hollywood on April 24 . After Universal chairman Lew Wasserman attended one of the screenings , he ordered the film 's initial release — planned for a massive total of as many as 900 theaters — to be cut down , declaring , " I want this picture to run all summer long . I don 't want people in Palm Springs to see the picture in Palm Springs . I want them to have to get in their cars and drive to see it in Hollywood . " Nonetheless , the several hundred theaters that were still booked for the opening represented what was then an unusually wide release . At the time , wide openings were associated with movies of doubtful quality ; not uncommon on the exploitation side of the industry , they were customarily employed to diminish the effect of negative reviews and word of mouth . There had been some recent exceptions , including the rerelease of Billy Jack and the original release of its sequel The Trial of Billy Jack , the Dirty Harry sequel Magnum Force , and the latest installments in the James Bond series . Still , the typical major studio film release at the time involved opening at a few big @-@ city theaters , which allowed for a series of premieres . Distributors would then slowly forward prints to additional locales across the country , capitalizing on any positive critical or audience response . The outsized success of The Godfather in 1972 had sparked a trend toward wider releases , but even that film had debuted in just five theaters , before going wide in its second weekend . 
 On June 20 , Jaws opened across North America on 464 screens — 409 in the United States , the remainder in Canada . The coupling of this broad distribution pattern with the movie 's then even rarer national television marketing campaign yielded a release method virtually unheard @-@ of at the time . ( A month earlier , Columbia Pictures had done something similar with a Charles Bronson thriller , Breakout , though that film 's prospects for an extended run were much slimmer . ) Universal president Sid Sheinberg reasoned that nationwide marketing costs would be amortized at a more favorable rate per print relative to a slow , scaled release . Building on the film 's success , the release was subsequently expanded on July 25 to nearly 700 theaters , and on August 15 to more than 950 . Overseas distribution followed the same pattern , with intensive television campaigns and wide releases — in Great Britain , for instance , Jaws opened in December at more than 100 theaters . 
 For its fortieth anniversary , the film was released in selected theaters ( across approximately 500 theaters ) in the United States on Sunday , June 21 and Wednesday , June 24 , 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office performance = = = 
 Jaws opened with a $ 7 million weekend and recouped its production costs in two weeks . In just 78 days , it overtook The Godfather as the highest @-@ grossing film at the North American box office , sailing past that picture 's earnings of $ 86 million to become the first film to earn $ 100 million in US theatrical rentals . Its initial release ultimately brought in $ 123 @.@ 1 million in rentals . Theatrical re @-@ releases in 1976 and 1979 brought its total rentals to $ 133 @.@ 4 million . 
 The picture entered overseas release in December 1975 , and its international business mirrored its domestic performance . It broke records in Singapore , New Zealand , Japan , Spain , and Mexico . By 1977 , Jaws was the highest @-@ grossing international release with worldwide rentals of $ 193 million , equating to about $ 400 million of gross revenue ; it supplanted The Godfather , which had earned $ 145 million in rentals . 
 Jaws was the highest @-@ grossing film of all time until Star Wars , which debuted two years later . Star Wars surpassed Jaws for the U.S. record six months after its release and set a new global record in 1978 . As of June 2013 , it is the 127th @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of all time with $ 470 @.@ 7 million worldwide , and the 66th highest domestically with a total North American gross of $ 260 million . Adjusted for inflation , Jaws has earned almost $ 2 billion worldwide at 2011 prices and is the second most successful franchise film after Star Wars . In North America , it is the seventh @-@ highest @-@ grossing movie of all time , with a total of $ 1 @.@ 017 billion at current prices , based on an estimated 128 @,@ 078 @,@ 800 tickets sold . In the United Kingdom , it is the seventh @-@ highest @-@ grossing film to be released since 1975 , earning the equivalent of over £ 70 million in 2009 / 10 currency , with admissions estimated at 16 @.@ 2 million . Jaws has also sold 13 million tickets in Brazil , the second @-@ highest attendance ever in the country behind Titanic . 
 On television , the American Broadcasting Company aired it for the first time right after its 1979 re @-@ release . The first U.S. broadcast attracted 57 percent of the total audience , the second highest televised movie share at the time behind Gone with the Wind . In the United Kingdom , 23 million people watched its inaugural broadcast in October 1981 , the second biggest TV audience ever for a feature film behind Live and Let Die . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Jaws received mostly positive reviews upon release . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times called it " a sensationally effective action picture , a scary thriller that works all the better because it 's populated with characters that have been developed into human beings " . Variety 's A. D. Murphy praised Spielberg 's directorial skills , and called Robert Shaw 's performance " absolutely magnificent " . According to The New Yorker 's Pauline Kael , it was " the most cheerfully perverse scare movie ever made ... [ with ] more zest than an early Woody Allen picture , a lot more electricity , [ and ] it 's funny in a Woody Allen sort of way " . For New Times magazine , Frank Rich wrote , " Spielberg is blessed with a talent that is absurdly absent from most American filmmakers these days : this man actually knows how to tell a story on screen . ... It speaks well of this director 's gifts that some of the most frightening sequences in Jaws are those where we don 't even see the shark . " Writing for New York magazine , Judith Crist described the film as " an exhilarating adventure entertainment of the highest order " and complimented its acting and " extraordinary technical achievements " . Rex Reed praised the " nerve @-@ frying " action scenes and concluded that " for the most part , Jaws is a gripping horror film that works beautifully in every department " . 
 The film was not without its detractors . Vincent Canby of The New York Times wrote , " It 's a measure of how the film operates that not once do we feel particular sympathy for any of the shark 's victims . ... In the best films , characters are revealed in terms of the action . In movies like Jaws , characters are simply functions of the action ... like stage hands who move props around and deliver information when it 's necessary " . He did , however , describe it as " the sort of nonsense that can be a good deal of fun " . Los Angeles Times critic Charles Champlin disagreed with the film 's PG rating , saying that " Jaws is too gruesome for children , and likely to turn the stomach of the impressionable at any age . ... It is a coarse @-@ grained and exploitative work which depends on excess for its impact . Ashore it is a bore , awkwardly staged and <unk> written . " Marcia Magill of Films in Review said that while Jaws " is eminently worth seeing for its second half " , she felt that before the protagonists ' pursuit of the shark the film was " often flawed by its busyness " . William S. <unk> of Commentary described Jaws as " a mind @-@ numbing repast for sense @-@ sated gluttons " and " filmmaking of this essentially manipulative sort " ; Molly Haskell of The Village Voice similarly characterized it as a " scare machine that works with computer @-@ like precision . ... You feel like a rat , being given shock therapy " . The most frequently criticized aspect of the film has been the artificiality of its mechanical antagonist : Magill declared that " the programmed shark has one truly phony close @-@ up " , and in 2002 , online reviewer James Berardinelli said that if not for Spielberg 's deftly suspenseful direction , " we would be doubled over with laughter at the cheesiness of the animatronic creature . " Halliwell 's Film Guide stated that " despite genuinely suspenseful and frightening sequences , it is a slackly narrated and sometimes flatly handled thriller with an over @-@ abundance of dialogue and , when it finally appears , a pretty unconvincing monster . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Jaws won three Academy Awards for Best Film Editing , Best Original Dramatic Score , and Best Sound ( Robert Hoyt , Roger Heman , Earl <unk> and John Carter ) . It was also nominated for Best Picture , losing to One Flew Over the Cuckoo 's Nest . Spielberg greatly resented the fact that he was not nominated for Best Director . Along with the Oscar , John Williams 's score won the Grammy Award , the BAFTA Award for Best Film Music , and the Golden Globe Award . To her Academy Award , Verna Fields added the American Cinema Editors ' Eddie Award for Best Edited Feature Film . 
 Jaws was chosen Favorite Movie at the People 's Choice Awards . It was also nominated for best Film , Director , Actor ( Richard Dreyfuss ) , Editing , and Sound at the 29th British Academy Film Awards , and Best Film — Drama , Director , and Screenplay at the 33rd Golden Globe Awards . Spielberg was nominated by the Directors Guild of America for a DGA Award , and the Writers Guild of America nominated Peter Benchley and Carl Gottlieb 's script for Best Adapted Drama . 
 In the years since its release , Jaws has frequently been cited by film critics and industry professionals as one of the greatest movies of all time . It was number 48 on American Film Institute 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies , a list of the greatest American films of all time compiled in 1998 ; it dropped to number 56 on the 10 Year Anniversary list . AFI also ranked the shark at number 18 on its list of the 50 Best Villains , Roy Scheider 's line " You 're gonna need a bigger boat " 35th on a list of top 100 movie quotes , Williams 's score at sixth on a list of 100 Years of Film Scores , and the film as second on a list of 100 most thrilling films , behind only Psycho . In 2003 , The New York Times included the film on its list of the best 1 @,@ 000 movies ever made . The following year , Jaws placed at the top of the Bravo network 's five @-@ hour miniseries The 100 Scariest Movie Moments . The Chicago Film Critics Association named it the sixth scariest film ever made in 2006 . In 2008 , Jaws was ranked the fifth greatest film in history by Empire magazine , which also placed Quint at number 50 on its list of the 100 Greatest Movie Characters of All Time . The film has been cited in many other lists of 50 and 100 greatest films , including ones compiled by Leonard Maltin , Entertainment Weekly , Film4 , Rolling Stone , Total Film , TV Guide , and Vanity Fair . 
 In 2001 , the United States Library of Congress selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry as a " culturally significant " motion picture . In 2006 , its screenplay was ranked the 63rd best of all time by the Writers Guild of America . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Jaws was key in establishing the benefits of a wide national release backed by heavy television advertising , rather than the traditional progressive release in which a film slowly entered new markets and built support over time . Saturation booking , in which a film opens simultaneously at thousands of cinemas , and massive media buys are now commonplace for the major Hollywood studios . According to Peter Biskind , Jaws " diminish [ ed ] the importance of print reviews , making it virtually impossible for a film to build slowly , finding its audience by dint of mere quality . ... Moreover , Jaws whet corporate appetites for big profits quickly , which is to say , studios wanted every film to be Jaws . " Scholar Thomas Schatz writes that it " recalibrated the profit potential of the Hollywood hit , and redefined its status as a marketable commodity and cultural phenomenon as well . The film brought an emphatic end to Hollywood 's five @-@ year recession , while ushering in an era of high @-@ cost , high @-@ tech , high @-@ speed thrillers . " 
 Jaws also played a major part in establishing summer as the prime season for the release of studios ' biggest box @-@ office contenders , their intended blockbusters ; winter had long been the time when most hoped @-@ for hits were distributed , while summer was largely reserved for dumping films thought likely to be poor performers . Jaws and Star Wars are regarded as marking the beginning of the new U.S. film industry business model dominated by " high @-@ concept " pictures — with premises that can be easily described and marketed — as well as the beginning of the end of the New Hollywood period , which saw auteur films increasingly disregarded in favor of profitable big @-@ budget pictures . The New Hollywood era was defined by the relative autonomy filmmakers were able to attain within the major studio system ; in Biskind 's description , " Spielberg was the Trojan horse through which the studios began to reassert their power . " 
 The film had broader cultural repercussions , as well . Similar to the way the pivotal scene in 1960 's Psycho made showers a new source of anxiety , Jaws led many viewers to fear going into the ocean . Reduced beach attendance in 1975 was attributed to it , as well as an increased number of reported shark sightings . It is still seen as responsible for perpetuating negative stereotypes about sharks and their behavior , and for producing the so @-@ called " Jaws effect " , which allegedly inspired " legions of fishermen [ who ] piled into boats and killed thousands of the ocean predators in shark @-@ fishing tournaments . " Benchley stated that he would not have written the original novel had he known what sharks are really like in the wild . Conservation groups have bemoaned the fact that the film has made it considerably harder to convince the public that sharks should be protected . 
 Jaws set the template for many subsequent horror films , to the extent that the script for Ridley Scott 's 1979 science fiction film Alien was pitched to studio executives as " Jaws in space " . Many films based on man @-@ eating animals , usually aquatic , were released through the 1970s and 1980s , such as Orca , Grizzly , Mako : The Jaws of Death , Barracuda , Alligator , Day of the Animals , Aatank , <unk> and Eaten Alive . Spielberg declared Piranha , directed by Joe Dante and written by John Sayles , " the best of the Jaws <unk> " . Among the various foreign <unk> based on Jaws , three came from Italy : Great White , which inspired a plagiarism lawsuit by Universal and was even marketed in some countries as a part of the Jaws franchise ; Monster Shark , featured in Mystery Science Theater 3000 under the title Devil Fish ; and Deep Blood , that blends in a supernatural element . The 1995 thriller film Cruel Jaws even has the alternate title Jaws 5 : Cruel Jaws , and the 2009 Japanese horror film Psycho Shark was released in the United States as Jaws in Japan . 
 Martha 's Vineyard celebrated the film 's 30th anniversary in 2005 with a " JawsFest " festival , which had a second edition in 2012 . An independent group of fans produced the feature @-@ length documentary The Shark is Still Working , featuring interviews with the film 's cast and crew . Narrated by Roy Scheider and dedicated to Peter Benchley , who died in 2006 , it debuted at the 2009 Los Angeles United Film Festival . 
 = = = Home video releases = = = 
 The first ever LaserDisc title marketed in North America was the MCA <unk> release of Jaws in 1978 . A second LaserDisc was released in 1992 , before a third and final version came out under MCA / Universal Home Video 's Signature Collection imprint in 1995 . This release was an elaborate boxset that included deleted scenes and outtakes , a new two @-@ hour documentary on the making of the film directed and produced by Laurent Bouzereau , a copy of the novel Jaws , and a CD of John Williams 's soundtrack . 
 MCA Home Video first released Jaws on VHS in 1980 . For the film 's 20th anniversary in 1995 , MCA Universal Home Video issued a new Collector 's Edition tape featuring a making @-@ of retrospective . This release sold 800 @,@ 000 units in North America . Another , final VHS release , marking the film 's 25th anniversary in 2000 , came with a companion tape containing a documentary , deleted scenes , outtakes , and a trailer . 
 Jaws was first released on DVD in 2000 for the film 's 25th anniversary , accompanied by a massive publicity campaign . It featured a 50 @-@ minute documentary on the making of the film ( an edited version of the one featured on the 1995 LaserDisc release ) , with interviews with Spielberg , Scheider , Dreyfuss , Benchley , and other cast and crew members . Other extras included deleted scenes , outtakes , trailers , production photos , and storyboards . The DVD shipped one million copies in just one month . In June 2005 , a 30th @-@ anniversary edition was released at the JawsFest festival in Martha 's Vineyard . The new DVD had many extras seen in previous home video releases , including the full two @-@ hour Bouzereau documentary , and a previously unavailable interview with Spielberg conducted on the set of Jaws in 1974 . On the second JawsFest in August 2012 , the Blu @-@ ray Disc of Jaws was released , with over four hours of extras , including The Shark Is Still Working . The Blu @-@ ray release was part of the celebrations of Universal 's 100th anniversary , and debuted at fourth place in the charts , with over 362 @,@ 000 units sold . 
 = = = Sequels = = = 
 Jaws spawned three sequels , none of which approached the success of the original . Their combined domestic grosses amount to barely half of the first film 's . In October 1975 , Spielberg declared to a film festival audience that " making a sequel to anything is just a cheap carny trick " . Nonetheless , he did consider taking on the first sequel when its original director , John D. Hancock , was fired a few days into the shoot ; ultimately , his obligations to Close Encounters of the Third Kind , which he was working on with Dreyfuss , made it impossible . Jaws 2 ( 1978 ) was eventually directed by Jeannot Szwarc ; Scheider , Gary , Hamilton , and Jeffrey Kramer ( who portrayed Deputy Hendricks ) reprised their roles . It is generally regarded as the best of the sequels . The next film , Jaws 3 @-@ D ( 1983 ) , was directed by Joe Alves , who had served as art director and production designer , respectively , on the two preceding films . Starring Dennis Quaid and Louis Gossett , Jr . , it was released in the 3 @-@ D format , although the effect did not transfer to television or home video , where it was renamed Jaws 3 . Jaws : The Revenge ( 1987 ) , directed by Joseph Sargent , starring Michael Caine , and featuring the return of Gary , is considered one of the worst movies ever made . While all three sequels made a profit at the box office ( Jaws 2 and Jaws 3 @-@ D were among the top 20 highest @-@ grossing films of their respective years ) , critics and audiences alike were generally dissatisfied with the films . 
 = = = Adaptations and merchandise = = = 
 The film has inspired two theme park rides : one at Universal Studios Florida , which closed in January 2012 , and one at Universal Studios Japan . There is also an animatronic version of a scene from the film on the Studio Tour at Universal Studios Hollywood . There have been at least two musical adaptations : <unk> The Musical ! , which premiered in 2004 at the Minnesota Fringe Festival , and Giant Killer Shark : The Musical , which premiered in 2006 at the Toronto Fringe Festival . Three video games based on the film were released : 1987 's Jaws , developed by LJN for the Nintendo Entertainment System ; 2006 's Jaws Unleashed by Majesco Entertainment for the Xbox , PlayStation 2 , and PC ; and 2011 's Jaws : Ultimate Predator , also by Majesco , for the Nintendo 3DS and Wii . A mobile game was released in 2010 for the iPhone . <unk> made an officially licensed slot machine based on the movie . 
 = Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 = 
 Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 ( Japanese : <unk> マーヴル VS . <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> Māvuru bāsasu Kapukon Surī ) is a crossover fighting game developed by Capcom in collaboration with Eighting . It is an updated version of Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds . The game features characters from both Capcom 's video game franchises and comic book series published by Marvel Comics . The game was released in November 2011 for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 , and was featured as a launch title for the PlayStation Vita in 2012 . 
 In Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 , players select a team of three characters to engage in combat and attempt to knock out their opponents . As an update , the game utilizes largely identical gameplay mechanics to the original . However , both the aerial combat and X @-@ Factor systems , introduced in Fate of Two Worlds , have received adjustments . In addition to gameplay modifications and new playable characters , the game features several aesthetic changes . 
 After the events of the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami disrupted the development schedule for downloadable content for Fate of Two Worlds , the additional content was created into a standalone title , Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 , for a discounted retail price . The game received generally positive reviews upon release ; critics praised the expanded character roster and improved online experience , but criticized the lack of new features and game modes . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 is an updated version of Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds , an arcade @-@ style fighting game , and changes little from the basic gameplay of the original . Players select teams of three different characters to engage in one @-@ on @-@ one combat . The game utilizes the same tag team @-@ based fighting mechanics as its predecessors ; players may choose to swap between their characters at any point during a match . Players must use the various attacks in their arsenal , such as character assists , special moves , and hyper combos , to exhaust their opponent 's life gauge and defeat the entire enemy team , or have the most cumulative health when time runs out . While the core mechanics remain the same , a number of aesthetic changes have been made in Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 , with a stronger emphasis on the comic book motif . The HUD , character selection , and stage selection screens have been redesigned . In addition , many returning characters receive balancing changes , which include new moves and animation tweaks . 
 Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 uses the same simplified , three @-@ button control scheme of undefined light , medium , and heavy attacks introduced in Fate of Two Worlds . The " exchange button " , used to launch opponents into the air and switch between characters while performing air combos , returns . The aerial exchange feature has been altered in Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 ; players can either remove meter from their opponent 's Hyper Combo gauge , add meter to their own gauge , or simply deal more damage . The “ X @-@ Factor ” mechanic , which grants increased damage output , speed , and health regeneration for a limited time , also reappears from Fate of Two Worlds . In Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 , the attack and speed boosts for each character while using X @-@ Factor have been adjusted . X @-@ Factor can now be used while in the air , as opposed to the previous game , in which activation was restricted to characters on the ground . 
 = = = Modes = = = 
 Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 includes several game modes from the original , including Arcade Mode , where the player fights against AI @-@ controlled opponents to reach the final boss character , Galactus ; Versus Mode , where two players engage in combat ; Mission Mode , which includes a series of trials for each playable character ; and Training Mode . " Heroes and Heralds " is a free downloadable single @-@ player and multiplayer team @-@ based mode where players earn new abilities with upgrade cards , customize their characters with new powers , and compete in factions as either the heroes defending Earth or as one of Galactus ’ Heralds . The " ability cards " , which feature various characters from the Marvel and Capcom universes , unlock special power @-@ ups , such as invisibility and projectile invincibility , for use during mode @-@ specific combat . Up to three different cards may be equipped at once , with more than 100 cards available to collect . A new offline mode , called " Galactus Mode " , allows players to fight as Galactus against AI @-@ controlled opponents . 
 An optimized netcode is present in the game , providing smoother online play compared to Fate of Two Worlds . A new spectator mode allows up to six players to watch online matches between other players . Rematch features and leaderboard functionality have also been improved to enhance the game 's online experience . 
 = = = Playable characters = = = 
 Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 features the original 36 characters from Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds and introduces 12 new playable fighters . The six new Marvel Comics characters include Doctor Strange , Ghost Rider , Hawkeye , Iron Fist , Nova , and Rocket Raccoon . The six new Capcom characters consist of Firebrand from Ghosts ' n Goblins , Frank West from Dead Rising , Nemesis T @-@ Type from Resident Evil , Phoenix Wright from Ace Attorney , Strider Hiryu from Strider , and Vergil from Devil May Cry . Jill Valentine and Shuma @-@ Gorath , the two characters released as downloadable content ( DLC ) for the previous game , remained available for download up until all DLC content for the game was removed from online stores in December 2013 . 
 = = Development = = 
 On July 20 , 2011 , at the San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , Capcom announced that an updated version of Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds was under development . The update , titled Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 , would add new characters , stages , modes , and other enhancements to improve the game 's balance and online functionality . According to Capcom , many new features and refinements , such as the addition of a spectator mode and tweaks to X @-@ Factor , were the results of fan feedback . At the 2011 Tokyo Game Show , Capcom video game producer , Yoshinori Ono , would later announce that the game would also be released as a launch title for the PlayStation Vita . The handheld edition promised to contain the same content as the console versions , in addition to touchscreen control support . 
 After the release of Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds , the game 's development team had plans to release more downloadable content . However , after the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami , in addition to staff health issues , delayed the development schedule , producer Ryota Niitsuma and his team decided to release the proposed DLC , along with rebalanced gameplay and other additions , as a separate installment . As a result , the makeup of Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 is split " about half and half " between DLC meant for Fate of Two Worlds and brand new content . 
 Character selection was a collaborative process between Capcom and Marvel . According to Seth Killian , a former community manager for Capcom , Marvel presented a list of their own characters that they were interested in seeing in Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 . Capcom then provided input regarding moveset possibilities in order to reach a consensus . Each company also had their own set of interests and priorities . Marvel characters , such as Rocket Raccoon and Nova , were chosen to cross @-@ promote upcoming products . On the other hand , Capcom sought to bring more diversity into the cast . For example , Capcom wanted a monster @-@ like character that could fight while in the air , leading to the inclusion of Firebrand . 
 = = Release = = 
 Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 was released for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 on November 15 , 2011 in North America , November 17 in Japan , and November 18 in Europe . The PlayStation Vita version was released on December 17 , 2011 in Japan , and February 22 , 2012 in North America and Europe . People who ordered the PlayStation Vita " First Edition " bundle in North America were able to receive an early copy of Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 on February 15 , 2012 , one week ahead of the console 's official launch date . 
 To promote Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 , special retailer @-@ exclusive costume packs were available as pre @-@ order bonuses . If the game was pre @-@ ordered from GameStop , the players received the Femme Fatale Pack ( Chun @-@ Li , Morrigan , Storm , X @-@ 23 ) . Amazon offered the New Age of Heroes Costume Pack ( Akuma , Doctor Doom , Sentinel , Strider Hiryu ) , while Best Buy gave access to the Villains Costume Pack ( C. Viper , <unk> , Super @-@ Skrull , Wesker ) . After the game 's launch , several other costume packs became available for purchase on specific dates through the Xbox Live Marketplace and PlayStation Network . The Ancient Warriors Costume Pack , consisting of Arthur , Firebrand , Hulk , and Magneto , was originally planned to be released in December 20 , 2011 . However , on December 19 , 2011 , Capcom announced that the pack would be delayed until March 6 , 2012 , due to existing controversy with Magneto 's alternate costume . The costume in question , which was based on Magneto 's appearance in Marvel 's House of M series , bore similarities to the attire of the King of Spain , Juan Carlos I , and was later removed from the pack . 
 Prior to the release of Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 , both Capcom and Marvel announced that the game would include reversible packaging . The front cover art featured the work of Capcom illustrator Shinkiro , while the reverse side featured the art of Marvel Comics ' Mark Brooks . Brook 's alternate cover featured all twelve of the game 's new characters in his own comic book style . Both pieces of art were printed on a single reversible cover for the entire first run of Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 in North America . 
 On December 13 , 2013 , Capcom announced that digital versions of Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 and its DLC would be removed from online platforms towards the end of the month , following the apparent expiration of Capcom 's licensing contracts with Marvel Comics . The game was pulled from the PlayStation Network on December 17 and 19 in North America and Europe , respectively , and from the Xbox Live Arcade on December 26 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 was released to generally favorable reviews , garnering scores of 80 / 100 and 79 / 100 from Metacritic for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions , respectively , and aggregate scores of 81 % from GameRankings for both systems . The PlayStation Vita version received a score of 80 / 100 from Metacritic and 82 % from GameRankings . 
 The game received praise for addressing several gameplay issues prevalent in Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds and refining the online experience . Daniel Maniago of G4 praised the game for its " simple , yet deep gameplay " , character roster , and improved online features . 1UP.com 's Neidel Crisan cited the game as a major improvement over the original . GameSpot 's Maxwell McGee stated that Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 was unquestionably the superior version , highlighting the series ' " unique blend of structured insanity " . 
 A common criticism amongst reviewers for Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 was the lack of additional on @-@ disc content beyond the expanded character roster and gameplay tweaks . While IGN 's Steven Hopper praised the inclusion of new characters , he criticized the lack of new features and modes . As a result , he stated that the game 's US $ 40 price tag was " a little hard to swallow " . Tim Turi of Game Informer stated that while hardcore fans would appreciate Capcom 's balancing tweaks , casual fans who already played Fate of Two Worlds and were only interested in new characters would " likely be left wanting " . 
 Reviewers praised the PlayStation Vita version for its technical performance , despite hardware constraints , and for providing the full console version experience on a portable system . Hopper complimented the graphics , stating that the Vita port matched the visual fidelity of the console versions . Martin Robinson of Eurogamer claimed Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 was one of the Vita 's " finer @-@ looking launch games , " praising its detail and faithfulness to the original . However , he criticized the addition of touchscreen controls , stating its implementation fell short of the mark laid down by Super Street Fighter IV : 3D Edition . 
 Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 sold approximately 600 @,@ 000 units worldwide for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 during the first two months of its release . As of March 2015 , the game sold 1 @.@ 2 million units across its various platforms . 
 = Really Achieving Your Childhood Dreams = 
 " Really Achieving Your Childhood Dreams " ( also referred to as " The Last Lecture " ) was a lecture given by Carnegie Mellon University computer science professor Randy Pausch on September 18 , 2007 , that received a large amount of media coverage , and was the basis for The Last Lecture , a New York Times best @-@ selling book co @-@ authored with Wall Street Journal reporter Jeffrey Zaslow . Pausch had been diagnosed with pancreatic cancer in September 2006 . On September 19 , 2006 , Pausch underwent a pancreaticoduodenectomy to remove the malignant tumor from his pancreas . In August 2007 , after doctors discovered that the cancer had recurred , Pausch was given a terminal diagnosis and was told to expect a remaining three to six months of good health . 
 During the lecture , Pausch was upbeat and humorous , alternating between wisecracks , insights on computer science and engineering education , advice on building multi @-@ disciplinary collaborations , working in groups and interacting with other people , offering inspirational life lessons , and performing push @-@ ups on stage . He also commented on the irony that the " Last Lecture " series had recently been renamed as " Journeys " : " I thought , damn , I finally nailed the venue and they renamed it . " After Pausch finished his lecture , Steve Seabolt , on behalf of Electronic Arts , which is now collaborating with CMU in the development of Alice 3 @.@ 0 , pledged to honor Pausch by creating a memorial scholarship for women in computer science , in recognition of Pausch 's support and mentoring of women in CS and engineering . 
 Professor Pausch 's " Last Lecture " has received attention and recognition both from the American media and from news sources around the world . The video of the speech became an Internet sensation , being viewed over a million times in the first month after its delivery on social networking sites such as YouTube , Google video , MySpace , and Facebook . Randy Pausch gave an abridged version of his speech on The Oprah Winfrey Show in October 2007 . On April 9 , 2008 , the ABC network aired an hour @-@ long Diane Sawyer feature on Pausch entitled " The Last Lecture : A Love Story For Your Life " . Four days after his death from pancreatic cancer on July 25 , 2008 , ABC aired a tribute to Pausch , remembering his life and his famous lecture . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Previous lectures = = = 
 Pausch was known for some lectures in his previous jobs . In his previous career , Pausch was associate professor in the Department of Computer Science at the University of Virginia 's School of Engineering and Applied Science in 1997 and 1998 , and also worked for The Walt Disney Company as an <unk> and for Electronic Arts . At the University of Virginia , he was known for a lecture on the importance of making technology more friendly to users in which he demonstrated his point by presenting a VCR ( other wise known as a video cassette recorder ) that was hard to program and then smashing it with a sledgehammer . He was also known for his lecture on time management which he delivered in 1998 at the University of Virginia , and again in 2007 at the same venue . " Really Achieving Your Childhood Dreams " was the first lecture of the nine part " Journeys " lecture series conducted by Carnegie Mellon , which also included speakers such as Raj Reddy , Jay Apt , and Jared Cohon , the university president . The series of lectures was focused on university staff members discussing their professional journeys and the decisions and challenges they faced . 
 = = = Terminal cancer = = = 
 At the time that Pausch gave the lecture , he was a pancreatic cancer patient . In an interview , Pausch stated that he had felt bloated , and learned that he had a cancerous tumor when doctors performed a CT Scan to check for gallstones . He then underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy surgery ( or the " Whipple procedure " ) to try to stop the growth of the cancerous tumor in his body , which later proved to be unsuccessful . The doctors removed his gall bladder , parts of his small intestine , a third of his pancreas , and parts of his stomach , and proceeded to begin an experimental radiation treatment that could possibly increase his chances of survival for another 5 years to 45 percent . Pausch began the radiation treatments in November 2006 and stopped in May 2007 , and felt that he was in good health after finishing . In July and August , tests conducted at Johns Hopkins University showed that Pausch was free of cancer . However , in late August of that year , Pausch informed readers of his website that his cancer had returned , saying : " A recent CT scan showed that there are 10 tumors in my liver , and my spleen is also peppered with small tumors . The doctors say that it is one of the most aggressive recurrences they have ever seen . " The doctors estimated Pausch had three to six months of good health left to live . 
 Pausch based the lecture on the generic " Last Lecture " given by some professors , and on the idea of imagining what one would say and what one would want their legacy to be if they could only have one last chance to share their knowledge with the world . Carnegie Mellon had previously had a lecture series titled the " Last Lecture " , but had renamed the series to " Journeys " , and had staff talk about their professional experiences . Pausch was offered the lecture around the time when he was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer , and had just received the news that he only had a few months left to live after his unsuccessful treatment for the tumors . Pausch nearly cancelled the lecture due to the terminal cancer , but discussed the issue with his wife and decided to take the one final chance to share his thoughts with the world . Pausch compared it to the final scene of The Natural , in which Roy Hobbs ( the main character ) overcomes injury and old age to hit one final home run . 
 = = = Speech inspiration = = = 
 Before Pausch was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer , he was originally going to have his lecture based on the generic academic @-@ style " Last Lecture " talk explained earlier , and was not expecting his cancer to play a part in the decision . Pausch could not think of a subject for the speech , and was constantly being e @-@ mailed by speech organizers and event organizers from Carnegie Mellon . Pausch was told in August , a month before the lecture , that a poster must be printed and he needed to decide on a subject immediately . The same week , he was told that the prognosis for his pancreatic cancer was to be terminal . Pausch nearly canceled the lecture after hearing the news . He was deciding whether to make the speech , or to stay at home to get his family in order so that they would be set to live a normal life following Pausch 's death . Pausch discussed the matter with his wife Jai , who requested that Pausch stay at home . Jai suggested that Pausch should be spending some of his time left with their three children , not giving a speech at his workplace . Pausch decided against this , after explaining that his children would remember him through seeing his lecture . 
 = = Speech = = 
 " Really Achieving Your Childhood Dreams " was delivered on September 18 , 2007 , at Carnegie Mellon University 's <unk> Auditorium . Over 450 Carnegie Mellon students , staff members , and friends of Pausch attended the lecture , leaving only standing room as this was more than the auditorium could hold . Pausch later commented about this in an interview , saying " A couple of hundred people in a room , looking and listening and laughing and applauding – hopefully at the appropriate times – that gives a lot of validation to my kids that a lot of people believe in this , and a lot of people who knew me believe that I did my best to try to live this way . " The first introduction of the speech as well as the series of lectures was given by Indira Nair , the Vice Provost for Education at Carnegie Mellon . Nair first explained the university 's aforementioned lecture series called " Journeys " , in which eight more professors from Carnegie Mellon would share their insights on their professional and personal experiences over the years . 
 Pausch was then introduced by Steve Sea @-@ bolt , who was the Vice President of Worldwide Publishing and Marketing at Electronic Arts , in addition to being Pausch 's close friend and former co @-@ worker . Sea @-@ bolt began with a joke referring to Electronic Arts , and another joke about a bet he and Pausch had made about how many people would attend the lecture , saying that " ... depending upon whose version of the story you hear , he either owes me 20 dollars or his new Volkswagen . " Seabolt began the next part of the introduction by talking about Pausch 's academic achievements and previous career with the University of Virginia and Electronic Arts . Seabolt concluded his introduction by describing the qualities of Pausch , saying that " Randy 's dedication to making the world a better place is self evident to anyone who has crossed paths with him . " He described how his accomplishments had affected others , as well as his wife and three children . Seabolt then turned the speech over to Pausch , who was greeted with a standing ovation . 
 As Pausch walked into the standing ovation , he tried to stop the applause , get the audience to sit down , and begin the speech by commenting " make me earn it " , to which one member of the audience responded " you did " . He then commented on the irony of his " last lecture " in a series that used to be the " Last Lecture " series , but was renamed " Journeys " : " It 's wonderful to be here . What Indira didn ’ t tell you is that this lecture series used to be called the ' Last Lecture ' . If you had one last lecture to give before you died , what would it be ? I thought , damn , I finally nailed the venue and they renamed it . " 
 Before beginning part I of the lecture , Pausch explained his story of having pancreatic cancer and only having 3 to 6 months to live , but still made a joke of it by saying that he was still in the best shape of his life ( and " better than most of you [ the audience ] " ) , proceeding to do a series of push @-@ ups on stage while still speaking . Pausch also talked about what he would not cover in the lecture , which included his family and children , religion , spirituality , and his terminal cancer or any other cancer . 
 = = = Pausch 's childhood dreams = = = 
 Pausch then went to the first part of his speech , explaining his childhood dreams and how he accomplished ( or tried to accomplish ) them . Pausch first explained his childhood , as well as his family life in the 1960s . Pausch stated that he had a " really good childhood " , and , when going back through his family archive of photographs , had never found a picture of him not smiling . Some of these pictures were shown on the projection as slides , including one of him dreaming . He explained how he was inspired by the Apollo 11 lunar landing in 1969 . Pausch then transitioned to a slide which contained a list of his childhood dreams , and explained them . His dreams were being in zero gravity , playing in the National Football League , being the author of a World Book Encyclopedia article , being Captain Kirk , being " one of the guys who won the big stuffed animals in the amusement park " , and becoming a Disney Imagineer . 
 First off , Pausch explained his dream of being in zero gravity . As a child , this had been a dream inspired by Apollo 11 , and had stayed with him as an adult . When he was the computer science professor at Carnegie Mellon , he learned of a program that NASA has that allows college students to go up into the air in NASA 's Vomit Comet , which uses parabolic arcs to simulate the feeling of weightlessness . Faculty members were not allowed to go ( Pausch called this a " brick wall " he faced ) , so he had to present himself as a web journalist , because local media was allowed on . Pausch proceeded to begin talking about his second childhood dream , playing in the National Football League . Although Pausch was never a player in the National Football League , he spoke about his childhood experiences with Pop Warner Football and how they had affected his life and taught him lessons . Pausch then moved on to his dream of publishing an article in the World Book Encyclopedia . As a child , Pausch always kept and read a World Book Encyclopedia in his home . As he progressed into a career , he became one of the leading professors in the field of virtual reality . World Book then called Pausch , interested in him writing for the encyclopedia . Currently , the article " virtual reality " in the World Book Encyclopedia is the one authored by Pausch . 
 Next , Pausch explained his dream of being like Captain Kirk from the Star Trek series , with the slide showing " Being like Meeting Captain Kirk " . Pausch explained that he realized that there were some things he just could not do , and that was one of them . He eventually changed the goal into meeting William Shatner , the actor who played Captain Kirk . Shatner had written a book on the science of Star Trek , and had gone to Pausch for help with the virtual reality section of the book . Pausch met and worked with Shatner for this purpose . Pausch concluded the section with the story of his becoming an Imagineer at Disney , as well as his achieving the goal of " being one of those guys who wins stuffed animals " , which was at a carnival with his wife and children . 
 = = = Enabling the dreams of others = = = 
 After explaining his childhood dreams , Pausch then began the second part of his speech , which was about how he enabled the dreams of others . He decided to become a professor , and reflected in the speech that there was no better job to enable the childhood dreams of other people . He also mentioned that working for Electronic Arts was " probably a close second " . Pausch told the audience about how he realized he could enable the dreams of others , due to Tommy Burnett , one of his students at the University of Virginia . Burnett was interested in joining Pausch 's research group . Pausch asked Burnett what his childhood dream was while talking about joining the team , and he responded that his dream was to work on the next Star Wars film . Burnett worked on Pausch 's virtual reality team while at the University of Virginia , and Pausch helped Burnett to try achieve this dream . When Pausch moved to Carnegie Mellon , his entire team moved with him except Burnett , who had been offered a job by Lucasfilm ( the creator of Star Wars ) . He eventually worked with Lucasfilm on three Star Wars films : The Phantom Menace , Attack of the Clones , and Revenge of the Sith . 
 This led Pausch to conduct a virtual reality class at Carnegie Mellon , to teach others and to help them realize their childhood dreams . In the course , 50 students from the university were separated into random teams of four and were each assigned a project relating to building a virtual world . Each group had two weeks to work on the project , and then presented the project to the group . The teams were then randomized again and a new project began . The project then evolved into something that people came to watch , and helped his students realize their potential . Finally , Pausch gave a few words of advice on how others could achieve their childhood dreams , and who his role models were when he was trying to do so . 
 = = = Conclusion = = = 
 After Pausch finished his lecture , Steve Seabolt , on behalf of Electronic Arts , which is now collaborating with Carnegie Mellon in the development of Alice 3 @.@ 0 , pledged to honor Pausch by creating a memorial scholarship for women in computer science in recognition of Pausch 's support and mentoring of women in CS and engineering . Then , university president Jared Cohon called his contributions to the university and to education " remarkable and stunning " . He then announced that Carnegie Mellon would build a raised pedestrian bridge named for Pausch in honor of his contributions to the university and to the world . This connected Carnegie Mellon 's new Computer Science building and the Center for the Arts , a symbol of the way Pausch linked those two areas . Finally , Brown University professor Andries van Dam followed Pausch 's last lecture with a tearful and impassioned speech praising him for his courage and leadership , calling him a role model . 
 = = Post @-@ speech media coverage = = 
 Pausch was named " Person of the Week " on ABC 's World News with Charles Gibson on September 21 . His " Last Lecture " attracted wide attention from the international media , became an Internet hit , and was viewed over a million times in the first month after its delivery . On October 22 , 2007 , Pausch appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show , where he discussed his situation and recapped his " Last Lecture " for millions of TV viewers . 
 On October 6 , 2007 , Pausch joined the Pittsburgh Steelers for the day during their regular practice , after the organization learned that one of his childhood dreams mentioned in his " Last Lecture " was to play in the National Football League . A devoted Star Trek fan , Pausch was invited by film director J. J. Abrams to film a role in the latest Star Trek movie . Abrams heard of Pausch 's condition and sent a personal e @-@ mail inviting Pausch to the set . Pausch happily accepted and traveled to Los Angeles , California to shoot his scene . In addition to appearing in the film , he also has a line of dialogue and donated the $ 217 @.@ 06 paycheck to charity . On April 9 , 2008 , the ABC network aired an hour @-@ long Diane Sawyer feature on Pausch entitled " The Last Lecture : A Love Story For Your Life " . On July 29 , 2008 , ABC aired a follow up to the Last Lecture special , remembering Pausch . 
 = = Book = = 
 The Disney @-@ owned publisher Hyperion paid $ 6 @.@ 7 million for the rights to publish a book about Pausch called The Last Lecture , co @-@ authored by Pausch and Wall Street Journal reporter Jeffrey Zaslow . The Last Lecture explained Pausch 's speech , and the events that led up to it . According to Robert Miller , a publisher for Hyperion Books , the book would " flesh out his speech " and show others " how to deal with mortality " and how to live well while death is imminent . The book was well @-@ received , eventually earning the number one spot on the New York Times bestseller list in the " Advice " category during the week of June 22 , 2008 . The book remained on the New York Times bestseller list for 80 straight weeks . 
 = Essence ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Essence " is the twentieth and penultimate episode of the eighth season and the 181st episode overall of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . The episode first aired in the United States on May 13 , 2001 on Fox , and subsequently aired in the United Kingdom . It was written by executive producer Chris Carter and directed by Kim Manners . " Essence " earned Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 7 and was viewed by 12 @.@ 8 million viewers . The episode received largely positive reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) — as well as ex @-@ FBI agent Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) — who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder , Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) , and Doggett come up against the horrible consequences of the Syndicate ’ s pact with the aliens , as Billy Miles ( Zachary Ansley ) — reprogrammed as a soldier — attempts to erase all evidence of the tests — including Scully 's soon @-@ to @-@ be @-@ born baby . Upon hearing information from Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) , the men reluctantly call upon him as well as Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) to help them . 
 " Essence " is a story milestone for the series . It was one of the later season eight episodes , starting with " Per Manum " , that introduced the story arc about super @-@ soldiers , which would continue throughout the ninth season . The series was the first part of two , and concluded with the season finale " Existence " . In addition , Nicholas Lea reprises his role as Alex Krycek , who temporarily switches sides and aides Mulder and Scully . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While preparing for Dana Scully 's ( Gillian Anderson ) baby shower , her mother , Margaret , invites a woman named Lizzy Gill to help Scully around her apartment . Unbeknownst to Scully , Gill tampers with her pregnancy medications . Meanwhile , Billy Miles , satisfied with the research conducted at Zeus Genetics in Germantown , kills a scientist ( Dr. Lev ) and burns the laboratory . All of the evidence at Zeus Genetics is destroyed , including the viable hybrid fetus . 
 Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) informs John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) of the fire at Zeus Genetics , and asks to go along to survey the crime scene . Mulder reveals that Dr. Lev is connected to Scully 's former obstetrician , Dr. Parenti . While searching Dr. Parenti 's office , the agents find another storage room containing hybrid fetuses . They confront Dr. Parenti , who denies everything . 
 Back at Scully 's apartment , Gill leaves for the day . She gets into a car driven by Duffy Haskell , and tells him she thinks Scully trusts her . 
 At the lab , Agent Crane derides Doggett for dealing with Mulder . Mulder and Doggett leave the office , during which time Miles appears and decapitates Dr. Parenti . The agents confront Miles — Mulder is thrown through a glass barrier while Doggett shoots him several times with no apparent effect . While Mulder and Doggett are distracted , Miles escapes . 
 The two go to Scully 's house to regroup . Gill overhears and contacts Haskell , who is at an illegal human @-@ cloning facility . At the other end , Haskell is also decapitated by Billy Miles . As Doggett , Skinner and Mulder survey Haskell 's murder scene , Scully catches Gill in the act of tampering with her medications . Later , Gill confesses that she , along with Haskell and others , have been monitoring Scully 's pregnancy as part of the Syndicate 's plans . However , she tells the agents that Scully 's baby is a perfect human child with no human weaknesses . 
 Mulder , fearing for Scully 's safety , prepares to take her away . Doggett and Agent Crane receive a call from Miles claiming to surrender , but this turns out to be a distraction . Miles instead goes after Scully , just as she and Mulder escape . As Miles is about to catch Mulder and Scully , Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) runs him over and takes them to Doggett and Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) , just before Miles gets back up . At the FBI , Krycek confesses that Billy Miles is one of a new type of aliens that are trying to wipe out humanity 's ability to survive the invasion — including Scully 's baby , which Krycek states is a special child that the aliens fear . 
 Mulder tells Doggett to send for help . Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) arrives as Miles shows up at the J. Edgar Hoover Building . Scully is able to sneak out of the building with the help of Krycek , Doggett and Reyes . Mulder and Skinner , meanwhile , lead Miles to the roof , where Mulder pushes him off into a waiting garbage truck , which then compacts him . Scully and Reyes pull away . The episode ends with Agent Crane pointing them to safety , then turning around , revealing to the camera protrusions on his spine . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Essence " was written by series creator Chris Carter . The episode , which was the first part of two and concluded with the season finale " Existence " , was written during a time of uncertainty for the series . Near the end of season eight , it was unclear whether or not the show would continue onto a ninth season . Carter had maintained for sometime that he would not continue the show without lead actor David Duchovny . However , Duchovny announced that after the end of the eighth season , he would leave the show for good . In addition , lead actress Gillian Anderson 's contract also expired at the end of the eighth season . Anderson had expressed her growing disinterest in the series ever since the beginning of the eighth season , saying " For a lot of people , if you don 't like your job , you can quit your job , I don 't necessarily have that option . " Anderson cited the fact that " eight years is a long time " as a contributing factor to her indifference . However , Carter soon changed his position and announced he would remain on the show and continue only if Anderson agreed to do another season . Eventually , Fox offered Anderson a " generous " incentive to stay , resulting in the retention of Carter and Anderson and a final season of the show . 
 The episode marks the return of Nicholas Lea as Alex Krycek . In previous episodes , Krycek was one of the series ' main antagonists . However , in " Essence " , he temporarily switches sides . As such , portraying actor Lea explains the character 's motivation : " Toward the end , he realizes that it 's possible that the world could completely go down the tubes — then he 's got a stake in trying to keep that from happening . That 's when he starts giving the information to Mulder so that he can use it . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Essence " first aired on Fox on May 13 , 2001 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 7 @.@ 7 , meaning that it was seen by 7 @.@ 7 % of the nation 's estimated households . The episode was viewed by 7 @.@ 87 million households , and 12 @.@ 8 million viewers . The episode ranked as the 41st most @-@ watched episode for the week ending April 8 . In the United Kingdom and Ireland , the episode made its first televised appearance on June 28 , 2001 on Sky1 and was the third most watched program that week , receiving 0 @.@ 65 million viewers . Fox promoted the episode with a poster parodying the 1968 horror movie Rosemary 's Baby . The episode 's tagline was " Scully 's baby is born . " The episode was later included on The X @-@ Files Mythology , Volume 4 – Super Soldiers , a DVD collection that contains episodes involved with the alien super soldiers arc . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Essence " received mostly positive reviews from critics . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B + " , noting that while much of the episode was a " blur " , it was nonetheless exciting . Handlen was complimentary towards the installment 's " tremendous sense of purpose [ that ] builds to a fever pitch that makes questions of who exactly wants what largely irrelevant . " While he offered a pessimistic opinion in regards to the series ' mythology as a whole , Handlen concluded that the eighth season 's sense of purpose , as exemplified in " Essence " , made the episode successful . George Avalos and Michael Liedtke of Contra Costa Times praised the episode , writing " where have nifty episodes like [ " Essence " ] been the last two years ? " Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations , gave the episode a largely positive review . Praising the storyline , he noted that " Thanks to ' Essence ' , I 've become a believer again . " John Keegan of Critical Myth gave the episode a 9 out of 10 rating and wrote " overall , this was a wonderful episode that served to prepare us for the final installment of the alien mythology ( presumably ) and managed to keep us in our seats the entire way . " Gareth Wigmore of TV Zone was positive toward both " Essence " and " Existence " . Wigmore gave the episodes a 9 out of 10 rating and wrote " the reason that this two @-@ parter works is that its plot is simple enough for the audience to still have a handle on " . Jessica Morgan of Television Without Pity awarded the episode a B + . 
 Not all reviews were so positive , however . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , gave the episode a more mixed two stars out of five . The two cited dense dialogue and bizarre characterization — most notably the fact that " there 's usually one FBI agent so angry that he interrupts [ ... ] only to be stopped by a calmer counterpart " — as detractors . Shearman and Pearson , however , did praise the final ten minutes , noting that the final act was " so good [ ... ] that it almost makes up for the episode which sadly returns to the style of the traditional mytharc exposition " . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a scathing review and awarded it no stars out of four . She heavily derided the plot , noting that the episode turned Scully into a " passive , mostly silent Virgin Mary who is about to give birth to … Jesus Christ . " She concluded that the episode " raise [ ed ] the [ misogyny ] to a whole new level " . 
 = Hello Pappy scandal = 
 The Hello Pappy scandal , alluding to the nickname of involved host Willie Revillame and the Hello Garci scandal , was a scandal surrounding an incident during the August 20 , 2007 episode of the Filipino variety show Wowowee , broadcast by ABS @-@ CBN . During the episode , a technical error occurred during the final jackpot round of the show 's Wilyonaryo segment which raised allegations within the media that the segment was , or could be , rigged by the producers . The incident prompted an investigation by the country 's Department of Trade and Industry , and was also the catalyst of an on @-@ air feud between Revillame and Joey de Leon , a personality from the rival GMA Network . 
 ABS @-@ CBN , who claimed that the incident was the result of a " design flaw " that had been fixed , was fined ₱ 290 @,@ 000 by the Department of Trade and Industry for violating the country 's Consumers Act . 
 = = Development = = 
 During the episode , a contestant named Weng participated in the Wilyonaryo segment of the show . In the earlier rounds , she had won ₱ 37 @,@ 000 . For the jackpot portion of the game , out of the 12 " wheels " used in the game ; she was randomly given a white @-@ colored wheel . Weng now had to choose between two big prizes : the ₱ 100 @,@ 000 that the host Willie Revillame was offering her , or whatever was inside the white wheel , which , according to the rules , could be a jackpot prize of ₱ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ( US $ 45 @,@ 000 ) , a jackpot prize of ₱ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ( US $ 22 @,@ 500 ) , a jackpot prize of ₱ 500 @,@ 000 ( US $ 11 @,@ 250 ) , a house and lot , or nothing at all ( which would be signified by the numeral zero ) . 
 At first , she decided to go with what was inside the white wheel . However , after being prodded by the hosts to take the money instead , Weng decided to forgo the possible jackpot prize revealed in the white wheel and instead take home the ₱ 100 @,@ 000 for this round , plus the ₱ 37 @,@ 000 from the earlier round . After this , Willie pulled the dark film from the window embedded in the wheel to reveal what prize the contestant had lost by choosing to take home the ₱ 137 @,@ 000 . Pulling the dark film revealed the numeral zero . This meant that if she had chosen the white wheel instead , she would have gone home with only ₱ 37 @,@ 000 . 
 After the decision , Willie went on to reveal where the other prizes — the ₱ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cash prize , the ₱ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cash prize , the ₱ 500 @,@ 000 cash prize , and the house and lot — were hidden . He said that the symbol for the ₱ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cash prize — the numeral " 2 " — was in the window of the violet wheel . He was handed the violet wheel , and he reached behind the wheel , supposedly to pull the dark film in order to reveal the numeral " 2 . " However , when he pulled the film , the numeral " 0 " appeared instead . He appeared to fiddle with the back of the wheel and then he pulled out two films : one dark film ( supposedly the " cover " film ) and another film with the numeral " 2 " printed on it . As he held those two films in his hand , the numeral " 0 " was still visible in the window of the violet wheel . 
 Although ABS @-@ CBN officials stated that this occurrence with the then @-@ new game was a " mechanical glitch " and an honest mistake , controversy erupted as many critics asked whether the mistake was a sign that the show — or at least this portion of the show — could be or was rigged . 
 = = Reactions and criticisms = = 
 The scandal grew after Joey de Leon , one of the hosts of Eat Bulaga ! , a rival variety show broadcast by GMA Network , began making comments about the incident - ending an edition of his Manila Bulletin entertainment column about the incident with the statement , " Teasing is not bad . Cheating is ... on TV . " 
 On the August 29 , 2007 episode of Wowowee , Willie Revillame emotionally , but obviously no shed of tears , addressed Joey de Leon and insisted that he had not been cheating . Joey retaliated Willie 's statement the following day in a 15 @-@ minute long monologue on Eat Bulaga ! by advising his rival to " explain before you complain " ; not mentioning Willie or Wowowee directly at all during the speech , but clearly directing the speech at him . He also accused Willie of resorting to personal attacks in order to dodge questions about the incident . Joey also clarified in the address that he was not directly accusing Willie or the Wowowee staff of cheating ; noting that the only information he got about the incident was through video postings on YouTube and text messages he had received about the incident . 
 On August 30 , 2007 , Senator Mar Roxas , chair of the Senate trade and commerce committee , announced that he would propose an inquiry into this alleged game rigging after getting information from the Department of Trade and Industry ( DTI ) and concerned parties . Joey had jokingly called upon lawmakers to stop probing the Hello Garci scandal , and to start probing the " Hello Pappy " scandal during his speech the previous day . The game was also later discontinued from the show . 
 The Movie and Television Review and Classification Board also became increasingly concerned about the scandal due to the escalating on @-@ air feuds between Willie and Joey — asking Willie to make an on @-@ air apology about his remarks towards Joey on the September 4 episode of Wowowee . 
 = = = Explanation by ABS @-@ CBN = = = 
 In response to the incident , network Vice President Bong Osorio stated that a fixed " design flaw " was the cause of the incident , further remarking that " [ we ] have no intention to manipulate results , but rather to add excitement and suspense . " Osorio also stated that a game shows can experience " glitches " during development , and re @-@ enforced that all game shows broadcast by the network were operated in accordance with ABS @-@ CBN 's corporate values of honesty and integrity . 
 = = = DTI probe , administrative fine and appeal = = = 
 On October 13 , 2008 , the DTI ordered ABS @-@ CBN to pay an administrative fine of ₱ 290 @,@ 000 , ruling that the Wilyonaryo segment violated the Consumers Act of the Philippines , ruling that “ A reasonable assessment of the existing game mechanics and procedures reveals that the game show segment allowed for reasonable likelihood of error and provided the host and organizers significant latitude in controlling the outcome of the contest . ” ABS @-@ CBN later released a statement that they would file an appeal on the decision . 
 = A Ghost Story for Christmas = 
 A Ghost Story for Christmas is a strand of annual British short television films originally broadcast on BBC One between 1971 and 1978 , and revived in 2005 on BBC Four . With one exception , the original instalments were directed by Lawrence Gordon Clark and the films were all shot on 16 mm colour film . The remit behind the series was to provide a television adaptation of a classic ghost story , in line with the oral tradition of telling supernatural tales at Christmas . 
 Each instalment is a separate adaptation of a short story , ranges between 30 and 50 minutes in duration , and features well @-@ known British actors such as Clive Swift , Robert Hardy , Peter Vaughan , Edward <unk> and Denholm Elliott . The first five are adaptations of ghost stories by M. R. James , the sixth is based on a short story by Charles Dickens , and the two final instalments are original screenplays by Clive Exton and John Bowen respectively . The stories were titled A Ghost Story for Christmas in listings such as the Radio Times , although this never appeared on screen , where they were regarded as individual films . 
 An earlier black @-@ and @-@ white adaptation of M. R. James 's Whistle and I 'll Come to You , directed by Jonathan Miller and shown as part of the series Omnibus in 1968 , is often cited as an influence upon the production of the films , and is sometimes included as part of the series . The series was revived by the BBC in 2005 with a new set of adaptations that were produced intermittently over the next few years . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The first five films are adaptations of stories from the four books by M. R. James published between 1904 and 1925 . The ghost stories of James , an English mediaeval scholar and Provost of Eton College and King 's College , Cambridge , were originally narrated as Christmas entertainments to friends and selected students . 
 The sixth film , The Signalman , is an adaptation of a story by Charles Dickens published in his magazine All the Year Round in 1866 . In its original context it was one of eight stories set around the fictional <unk> Junction and its branch lines . It was inspired by the Staplehurst rail crash of June 1865 , which Dickens himself survived , having attended to dying fellow passengers . He subsequently suffered panic disorders and flashbacks as a result . 
 The final two stories were based on original screenplays , one by Clive Exton , who was an experienced television screenwriter , and the other by John Bowen , who was primarily known as a novelist and playwright . 
 = = = Adaptation = = = 
 In an interview in 1995 Lawrence Gordon Clark stated that the stories " focus on suggestion . The aim , they say , is to chill rather than shock . Partly because television is not best suited to carrying off big @-@ screen pyrotechnics , but mainly because they want to keep faith with the notion of a ghost story in its literary rather than cinematic tradition . " Helen Wheatley notes that the best adaptations maintain the stories ' " sense of decorum and restraint , ... withholding the full revelation of the supernatural until the very last moment , and centring on the suggestion of a ghostly presence rather than the horror of visceral excess and abjection . " 
 After the first two adaptations , both done by Clark , the tales were adapted by a number of playwrights and screenwriters . In most instances the adaptations alter the original source material . For example , A Warning to the Curious frequently deviates from its literary source . The screenplay avoids the convoluted plot structure of M. R. James 's original , opting for a more linear construction and reducing the number of narrators . In addition the central character , Paxton , is changed from a young fair @-@ haired innocent who stumbles across the treasure to a middle @-@ aged character driven by poverty to seek the treasure and acting in full awareness of what he is doing . 
 To take another example , in his screenplay for The Signalman Andrew Davies adds scenes of the traveller 's nightmare @-@ plagued nights at an inn , and reinforces the ambiguity of the traveller @-@ narrator by restructuring the ending and matching his facial features with those of the spectre . The film also makes use of visual and aural devices . For example , the appearance of the spectre is stressed by the vibrations of a bell in the <unk> and a recurring red motif connects the signalman 's memories of a train crash with the danger light attended by a ghostly figure . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Lawrence Gordon Clark had made his name as a BBC documentary director during the 1960s . The Stalls of Barchester was the first dramatic production he directed . Clark recalled in an interview for the BFI 's DVD release in 2012 that " the BBC at that time gave you the space to fail , and generously so too . They backed you up with marvellous technicians , art departments , film departments and so forth . " 
 Unusually for a BBC television drama of the 1970s , each instalment was filmed entirely on location using 16 mm film . As a result , the cameraman John McGlashan , who filmed all of the original adaptations , was able to make use of night shoots and dark , shadowy interiors , which would not have been possible with the then @-@ standard video @-@ based studio interiors . Of The Stalls of Barchester Clark recalls that " Paul Fox ( Controller of BBC One ) gave us a tiny budget ... and we set out to do a full @-@ blooded drama on location . Budgets were really tiny , and we shot for ten days and brought the film in for about 8 @,@ 000 pounds . " 
 The filming of the adaptations took place at a variety of locations , although East Anglia , where M. R. James set many of his stories , was the location for early instalments . The Stalls of Barchester was filmed at Norwich Cathedral and in the surrounding close . A Warning to the Curious was filmed on the coast of North Norfolk , at <unk> , <unk> and Wells @-@ next @-@ the @-@ Sea , although the original story was set in " <unk> " ( a disguised version of Aldeburgh , Suffolk ) . Later locations include the Severn Valley Railway for The Signalman and Wells Cathedral for The Treasure of Abbot Thomas . 
 = = Episode list = = 
 With the exception of the final film , the tales were directed by Lawrence Gordon Clark and produced by Rosemary Hill . The final episode was directed by Derek Lister . 
 = = Revivals = = 
 BBC Four revisited the series at Christmas 2004 , and in 2005 began to produce new adaptations of stories by M. R. James , broadcast along with repeats of episodes from the original series . 
 BBC Two premiered a new adaptation by Neil Cross of M. R. James 's Oh , Whistle and I 'll come to You , My Lad on Christmas Eve 2010 . 
 Mark Gatiss 's adaptation of The Tractate <unk> , yet another story by M. R. James , was broadcast on BBC Two on Christmas Day 2013 . This was followed by a documentary , M. R. James : Ghost Writer . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The critical reception of the films has been varied , but several are regarded as classic television ghost stories . Sarah Dempster , writing in The Guardian in 2005 , noted that " Perhaps the most surprising aspect ... is how little its adaptations ... have dated . They may boast the odd signifier of cheap 1970s telly – outlandish regional vowels , inappropriate eyeliner , a surfeit of depressed oboes – but lurking within their hushed cloisters and glum expanses of deserted coastline is a timelessness at odds with virtually everything written , or broadcast , before or since . " 
 The production values have received particular praise . Helen Wheatley writes that " the series was shot on film on location , with much attention paid to the minutiae of period detail ; ... it might be seen to visually prefigure the filmic stylishness and traditions of later literary adaptations such as Brideshead Revisited and The Jewel in the Crown . " However , she notes that , unlike those adaptations , the sinister tone of the period pieces could lend itself the label of a " feel bad " heritage television drama . 
 The Signalman is perhaps the most critically acclaimed . Simon Farquhar suggests that the film is the first evidence of Andrew Davies 's gift as an adaptor of literary fiction : " despite an extremely arduous shoot , Davies and Clarke 's fog @-@ wreathed , flame @-@ crackling masterpiece manages something the production team could never have imagined : it 's better than the book . " Dave <unk> notes that , while " the adaptation inevitably misses Dickens 's nuanced and often unsettling prose , ... it achieves comparably skilful effects through visual language and sound , heightening theme and supernatural mood . ... The production heightens the story 's crucial features of repetition and foreshadowing . " 
 Sergio Angelini writes about A Warning to the Curious : " Of Clark 's many adaptations of James 's stories , this is perhaps the most varied in its use of landscape and the most visually arresting in its attempt to create an otherworldly atmosphere . ... Using long lenses to flatten the scenery and make the ghost indistinct in the background , John McGlashan 's fine cinematography brilliantly conveys the ageless , ritualistic determinism of Ager 's pursuit and signposts the inevitability of Paxton 's demise . " Angelini is less appreciative of The Ash Tree , noting that the literal adaptation of the story 's ending loses the atmosphere of earlier instalments : " While the creatures are certainly grotesque and threatening , compared with some of the other adaptations of the series , The Ash Tree does lose some power through this lack of ambiguity . The result overall remains satisfyingly unsettling , however , thanks also to <unk> 's restrained , psychologically acute performance . " 
 The adaptations have had an influence on the work of the writer Mark Gatiss . Interviewed in 2008 , Gatiss said that Lost Hearts is his favourite adaptation because it is the one that frightened him as a child and that " I absolutely love The Treasure of Abbot Thomas . The moment when Michael Bryant has found the treasure and ... is obviously losing his wits . He just says , rationally , ' It is a thing of slime , I think . Darkness and slime ... ' There 's also the fantastic scene where he thinks he 's got away with it by putting the treasure back . The doctor is heading up the drive and he can 't quite see him in the sunlight . Then it pauses to that amazing crane shot . ... Very spooky . 
 The reception of the two later instalments , Stigma and The Ice House , was decidedly critical . Most reviewers concluded that switching to original stories instead of adaptations was " misjudged " . David Kerekes writes that The Ice House is almost " totally forgotten " . Wheatley has commented that they heralded a divergence from the stage @-@ inspired horror of the 1940s and 1950s to a more modern Gothic horror based in the present day , losing in the process the " aesthetic of restraint " evident in the original adaptations . 
 The BBC Four revival beginning in 2005 with A View from a Hill was greeted warmly by Sarah Dempster , who stated that the programme was , " in every respect , a vintage Ghost Story for Christmas production . There are the powdery academics hamstrung by extreme social awkwardness . There is the bumbling protagonist bemused by a particular aspect of modern life . There are stunning , panoramic shots of a specific area of the British landscape ( here , a heavily autumnal Suffolk ) . There is the determined lack of celebrity pizzazz . There is tweed . And there is , crucially , a single moment of heart @-@ stopping , corner @-@ of @-@ the @-@ eye horror that suggests life , for one powdery academic at least , will never be the same again . " 
 = = Related works = = 
 Before Clark 's films came under the remit of the BBC Drama Department it commissioned a Christmas play from Nigel Kneale , an original ghost story called The Stone Tape , broadcast on Christmas Day 1972 . With its modern setting , this is not generally included under the heading of A Ghost Story for Christmas and was originally intended as an episode of the anthology Dead of Night . 
 Clark directed another story by M. R. James , Casting The Runes for the series Playhouse , produced by Yorkshire Television and first broadcast on ITV on 24 April 1979 . Adapted by Clive Exton , it reimagined the events of James 's story taking place in a contemporary television studio . 
 For Christmas 1979 the BBC produced a 70 @-@ minute @-@ long adaptation of Sheridan Le Fanu 's gothic tale <unk> the Painter , directed and adapted by Leslie <unk> . Like the earlier Whistle and I 'll Come to You , the production was listed as part of the long @-@ running BBC arts series Omnibus . 
 Repeats of the original series on BBC Four at Christmas 2007 included The Haunted Airman , a new adaptation of Dennis Wheatley 's novel The Haunting of Toby <unk> by Chris <unk> , although this film was originally screened on 31 October 2006 . 
 For Christmas 2008 an original three @-@ part ghost story by Mark Gatiss , Crooked House , was produced instead , though Gatiss has cited the original adaptations as a key influence . 
 The Turn of the Screw ( 1898 ) , a novella by Henry James ( no relation to M. R. James ) , was adapted as a feature @-@ length drama by Sandy Welch and broadcast on BBC One on 30 December 2009 . 
 = = Release = = 
 The BFI released the complete set of Ghost Story for Christmas films plus related works such as both versions of Whistle and I 'll Come to You on Region 2 DVD in 2012 , in five volumes as well as a box set , in celebration of the 150th anniversary of M. R. James 's birth . The following year , an expanded boxset featuring Robert Powell and Michael Bryant narrating M. R. James in the series Classic Ghost Stories ( 1986 ) and Spine <unk> ( 1980 ) respectively . 
 A Warning to the Curious , The Signalman and Miller 's Whistle and I 'll Come to You were released as individual VHS cassettes and Region 2 DVDs by the British Film Institute in 2002 and 2003 . A number of the adaptations were made available in Region 4 format in Australia in 2011 and The Signalman is included as an extra on the Region 1 American DVD release of the 1995 BBC production of Hard Times . For Christmas 2011 , the BFI featured the complete 1970s films in their <unk> centres . 
 = Hurricane Naomi ( 1968 ) = 
 Hurricane Naomi was a short @-@ lived Category 1 hurricane that made landfall in Mexico 's Pacific coast during the 1968 Pacific hurricane season . After rapidly intensifying before its landfall in Sinaloa , Naomi caused rainfall throughout northern Mexico and the U.S. state of Texas in association with a frontal system , with the highest measurement occurring in Corpus Christi . Four people perished in Mexico due to Naomi 's effects with ten more missing , all in Sinaloa . The only reported injury in Texas due to the remnants was a factory worker who was injured when the roof of the plant they were working in collapsed due to rainfall . 
 Naomi was the seventeenth tropical depression , fourteenth tropical storm and the fourth hurricane of the 1968 Pacific hurricane season . Its precipitation on the Mexican Altiplano briefly threatened the unfinished Lázaro Cárdenas dam on the Nazas River . If the dam failed , the twin cities of Gómez Palacio , Durango , and Torreón , Coahuila , would have been inundated . On the other hand , releasing water from the dam would have saved Torreón by submerging Gómez Palacio with the dam 's runoff . From help with satellite imagery , the authorities decided to keep the dam closed — risking its possible failure — saving both towns . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The disturbance that developed into Hurricane Naomi was reported in the Intertropical Convergence Zone on September 8 at 12 ° N , 98 ° W. At that time , a ship called the <unk> reported winds to the south @-@ southwest of force 7 on the Beaufort Scale 30 mi ( 48 km ) south of this position , the equivalent of a strong tropical depression on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . On September 9 , six more ships reported winds of 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) from the system , which was at 13 ° N , 101 ° W at the time , and the system was given depression status on the same day . Later that day , satellite pictures clearly showed the vortex and center of the developing cyclone , and on September 10 , the first report of tropical storm force winds were reported south of the low by the ship Builder , which showed winds of 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) . The depression continued to develop at a rapid pace , with large feeder bands which helped to absorb moisture to strengthen the cyclone extending from the center , which was becoming better defined . One of the feeder bands developed near Manzanillo , Colima , which reported winds of 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) from the band prior to daybreak . Towards the end of the day , the Allison Lykes reported 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) winds from the cyclone and , early on September 11 , sufficient evidence that the depression had reached tropical storm status resulted in the cyclone being upgraded and named " Naomi " . 
 For the next twelve hours , Naomi continued to rapidly intensify , with feeder bands flowing into a tightening spiral structure in the center of the storm . Ship reports around this time showed winds of 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) to 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . Towards midnight , a computerized mosaic showed a clear eye and Naomi was upgraded to hurricane strength early on September 12 while at 19 @.@ 8 ° N , 106 @.@ 8 ° W based on the mosaic , an intensity that was verified by the <unk> Maru , which reported winds of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) at 6 : 00 Greenwich Mean Time ( GMT ) . After being upgraded , the hurricane moved to the north at a pace of 9 mph ( 14 km / h ) before making a slow northeastward turn . The turn had the hurricane passing 30 mi ( 48 km ) – 40 mi ( 64 km ) west of Mazatlán , Sinaloa . The hurricane then began to accelerate , landfalling on Sinaloa near Punta <unk> at 3 : 00 GMT on September 13 . Shortly after landfall , the Sierra Madre Occidental took a toll on the hurricane , causing it to dissipate later that day while midway between Chihuahua , Chih . , and Piedras Negras , <unk> . , with the remnants moving over Texas . In total , the hurricane travelled 1 @,@ 100 mi ( 1 @,@ 800 km ) while active . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 A dispatch from the Associated Press to Mexico City reported that 20 @,@ 000 citizens from villages in Durango , Sinaloa , Nayarit , and Jalisco evacuated due to the threat of flooding and high winds from Naomi . The damage from Naomi in Mexico was moderate , although no monetary figures have ever been released . The Associated Press dispatch also reported that Naomi was responsible for knocking out communications over a large area in Mazatlán as well as downing power lines and damaging houses . At least 2000 people were reported homeless in Durango due to the hurricane . The hurricane also caused damage to Highway 15 between Mazatlán and Tepic . Although the highway reopened soon afterward , some areas that were struck by the hurricane were still rough . Naomi 's most notable impact in Mexico involved the Lázaro Cárdenas Dam on the Nazas River , which was not complete by the time the hurricane hit . The dam , upriver from Gómez Palacio and Torreón , was feared to break down from the water being built up behind it , influenced by the hurricane . The two options were to either open the dam , saving Torreón by inundating Gómez Palacio , or risk inundating both towns by keeping the dam closed . The decision was made harder by the fact that , if the dam was released and no rain fell to refill the basin behind the dam , the farms would have insufficient water for agricultural growth . Photography from the Environmental Science Services Administration 's Automatic Picture Transmission based on the ESSA @-@ 6 weather satellite showed that the clouds from Naomi responsible for the rain had almost moved over the area near the dam . Based on the images , the authorities decided to gamble on the dam to successfully hold up , and it managed to hold back the waters without breaking . The hurricane caused four drowning deaths and $ 16 million in damage in Sinaloa . 
 = = = Texas = = = 
 In Texas , the remnants of Naomi coupled with a frontal system resulted in prolonged rains over the state . The hardest hit city was Corpus Christi , which reported over 8 inches ( 200 mm ) of rain in relation to the disturbance as well as funnel clouds to the south and west of the city , resulting in many roads being stopped to traffic . Accumulated rainfall caused the roof of a tortilla plant to collapse , slightly injuring a worker . Although the range of heavy rains was large , only minor rains were reported in Andrews , Crane , <unk> , Kermit , Wink , Stanton , and Pecos . Despite the totals , the rain proved beneficial as well , helping saturate areas of grassland in need of water . 
 = = = Naming = = = 
 This was the second time an East Pacific storm was named Naomi and the only time that a storm named Naomi in the basin reached hurricane strength . Because the effects from the hurricane were minor , the name was not retired after this hurricane and was re @-@ used in the 1976 season . However , a name change in 1978 dropped the name Naomi , and the name has not been used since . 
 = The Beatles : Rock Band = 
 The Beatles : Rock Band is a 2009 music video game developed by Harmonix , published by MTV Games , and distributed by Electronic Arts . It is the third major console release in the Rock Band music video game series , in which players can simulate the playing of rock music by using controllers shaped like musical instruments . The Beatles : Rock Band is the first band @-@ centric game in the series , and it is centered on the popular English rock group the Beatles . The game features virtual portrayals of the four band members performing the songs throughout the band 's history , including depictions of some of their famous live performances , as well as a number of " dreamscape " sequences for songs from the Abbey Road Studios recording sessions during the group 's studio years . The game 's soundtrack consists of 45 Beatles songs ; additional songs and albums by the Beatles were made available for the game as downloadable content . 
 The game was released internationally on 9 September 2009 , coinciding with the release of new , remastered compact disc versions of the Beatles ' albums . It incorporates many of the gameplay features of the Rock Band series ; however , it is not an expansion pack for the Rock Band series and content for it and other Rock Band titles is not cross @-@ compatible . Harmonix co @-@ founder Alex Rigopulos described the game as " ... a new , full game title production built from the ground up . " Gameplay mechanics differ slightly from previous Rock Band games , including the addition of a three @-@ part vocal harmony system . Subsequent games in the Rock Band series would reuse these new elements , including vocal harmonies . 
 The game was developed with the blessing and critical input of Apple Corps , including former Beatles Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr , who both made public appearances supporting the game . George Harrison 's son Dhani helped to bridge discussion between Harmonix and Apple Corps , while Giles Martin , son of the Beatles ' music producer George Martin , ensured high @-@ fidelity versions of the Beatles ' songs would be available . 
 The Beatles : Rock Band was well received by the press , both as a genuine means of experiencing the music and history of the Beatles and as a standalone music video game . Although the game 's sales were considered respectable , with more than half a million units sold during its first month of release in the United States , analysts had projected larger sales volumes and attributed the lower sales to waning interest in the rhythm game genre and the video game industry recovery from the late @-@ 2000s recession . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The Beatles : Rock Band allows players to perform simulated rock music by providing up to six players with the ability to play three different controllers modeled after music instruments ( a guitar controller for lead guitar and bass guitar gameplay , a drum controller and up to three microphones for vocals ) . Players simulate the performance of rock music by using their controllers to play scrolling on @-@ screen notes . For lead and bass guitar , this is accomplished by holding down colored buttons mimicking guitar frets and pushing the controller 's strum bar ; for drums , this requires striking the matching colored drumhead , or stepping on the pedal to simulate playing bass drum notes . A " Lefty " mode allows left @-@ handed people to play , by switching which colour the beats are given . When singing vocals , the player must sing in relative pitch to the original vocals . A pitch indicator displays the singer 's accuracy relative to the original pitch . For songs with multi @-@ part vocals , players need only to stay in tone with the lead singer to score points and keep their performance meter up , but players earn additional scoring bonuses when they successfully complete phrases in harmony . 
 As in previous Rock Band games , successfully hitting the proper notes in sequence earns points for each player and boosts their " performance meter " . Each separate instrument is given a level , defined by their instrument icon , and the average level is also displayed . If a player fails to match the notes , their performance meter drops . If the meter empties , that player is forced to drop out of play , which in turn causes the band 's overall performance to drop . Any player to drop out can be " saved " if another player activates " Beatlemania " ( referred to as " Overdrive " in other Rock Band titles ) , which is collected by successfully completing specially marked phrases . These phrases appear in white , and if the phrase is completed , the energy bar , displayed at the bottom of every track , fills by one quarter . Beatlemania can also be used to temporarily increase the amount of points the band earns . Activating Beatlemania is specific to each " instrument " . For guitar , the controller must be temporarily shifted to an upright position ; for drums , a special " cymbal " ( Green , or red for " Lefty " mode ) is hit ; and for vocals , a noise must be registered by the microphone when prompted . 
 Some alterations to the Rock Band formula were made to preserve the sound of the Beatles ' music . Audio cues that provide feedback on how well the band is doing , typically through the crowd cheering , singing along with the lyrics , or booing if the band is failing , are not included . The virtual band members are not booed off the stage if a player fails a song . Rather , the game simply cuts to a " song failed " menu with the option to try again . The song is restarted from the beginning . Variations on Overdrive / Beatlemania activation include the removal of player @-@ controlled audio effects . While guitar players can use the controller 's whammy bar on sustained marked note to collect more Beatlemania , this does not alter the sound of the note . There are also no freestyle drum fills in the songs for activating Beatlemania ; instead the player continues to perform the correct note sequence before being presented with a note to activate Beatlemania . 
 Throughout the song , players receive points for every note hit , and this is totalled up and displayed at the end of the song , along with a percentage of how many notes they hit , and a rating : 1 to 5 stars . If the score is close to perfect , normally requiring at least 98 % of the notes , the rating is five ' gold ' stars , instead of the normal bronze . The score is saved and shown alongside the song in the select screen ; over time , as the song is replayed , it shows only the highest score . 
 = = = Instrument peripherals = = = 
 All currently available Rock Band peripherals are compatible with their respective console version of The Beatles : Rock Band . Similarly , peripherals designed for The Beatles : Rock Band are backward compatible with other Rock Band titles . Some controllers designed for Guitar Hero games will also work with The Beatles : Rock Band . 
 Four new instrument peripherals modeled after those used by the Beatles members were introduced alongside the game : a Rickenbacker 325 guitar , a Gretsch Duo Jet guitar , a Höfner bass and a Ludwig drum set . These instrument controllers function similarly to the controllers designed for Rock Band 2 , with most alterations being purely aesthetic . A " Limited Edition " bundle of the game includes one Höfner bass guitar controller , one Ludwig @-@ branded drum controller , a microphone , a microphone stand and Beatles @-@ themed postcards . A second , less expensive bundle configuration contains peripherals first introduced with the original Rock Band game ; this bundle does not contain a mic stand or postcards . The game was also released as a SingStar bundle with two microphones , and finally as a standalone release . The Rickenbacker and Gretsch guitar peripherals are sold separately . 
 = = = Modes = = = 
 The Beatles : Rock Band features gameplay modes similar to other Rock Band games , playable both locally and online . " Story " mode is similar to the " Career " mode of the first Rock Band game and follows a linear progression through the Beatles history . Optional challenges are available in each story " chapter " , tasking players to complete every song in a specific chapter as a single performance . By earning high score ratings for songs or challenges , players will unlock photographs and video clips of the Beatles taken from the Apple Corps ' archive to provide " splashes of history " . One such unlockable " prize " is an edited version of the 1963 Beatles Christmas Record . 
 Up to six players can play any song in the game cooperatively via " Solo / Band Quickplay " mode . Two players can also play against one another in Rock Band 's two competitive modes : " Tug of War " , where two players perform alternating sections of songs to outdo the other 's performance , and " Score Duel " , where each player simultaneously plays the entirety of a song while trying to accumulate the highest score . Tug of War allows players to choose individual difficulty levels , while Score Duel requires that both players play at the same difficulty level . Both competitive modes require that players use the same type of instrument . 
 Several " Training " modes are available for The Beatles : Rock Band , including tutorials for both guitar / bass and drums . Practice modes are instrument @-@ specific and allow players to practice entire songs or individual sections of songs . Guitar , bass , and drum practice modes allow players to slow the tempos of songs ; vocal practice mode helps to emphasize the selected harmony portion of the vocals by adding a generated waveform sound to the selected harmony line in tune with the lyrics . There are also two drum training modes called " Drum Lessons " and " Beatle Beats " . 
 Before playing , a difficulty has to be selected : easy , medium , hard or expert . Expert is a match of the original notes ; hard has some note @-@ heavy drum rolls and other difficult or fast notes removed ; medium takes away the orange notes ( for guitar and bass ) and anything else considered tricky . Easy is designed for new players , and gives an easy rhythm for those to settle into the game . However , there are too few notes for it to feel like they 're playing the actual tune from the song . A " No Fail " mode has been carried over from Rock Band 2 and is accessible from the band members selection screen rather than from the game 's main menu . This mode allows players to continue to play , even if their performance metre hits the bottom . In addition , No Fail mode is automatically enabled for any player who chooses the " Easy " difficulty . 
 = = Development = = 
 Prior to The Beatles : Rock Band , no song by The Beatles , nor a cover of a Beatles song , had been featured in any Guitar Hero or Rock Band title , whether as disc @-@ based or downloadable content . The idea of The Beatles : Rock Band came about during a chance encounter between MTV president Van Toffler and Dhani Harrison , son of George Harrison , at a luncheon sponsored by Robert Earl during the 2006 Christmas holiday , shortly after MTV 's acquisition of Harmonix . Dhani , having been familiar with the Guitar Hero franchise and learning of the recent acquisition and plans for Rock Band from Toffler , suggested a game based on the Beatles . Though both Dhani and Toffler considered the concept an unlikely possibility , their meeting nonetheless spurred Dhani into further discussions with Harmonix 's president , Alex Rigopulos . At the same time , Dhani helped to introduce the Rock Band concept to Apple Corps , the music production company created by the Beatles , and its key shareholders Paul McCartney , Ringo Starr and Yoko Ono . Initial meetings were arranged with the shareholders using an early prototype of the game to garner their interest in the title . One stipulation that the Apple Corps shareholders required of Harmonix was that the game feature songs spanning the band 's entire career . Harmonix subsequently created a more complete demonstration that used examples of music and artwork that they envisioned for the game . The five @-@ song demo , which included an early build for " Here Comes the Sun " , was finished in February 2008 . It was used to gain approval from McCartney , Starr , Ono and Olivia Harrison , effectively bringing them aboard the project as creative partners . 
 The Apple Corps shareholders considered The Beatles : Rock Band a new way to introduce the band 's music to the public . They approved of the songs and venues that would appear in the game , and provided feedback on the artwork , character representations , and storyboards for animation sequences . McCartney and Starr fact @-@ checked certain anecdotes relating to The Beatles while Ono and Harrison provided insight on their late husbands ' performances and lyrics . At the developer 's request , Ono visited the Harmonix offices late in development to provide critical feedback on several visual elements . In a Wired article , MTV 's senior vice president of the games division Paul <unk> was quoted saying " She gave the designers hell " , with Harmonix head Alex Rigopulos adding , " She really held our feet to the fire " . <unk> and Rigopulos clarified the statement soon after the article had been published , asserting that the visit was " a high point of the two @-@ year development process " and " has been mischaracterized by some in the press . " 
 Though The Beatles : Rock Band aims to present a visual and musical history of the Beatles , the game does not attempt to replicate periods of turmoil between the band members . Rather , it presents a " fantasy version " of The Beatles to better serve the entertainment purposes of the video game . For example , Ringo Starr was estranged from the rest of the band during periods of recording for The Beatles ( commonly referred to as the White Album ) . Thus , he did not perform on certain songs , such as " Back in the U.S.S.R. " . In the game , however , the Ringo Starr character plays drums during the animated performance of the song . 
 = = = Music production = = = 
 Preparing the Beatles ' songs for Rock Band was a significant technical challenge for Harmonix . The band 's earlier songs , recorded on two- and four @-@ track equipment , needed to be reworked into a multitrack format that is essential in providing feedback to players . Each of the game 's four instrument parts need to have their own " stems " — for example , when a player <unk> a note from the guitar track , the guitar audio for the song will be temporarily quieted , leaving the other instruments ' audio unaffected . Such isolated tracks were not available through the new 2009 remasters , so the team started with the original master recordings . 
 The development team was able to bring Giles Martin aboard as the game 's music producer . Martin had recently completed co @-@ production on the 2006 Love project with his father George Martin and was already familiar with the Beatles catalogue . Through that project , Martin created digital back @-@ up copies of all the original tapes , which aided his work on The Beatles : Rock Band . Using audio forensics software , Martin and his team were able to extract the audio of individual instruments by isolating sounds at certain frequencies with digital filters , thus assuring multitrack capabilities for the Beatles ' master recordings . This process , conducted at Abbey Road Studio 52 with the help of Paul Hicks and other Abbey Road recording engineers , reportedly took months to complete . 
 During the game 's development , Harmonix only used low @-@ fidelity versions of the remasters , which were sufficient for programming and note charting ; Apple Corps feared that the leak of any high @-@ fidelity remastered track from Abbey Road studios would lead to the unauthorized use of samples of the Beatles ' music in remixes . High @-@ fidelity versions of the songs were not implemented until the final publishing of the game . Harmonix performed very little additional remixing upon receipt of these remasters ; in some cases , three different guitar parts — lead , solo , and rhythm — were brought into a single cohesive guitar part , slightly raising the volume of the specific guitar track that was used in note tracking to make it easier for the player to follow in the game . The ability for up to three players to sing vocal harmonies , a feature not present in previous Rock Band games , was designed and implemented as an optional feature so as not to be overwhelming to players . 
 While live recordings of songs , such as " Paperback Writer " at the Budokan , were available , Martin believed some of these renditions were sloppy and would not be enjoyable to play . Instead , he took the studio versions and added audio effects from the live performances to create a " live concert " ambiance . In several instances , the team also opted to slightly restructure the endings to certain songs , particularly those that fade out . Differences in editing between the album versions and in @-@ game versions of songs continued with the release of downloadable content , notably the inclusion of a once @-@ missing final chord at the end of the Abbey Road closer " Her Majesty " . 
 Dhani Harrison has stated the game will include " stuff that has never been heard , never been released . " Some of the new material includes band chatter and instrument tunes taken from recorded performances . This audio plays during the loading screens or bookends certain songs . Within the Abbey Road studio , Martin recreated some of the incidental sound , played through speakers but capturing the acoustics of the studio room . In one instance , for example , this process involved recording four people miming the act of drinking tea . The entirety of the game 's credits are also made up of this band chatter and studio takes . 
 In coordination with the art team , sound programmers attempted to realistically map the game 's note tracks relative to the real performances by the Beatles . For guitar parts , colored notes were selected not necessarily to match tonally with the music , but to replicate the movement and finger positioning used by the original performers . These were then matched against ten different strumming animations to be used for the virtual depictions of the guitarists . The " Expert " difficulty drum tracks attempt to match every single drum beat that is performed in a song , including some peculiar rhythms brought about by Starr 's ambidextrous drumming habits . Vocals were slowed down and broken into phonetic segments , allowing the art team to determine the appropriate facial movement for the virtual characters to go along with the lyrics . 
 = = = Art production = = = 
 Art assets were created with help of Apple Corps , with Harmonix developers gaining access to their unique archive as well as personal photos from the shareholders . Apple Corps had strict desires for how the Beatles were to appear ; art director Ryan Lesser noted that the art team 's earliest character designs were met with " brutal " responses from Apple , but that this feedback was essential in developing the visual styles of the band . In addition to Apple Corps ' material , Harmonix designers watched the eight @-@ part The Beatles Anthology on a weekly basis for further reference on the band . These materials were meticulously reviewed to replicate the outfits that the Beatles wore for each of their concerts , as well as the instruments they used for recordings and live performances . 
 Although McCartney had hoped technology would allow the virtual band members to appear in hyper @-@ realistic detail , Harmonix opted to start with more exaggerated , cartoon @-@ like designs , gradually scaling them back to appear more realistic . Animation for the Beatles characters was aided by motion capture provided by Beatles tribute bands . Dhani Harrison also assisted with modeling for character animation in the game . 
 The team designed venues that represented parts of the Beatles ' history in order to create an atmosphere of authenticity . For example , the set of The Ed Sullivan Show was recreated from photographs and videos , including a rare color photograph in Apple 's collection that showed the yellow tint used to enhance the video as shown on black @-@ and @-@ white television sets . The Cavern Club , Shea Stadium , Budokan , Abbey Road Studios and the rooftop of the Apple Corps Headquarters also appear as venues in the game . Fashions of the 1960s were researched to properly apply them to the various virtual crowds at these locations . 
 Twenty of the game 's on @-@ disc songs are associated with " dreamscape " sequences in conjunction with the Abbey Road venue , representing the exclusively studio @-@ based nature of the band in their later years . Animation sequences for songs linked with dreamscapes feature abstract or representative scenery . For example , the sequence for " Octopus 's Garden " takes place in an underwater reef , while the sequence for " I Am the Walrus " is reminiscent of the band 's psychedelic performance of the song in the 1967 film Magical Mystery Tour . The concept of dreamscapes evolved from brainstorming sessions between Harmonix and Apple Corps . ; as Rock Band was a game that celebrated the performance of music , simply portraying The Beatles performing in the Abbey Road studio was not enough , and the dreamscape sequences provided a way to surpass that . While the art team used existing materials as reference , the Apple Corps. shareholders encouraged the team to interpret the songs in new ways . For inspiration , Harmonix looked to Cirque du Soleil 's approach in interpreting The Beatles catalogue for the Love stage show . Storyboards for these animated sequences were created using both hand @-@ drawn and 2D computer @-@ generated art . In some cases , the computer @-@ generated elements used in storyboarding were kept as elements in the final venue , such as computer @-@ generated blades of grass in the " Here Comes the Sun " sequence . 
 The game includes heavily stylized opening and ending cinematics produced in part by Pete <unk> of Passion Pictures , with help from animator Robert Valley and background visuals from Alberto <unk> . <unk> , who is known for his work animating Gorillaz videos , also produced the opening cinematics for both the original Rock Band and Rock Band 2 . Within two and a half minutes , the opening cinematic provides a brief representative history of the band interspersed with numerous references to songs by The Beatles , followed by more metaphorical scenes reflecting their studio albums . Prior to each of the chapters in the game 's Story mode , the game presents short introductory animations ; these animations were prepared by graphic design studio MK12 , who had previously worked on the opening cinematics for movies such as Stranger than Fiction and Quantum of Solace . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 The Beatles : Rock Band was first revealed on 30 October 2008 when Harmonix , MTV Games , and Viacom announced an exclusive agreement with Apple Corps , Ltd. to produce the standalone title . Prior to this announcement , industry rumours reported that both Harmonix / MTV Games and Activision were vying for The Beatles songs , the latter for the Guitar Hero franchise . The agreement was the result of 17 months of discussions . John Drake , PR spokesperson for Harmonix , stated that Apple Corps " respected and appreciated what Harmonix does creatively for rhythm games " as part of the success of the deal . Eversheds , the legal firm working for Apple Corps. for both The Beatles : Rock Band and the abandoned remake of Yellow Submarine by Disney , stated that it took six months to complete the complex agreements and paperwork over the copyrights , trademarks , and publishing issues . Viacom 's deal with The Beatles ' property owners includes royalties with a guaranteed minimum of $ 10 million and upwards of $ 40 million based on initial sales projections , an amount that chairman Martin <unk> of Sony / ATV Publishing has stated to be " not even comparable to anything that has been done before " . The licensing of the Beatles ' work for the game was considered a critical step in the later negotiations and availability of the band 's songs on iTunes about a year after the game 's release . A further complication arose about a year after the game 's release ; Chrysalis Group legally challenged EMI over a previous 1965 agreement whereby EMI would pay Chrysalis up to 1 @.@ 5 % of royalties on sales of the Beatles ' records , and claimed that they are owned ₤ 500 @,@ 000 for the two million units sold of The Beatles : Rock Band . EMI asserts that the video game format would not be covered under the concept of a " record " from the 1965 agreement . 
 The game was released internationally on 9 September 2009 . The game 's release was planned to coincide with the release of the new , remastered CD versions of The Beatles albums . Footage from The Beatles : Rock Band was revealed for the first time on 18 April 2009 , during Paul McCartney 's performance at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival . McCartney continued to utilize gameplay footage during his concert performances while touring during the months prior to the game 's release . The game was formally showcased on 1 June 2009 at E3 2009 . Presented by Harmonix at the beginning of the Microsoft press conference , Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr briefly took the stage to discuss the games . Yoko Ono and Olivia Harrison also made a brief appearance . The game 's E3 demo booth was modeled as a recreation of Abbey Road Studios . 
 The game 's official website was revealed early in 2009 , showing only images of the Abbey Road studios and the game 's release date . Over time , images of the Beatles ' favored instruments appeared in the studio as their game peripheral replicas were announced . On 5 May 2009 , the website was updated to include general information and promotional media . Customers who pre @-@ ordered the game from selected vendors received an access code to view exclusive images and media on the site before it was eventually made public . 
 In August 2009 , VH1 Classic aired music videos from the TV special Around The Beatles ( 1964 ) , Help ! ( 1965 ) , and a music video of the " Birthday " gameplay footage , promoting the launch of The Beatles Rock Band online store . This store was also launched by several segments held on the home shopping channel , QVC , for the game , the Beatles ' remastered albums , and other related products ; several Harmonix employees were present to demonstrate the game . 
 A video advertisement for the game featuring the song " Come Together " premiered on 28 August 2009 . The spot features a live action recreation of the iconic Abbey Road album cover ; as The Beatles cross the road , a crowd of people follow , some of whom are carrying the game 's controllers . The advertisement was directed by Marcel <unk> , who worked with Apple Corps and Giles Martin to build an Abbey Road set at a Hollywood studio , and to blend archival footage of The Beatles into the video . Body doubles , vetted by the Apple Corps shareholders , appear in some shots . On 8 September 2009 , Dhani Harrison appeared as a guest on The Tonight Show with Conan O 'Brien to promote the game . Harrison and O 'Brien ( along with Tonight Show web manager Aaron <unk> and The Tonight Show Band member Mark Pender ) performed the song " Birthday " at the close of the show . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The game includes 45 songs from 12 of The Beatles albums recorded during their 1963 – 1970 tenure with EMI Records . With the exception of Magical Mystery Tour , track information is based on the United Kingdom @-@ released versions of the albums . Six non @-@ album singles and the mashup track " Within You Without You / Tomorrow Never Knows " from the 2006 remix album Love have also been included . Selections of the soundtrack are under license from Sony / ATV Music Publishing Company . Although Michael Jackson , who owned 50 % of the publishing rights to the Beatles songs through Sony / ATV , died in June 2009 , the sale of his estate did not affect the songs or the release schedule of The Beatles : Rock Band , according to Harmonix . 
 = = = Downloadable content = = = 
 Additional songs are available for the game as downloadable content . The song " All You Need Is Love " was first to appear as downloadable content , proceeds from which ( $ 1 @.@ 40 of the $ 2 song cost ) are donated to Doctors Without Borders . The song was initially made available as an exclusive for Xbox 360 on the same day the game was released . Within two weeks of the game 's release , " All You Need Is Love " was announced by Microsoft and MTV to be the fastest @-@ selling downloadable song across any of the Rock Band platforms , with tens of thousands of downloads ; The song had been downloaded more than 100 @,@ 000 times by the end of September , and by February 2010 , had generated over $ 200 @,@ 000 for the charity . The song is now available for download on the Wii and PlayStation 3 . 
 Full albums were also made available as downloadable content ; the remaining songs from Abbey Road , Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , and Rubber Soul have since been released on the consoles ' respective store services . While there is potential for the entire Beatles catalogue to be made available , this will be unlikely , according to John Drake of Harmonix . Drake identified the costly development process as a potentially prohibitive factor : " Every time we do one song , it 's not like Rock Band where we wait for the masters to come in and just author them ... its like , send people to Abbey Road , use the original tape , separate them out ... it costs thousands of dollars . " Drake asserted that Harmonix would take sales of the currently announced albums into consideration before continuing development of downloadable content . Harmonix 's Foster stated that solo acts from the Beatles ' members will not be included as downloadable content for The Beatles : Rock Band ; however , he did not rule out the possibility of these acts appearing in other Rock Band games . A three pack of songs from Paul McCartney 's 2009 live album , Good Evening New York City , was made available for the main Rock Band series on 5 January 2010 . John Lennon 's " Imagine " is a part of the Rock Band 3 soundtrack , with the full Imagine album arriving later as downloadable content in celebration of Lennon 's 70th birthday . A pack featuring Paul McCartney 's band Wings was also released as DLC for Rock Band 3 on 28 December 2010 . 
 The respective downloadable content for The Beatles : Rock Band and other currently available Rock Band titles are not cross @-@ compatible . Furthermore , the songs contained on the Beatles disc are not exportable to other games in the Rock Band series . Harmonix 's Chris Foster cited the game 's new vocal harmony feature as well as the unique song @-@ specific dreamscape animations as reasons for the lack of <unk> to other Rock Band games . John Drake stated that the developer had a responsibility to treat the Beatles ' songs as " iconic " , and keep its music separated from other songs . 
 On May 5 , 2016 , Harmonix ceased downloadable content distribution for The Beatles : Rock Band due to the license expiration , though those that had already purchased the tracks would be able to <unk> them in the future . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Beatles : Rock Band received high praise from several media outlets upon release . Regarding the game 's cross @-@ generational appeal , Chad Sapieha of The Globe and Mail suggested that the game would spark a new wave of Beatlemania , while Seth Schiesel of The New York Times called it " nothing less than a cultural watershed " . Some critics hailed the title as landmark of the music game genre ; Randy Lewis of the Los Angeles Times described the game as a " quantum leap forward for the music video game " , while Johnny Minkley of Eurogamer called it " the new standard by which all band @-@ specific game experiences will be judged " . 
 Described as an " interactive Beatles experience " , the game was considered to bring players closer to the band through both technical and emotional means . By playing each song 's respective note chart , players were said to have a better appreciation for the structure and complexity of the compositions and performances by the Beatles . Emotionally , critics commented on the sentimental values of the game 's career mode , recalling the history of the band . Critics were mostly positive concerning the visual and aural elements of the game ; G4 's Abbie Heppe considered it a preferable package to the newly remastered albums , citing song @-@ specific animations as a strong feature . The dreamscape sequences in particular were likened to live performances , praised as " dazzling " and " evocative " . However , Schiesel remarked that due to the players ' concentration on the note tracks , the animations " serve mostly to entertain onlookers rather than the players themselves " . Heppe observed that the color saturation of the background elements as well as the " Beatlemania " visual effects can sometimes contrast poorly with the scrolling notes , making it difficult to play . After the game 's release , Harmonix lead designer Chris Foster acknowledged that the visuals can be " too overwhelming for [ some players ] at moments " . The implementation of three @-@ part harmonies , expressed by some to be the most significant addition to the series , was well received . 
 Critics primarily found fault with the game 's length , as the bulk of the game 's content can be completed in only a few hours . Will Tuttle of GameSpy questioned whether Harmonix limited the number of songs on release knowing that there would be a market for the game 's downloadable content in the near future . The low number of songs , along with the new themed instrument controllers , were found to make the game an expensive proposition for those new to rhythm games . Due to the limited selection of songs on the disc , some critics questioned the specific inclusion of certain songs or the exclusion of more popular songs . Furthermore , critics claimed that the game 's complete dedication to the Beatles , without the option for cross @-@ compatibility with Rock Band or vice versa , can potentially lead to tedious play sessions with minimal variety , hampering the social nature of the game . Justin Haywald of 1UP.com considered that in attaching the Rock Band name to the game 's title , there was a certain expectation on an expandable library of songs and interoperability with previous Rock Band titles , which The Beatles : Rock Band failed to meet . Some players coming from previous versions of Rock Band would consider the songs in The Beatles : Rock Band to lack technical challenge . However , the less difficult note tracks were seen to be a welcoming benefit for newcomers to the series as well as those attempting to sing along with the harmony portions of the game . For purist fans , some critics noted that the game purposely avoids certain aspects of the Beatles ' history ; former band members such as Pete Best or collaborators such as Billy Preston or Eric Clapton are never seen during gameplay . Concerning supplemental content , Hilary Goldstein of IGN felt the extra features could have been more substantial , especially in comparison to the additional material that accompanies the remastered CDs . 
 PC World listed The Beatles : Rock Band as their ninth Best Product of 2009 . The game won for Best Music Game on the Spike Video Game Awards 2009 . The game won the Family Game of the Year and was nominated for the Outstanding Achievement in Soundtrack 13th Annual Interactive Achievement Awards from the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences . The game was also nominated for the Best Audio Game Developers Choice Award . The game 's official website , published by Harmonix , won the Games @-@ Related category for the 14th Annual Webby Awards . In 2010 , the game was included as one of the titles in the book 1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die . 
 The Beatles : Rock Band is currently being used as a finale for each performance of the 125th anniversary season of the Boston Pops Orchestra ; the orchestra leads the audience in a sing @-@ along to several songs by the Beatles played by the orchestra but synchronized to the visuals from the game . 
 = = = E3 reception = = = 
 The Beatles : Rock Band was well received at the 2009 E3 Convention , and was named the Best Music / Rhythm Game by GameSpot , GameSpy , 1UP.com , and X @-@ Play ; the game was also nominated for Best Music or Rhythm game by the Game Critics Awards and IGN . The opening animation video , released at the same time as E3 , was praised by the press . It has been described as " surreal " by both the Los Angeles Times and Boing Boing 's <unk> blog . Frames Per Second called it " simply stunning " , and the Entertainment Weekly blog <unk> described it as " damned spiffy " . The second half of the video , where traditional animation gives way to a combination of computer @-@ aided 2D and 3D scenery has been described as " a mashup of Peter Max and the Unreal Engine ... chaperoned by the ghost of Salvador Dalí " by the ECA 's <unk> blog . The opening video was awarded the 2009 British Animation Award for " Best Commissioned Animation " and won a Silver Clio Award in the field of " Television / Cinema / Digital Technique " . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 According to Viacom CEO Philipe Dauman , one quarter of The Beatles : Rock Band inventory was sold during its first week of release , exceeding their expectations . Based on current sales projections , Dauman claimed that the Limited Edition Premium bundle of the game could be sold out by November . Dauman attributed some success of the game 's sales to the price reduction of the PlayStation 3 , which occurred a few weeks before the release of The Beatles : Rock Band . 
 The Beatles : Rock Band was the fourth high @-@ selling game across all platforms in its first week of release in the United Kingdom . According to the NPD Group , The Beatles : Rock Band sold 595 @,@ 000 units across all offerings for the Xbox 360 , Wii , and PlayStation 3 versions during September 2009 , respectively in the United States , making the game the 5th , 10th , and 20th top sellers for the month , respectively ; only Guitar Hero 5 for the Xbox 360 placed in the top 10 titles selling 210 @,@ 800 units . Total sales across all platforms in the United States was 595 @,@ 000 units with revenue between $ 59 and 60 million , and was the second highest revenue @-@ generating game behind Halo 3 : ODST driven by sales of the bundled units . Though MTV Games was pleased with the sales performance of the game , the sales numbers fell short of the projected values by industry analysts , attributing it to the slow recovery of the video game market from the late @-@ 2000s recession . As of December 2009 , Harmonix has stated that the game has sold more than 3 million copies worldwide . NPD Group data through the end of 2009 reported North American sales of the game at 1 @.@ 18 and 1 @.@ 7 million . In considering the comparison of The Beatles : Rock Band sales in North America to the nearly 1 million units sold by Guitar Hero 5 , the magazine Advertising Age identified the ability of MTV Games and Harmonix to leverage the music of the Beatles and their other partners in novel and experimental methods among more traditional means . In an October 2010 interview Alex Rigopulos claimed that The Beatles : Rock Band sales were " respectable " , having sold " well over three million units " , though had not exceeded sales of other Rock Band games . 
 = Heroes and Demons = 
 " Heroes and Demons " is the 12th episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Voyager . The episode first aired on the UPN network on April 24 , 1995 . It was directed by Les Landau and written by former Star Trek : The Next Generation story editor Naren Shankar . Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the Starfleet and Maquis crew of the starship USS Voyager after they were stranded in the Delta Quadrant far from the rest of the Federation . In this episode , after a sample of a protostar is brought on board , crewmen start to vanish from a holodeck simulation of Beowulf . The Doctor ( Robert Picardo ) , a hologram , investigates and finds that a lifeform was transported to the ship alongside the sample . It escaped to the holodeck where it was converting those who entered into energy . The Doctor has the samples brought to the holodeck and released , resulting in the lifeform returning the crewmen to their corporeal states . 
 With this episode , Shankar sought to move the Doctor out of sickbay , and while he was looking generally involving vikings on the holodeck , it wasn 't until later that he realised he had <unk> followed the story of the Beowulf poem , and so changed the script to include direct references . Composer Dennis McCarthy sought to increase the tempo of the music used in this episode , and included an unused piece written for The Next Generation episode " Qpid " ; he was nominated for Outstanding Music Composition at the Emmy Awards for his work on " Heroes and Demons " . A further nomination at those awards was received by Marvin V. Rush for Individual Achievement in Cinematography for a Series . Picardo 's performance was praised by the crew , and the episode was received positively by critics , who compared elements to The Lord of the Rings and computer based roleplaying games . It received Nielsen ratings of 6 @.@ 4 / 11 percent . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The crew encounters a protostar and Captain Kathryn Janeway ( Kate Mulgrew ) decides to have samples beamed aboard for use as a potential power source . A problem occurs when beaming the samples to Voyager . Janeway recommends to B 'Elanna Torres ( Roxann Dawson ) that she should have Ensign Harry Kim 's ( Garrett Wang ) assistance , but it turns out that he is missing . The crew finds his holodeck program , based on the epic poem Beowulf , still running . With each person sent into the holodeck also becoming lost , Captain Janeway sends in The Doctor ( Robert Picardo ) to investigate , under the assumption that he as an already immaterial hologram cannot be <unk> the way the missing crew had been . The Doctor shows signs of nervousness when preparing for his first " away " mission , so Kes ( Jennifer Lien ) encourages him to take a name to embolden him with having an identity of his own . He states that he has narrowed his choices to three but does not reveal them . 
 Once in the holodeck , The Doctor meets Freya ( Marjorie Monaghan ) , a shieldmaiden , and introduces himself as " Schweitzer " . After taking him to the hall , where he is made to prove himself before the others , and after a celebratory meal , after which everyone has retired to separate rooms , she reappears and suggests that , in the cold of the night when the fire in his hearth has gone out , he ought to join her . Though he dismisses her advances , he relaxes his inhibition in later scenes . Later they are confronted by <unk> ( Christopher Neame ) who kills Freya . She dies in Schweitzer 's arms . With her last words she speaks his name . 
 As The Doctor investigates further , he realizes that alien energy lifeforms were beamed onto the ship within the containment field into which the protostar samples were transported . During the transport , one of the lifeforms managed to escape through a breach in the containment field . It escaped to the holodeck and began converting the matter of every person who entered into energy . The Doctor returns the energy samples holding the other lifeforms to the alien in the holodeck ; in kind , the missing crew are returned to their original forms . Afterwards , upon reflection , The Doctor decides not to keep the name Schweitzer , as his memories associated with it are too painful . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Rick Berman , Jeri Taylor and Michael Piller had worked together as executive producers for the pilot of Voyager , " Caretaker " , and the following ten episodes . " Heroes and Demons " was the first episode where Piller wasn 't involved in the writing of the scripts because he had begun work on the series Legend . Instead , the episode was written by Naren Shankar , the former story editor for Star Trek : The Next Generation during the final two seasons of the show where he worked with Berman , Taylor and Piller . Following the end of The Next Generation , Shankar had pitched a number of spec scripts for a variety of television series including The Simpsons , but " Heroes and Demons " was the first one he sold , which was accepted before Voyager had begun production . 
 The initial idea for the episode had come from a conversation between Shankar and Brannon Braga over dinner in which they sought to move the Doctor from sickbay into the holodeck , marking this episode as the first one in which the Doctor had left sickbay . Shankar had originally intended the story to be " Star Trek with Vikings " , and it wasn 't until he was sketching out the plot of the episode that he realised that he had inadvertently created something similar to the Beowulf poem . He deliberately worked direct references in the poem into the script for the episode , such as specific lines and the attack on the mead hall . His significant change from Beowulf was the addition of the character , Freya . 
 The script went through two drafting stages , with the main issue being the alien element rather than the Viking details . Shankar was pleased that the work he did on the Viking parts of the script went unchanged from the first draft to the screen , calling it his " best experience " as a writer . He also chose the first name that the Doctor would attempt to use , selecting Albert Schweitzer from a list of scientists and doctors because he thought the surname sounded funny . He expected that it would be cut or changed , based on his experience in writing humorous elements into scripts for The Next Generation . He wrote several lighthearted scenes into the script and was pleased when none of them were cut , saying that he was particularly proud of the exchange between the Doctor and Freya where she says " Your people must value you highly " , and the Doctor responds dryly , " You would think so . " He submitted his final version of the script on February 2 , 1995 . Taylor later talked about the use of the holodeck as a plot device in this episode , saying that it allowed the series to show things that otherwise couldn 't happen on the show . She added that the plot in this episode " transcended the idea of ' Oh , we 're in trouble on the holodeck . ' " 
 = = = Guest stars , set design and musical composition = = = 
 Guest star Christopher Neame had previously appeared on The Next Generation in the seventh season episode " Sub Rosa " . After his performance in " Heroes and Demons " , he would go on to appear in the Star Trek : Deep Space Nine sixth season episode " Statistical Probabilities " . Marjorie Monaghan later appeared in Babylon 5 in the recurring role of Number One / Theresa Halloran from the episode " Lines of Communication " onwards . During the filming of " Heroes and Demons " , Monaghan 's stunt double was Patricia Tallman . The duo went on to work together on Babylon 5 with Tallman playing the character of Lyta Alexander . They didn 't initially recognise each other on the later show because of the costumes they wore in the Voyager episode . Monaghan was also considered for the main cast part of T 'Pol in Star Trek : Enterprise . 
 The forest set was constructed on stage 12 at the Paramount Studios lot , and was designed by production designer Richard James . Backdrops were used to expand the depth of the stage . Marvin V. Rush later explained that they were not aiming for a real world forest look to the scenes , as the story allowed them to aim for something in the " in mythology and in historical record " instead . He attributed this for why the scenery design and creation was successful . Director Les Landau also found that it enabled him to use some different camera angles in " Heroes and Demons " , including shooting from a crane and the use of close @-@ focus lenses to enable some wide shooting to get a sense of depth . 
 Composer Dennis McCarthy had worked on the Star Trek franchise since the pilot episode of The Next Generation , and has included such work as the music for the film Star Trek Generations and the theme to Deep Space Nine . " Heroes and Demons " was significant for McCarthy , as he had sought to increase the tempo of the music he created over the course of several years with the addition of further percussion instruments . He had one piece which was written for The Next Generation episode " Qpid " which he wanted to use but had never managed to include it in an episode . This was finally used in " Heroes and Demons " , and he submitted that work for consideration at the Emmy Awards . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Heroes and Demons " was first broadcast on April 24 , 1995 , on the UPN network . According to the Nielsen ratings , it received a 6 @.@ 4 / 11 share , meaning it was watched by 6 @.@ 4 percent of all households and 11 percent of all households watching television at the time of broadcast . This placed it as the 74th highest rated broadcast of the week across all networks . At the time of broadcast , this was the lowest rated episode of the series so far but received the same ratings as the following episode " Cathexis " and higher than the final two episodes , " <unk> " and " Learning Curve " . 
 = = = Cast and crew response = = = 
 Writer Naren Shankar was happy with the overall episode , saying " I think all the Viking scenes worked very well . The sets were magnificent @-@ the forest set was beautiful , and I don 't really have any complaints about it . Everybody really outdid themselves on it . " Supervising producer David Livingston praised the prop and wardrobe departments for creating the array of " cool @-@ looking " extras , while Michael Piller said that the whole episode was " well produced " . Taylor praised the premise , calling the idea " irresistible " and the overall episode " delightful " . 
 Members of the crew praised the work of Robert Picardo on this episode , with Taylor saying that he was " wonderful " in " Heroes and Demons " , while Piller saw the character as a " fish out of water " and added that " Picardo is a wonderful actor . " Kenneth Biller , executive story editor , felt that the episode gave Picardo a " chance to shine " , and that the episode was " a lot of fun " . Picardo himself was pleased with the episode , later describing it as his favourite of the first season . Garrett Wang also added that he was happy with the episode , as being an Asian @-@ American actor he didn 't otherwise get a great deal of chances to appear in period work , and he enjoyed the wardrobe he wore . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 In his chapter , " From Anglo @-@ Saxon to Angelina : Adapting Beowulf for Film " , in Medieval <unk> in Contemporary Culture , Stewart Brooks compared " Heroes and Demons " to the Beowulf story . He said that certain elements of the episode were more similar to the roleplaying game Dungeons & Dragons instead of historical fact , such as the character of Freya who he also compared to Éowyn from J. R. R. Tolkien 's The Lord of the Rings . He praised the episode , saying that the " real pleasures " were " to witness the surly , introverted , neurotic Doctor being forced to play the hero , banter with Vikings and have his first romantic liaison when Freya falls for him . " In 2011 , Brian J. Robb also linked the episode to roleplaying games in his article on the episode for Star Trek Monthly , suggesting that the repetition of some scenes may have been influenced by the increase in popularity of computer based roleplaying games at the time of production . 
 Edward L. <unk> described " Heroes and Demons " as " Pulp TV tackles mead @-@ hall ritual " in his book , co @-@ authored with Nickolas Haydock , Beowulf on Film : Adaptations and Variations . He added that it gave the Beowulf story " a new twist adaptive to science fiction and to audiences who want human interest even in electronic projections . " Michelle Erica Green , while reviewing the episode for <unk> , said that the plot was " pretty superficial " and the science was " pretty nonsensical " . But she said that it was a " delightful outing for the Doctor " and demonstrated the potential for the character . Jamahl Epsicokhan , at his website Jammer 's Reviews , called the plot a " lame @-@ brained exercise in the obvious " , but praised the performance of Picardo and the drama within the holodeck . He described McCarthy 's score as " ambitious " , and added that the production design was " convincing " providing an added bonus to the episode . 
 Marvin V. Rush was nominated for Individual Achievement in Cinematography for a Series at the 47th Primetime Emmy Awards for his work in this episode , but the award went to Tim <unk> for his work on " Over the Rainbow " , an episode of Chicago Hope . At the same ceremony , Dennis McCarthy was also nominated for an Emmy in the category of Outstanding Music Composition for his work on " Heroes and Demons " . 
 = = = Home media release = = = 
 The first home media release of " Heroes and Demons " was on VHS cassette in the UK . The releases featured two episodes per tape , with this episode appearing alongside " State of Flux " in 1995 . It was subsequently released by itself on VHS in the United States July 11 , 2000 . The first DVD release was also in the UK , as part of the first season box set on May 3 , 2004 . A similar release followed in the United States on February 24 , 2004 , and a re @-@ release occurred in the UK on September 24 , 2007 . 
 = Tefillin = 
 Tefillin ( <unk> : / <unk> / ; Israeli Hebrew : [ <unk> ] , <unk> ) , also called phylacteries ( / <unk> / from Ancient Greek <unk> <unk> , form of <unk> , <unk> meaning " to guard , protect " ) , are a set of small black leather boxes containing scrolls of parchment inscribed with verses from the Torah . They are worn by male observant Jews during weekday morning prayers . 
 Although " tefillin " is technically the plural form ( the singular being " tefillah " ) , it is loosely used as a singular as well . The arm @-@ tefillin , or <unk> yad , is placed on the upper arm , and the strap wrapped around the arm / hand , hand and fingers ; while the head @-@ tefillin , or <unk> <unk> , is placed above the forehead . The Torah commands that they should be worn to serve as a " sign " and " remembrance " that God brought the children of Israel out of Egypt . 
 The scriptural texts for tefillin are obscure in literal meaning . For example , Deuteronomy 11 : 18 is one of the standard texts referenced as supporting the obligation , but does not designate what specifically to " bind upon your arm , " and the definition of totafot between your eyes is not obvious . It is the Talmud , the authoritative oral tradition for Rabbinic Judaism , which explains what are to be bound to the body and the form of tefillin . 
 = = Biblical source = = 
 The obligation of tefillin , as expounded by the Oral Law , is mentioned four times in the Torah : twice when recalling The Exodus from Egypt : 
 And it shall be for a sign for you upon your hand , and for a memorial between your eyes , that the law of the LORD may be in your mouth ; for with a strong hand did the LORD bring you out of Egypt . 
 And it shall be for a sign upon your hand , and as totafot between your eyes ; for with a mighty hand did the LORD bring us forth out of Egypt . 
 and twice in the <unk> passages : 
 And you shall bind them as a sign upon your arm , and they shall be as totafot between your eyes . 
 You shall put these words of mine on your heart and on your soul ; and you shall tie them for a sign upon your arm , and they shall be as totafot between your eyes . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The ultimate origin of Hebrew " tefillin " is uncertain . The word " tefillin " is not found in the Bible , which calls them ṭoṭafot . The Septuagint renders " ṭoṭafot " <unk> , " something immovable . " Some believe it refers to a charm , similar to the Hebrew <unk> , " round jewel . " The Talmud ( Sanhedrin 4b ) explains that the word ṭoṭafot is combination of two foreign words : Tot means " two " in the " <unk> " language and <unk> means " two " in the " <unk> " language , hence tot and fot means " two and two " , corresponding to the four compartments of the head @-@ tefillin . Menahem ben <unk> explains that the word is derived from the Hebrew Ve <unk> and <unk> , both expressions meaning " speech " , " for when one sees the tefillin it causes him to remember and speak about The Exodus from Egypt . " 
 The first texts to use " tefillin " are the <unk> and Peshitta and it is also used in subsequent Talmudic literature , although the word " <unk> " was still current , being used with the meaning of " frontlet . " " Tefillin " may have derived from the Aramaic <unk> , " to plead , pray , " a word closely related to the Hebrew tefillah , " prayer . " Jacob ben Asher ( 14th century ) suggests that " tefillin " is derived from the Hebrew <unk> , " justice , evidence , " for tefillin act as a sign and proof of God 's presence among the Jewish people . 
 The only instance of the name " phylacteries " in ancient times occurs once in the Greek New Testament ( Matthew 23 : 5 ) whence it has passed into the languages of Europe . " <unk> " derives from the Greek <unk> - <unk> , " defences , " and in late Greek , " amulets " or " charms . " Neither Aquila nor Symmachus use the word " phylacteries . " 
 = = Purpose = = 
 The tefillin are to serve as a reminder of God 's intervention at the time of the Exodus from Egypt . Maimonides details of the sanctity of tefillin and writes that " as long as the tefillin are on the head and on the arm of a man , he is modest and God @-@ fearing and will not be attracted by hilarity or idle talk ; he will have no evil thoughts , but will devote all his thoughts to truth and righteousness . " The Sefer ha @-@ <unk> ( 14th century ) adds that the purpose of tefillin is to help subjugate a person 's worldly desires and encourage spiritual development . Joseph Caro ( 16th century ) explains that tefillin are placed on the arm adjacent to the heart and on the head above the brain to demonstrate that these two major organs are willing to perform the service of God . 
 Many have the custom to have high quality tefillin and beautiful tefillin bags as a <unk> Mitzvah . This idea comes from the verse " This is my God and I will glorify Him " ( Exodus 15 : 2 ) . The Jewish Sages explain : " Is it possible for a human being to add glory to his Creator ? What this really means is : I shall glorify Him in the way I perform mitzvot . I shall prepare before Him a beautiful <unk> , beautiful <unk> , beautiful fringes ( <unk> ) , and beautiful phylacteries ( <unk> ) . " 
 = = Manufacture and contents = = 
 The manufacturing processes of both the boxes and the parchment scrolls are intricate and governed by hundreds of detailed rules . In earlier Talmudic times , tefillin were either cylindrical or cubical , but later the cylindrical form became obsolete . Nowadays the boxes should be fashioned from a single piece of animal hide and form a base with an upper compartment to contain the parchment scrolls . They are made in varying levels of quality . The most basic form , called <unk> ( " simple " ) , are made using several pieces of parchment to form the inner walls of the head tefillin . The higher quality tefillin , namely <unk> ( " thin " ) , made by stretching a thin piece of leather , and the more durable <unk> ( " thick " ) are both fashioned from the single piece of hide . Black leather straps ( <unk> 'ot ) pass through the rear of the base and are used to secure the tefillin onto the body . On both sides of the head @-@ tefillin , the Hebrew letter shin ( ש ) is moulded . The knot of the head @-@ tefillin strap forms the letter dalet ( ד ) or double dalet ( ד ) ( known as the square @-@ knot ) while the strap that is passed through the arm @-@ tefillin is formed into a knot in the shape of the letter <unk> ( י ) . These three letters spell Shaddai ( <unk> ) , one of the names of God . 
 = = = Parchment scrolls = = = 
 Four biblical passages which refer to the tefillin are placed inside the leather boxes . These are : " Sanctify to me ... " ( Exodus 13 : 1 @-@ 10 ) ; " When <unk> brings you ... " ( Exodus 13 : 11 @-@ 16 ) ; " Hear , O Israel ... " ( Deuteronomy 6 : 4 @-@ 9 ) ; and " If you observe My Commandments ... " ( Deuteronomy 11 : 13 @-@ 21 ) . They are written by a scribe with special ink on parchment scrolls ( <unk> ) . The Hebrew <unk> script must be used and there are three main styles of lettering used : Beis Yosef – generally used by Ashkenazim ; <unk> – generally used by Hasidim ; <unk> – used by <unk> . The passages contain 3 @,@ 188 letters , which take a <unk> ( scribe ) between 10 – 15 hours to complete . The arm @-@ tefillin has one large compartment , which contains all four biblical passages written upon a single strip of parchment . The head @-@ tefillin has four separate compartments in each of which one scroll of parchment is placed . 
 There was considerable discussion among the commentators of the Talmud about the order in which the scrolls should be inserted into the four compartments of the head @-@ tefillin . In the Middle Ages , a famous debate on the issue was recorded between Rashi and his grandson Rabbeinu Tam . Rashi held that the passages are placed according to the chronological order as they appear in the Torah : Kadesh Li , Ve @-@ <unk> Ki <unk> , Shema , Ve @-@ <unk> Im <unk> , while according to Rabbeinu Tam , the last two passages are switched around . Of the tefillin dating from the 1st @-@ century CE discovered at Qumran in the Judean Desert , some were made according to the order understood by Rashi and others in the order of Rabbeinu Tam . The prevailing custom is to arrange the scrolls according to Rashi 's view , but some pious Jews are also accustomed to briefly lay the tefillin of Rabbeinu Tam as well , a custom of the Ari adopted by the Hasidim . The placement of the protrusion of a tuft of the sinew ( se 'ar <unk> ) identifies as to which opinion the tefillin were written . The Vilna Gaon , who wore the tefillin of Rashi , rejected the stringency of also laying Rabbeinu Tam , pointing out that there were sixty @-@ four permutations for the arrangement of the tefillin scrolls . 
 = = Obligation = = 
 The duty of laying tefillin rests upon males after the age of thirteen years . Although women are exempt from the obligation , some early <unk> allowed them to do so . Moses <unk> ( 16th century ) , however , strongly discourages it . Historically , the mitzvah of tefillin was not performed by women , but the ritual was apparently kept by some women in medieval France and Germany . Traditions exist of some prominent women laying tefillin and the idea is gaining a following among women affiliated to the Conservative movement . In 2013 SAR High School in Riverdale , New York began allowing girls to wrap tefillin during <unk> @-@ morning prayer ; it is probably the first Modern Orthodox high school in the U.S. to do so . The wearing of tefillin by members of Women of the Wall at the Western Wall caused consternation from the rabbi in charge of the site until a Jerusalem District Court judge ruled in 2013 that doing so was not a violation of “ local custom . ” 
 Others who are not obliged to lay tefillin include a mourner during the first day of his mourning period , and a bridegroom on his wedding @-@ day . A sufferer from stomach @-@ trouble or one who is otherwise in pain and can not concentrate his mind is also exempt . One who is engaged in the study of the Law and scribes of and dealers in tefillin and mezuzot while engaged in their work if it can not be postponed , are also free from this obligation . 
 The codes view the commandment of tefillin as important and call those who neglect to observe it " transgressors . " Maimonides counts the commandment of laying the arm @-@ tefillin and head @-@ tefillin as two separate positive mitzvot . The Talmud cites Rav <unk> who said that by neglecting the precept , one <unk> eight positive commandments . A report of widespread laxity in its observance is reported by Moses of Coucy in 13th century Spain . It may have arisen from the fear of persecution , similar to what had occurred to the Jews living in the Land of Israel under Roman rule in the 2nd @-@ century . 
 = = Performance = = 
 Originally tefillin were worn all day , but not during the night . Nowadays the prevailing custom is to wear them only during the weekday morning service , although some individuals wear them at other times during the day as well . 
 Tefillin are not donned on Shabbat and the major festivals because these holy days are themselves considered " signs " which render the need of the " sign " of tefillin superfluous . On Chol HaMoed ( intermediate days ) of Pesach and Sukkot , there is a great debate among the early <unk> authorities as to whether tefillin should be worn or not . Those who forbid it consider the " sign " of intermediate days as having the same status as the festival itself , making the ritual of tefillin redundant . Others argue and hold that Chol HaMoed does not constitute a " sign " in which case tefillin must be laid . Three customs evolved resulting from the dispute : 
 To refrain from wearing tefillin : This ruling of the <unk> <unk> is based on <unk> and the Zohar which strongly advocate refraining from laying tefillin on Chol HaMoed . This position is maintained by Sephardic Jews and is also the opinion of the Vilna Gaon whose ruling has been universally accepted in Israel . 
 To wear tefillin without reciting the blessings : This is the opinion of , among others , Jacob ben Asher , Moses of Coucy and David <unk> Segal . The advantage of this compromise is that one avoids the transgressions of either not donning tefillin or making a blessing in vain . 
 To wear tefillin and recite the blessings in an undertone : This opinion , based on Maimonides , is the ruling of Moses <unk> who writes that this is the universally accepted practice among Ashkenazic Jews . However , he was evidently mistaken , since many Ashkenazim refrain from wearing it or wear it without a blessing during Chol HaMoed . 
 In light of the conflicting opinions , the <unk> <unk> ( 20th @-@ century ) recommends Ashkenazim make the following stipulation before donning tefillin : " If I am obligated to don tefillin I intend to fulfill my obligation and if I am not obligated to don tefillin , my doing so should not be considered as fulfilling any obligation " and that the blessing not be recited . 
 On the fast day of Tisha B 'Av , tefillin are not worn in the morning , as tefillin are considered an " adornment " , symbols of beauty , which is deemed inappropriate for a day of mourning . They are worn instead at the afternoon <unk> service . There are those however who have a custom ( Jews from Aleppo , Syria ) on Tisha B 'Av to privately put on tefillin at home and pray privately , say the <unk> and take off the tefillin and go to synagogue to finish the prayers . 
 = = = How to put on tefillin = = = 
 Ashkenazim put on and remove the arm tefillin while standing in accordance to the <unk> <unk> , while most Sephardim do so while sitting in accordance with the Ari . All , however , put on and remove the head tefillin while standing . It is forbidden to speak or be distracted while putting on the tefillin . An Ashkenazi says two blessings when laying tefillin , the first before he ties the arm @-@ tefillin : ... <unk> <unk> tefillin ( " to bind tefillin " ) , and the second after placing the head tefillin : ... al <unk> tefillin ( " as to the commandment of tefillin " ) , thereafter he tightens the head straps and says " Baruch Shem <unk> .... " ( " blessed be the holy name " ) The Sephardic custom is that no blessing is said for the head @-@ tefillin , the first blessing sufficing for both . Sephardim and many members of the Chabad Orthodox movement only recite the blessing on the head @-@ tefillah if they spoke about something not related to tefillin since reciting the blessing on the arm @-@ tefillah . 
 Procedure 
 The arm @-@ tefillin is laid on the inner side of the bare left arm , right arm if one is left handed , two finger <unk> above the elbow , so that when the arm is bent the tefillin faces towards the heart . The arm @-@ tefillin is tightened with the thumb , the blessing is said , and the strap is immediately wrapped around the upper arm in the opposite direction it came from in order to keep the knot tight without having to hold it . Some wrap it around the upper arm for less than a full revolution ( the bare minimum to keep the knot tight ) and then wrap it around the forearm seven times , while others wrap it around the upper arm an addition time before wrapping it around the forearm . Many Ashkenazim wear the knot to be tightened ( not to be confused with the knot on the base which is <unk> tied and always worn on the inside , facing the heart ) on the inside and wrap inward , while Nusach <unk> Ashkenazim and all Sephardim wear it on the outside and wrap outward . 
 Then the head @-@ tefillin is placed on the middle of the head just above the forehead , so that no parts rests below the hairline . A bald or partially bald person 's original hairline is used . The knot of the head @-@ tefillin sits at the back of the head , upon the part of the occipital bone that protrudes just above the nape , directly opposite the optic chiasm . The two straps of the head @-@ tefillin are brought in front of the shoulders , with their blackened side facing outwards . Now the remainder of the arm @-@ tefillin straps are wound three times around the middle finger and around the hand to form the shape of the Hebrew letter of either a shin ( ש ) according to Ashkenazim , or a dalet ( ד ) according to Sephardim . There are various customs regarding winding the strap on the arm and hand . In fact , the arm strap is looped for counter @-@ clockwise wrapping with Ashkenazi tefillin while it is knotted for clockwise wrapping with Sephardic and Chabad tefillin . On removing the tefillin , the steps are reversed . 
 = = Biblical passages = = 
 = Prince of Persia : The Sands of Time = 
 Prince of Persia : The Sands of Time is a third @-@ person action @-@ adventure puzzle @-@ platform video game developed and published by Ubisoft . First revealed in March 2003 , it was released across PlayStation 2 , Xbox , GameCube , Game Boy Advance and Microsoft Windows in November 2003 . The Sands of Time is a reboot of the Prince of Persia series , created by Jordan Mechner . Mechner served as creative consultant , designer , and scenario writer for The Sands of Time . 
 The game follows an unnamed Prince whose father sacks a Maharaja 's city at the instigation of its treacherous Vizier . During the attack , the Prince obtains an artifact called the Dagger of Time , while his army captures an hourglass containing the Sands of Time . Visiting Azad to present the Sands as a gift to the city 's ruler , the Vizier tricks the Prince into releasing the Sands , transforming the city 's population into savage monsters . Together with the Maharaja 's daughter Farah , the Prince works to correct his mistake and return the Sands to the hourglass . The gameplay revolves around the Prince 's platforming abilities , broken up by fights with the creatures created by the Sands . A key mechanic in the game is using the Dagger to rewind time if the Prince makes a mistake platforming , and using it to kill and freeze enemies . 
 Concept work began in spring of 2001 , after Ubisoft acquired the Prince of Persia catalog . After Mechner was brought on board , production began in June of that year . After the initial story draft was scrapped as it was too complex , the team began with four guiding concepts , including the ability to rewind time : this idea grew into the Dagger , the Sands , and the various powers related to them . Mechner 's script drew inspiration from the Shahnameh , with the main focus on creating a simple narrative that worked with the pace of gameplay . The game used Ubisoft 's Jade engine , originally designed for Beyond Good & Evil , another game published by the company . Production was troubled , with the team facing problems with the engine structure and delays with environment assets , while also managing to create an effective tester network to seek out the game 's bugs . In 2004 , a version for mobile phones was developed and published in North America by Gameloft . 
 Upon release , it received critical acclaim , won and was nominated for numerous awards , and has been recognized by many as one of the greatest games of all time . Sales of the title were initially slow , but it eventually became a commercial success . Its success prompted the development of a sequel , Prince of Persia : Warrior Within , which was released in November 2004 . Further games set in the Sands of Time continuity have been developed , and it is generally cited as the reason for the Prince of Persia series ' return to fame . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Prince of Persia : The Sands of Time is an action @-@ adventure puzzle @-@ platformer . The player controls the main protagonist , an unnamed Prince from a kingdom in Persia . Environments are seen through a controllable third @-@ person view . The camera 's view changes to different positions triggered by entering certain areas or performing actions . The Prince can be moved in all directions , and he is able to manipulate large objects such as blocks and levers connected to mechanisms . His health and power metre are represented in the top left @-@ hand corner of the screen . The Prince restores health by drinking water from pools and fountains . Collecting Sands increases the Prince 's power , and drinking from hidden magic fountains increases the Prince 's maximum health . During several points in the game , the Prince is assisted by his companion Farah , who fires a bow at enemies , though her arrows can also hit the Prince if he strays into her line of fire . Monsters will attack her , and if she is killed , the game ends . 
 During exploration , the Prince navigates areas filled with traps : these traps include spike pits , arrow traps , wall @-@ mounted blades and saws , and spinning spiked stakes . The Prince 's main contextual move is wall @-@ running , an action where he runs up onto and along a wall for a set distance , either to land on or jump off to a platform . The Prince 's other acrobatic abilities include climbing along and across ledges , walking along beams , swinging on and jumping from poles , jumping onto and between pillars , and swinging on ropes . Large environmental puzzles are encountered during the Prince 's journey , extending across multiple areas in large rooms . Many puzzles are cooperative , requiring Farah 's help to complete them . In combat , the Prince fights monsters created by the Sands infecting the Palace 's inhabitants . A single command contextually triggered different moves depending on position and directional movement , while other special moves such as a somersault attack and bouncing off walls into enemies require additional commands . Enemies can only be killed by stabbing them with the Dagger of Time , which gathers up the Sands inside them . 
 The Sands the Prince collects from enemies and the environment are tied to his magical abilities , themselves connected with the Dagger . The most basic power is Rewind , the ability for the Prince to rewind time by up to ten seconds if he makes a mistake in platforming or dies . In combat , the Prince can also slow time immediately around him , freeze time for a single enemy , and freeze time completely so the Prince can attack his enemies at great speed while they are unable to move . Each use of power uses up one Sand Tank , and when empty , all powers become inaccessible until more Sand is collected . More powerful abilities , such as freezing time , are powered by Power Tanks . Increasing their number unlocks new Sand @-@ based powers . Starting out with a small amount of Sand available to him , its capacity can be increased by collecting Sand from enemies , along with Sand Clouds scattered around the palace . Large columns of Sand within the Palace grant visions of future areas and act as save points . 
 The Game Boy Advance version shares basic elements with its console counterparts . Displayed from a side @-@ scrolling view , the Prince navigates the palace of Azad using his acrobatic skills . The Rewind ability is still present to save the Prince 's life , and is also involved in solving some puzzles and fighting bosses . New moves and abilities are gained by the Prince by performing moves and solving puzzles . Farah is featured as a second playable character in some sections , with switching between the two being key to some puzzles . The mobile version is similarly a side @-@ scroller , featuring simple puzzles and traps . The powers linked to the Sands are absent , but enemies must still be killed by stabbing them with the Dagger . There are three enemy types : archers , flying enemies , and foot soldiers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story is set in Persia during the 9th century AD , and begins with the Prince narrating to an unseen listener about his adventures . The Prince and the army of his father <unk> are passing through India to visit the Sultan of Azad . The Vizier of a local Maharaja , wanting to prevent his death using a substance known as the Sands of Time , entices them into attacking the Maharaja 's palace , where the Sands are stored . During the fight , the Prince loots an artefact called the Dagger of Time , and the Maharaja 's daughter Farah is taken as a gift for the Sultan of Azad . Visiting Azad , the Vizier tricks the Prince into releasing the Sands , turning everyone but the Prince , the Vizier and Farah ( protected by the Dagger , a staff and a medallion respectively ) into monsters . The Vizier attempts to seize the Dagger from the Prince , but he escapes and eventually allies with Farah to undo the damage he has caused and prevent the Sands from covering the world , even though he has doubts about her loyalties and motives . 
 After navigating the palace of Azad and reaching the hourglass of the Sands in the Tower of Dawn , the Prince hesitates when following Farah 's instructions on containing the Sands , unsure of whether to trust her . The Vizier ambushes them and they barely escape with the Dagger , ending up in a tomb beneath the city . Eventually finding shelter in a mysterious bathhouse , the two rest and consummate their growing feelings for each other . When the Prince wakes up back in the palace , Farah has gone with the Dagger , leaving him her medallion . He follows her and only just manages to catch her as she is driven over a ledge above the hourglass by monsters . To save the Prince , Farah allows herself to fall to her death . As the Prince mourns over her , the Vizier offers him eternal life in exchange for the Dagger . The Prince refuses and stabs the hourglass with the Dagger . Time rewinds to before the attack on the Maharaja 's palace , and the Prince , still in possession of the Dagger and his memories , runs ahead to warn Farah of the Vizier 's treachery . It is now revealed that the Prince has been recounting his tale to Farah , and as he finishes , the Vizier enters to kill him . The Prince kills the Vizier and returns the Dagger to Farah , who believes his narrative was just a story . In parting , the Prince mentions a private word she told him during their time in the tomb , leaving her amazed . 
 = = Development = = 
 The development of the initial concept work for The Sands of Time began in the second quarter of 2001 , after Ubisoft had bought the Prince of Persia license . While Ubisoft held the Prince of Persia catalog , the actual IP still belonged to the series original creator Jordan Mechner , but he was initially unwilling to return to the series after poor experiences with Prince of Persia 2 : The Shadow and the Flame and Prince of Persia 3D . The game was developed by Ubisoft Montreal , which was also a year into developing Tom Clancy 's Splinter Cell . After some mock assets had been created , Ubisoft asked Mechner to come and help develop the game , showing them their concepts and the assets as <unk> . Mechner was impressed by Ubisoft 's work and came on board as a creative consultant . He soon became more involved with the project , becoming the game 's designer and writer . Full production began in June 2001 , and at its peak was worked on by a staff of 65 people , internally known as " <unk> Team " . Development ran parallel to that of Splinter Cell , and as part of their research , the development team read One Thousand and One Nights , a collection of stories originating from the Middle East that Mechner had previously used as inspiration when designing the original Prince of Persia . Over the course of production , the team ran through over 150 different versions before the retail version . 
 The game 's title was thought up by the production team , but the original story built around the title proved impossible to work . The original draft had nine characters ( including the Prince , two love interests , two villains , and two helper characters ) representing different political factions , and the setting of the Prince 's own palace home instead of in another kingdom . This storyline ultimately impeded other aspects of development , and so was scrapped . In starting over , the team returned to the " The Sands of Time " title and concept . They decided upon four key elements for the game : " Unity of time and place " , with the game taking place over twenty @-@ four hours within the palace of Azad ; " <unk> " , referring to the gameplay and how the setting was constructed around this concept ; " Combat " , with the palace being filled with monsters to give the game and story a fast @-@ paced feeling ; and " Rewind " , the ability to turn back and manipulate time . One of the early decisions made by the production team was not to refer to Prince of Persia 3D in any degree in designing the gameplay , instead looking to the 1989 original for reference . They intended to capture the original feeling of platforming an adventure in a 3D environment . The Rewind mechanic began as a gameplay wish for the title , surviving the initial rewrite of the story and becoming key to both story and gameplay . The Dagger of Time and the Sands were both born from the need to explain this mechanic in @-@ game . The initial concept was simply using the Dagger to rewind time and dispatch enemies , but its powers were gradually expanded into its current roster . The main character 's acrobatics were designed to be novel to the video game medium , inspired by similar stunts performed in Crouching Tiger , Hidden Dragon and The Matrix . A video game which provided inspiration for the acrobatic feats of the Prince was Tony Hawk 's Pro Skater . Elements such as using ladders as part of combat , and riding on a magic carpet or a horse were axed early in development . The Rewind function was suggested by the game 's director Patrice <unk> based on experiences playing Donald Duck : Goin ' <unk> , where he had wished to rewind after making a mistake rather than restarting the entire level . 
 Pre @-@ production was originally estimated at ten months , but ultimately extended to fourteen months . Each time a new movement or ability was created for the Prince , it required adjustments to multiple other systems , as leaving them alone would have damaged the game . They also needed to make adjustments to the enemy and partner artificial intelligence , and they did not have time to polish those systems . All this meant that the debugging started much later than originally scheduled . The Prince had over 780 scripted movements , far more than any other character in the game . This caused problems with creating the movements for other characters . To make the character movements realistic , the team used motion capture to animate their movements . Art director Raphael Lacoste did not join the team until July 2002 , well into the game 's production , resulting in multiple delays in creating the game 's environments . This issue was compounded by the need to produce a demo for the 2003 Electronic Entertainment Expo , then to deliver an entire game at the same if not a higher quality than the demo . Each environment needed to work for the Prince 's set of movements and abilities : the work needed involved checking each rewind sequence , and each of the Prince 's movement in and effect on the environment worked . These issues were compounded by the late delivery of environmental maps . In hindsight , producer Yannis <unk> lamented the fact that they did not have enough time to work out the problems caused by these issues . Despite these problems , other parts of production including play @-@ testing , management of creative tools , and the integrated testing system worked smoothly . A cited example was the team discovering a tester that was good at finding severe bugs , so they included her in one of their testing groups , giving her a development kit she could use to sort out those bugs . This was replicated , and managed to greatly increase the amount of bugs that could be found and fixed . The development team 's enthusiasm was also high , which enabled the problems during development to be overcome . During the aftermath of E3 , the team considered release The Sands of Time as two games so they could include all the desired content , but the idea was dropped . Another element that needed to be cut after the demo was a griffin boss that would appear three times during the Prince 's journey . 
 The game used an updated version of the company 's Jade engine , designed for Beyond Good & Evil . When the team saw the capacities of the Jade engine , they decided to use it for The Sands of Time . For The Sands of Time , the team made improvements to the engine by adding additional walking and running animations , enabling smoother character movement . They also made custom animations for the character . The engine made editing and fine @-@ tuning the game very easy due to its easy @-@ to @-@ use tools . Using this as a base , they were able to focus on rapid integration of new elements into the game , and were also able to do quick testing and adjustments . The team developed " substance " and " glow " systems , which respectively enabled natural movements of cloth and gave the lightning effects a " magical " feel . The way the engine was structured , with all assets in a single accessible folder , proved problematic when alterations needed to be made or new features added , as the team size meant too many people were accessing the engine and were causing data to be overwritten , files to be corrupted , and the whole system to crash . They attempted to solve the problem using a " data monkey " solution which would allow for simultaneous access , but it came late in development and they did not risk making such a radical change to the system . Instead , they set up a file server to manage check @-@ in times , which could allow for management of access and prioritisation of critical work . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Mechner created the scenario and wrote the game 's script . While doing his research for the script , Mechner read a translation of the Shahnameh , an epic poem written by Ferdowsi between the 10th and 11th century . Reading it through helped Mechner visualise the new Prince as a more mature character than the original . Despite this , <unk> felt that the character could not fully shed the " happy @-@ go @-@ lucky " elements of One Thousand and One Nights . In retrospect , Mechner also felt that this inability to resolve this inherent conflict gave the character his charm . Mechner also included specific references in the Prince 's dialogue to stories from the Shahnameh . The story and the Prince were created for newcomers to the series . The main scenario was based around second chances , while an unstated anti @-@ war theme was also included by Mechner and showcased in the game 's opening level . Mechner created the Dagger of Time as a combined gameplay and narrative device within the four core concepts created by the team . Its acquisition by the Prince was directly inspired by the opening of Raiders of the Lost Ark , which had previously inspired his portrayal of the Prince in the original Prince of Persia . The palace of Azad was crafted to be the Prince 's " playground " , while some scenes which developed the Prince 's portrayal ( the opening attack on the Maharaja 's palace , activating Azad 's traps on the instructions of a deranged guard ) were deliberately meant to be morally dubious to the player while increasing empathy with the character . 
 Mechner 's main preoccupation for this new storyline was keeping the narrative simple and engaging , using his preferred writing style of keeping cutscenes short and working as much of the story as possible into the gameplay . He also aimed to mix narrative and gameplay genres that might normally clash with one @-@ another . The three main characters he created were the hero ( the Prince ) , the villain ( the Vizier ) and the love interest and sidekick ( Farah ) . Two non @-@ playable authority figures ( the Prince 's father <unk> and the Sultan of Azad ) were included to add weight to the Prince 's burden as they were transformed into monsters by the Sands . The three artefacts each character used ( the Dagger , Farah 's medallion and the Vizier 's staff ) were created to explain their survival of the Sands ' release , with the Dagger also becoming integral to gameplay . The Prince 's narration was both difficult and satisfying for Mechner . It needed to be written to work on two levels : first to be understandable for first @-@ time players , and to gain greater significance upon future playthroughs . The narration also served to give gentle hints to the player , and expand upon the setting and add depth to the experience . Among his cited reference points for the narration were the 1940s version of The Thief of Bagdad , the works of Edgar Allan Poe , and films such as Double Indemnity and Sunset Boulevard . The Prince 's interactions with Farah were also an important factor . As part of the character interaction , Farah was deliberately designed not to be a perfect archer , sometimes hitting the Prince if he strayed into her line of fire . Despite this , unspecified features planned for her needed to be cut . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 The music for The Sands of Time was composed by Stuart Chatwood of the Canadian rock band The Tea Party . Chatwood was chosen for the role as Ubisoft wanted music that had Persian elements in it to fit the setting , while not being pure Persian music . When he was approached , Chatwood expanded his music library as part of his research . To achieve the desired effect , rock elements were mixed with Middle Eastern music and melodies , along with Indian elements . Chatwood used different instruments , including an Indian tabla and strings , along with vocal tracks by Cindy Gomez and <unk> <unk> . A soundtrack album for the game , Prince of Persia : The Sands of Time Original Soundtrack , was released in Japan in October 20 , 2004 by Scitron Digital Content . Tracks from the game were included in an album featuring music from both The Sands of Time and its two sequels Warrior Within and The Two Thrones . Titled Prince Of Persia The Official Trilogy Soundtrack , the album was released by Ubisoft on December 1 , 2005 . 
 For the sound effects , the team worked with sound company Dane Tracks to create most of the game 's sound effects , with the rest being done by Ubisoft Montreal . To make the enemies in the game stand out , the sound team mixed " organic and evil " sound effects with whispering sounds , rather than using sound effects associated with the undead . Mechner supervised the game 's voice recording . One of the unconventional choices made by the team was not to halt gameplay during in @-@ game dialogue , meaning players could miss large portions of character interaction . In addition to story @-@ based dialogue and banter , context @-@ specific dialogue was written for certain situations . Over one thousand lines of dialogue were written , though over half of them were cut . To help with voice recording , the recording team created a graph to help the actors playing the Prince and Farah time their exchanges correctly . Aside from some exceptions which played in sequence , all comments made by Farah when the Prince did a specific thing were stand @-@ alone responses . The Prince was voiced by Yuri Lowenthal , whose performance was proven popular and would return to voice the character in future games set after The Sands of Time . Speaking in a 2008 interview , Lowenthal felt " that [ he ] in a way originated that role " . 
 = = Release = = 
 The Sands of Time was announced in March 2003 . It was released for the PlayStation 2 , Xbox , GameCube , Game Boy Advance and Microsoft Windows . The versions were released gradually between October and November 2003 . The various versions had multiple differences in both graphics and control options . The GameCube and Xbox versions included a documentary about the making of the game . Gameloft developed a version of the game for mobile phones , which released in April 2004 . Two versions were developed for higher and lower @-@ spec mobile phones . Connecting the GameCube and Game Boy Advance versions of the game gave access to a port of the original Prince of Persia with the GameCube version , along with the ability for the Prince to automatically regenerate health . The PS2 version was released in Japan in September 2004 . The game was published in the region by Sony Computer Entertainment Japan , who were impressed by both the quality and the praise it earned in the west . The Sands of Time was later re @-@ released with its two sequels in a Europe @-@ exclusive PlayStation 3 collection on November 19 , 2010 , which included a 3D display option . 
 = = Reception = = 
 During its North American debut , the game suffered from poor sales : by December , the PS2 version had sold 218 @,@ 000 copies , the Xbox version 128 @,@ 000 copies , and the GameCube version 85 @,@ 000 copies . Its combined sales since release at that time totaled 272 @,@ 000 ( PS2 ) , 172 @,@ 000 ( Xbox ) , and 100 @,@ 000 copies ( GameCube ) . It was speculated that its sales were negatively affected by the concurrent release of Beyond Good & Evil , alongside other prominent releases at the time . In response to this , Ubisoft offered copies of their other games free with purchases of The Sands of Time , providing a boost to sales . As of 2006 , the game has sold 700 @,@ 000 copies in North America , bringing an estimated revenue of $ 24 million . During its week of release in Japan , the game reached seventh place in the charts , selling 14 @,@ 000 copies . This was noted as being high for a western game released in Japan . By the end of 2004 , it had sold 26 @,@ 116 copies . In Europe , it was among the top ten best @-@ selling games across main territories , selling over two million copies . The game eventually sold over 14 million copies worldwide . 
 The Sands of Time received critical acclaim upon launch . Edge said that , despite difficulty spikes caused by respawning enemies , " the game cannot be commended highly enough " . IGN 's Matt Casamassina found the entire experience enjoyable , saying that " Whether you 're a diehard Prince of Persia fan or somebody with a mild interest in action @-@ adventures , The Sands of Time is a must own -- a soon @-@ to @-@ be @-@ classic worthy of a permanent place in your collection " . 1UP.com , while pointing out the camera control as " tricky " , said that the game " will make your chest explode if you 've got a heart condition ( in a good way , of course ) " . GameSpot 's Greg Kasavin called it " a game that can be recommended wholeheartedly " . Both Eurogamer and Official PlayStation Magazine positively compared the game 's aesthetics and presentation to Ico . Francesca Reyes of Official Xbox Magazine gave the game a good review , praising the story and general gameplay , but finding the combat difficult at times and lack of new skills . In closing , she praised the game 's lasting appeal : " When the whole thing is over , it 's perfectly timed to leave you wanting more . It 's a stunning and rare achievement that makes you feel happy to be a gamer . " Japanese gaming magazine Famitsu gave the PS2 version a good review , saying that the action was smooth and challenging , bearing similarities to the original Prince of Persia , and one reviewer found the Prince " colourful " . 
 The PC version shared much of the console version 's praise , but the controls and responsiveness of the camera caused criticism . The Game Boy Advance version garnered lower scores than the console and PC versions due to its scaled @-@ down gameplay and presentation , but was still generally praised as a competent port of the game . Nintendo Power said that " Acrobatic moves and inventive traps have never been as free @-@ flowing as they are in [ The Sands of Time ] " . Reviewing the mobile version , IGN reviewer Levi Buchanan was impressed by the company 's adaptation of the console game 's basic actions and atmosphere , giving it a score of 9 @.@ 5 out of 10 . 1UP reviewer Corey Padnos was pleased with the Prince 's acrobatic performance and the game 's general performance , while lamenting the lack of the time @-@ based mechanics of the main games and the lack of plot . 
 At E3 2003 , The Sands of Time was named as " Game of the Year " . The game was named as Editor 's Choice by GameSpot and IGN . At the 2003 Game Critics Awards , the game was awarded as " Best Action / Adventure Game " . The Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences , at its meeting in 2004 , recognised the game as " Console Game of the Year " , " Console Platform Action Adventure Game of the Year " , and " Computer Action / Adventure Game of the Year " . It was also awarded for " Outstanding Innovation in Computer Gaming " , " Outstanding Achievement in Game Design " , " Outstanding Achievement in Visual Engineering " , " Outstanding Achievement in Animation " , and " Outstanding Achievement in Game Play Engineering " . At the 2004 Game Developers Choice Awards , the game won the " Excellence in Game Design " and " Excellence in Programming " awards . It was also nominated in the " Game of the Year " and " Excellence in Visual Arts " categories . 
 In 2009 , Official Nintendo Magazine ranked it the 86th best game available on Nintendo platforms . The staff praised the developer 's successful transition from 2D to 3D . IGN and Edge both named it among their 100 greatest games of all time in 2005 and 2007 respectively . Computer and Video Games placed it in its 2007 list of the 101 best PC games ever . In 2010 , GamePro chose it as the 13th best PS2 game of all time . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The year after the game 's release , the game was featured in an episode of How It 's Made , in a segment dedicated to video game production . The game has been cited as the reason why the Prince of Persia series , formerly ignored after Prince of Persia 3D , returned to prominence in the gaming world . In 2004 , Mechner began work on a film adaptation , produced by Jerry Bruckheimer . The film was eventually released in 2010 . The success of the game prompted immediate development on a sequel . Titled Prince of Persia : Warrior Within , the game was made aesthetically darker by the team . It released in November 2004 . Several further sequels set in the continuity of The Sands of Time followed . Aspects of its design , such as the relationship between the Prince and Farah , later provided inspiration for the 2008 series reboot . 
 = Eat You Up = 
 " Eat You Up " is a song recorded by South Korean recording artist BoA for her twelfth studio and debut English eponymous studio album ( 2009 ) . It was released on October 16 , 2008 in Japan as the lead single from the album . The song was written by <unk> and Thomas Troelsen , while production was handled by Henrik Jonback . The song was BoA 's first attempt into the Western market , particularly North America . Musically , the track was described as an electronic dance song with elements of R & B. 
 Upon its release , " Eat You Up " garnered positive reviews from music critics . Many critics commended the song 's electronic and dance @-@ infused composition , and praised the song 's commercial appeals ; they also felt it was a choice to release through Western markets , and felt BoA 's English skills had improved . It was successful on the US Billboard Dance Club Songs chart , peaking at number eight and staying in the chart for 12 consecutive weeks . 
 Two music videos were created for the single ; the first had BoA dancing in ballet recital with back @-@ up dancers , whilst the second has her dancing in a utopian @-@ inspired planet . BoA performed the single during several of her concerts , including her <unk> and Who 's Back ? concert tours . Since its release , the song has received several recognitions and has been listed on several best lists by Eastern and Western publications . " Eat You Up " is one of the first songs by a Korean artist to be produced and written by Western producers , and is recognized as a key factor to the Korean Wave movement . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 In January 2008 , publications in South Korea reported that BoA was planning on her North American debut . However , the head of BoA 's label SM Entertainment , Lee Soo Man , denied the claims , saying that BoA was continuing work in Asian markets . South Korean publications started to surface once again about her North American debut , after SM Entertainment announced their US subsidiary label . On September 2 , 2008 , SM Entertainment officially announced BoA 's North American debut under their subsidiary label . Ten days later , a press conference was held at the Seoul Imperial Palace Hotel to further clarify her plans . During her press conference , SM Entertainment announced that a song entitled " Eat You Up " was chosen as her debut English single . " Eat You Up " was first released on Japanese radio stations Tokyo @-@ FM and <unk> 38 Station on October 16 . It was originally set for release on October 14 , 2008 in the US , but was then pushed back to October 21 , 2008 . 
 " Eat You Up " was written by <unk> and Thomas Troelsen , while production was handled by Henrik Jonback . It was programmed and contained background vocals by Troelsen , while mixing was handled by Anders Hvenare . Musically , the track was described as an electronic dance song with elements of R & B and pop music . Victoria Goldenberg from Purple Sky Magazine noted the songs " combination of grimy rhythms and staccato singing with the most melodic development of any track on the album . " Majority of the songs composition , including the use of synthesizers and keyboards , have been processed through a reverse filter . The use of drum machines was overlapped after the reverse filter was used on the demo version , and was mixed after its completion . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Eat You Up " received positive reviews from most music critics . Patrick Sullivan from AllMusic was positive in his review , labelling it a " catchily electro " song ; Sullivan highlighted the song as an album stand out track , while David Hickey from the same publication selected the song as one of BoA 's best career moments . Staff members from Idolator listed the songs parent album on their " 13 Great Pop Albums That Were Overlooked and Underrated In Their Time " list . Reviewing the album , Bradley Stern highlighted the song as one of the best tracks and stated that the material " deserves so , so much more than the dust it was dealt . " Victoria Goldenberg from Purple Sky Magazine selected the song as the album 's best track . A staff member from CD Journal was positive in their review ; They commended the commercial appeal for its North American release , and praised the mixture of R & B and electronic music musical elements . 
 A reviewer from Selective Hearing was positive in his review . They praised the production and BoA 's English pronunciation , stating " The production as a whole has a bit of en edge to it which is a slight departure from the typical BoA song but it works ... Her pronunciation is miles above the English in her older songs . Her vocals are as strong as ever and even when the vocal effects are laid on thick her voice doesn ’ t get drowned in them . You can still hear her clearly . " Overall , the reviewer felt it was a great debut track for the North American audience . Asian Junkie member Random J reviewed the song on his personal blog site , and his response was mixed . He felt the song was " boring " and " bog standard " upon its release . However , he stated , " But in comparison to the rest of the album , the song is actually rather decent and a highlight . A definite grower . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 " Eat You Up " was ranked at number six on Spin 's " 21 Greatest K @-@ Pop Songs of All Time " list ; they said , " Though “ Eat You Up ” didn ’ t take upon arrival , it ’ s hard to hear why a pop offering this muscular ( it ’ s got a chorus like a Clydesdale ) couldn ’ t put a dent on American charts right this second . " The song was recognized by Michael Fuhr , who wrote the book Globalization and Popular Music in South Korea : Sounding Out K @-@ Pop , as one of the first songs by a South Korean artist to be handled by Western and European artists . It was ranked at number 12 on <unk> 's Introduction to K @-@ Pop list . It was ranked at number six on Buzzfeed 's 21 Greatest Korean Pop Songs Ever list . It was ranked at number two on Allkpop 's seven greatest North American debuts . 
 = = Commercial response = = 
 Because of its digital release , it was ineligible to chart on Japan 's Oricon Singles Chart , making it BoA 's first single to not chart there since her 2005 single " Girls on Top " . Despite its online success throughout several digital retailers in North America , it has failed to chart on the US Billboard Hot 100 or the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart , or the Canadian Hot 100 . The single charted on US Dance Club Songs chart ; it debuted at number 42 and peaked at number 27 for the week ending December 27 , 2008 . It was present for seven weeks , before it reached its peak position of eight on the week end of February 7 . It fell to number 15 the following week end of February 14 . It slipped outside the top 20 on the week end of February 21 , and spent its final week at number 22 on the week end of February 28 . The song was present for 12 weeks on the chart . It remains her only top ten single on the Dance Club Songs chart , her only top ten in any US Billboard chart , and her longest charting single . As of May 2009 , Nielsen Soundscan confirmed that " Eat You Up " has sold over 28 @,@ 000 units in the United States . 
 = = Music videos = = 
 Two music videos were filmed for the single ; a North American version directed by American director Diane Martel , and an Asian video by Korean director Eun Taek Cha . Due to heavily speculation of its premiere , SM Entertainment revealed that they planned on using both music videos to promote the single under the titles Version A ( North American video ) and Version B ( Asian video ) . They said they never intended to use the Version A for Asia and Version B for North America , as they only labelled the videos as Version A and B. The North American video premiered in Japan on Mega Hits on October 17 , 2008 . Both videos were choreographed by Misha Gabriel and <unk> <unk> respectively . The background dancers for both music videos are Nick Bass , Kenny Wormald and Trent Dickens . 
 The North American video starts with BoA standing in front of a window in a high @-@ rise building , showing close @-@ ups of her . The verse starts with her and backup dancers dancing on a deserted planet , with inter cut scenes of her singing in the high @-@ rise building . The second verse shows her singing to the male lead interest , with inter cut scenes of her singing the second verse in a snow globe setting . She sings the bridge while dancing on the planet with her dancers with closeup scenes of her as well as a clip of the sun rising . The final chorus shows BoA dancing by herself with a wall of graffiti behind her as well as the deserted planet during the daytime as it is becoming more violent with winds blowing about . The video ends with her name BoA being displayed as well as the title of the song " Eat You Up " . 
 The Asian video starts with BoA turning on a radio which starts the song . BoA starts to sing the song whilst dancing in the hallway of a large house . At the start of the second verse , a girl is doing ballet dancing in front a group of judges . When the chorus starts again BoA and her dancers breaks down the door and proceeds to dance in front of the judges . Due to the intensity of their dancing , they make cracks in the floor and cause a picture to fall from where it once stood . During the bridge , BoA is dancing alone and then switches back and she is dancing by herself in the faces of the judges . During the second chorus , things starts to explode such as a clock that was hanging from the wall , the male judge 's glasses and books start to fall from a bookcase . As the chorus ends most of the remaining windows break , the chandelier falls and a fire starts , which turn on the sprinklers . The video ends with BoA and her dancers leaving , and the room is left in destruction . 
 Both music videos received positive reviews from critics . Jun Eun @-@ Young , writing in his book The Korean Wave , commended BoA 's sexual image and felt its American appeal made it quite " infamous " . A staff member from Rap Up was positive , commending BoA 's " impressive moves " . Lorna Fitzsimmons and John A. Lent , writing in their book Asian Popular Culture in Transition , commended BoA 's dance moves and found that the directors " collaboration with various US @-@ <unk> artists clearly shows SM Entertainment 's attempt to recreate an Americanized @-@ localized BoA in the hope of accommodating her US pop customers tastes more easily . " It was ranked at number seven on Eat Your Kim Chi 's Seven Best SM Entertainment music videos . 
 = = Promotion and legacy = = 
 A remix of the single featured American rapper Flo Rida , which was slated for a November 2008 release . However , after the single was leaked online , the release was scrapped . BoA performed the song at YouTube 's Tokyo Live concert , and performed in New York City on December 3 , 2008 , as well as the Jingle Ball at the Anaheim Honda Center on December 6 , 2008 . She headlined as a performer for the San Francisco Pride Festival on June 28 , 2009 alongside Solange Knowles and The <unk> . She also performed the song , alongside " Energetic " and " I Did It for Love " . from the self @-@ titled studio album . 
 BoA performed the song on her Best & USA concert tour . It was later included on the live DVD for her studio album Identity ( 2010 ) . The song was performed on BoA 's Identity tour in Asia , where it was included during the first segment . It included on the live album , released on August 18 , 2010 . The song was performed on Here I Am tour in South Korea , where it was included during the first segment . It was included on the live DVD , released on July 2 , 2015 . The song was performed on BoA 's Who 's Back concert tour in Japan , where it was included during the first segment . It included on the live album , released on February 25 , 2015 . The song was performed on BoA 's <unk> concert tour in Japan , where it was included during the first segment . 
 " Eat You Up " was included on BoA 's double album Best & USA ( 2009 ) . " Eat You Up " , and BoA herself , have both been recognized by publications as a factor towards Korean Wave ; a neologism that justifies an immigration of the culture of South Korea into Western market and society . But despite BoA 's attempts to break into the Western market , particularly North America , such attempts did not succeed . Esther Oh , a freelance journalist writing for CNN , stated that BoA and another South Korean recording artist Se7en moved back to South Korea after their U.S. music careers struggled to gain traction . Oh labelled their attempts as " complete flops " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of the promotional CD . 
 = = Charts and sales = = 
 = Broken ( Lifehouse song ) = 
 " Broken " is a song by American alternative band Lifehouse . It is the third single released from their fourth studio album , Who We Are ( 2007 ) . Lead singer Jason Wade was inspired to write the song after he visited a friend in Nashville who needed a kidney transplant . Originally released on June 18 , 2007 as the fifth track on Who We Are , the song was then edited for radio to give it more of a " rock " feel . The new radio version of the song was released via digital download on July 8 , 2008 . 
 The song received positive reviews from critics , as they applauded the use of instruments in the song . The song charted at number 83 and 84 in the United States and Canada respectively , and later charted in New Zealand at number 21 . The song 's music video premiered on VH1.com on September 16 , 2008 . It is set in the scene of a tunnel where Wade is walking away in the opposite direction of a car crash . Lifehouse has played " Broken " live on several occasions , including on Soundstage and at the 2011 Pinkpop Festival in the Netherlands . A seven @-@ minute extended version is often the final song in their concert setlist . 
 = = Background , release and composition = = 
 The song was written by Jason Wade , who originally finished the song in a hotel room after he visited a friend in Nashville who needed a kidney transplant . It was produced by John Fields and Scott Faircloff . In an interview with Alternative Addiction , Wade said , " Broken is the song that moves me the most . I wrote it in Nashville , about 6 months ago . I was in my hotel room at 3 AM , I was out there visiting a friend ... he ’ s really sick , he needs a kidney transplant . " Furthermore , he said , " That [ the ] song just kinda fell in my lap , and I really haven ’ t written a song like that since ' Hanging by a Moment ' where it just happened within a 15 minute time period . " Broken was released as the third single from the album on June 18 , 2007 . The song was then edited for radio to give it more of a " rock " feel and was released via digital download on July 8 , 2008 . 
 " Broken " was described as a pop @-@ rock song with influences of adult alternative . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , the song is set in common time with a slow tempo of 69 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of C major with Wade 's vocal range spanning from the low @-@ note of G3 to the high @-@ note of G5 . The song has a basic chord progression of F2 – Am7 – F2 – Am7 – F2 – Am7 – C / G – G. Alex Lai of Contactmusic.com described as a song " [ that ] features great string use and takes a tender tone " . A review from Alternative Addiction said that the song was one of the best Wade has ever written and noted " [ that ] the more you listen to it , the better it gets . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Broken " debuted at number 95 on the Billboard Hot 100 for the week of November 8 , 2008 . It fluctuated on the chart for several weeks , before reaching its peak of 83 . The song debuted at number 70 on the Billboard Digital Songs chart and peaked at number 38 after being on the chart for three non @-@ consecutive weeks . On the Billboard Adult Pop Songs chart , the song debuted at number 38 for the week of August 2 , 2008 and after moving around the chart for 32 consecutive weeks , the song eventually peaked at number seven . 
 The song also charted internationally . " Broken " debuted at number 92 on the Canadian Hot 100 for the week of January 26 , 2008 . On July 26 , 2008 , the song reappeared in the chart and peaked at number 84 . It debuted at number 40 on the New Zealand Singles Chart for the week of May 26 , 2008 . After being on the chart for 13 consecutive weeks , the song eventually peaked at number 21 . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The music video for " Broken " was filmed on August 24 , 2008 in Los Angeles and was directed by Kiefer Sutherland and Frank Borin . It first premiered on VH1.com on September 16 , 2008 . Wade and Sutherland then appeared together on the VH1 Top 20 Video Countdown on September 20 , 2008 to debut the music video on VH1 . In an interview with Ultimate Guitar , Wade described his experience with working with Sutherland by saying , " Whilst listening to the song a little while back , Kiefer came up with the video 's concept . Working with him was a great experience ; with all of the expressions and very moments , Kiefer was extremely hands on . With him handling direction , acting in the music video was extremely easy . " 
 The video starts with Wade in the drivers seat of a car , with the other members of Lifehouse in the car with him . The traffic is at a stand still in a tunnel , as a swarm of people have abandoned their vehicles and are walking through . Wade and the band members get out of the car , and begin walking in the opposite direction of the crowd to the other side of the tunnel . Wade pushes through the people , who are in a rush to get to the entrance of the tunnel and is constantly focused on his destination to get to the end . When he reaches the tunnel 's end , he sees the wreckage of a car crash with firefighters and paramedics cleaning up the mess . Wade then sees a girl observing what appears to be herself , dead inside one of the crashed car . He then looks to the left , and sees an old man observing himself , dead on the ground . As Wade looks into the other car , he sees himself , also seemingly dead . Upon this , he frantically runs back into the tunnel towards his car . He sees himself in the car with the band members , however everyone seems to be frozen as he bangs on the windows . Suddenly he 's inside the car again , and a police officer comes to the window to motion him to continue driving , since he is stopped in the middle of the tunnel for no apparent reason . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 Lifehouse performed " Broken " along with other songs on Nissan Live Sets on Yahoo ! Music in 2007 . On October 15 , 2007 , Lifehouse performed an acoustic version of the song on VH1 . In January 2008 , the band performed the song as part of a set list on the PBS show Soundstage . The song was also performed live at the 2011 Pinkpop Festival on June 11 , 2011 , as part of a set list of songs at the festival . 
 = = = Media appearances = = = 
 " Broken " was featured on General Hospital , Criminal Minds , Grey 's Anatomy and One Tree Hill . 
 The song was used in the trailer for The Time Traveler 's Wife . 
 = = = Cover versions = = = 
 Daniel Evans , a finalist on series 5 of The X Factor ( UK ) recorded a mellow contemporary version and was a standout track on his 2013 iTunes EP " Reflections " 
 In 2016 , Trisha Yearwood covered the song for the soundtrack to the U.S. version of The Passion and performed the song during the live broadcast for the special . Her version peaked at number 48 on the Billboard Hot Christian Songs chart , and # 20 on the Billboard A / C Chart 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Jason Wade 
 Production – Jason Wade , Jude Cole 
 Mixing – Thom Panunzio , Jack Joseph Puig , Florian Ammon , Keith Armstrong , Dean Nelson , Jeff Rothschild 
 Engineering – Florian Ammon , Scott Faircloff , Ross Hogarth , Will <unk> 
 Credits and personnel adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Battle record of Arthur Wellesley , 1st Duke of Wellington = 
 Field Marshal Arthur Wellesley , 1st Duke of Wellington , KG , GCB , <unk> , PC , FRS ( 1 May 1769 – 14 September 1852 ) , was one of the leading British military and political figures of the 19th century . Often referred to as " The Duke of Wellington " , he led a successful military career during the Napoleonic Wars . 
 Starting his career in 1787 as a commissioned officer in the infantry , before seeing his first action in the Flanders Campaign , Wellesley rose in rank by purchasing his first four commissions , as was common practice in the British Army for wealthy officers . His continued rise in status and fame thereafter was the result of his ability as a commander . 
 Between 1794 and 1815 Wellesley participated in a number of military campaigns where he achieved tactical , strategic , and decisive victories in India and across six countries of western Europe . He faced and defeated many of Napoleon 's marshals as the commander in chief of the Anglo @-@ Portuguese Army during the Peninsular War , but his best known battle was at Waterloo in 1815 where he led an Anglo @-@ Allied force to a decisive victory over Napoleon I. It was to be his last battle . 
 = = Military career = = 
 There is speculation by historians and biographers about how many battles Wellington actually participated in during his career . Military historian , Ian Fletcher , identifies twenty @-@ four major battles and sieges involving the British Army between 1808 and 1815 with Wellington in command of seventeen . Military historian , Mark <unk> , comments that " Wellington had fought in some twenty @-@ four battles and sieges prior to Waterloo " . Although this is easily contested , the precise number of battles may never be known . It can be established from records , dispatches and reports dating back to the events that he was present in at least fifty separate military actions , including an assortment of meeting engagements , pitched battles , sieges , skirmishes and minor engagements , throughout his career . He also ordered countless other remote engagements mostly whilst serving in the Napoleonic Wars , during which Britain played a major role in securing Europe against French occupation , between 1805 and 1815 . 
 = = = Commissions and promotions = = = 
 Wellington was gazetted ensign on 7 March 1787 , in the 73rd ( Highland ) Regiment of Foot , and became an aide @-@ de @-@ camp in October . He purchased his commission to lieutenant on 25 December 1787 , in the 76th Regiment . As a junior officer he transferred to the 41st Regiment soon after to avoid duty in the East Indies , and in June 1789 transferred again , to the 12th ( Prince of Wales 's ) Light Dragoons cavalry regiment . He obtained his commission to captain on 30 June 1791 , in the 58th ( <unk> ) Regiment , having served the regulation minimum of three years , and again to major on 30 April 1793 , in the 33rd ( First Yorkshire West Riding ) Regiment , having served six years . He purchased his final commission to lieutenant @-@ colonel on 30 September 1793 , at the age of 24 . From there on further promotion could only be attained through seniority , per Army Regulations . 
 In September 1794 , Wellesley experienced his first battle , against the French , at the Battle of <unk> with the 33rd . His promotion to colonel , on 3 May 1796 , came by seniority , and in June he was sent with the 33rd to India . In 1799 he fought in the Fourth Anglo @-@ Mysore War , commanding three victorious actions with the British East India Company . After winning the war , and serving as governor of Seringapatam and Mysore , Wellesley was promoted to major @-@ general on 29 April 1802 , although he did not receive the news until September . Whilst in India he wrote of his regiment " I have commanded them for nearly ten years during which I have scarcely been away from them and I have always found them to be the quietest and best behaved body of men in the army . " 
 Wellesley gained further success in India during the Second Anglo @-@ Maratha War of 1803 – 05 , and in 1806 Wellesley succeeded the Marquis Cornwallis as Colonel of the 33rd , which he held until 1813 . By 1807 , Napoleon 's attempt to prevent continental Europe from trading with Britain had resulted in all but Sweden , Denmark and Portugal closing their ports . In June 1807 , Napoleon pressured Denmark further , resulting in the British naval bombardment of Copenhagen and seizure of the Danish fleet to prevent it from falling into French hands . Wellesley 's brief role against Danish land forces at the Battle of Køge helped secure Denmark . Wellesley later disapproved of the bombardment , saying " we might have taken the capital with greater ease " . He was promoted to lieutenant @-@ general on 25 April 1808 , and in June was given command of 9 @,@ 000 men set to invade revolutionary Spanish America . But in 1807 , Napoleon had invaded Portugal , via Spain , intent on preventing its continued trade with Britain , but replaced the Spanish royal family with his own brother , Joseph Bonaparte , in May 1808 . In Madrid , the Spanish resisted the French occupation , leading the Portuguese to call on British support . In August 1808 , Wellesley entered the Peninsular War with 15 @,@ 000 men . 
 When the head of the British forces in the Peninsula , Sir John Moore , was killed in the Battle of Corunna in January 1809 , the British Army having been driven from the Peninsula in disarray , Wellington sent the Secretary of War a memo insisting that a British force of no less than 30 @,@ 000 British troops should be sent to defend and rebuild Portugal 's military strength . His proposal was approved and he re @-@ embarked to Lisbon on 16 April 1809 , where he was appointed to head of the forces in Portugal – a motion supported by the government and Prince Regent George IV , as Wellington did not hold seniority . 
 On 31 July 1811 , he was promoted to general , although it only applied in the Peninsula . His final promotion to field marshal came on 21 June 1813 , following his success at the Battle of Vitoria which had broken the remaining French hold in Spain . Wellington was awarded with a Marshal 's baton – partially designed by the Prince Regent himself – the first of its kind in the Britain Army . 
 = = = Allied commander = = = 
 Wellington was appointed head of all British forces from April 1809 , following the death of Sir John Moore , and due to the second invasion of Portugal by the French he remained to continue the Peninsular War for a further five years , engaging the French armies across Portugal , Spain , and north into France until Napoleon 's abdication in 1814 . He returned to Europe in 1815 appointed overall commander of the Anglo @-@ Allied forces of the Seventh Coalition , better known as the Hundred Days , following Napoleon 's escape from exile and attempt to retain power . 
 Despite many battles to his name , over twenty @-@ one years of duty , it would be shortly after the battle at Waterloo upon hearing of approximately 50 @,@ 000 casualties dead or dying that he wept , saying " I hope to God I have fought my last battle " . It had been a close victory at such great cost that it broke his fighting spirit , and marked the end of his long service overseas with a notable military career . He returned to British politics and became a leading statesman . He was appointed Master @-@ General of the Ordnance ( 1819 – 27 ) and Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Forces ( 1827 – 28 / 1842 – 52 ) , but Wellington did not fight again . 
 = = Generalship = = 
 Wellington 's understanding of logistics was to prove valuable in leading an expeditionary force against the French invasion of Portugal and Spain . He was adept at planning long marches through unknown territory , understanding that he not only had thousands of men to manage efficiently , but that a huge amount of supplies were required to adequately feed and sustain his army . Secure supply lines to the Portuguese coast were of vital importance if he was to maintain his ability to fight the French . 
 In April 1809 , Wellington returned to Portugal with 28 @,@ 000 British and 16 @,@ 000 Portuguese troops under his command – the French Army of Spain numbered 360 @,@ 000 . Despite many French troops having been dispersed to garrisons across Spain or located to protect supply and communication lines , even with the Portuguese Army and militia , and remnants of the Spanish Army and guerrillas to support him , Wellington faced overwhelming odds . Throughout the Peninsular War the number of soldiers enlisted in Britain rarely exceeded 40 @,@ 000 , though Wellington had some 57 @,@ 000 British soldiers under his command at Vitoria in 1813 . He also had the men of the King 's German Legion ( KGL ) and the British @-@ trained Portuguese Army under his command . Many British politicians were opposed to the war in Europe and favoured withdrawal , which hampered its will to muster a larger force to defeat Napoleon . This served in sharpening Wellington 's awareness that a defensive strategy was essential , initially , to ensure the British Army survived . At Waterloo , of his roughly 73 @,@ 000 strong army , around 26 @,@ 000 ( 36 percent ) were British , though this relatively low number was due to the majority of his Peninsular veterans being shipped elsewhere after Napoleon 's first abdication , many being sent to North America to serve in the final months of the war against the United States . 
 Wellington faced armies formed from the disbanded French Grande Armée , once an overpowering force , which having conquered Europe and expanded the French Empire had been led by Napoleon and his marshals since 1804 . It had been reformed into multiple smaller and more mobile armies from October 1808 . In the Peninsula the French were grouped into multiple armies , each operating chiefly in its own area , in order to secure Portugal and Spain . These forces were commanded by French marshals , senior generals chosen for elevation by Napoleon himself . Though these armies were under the <unk> command of Napoleon 's brother , King Joseph Bonaparte , the marshals commanded their armies with a high degree of independence . Wellington arrived in Lisbon in 1809 with an army composed mostly of volunteers . British troops were better trained than their French counterparts and were required to repeatedly practice firing with live rounds before encountering combat . Napoleon only personally campaigned in Spain once , between October 1808 and January 1809 , taking most of his Guard and many élite troops with him when he left . After the disastrous failure of the invasion of Russia , Napoleon weakened his forces in Spain in early 1813 by redeploying many veteran troops from the Peninsula to Germany to shore up his losses . Subsequently , many of the remaining troops became a second line in quality , experience and equipment – some new recruits were often not French . 
 Wellington 's army consisted of four combat arms : Infantry , cavalry and artillery . Engineers also played a valuable role in the Peninsula , such as the building of the Lines of Torres Vedras – a defensive line of forts built to protect Lisbon – and making preparations for any sieges throughout the war . Wellington 's main combat arm was his well @-@ trained infantry . He never had more than 2 @,@ 000 cavalry before 1812 and his cannons , although highly competent , were inferior to French guns in both number and quality . It was with this force that Wellington aimed to defend Portugal until he took to an offensive strategy in 1812 , beating the French at the Salamanca . He advanced on to Madrid , arriving on 12 August 1812 – Joseph Bonaparte had abandoned the capital after the defeat at Salamanca . 
 The Spanish government made Wellington commander @-@ in @-@ chief of all allied armies , providing an extra 21 @,@ 000 Spanish troops after Salamanca . Although not completely undefeated he never lost a major battle . His greatest defeat came at the Siege of Burgos in 1812 , where he had hoped to prevent French forces concentrating . After losing 2 @,@ 000 men and causing only 600 French casualties he was forced to raise the siege and retreat , calling it " the worst scrape I was ever in . " Retiring to winter quarters , where he received reinforcements that brought his regular army up to 75 @,@ 000 men , Wellington began his final offensive in June 1813 . He advanced north , through the Pyrenees , and into France itself . The French were no longer fighting to keep Spain but to defend their own border . 
 Ultimately , between the battles of <unk> ( August 1808 ) and Toulouse ( April 1814 ) , the war against the French lasted for six years , with Wellington finally managing to drive the French from the Iberian Peninsula . Shortly thereafter , on 12 April 1814 , word reached Wellington that Napoleon had abdicated on 6 April . The war on the Peninsula was over . Wellington and his army had marched over an estimated 6 @,@ 000 miles ( 9 @,@ 656 km ) and fought in many engagements through Portugal and Spain , the consequences of which helped bring the downfall of Napoleon , resulting in peace across Europe . 
 = = Battle record = = 
 There are a large number of battles attributed to Wellington . Although many leave the impression that he was present or in command at those actions , it was sometimes the case that he entrusted other officers to engage the enemy , such as at remote locations , and that he could not have attended them all in person . Similarly , Wellington was not usually in command of rear guard actions , during advances or retreats , despite his army engaging in them often . Engagements where the lack of his presence is absolutely certain , or where his position is unconfirmed by records and accounts , are not included in his battle record . 
 Key to opponent flags 
 Key to outcome 
 * Indicates a decisive victory 
 = Hurricane Manuel = 
 Hurricane Manuel ( pronounced / <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> / ) was a destructive tropical cyclone that brought widespread flooding across much of Mexico in September 2013 . The fifteenth named storm and seventh hurricane in the Eastern Pacific that year , Manuel originated from a strong area of low pressure south of Acapulco on September 13 . Within favorable conditions aloft , the storm intensified into a tropical storm as it tracked northward . The following day , Manuel curved westward and strengthened to a point just shy of hurricane intensity before making its first landfall at that intensity on September 15 . Due to interaction with land , the tropical storm quickly weakened , and its center dissipated over western Mexico on September 16 . However , the storm 's remnants continued to track northwestward into the Gulf of California , where they reorganized into a tropical cyclone the next day . Manuel regained tropical storm status on September 18 as it began to curve northeastward . Shortly thereafter , Manuel attained hurricane intensity , before making its final landfall just west of Culiacán at peak intensity . Over land , Manuel quickly weakened due to interaction with Mexico 's high terrain , and the storm dissipated early on September 20 . 
 Due to the impending threat of Manuel , several Mexican municipalities were put under disaster alerts . Upon making its first landfall , Manuel caused extreme flooding in southern Mexico . Property and agricultural damage as a result of the system was widespread , and roughly one million people were estimated to have been directly affected . In Guerrero , 97 people perished , including 18 in Acapulco . Seventy @-@ one others died due to a mudslide in La Pintada . In Guerrero alone , around 30 @,@ 000 homes were damaged and 46 rivers overflowed their banks . There , 20 @,@ 000 persons were evacuated to shelters . Statewide , repairs to damage from the storm totaled MXN $ 3 billion ( $ 230 million USD ) . Other impacts from Manuel spread as far east as the Isthmus of Tehuantepec , where 300 families were displaced . In the region , at least 11 @,@ 591 homes were destroyed by the floods . Meanwhile , the nation sustained additional impacts from Atlantic Hurricane Ingrid . 
 After its second landfall , additional floods occurred in several towns , and in Sinaloa over 100 @,@ 000 people were rendered homeless and four people died . As a result of Manuel 's impacts , 107 municipalities were declared disaster regions . Damage in Sinaloa totaled MXN $ 500 million ( US $ 37 @.@ 9 million ) . The Mexican Army was dispatched in several locations to aid in post @-@ tropical cyclone relief operations . Following the storm , looting in heavily impacted areas became commonplace , and as such government forces were also dispatched to prevent further looting . Overall , 123 people lost their lives in Mexico while damage exceeded MXN $ 55 billion ( US $ 4 @.@ 2 billion ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Manuel can be traced back to a tropical wave that left the African continent in late August . The wave entered the Caribbean Sea on September 5 , although the northern portion of the wave axis later developed into Hurricane Ingrid . On September 10 , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) remarked the potential for a low @-@ pressure area to develop off the southwest coast of Mexico during the subsequent few days , provided the system remained offshore . The next day , a low formed while it was nearly stationary , accompanied by scattered convection . Strong wind shear and proximity to land were expected to limit development , although conditions became more favorable on September 12 . On that day , the convection became better organized . At 1200 UTC on September 13 , the NHC initiated advisories on Tropical Depression Thirteen @-@ E , noting that the system had enough of a well @-@ defined circulation and convection . By that time , wind shear had diminished and warm waters were expected to allow intensification , and the main inhibiting factors for development were proximity to Mexico and association with the intertropical convergence zone . 
 Within a few hours of developing , the depression quickly intensified into Tropical Storm Manuel . By early on September 14 , an eye feature developed as rainbands increased . However , Manuel was embedded within a broad weather system that extended from the eastern Pacific across Mexico , which included Hurricane Ingrid in the Bay of Campeche on the Gulf of Mexico coast . The broad system , including Manuel , moved generally northward . By early on September 15 , Manuel had developed a central dense overcast , with a 17 mi ( 28 km ) wide eye in the center . Based on the structure and satellite @-@ intensity estimates , the NHC estimated Manuel attained secondary peak winds of 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) , just shy of hurricane status . The agency noted the potential for further strengthening into a hurricane , citing the warm waters , moist environment , and low shear . A break in the subtropical ridge to the north allowed the storm to initially continue generally to the north @-@ northeast , but after attaining its secondary peak , Manuel turned back to the northwest while accelerating . On September 15 , Manuel made landfall near Aquila in Michoacán as a high @-@ end tropical storm , though operationally , it was believed to have moved ashore near Manzanillo in Colima . Early on September 16 , the storm weakened into a tropical depression after the circulation became disrupted , although it continued dropping heavy rainfall . Later that day , the surface center dissipated over western Mexico . 
 The remnants of Manuel tracked northwest around a ridge situated over the southeastern United States , and late on September 16 , emerged over open waters . Despite only marginally favorable conditions , convection soon increased over the center . At 1800 UTC on September 17 Manuel regenerated into a tropical depression after redeveloping a well @-@ defined circulation . Furthermore , conditions favored additional strengthening as the system tracked slowly northwestward around a ridge , although the cyclone was expected to move onshore the Baja California Peninsula in a few days . Although the convection was initially ragged , Manuel re @-@ intensified into a tropical storm on September 18 . Later that day , an eye developed in the center of the increasingly organizing convection , and at 0000 UTC on September 19 , Manuel became a hurricane . It thus became the first eastern North Pacific tropical cyclone since records began in 1949 to make landfall in mainland Mexico , and later redevelop into a hurricane . The storm shifted more to the north , resulting in land interaction earlier than anticipated . Around 1200 UTC on September 19 , Manuel made landfall just west of Culiacán as a minimal hurricane . Moving over the high terrain of western Mexico , Manuel quickly weakened into a tropical storm . The circulation dissipated at 0000 UTC on September 20 , over the Sierra Madre Occidental mountain range . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 On the afternoon of September 13 , a tropical storm warning was issued from Acapulco to Lázaro Cárdenas , Michoacán . Thirty @-@ six hours later , a hurricane warning was issued from Lázaro Cárdenas to Manzanillo as the system was expected to become a hurricane prior to landfall . Later on <unk> 15 , a tropical storm watch was declared north of the hurricane warning . By early the next day , all watches and warnings were no longer in effect . In addition to the aforementioned watches and warnings , an " orange " alert was issued in southern Michoacán , and " yellow " ( moderate ) alert was in place for the rest of Michoacán and Guerrero . Lower levels of alerts were issued in Nayarit , Colima , Jalisco , Oaxaca , and in the southern portion of Sinaloa . Twenty @-@ five families were evacuated in Lázaro Cárdenas , and <unk> , Michoacán . On September 17 , all classes were suspended in Colima . 
 After regenerating into a tropical cyclone in the Gulf of California , a tropical storm watch was issued just north of Mazatlán as well as the southwestern portion of the Baja California Peninsula The next day , a hurricane watch was issued for the area south of Topolobampo . At 2100 UTC on September 18 , the hurricane watch was upgraded into a hurricane warning . Meanwhile , a tropical storm warning was designated south of the hurricane warning area to Mazatlan . On the evening of September 19 , all watches and warnings were discontinued , as Manuel had moved inland . 
 On September 18 , when the cyclone first threatened the state , 13 municipalities were placed on alert in Sonora . Along the Baja California Peninsula , seven ports were closed . The ports of Mazatlán , Cabo San Lucas , and San José del Cabo were closed for small craft and night interests . A " yellow " alert was issued for southern Baja California Sur while a " green " alert was issued for the northern portion of the state . In Sinaloa , classes were suspended . Prior to landfall , statewide 700 humans were evacuated including 365 residents from two municipalities were evacuated . Over 60 families were evacuated in Navolato . An " orange " alert was also activated for the state . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Around the same time as Manuel 's first landfall , Hurricane Ingrid made landfall along the eastern coast of the nation ; this marked the first time two tropical cyclones struck the nation within 24 hours since 1958 . Overall , economic impact exceeded MXN $ 55 billion ( US $ 4 @.@ 2 billion ) . Damage to roads alone totaled to $ 2 billion pesos ( $ 153 million 2013 USD ) . A total of 123 people were killed due to Hurricane Manuel , at least of 104 of which were direct . Roughly 59 @,@ 000 people were evacuated , including 39 @,@ 000 that sought shelter . Approximately 1 million people were directly affected by Manuel . 
 Hurricane Manuel brought extremely heavy rains for eight days over much of Mexico , especially over mountainous terrain , although this precipitation was aided by Ingrid as well as large @-@ scale southwesterly monsoonal flow . Numerous locations recorded more than 10 in ( 250 mm ) of rain . A peak storm total of 43 @.@ 6 in ( 1 @,@ 110 mm ) was measured in San Isidro , Guerrero . In nearby Acapulco , a secondary maximum of 17 @.@ 8 in ( 450 mm ) was recorded . Further north , in Michoacán , a statewide peak rainfall total of 22 @.@ 11 in ( 562 mm ) occurred . After making its second landfall , 18 @.@ 52 in ( 470 mm ) of precipitation fell in Culiacán and 15 @.@ 32 inches ( 389 mm ) was observed in nearby <unk> . 
 = = = Oaxaca = = = 
 In <unk> , Manuel damaged 10 homes and flooded a school . Offshore , one boat was reportedly missing . Along the Isthmus of Tehuantepec , 300 families were displaced from their homes . Roughly 5 @,@ 000 animals were killed by the storm . A total of 200 ha ( 490 acres ) of crop was destroyed in Oaxaca ; however , damage in the state was considerably less than in Guerrero . Within Oaxaca , 19 communities were isolated . Four people were killed in the state . Overall , 77 municipalities or 10 @,@ 000 people were directly affected by the floods . 
 = = = Guerrero = = = 
 At least 97 people were killed throughout Guerrero . Approximately 30 @,@ 000 dwellings were damaged , including 11 @,@ 591 houses sustained severe damage . Moreover , at least 11 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed 20 @,@ 000 people were evacuated to shelters . 12 @,@ 000 of which were evacuated to 47 shelters . Overall , 24 rivers flooded , at least 32 roads sustained damage , and four bridges collapsed . 
 In La Pintada , a remote fishing village of around 400 residents situated to the west of Acapulco , a mudslide occurred on September 14 , which within a few minutes , swept through the center of town . As such , many residents initially wandered throughout town in a state of panic and confusion ; it took two days for word of the mudslide to spread to the public . Throughout the village , 71 people were killed . Over half the town , including 20 homes , were demolished due to the mudslide . A total of 334 people were evacuated by police , though 30 elected to stay in the area until all the victims had been identified . Many surviving citizens of La Pintada were also hurt , including one seriously . 
 In the municipality of <unk> , a woman died after a collapse of a dwelling . In Chilpancingo , the capital of Guerrero , four people perished . Numerous trees were downed and power outages were reported . Additionally , the nearby Cerrito Rico dam nearly overflowed its banks . In the Tecpan municipality , four rivers overflowed their banks and six people died because of landslides . Many mountainous communities were isolated , thus making in difficult to receive aid . 
 = = = = Acapulco = = = = 
 The city of Acapulco sustained the worst damage from the storm ; the damage in Acapulco was described by the National Broadcasting Company as the " worst storm damage to hit Mexico in years " . There , 18 fatalities occurred , including one person that died when a wall collapsed . Nearby , six tourists perished in a car crash , including two minors . The crash also damaged two fences , a boat , and injured two people . Several homes were flooded in nearby neighborhoods of Acapulco when a nearby river overflowed its banks . Isolated incidents of vandalism were reported . Two mudslides were reported , resulting in the destruction of a home and the closure of a few roads . A family of six perished in Acapulco when a landslide demolished their home . At least 40 @,@ 000 tourists who spent the Mexican Independence Day in Acapulco were stranded since the terminal of the airport was underwater . Furthermore , the main roads out of the city were blocked by landslides . Even though by September 19 , the military had evacuated 10 @,@ 000 people via 100 flights to Mexico City , this process was difficult because the radar was not functioning . City @-@ wide , 13 @,@ 516 dwellings were damaged . 
 = = = Colima = = = 
 Although flooding was minor in Colima , a peak rainfall total of 144 mm ( 5 @.@ 7 in ) was measured in <unk> . Many families were evacuated . Several dams statewide reached their maximum capacity while numerous roads that led to the Manzanillo airport were closed . In <unk> , 50 families were evacuated when a river threatened to overflow its banks ; thirty others were taken to shelter in the rest of the state . A bridge collapsed in Villa de Alvarez . One man was killed in the state when he unsuccessfully attempted to cross a river . Four trees were brought down . Around 15 @,@ 000 ha ( 58 sq mi ) of banana crop was wiped out . In all , the municipalities of <unk> , Tecomán , Manzanillo , and <unk> <unk> sustained the worst effects from Manuel in the state . Manuel was considered the worst storm to hit the Mexican state since the 1959 Mexico hurricane . Damage in the state exceeded $ 479 million pesos ( $ 36 @.@ 8 million 2013 USD ) . Hurricane Patricia in 2015 caused $ 483 @.@ 2 million USD , though 
 = = = Jalisco = = = 
 Further north , minor flooding was reported in Jalisco . Statewide , four people were killed . A 26 @-@ year @-@ old man died after being swept away by in the village of <unk> while a 12 @-@ year @-@ old boy drowned after falling in a dam in the municipality of <unk> de Corona . Another man perished when he drove his car into a ravine in <unk> de Garcia Barragan . A total of 1 @,@ 500 people were evacuated from their homes . Classes were briefly cancelled in 588 schools , leaving over 40 @,@ 000 pupils home . Bridges collapsed in the Jalisco towns of <unk> de Torres and <unk> de <unk> . The worst hit areas in the state were the southern and coastal areas of the state , as well as the Guadalajara area , where flooding and landslides occurred in some neighborhoods . Through Jalisco , 56 municipalities sustained damage . 
 = = = Sinaloa = = = 
 Just before its second landfall , one fisherman was killed in <unk> . Another causality occurred when a person fell off a shrimp boat . A truck driver and a 5 year old also died , while the toddler 's mother was considered missing . The towns of <unk> , El Rosario , and Mazatlán sustained flooding . The municipalities of Angostura , Mocorito , Navolato , and Culiacán were flooded , resulting in modest damage . In Angostura , numerous people were trapped on the roofs of their houses . Coastal areas of Navolato were flooded while authorities reported 500 homeless ; hundreds of threes were toppled and power lines were disconnected . Parts of Mocorito were isolated due to overflow of the <unk> channel . About 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) of water and debris was reported in Mocorito . In Culiacán , minor flooding happened . Meanwhile , in <unk> , almost all roads were destroyed . Offshore , 24 boats were damaged . Throughout the state , 100 @,@ 000 people were rendered as homeless . A total of 3 @,@ 000 persons were evacuated to 62 shelters . In all , 70 communities were damaged by the tropical cyclone . Hurricane Manuel directly affected 146 @,@ 000 persons in 10 municipalities in the state . Damage in Sinaloa totaled $ 500 million pesos ( $ 37 @.@ 9 million 2013 USD ) . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 Elsewhere , in Michoacán , flooding was reported ; many people had to be rescued via air and two casualties were reported . In Durango , 42 homes were damaged , stranding 50 residents . While brushing the Baja California Peninsula , 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) waves were measured in La Paz in addition to winds of 26 mph ( 42 km / h ) . In Sinaloa , a peak rainfall total of 415 mm ( 15 in ) was recorded at Culiacan . After dissipating , the remnants of Manuel brought copious amounts of rainfall to a wide swath of Texas . The precipitation was further enhanced by deepening moisture from the Gulf of Mexico and an approaching cold front . In the Austin area , the rains resulted in localized flooding , forcing the closure of several low water crossings . A weather station in Camp Mabry recorded 2 @.@ 92 in ( 74 mm ) of rain on September 20 , making it a daily record for the station . Elsewhere , radar estimates indicated that as much as 8 in ( 200 mm ) may have fallen in localized areas in West Texas . In Kimble County , one road was closed due to flooding . Across central Arkansas , 2 – 4 @.@ 5 in ( 51 – 114 mm ) of rainfall was recorded . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 During the aftermath of the storm , a state of emergency was declared for Acapulco ; about 12 @,@ 000 items were airlifted to the <unk> overall . In all , 662 donation centers were opened across Guerrero . Damages repairs to Guerrero totaled to $ 3 billion MXN ( $ 123 million 2013 USD ) . The Minister of Economy granted an additional $ 100 million pesos to the devastated state . Furthermore , the Finance Ministry declared it had $ 12 billion pesos ( US $ 925 @.@ 60 million ) available in funds . In addition , the Mexican Red Cross collected and subsequently delivered cargo to the devastated area , especially Guerrero while also providing 400 @,@ 079 tons of aid . Local authorities also provided 29 @,@ 000 tons of personal and household items . The <unk> Sin <unk> distributed 2 @,@ 800 L ( 620 imp gal ) of water , food , and medicines in five shelters . A total of 87 million Euros ( $ 118 million USD ) , from the National Fund for Natural Disasters , were allocated to provide essential items such as food , mattresses , drinking water , and medicine . The Water Missions International provided water to about 20 @,@ 000 persons . World Vision Mexico disturbed plastic tends to help cover roofs for 80 families . Furthermore , the organization donated mosquito nets for 76 families . Grocery items such as rice , oil , sardines , sugar , salt , cookies , and beans were also provided . <unk> Mexico was one of the first organizations to help victims , and by early October , had helped 8 @,@ 000 people . 
 In Oaxaca , 42 municipalities were declared disaster areas . Throughout the state of Guerrero , 56 municipalities were declared a disaster area while 9 municipalities in Michoacán were declared a disaster zone . In all , 428 municipalities were designated as disaster areas and 155 emergencies declarations were issued due to both Ingrid and Manuel . State of emergencies were declared in Michoacan and 21 municipalities in Jalisco , though by mid @-@ October , they were lifted . 
 Thirty @-@ two damage assessment committees were installed to help estimate and analyze the cost of damage to public infrastructure . <unk> were established to help assess damage to schools , houses , and water supplies . Ten shelters were opened in both Chilpancingo and Acapulco . All survivors form the La Pintada mudslide were transported to a basketball gym in Acapulco , who were all provided with a $ 150 USD pension . Due to the closure of the commercial terminal of the Acapulco airport , special flights provided by Aeromexico and Interjet were used to deliver aid . 
 By September 18 , power services had been restored to the state of Guerrero . That day , gas and water services were revived in Acapulco . Emergency declarations were requested in Angostura and Navolato . Within 12 hours after its second landfall , power was retrieved to 26 @,@ 000 dwellings in Sinaloa . In La Pintada , the search process for victims was halted briefly due to the threat of another mudslide , but on September 20 , 100 rescuers resumed searching , who frequently had to dig through mud to recover bodies . 
 The Mexican government received criticism by the press for being under @-@ prepared for both Manuel and Ingrid . One newspaper said that the authorities underestimated both storms , due to a combination of a " lack of coordination " and " the distraction of the weekend ’ s independence @-@ related festivities . " Guerrero governor Angel Aguirre was criticized by many for attending a night @-@ long party and drinking when the storm first threatened the state . However , Aguirre later acknowledged political corruption , as well as the construction of homes and hotels in unsafe areas in a televised speech . Consequently , the Mexican Senate requested an investigation in the amount of preparation that occurred . 
 To cope with relief efforts , Mexican Army troops and marines forces helped families whose homes were flooded . Additionally , the military provided 60 tonnes ( 132 @,@ 275 lb ) of food supplies and 8 @,@ 000 litres ( 1 @,@ 760 imp gal ) of water to the city . A military airbase was installed to transport aid via air . Authorities rushed to clean rocks and other debris from two highways in order to liberate Acapulco from isolation . The disaster also resulted in panic buying at supermarkets . Looters were spotted in Acapulco many angry victims robbed shops , homes , luxury hotels , and apartments . Marines were posted outside stores to prevent further theft . Mexico President Enrique Pena Nieto toured through most of the devastated areas , promising to rebuild La Pintada and Acapulco . On May 26 , 2014 , La Pintada was re @-@ opened , with 125 new homes . 
 Because of the severe damage caused by the storm in Mexico , the name Manuel was later retired by the World Meteorological Organization , and will never be used again for an Eastern Pacific hurricane . It will be replaced with Mario for the 2019 Pacific hurricane season . 
 = Goito @-@ class cruiser = 
 The Goito class was a group of four torpedo cruisers built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in the 1880s . The members of the class were Goito , Montebello , Monzambano , and Confienza . They were among the first torpedo cruisers built for the Italian fleet , and were built to improve on the previous vessel , Tripoli . Experimental ships , the four Goito @-@ class vessels varied in their dimensions , machinery , and armament , though all were comparable in terms of capabilities , having a top speed of 17 to 18 knots ( 31 to 33 km / h ; 20 to 21 mph ) and carrying an armament of four or five 14 @-@ inch ( 360 mm ) torpedo tubes . 
 All four ships spent the majority of their time in service with the main Italian fleet , alternating between active duty for training exercises and reserve status . In 1897 , Goito was converted into a minelayer and Montebello became a training ship for engine room personnel . Monzambano and Confienza were simply sold for scrap in 1901 . Goito laid defensive minefields after Italy entered World War I in 1915 , but otherwise did not see action during the war . The two surviving vessels remained in the Italian fleet until 1920 , when they too were broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 The first three members of the Goito class was designed by Engineering General Inspector Benedetto Brin , while Confienza was designed by Engineering Director Giacinto <unk> . Brin had previously designed several classes of very large ironclad battleships , including the Caio Duilio and Italia classes , but by the 1880s , he had begun to embrace the ideas of the Jeune École , which emphasized small , fast , torpedo @-@ armed vessels that could damage or destroy the much larger battleships at a fraction of the cost . The four <unk> were similar to the preceding cruiser Tripoli , the first torpedo cruiser Brin designed . As these were among the initial designs prepared by the Italian navy , they were experimental ; Brin and <unk> used different hull shapes for all four vessels and fitted them with a variety of propulsion systems and armament . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 As a result of their experimental nature , the ships of the Goito class varied slightly in size . They all were 70 meters ( 229 ft 8 in ) long at the waterline and 73 @.@ 4 m ( 240 ft 10 in ) long overall , but their beam varied from 7 @.@ 88 to 8 @.@ 05 m ( 25 ft 10 in to 26 ft 5 in ) and their draft ranged from 3 @.@ 04 to 3 @.@ 6 m ( 10 ft 0 in to 11 ft 10 in ) . The ships were built with steel hulls . They displaced 756 to 856 metric tons ( 744 to 842 long tons ; 833 to 944 short tons ) normally and 955 to 974 metric tons ( 940 to 959 long tons ; 1 @,@ 053 to 1 @,@ 074 short tons ) at full load . They had a crew of between 105 and 121 . 
 The first three ships had similar propulsion systems that consisted of three steam engines , each driving a single screw propeller . Goito and Monzambano had double @-@ expansion engines , while Montebello had more advanced triple @-@ expansion engines . Confienza instead used a two @-@ shaft configuration for her double @-@ expansion engines . Steam for the engines was supplied by coal @-@ fired locomotive boilers ; Goito and Montebello had six boilers , while Monzambano and Confienza had four . The boilers for Goito and Monzambano were trunked into two funnels , Montebello had three , and Confienza only had one . 
 Exact figures for the first three ships ' performance have not survived , but they could steam at a speed of about 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) from 2 @,@ 500 to 3 @,@ 180 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 860 to 2 @,@ 370 kW ) . Confienza , with only two screws , had a top speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) from 1 @,@ 962 ihp ( 1 @,@ 463 kW ) . In 1894 , Goito had her center engine and screw removed and her original boilers replaced with oil @-@ fired models . With these changes , her engines were capable of producing 17 @.@ 2 knots ( 31 @.@ 9 km / h ; 19 @.@ 8 mph ) from 2 @,@ 521 ihp ( 1 @,@ 880 kW ) . The ships had a cruising radius of 1 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 000 km ; 1 @,@ 300 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . They were originally fitted with a fore @-@ and @-@ aft sailing rig to supplement the steam engines , though they were later removed . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 The primary armament for the Goito class was five 14 in ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes , though Montebello only had four tubes . The ships also carried a variety of light guns . Goito was equipped with five 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) 40 @-@ caliber ( cal . ) guns , two 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 20 @-@ cal. guns , and three 37 mm revolving Hotchkiss guns , all mounted singly . Montebello had six 57 mm guns and two 37 mm guns , and Monzambano carried only six 57 mm guns . Confienza was the only vessel to carry a medium @-@ caliber gun , a single 4 @.@ 7 in ( 120 mm ) 32 @-@ cal. gun mounted on her bow . She also carried six 57 mm guns and two 37 mm guns . The ships were protected with an armored deck that was 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) thick . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 All four Goito @-@ class cruisers served with the main Italian fleet for the majority of their careers . This time was spent either laid up in the reserve component of the fleet , or activated for yearly training maneuvers . These frequently gamed a French attack on Italy , as in the case of the 1888 maneuvers — for which only Goito had been completed in time to participate — that simulated a French attack on La Spezia , or the 1893 maneuvers , which tested a French attack on Naples . In 1898 , Monzambano and Montebello participated in a rare deployment for members of the class when they were assigned to the Levant Squadron that was tasked with patrolling the eastern Mediterranean Sea . Throughout this period , the ships of the class would either be distributed among the divisions of the fleet , as with the case of the annual training maneuvers , or stationed together while in reserve status ; in 1895 , for example , the four <unk> were assigned to the 2nd Maritime Department , along with Tripoli and the eight Partenope @-@ class torpedo cruisers . 
 In 1897 , Goito was withdrawn from front @-@ line service and converted in a minelayer , with a capacity for 60 naval mines in place of her torpedo tubes . Montebello remained on active duty until 1898 , when she was converted into a training ship for engine room personnel , and was re @-@ boilered with <unk> and oil @-@ fired equipment from several manufacturers in 1903 . Confienza and Monzambano were the last members of the class to leave active service , being stricken from the naval register on the same day , 26 August 1901 and sold for scrapping . Goito continued to take part in fleet maneuvers as late as 1907 in her minelayer configuration , and both she and <unk> remained in the Regia Marina 's inventory during the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 and World War I. Neither ship saw action in either conflict , though Goito laid defensive minefields in the Adriatic Sea after Italy entered World War I in 1915 . Montebello was eventually stricken on 26 January 1920 , and Goito followed her to the breakers ' yard on 15 March . 
 = USS Arkansas ( BB @-@ 33 ) = 
 USS Arkansas ( BB @-@ 33 ) was a dreadnought battleship , the second member of the Wyoming class , built by the United States Navy . She was the third ship of the US Navy named in honor of the 25th state , and was built by the New York Shipbuilding Corporation . She was laid down in January 1910 , launched in January 1911 , and commissioned into the Navy in September 1912 . Arkansas was armed with a main battery of twelve 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns and capable of a top speed of 20 @.@ 5 kn ( 38 @.@ 0 km / h ; 23 @.@ 6 mph ) . 
 Arkansas served in both World Wars . During the First World War , she was part of Battleship Division Nine , which was attached to the British Grand Fleet , but she saw no action during the war . During the interwar years , Arkansas performed a variety of duties , including training cruises for midshipmen and goodwill visits overseas . 
 Following the outbreak of World War II , Arkansas conducted Neutrality Patrols in the Atlantic prior to America 's entry into the war . Thereafter , she escorted convoys to Europe through 1944 ; in June , she supported the invasion of Normandy , and in August she provided gunfire support to the invasion of southern France . In 1945 , she transferred to the Pacific , and bombarded Japanese positions during the invasions of Iwo Jima and Okinawa . After the end of the war , she ferried troops back to the United States as part of Operation Magic Carpet . Arkansas was expended as a target in Operation Crossroads , a pair of nuclear weapon tests at Bikini Atoll in July 1946 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Arkansas was laid down on 25 January 1910 at New York Shipbuilding in Camden , New Jersey . She was launched on 14 January 1911 , after which fitting @-@ out work was effected . The ship was completed by September 1912 , and was commissioned into the US Navy on 17 September at the Philadelphia Navy Yard , under the command of Captain Roy C. Smith . The ship was 562 ft ( 171 m ) long overall and had a beam of 93 ft 3 in ( 28 m ) and a draft of 28 ft 6 in ( 9 m ) . She displaced 26 @,@ 000 long tons ( 26 @,@ 000 t ) as designed and up to 27 @,@ 243 long tons ( 27 @,@ 680 t ) at full combat load . The ship was powered by four @-@ shaft Parsons steam turbines and twelve coal @-@ fired Babcock & Wilcox boilers rated at 28 @,@ 000 shp ( 21 @,@ 000 kW ) , generating a top speed of 20 @.@ 5 kn ( 38 @.@ 0 km / h ; 23 @.@ 6 mph ) . The ship had a cruising range of 8 @,@ 000 nmi ( 15 @,@ 000 km ; 9 @,@ 200 mi ) at a speed of 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The ship was armed with a main battery of twelve 12 @-@ inch / 50 caliber Mark 7 guns guns in six twin Mark 9 gun turrets on the centerline , two of which were placed in a superfiring pair forward . The other four turrets were placed aft of the superstructure in two superfiring pairs . The secondary battery consisted of twenty @-@ one 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) / 51 caliber guns mounted in casemates along the side of the hull . The main armored belt was 11 in ( 279 mm ) thick , while the gun turrets had 12 in ( 305 mm ) thick faces . The conning tower had 11 @.@ 5 in ( 292 mm ) thick sides . 
 = = = Modifications = = = 
 In 1925 , Arkansas was modernized in the Philadelphia Navy Yard . Her displacement increased significantly , to 26 @,@ 066 long tons ( 26 @,@ 484 t ) standard and 30 @,@ 610 long tons ( 31 @,@ 100 t ) full load . Her beam was widened to 106 ft ( 32 m ) , primarily from the installation of anti @-@ torpedo bulges , and draft increased to 29 ft 11 @.@ 75 in ( 9 m ) . Her twelve coal @-@ fired boilers were replaced with four White @-@ Forster oil @-@ fired boilers that had been intended for the ships cancelled under the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty ; performance remained the same as the older boilers . The ship 's deck armor was strengthened by the addition of 3 @.@ 5 in ( 89 mm ) of armor to the second deck between the end barbettes , plus 1 @.@ 75 in ( 44 mm ) of armor on the third deck on the bow and stern . The deck armor over the engines and boilers was increased by 0 @.@ 75 in ( 19 mm ) and 1 @.@ 25 in ( 32 mm ) , respectively . Five of the 5 @-@ inch guns were removed and eight 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) / 50 caliber anti @-@ aircraft guns were installed . The mainmast was removed to provide space for an aircraft catapult mounted on the Number 3 turret amidships . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Following her commissioning , Arkansas participated in a fleet review on 14 October 1912 for President William Howard Taft . The ship took Taft aboard that day for a trip to Panama to inspect the Panama Canal , which was still under construction . Arkansas began her shakedown cruise after delivering Taft and his entourage to the Canal Zone . On 26 December , she returned to the Canal Zone to take Taft to Key West , Florida . After completing the voyage , Arkansas was assigned to the Atlantic Fleet and participated in fleet maneuvers off the east coast of the United States . Arkansas 's first overseas cruise , to the Mediterranean Sea , began in late October 1913 . While there , she stopped in several ports , including Naples , Italy on 11 November , where the ship celebrated the birthday of King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy . 
 In early 1914 , an international incident with Mexico culminated in the American occupation of Veracruz . Arkansas participated in the occupation , contributing four companies of naval infantry , which amounted to 17 officers and 313 enlisted men . The American forces fought their way through the city until they secured it . Two of Arkansas 's crewmen were killed in the fighting , and another two , John Grady and Jonas H. Ingram , received the Medal of Honor for actions during the occupation . The ship 's detachment returned on 30 April ; Arkansas remained in Mexican waters until she departed on 30 September to return to the United States . While stationed in Veracruz , the ship was visited by Captain Franz von Papen , the German military attaché to the United States and Mexico , and Rear Admiral Christopher Cradock , the commander of the British 4th Cruiser Squadron , on 10 May and 30 May 1914 , respectively . 
 Arkansas arrived in Hampton Roads , Virginia on 7 October , after which she took part in exercises for a week . She then sailed to the New York Navy Yard for periodic maintenance . After repairs were completed , the ship steamed down to the Virginia Capes area for training maneuvers . She returned to the New York Navy Yard on 12 December for additional maintenance . The repairs were completed within a month , and on 16 January 1915 , Arkansas departed for the Virginia Capes for exercises on 19 – 21 January . The ship then steamed down to Guantánamo Bay , Cuba for exercises with the fleet . Arkansas returned for training off Hampton Roads on 7 April , followed by another maintenance period at the New York Navy Yard , starting on 23 April . 
 On 25 June , the repairs were complete , and Arkansas departed for Newport , Rhode Island for torpedo practice and tactical maneuvers in Narragansett Bay , which lasted through late August . On 27 August , the ship was back in Hampton Roads . There , she participated in exercises off Norfolk through 4 October . She then returned to Newport , where she took part in strategic maneuvers on 5 – 14 October . She went to the New York Navy Yard on 15 October , where she was drydocked for extensive maintenance . The work was completed by 8 November , when Arkansas returned to Hampton Roads . The ship was in Brooklyn for repairs on 19 November , which lasted until 5 January 1916 , when she steamed south to the Caribbean Sea , via Hampton Roads , for winter exercises . She steamed to Mobile Bay on 12 March for torpedo practice , before returning to Guantánamo Bay . She returned to the New York Navy Yard on 15 April for an overhaul . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 The United States declared war on Germany on 6 April 1917 , joining the Allied Powers in World War I. Arkansas was at the time assigned to Battleship Division 7 stationed in Virginia . The ship patrolled the east coast and trained gun crews for the next fourteen months . The ship was sent to Britain in July 1918 to relieve Delaware , which had been assigned to operate with the Grand Fleet in the 6th Battle Squadron since December 1917 . Arkansas departed the United States on 14 July ; while approaching the Royal Navy base in Rosyth , the battleship fired on what was thought to be a periscope from a German U @-@ boat . The destroyers escorting Arkansas dropped depth charges but did not hit the alleged submarine . Arkansas arrived in Rosyth on 28 July and joined the rest of Battleship Division 9 stationed there . For the remainder of the conflict , Battleship Division 9 operated as the 6th Battle Squadron of the Grand Fleet . 
 On 11 November , the Armistice with Germany that ended World War I went into effect . The terms of the Armistice required Germany to intern the bulk of the High Seas Fleet in Scapa Flow , under the supervision of the Grand Fleet . Arkansas and the other American warships participated in the internment ; a combined fleet of 370 British , American , and French warships met the High Seas Fleet in the North Sea on 21 November and escorted it into Scapa Flow . On 1 December , Battleship Division 9 was detached from the Grand Fleet , after which Arkansas departed the Firth of Forth for the Isle of Portland . She then went to sea to meet the ocean liner George Washington , which was carrying President Wilson to Europe . Arkansas and the other American naval forces in Europe escorted the ship into Brest , France on 13 December . After completing the escort , Arkansas sailed for New York City , arriving on 26 December , where the fleet participated in a Naval Review for Secretary of the Navy Josephus Daniels . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war period = = = 
 The peacetime training regimen for Arkansas consisted of individual training , an annual fleet maneuver , and periodic maintenance in drydock . She also participated in gunnery and engineering competitions . After returning to the United States , Arkansas went into drydock at the Norfolk Navy Yard for an extensive overhaul . She then rejoined the fleet to conduct training exercises off Cuba , after which she crossed the Atlantic , bound for Europe . She reached Plymouth on 12 May 1919 , and then took weather observations on 19 May and later served as a reference vessel to guide the Navy Curtiss NC flying boats flying from Trepassey Bay , Newfoundland to Europe . After completing that task , she steamed to Brest on 10 June and picked up Admiral William S. Benson , the Chief of Naval Operations , and his wife . Arkansas carried them back to New York after Benson was finished at the Peace Conference in Paris , arriving on 20 June . 
 On 19 July , Arkansas departed Hampton Roads to join her new assignment , the US Pacific Fleet , bound for San Francisco . She arrived 6 September , via the Panama Canal , and embarked Secretary and Mrs. Josephus Daniels . She took Daniels and his wife to Blakely Harbor , Washington on 12 September , and the following day , participated in a naval review for President Wilson . On 19 September , Arkansas entered the Puget Sound Navy Yard for a general overhaul . She returned to the fleet in May 1920 for training operations off California . The Navy adopted a hull classification system , and on 17 July , assigned Arkansas the designation " BB @-@ 33 " . She steamed to Hawaii in September , the first time she went to the islands . In early 1921 , Arkansas visited Valparaíso , Chile , where she was received by President Arturo Alessandri Palma ; the ship 's crew manned the rail to honor the Chilean president . 
 In August 1921 , Arkansas returned to the Atlantic Fleet , where she became the flagship of the Commander , Battleship Force , Atlantic Fleet . Throughout the 1920s , Arkansas carried midshipmen from the United States Naval Academy on summer cruises . She went on a tour of Europe in 1923 ; there , on 2 July , she stopped in Copenhagen and was visited by King Christian X of Denmark . She also stopped in Lisbon and Gibraltar . Another midshipmen cruise to Europe followed in 1924 ; the cruise for the next year went to the west coast of the United States . On 30 June 1925 , she stopped in Santa Barbara , California to assist in the aftermath of the 1925 Santa Barbara earthquake . Arkansas , the destroyer McCawley , and the patrol craft PE @-@ 34 sent detachments ashore to help the police in Santa Barbara . They also established a temporary radio station in the city . 
 After returning from the 1925 cruise , the ship was modernized at the Philadelphia Navy Yard . She had her twelve old coal @-@ fired boilers replaced with four oil @-@ fired models , which were trunked into a single larger funnel . She also had more deck armor added to protect her from plunging fire , and a short tripod mast was installed in place of the aft cage mast . The modernization was completed in November 1926 , after which Arkansas conducted a shakedown cruise in the Atlantic . She returned to Philadelphia , where she ran acceptance trials before she could rejoin the fleet . On 5 September 1927 , Arkansas was present for ceremonies unveiling a memorial tablet honoring the French soldiers and sailors who died during the Yorktown campaign in 1781 . 
 She returned to training cruises in May 1928 , when she took a crew of midshipmen into the Atlantic along the east coast , along with a trip down to Cuba . In June , she participated in a join Army @-@ Navy coast defense exercise as part of the hostile " attacking " fleet . In early 1929 , Arkansas cruised in the Caribbean and near the Canal Zone . She returned to the United States in May 1929 for an overhaul in the New York Navy Yard . After emerging from drydock , she conducted another training cruise , this time to European waters ; she spent time in the Mediterranean and visited Britain . Arkansas returned to the United States in August and operated with the Scouting Fleet off the east coast . The training cruise for 1930 again went to Europe . She called in Cherbourg , France , Kiel , Germany , Oslo , Norway , and Edinburgh , Scotland . The cruise continued through the end of the year , and in 1931 , the battleship visited Copenhagen , Greenock , Scotland , and Cadiz and Gibraltar in Spain . By September , the ship had crossed the Atlantic , and she stopped in Halifax , Nova Scotia . In February , Arkansas participated in Fleet Problem XII . During the maneuvers , she served as Admiral Arthur L. Willard 's flagship , and she was " sunk " by a submarine . A month later , on 21 – 22 March , Arkansas conducted exercises with the carriers Lexington and Saratoga . 
 Arkansas participated in the Yorktown Sesquicentennial celebrations in October 1931 , marking the 150th anniversary of the Siege of Yorktown . She embarked President Herbert Hoover and his entourage on 17 October and took them to the exposition , and returned them to Annapolis on 19 – 20 October . She then went into drydock for an extensive refit in the Philadelphia Navy Yard , which lasted until January 1932 . During this time , she was under the command of George <unk> . Arkansas was transferred to the Pacific Fleet after completing the refit ; while en route , she stopped in New Orleans to participate in the Mardi Gras celebration . She operated off the west coast through early 1934 , at which point she was transferred back to the Atlantic Fleet , where she served as the flagship of the Training Squadron . 
 She conducted another training cruise to Europe in the summer of 1934 . She stopped in Plymouth , England , Nice , France , Naples , Italy , and Gibraltar . She returned to Annapolis in August , after which she steamed to Newport . In Newport , President Franklin Delano Roosevelt reviewed the battleship from the yacht Nourmahal . While there , Arkansas entered one of her cutters in a competition with the British cruiser HMS Dragon for the Battenberg Cup , and the City of Newport Cup ; Arkansas 's cutter won both races . The ship carried the 1st Battalion , 5th Marines to Culebra for a Fleet Landing Exercise No. 1 ( FLEX 1 ) in January 1935 . She returned to training cruise duties in June , and she again took the midshipmen to Europe . Among the stops were Edinburgh , Oslo , Copenhagen , Gibraltar , and Funchal on the island of Madeira . She disembarked the Naval Academy crew in August and began another training cruise to Halifax , this time for Naval Reservists , the following month . A refit was conducted in October after completing the cruise . 
 Arkansas participated in the FLEX 2 at Culebra in January 1936 , and then visited New Orleans during Mardi Gras . She went to Norfolk for a major overhaul that lasted through the spring of 1936 . After completing the overhaul , the ship took another midshipmen crew to European waters ; she called in the ports of Portsmouth , England , Gothenburg , Sweden , and Cherbourg and returned to Annapolis in August . As in the previous year , she conducted another Reserve training cruise , and then went into drydock for an overhaul in Norfolk . The remainder of the 1930s followed a similar pattern ; in 1937 the midshipmen training cruise went to Europe , but the 1938 and 1939 cruises remained in the western Atlantic . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 At the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 , Arkansas was moored at Hampton Roads , preparing to depart on a training cruise for the Naval Reserve . She departed to transport seaplane mooring and aviation equipment from Norfolk to Narragansett Bay , where the Navy planned to set up a seaplane base . While in Newport , Arkansas picked up ordnance for destroyers and brought it back to Hampton Roads . After returning to Virginia , Arkansas was assigned to a reserve force for the Neutrality Patrols in the Atlantic , along with her sister Wyoming , the battleships New York and Texas and the carrier Ranger . On 11 January 1940 , Arkansas , New York , and Texas left for fleet maneuvers off Cuba . She underwent an overhaul at Norfolk between 18 March and 24 May . After emerging from her refit , Arkansas conducted another midshipman training cruise , along with Texas and New York , to Panama and Venezuela . In late 1940 , she conducted three Naval Reserve training cruises in the Atlantic . 
 Over the months that followed , the United States gradually edged toward war in the Atlantic . The ship was assigned to the escort force for the Marines deployed to occupy Iceland in July 1941 , along with New York , two cruisers , and eleven destroyers . The task force deployed from NS Argentia , Newfoundland on 1 July and were back in port by the 19th . Starting on 7 August 1941 , Arkansas went on a neutrality patrol in the mid @-@ Atlantic that lasted a week . After returning to port , Arkansas traveled to the Atlantic Charter conference with President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill , which took place onboard HMS Prince of Wales . While there , the US Under Secretary of State , Sumner Welles , stayed aboard Arkansas . She conducted another neutrality patrol between 2 and 11 September . 
 Arkansas was anchored in Casco Bay , Maine , on 7 December 1941 , when Japan attacked Pearl Harbor and brought the United States into the war . A week later , she steamed to <unk> , Iceland , and returned to Boston on 24 January 1942 . She conducted training maneuvers in Casco Bay to prepare her crew for convoy escort duties . On 6 March , she arrived at Norfolk to begin overhaul . The secondary battery was reduced to six 5 @-@ inch / 51 cal guns . Also , 36 40 mm Bofors anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns ( in quadruple mounts ) and 26 20 mm Oerlikon AA guns were added , the experience at Pearl Harbor having made the US Navy aware of the need for increased light AA armament . The 3 @-@ inch / 50 caliber gun armament was also increased from 8 guns to 10 . Work lasted until 2 July , after which time Arkansas conducted a shakedown cruise in Chesapeake Bay ; she then proceeded to New York , arriving on 27 July . There , she became the flagship of Task Force 38 ( TF 38 ) , the escort for a convoy of twelve transports bound for Scotland . The convoy arrived in Greenock on 17 August , and Arkansas returned to New York on 4 September . 
 Arkansas again escorted a convoy to Scotland , returning to New York by 20 October . Thereafter , convoys were sent to North Africa to support the invasion of North Africa . Arkansas covered her first such convoy , along with eight destroyers , on 3 November . She returned to New York on 11 December , where she went into dock for another overhaul . On 2 January 1943 , Arkansas departed New York to conduct gunnery training in Chesapeake Bay . Back in New York by 30 January , the ship 's crew prepared for a return to convoy escort duty . She escorted two convoys to Casablanca between February and April , before returning to New York for yet another period in dry @-@ dock , which lasted until 26 May . Arkansas returned to duty as a training ship for midshipmen based at Norfolk . She resumed her convoy escort duties after four months , and on 8 October , she steamed to Bangor , Northern Ireland . She remained in Ireland through November , and departed on 1 December , bound for New York . After arriving on the 12th , Arkansas went into dock for more repairs , and then returned to Norfolk on 27 December . The ship escorted another convoy bound for Ireland on 19 January 1944 before returning to New York on 13 February . Another round of gunnery drills followed on 28 March , after which Arkansas went to Boston for more dry @-@ dock period . 
 On 18 April , Arkansas departed for Ireland , where she trained for shore bombardment duties , as she had been assigned to the shore bombardment force in support of Operation Overlord , the invasion of northern France . She was assigned to Group II , along with Texas and five destroyers . Her float plane artillery observer pilots were temporarily assigned to VOS @-@ 7 flying Spitfires from RNAS Lee @-@ on @-@ Solent ( HMS Daedalus ) . On 3 June , she left her moorings , and on the morning of the 6th , took up a position about 4 @,@ 000 yd ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) from Omaha Beach . At 05 : 52 , the battleship 's guns fired in anger for the first time in her career . She bombarded German positions around Omaha Beach until 13 June , when she was moved to support ground forces in <unk> les Bains . On 25 June , Arkansas bombarded Cherbourg in support of the American attack on the port ; German coastal guns straddled her several times , but scored no hits . Cherbourg fell to the Allies the next day , after which Arkansas returned to port , first in Weymouth , England , and then to Bangor , Wales on 30 June . 
 On 4 July , Arkansas departed Ireland for the Mediterranean Sea ; she reached Oran , Algeria on 10 July , before proceeding on to Taranto , arriving on 21 July . There , she joined the support force for Operation Dragoon , the invasion of southern France . Again , the battleship provided gunfire support to the amphibious invasion along with six Allied cruisers , starting on 15 August . The bombardment lasted for two more days , after which she withdrew , first to Palermo and then to Oran . Arkansas then returned to the United States , arriving in Boston on 14 September , where she underwent another refit that lasted until early November . She then steamed to California via the Panama Canal , and spent the rest of the year conducting training maneuvers . On 20 January 1945 , Arkansas departed California for Pearl Harbor , and then proceeded to Ulithi to join the fleet in preparation for the amphibious assault on Iwo Jima . There , she was assigned to Task Force 54 , which included five other battleships , four cruisers , and sixteen destroyers . 
 On 16 February , Arkansas was in position off Iwo Jima , and at 06 : 00 , she opened fire on Japanese positions on the island 's west coast . The bombardment lasted until the 19th , though she remained off the island throughout the Battle of Iwo Jima , ready to provide fire support to the American marines ashore . She departed on 7 March , bound for Ulithi , and arrived on 10 March , where she rearmed and refueled in preparation for the next major operation in the Pacific War , the invasion of Okinawa . She departed Ulithi on 21 March and arrived off Okinawa four days later , when she began the bombardment along with the rest of Task Force 54 . The soldiers and marines went ashore on 1 April , and Arkansas continued to provide gunfire support over the course of 46 days throughout the Battle of Okinawa . Kamikazes repeatedly attacked the ship , though none struck her . She left the island in May , arriving in Guam on the 14th . She then proceeded to Leyte Gulf on 12 June , arriving four days later . There , she was assigned to Task Group 95 @.@ 7 , along with Texas and three cruisers . She remained in the Philippines until 20 August , when she departed for Okinawa , arriving in Buckner Bay on the 23rd , by which time Japan had surrendered , ending World War II . Over the course of the war , Arkansas earned four battle stars . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 After the end of the war , Arkansas <unk> in Operation Magic Carpet , the repatriation of American servicemen from the Pacific . She took around 800 men back to the United States , departing on 23 September , and reaching Seattle , Washington on 15 October . She made another three Magic Carpet trips between Pearl Harbor and the continental United States to ferry more soldiers home . During the first months of 1946 , Arkansas lay at San Francisco . In late April , the ship got underway for Hawaii . She reached Pearl Harbor on 8 May , and departed Pearl Harbor on 20 May , bound for Bikini Atoll , earmarked for use as target for atomic bomb testing in Operation Crossroads . On 1 July , Arkansas was exposed to an air burst in ABLE , but survived with extensive shock damage to her upperworks , while her hull and armored turrets were lightly damaged . 
 On 25 July , the battleship was sunk by the underwater nuclear test BAKER at Bikini Atoll . <unk> by air , the shock was " transmitted directly to underwater hulls " , and Arkansas , only 250 yards from the epicenter , appeared to have been " crushed as if by a tremendous hammer blow from below " . It appears that the wave of water from the blast capsized the ship , which was then hammered down into the shallow bottom by the descent of the water column thrown up by the blast . Decommissioned on 29 July , Arkansas was struck from the Naval Vessel Register on 15 August . The ship lies inverted in about 180 feet of water at the bottom of Bikini Lagoon and there are many pictures of the wreck on the National Park Service website . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Mexican Service Medal 
 Victory Medal with " Atlantic Fleet " and " Grand Fleet " clasps 
 American Defense Service Medal with " FLEET " clasp and " A " device 
 American Campaign Medal 
 European @-@ African @-@ Middle Eastern Campaign Medal with two battle stars 
 Asiatic @-@ Pacific Campaign Medal with two battle stars 
 World War II Victory Medal 
 Navy Occupation Medal with " ASIA " clasp 
 = Tales of Magic and Mystery ( magazine ) = 
 Tales of Magic and Mystery was a pulp magazine which published five monthly issues from December 1927 to April 1928 . It was edited by Walter Gibson , and published a mixture of fiction and articles on magic . It is now mainly remembered for having published a story by H.P. Lovecraft . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Tales of Magic and Mystery was published by Personal Arts , which was owned by International Correspondence Schools ( ICS ) . In 1927 ICS had had success with a mailing titled " Secrets of the Ages " . Bill Kofoed and Walter Gibson suggested a magazine to appeal to the same audience as the mailing , and Haddon Press , also owned by ICS , provided cost estimates that seemed very positive . Kofoed checked the numbers with Haddon Press and was convinced they were accurate , and the magazine was launched in December of that year with Gibson as editor . 
 The contributors included H. P. Lovecraft , with " Cool Air " , and Frank Owen , with three stories : " The Yellow Pool " , " The Black Well of Wadi " , and " The Lure of the <unk> Hand " . A story by Miriam Allen <unk> , " Ghostly Hands " , also appeared , though it later became apparent that it had been printed without permission or payment . Gibson later recalled that the Kofoed obtained some of the submissions from stories submitted to Brief Stories , which Kofoed edited ; science fiction historian Mike Ashley suggests that Gibson may not have been fully aware of how the submissions were obtained , and believes it is possible that some of the other material printed was also not paid for . 
 The magazine is now extremely rare , and has become a collectors ' item because of the connection to H. P. Lovecraft . Most of Lovecraft 's short fiction appeared in Weird Tales , and it is possible that he submitted to Tales of Magic and Mystery because of his interest in Harry Houdini — he had ghost @-@ written a story for Houdini a couple of years earlier , and Gibson was a friend of Houdini 's . In addition to fiction the magazine published articles about magic , all of which were written by Gibson , some under pen @-@ names . The articles included one on bullet @-@ catching ( illustrated by Earle K. Bergey ) , one on mysterious people , and a series on Houdini . Overall , the magazine focused more on magic than on fiction , but the stories chosen were readable . The weird and occult fiction genre was dominated by Weird Tales in the years before World War II ; Tales of Magic and Mystery and Ghost Stories were the only two magazines to attempt to rival Weird Tales in the years before 1931 , when Strange Tales of Mystery and Terror appeared . 
 After the fifth issue , it became apparent that the reason the cost estimates had appeared so strong was that Haddon Press had forgotten to include the cost of the paper . This made it apparent that the magazine was losing money rapidly , and Tales of Magic and Mystery was immediately shut down . Some of the manuscripts in inventory at the time the magazine was closed down may have been printed in True Strange Stories , another short @-@ lived magazine which Gibson edited the following year . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 Walter B. Gibson was the editor of all five issues of Tales of Magic and Mystery , which remained in saddle @-@ stapled pulp format throughout its run . It was priced at 25 cents , and each issue was 64 pages long . 
 In 2004 , Wildside Press released a facsimile edition of the February 1928 issue , and in 2013 , Adventure House released a facsimile of the March 1928 issue . 
 = Washington State Route 305 = 
 State Route 305 ( SR 305 ) is a 13 @.@ 50 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 21 @.@ 73 km ) state highway in the U.S. state of Washington , primarily serving Bainbridge Island in Kitsap County and connecting it to Seattle in King County via the Seattle – Winslow Ferry . The highway travels north through Bainbridge Island and leaves the island on the Agate Pass Bridge into the Kitsap Peninsula . SR 305 continues northwest through Poulsbo , intersecting SR 307 and ending at the SR 3 freeway . The highway was created during the 1964 highway renumbering and was preceded by Secondary State Highway 21A ( SSH 21A ) , established in 1937 . The ferry , part of the highway since 1994 , is served by the Jumbo Mark II class MV Tacoma and MV Wenatchee and operates on a 35 @-@ minute crossing time . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 305 begins at Colman Dock in Seattle and travels on the Seattle – Winslow Ferry to Bainbridge Island . The ferry , operated by Washington State Ferries ( WSF ) , is on a 8 @.@ 6 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 13 @.@ 8 km ) route and is served by the Jumbo Mark II class MV Tacoma and MV Wenatchee , traveling at a speed of 18 knots ( 21 mph ) for a 35 @-@ minute crossing . The ferries depart from Colman Dock and travel northwest across Elliott Bay and Puget Sound to Winslow , part of the city of Bainbridge Island . As of Spring 2013 , WSF operates the ferry on 24 weekday crossings and 22 weekend crossings , as a $ 8 @.@ 00 toll for adult passengers is charged with prepaid Wave2Go cards being accepted . 
 SR 305 leaves the ferry in Winslow on Bainbridge Island and travels north through the island 's interior , passing Bainbridge High School before turning northwest near Murden Cove . The highway travels over Agate Pass on the truss cantilever Agate Pass Bridge , listed on the National Register of Historic Places . SR 305 continues northwest along the coast of Liberty Bay , passing through <unk> and entering Poulsbo to intersect the southern terminus of SR 307 . The highway continues northwest to end at a partial cloverleaf interchange with the SR 3 freeway north of the city . 
 Every year , the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2011 , WSDOT calculated that between 5 @,@ 300 and 27 @,@ 000 vehicles per day used the highway , mostly in Poulsbo . The Seattle – Winslow ferry was the busiest ferry in the Puget Sound , carrying 6 @.@ 119 million passengers and 1 @.@ 194 million vehicles in 2012 . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 305 was established during the 1964 highway renumbering as a replacement for SSH 21A , which traveled 13 @.@ 45 miles ( 21 @.@ 65 km ) between the Winslow ferry dock and Primary State Highway 21 ( PSH 21 ) northwest of Poulsbo . SSH 21A originally began at the Port Blakely ferry dock when it was codified in 1937 , but was moved north to Winslow in 1949 . The highway connected Bainbridge Island to the Kitsap Peninsula via a car ferry that began in the 1920s and was replaced by the 1 @,@ 229 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 375 m ) Agate Pass Bridge after it opened on October 2 , 1950 with a 35 @-@ cent toll . The bridge , which cost $ 1 @.@ 4 million , had its tolls removed in October 1951 after it was paid for by a bond issue passed by the Washington State Legislature . The highway was later straightened in segments in the late 1950s by the Department of Highways before becoming SR 305 and being re @-@ codified in 1970 . SR 305 was extended north to the newly built SR 3 freeway and east on the Seattle – Winslow Ferry to Seattle in 1994 . No major revisions to the highway have occurred since 1994 ; however , WSDOT widened SR 305 in 2009 within Poulsbo and installed high @-@ occupancy vehicle lanes ( HOV lanes ) for use during peak hours . 
 Regular boat service between Bainbridge Island and Seattle began with passenger and freight @-@ carrying steamboats . The Eagle Harbor Transportation Co. operated various steamers on the route , including the Bainbridge and Chippewa , until WSF was created in 1951 to manage most ferries in the Puget Sound . WSF operated the MV <unk> and steam ferry San Mateo on the route , with the MV <unk> used on extra runs . The 2 @,@ 500 @-@ passenger and 160 @-@ car Super class MV ' <unk> and MV <unk> replaced the older ferries in 1968 . The Jumbo Mark II class MV Tacoma and MV Wenatchee were built and placed on the route in 1997 and 1998 respectively to serve growing traffic on the older ferries . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Lo Mejor de ... Selena = 
 Lo Mejor de ... Selena ( English : The Best of ... Selena ) is a double disc compilation album by American singer Selena . It was released posthumously in the United States on March 31 , 2015 by EMI Latin and Universal Music Latin Entertainment . The album was released after the commercial and chart success of Enamorada de Ti ( 2012 ) , which featured several Latin music acts lending their voices for the remix album . The recording features six number one United States Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart singles by the singer — " Buenos Amigos " , " Donde Quiera Que Estés " , " Amor Prohibido " , " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " , " No Me Queda Más " , " Fotos y Recuerdos " , and the U.S. Billboard Latin Pop Airplay chart single " I Could Fall in Love " . 
 The album debuted and peaked at number two on the U.S Billboard Top Latin Albums . A year after its release , the recording peaked at number one on the Latin Pop Albums chart , giving Selena her first number one album in four years . Lo Mejor de ... Selena also debuted and peaked at number 102 on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart , her highest charting album since 1999 's All My Hits / Todos Mis Exitos . The album has since been charting on the Top Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums chart ( for 65 weeks ) since its release consecutively , earning the singer the award for Top Latin Albums Artist of the Year , Female along with another nomination at the 2016 Billboard Latin Music Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 In March 1995 , American Tejano music singer Selena was shot and killed by Yolanda Saldívar , her friend and former manager of the singer 's boutiques . The impact of the singer 's death had a negative impact on Latin music , her genre — which she catapulted it into the mainstream market — suffered and its popularity waned following Selena 's death . She continued to be the last remaining Tejano recording artist to appear on the United States Billboard 200 chart since 2000 . In the fall of 2011 , Chilean record producer Humberto Gatica and Capitol Latin senior vice president Sergio Lopes had the idea of turning Selena 's songs into duets in popular music genres . Mexican singers Cristian Castro , Samo , American singers Don Omar , Carlos Santana , Selena Gomez ( who was named after Selena ) , and Spanish singer Juan Magan lent their voices for the duet / remix style album . The project — named Enamorada de Ti — was released in April 2012 and debuted and peaked at number one on the U.S. Top Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums chart . Lo Mejor de ... Selena followed the commercial success of Enamorada de Ti , released on the twentieth anniversary of Selena 's death . It was also made available for digital download and released as a double disc . 
 = = Songs = = 
 Lo Mejor de ... Selena contains six Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart number one singles by the singer — " Buenos Amigos " , " Donde Quiera Que Estés " , " Amor Prohibido " , " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " , " No Me Queda Más " , " Fotos y Recuerdos " , and " I Could Fall in Love " — the latter of which peaked at number one on the Billboard Latin Pop Airplay chart . " Como la Flor " , Selena 's signature song , and " La Carcacha " are both originally on 1992 's Entre a Mi Mundo . " Como la Flor " launched her on the Latin music scene , according to journalists . The song was acclaimed by music critics and was credited as Selena 's first solo number one single in popular culture despite Billboard 's official record of the single peaking at number six . " No Debes Jugar " , the lead single from 1993 's Live ! , and " La Llamada " made the album cut . Sally Jacobs of the Boston Globe called " No Debes Jugar " one of " her cumbia signature songs " and " most popular cumbia song [ s ] " . " Si Una Vez " peaked at number four on the Regional Mexican Songs chart , while " El Chico del Apartamento 512 " failed to gain any chart success . " Techno Cumbia " peaked at number four on Billboard 's Latin charts . 
 The second disc of Lo Mejor de ... Selena contains ten English @-@ language tracks beginning with " My Love " — written by Selena in 1989 . The duet with David Byrne on " God 's Child ( Baila Conmigo ) " , the English version of " Donde Quiera Que Estes " called " Wherever You Are " , and " Dreaming of You " were originally on Selena 's posthumous planned crossover album Dreaming of You ( 1995 ) . The latter song became the singer 's highest charting Billboard Hot 100 single , peaking at number 22 on the chart . It also remains the best @-@ selling single of Selena 's musical career , selling over 250 @,@ 000 digital units . The contemporary R & B ballad " Missing My Baby " , the remix version of " My Love " called " Don 't Throw Away My Love " , and the movie soundtrack songs " Is It the Beat ? " and " Disco Medley " , were also added to the second disc of the album . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 Mexican newspaper El Diario de Yucatán called Lo Mejor de ... Selena an album " that is a recollection of the singer " . Terra Chile also called the album a way to " remember and honor the legacy of [ Selena ] " and said that her " departure still lives in the hearts of her fans . " The newspaper called the addition of " Disco Medley " on Lo Mejor de ... Selena as having a " new voice on [ the ] classics " of " I Will Survive " , " Funkytown " , and " On the Radio " . 
 The album debuted and peaked at number two on the U.S. Top Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums chart on the week ending on April 18 , 2015 . The set also debuted and peaked at number 102 on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart , becoming her fifteenth album to appear on the chart and her highest charting album since 1999 's All My Hits / Todos Mis Exitos . On the Top Latin Albums chart , Lo Mejor de ... Selena also became Selena 's fifteenth top 10 album on the chart , selling just over 2 @,@ 000 units in its first week of availability . Due to the anniversary of Selena 's death , her total albums sold 9 @,@ 000 units a 267 % increase from the previous week and her digital songs grew 167 % to 26 @,@ 000 copies sold on the same week . Seven of her songs charted simultaneously on the Latin Digital Songs chart , the most Selena had ever placed since Billboard began monitoring digital sales for Latin singles in 2010 . As of March 2016 , Lo Mejor de ... Selena continued to chart on the Top Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums chart for a total of 50 consecutive weeks . Lo Mejor de ... Selena finished 2015 as the fourteenth best @-@ selling Latin album and the eighth best @-@ selling Latin pop album . In Mexico , the album peaked at numbers 44 and 18 on the Mexican Albums chart and Mexican Spanish Albums chart , respectively . In the week ending April 23 , 2016 and following the twenty @-@ first anniversary of Selena 's death , Lo Mejor de ... Selena peaked at number one on the Latin Pop Albums chart . The album dethroned Juan Gabriel 's Los Dúo , Vol . 2 ( 2015 ) album , and was the first number one album by the singer in four years . 
 Selena has been posthumously nominated for two Billboard Latin Music Awards for Top Latin Albums Female Artist of the Year and Latin Pop Albums Solo Artist of the Year as a result of Lo Mejor de ... Selena 's chart success . After the 2016 Billboard Latin Music Awards nominations were announced , Spanish @-@ language channel Telemundo called Selena a " role model for Latinos " and that her " voice continues to echo and touch the hearts of audiences , regardless of gender . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 <unk> , Kenneth L. ( 2013 ) . Cowboys , Cops , Killers , and Ghosts : Legends and Lore in Texas . University of North Texas Press . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 532 @-@ 8 . 
 Shaw , Lisa ( 2005 ) . Pop Culture Latin America ! : Media , Arts , and Lifestyle . ABC @-@ CLIO . ISBN 1 @-@ 85109 @-@ 504 @-@ 7 . 
 Miguel , Guadalupe San ( 2002 ) . Tejano Proud : Tex @-@ Mex Music in the Twentieth Century . Texas A & M University Press . ISBN 1 @-@ 58544 @-@ 188 @-@ 0 . 
 = Hurricane Beta = 
 Hurricane Beta was a compact , but intense tropical cyclone that impacted the southwestern Caribbean Sea in late October 2005 . Beta was the twenty @-@ fourth tropical or subtropical storm , fourteenth hurricane , and seventh and final major hurricane of the record @-@ breaking 2005 Atlantic hurricane season . On October 21 , a developing tropical wave entered the eastern Caribbean Sea and spawned Tropical Storm Alpha the following day . As the wave entered the southwestern Caribbean , convection redeveloped and on October 26 , the system spawned another low pressure area which developed into Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ six . The depression intensified into a tropical storm the next morning and was named Beta . By the morning of October 28 , the storm intensified into a hurricane , the fourteenth of the season . Beta underwent rapid intensification for several hours to attain its peak intensity with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) on October 30 . The storm began to deteriorate before landfall , weakening to Category 2 status as it crossed the Nicaraguan coastline . Rapid weakening followed landfall , and the storm dissipated early the next morning . 
 Due to the storm 's proximity to Central America , several countries were placed on alert and began allocating supplies for a potential disaster . Several hurricane watches and warnings were raised for the small Colombian island of Providencia as well as the Nicaragua and Honduras coastlines . An estimated 150 @,@ 000 people were evacuated from dangerous regions in Nicaragua and more than 125 @,@ 000 more were evacuated in Honduras . 
 As a tropical storm , Beta produced heavy rains over northern Panama , amounting up to 3 inches ( 76 mm ) , which caused several mudslides as well as three fatalities . On October 29 , the storm passed over Providencia Island , caused significant damage to structures , and injured 30 people . In Honduras and Nicaragua , over 1 @,@ 000 structures were damaged by the storm , hundreds of which were destroyed . Ten people were initially feared dead after their boat went adrift during the storm . However , a Panamanian vessel rescued the men after drifting in the water for several hours . Rains in Honduras totaled to 21 @.@ 82 in ( 554 mm ) and 6 @.@ 39 in ( 162 mm ) in Nicaragua . Six people were killed in Nicaragua as a result of the storm and the cost to repair damages exceeded 300 million córdoba ( $ 14 @.@ 5 million USD ) . Overall , Beta was responsible for nine fatalities and more than $ 15 @.@ 5 million in damage across four countries . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On October 21 , a westward @-@ moving tropical wave entered the Caribbean Sea . The wave quickly developed organized convection , indicating that a possible low pressure area had developed along the wave . Continued development led to the formation of Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ Five ( which would later be named Alpha ) . The wave continued to move towards the west , producing minimal shower and thunderstorm activity . Once in the southwestern Caribbean , the wave slowed , and convection gradually redeveloped on October 25 . The next day , with continued organization , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) stated that a tropical depression could develop in the following day or two . At around 18 : 00 UTC , the NHC determined that Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ Six had developed about 105 miles ( 170 km ) north of the central cost of Panama . 
 Located within an area of weak vertical wind shear and warm sea surface temperatures , the depression intensified . By 06 : 00 UTC the next morning , the depression was upgraded to a tropical storm and given the name Beta by the NHC . Beta was slowly moving towards the north @-@ northwest in response to a mid @-@ tropospheric shortwave trough over the Gulf of Mexico and mid @-@ tropospheric ridge to the northeast of the storm . Deep convection developed near the center of circulation , signifying a developing system . With favorable conditions for development , Beta was forecast to intensify into a hurricane before making landfall in central Nicaragua . An eyewall rapidly developed around the center of circulation , fuelling further intensification . With the formation of an eyewall and the compact size of the storm , rapid intensification was anticipated . By the end of October 27 , maximum sustained winds around the center of Beta were estimated at 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . An increase in wind shear caused a minor disruption of the storm 's structure , briefly preventing strengthening . 
 After maintaining its intensity for 30 hours , the shear weakened , and Beta began to intensify again . Around 00 : 00 UTC on October 29 , the storm passed near Providencia Island with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) , just below hurricane @-@ status . At this time , the cyclone began to turn towards the west . Beta intensified into a hurricane several hours later , with winds of 80 mph ( 140 km / h ) , as an eye became pronounced on infrared satellite images . Located south of a weakness within the subtropical ridge , the hurricane 's motion slowed to a westward drift . With the formation of an eye , the chances of rapid intensification reached 62 % , and the storm could possibly become a major hurricane — a hurricane with winds of 111 mph ( 178 km / h ) or higher — before landfall . Beta continued to intensify as convection deepened around the 11 @.@ 5 mi ( 18 @.@ 5 km ) wide eye , strengthening into a Category 2 hurricane with winds of 105 mph ( 170 km / h ) . 
 After undergoing a brief period of rapid intensification from 18 : 00 UTC on October 29 – 06 : 00 UTC on October 30 , the hurricane reached its peak intensity as a Category 3 hurricane with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 962 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 42 inHg ) . The storm also began to turn towards the south @-@ southwest as it reached its peak intensity and its maximum size , with tropical storm @-@ force winds extending out 60 mi ( 95 km ) from the center . However , as it neared the coast , cloud tops around the eye began to warm , signifying weakening . Around 12 : 00 UTC on October 30 , Beta made landfall in central Nicaragua near La Barra del Rio Grande with winds of 105 mph ( 170 km / h ) . After making landfall , the hurricane weakened to a tropical storm , with winds decreasing to 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) , as the structure of the storm began to deteriorate . Early on October 31 , Beta weakened to a tropical depression and dissipated a few hours later over the mountains of central Nicaragua . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 = = = Panama , Costa Rica and El Salvador = = = 
 Although Panama and Costa Rica were not in the direct path of Hurricane Beta , storm warnings were issued for the two countries on October 27 as heavy rains , up to 20 in ( 508 mm ) , from the outer bands of Beta were possible . The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Panama alerted officials in Nicaragua , Honduras , Costa Rica , El Salvador and Guatemala about the possible impacts from Beta . Civil defence officials in El Salvador declared a pre @-@ emptive alert due to the possibility of rain @-@ triggered mudslides from the outer bands of Beta . 
 = = = Colombia = = = 
 Early on the morning of October 27 the Colombian Government issued a tropical storm warning for the islands of San Andrés and Providencia . Hours later , a hurricane watch was issued . By late morning , both advisories were replaced by a hurricane warning . The island did not have much time to prepare for Hurricane Beta , being struck only three days after its formation . Of its 5 @,@ 000 residents all stayed to weather the storm but , about 300 of them evacuated wooden homes on the beach for sturdier brick shelters inland on the island 's mountains . The neighbouring island of San Andrés initiated a moratorium on all outdoor activities as the storm 's outer bands reached the island on October 29 . Officials evacuated about 700 people , 500 tourists and 200 residents on San Andrés to temporary shelters . The Colombian Government provided 8 tons ( 7 @.@ 2 tonnes ) of food and emergency supplies , including 1 @,@ 100 sheets , 300 hammocks , and 350 cooking kits to the island . 
 = = = Nicaragua = = = 
 Immediately upon the storm 's formation on October 26 , the Government of Nicaragua issued a tropical storm warning for its entire eastern coast . The next day the tropical storm warning was supplemented by a hurricane watch . On October 29 , Nicaraguan President Enrique Bolaños declared a maximum " red alert " for the country 's eastern coast . Despite the governments efforts , only 10 @,@ 000 people were evacuated from the Caribbean @-@ side coast and the majority secured themselves in their homes . However , the national army reported that 150 @,@ 000 people were evacuated prior to the storm 's arrival . The government pre @-@ positioned food , medicines , clothing , emergency supplies , and army rescue specialists in the most vulnerable areas to provide relief immediately after the storm passed . Classes were canceled in all of the country 's schools and businesses experienced surging demand for hurricane supplies . 
 In the city of Puerto Cabezas , population 60 @,@ 000 , meteorologists expected a direct hit . Local authorities announced a curfew to prevent looting . The government also cut off electricity throughout the small coastal city to prevent injuries . Evacuations were limited , and the most vulnerable of the population weathered the storm in poorly constructed shelters . To be able to respond to an emergency following Beta , the government of Nicaragua requested relief supplies for 41 @,@ 866 families which would last 15 days . These supplies consisted of 98 @,@ 000 lb ( 44 @,@ 452 kg ) of cereals , 628 @,@ 600 lb ( 285 @,@ 128 kg ) of beans , 628 @,@ 600 lb ( 285 @,@ 128 kg ) of corn , 125 @,@ 7200 lb ( 57 @,@ 025 kg ) of rice , 44 @,@ 500 lb ( 20 @,@ 184 kg ) of sugar , 171 @,@ 600 lb ( 77 @,@ 836 kg ) of salt , 4 @,@ 929 gal ( 18 @,@ 658 L ) of cooking oil , 324 @,@ 900 lb ( 147 @,@ 372 kg ) of milk and 21 @,@ 264 blankets . 
 = = = Honduras = = = 
 On October 29 , Honduras President Ricardo Maduro declared a State of National Emergency as Beta was forecast to bring heavy rains up to 12 in ( 300 mm ) . Three departments , Gracias a Dios , Colon , Olancho and El Paraiso , were placed under Red Alert and mandatory evacuations were put in place . The departments of Atlántida , Yoro , Comayagua , Francisco Morazán and Choluteca were placed under Yellow Alert and a Green Alert was in place for the rest of the country . The Local Emergency Management Agency opened its regional and municipal offices to conduct preparative activities . An emergency radio network was set up to alert the public of any emergencies . The government designated several public schools as shelters for the affected population . In the Francisco Morazán Department , the Tegucigalpa Municipal Emergency Committee opened 73 shelters . Extensive cleaning and garbage disposal was conducted , especially around creeks , rivers , and sewers . The National Armed Forces were placed in strategic areas and were on stand @-@ by for search and rescue operations once the storm passed . About 3 @,@ 306 tons ( 3 @,@ 000 tonnes ) of food was reported to be available and local travels in the country were suspended . In Tegucigalpa , the emergency committee called for the evacuation of 125 @,@ 000 people from the most vulnerable areas of the capital . About 8 @,@ 000 others were evacuated from 50 communities along the Nicaragua border due to the threat of flooding . A hurricane alert was put in place for areas north of the Nicaragua border but was cancelled on October 30 after Beta turned towards the southeast . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Hurricane Beta was responsible for nine fatalities and roughly $ 15 @.@ 5 million ( 2005 USD ) in damage across four countries . 
 = = = Panama = = = 
 Heavy rains for the outer bands of Hurricane Beta , amounting up to 3 in ( 76 mm ) , caused flooding and landslides in Panama . At least 256 people were affected by the storm and 52 homes were damaged ; however , the cost of the damages is unknown . At least 50 hectares ( 124 acres ) of rice fields were flooded across the country . One person , a young girl , was killed after the boat she was on sank amid rough seas . Both her parents escaped the sinking ship . Two other people drowned after being swept away by the swollen Chagres River and two others were reported missing . 
 = = = Providencia Island = = = 
 Hurricane Beta reached Providencia Island , on October 29 , 2005 . Rainfall from the storm were estimated over 12 in ( 304 mm ) . Roofs were damaged all over the island , and the island 's main communications tower was knocked over . A total of 1 @,@ 660 homes were damaged by the storm throughout the island , leaving 1 @.@ 4 million Colombian peso ( 2005 COP ; $ 681 USD ) in repair costs . This disrupted fixed @-@ line telephone service and as the island has no cellular telephone service , it caused a total cessation of communication with the mainland . Beta 's arrival on the island was accompanied by a seven @-@ foot storm surge , which damaged beaches , coastal houses and roads , and washed out a tourist footbridge . Coral reefs around the island were , for the most part , untouched , as only 1 percent of the coral sustained minor damage . Minor effects were also found around areas of sea grass . Beaches all around the island lost an average of 9 @.@ 8 ft ( 3 m ) of sand due to erosion . Thirty people were injured and 913 families , a total of 3 @,@ 074 people , were affected during Hurricane Beta 's passage over the island . 
 = = = Nicaragua = = = 
 Heavy rains from Hurricane Beta , amounting up to 6 @.@ 39 in ( 162 mm ) , and strong winds caused extensive property damage in Nicaragua . Six people were confirmed to have been killed by Beta in Nicaragua , one of which was caused by a heart attack . It was initially feared that ten others , who were listed as missing , were killed when their vessel disappeared during the storm . But they were later rescued by a Panamanian vessel after drifting in the waters for several hours . Throughout the country , a total of 376 latrines , 215 homes , two schools , two community children centres , two community water tanks and five solar panels were destroyed . An additional 852 homes , 21 schools , and three health centres were damaged . The cost to repair damages caused by the hurricane were estimated at $ 2 @.@ 1 million ( 2006 USD ) . A total of 2 @,@ 668 people were left homeless as a result of the storm . 
 Two communities of <unk> , with a total population of 3 @,@ 200 , were isolated during the storm . Nearly 80 percent of the homes in four communities along the Caribbean coast near Bluefields were destroyed by the storm . The strong winds from Beta levelled 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @,@ 900 km2 ) of forested land . Agricultural damage from the storm in Nicaragua amounted to 67 million córdoba ( $ 4 million USD ) . Structural damage amounted to 35 million córdoba ( $ 1 @.@ 6 million USD ) . Damage to roadways throughout the country left over 20 million córdoba ( $ 979 @,@ 000 USD ) in damages . Offshore , the damage to algae , mangroves , and other aquatic life was severe . Hundreds of dead fish washed up along the coastline in the days following Beta . 
 = = = Honduras = = = 
 Torrential rains , peaking at 21 @.@ 82 in ( 554 mm ) , caused numerous mudslides which isolated several communities . Widespread damage occurred to structures , with numerous roofs being torn off . Signs , trees , power poles , and telephone poles were knocked down due to the wind . Four rivers overflowed and communications were disrupted across areas near the Nicaragua border . An estimated 60 @,@ 483 people were affected by the storm in the country . A total of 954 homes and 11 bridges were destroyed while another 237 homes , 30 roads , 30 bridges and 66 drinking water systems were damaged . A total of 7 @,@ 692 @.@ 1 acres ( 3 @,@ 112 @.@ 9 ha ) of farmland was destroyed . At least 11 @,@ 000 people were left stranded by the storm . Throughout the country , damage was estimated at 170 million <unk> ( $ 9 million USD ) . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Colombia = = = 
 On Providencia Island , two teams of aid personnel , consisting of a total of 800 people , from National Intervention Teams were mobilized in response to Beta . The Colombian Red Cross Society and the National Disaster Response and Preparedness System ( <unk> ) provided assistance to 600 families with non @-@ food relief , pre @-@ hospital care , first aid , temporary shelter and psychosocial support , and carried out a preventative health campaign on the island . On October 29 , Diego Palacio , the Minister of Social Protection , flew to Providencia to assess the damage caused by Beta . A frigate was also deployed to the island , carrying two tons of relief items along with 130 search and rescue workers . Reconstruction on the island took place shortly after the storm dissipated and 60 percent of the structures were repaired by January 20 , 2006 . The completion date for repairs was set at the third week of February . 
 = = = Nicaragua = = = 
 The <unk> in Nicaragua distributed food to 1 @,@ 500 victims and reported that food was needed for an additional 35 @,@ 000 people . Roughly 300 million córdoba was required to repair roadways throughout the affected region . On November 1 , the government of Nicaragua announced that it would assist in the reconstruction and repair of 334 for the Miskito Indians . By November 7 , airlifts from Managua were able to bring roughly 60 tons ( 54 tonnes ) of supplies to natives living along the Coco River . Additionally , plans for a four @-@ month operation to supply the Miskito Indians with food were implemented . In attempts to lessen the effects of disease and famine , 5 @,@ 000 tons ( 4 @,@ 536 tonnes ) of food was planned to be distributed in the region during this time . 
 Ahead of Hurricane Beta , the U.S. ambassador to Nicaragua signed a disaster declaration on October 28 , prompting the United States Agency for International Development ( USAID ) and Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance ( OFDA ) to send aid . Before the storm hit , $ 200 @,@ 000 was sent to the country for emergency relief supply distribution and helicopter fuel . On November 1 , USAID and OFDA airlifted 200 rolls of plastic sheeting , 5 @,@ 020 ten @-@ litre water containers , and 2 @,@ 736 hygiene kits , valued at $ 120 @,@ 877 . Another $ 22 @,@ 000 was used to supply an aircraft and Bell 204 / 205 helicopter to assist affected areas . On November 10 , another $ 100 @,@ 000 was sent for sanitation and health activities . The United Nations sent $ 10 @,@ 000 to the South Caribbean Coast Autonomous Region to cover emergency needs . Forty @-@ five tents were sent to communities in need . The Spanish Government also sent $ 377 @,@ 188 in aid and to Nicaragua . 
 The International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement sent 300 food packages , 300 kitchen kits , 200 mattresses , 300 hygiene kits , 150 hammocks , plastic sheeting , and 26 @.@ 4 tons ( 24 tonnes ) of construction materials and tools to Nicaragua . As a precaution , about 2 @.@ 2 tons ( 2 tonnes ) of food was also sent to the National Society ’ s warehouse in Bogotá . A total of $ 116 @,@ 367 was also allocated from disaster relief funds . The Justice , Global & Ecumenical Relations Unit in Canada also provided $ 6 @,@ 500 in relief funds to Nicaragua . Two shipments of relief supplies were sent to the hardest hit areas by Direct Relief International . The first shipment arrived on November 9 ; it contained 3 @,@ 000 lbs ( 1 @,@ 360 kg ) of antibiotics valued at $ 237 @,@ 241 . The second shipment arrived on November 22 ; it contained numerous supplies , valued at $ 139 @,@ 283 , which would be delivered to the hardest hit areas . The governments of Sweden and France sent $ 37 @,@ 191 and $ 36 @,@ 058 in funds respectively . 
 = = = Honduras = = = 
 On October 31 , a disaster declaration was signed for Honduras due to the effects from Beta . USAID sent $ 50 @,@ 000 in funds for the purchase of relief items such as blankets , foam mattresses , and hygiene kits . Two Fokker F27 aircraft were also supplied to help assist the transportation of relief supplies at a cost of $ 40 @,@ 000 . The United States Department of Defense sent military personnel to the affected areas from November 4 – 8 . During that time , more than 155 @,@ 000 lb ( 70 @,@ 306 kg ) of relief supplies were airlifted to the affected communities . The United States embassy in Honduras also provided a C @-@ 12 Huron aircraft to transport 3 @,@ 000 lb ( 1 @,@ 360 kg ) to Puerto Lempira . A total of $ 500 @,@ 000 was sent in the form of relief supplies and transport to Honduras from USAID . The Spanish Government offered a C @-@ 130 Hercules containing emergency supplies to Honduras . The World Food Programme pre @-@ positioned 509 tons ( 461 @.@ 7 tonnes ) of food to be used in temporary shelters and recovery activities . The government of Great Britain offered humanitarian assistance , consisting of 1 @,@ 500 plastic bags , 1 @,@ 800 <unk> , one helicopter , five boats , 250 military personnel , and five medical assistants . 
 = = Naming and records = = 
 When Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ six was upgraded to Tropical Storm Beta , it was the first time that the second letter of the Greek alphabet was used for a tropical cyclone . Upon being named , it was the first time that an Atlantic hurricane season had produced 24 tropical or subtropical cyclones . Operationally , Beta was the record @-@ breaking 13th hurricane , surpassing the 12 hurricanes produced in 1969 . In the post @-@ season analysis by the National Hurricane Center , Tropical Storm Cindy was upgraded to a hurricane , thus making Beta the 14th hurricane of 2005 . Due to the relatively low impact caused by Beta , the name was not retired by the World Meteorological Organization in the spring of 2006 and remains on the auxiliary list of names in the event that another Atlantic hurricane season produces more than 21 storms . 
 = Germanus of Winchester = 
 Germanus ( sometimes Germanus of Winchester , died circa 1013 ) was a medieval English abbot and Benedictine monk . He travelled to Rome in about 957 and became a monk at Fleury Abbey in France . Back in England by 964 he served as a monastic official before being named abbot of Winchcombe Abbey in about 970 , a position he was removed from in 975 . Germanus may have become abbot of Cholsey Abbey in 992 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Although Germanus 's name is not Anglo @-@ Saxon , Byrhtferth , a contemporary who wrote the Vita Oswaldi , which contains much information on Germanus , states that he was a native of Winchester . Germanus accompanied Oscytel , the Archbishop of York , and Oswald of Worcester , on their trip to Rome in about 957 , purportedly to collect Oscytel 's pallium , the symbol of an archbishop 's authority . This journey , however , has been challenged by the historian Donald Bullough , who argues that no previous archbishops of York had collected their <unk> in person . He also points out that this story is only related in the Chronicon Abbatiae Rameseiensis , the chronicle of the abbey of Ramsey . According to the Ramsey story , Oscytel and Oswald returned to England , but Germanus remained on the continent and became a monk at Fleury Abbey in France . Another story has Oswald journeying to Fleury on his own , with Germanus arriving at Fleury after Oswald had been resident at Fleury for a number of years prior to 958 . 
 = = Return to England = = 
 In 963 or 964 Germanus was recalled to England by Oswald , who had recently founded a small monastic priory at Westbury @-@ on @-@ Trym . Germanus was named prior of that community and helped with teaching the novice monks . He was also prior of Ramsey Abbey , or perhaps dean , before becoming abbot of Winchcombe Abbey in about 970 . Ramsey was founded by moving the monks of Westbury to Ramsey , but Germanus was not named abbot of Ramsey when this move was completed , being named abbot of Winchcombe instead . The reasons for this transfer are unrecorded . He was the first abbot of Winchcombe , but was removed from office in 975 , as a result of political instability following the death of King Edgar of England in 975 , when the monks at Winchcombe were exiled to Ramsey . The Chronicon Abbatiae Rameseiensis states that he became abbot of Cholsey Abbey in 992 , and the Vita Oswaldi concurs with this statement . The Vita relates that when Oswald and the lay patron of Ramsey were near to death in 992 they urged the monks to elect Germanus as the next abbot of Ramsey when that office might become vacant . Instead , the monks elected another monk , and the Vita states that King Æthelred II of England appointed Germanus to Cholsey instead . Some historians have challenged Germanus ' appointment to Cholsey , owing to the extreme length of ecclesiastical career this would necessitate . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 Germanus took part in the translation , or moving , of the relics of St Ivo to Ramsey in 1001 or the following year . He and Eadnoth , the abbot of Ramsey , carried the remains of the saint and his recently discovered companions from where they were found to Ramsey . 
 The " Ramsey Psalter " or " Psalter of Oswald " , sometimes known as the " Harley Psalter " , ( now British Library manuscript ( MS ) Harley <unk> ) and the " Cambridge Psalter " ( now Cambridge University Library MS <unk> ) as well as the " <unk> of Winchcombe " ( now in Orleans , MS BM 127 ( 105 ) ) have been connected with his abbacy . 
