 Germanus died some time around 1013 . The Vita Oswaldi describes him as an expert in monastic affairs ; a forged charter later described him as abbot of Fleury , although he never held that office . 
 = Crawford expedition = 
 The Crawford expedition , also known as the Sandusky expedition and Crawford 's Defeat , was a 1782 campaign on the western front of the American Revolutionary War , and one of the final operations of the conflict . Led by Colonel William Crawford , the campaign 's goal was to destroy enemy American Indian towns along the Sandusky River in the Ohio Country , with the hope of ending Indian attacks on American settlers . The expedition was one in a long series of raids against enemy settlements which both sides had conducted throughout the war . 
 Crawford led about 500 volunteer militiamen , mostly from Pennsylvania , deep into American Indian territory , with the intention of surprising the Indians . The Indians and their British allies from Detroit had already learned of the expedition , however , and gathered a force to oppose the Americans . After a day of indecisive fighting near the Sandusky towns , the Americans found themselves surrounded and attempted to retreat . The retreat turned into a rout , but most of the Americans managed to find their way back to Pennsylvania . About 70 Americans were killed ; Indian and British losses were minimal . 
 During the retreat , Crawford and an unknown number of his men were captured . The Indians executed many of these captives in retaliation for the <unk> massacre that occurred earlier in the year , in which about 100 peaceful Indians were murdered by Pennsylvanian militiamen . Crawford 's execution was particularly brutal : he was tortured for at least two hours before being burned at the stake . His execution was widely publicized in the United States , worsening the already @-@ strained relationship between Native Americans and European Americans . 
 = = Background = = 
 When the American Revolutionary War began in 1775 , the Ohio River marked a tenuous border between the American colonies and the American Indians of the Ohio Country . Ohio Indians — Shawnees , Mingos , Delawares , and Wyandots — were divided over how to respond to the war . Some Indian leaders urged neutrality , while others entered the war because they saw it as an opportunity to halt the expansion of the American colonies and to regain lands previously lost to the colonists . 
 The border war escalated in 1777 after British officials in Detroit began recruiting and arming Indian war parties to raid the frontier American settlements . An unknown number of American settlers in present Kentucky , West Virginia , and Pennsylvania were killed during these raids . The intensity of the conflict increased in November 1777 , after enraged American militiamen murdered <unk> , the leading advocate of Shawnee neutrality . Despite the violence , many Ohio Indians still hoped to stay out of the war , which proved difficult because they were located directly between the British in Detroit and the Americans along the Ohio River . 
 In February 1778 , the Americans launched their first expedition into the Ohio Country in an attempt to neutralize British activity in the region . General Edward Hand led 500 Pennsylvania militiamen on a surprise winter march from Fort Pitt towards the Cuyahoga River , where the British stored military supplies which were distributed to Indian raiding parties . However , adverse weather conditions prevented the expedition from reaching its objective . On the return march , some of Hand 's men attacked peaceful Delaware Indians , killing one man and a few women and children , including relatives of the Delaware chief Captain Pipe . Because only non @-@ combatants had been killed , the expedition became derisively known as the " squaw campaign " . 
 Despite the attack on his family , Captain Pipe said that he would not seek vengeance . Instead , in September 1778 , he was one of the signers of the Treaty of Fort Pitt between the Delawares and the United States . Americans hoped this agreement with the Delawares would enable American soldiers to pass through Delaware territory and attack Detroit , but the alliance deteriorated after the death of White Eyes , the Delaware chief who had negotiated the treaty . Eventually , Captain Pipe turned against the Americans and moved his followers west to the Sandusky River , where he received support from the British in Detroit . 
 Over the next several years , Americans and Indians launched raids against each other , usually targeting settlements . In 1780 , hundreds of Kentucky settlers were killed or captured in a British @-@ Indian expedition into Kentucky . George Rogers Clark of Virginia responded in August 1780 by leading an expedition that destroyed two Shawnee towns along the Mad River , but did little damage to the Indian war effort . As most of the Delawares had by then become pro @-@ British , American Colonel Daniel Brodhead led an expedition into the Ohio Country in April 1781 , and destroyed the Delaware town of Coshocton . Clark then recruited men for an expedition against Detroit in the summer of 1781 , but Indians decisively defeated one hundred of his volunteers along the Ohio River , effectively ending his campaign . Survivors fled to the militant towns on the Sandusky River . 
 Several villages of Christian Delawares lay between the combatants on the Sandusky River and the Americans at Fort Pitt . The villages were administered by the Moravian missionaries David <unk> and John <unk> . Although pacifists , the missionaries favored the American cause and kept American officials at Fort Pitt informed about hostile British and Indian activity . In September 1781 , to prevent further communication between the missionaries and the American military , hostile Wyandots and Delawares from Sandusky forcibly removed the missionaries and their converts to a new village ( Captive Town ) on the Sandusky River . 
 In March 1782 , 160 Pennsylvania militiamen under Lieutenant Colonel David Williamson rode into the Ohio Country , hoping to find the warriors who were responsible for raids against Pennsylvania settlers . Enraged by the gruesome murder by Indians of a white woman and her baby , Williamson 's men detained about 100 Christian Delawares at the village of Gnadenhütten . The Christian Delawares ( mostly women and children ) had returned to Gnadenhütten from Captive Town in order to harvest the crops they had been forced to leave behind . Accusing the Christian Indians of having aided hostile raiding parties , the Pennsylvanians murdered them all by hammer blows to the head . The <unk> massacre , as it came to be called , would have serious repercussions for the next American expedition into the Ohio Country . 
 = = Planning the expedition = = 
 In September 1781 , General William Irvine was appointed commander of the Western Department of the Continental Army , which was headquartered at Fort Pitt . Although a major British army under Lord Cornwallis had surrendered at Yorktown in October 1781 , virtually ending the war in the east , the conflict on the western frontier continued . Irvine quickly learned that the Americans living on the frontier wanted the army to launch an expedition against Detroit to end ongoing British support for the American Indian war parties . Irvine investigated , then wrote to George Washington , the American commander @-@ in @-@ chief , on December 2 , 1781 : 
 It is , I believe , universally agreed that the only way to keep Indians from harassing the country is to visit them . But we find , by experience , that burning their empty towns has not the desired effect . They can soon build others . They must be followed up and beaten , or the British , whom they draw their support from , totally driven out of their country . I believe if Detroit was demolished , it would be a good step toward giving some , at least , temporary ease to this country . 
 Washington agreed with Irvine 's assessment that Detroit had to be captured or destroyed in order to end the war in the west . In February 1782 , Irvine sent Washington a detailed plan for an offensive . Irvine estimated that with 2 @,@ 000 men , five cannons , and a supply caravan , he could to capture Detroit . Washington replied that the bankrupt U.S. Congress would be unable to finance the campaign , writing that " offensive operations , except upon a small scale , can not just now be brought into contemplation . " 
 With no resources available from either Congress or the Continental Army , Irvine gave permission for volunteers to organize their own offensive . Detroit was too far and too strong for a small @-@ scale operation , but militiamen such as David Williamson believed that an expedition against the American Indian towns on the Sandusky River was feasible . It was to be a low @-@ budget campaign . Each volunteer had to provide at his expense a horse , rifle , ammunition , rations , and other equipment . Their only payment would be an exemption from two months of militia duty , plus whatever plunder might be taken from the Indians . Because of ongoing Indian raids — the wife and children of a Baptist minister were killed and scalped in western Pennsylvania on May 12 , 1782 — there was no shortage of men willing to volunteer . 
 Because of Washington 's reservations , Irvine believed he was not authorized to lead the expedition himself . However , he did what he could to influence the planning of the campaign . Irvine wrote detailed instructions for the yet to be chosen commander of the volunteers : 
 The object of your command is , to destroy with fire and sword ( if practicable ) the Indian town and settlement at Sandusky , by which we hope to give ease and safety to the inhabitants of this country ; but , if impracticable , then you will doubtless perform such other services in your power as will , in their consequences , have a tendency to answer this great end . 
 = = Organizing the expedition = = 
 On May 20 , 1782 , the volunteers began gathering at the rendezvous point at Mingo Bottom ( present Mingo Junction , Ohio ) , on the Indian side of the Ohio River . They were mostly young men of Irish and Scots @-@ Irish ancestry , and came primarily from Washington and Westmoreland counties in Pennsylvania . Many were Continental Army veterans . The exact number of men who took part in the expedition is unknown . An officer wrote to General Irvine on May 24 that there were 480 volunteers , although additional men may have subsequently joined the group , bringing the total to more than 500 . Given the daunting nature of the task ahead of them , many of the volunteers made out their " last wills and testaments " before leaving . 
 Because this was a volunteer expedition and not a regular army operation , the men elected their officers . The candidates for the top position were David Williamson , the militia colonel who had commanded the Gnadenhütten expedition , and William Crawford , a retired Continental Army colonel . Crawford , a friend and land agent of George Washington , was an experienced soldier and frontiersman . He was a veteran of these kinds of operations , having destroyed two Mingo villages during Dunmore 's War in 1774 . He had also taken part in the failed " squaw campaign " . 
 Fifty @-@ year @-@ old Crawford had been reluctant to volunteer , but he did so at the request of General Irvine . Williamson , although popular with the militia , was in disfavor with regular army officers such as Irvine because he had allowed the Gnadenhütten massacre . Hoping to avoid a repetition , Irvine made it known that he favored Crawford 's election as commander . The election , which was acrimonious , ended in a close vote : Crawford received 235 votes to Williamson 's 230 . Colonel Crawford took command , and Williamson became second @-@ in @-@ command with the rank of major . The other majors included John B. McClelland , Thomas Gaddis , and either James Brenton or Joseph Brinton . 
 At Crawford 's request , Irvine allowed Dr. John Knight , a Continental Army officer , to accompany the expedition as surgeon . Another volunteer from Irvine 's staff was a foreigner with an aristocratic bearing who called himself " John Rose " . Rose asked to serve as Crawford 's aide @-@ de @-@ camp . Unknown even to General Irvine until several years later , " Rose " was actually Baron Gustave Rosenthal , a Baltic German nobleman from the Russian empire who had fled to America after killing a man in a duel . Rosenthal is the only Russian known to have fought on the American side of in the Revolutionary War . 
 = = Journey to the Sandusky = = 
 Crawford 's volunteers left Mingo Bottom on May 25 , 1782 , carrying provisions for 30 days . In planning the operation , General Irvine had estimated the 175 @-@ mile ( 282 km ) journey to Sandusky would take seven days . The campaign began with high spirits . Some volunteers boasted they intended " to <unk> the whole <unk> Tribe . " 
 As was often the case with militia , who were poorly trained amateur soldiers , there was difficulty maintaining military discipline . The men wasted their rations , and often fired their muskets at wild game , despite orders to the contrary . They were slow to break camp in the mornings , and often failed to take their turn at guard duty . Crawford also proved to be a less capable leader than expected . Rose wrote that Crawford in councils " speaks incoherent , proposes matters confusedly , and is incapable of persuading people into his opinion . " The expedition often halted as the commanders debated what to do next . Some volunteers lost heart and deserted . 
 The journey across the Ohio Country was mostly through woods . The volunteers initially marched in four columns , but the thick underbrush compelled them to form just two . On June 3 , Crawford 's men emerged into the open country of the Sandusky Plains , a prairie region just below of the Sandusky River . The following day , they reached Upper Sandusky , the Wyandot village where they expected to find the enemy . However , they discovered it had been abandoned . Unknown to the Americans , the Wyandots had recently relocated their town eight miles ( 13 km ) to the north . The new Upper Sandusky , also called the " Half King 's Town " , was near present @-@ day Upper Sandusky , Ohio ) and close to Captain Pipe 's town ( near present @-@ day Carey , Ohio ) . The Americans were unaware that Pipe 's town was nearby . 
 Crawford 's officers held a council of war . Some argued the abandoned village proved that the Indians knew about the expedition and were concentrating their forces elsewhere . Others expressed the desire to call off the expedition and return home immediately . Williamson asked for permission to take 50 men and burn the abandoned village , but Crawford refused as he did not wish to divide his forces . The council decided to continue the march for the rest of the day , but then to go no further . As the column halted for lunch , John Rose was sent north with a scouting party . Soon , two men returned to report that the scouts were skirmishing with a large force of Indians which was advancing towards the Americans . 
 = = British and Indian preparations = = 
 While planning the expedition , General Irvine had advised Crawford that , " Your best chance of success will be , if possible , to effect a surprise " against Sandusky . The British and Indians , however , learned about the expedition even before Crawford 's army had left Mingo Bottom . Thanks to information from a captured American soldier , on April 8 the notorious British agent Simon Girty relayed to Detroit an accurate report of Crawford 's plans . 
 Officials of the British Indian Department in Detroit had accordingly prepared for action . In command at Detroit was Major Arent Schuyler DePeyster , responsible to Sir Frederick Haldimand , the Governor General of British North America . DePeyster used agents such as Girty , Alexander McKee , and Matthew Elliott , who all had close relations with American Indians , to coordinate British and Indian military actions in the Ohio County . In a council at Detroit on May 15 , DePeyster and McKee told a gathering of Indian leaders about the Sandusky expedition and advised them to " be ready to meet them in a great body and repulse them . " McKee was sent to the Shawnee villages in the Great Miami River valley to recruit warriors to repel the American invasion . Captain William Caldwell was dispatched to Sandusky with a company of mounted Butler 's Rangers , as well as a number of Indians from the Detroit area led by Matthew Elliott . 
 Indian scouts had spied on the expedition from the beginning . As soon as Crawford 's army moved into the Ohio Country , the warning was sent to Sandusky . As the Americans approached , women and children from the Wyandot and Delaware towns were hidden in nearby ravines , while British fur traders packed their goods and hurried out of town . On June 4 , Delawares under Captain Pipe and Wyandots under Dunquat , the " Half King " , along with some Mingos , joined forces to oppose the Americans . The size of the combined Delaware , Wyandot , and Mingo force has been estimated at anywhere from 200 to 500 . British reinforcements were nearby , but Shawnees from the south were not expected to arrive until the next day . When the American scouts appeared , Pipe 's Delawares pursued them , while the Wyandots temporarily held back . 
 = = Battle of Sandusky = = 
 = = = June 4 : " Battle Island " = = = 
 The first skirmishing of the Crawford expedition began at about 2 p.m. on June 4 , 1782 . The scout party led by John Rose encountered Captain Pipe 's Delawares on the Sandusky Plains and conducted a fighting retreat to a grove of trees where they had stored their supplies . The scouts were in danger of being overrun , but were soon reinforced by the main body of Crawford 's army . Crawford ordered the men to dismount and drive the Indians out of the woods . After intense fighting , the Americans gained possession of the grove , later known as " Battle Island " . 
 The skirmish became a full @-@ scale battle by 4 : 00 p.m. After the Americans drove Captain Pipe 's Delawares out of the woods and onto to prairie , the Delawares were reinforced by Dunquat 's Wyandots . Elliott also arrived on the scene and coordinated the actions of the Delawares and the Wyandots . Pipe 's Delawares skillfully outflanked the American position and then attacked their rear . A few Indians crept close to the American lines in the tall prairie grass . The Americans responded by climbing trees to get a better shot at them . Gunsmoke filled the air , making it difficult to see . After three and a half hours of incessant firing , the Indians gradually broke off the attack with the approach of nightfall . Both sides slept with arms at the ready , and surrounded their positions with large fires to prevent surprise night attacks . 
 In the first day of fighting , the Americans lost 5 killed men and 19 wounded . The British and Indians suffered 5 killed and 11 wounded . The American volunteers scalped several of the Indian dead , while the Indians stripped the clothing from dead Americans and scalped at least one . Fifteen Pennsylvanians deserted during the night and reached home to report Crawford 's army had been " cut to pieces . " 
 = = = June 5 : Reinforcements = = = 
 Firing began early on the morning of June 5 . The Indians did not close , but remained at a distance of two or three hundred yards . Such long range firing with smooth bore muskets caused little loss to either side . The Americans thought that the Indians held back because they had suffered heavy losses on the previous day . In fact , the Indians were buying time , waiting for reinforcements to arrive . Crawford decided to hold his position trees and make a surprise attack on the Indians after nightfall . At this point , he was still confident of success , although his men were low on ammunition and water . Simon Girty , the British agent and interpreter , rode up with a white flag and called for the Americans to surrender , which was refused . 
 That afternoon , the Americans finally noticed that about 100 British rangers were fighting alongside the Indians . Unaware that the expedition had been watched from the beginning , the Americans were surprised that British troops from Detroit had been able to join in the battle on such short notice . While the Americans were discussing this , Alexander McKee arrived with about 140 Shawnees under the leadership of <unk> , who took up a position to Crawford 's south , effectively surrounding the Americans . The Shawnees repeatedly fired their muskets into the air , a ceremonial show of strength known as a feu de joie ( " fire of joy " ) , which shook American morale . Recalled Rose , the feu de joie " completed the Business with us . " With so many enemies gathering around them , the Americans decided to retreat after dark rather than make a stand . The dead were buried , and fires were burned over the graves to prevent their discovery and desecration . The severely wounded were placed on <unk> in preparation for the withdrawal . 
 That night the Americans began to withdraw silently from the battlefield . Indian sentries detected the movement and attacked , creating confusion . Many volunteers became lost in the dark , separating into small groups . Crawford became concerned about his family members — his son John , his son @-@ in @-@ law William Harrison , and his nephew , also named William Crawford . With Dr Knight , Crawford remained near the battlefield as his men passed , calling for his missing relatives and not finding them . Crawford became angry when he realized the militia , despite his orders , had left some of the wounded behind . After all the men had passed , Crawford and Knight , with two others , finally set off , but were unable to find the main body of men . 
 = = = June 6 : Battle of the Olentangy = = = 
 When the sun rose on June 6 , about 300 Americans had reached the abandoned Wyandot town . Because Colonel Crawford was missing , Williamson assumed command . Fortunately for the Americans , the pursuit of the retreating army was disorganized because Caldwell , overall commander of the British and Indian forces , had been wounded in both legs . As the retreat continued , a force of Indians finally caught up with the main body of Americans on the eastern edge of the Sandusky Plains , near a branch of the Olentangy River . Some Americans fled as the attack began , while others milled around in confusion . However , Williamson made a stand with a small group of volunteers and drove off the Indians after an hour of fighting . Three Americans were killed and eight more wounded in the " Battle of the Olentangy " . Indian losses are unknown . 
 The Americans buried their dead and resumed the retreat , the Indians and British rangers pursuing and firing occasionally from at long range . Williamson and Rose kept most of the men together by warning them that an orderly retreat was their only chance to get home alive . The Americans fell back more than 30 miles ( 48 km ) , some on foot , before making camp . The next day , two American stragglers were captured and presumably killed before the Indians and rangers finally abandoned the chase . The main body of Americans reached Mingo Bottom on June 13 . Many stragglers arrived in small groups for several days more . In all , about 70 Americans never returned from the expedition . 
 = = Fates of the captives = = 
 While Williamson and Rose were retreating with the main body of men , Crawford , Knight , and four other stragglers were traveling south along the Sandusky River in present @-@ day Crawford County , Ohio . On June 7 , they came upon a party of Delawares about 28 miles ( 45 km ) east of the battlefield . Knight raised his gun , but Crawford told him not to fire . Crawford and Knight knew some of these Delawares , who were part of a band led by a war chief named <unk> . Crawford and Knight were taken prisoner , but the other four Americans escaped . Two of them were later tracked down , killed , and scalped . 
 Captives taken by American Indians during the American Revolution might be ransomed by the British in Detroit , adopted into the tribe , enslaved , or simply killed . However , after the Gnadenhütten massacre , the Ohio Indians had resolved to kill all American prisoners who fell into their hands . The number of Americans executed after the Sandusky expedition is unknown , since their fate was usually recorded only if one of the prisoners survived to tell . 
 While some were executed quickly , others were tortured before being killed . The public torture of prisoners was a traditional ritual in many tribes of the Eastern Woodlands . Captives might have to endure excruciating torture for hours and even days . The British Indian Department used its influence to discourage the killing and torturing of prisoners , with some success , but in 1782 the Indians revived the practice of ritual torture in order to exact revenge for the slaughter at Gnadenhütten . 
 = = = Crawford 's execution = = = 
 Crawford and Knight were taken to <unk> 's camp on June 7 , where they found nine other prisoners . On June 11 , Captain Pipe painted the faces of the prisoners black , the traditional sign they were to be executed . The prisoners were marched to the Delaware town on <unk> Creek , near the present @-@ day village of Crawford , Ohio . Four prisoners were killed with tomahawks and scalped along the way . When the war party stopped , the seven remaining prisoners were made to sit , with Crawford and Knight a short distance away from the others . Delaware women and boys killed the other five with tomahawks , beheading one of them . The boys scalped the victims and slapped the bloody scalps in the faces of Crawford and Knight . 
 About one hundred men , women , and children had gathered at the Delaware village to witness the execution of the American leader . Dunquat and a few Wyandots were present , as well as Simon Girty and Matthew Elliott . Captain Pipe , who knew Crawford from the 1778 Fort Pitt treaty , spoke to the crowd , pointing out that Crawford had been captured while leading many of the men who had committed the Gnadenhütten murders . Crawford had nothing to do with the massacre , but he had taken part in the " squaw campaign " in which several of Pipe 's family members had been killed . Pipe apparently mentioned this as well . 
 After Pipe 's speech , Crawford was stripped naked and beaten . His hands were tied behind his back , and a rope was tied from his hands to a post in the ground . A large fire was lit about six or seven yards ( 6 m ) from the pole . Indian men shot charges of gunpowder into Crawford 's body , then cut off his ears . Crawford was poked with burning pieces of wood from the fire , and hot coals were thrown at him , which he was compelled to walk on . Crawford begged Girty to shoot him , but Girty was unwilling or afraid to intervene . After about two hours of torture , Crawford fell down unconscious . He was scalped , and a woman poured hot coals over his head , which revived him . He began to walk about insensibly as the torture continued . After he finally died , his body was burned . 
 The next day , Knight was marched towards the Shawnee towns , where he was to be executed . Along the way , he struck his guard with a log and managed to escape . He successfully made his way back to Pennsylvania on foot . By the time hunters found him on July 4 , he was in poor health and barely coherent . They carried him to Fort McIntosh . 
 = = = Wapatomica executions = = = 
 On the same day that Crawford was executed , at least six American prisoners were taken in two different groups to the Shawnee town of Wapatomica on the Mad River , in present Logan County , Ohio . These prisoners included Major John B. McClelland , who had been fourth in command of the expedition , as well as William Harrison ( Crawford 's son @-@ in @-@ law ) and Private William Crawford ( Colonel Crawford 's nephew ) . Four of the six , including McClelland , Harrison , and Crawford , were painted black . The villagers , made aware of the coming of prisoners by a messenger , formed two lines . The prisoners were made to run the gauntlet towards the council house , about 300 yards ( 270 m ) distance . As the prisoners ran by , the villagers beat them with clubs , concentrating on those who had been painted black . The blackened prisoners were then hacked to death with tomahawks and cut into pieces . Their heads and limbs were stuck on poles outside the town . One of the prisoners , a scout named John <unk> , was taken to Mac @-@ a @-@ <unk> ( near present West Liberty , Ohio ) , but escaped before he could be burnt . Still naked , he stole a horse and rode it until it gave out , then ran on foot , reaching Fort Pitt on July 10 , one of the last survivors to return . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Final year of the war = = = 
 The failure of the Crawford expedition caused alarm along the American frontier , as many Americans feared that the Indians would be emboldened enough and launch a new series of raids . More defeats for the Americans were yet to come , and so for Americans west of the Appalachian Mountains , 1782 became known as the " Bloody Year " . On 13 July 1782 , the Mingo leader Guyasuta led about 100 Indians and several British volunteers into Pennsylvania , destroying <unk> , killing nine and capturing twelve settlers . It was the hardest blow dealt by Indians in Western Pennsylvania during the war . 
 In Kentucky , the Americans went on the defensive while Caldwell and his Indian allies prepared a major offensive . In July 1782 , more than 1 @,@ 000 Indians gathered at Wapatomica , but the expedition came to a halt after scouts reported that George Rogers Clark was preparing to invade the Ohio Country from Kentucky . Most of the Indians dispersed after learning that the reports of imminent invasion were false , but Caldwell led 300 Indians into Kentucky and delivered a devastating blow at the Battle of Blue Licks in August . After his victory at Blue Licks , Caldwell was ordered to cease operations because the United States and Great Britain were about to make peace . Although General Irvine had finally gotten permission to lead his own expedition into the Ohio Country , rumors of the peace treaty killed enthusiasm for the undertaking , which never took place . In November , George Rogers Clark delivered the final blow in the Ohio Country , destroying several Shawnee towns , but inflicting little damage on the inhabitants . 
 Details of the forthcoming peace treaty arrived late in 1782 . The Ohio Country , the land that the British and Indians had successfully defended , had been signed away by Great Britain to the United States . The British had not consulted the Indians in the peace process , and the Indians were nowhere mentioned in the treaty 's terms . For the Indians , the struggle with American settlers would resume in the Northwest Indian War , though this time without the assistance of their British allies . 
 = = = Impact of Crawford 's death = = = 
 Crawford 's death was widely publicized in the United States . A ballad about the expedition , titled " Crawford 's Defeat by the Indians " , became popular and was long remembered . In 1783 , John Knight 's eyewitness account of Crawford 's torture was published . The editor of Knight 's narrative , Hugh Henry Brackenridge , deleted all mention of Crawford 's trial and the fact that Crawford was executed in retaliation for the Gnadenhütten massacre . By suppressing the Indians ' motivation , Brackenridge was able , according to historian Parker Brown , to create " a piece of virulent anti @-@ Indian , anti @-@ British propaganda calculated to arouse public attention and patriotism . " In an introduction , Brackenridge 's publisher made clear why the narrative was being published : 
 But as they [ the Indians ] still continue their murders on our frontier , these Narratives may be serviceable to induce our government to take some effectual steps to chastise and suppress them ; as from hence , they will see that the nature of an Indian is fierce and cruel , and that an extirpation of them would be useful to the world , and honorable to those who can effect it . 
 As intended , Knight 's narrative increased racial antipathy towards Native Americans , and was often republished over the next 80 years , especially whenever violent encounters between white Americans and Indians was in the news . Although American frontiersmen had often killed Indian prisoners , most Americans regarded Indian culture as barbaric because of the use of torture , and Crawford 's death greatly reinforced this perception of Indians as " savages " . In the American national memory , the details of Crawford 's torture overshadowed American atrocities such as the Gnadenhütten massacre . The image of the savage Indian became a stereotype ; the peacekeeping efforts of men like <unk> and White Eyes were all but forgotten . 
 = Chris Holroyd = 
 Christopher " Chris " Holroyd ( born 24 October 1986 ) is an English professional footballer who plays as a striker for National League club Macclesfield Town . Holroyd started his football career at Crewe Alexandra , progressing through the club 's youth system . He subsequently joined Chester City for the third year of his scholarship , and signed professional terms in 2006 . In July 2008 , Holroyd left Chester by mutual agreement with a year remaining on his contract . 
 A month later , in August 2008 , Holroyd signed for Conference National side Cambridge United , scoring ten goals in his first season with the club . The following season , Holroyd 's goalscoring form which saw him score 18 goals during the first half of the 2009 – 10 campaign , culminated into a move to League One side Brighton & Hove Albion for an undisclosed fee in January 2010 . In September 2010 , Holroyd joined Stevenage on a three @-@ month loan deal . He was loaned out again in March 2011 to Bury , playing a handful of games . At the end of the 2010 – 11 season , Holroyd was released by Brighton , and was subsequently signed by Rotherham United in June 2011 . He joined League One side Preston North End for an undisclosed fee in January 2012 . In September 2012 , Holroyd joined Macclesfield Town on loan until January 2013 . On returning to his parent club , his contract was cancelled by mutual consent . He signed for Morecambe of League Two on a free transfer in January 2013 , and rejoined Macclesfield at the end of the season . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Holroyd began his career at Crewe Alexandra , spending five years at the club as a schoolboy , as well as a further two years as a scholar at the club 's " highly rated youth academy " . Holroyd left Crewe after he was not offered a professional contract entering his third year of scholarship and joined Chester City , signing professional terms in 2006 after scoring 21 goals in 28 stats for Chester 's youth team in the Football League Youth Alliance . He made his first @-@ team debut for Chester at the start of the 2006 – 07 season , coming on as a 75th @-@ minute substitute in Chester 's 2 – 1 home defeat to Wrexham . The following season , Holroyd scored his first goal for Chester in a competitive match in October 2007 , scoring a consolation goal in a 4 – 2 Football League Trophy defeat at Carlisle United . His first Football League goal followed later in the month in Chester 's 2 – 2 draw with Wycombe Wanderers , scoring from eight yards to restore parity in the match . Holroyd scored his second goal of the season in a 5 – 3 defeat at Morecambe , as well as twice in a 3 – 3 draw at Accrington Stanley . He also made a further two assists towards the latter stages of the 2007 – 08 campaign in victories against Mansfield Town and Darlington respectively . Holroyd played 26 games in all competitions for Chester during the season , scoring five times . In July 2008 , he was transfer @-@ listed by the club in an attempt to reduce the size of their squad . A day after being transfer @-@ listed , Holroyd left Chester by mutual agreement with a year remaining on his contract , while being linked with a transfer to other clubs . During his time without a club , Holroyd rejected the option of trialling with A.F.C. Bournemouth . 
 = = = Cambridge United = = = 
 A month later , Holroyd signed for Conference National side Cambridge United on a one @-@ year contract , with the option of a further year . Holroyd made his debut for Cambridge in the club 's 3 – 0 away win at Eastbourne Borough , coming on as a 79th @-@ minute substitute and scoring five minutes later to give Cambridge a three @-@ goal lead . After scoring on his debut , Holroyd went sixteen games without scoring , ending his goal drought in a 4 – 0 victory over Salisbury City in December 2008 . In February 2009 , Holroyd scored in successive away victories for Cambridge , scoring from the penalty spot against Rushden & Diamonds , before scoring twice away at Kidderminster Harriers . A month later , he scored three goals within the space of three days , scoring two second @-@ half goals in Cambridge 's 2 – 0 win at Barrow , as well as netting against Northwich Victoria . Holroyd scored his ninth goal of the season from the penalty spot as Cambridge came from a goal behind to beat Eastbourne Borough 2 – 1 . Two days later , he scored once more , again from the penalty spot , this time away at Kettering Town . Holroyd also featured in all three of Cambridge 's play @-@ off games , coming on as an 80th @-@ minute substitute in Cambridge 's 2 – 0 loss in the final to Torquay United . He played a total of 43 times for Cambridge during the campaign , scoring ten goals . In May 2009 , Cambridge United exercised the option to extend the contract of Holroyd for the following season . 
 Ahead of the 2009 – 10 season , Holroyd was assigned the number nine shirt following the departure of fellow striker Scott Rendell . He started the club 's first match of the season , playing the whole game in a 2 – 0 home defeat to Barrow . Three days later , he scored twice in Cambridge 's 3 – 1 win against Ebbsfleet United , scoring both goals . Holroyd scored his first professional hat @-@ trick four days later , scoring against his former employers , Chester City , as Cambridge came from two goals down to win the match 4 – 2 . One of his goals included an audacious over head kick , 15 yards from goal . Holroyd scored four goals in two games shortly after , netting against Gateshead and Forest Green Rovers respectively . He scored a further two goals in Cambridge 's 4 – 3 home loss to Luton Town in September 2009 , taking his goal tally to eleven for the season . His twelfth goal of the season came against Cambridge 's local rivals , Histon , Holroyd netting with just nine minutes remaining in a 1 – 1 draw . A week later , he scored from the penalty spot in Cambridge 's 4 – 0 win against Ebbsfleet United . His fine goalscoring form continued into November 2009 , scoring in victories against Kidderminster Harriers and Ilkeston Town respectively . After his goal against Ilkeston Town , Holroyd did not find the net until the end of December 2009 , scoring just before half @-@ time for Cambridge as they lost 2 – 1 at Mansfield Town . A week later , Cambridge United assistant manager , Paul Carden , said that he expected Holroyd to leave the club in the January transfer window . He subsequently played his last game for the club in Cambridge 's 1 – 0 home defeat to Eastbourne Borough . During the first half of the 2009 – 10 season , Holroyd scored 15 goals in 25 games for Cambridge . 
 = = = Brighton & Hove Albion = = = 
 Holroyd joined League One team Brighton & Hove Albion on 29 January 2010 . An undisclosed fee was agreed between Cambridge United and Brighton on 22 January , but the transfer was not finalised until a week later due to negotiations over personal terms between player and club . The intervening period led to much speculation that the deal had collapsed . Holroyd made his Brighton debut just a day after signing , which came as a surprise , coming on as a 64th @-@ minute substitute in a 1 – 0 defeat to Millwall . Holroyd featured a total of 13 times during the latter stages of the club 's 2009 – 10 campaign , failing to score . The following season , Holroyd found first @-@ team opportunities hard to come by , featuring just twice in games against Northampton Town and Walsall . He slipped further down the pecking order following Francisco <unk> 's arrival at the club . Brighton manager Gus Poyet said that Holroyd " needs to play in a different environment to try and re @-@ establish himself " , as well as saying " he needs to play regularly " . In May 2011 the club announced that he would be released at the end of the season following the ending of his current contract , along with five other players . 
 = = = = Stevenage and Bury loans = = = = 
 Holroyd signed for League Two side Stevenage on a three @-@ month loan deal in September 2010 . He made his debut the next day , scoring the only goal of the game in the club 's 1 – 0 win over Lincoln City at Sincil Bank . Three days later , Holroyd scored a hat @-@ trick in Stevenage 's 4 – 1 victory against Hereford United , taking his tally up to four goals in two games . Stevenage manager Graham Westley said " He 's lethal , we knew that before he came to the club . He 's been very impressive in his two games so far , his work ethic is excellent and he is a constant menace for opposition defences " . Holroyd scored his fifth goal for Stevenage in the club 's 2 – 1 home win against Burton Albion , turning sharply in the box to restore Stevenage 's lead in the second @-@ half . Earlier on in the same game , he missed a penalty after originally being fouled in the area . Holroyd scored his sixth goal for Stevenage in a 1 – 1 draw against Shrewsbury Town . Due to a host of postponements , Holroyd 's final game for the club was a 1 – 0 home loss to Northampton Town on 11 December , and he returned to his parent club on Boxing Day . During his three @-@ month loan spell , Holroyd scored six goals in twelve games . 
 In March 2011 , after making three substitute appearances for Brighton , Holroyd was loaned out to another League Two side in the form of Bury . His loan spell ran until the end of the 2010 – 11 season . Holroyd made his debut a day after signing for the club , coming on as a 69th @-@ minute substitute in a 0 – 0 draw at Rotherham United . Three days later , Holroyd scored in a 2 – 1 home loss to Torquay United . Brighton opted to recall Holroyd on 11 April 2011 . He made four appearances for Bury during his loan spell , scoring one goal . 
 = = = Rotherham United = = = 
 After being released by Brighton , Holroyd signed for League Two side Rotherham United on 20 June 2011 . He joined the club on a free transfer , signing a two @-@ year contract . Holroyd made his Rotherham debut in the club 's 1 – 0 home win against Oxford United on 6 August 2011 , playing 72 minutes of the match . He scored his first goal for Rotherham in a 2 – 0 home victory against Aldershot Town in November 2011 , scoring a glancing header to double Rotherham 's advantage on their way to recording their first victory in ten games . It was to be Holroyd 's only goal for the club , making a total of 19 appearances in the first half of the 2011 – 12 campaign , of which only six were starting appearances even though Holroyd was the club 's top scorer in pre @-@ season games . 
 = = = Preston North End = = = 
 Holroyd joined League One club Preston North End for an undisclosed fee on 20 January 2012 . The move meant that Holroyd was again playing under the management of Graham Westley , who had signed him on loan during his time at Stevenage . He made his debut a day later playing in a new position on the right wing and winning the man of the match award in a 2 – 0 home defeat to Leyton Orient . Holroyd scored his first goal for Preston on 21 April 2012 , heading in a Danny Mayor cross at the back post in a 1 – 1 draw away at Oldham Athletic . In total , Holroyd made 20 appearances for Preston , where he was played mostly as a traditional right winger . 
 In August 2012 , Holroyd joined his hometown club , Conference National side Macclesfield Town , on loan until January 2013 . He made a scoring debut for the club , coming off the bench to score with his first touch in a 3 – 2 win against Lincoln City . In the fourth appearance of his loan spell , Holroyd scored a hat @-@ trick as Macclesfield defeated Stockport County 4 – 3 at Edgeley Park . Holroyd scored his fifth goal for Macclesfield in a 2 – 2 away draw with Gateshead , coming on as a substitute and equalising late @-@ on . He went on to score nine times in 23 appearances during the five @-@ month loan spell , including two goals in a 4 – 1 FA Cup victory over Barrow that ensured Macclesfield progressed to the third round of the competition . 
 Holroyd returned to Preston in January 2013 , and was told he did not feature in the club 's plans . With his contract expiring in June 2013 , Holroyd 's contract was cancelled by mutual consent . 
 = = = Morecambe = = = 
 Available on a free transfer , Holroyd attracted the interest of Macclesfield Town , having just spent five months on loan with the club . However , no permanent transfer materialised , and , on 17 January 2013 , he signed for League Two side Morecambe on a contract until the end of the 2012 – 13 season . Holroyd made his debut a day after signing for the club , coming on as a second @-@ half substitute in a 0 – 0 home draw against Cheltenham Town . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of match played 27 February 2016 
 = Milo of Croton = 
 Milo of Croton ( / <unk> / ; Greek : <unk> , <unk> ; gen . : <unk> , <unk> ) was a 6th @-@ century BC wrestler from the Magna <unk> city of Croton , who enjoyed a brilliant wrestling career and won many victories in the most important athletic festivals of ancient Greece . In addition to his athletic victories , Milo is credited by the ancient commentator Diodorus Siculus with leading his fellow citizens to military triumph over neighboring Sybaris in 510 BC . 
 Milo was said to be an associate of Pythagoras . One story tells of the wrestler saving the philosopher 's life when a roof was about to collapse upon him and another that Milo may have married the philosopher 's daughter <unk> . Like other successful athletes of ancient Greece , Milo was the subject of fantastic tales of strength and power , some , perhaps , based upon misinterpretations of his statues . Among other tales , he was said to have carried a bull on his shoulders and to have burst a band about his brow by simply inflating the veins of his temples . 
 The date of Milo 's death is unknown , but he reportedly was attempting to tear a tree apart when his hands became trapped in a crevice in its trunk , and a pack of wolves surprised and devoured him . Milo has been depicted in works of art by Pierre Puget , Étienne @-@ Maurice Falconet and others . In literature , he has been referenced by Rabelais in Gargantua and Pantagruel , by Shakespeare in Troilus and Cressida , and also by Alexandre Dumas in The Man in the Iron Mask . 
 = = Athletic career = = 
 Milo was a six @-@ time Olympic victor . He won the boys ' wrestling ( probably in 540 BC ) , and thereafter five men 's wrestling titles between 536 and 520 BCE . He also won seven crowns at the Pythian Games at Delphi ( one as a boy ) , ten at the Isthmian Games , and nine at the Nemean Games . Milo was a five @-@ time <unk> , a " grand slam " sort of title bestowed on the winner of all four festivals in the same cycle . Milo 's career at the highest level of competition must have spanned 24 years . 
 Milo was defeated ( or tied ) in his attempt at a seventh Olympic title in 516 BCE by a young wrestler from Croton who practiced the technique of <unk> — literally , ' <unk> ' or wrestling at arm 's length — and by doing so , avoided Milo 's crushing embrace . Simple fatigue took its toll on Milo . 
 Milo 's hometown had a reputation for producing excellent athletes . In the Olympiad of 576 BC , for example , the first seven finishers in the stade — a 200 yards ( 180 m ) sprint — were all men of Croton . After Milo 's career , Croton apparently produced no other athletes of renown . 
 = = Military experience = = 
 About 510 BC , hostilities arose between Croton and nearby Sybaris when <unk> , a Sybarite tyrant , banished the 500 wealthiest citizens of Sybaris after seizing their property . When the displaced <unk> sought refuge at Croton and <unk> demanded their return , an opportunity for the <unk> to destroy a powerful neighbor presented itself . In an account that appeared five hundred years after the event , Diodorus Siculus wrote that the philosopher Pythagoras , who spent much of his life at Croton , urged the Croton assembly to protect the banished citizens of Sybaris . When the decision to do so was made , the dispute between the two cities was aggravated , each took up arms , and Milo led the charge against Sybaris . 
 According to Diodorus ( XII , 9 ) : 
 " One hundred thousand men of Croton were stationed with three hundred thousand Sybarite troops ranged against them . Milo the athlete led them and through his tremendous physical strength first turned the troops lined up against him . " 
 Diodorus indicates Milo led the charge against the <unk> wearing his Olympic crowns , draped in a <unk> and brandishing a club in a manner similar to the mythic hero Heracles ( see adjacent image ) . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 According to Pausanias he was the son of <unk> . Ancient commentators mention an association between Milo and the philosopher Pythagoras , who lived at or near Croton for many years . Commentators may have confused the philosopher with an athletic trainer , Pythagoras of Samos , but it is also possible the trainer and the philosopher were the same person . 
 It was said Milo saved Pythagoras 's life when a pillar collapsed in a banquet hall and he supported the roof until Pythagoras could reach safety . He may have married <unk> , a Pythagorean herself or possibly Pythagoras ' daughter . Diogenes Laertius ( VIII , 39 ) says Pythagoras died in a fire in Milo 's house , but <unk> ( as cited by Diogenes Laertius , VIII , 40 ) says Pythagoras died in the temple of the Muses at Metapontum of self @-@ imposed starvation . Porphyry ( Vita <unk> , 55 ) says Milo 's house at Croton was burned and the Pythagoreans within stoned . 
 Herodotus ( III , 137 @-@ 38 ) , who lived one hundred years after Milo 's death , says the wrestler accepted a large sum of money from the distinguished physician Democedes for the privilege of marrying Milo 's daughter . If Herodotus is indeed correct , then Milo was probably not a member of Croton 's nobility for such an arrangement with a wage @-@ earning physician would have been beneath the dignity of a Greek noble . Democedes was a native of Croton and enjoyed a successful career as a physician at Croton , Aegina , Athens , and Samos . He was captured by Darius in the defeat of the Samian tyrant Polycrates and taken to the Persian capital of Susa as a slave . There , he carefully tended both the king and queen and was eventually permitted to revisit Croton , but under guard . He escaped his Persian guards and made his way to Croton , where he married Milo 's daughter . The physician sent a message regarding his marriage to Darius , who was an admirer of the wrestler and can only have learned of him through Democedes during his slavery at Susa . 
 = = Cultural representations = = 
 = = = Place of champions in Greek culture = = = 
 Like the tragic protagonists of Greek drama , the Greek athlete had a " larger than life " quality . At Olympia , for example , they were set apart from the general population for lengthy training periods and the observation of a complex series of prohibitions that included abstinence from intercourse . Once training was completed and the athletes were brought before their fellow citizens trim , fit , nude and shimmering with oil , they must have appeared semi @-@ divine . 
 The reverential awe in which athletes were held in Greece led to exaggeration in the tales surrounding their lives . In Milo 's case , Aristotle ( <unk> <unk> , II , 6 = <unk> ) began the myth @-@ making process with reports likening Milo unto Heracles in his enormous appetite , and Athenaeus ( X , <unk> @-@ f ) continued the process with the story of Milo carrying a bull — a feat also associated with Heracles . It is Milo 's sudden death which makes him most akin to the heroes : there is a hint of hubris in his attempt to rend the tree asunder , and striking contrast between his glorious athletic achievements and his sudden ignoble death . 
 = = = Feats of strength = = = 
 Anecdotes about Milo 's almost superhuman strength and lifestyle abound . His daily diet allegedly consisted of 20 lb of meat , 20 lb of bread , and eighteen pints of wine . Pliny the Elder ( XXXVII , 54 = 144 ) and Solinus ( De <unk> mundi , 77 ) both attribute Milo 's invincibility in competition to the wrestler 's consumption of <unk> , the gizzard stones of roosters . Legends say he carried his own bronze statue to its place at Olympia , and once carried a four @-@ year @-@ old bull on his shoulders before slaughtering , roasting , and devouring it in one day . He was said to have achieved the feat of lifting the bull by starting in childhood , lifting and carrying a newborn calf and repeating the feat daily as it grew to maturity . 
 One report says the wrestler was able to hold a pomegranate without damaging it while challengers tried to pry his fingers from it , and another report says he could burst a band fastened around his brow by inhaling air and causing the temple veins to swell . He was said to maintain his footing on an oiled discus while others tried to push him from it . These feats have been attributed to misinterpretations of statues depicting Milo with his head bound in victor 's ribbons , his hand holding the apple of victory , and his feet positioned on a round disc that would have been fitted into a pedestal or base . 
 When he participated in the Olympics for the seventh time and collided against a fellow , the eighteen year <unk> , who admired him as a child and where he also learned many moves , the final , his opponent bowed without even start fighting , in a sign of respect . This was the only case in the history of Greece when we remember the name of the man who finished second in a race / competition . For his exploits as a supporter of the <unk> erected a statue in the stadium of Olympia , where he was represented standing on a disc with their feet united . 
 While one report says Milo held his arm outstretched and challengers were unable to bend his fingers , another anecdote recorded by Claudius Aelianus ( Varia historia , XII , 12 ) disputes Milo 's reputation for enormous strength . Apparently , Milo challenged a peasant named <unk> to a trial of strength . <unk> proclaimed he had little strength , but lifted a boulder to his shoulders , carried it several meters and dropped it . Milo was unable to lift it . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 The Ancient Greeks typically attributed remarkable deaths to famous persons in keeping with their characters . The date of Milo 's death is unknown , but according to Strabo ( VI , 1 , 12 ) and Pausanias ( VI , 14 , 8 ) , Milo was walking in a forest when he came upon a tree @-@ trunk split with wedges . In what was probably intended as a display of strength , Milo inserted his hands into the cleft to rend the tree . The wedges fell from the cleft , and the tree closed upon his hands , trapping him . Unable to free himself , the wrestler was devoured by wolves . A modern historian has suggested it is more likely that Milo was traveling alone when attacked by wolves . Unable to escape , he was devoured and his remains found at the foot of a tree . 
 = = = Modern art and literature = = = 
 Milo 's legendary strength and death have become the subjects of modern art and literature . His death was a popular subject in 18th @-@ century art . In many images of this period his killer is portrayed as a lion rather than wolves . In Pierre Puget 's sculpture Milo of Croton ( 1682 ) , the work 's themes are the loss of strength with age , and the <unk> of glory as symbolized by an Olympic trophy lying in the dust . 
 Étienne @-@ Maurice Falconet 's marble Milo of Croton ( 1754 ) secured his admission to the Académie des beaux @-@ arts , but was later criticized for lack of nobility . The work clashed with the classical ideal requiring a dying hero to express stoic restraint . 
 Milo was the subject of a bronze by Alessandro Vittoria circa 1590 , and another bronze now standing in Holland Park , London by an unknown nineteenth @-@ century artist . A sculpture was made by John Graham Lough and exhibited at the Royal Academy . It was depicted by Ralph Hedley in a painting of the artist in his studio , and a bronze cast of it stands in the grounds of Blagdon Hall , Northumberland . 
 His death is also depicted in paintings . It is the subject of an eighteenth @-@ century oil on canvas by Joseph @-@ Benoît <unk> and a work by the eighteenth @-@ century Irish painter James Barry . 
 In literature , François Rabelais compares Gargantua 's strength to that of Milo 's in Gargantua and Pantagruel , and Shakespeare refers anachronistically to " bull @-@ bearing Milo " in Act 2 of Troilus and Cressida . In Emily Brontë 's Wuthering Heights , character Catherine Earnshaw refers to the circumstances of Milo 's demise when she says , " Who is to separate us , pray ? They 'll meet the fate of Milo ! " In Johann Wyss ' novel Swiss Family Robinson , the youngest son Franz is entrusted with a bull buffalo to raise , and from which gains comparison to Milo . Alexandre Dumas has the strongest of the Three Musketeers , Porthos , mention " Milo of <unk> " saying that he had replicated a list of his feats of strength - all except breaking a cord tied around the head , whereupon d 'Artagnan tells Porthos that it is because his strength is not in his head ( a joke about Porthos being a bit dim @-@ witted ) . 
 = Hergé = 
 Georges Prosper Remi ( French : [ <unk> ] ; 22 May 1907 – 3 March 1983 ) , known by the pen name Hergé ( [ <unk> ] ) , was a Belgian cartoonist . He is best known for creating The Adventures of Tintin , the series of comic albums which are considered one of the most popular European comics of the 20th century . He was also responsible for two other well @-@ known series , Quick & Flupke ( 1930 – 40 ) and The Adventures of Jo , Zette and Jocko ( 1936 – 57 ) . His works were executed in his distinct ligne claire drawing style . 
 Born to a lower middle @-@ class family in Etterbeek , Brussels , Hergé began his career by contributing illustrations to Scouting magazines , developing his first comic series , The Adventures of Totor , for Le Boy @-@ Scout Belge in 1926 . Working for the conservative Catholic newspaper Le Vingtième Siècle , he created The Adventures of Tintin in 1929 on the advice of its editor Norbert Wallez . Revolving around the actions of boy reporter Tintin and his dog Snowy , the series ' early instalments – Tintin in the Land of the Soviets , Tintin in the Congo , and Tintin in America – were designed as conservative propaganda for children . Domestically successful , after serialisation the stories were published in book form , with Hergé continuing the series and also developing both the Quick & Flupke and Jo , Zette and Jocko series for Le Vingtième Siècle . Influenced by his friend Zhang Chongren , from 1934 Hergé placed far greater emphasis on conducting background research for his stories , resulting in increased realism from The Blue Lotus onward . Following the German occupation of Belgium in 1939 , Le Vingtième Siècle was closed but Hergé continued his series in Le Soir , a popular newspaper controlled by the Nazi administration . 
 After the Allied liberation of Belgium in 1944 , Le Soir was shut down and its staff – including Hergé – accused of having been collaborators . An official investigation was launched , and while no charges were brought against Hergé , in subsequent years he repeatedly faced accusations of having been a traitor and collaborator . With Raymond Leblanc he established Tintin magazine in 1946 , through which he serialised new Adventures of Tintin stories . As the magazine 's artistic director , he also oversaw the publication of other successful comics series , such as Edgar P. Jacobs ' Blake and Mortimer . In 1950 he established Studios Hergé as a team to aid him in his ongoing projects ; prominent staff members Jacques Martin and Bob de Moor greatly contributed to subsequent volumes of The Adventures of Tintin . Amid personal turmoil following the collapse of his first marriage , he produced Tintin in Tibet , his personal favourite of his works . In later years he became less prolific , and unsuccessfully attempted to establish himself as an abstract artist . 
 Hergé 's works have been widely acclaimed for their clarity of draughtsmanship and meticulous , well @-@ researched plots . They have been the source of a wide range of adaptations , in theatre , radio , television , cinema , and computer gaming . He remains a strong influence on the comic book medium , particularly in Europe . Widely celebrated in Belgium , a Hergé Museum was established in Louvain @-@ la @-@ Neuve in 2009 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood : 1907 – 25 = = = 
 Georges Prosper Remi was born on 22 May 1907 in his parental home in Etterbeek , Brussels , a central suburb in the capital city of Belgium . His Walloon father , Alexis Remi , worked in a confectionery factory , whilst his Flemish mother , Elisabeth Dufour , was a housewife . Married on 18 January 1905 , they moved into a house at 25 rue <unk> ( now 33 rue Philippe <unk> ) , where Hergé was born , although a year later they moved to a house at 34 rue de <unk> . His primary language was his father 's French , but growing up in the bilingual Brussels , he also learned Dutch , developing a <unk> accent from his maternal grandmother . Like most Belgians , his family belonged to the Roman Catholic Church , though they were not particularly devout . He later characterised his life in Etterbeek as dominated by a monochrome gray , considering it extremely boring . Biographer Benoît Peeters suggested that this childhood melancholy might have been exacerbated through being sexually abused by a maternal uncle . 
 Remi developed a love of cinema , favouring Winsor McCay 's Gertie the Dinosaur and the films of Charlie Chaplin , Harry Langdon and Buster Keaton ; his later work in the comic strip medium displayed an obvious influence from them in style and content . Although not a keen reader , he enjoyed the novels of British and American authors , such as Huckleberry Finn , Treasure Island , Robinson Crusoe and The Pickwick Papers , as well as the novels of Frenchman Alexandre Dumas . Drawing as a hobby , he sketched out scenes from daily life along the edges of his school books . Some of these illustrations were of German soldiers , because his four years of primary schooling at the Ixelles Municipal School No. 3 coincided with the First World War , during which Brussels was occupied by the German army . In 1919 , his secondary education began at the secular Place de Londres in Ixelles , but in 1920 he was moved to Saint @-@ Boniface School , an institution controlled by the archbishop where the teachers were Roman Catholic priests . Remi proved a successful student , being awarded prizes for excellence . He completed his secondary education in July 1925 as the top of his class . 
 Aged 12 , Remi joined the Boy Scout brigade attached to Saint @-@ Boniface School , becoming troop leader of the Squirrel Patrol and earning the name " Curious Fox " ( Renard curieux ) . With the Scouts , he travelled to summer camps in Italy , Switzerland , Austria and Spain , and in the summer of 1923 his troop hiked 200 miles across the Pyrenees . His experiences with Scouting would have a significant influence on the rest of his life , sparking his love of camping and the natural world , and providing him with a moral compass that stressed personal loyalty and keeping one 's promises . His Scoutmaster , Rene Weverbergh , encouraged his artistic ability , and published one of Remi 's drawings in the newsletter of the Saint @-@ Boniface Scouts , Jamais <unk> ( Never Enough ) : his first published work . When Weverbergh became involved in the publication of Boy @-@ Scout , the newsletter of the Federation of Scouts , he published more of Remi 's illustrations , the first of which appeared in the fifth issue , from 1922 . Remi continued publishing cartoons , drawings and woodcuts in subsequent issues of the newsletter , which was soon renamed Le Boy @-@ Scout Belge ( The Belgian Boy Scout ) . During this time , he experimented with different pseudonyms , using " Jérémie " and " <unk> " before settling on " Hergé " , the French pronunciation of his reversed initials ( R.G. ) His work was first published under this name in December 1924 . 
 = = = Totor and early career : 1925 – 28 = = = 
 Alongside his stand @-@ alone illustrations , in July 1926 Hergé began production of a comic strip for Le Boy @-@ Scout Belge , Les Aventures de Totor ( The Adventures of Totor ) , which continued intermittent publication until 1929 . Revolving around the adventures of a Boy Scout patrol leader , the comic initially featured written captions underneath the scenes , but Hergé began to experiment with other forms of conveying information , including speech bubbles . Illustrations were also published in Le <unk> qui <unk> ( The Wheat That Grows ) and other publications of the Catholic Association of Belgian Young People , and Hergé produced a book jacket for Weverbergh 's novel , The Soul of the Sea . Being young and inexperienced , still learning his craft , Hergé sought guidance from an older cartoonist , Pierre Ickx , and together they founded the short @-@ lived Atelier de la Fleur de Lys ( AFL ) , an organisation for Christian cartoonists . 
 After graduating from secondary school in 1925 , Hergé enrolled in the École Saint @-@ Luc art school , but finding the teaching boring , he left after one lesson . He hoped for a job as an <unk> alongside Ickx at Le Vingtième Siècle ( The Twentieth Century ) — a conservative " Catholic Newspaper of Doctrine and Information " — but no positions were available . Instead he got a job in the paper 's subscriptions department , starting in September 1925 . <unk> the boredom of this position , he enlisted for military service before he was called up , and in August 1926 was assigned to the Dailly barracks at Schaerbeek . Joining the first infantry regiment , he was also bored by his military training , but continued sketching and producing episodes of Totor . 
 Toward the end of his military service , in August 1927 , Hergé met the editor of Le Vingtième Siècle , the Abbé Norbert Wallez , a vocal fascist who kept a signed photograph of the Italian Fascist leader Benito Mussolini on his desk . Impressed by Hergé 's repertoire , Wallez agreed to give him a job as a photographic reporter and cartoonist for the paper , something for which Hergé always remained grateful , coming to view the Abbé as a father figure . Supplemented by commissions for other publications , Hergé illustrated a number of texts for " The Children 's Corner " and the literary pages ; the illustrations of this period show his interest in woodcuts and the early prototype of his ligne claire style . 
 = = = Founding Tintin and Quick & Flupke : 1929 – 32 = = = 
 Beginning a series of newspaper supplements in late 1928 , Wallez founded a supplement for children , Le Petit Vingtième ( The Little Twentieth ) , which subsequently appeared in Le Vingtième Siècle every Thursday . Carrying strong Catholic and fascist messages , many of its passages were explicitly anti @-@ semitic . For this new venture , Hergé illustrated L <unk> Aventure de Flup , Nénesse , Poussette et Cochonnet ( The Extraordinary Adventure of Flup , Nénesse , Poussette and Cochonnet ) , a comic strip authored by one of the paper 's sport columnists , which told the story of two boys , one of their little sisters , and her inflatable rubber pig . Hergé was unsatisfied , and eager to write and draw a comic strip of his own . He was fascinated by new techniques in the medium — such as the systematic use of speech bubbles — found in such American comics as George McManus ' Bringing Up Father , George Herriman 's Krazy Kat and Rudolph Dirks 's The Katzenjammer Kids , copies of which had been sent to him from Mexico by the paper 's reporter Léon Degrelle , stationed there to report on the Cristero War . 
 Hergé developed a character named Tintin as a Belgian boy reporter who could travel the world with his fox terrier , Snowy — " Milou " in the original French — basing him in large part on his earlier character of Totor and also on his own brother , Paul . Degrelle later falsely claimed that Tintin had been based on him , while he and Hergé fell out when Degrelle used one of his designs without permission ; they settled out @-@ of @-@ court . Although Hergé wanted to send his character to the United States , Wallez instead ordered him to set his adventure in the Soviet Union , acting as a work of anti @-@ socialist propaganda for children . The result , Tintin in the Land of the Soviets , began serialisation in Le Petit Vingtième on 10 January 1929 , and ran until 8 May 1930 . Popular in Francophone Belgium , Wallez organized a publicity stunt at the Gare de Nord station , following which he organized the publication of the story in book form . The popularity of the story led to an increase in sales , and so Wallez granted Hergé two assistants , Eugène Van <unk> and Paul " Jam " Jamin . 
 In January 1930 , Hergé introduced Quick & Flupke ( Quick et Flupke ) , a new comic strip about two street kids from Brussels , in the pages of Le Petit Vingtième . At Wallez 's direction , in June he began serialisation of the second Tintin adventure , Tintin in the Congo , designed to encourage colonial sentiment towards the Belgian Congo . Authored in a paternalistic style that depicted the Congolese as childlike idiots , in later decades it would be accused of racism , however at the time was un @-@ controversial and popular , with further publicity stunts held to increase sales . For the third adventure , Tintin in America , serialised from September 1931 to October 1932 , Hergé finally got to deal with a scenario of his own choice , although he used the work to push an anti @-@ capitalist , anti @-@ consumerist agenda in keeping with the paper 's ultra @-@ conservative ideology . Although the Adventures of Tintin had been serialised in the French Catholic Cœurs Vaillants ( " Brave Hearts " ) since 1930 , he was soon receiving syndication requests from Swiss and Portuguese newspapers too . Though wealthier than most Belgians at his age , and despite increasing success , he remained an unfazed " conservative young man " dedicated to his work . 
 Hergé sought work elsewhere too , creating The Lovable Mr. <unk> cartoon for the Bon Marché department store , and The Adventures of Tim the Squirrel Out West for the rival L 'Innovation department store . On 20 July 1932 , he married Germaine Kieckens , who was Wallez 's secretary ; although neither of them were entirely happy with the union , they had been encouraged to do so by Wallez , who demanded that all his staff married and who personally carried out the wedding ceremony at the Saint @-@ Roch Church in Laeken . Spending their honeymoon in Vianden , Luxembourg , the couple moved into an apartment in the rue Knapen , Schaerbeek . After Wallez was removed from the paper 's editorship in August 1933 following a scandal , Hergé became despondent , and in March 1934 tried to resign , but was encouraged to stay after his monthly salary was increased from 2000 and 3000 francs and his workload was reduced , with Jamin taking responsibility for the day @-@ to @-@ day running of Le Petit Vingtième . 
 = = Rising fame = = 
 = = = Tintin in the Orient and Jo , Zette & Jocko : 1932 – 39 = = = 
 In November 1932 Hergé announced that the following month he would send Tintin on an adventure to Asia . Although initially titled The Adventures of Tintin , Reporter , in the Orient , it would later be renamed Cigars of the Pharaoh . A mystery story , the plot began in Egypt before proceeding to Arabia and India , during which the recurring characters of Thomson and Thompson and Rastapopoulos were introduced . Through his friend Charles Lesne , Hergé was hired to produce illustrations for the company Casterman , and in late 1933 they proposed taking over the publication of both The Adventures of Tintin and Quick and Flupke in book form , to which Hergé agreed ; the first Casterman book was the collected volume of Cigars . Continuing to subsidise his comic work with commercial advertising , in January 1934 he also founded the " Atelier Hergé " advertising company with two partners , but it was liquidated after six months . From February to August 1934 Hergé serialised Popol Out West in Le Petit Vingtième , a story using animal characters that was a development of the earlier Tim the Squirrel comic . 
 From August 1934 to October 1935 , Le Petit Vingtième serialised Tintin 's next adventure , The Blue Lotus , which was set in China and dealt with the recent Japanese invasion of Manchuria . Hergé had been greatly influenced in the production of the work by his friend Zhang Chongren , a Catholic Chinese student studying at Brussels ' Académie Royale des Beaux @-@ Arts , whom he had been introduced to in May 1934 . Zhang gave him lessons in Taoist philosophy , Chinese art , and Chinese calligraphy , influencing not only his artistic style but also his general outlook on life . As a token of appreciation Hergé added a fictional " Chang Chong @-@ Chen " to The Blue Lotus , a young Chinese boy who meets and befriends Tintin . For The Blue Lotus , Hergé devoted far more attention to accuracy , resulting in a largely realistic portrayal of China . As a result , The Blue Lotus has been widely hailed as " Hergé 's first masterpiece " and a benchmark in the series ' development . Casterman published it in book form , also insisting that Hergé include colour plates in both the volume and in reprints of America and Cigars . In 1936 , they also began production of Tintin merchandise , something Hergé supported , having ideas of an entire shop devoted to The Adventures of Tintin , something that would come to fruition 50 years later . Nevertheless , while his serialised comics proved lucrative , the collected volumes sold less well , something Hergé blamed on Casterman , urging them to do more to market his books . 
 Hergé 's next Tintin story , The Broken Ear ( 1935 – 37 ) , was the first for which the plot synopsis had been outlined from the start , being a detective story that took Tintin to South America . It introduced the character of General Alcazar , and also saw Hergé introduce the first fictional countries into the series , San Theodoros and Nuevo Rico , two republics based largely on Bolivia and Paraguay . The violent elements within The Broken Ear upset the publishers of Cœurs Vaillants , who asked Hergé to create a more child @-@ appropriate story for them . The result was The Adventures of Jo , Zette , and Jocko , a series about a young brother and sister and their pet monkey . The series began with The Secret Ray , which was serialised in Cœurs Vaillants and then Le Petit Vingtième , and continued with The <unk> H @-@ 22 . Hergé nevertheless disliked the series , commenting that the characters " bored me terribly . " Now writing three series simultaneously , Hergé was working every day of the year , and felt stressed . 
 The next Tintin adventure was The Black Island ( 1937 – 38 ) , which saw the character travel to Britain to battle counterfeiters and introduced a new antagonist , the German Dr. Müller . Hergé followed this with King Ottokar 's Sceptre ( 1938 – 39 ) , in which Tintin saves the fictional Eastern European country of Syldavia from being invaded by its expansionist neighbour , Borduria ; the event was an anti @-@ fascist satire of Nazi Germany 's expansion into Austria and Czechoslovakia . In May 1939 , Hergé moved to a new house in <unk> @-@ Boitsfort , although following the German invasion of Poland , he was conscripted into the Belgian army and temporarily stationed in <unk> . <unk> within the month , he returned to Brussels and adopted a more explicit anti @-@ German stance when beginning his next Tintin adventure , Land of Black Gold , which was set in the Middle East and featured Dr. Müller sabotaging oil lines . 
 During this period , Hergé also contributed to L 'Ouest ( The West ) , a newspaper run by his friend Raymond De Becker . L 'Ouest urged Belgium to remain neutral in World War II , a stance Hergé supported , creating the Mr Bellum strip to argue this position . Hergé was invited to visit China by Chinese Nationalist leader Chiang Kai @-@ shek , who had enjoyed The Blue Lotus , although due to the political situation in Europe , this was not possible . He was re @-@ mobilized in December , and stationed in Antwerp , from where he continued to send the Tintin strip to Le Petit Vingtième . However , he fell ill with sinusitis and boils and was declared unfit for military service in May 1940 . That same day , Germany invaded Belgium . Le Vingtième Siècle was shut down , part way through the serialisation of Land of Black Gold . 
 = = = German occupation and Le Soir : 1939 – 45 = = = 
 As the Belgian army clashed with the invading Germans , Hergé and his wife fled by car to France along with tens of thousands of other Belgians , first staying in Paris and then heading south to Puy @-@ de @-@ Dôme , where they remained for six weeks . On 28 May , Belgian King Leopold III surrendered the country to the German army to prevent further killing ; a move that Hergé supported . He followed the king 's request that all of those Belgians who had fled the country return , arriving back in Brussels on 30 June . There , he found that his house had been occupied as an office for the German army 's <unk> , and also faced financial trouble , as he owed back taxes yet was unable to access his financial reserves . All Belgian publications were now under the control of the German occupying force , who refused Le Petit Vingtième permission to continue publication . Instead , Hergé was offered employment as a cartoonist for Le Pays Réel by its editor , the Rexist Victor <unk> ; however , Hergé perceived Le Pays Réel as an explicitly political publication , and thus declined the position . 
 Instead , he took up a position with Le Soir , Belgium 's largest Francophone daily newspaper . Confiscated from its original owners , the German authorities had permitted Le Soir to be re @-@ opened under the directorship of De <unk> , although it remained firmly under Nazi control , supporting the German war effort and espousing anti @-@ Semitism . After joining the Le Soir team on 15 October , Hergé was involved in the creation of a children 's supplement , Soir @-@ Jeunesse , aided by Jamin and Jacques Van Melkebeke . He relaunched The Adventures of Tintin with a new story , The Crab with the Golden Claws , in which Tintin pursued drug smugglers in North Africa ; the story was a turning point in the series for its introduction of Captain Haddock , who would become a major character in the rest of the Adventures . This story , like the subsequent Adventures of Tintin published in Le Soir , would reject the political themes present in earlier stories , instead remaining firmly neutral . Hergé also included new Quick & Flupke gags in the supplement , as well as illustrations for serialised stories by Edgar Allan Poe and the Brothers Grimm . 
 In May 1941 , a paper shortage led to the Soir @-@ Jeunesse being reduced to four pages , with the length of the Tintin strip being cut by two thirds . Several weeks later the supplement disappeared altogether , with The Crab with the Golden Claws being moved into Le Soir itself , where it became a daily strip . While some Belgians were upset that Hergé was willing to work for a newspaper controlled by the occupying Nazi administration , he was heavily enticed by the size of Le Soir 's readership , which reached 600 @,@ 000 . With Van Melkebeke , Hergé put together two Tintin plays . The first , Tintin in the Indies , appeared at Brussels ' Theatre des Galeries in April 1941 , while the second , Mr Boullock 's Disappearance , was performed there in December . From October 1941 to May 1942 , Le Soir serialised Hergé 's next Tintin adventure , The Shooting Star , followed by publication as a single volume by Casterman . In keeping with Le Soir 's editorial standpoint , The Shooting Star espoused an anti @-@ Semitic and anti @-@ American attitude , with the antagonist being a wealthy Jewish American businessman ; it would thus prove particularly controversial in the post @-@ war period , although Hergé denied any malicious anti @-@ Semitic intention . 
 Casterman felt that the black @-@ and @-@ white volumes of The Adventures of Tintin were not selling as well as colour comic books , and thus that the series should be produced in colour . At the same time , Belgium was facing a paper @-@ shortage , with Casterman wishing to cut down the volumes from 120 @-@ pages in length to 62 . Hergé was initially sceptical , but ultimately agreed to their demands in February 1942 . For these new editions , Casterman introduced a four @-@ colour system , although Hergé insisted that colour should remain secondary to line , and that it would not be used for shading . To cope with this additional workload , Hergé approached a friend whom he had met through Van Melkebeke , Edgar P. Jacobs , to aid him as a cartoonist and colourist . Jacobs could only work on the project part time , and so on March 1942 Hergé also employed a woman named Alice <unk> to aid him . In July 1942 , Hergé then procured an agent , Bernard <unk> , who took 40 % of his commissions ; their working relationship would be strained . With their assistance , from 1942 to 1947 , Hergé adapted most of his previous Adventures of Tintin into 62 @-@ page colour versions . 
 Hergé 's next Adventure of Tintin would be The Secret of the Unicorn , serialised in Le Soir from June 1942 . He had collaborated closely with Van Melkebeke on this project , who had introduced many elements from the work of Jules Verne into the detective story , in which Tintin and Haddock searched for parchments revealing the location of hidden pirate treasure . The Secret of the Unicorn marked the first half of a story arc that was completed in Red Rackham 's Treasure , serialised in Le Soir from February 1943 ; in this story , Tintin and Haddock search for the pirate 's treasure in the Caribbean , with the character of Professor Calculus being introduced to the series . Following Red Rackham 's Treasure , Hergé drew illustrations for a serialised story titled Dupont et Dupond , détectives ( " Thomson and Thompson , Detectives " ) , authored by the newspaper 's crime editor , Paul Kinnet . 
 In September 1943 , De Becker was removed as editor of Le Soir for stating that although the Nazis were motivated " by undoubted good will , [ they were also ] extremely out of touch with reality " ; although Hergé was close to De Becker , he decided to remain at the newspaper , which came under the editorship of Max <unk> . In autumn 1943 , Hergé had decided that he wanted Jacobs to collaborate with him on The Adventures of Tintin . Although initially hesitant , Jacobs eventually agreed , adopting the paid position in January 1944 . Jacobs and Hergé became close collaborators and greatly influenced each other , while together they developed the plot for the next Adventure of Tintin , The Seven Crystal Balls , which began serialisation in Le Soir in December 1943 . 
 = = = Post @-@ war controversy : 1944 – 46 = = = 
 As the Allied troops liberated Brussels from German occupation , Le Soir ceased publication on 2 September 1944 , partway through its serialisation of The Seven Crystal Balls . Hergé was arrested on 3 September , having been named as a collaborator in a Resistance document known as the " Gallery of Traitors " . This would be the first of four incidents in which Hergé was arrested – by the State Security , the Judiciary Police , the Belgian National Movement , and the Front for Independence respectively – during the course of which he spent one night in jail . On 5 September the entire staff of Le Soir were fired and a new editorial team introduced , while on 8 September the Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force ( SHAEF ) issued a proclamation announcing that " any journalist who had helped produce a newspaper during the occupation was for the time being barred from practising his profession . " Blacklisted , Hergé was now unemployed . Further , he was publicly lampooned as a collaborator by a newspaper closely associated with the Belgian Resistance , La Patrie , which issued a satirical strip titled The Adventures of Tintin in the Land of the Nazis . 
 The period witnessed widespread recriminations against accused collaborators , with military courts condemning 30 @,@ 000 on minor charges and 25 @,@ 000 on more serious charges ; of those , 5 @,@ 500 were sentenced to life imprisonment or capital punishment . A judiciary inquiry into Hergé 's case was launched by the deputy public prosecutor , Mr <unk> , although in his report he urged lenience , stating that " I am inclined to close the case . I believe it would bring ridicule on the judicial system to go after an inoffensive children 's book author and illustrator . On the other hand , Hergé worked for Le Soir during the war , and his illustrations are what made people buy the newspaper . " Although unable to work for the press , Hergé continued to re @-@ draw and colour the older Adventures of Tintin for publication in book form by Casterman , completing the second version of Tintin in the Congo and starting on King Ottokar 's Sceptre . Casterman supported Hergé throughout his ordeal , for which he always remained grateful . Attempting to circumvent his blacklisting , with Jacobs he began producing comics under the anonymous pseudonym of " Olav " , but upon sending them to publishers found none who would accept them . Although this period allowed him an escape from the pressure of daily production which had affected most of his working life , he also had family problems to deal with ; his brother Paul returned to Brussels from a German prisoner of war camp , although their mother had become highly delusional and was moved to a psychiatric hospital . 
 In October 1945 , Hergé was approached by Raymond Leblanc , a former member of a conservative Resistance group , the National Royalist Movement , and his associates André Sinave and Albert Debaty . The trio were planning on launching a weekly magazine for children , and Leblanc – who had fond childhood memories of Tintin in the Land of the Soviets – thought Hergé would be ideal for it . Hergé agreed , and Leblanc obtained clearance papers for him , allowing him to work . Concerned about the judicial investigation into Hergé 's wartime affiliations , Leblanc convinced William Ugeux , a leader of the Belgian Resistance who was now in charge of censorship and certificates of good citizenship , to look into the comic creator 's file . Ugeux concluded that Hergé had been " a <unk> rather than a traitor " for his work at Le Soir . The decision as to whether Hergé would stand trial belonged to the general auditor of the Military Tribunal , Walter Jean Ganshof van der Meersch . He closed the case on 22 December 1945 , declaring that " in regard to the particularly inoffensive character of the drawings published by Remi , bringing him before a war tribunal would be inappropriate and risky " . 
 Now free from threat of prosecution , Hergé continued to support his colleagues at Le Soir who were being charged as collaborators ; six of them were sentenced to death , and others to lengthy prison sentences . Among those sentenced to death was Hergé 's friend , Jamin , although his sentence was commuted to life imprisonment . In May 1946 , Hergé was issued a certificate of good citizenship , which became largely necessary to obtain employment in post @-@ war Belgium . Celebrations were marred by his mother 's death in April 1946 ; she was aged 60 . Harry Thompson has described this post @-@ war period as the " greatest upheaval " of Hergé 's life . Hergé later described it as " an experience of absolute intolerance . It was horrible , horrible ! " He considered the post @-@ war trials of alleged collaborators a great injustice inflicted upon many innocent people , and never forgave Belgian society for the way that he had been treated , although he hid this from his public persona . 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = Establishing Tintin magazine : 1946 – 49 = = = 
 Sinave devised the idea of naming their new magazine Tintin , believing that this would attract a wide audience . The Dutch @-@ language edition produced for release in Belgium 's Flemish north was titled Kuifje after the character 's Dutch @-@ language name . Adopting the slogan of " The Newspaper for the Young Aged 7 to 77 " , the magazine also used a logo featuring the Tintin character himself . The capital for the project had been put up by those involved : as executive director , Leblanc provided 50 % , while its managing director Georges <unk> provided 40 % and Hergé , its artistic director , provided 10 % . Hergé assembled a group of associates to aid him , including Van Melkebeke , Jacobs , Paul <unk> , and Jacques Laudy . Van Melkebeke was initially appointed editor @-@ in @-@ chief , although he was arrested for having worked for the collaborationist Le Nouveau journal shortly after , with his involvement in the project thus being kept secret so as to avoid further controversy . Van Melkebeke continued to provide work for the magazine under pseudonyms , although this ceased during his imprisonment from December 1947 to October 1949 . 
 The first issue of Tintin magazine was published on 26 September 1946 . Hergé was assigned to produce a two @-@ page spread each week , and began by concluding The Seven Crystal Balls before embarking on its successor story , Prisoners of the Sun . Alongside Hergé 's Adventures of Tintin , the magazine also included Laudy 's The Legend of the Four Aymon Brothers and Jacobs ' The Secret of the Swordfish , the first in his new Blake and Mortimer series . While the magazine was in competition with a number of rivals , most notably Spirou , famous for serialising the Lucky Luke and Buck Danny comics , it proved an immediate success , with 60 @,@ 000 copies being sold in three days of its release . Its publication resulted in a massive boost to Hergé 's book sales too . 
 In 1947 a Belgian film adaptation of The Crab with the Golden Claws was produced , and believing that cinematic adaptations were a good way to proceed , Hergé contacted Disney Studios in the United States ; they declined his offer to adapt The Adventures of Tintin for the silver screen . In May 1947 the artistic collaboration between Hergé and Jacobs ended after an argument . Hergé had been jealous of the immediate success of Jacobs ' Blake and Mortimer series , and had turned down Jacobs ' request that he be credited as co @-@ creator of the new Adventures of Tintin . That same month , Hergé broke from his manager , <unk> , after discovering that the latter had been siphoning off money for himself . 
 Many Belgians were highly critical of the magazine due to its connections with Hergé , who was still deemed a collaborator and traitor by many ; La Soir and La Cité publicly criticised the decision without referring to him by name while Le <unk> and Le Drapeau Rouge specifically singled him out for denunciation . Hergé believed that the children 's author Jeanne Cappe was behind many of these accusations , and threatened her with a lawsuit . Unhappy with life in Belgium , Hergé made plans to emigrate to Argentina , a nation that was welcoming many Europeans who had supported the defeated Axis powers and which had a thriving comic book scene . Ultimately , he changed his mind , for reasons that have remained unknown ; it is possible that he was unable to secure any promise of work in the South American country . 
 In May , Hergé and Germaine holidayed near to Gland on Lake Geneva , Switzerland , where they were accompanied by a friend of theirs , a young woman named <unk> . During the holiday , Hergé and <unk> embarked on an extra @-@ marital affair . He felt guilty , and returned to Brussels in June . Privately , he expressed the view that he had been led to commit such an act , which he viewed as immoral , through the influence of " amoral friends " that he was associating with . Hoping to reignite the passion and stability of his marriage , he arranged for he and Germaine to return to Switzerland soon after ; here they argued , and embarked on a temporary separation . Remaining in Switzerland , he visited King Leopold III , who was then holidaying in <unk> , before briefly returning to Brussels in July . Back in Switzerland , he embarked on an affair with a married woman , although again informed Germaine before setting off to spend time in Ardenne . In August , the couple sought to reunite by holidaying together in Brittany , but there they broke up again and Hergé returned to his lover in Switzerland . In September he finally returned to Brussels , but with his close friend Marcel Dehaye then spent time in a retreat at the Abbey of Notre @-@ Dame @-@ de @-@ <unk> . That month , he revived Land of Black Gold – the Adventure of Tintin that had been interrupted by the German invasion of 1940 – and began serialising it in Tintin magazine . However , the story was again interrupted , this time for twelve weeks as Hergé took a further unannounced holiday to Gland , greatly annoying many of his colleagues . 
 Although they retained respect for each other , Hergé 's repeated absences had created a tense situation between himself and Leblanc . After a lengthy search , Leblanc had found a publisher willing to produce an edition of Tintin magazine in France : Georges Dargaud 's Le Lombard , which began production of a French edition in October 1948 . However , Hergé was unhappy that Leblanc had appointed André <unk> as Van Melkebeke 's replacement as editor @-@ in @-@ chief , describing <unk> as " a cold functionary " . Hergé was stubborn and uncompromising as the magazine 's artistic director , known for strongly criticising the work of old friends like Pierre Ickx if he felt that they did not meet his exacting standards . He was particularly critical of the work of two of the newly hired staff at Tintin and Kuifje , Jacques Martin and Willy Vandersteen , encouraging them to change their artistic style to better reflect his own preferences . To Leblanc , he expressed the concern that most of those working at Tintin were better illustrators than storytellers . He also opined that Tintin was not keeping up with the times and what he perceived as the increased maturity of children , encouraging the magazine to better reflect current events and scientific developments . 
 = = = Studios Hergé and Fanny <unk> : 1950 – 65 = = = 
 On 6 April 1950 Hergé established Studios Hergé as a public company . The Studios were based in his Avenue Delleur house in Brussels , with Hergé making a newly purchased country house in Céroux @-@ Mousty his and Germaine 's main abode . The Studios would provide both personal support to Hergé and technical support for his ongoing work . Initially with only three employees , this would rise to fifteen , with all working on Hergé 's projects . He hired Bob de Moor as his primary apprentice at the Studios in March 1951 . Impressed by Jacques Martin 's work on The Golden Sphinx , Hergé convinced Martin to join the Studios in January 1954 ; Martin insisted on bringing with him his own two assistants , Roger Leloup and Michel <unk> . During the early 1950s , a number of those convicted for collaborating with the Nazi occupiers were freed from prison . Sympathetic to their plight , Hergé lent money to some and aided others in getting jobs at Tintin magazine , much to Leblanc 's annoyance . For instance , as well as lending him money , Hergé used his connections to secure Raymond de Becker a job in Switzerland as a book shop sales inspector . He also hired those associated with collaboration for his Studios ; his new colourist , Josette <unk> , was the wife of a recently assassinated member of the Walloon Legion , and his new secretary , Baudouin van der Branden de <unk> , had served a prison sentence for working at Le Nouveau Journal during the occupation . 
 Hergé had developed the idea of setting an Adventure of Tintin on the moon while producing Prisoners of the Sun . He began serialisation of Destination Moon , the first of a two part arc followed by Explorers on the Moon , in Tintin magazine in March 1950 . In September 1950 , Hergé broke off the story , feeling the need for a break from work , having fallen back into clinical depression . He and Germaine went on holiday to Gland before returning to Brussels in late September . Many readers sent letters to Tintin asking why Explorers on the Moon was no longer being serialised , with a rumour emerging that Hergé had died . Explorers of the Moon would resume after an eighteen month hiatus , returning in April 1951 . Alongside his work on the new stories , Hergé also made use of the Studios in revising more of his early works . 
 In February 1952 , Hergé was involved in a car crash in which Germaine 's leg was shattered ; she had to have a steel rod implanted in it , and was confined to a wheelchair for several months . Their relationship was further strained when they received news of Wallez 's death on September 1952 . His friendship with Van Melkebeke also broke apart in this period , in part due to advice gained from an alleged clairvoyant , <unk> <unk> , whom both Hergé and Germaine were increasingly relying upon for guidance . In January 1955 a young woman named Fanny <unk> was hired as a colourist at the Studios . Hergé embarked on an extra @-@ marital affair with her in November 1956 , with the rest of the studio staff soon finding out . Germaine grew suspicious of her husband 's affections for Fanny , but was also experiencing strong romantic attraction to her ballroom dance partner . Hergé and Germaine went on a cruise for the former 's fiftieth birthday in May 1957 , in which they visited Casablanca , Rabat , Palermo , and Rome , and in October went on a second holiday , this time to Ostend . Following this , he revealed his affair with Fanny to Germaine . He began experiencing traumatic dreams dominated by the colour white , and seeking to explain them he visited Franz <unk> , a psychoanalyst who was a student of Carl Jung in Zurich in May 1959 . In February 1960 he returned to Switzerland , and upon its arrival back in Brussels he began renting an apartment in Uccle , away from Germaine . His relationship with Germaine had ended , although due to restrictions under Belgian law he was unable to obtain a divorce until seventeen years later . 
 In September 1958 , Tintin magazine moved its headquarters to a newly constructed building near the Gare du Midi . Hergé continued to feud with Leblanc over the direction of the magazine ; his constant absences had led to him being replaced as artistic director , and he demanded that he be reinstated . Leblanc relented in early 1965 , although Hergé soon departed to Sardinia for six weeks . In October 1965 Leblanc appointed the cartoonist Greg to be editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the magazine , believing him capable of reforming the paper to remain relevant to the youth of the day . By this point , Tintin magazine was at its commercial peak , with sales of 600 @,@ 000 a week , although Hergé had lost much of his interest in it . 
 Hergé 's book sales were higher than ever , and translations were being produced for the British , Spanish , and Scandinavian markets . He was receiving international press attention , with articles on his work appearing in France @-@ Observateur , The Listener , and Times Literary Supplement . Paul <unk> authored an un @-@ critical book on Hergé , Le Monde de Tintin ( " The World of Tintin " ) , published by Gallimard ; Hergé vetoed the inclusion of a proposed preface by Roger <unk> after finding its praise for his own work too embarrassing . Radio adaptations of The Adventures of Tintin were produced , as was an animated cartoon series produced by Belvision , Hergé 's Adventures of Tintin . Two live @-@ action films were also produced , Tintin and the Golden Fleece ( 1961 ) and Tintin and the Blue Oranges ( 1964 ) , the former of which Hergé had been closely involved with . 
 Developing an interest in modern art , in the early 1960s Hergé befriended the art dealer Marcel Stal , owner of the Carrefour gallery in Brussels . He was a particular fan of the work of Constant <unk> , Jakob Smits , Lucio Fontana , and Jean @-@ Pierre <unk> , as well as the pop art movement , in particular the work of Roy Lichtenstein . He built up his own personal collection , which consisted of both modern paintings as well as African art and Chinese ceramics . In 1962 , Hergé decided he wanted to paint . He chose Louis Van Lint , one of the most respected Belgian abstract painters at the time , whose work he liked a lot , to be his private teacher . Hergé took up painting as a hobby , producing abstract art works which were influenced by the styles of Joan Miró and Serge Poliakoff . He showed his work to the art historian Léo Van <unk> , who was the chief conservator of the Musées des Beaux @-@ Arts , who believed that they showed promise but that Hergé 's real talent lay with cartoon drawing . Hergé abandoned painting shortly after , having produced 37 paintings in all . Spending less time on new Adventures of Tintin , from June to December 1965 Tintin magazine serialised a redrawn and newly coloured version of The Black Island prepared by staff at Studios Hergé . Supported by his studio , Hergé produced The Calculus Affair between 1954 until 1956 which was followed by The Red Sea Sharks in 1956 to 1957 . 
 = = = Final years : 1966 – 83 = = = 
 In the 1960s , Hergé became increasingly annoyed at the success of René Goscinny and Albert Uderzo 's Asterix comic book series , which various commentators had described as eclipsing The Adventures of Tintin as the foremost comic in the Franco @-@ Belgian tradition . Hoping to imitate the success of the recent animated films Asterix the Gaul ( 1967 ) and Asterix and Cleopatra ( 1968 ) , Hergé agreed to the production of two animated Belvision films based on the Adventures of Tintin . The first , Tintin and the Temple of the Sun ( 1969 ) , was based on pre @-@ existing comics , whereas the second , Tintin and the Lake of Sharks ( 1972 ) was an original story written by Greg . In 1982 the American filmmaker Steven Spielberg requested the film rights for a live @-@ action adaptation of one of The Adventures of Tintin , a prospect that excited Hergé , but the project never came to fruition at the time . 
 In October 1971 , the journalist Numa Sadoul conducted a wide @-@ ranging interview with Hergé , in which the latter opened up about many of the problems he had experienced in his personal life . Sadoul planned to publish the interview as a book , but Hergé made many alterations to the transcript , both to improve its prose and to remove sections which cast him in a negative light . Editors at Casterman then removed even further sections , particularly those in which Hergé expressed a negative view of Catholicism . The interview was published as Tintin et moi ( " Tintin and I " ) in 1975 . Hergé followed this by agreeing to be the subject of a documentary film produced by Henri Roane , Moi , Tintin ( " I , Tintin " ) , which premiered in 1975 . In January 1977 he attended an early comic book convention at Angoulême , where he was widely heralded as one of the masters of the discipline . To mark the fiftieth anniversary of The Adventures of Tintin in 1979 , a celebratory event was held at Brussels ' Hilton hotel , while an exhibit on " Le Musée <unk> de Tintin " ( " The Imaginary Museum of Tintin " ) was held at the Palais de Beaux @-@ Arts . 
 In April 1971 Hergé visited the United States for the first time , primarily to visit a liver specialist in Rochester , Minnesota , but on the trip he also visited a Sioux reservation in South Dakota , but was shocked at the conditions in which their inhabitants ' lived . On this visit he also spent time in Chicago , San Francisco , Los Angeles , Las Vegas , and Kansas City . In April 1972 he travelled to New York City for an international conference on the strip cartoon , and there presented Mayor John Lindsay with a cartoon of Tintin visiting the city and also met with the pop artist Andy Warhol . Several years later , in 1977 , Warhol visited Europe , where he produced a pop art portrait of Hergé . In April 1973 , Hergé took up an invite to visit Taiwan by the nation 's government , in recognition of his promotion of Chinese culture in The Blue Lotus . During the visit he also spent time in Thailand and Bali . 
 Hergé had long sought to regain contact with his old friend Zhang Chongren , with whom he had lost contact . He regularly asked any Chinese people that he met if they knew of Zhang , and in 1979 had some success when a staff member in a Brussels Chinese restaurant revealed that he was Zhang 's godson . Hergé was thus able to re @-@ establish contact with his old friend . The journalist Gérard Valet organised for Zhang to visit Brussels so that he and Hergé could be re @-@ united . The event took place in March 1981 , and was heavily publicised ; Hergé however found the situation difficult , disliking the press attention and finding that he and Zhang had grown distant during the intervening years . 
 In June 1970 , Hergé 's father died , and after the funeral he holidayed near Lake Geneva . In 1974 , his assistant Branden suffered a stroke and was left unable to write , with Hergé replacing him with a young man , Alain Baran , who Hergé biographer Pierre Assouline later termed Hergé 's " surrogate son " . In March 1977 , Hergé 's divorce with Germaine was finalised ; although Hergé continued to visit her and financially support her , Germaine took the divorce badly , viewing it as a further betrayal . Hergé was then able to marry Fanny several weeks later , in a low @-@ key ceremony on 20 May ; he was 70 years old and she 42 . In 1979 , Hergé was diagnosed with <unk> , necessitating a complete blood transfusion . His need for blood transfusions had increased , as he came to require them every two weeks , and then every week . On 25 February 1983 , Hergé entered cardiac arrest and was hospitalised in intensive care at Brussels ' <unk> <unk> Saint @-@ Luc . 
 He died there on 3 March . His death received front page coverage in numerous francophone newspapers , including Libération and Le Monde . In his will , he had left Fanny as his sole heir . In November 1986 , Fanny closed Studios Hergé , replacing it with the Hergé Foundation . In 1988 , Tintin magazine was discontinued . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Hergé was a highly private person , being described by biographer Harry Thompson as " reserved [ and ] unostentatious " . He greatly enjoyed walking in the countryside , gardening , and art collecting , and he was a fan of jazz music . Although he disliked making public or press appearances , Hergé insisted on personally responding to all fan mail received , which took up a considerable part of his time . He stated that " not replying to children 's letters would be to betray their dreams . " Friends described him as a humorous man , known particularly for his self @-@ deprecating jokes . Colleagues described Hergé as egocentric , an assessment he agreed with . He was known to be authoritarian in dealing with his assistants and refused to share credit with them for their part in his work . 
 Throughout his first marriage he had a number of affairs with other women . He had no children , having been rendered sterile by radiation treatment , but in the 1950s offered to adopt his brother Paul 's two children , Denise and George , when their parents were experiencing trouble in their relationship . Paul declined the offer , with Denise and George later noting that they had no great affection for Hergé , deeming him awkward around children . For a large part of his life , Hergé was a devout Catholic and supported most of the traditional elements of Belgian society , a view expressed in some of the early Tintin comics . His adherence to Catholicism declined in later life as he developed a keen interest in Taoism , and became an agnostic . He was a fan of the Tao Te Ching and Arnaud Desjardins ' The Path to Wisdom , as well as Fritjof Capra 's The Tao of Physics and the work of Jean @-@ Émile Charon . 
 = = = Political views = = = 
 Politically , Hergé was a fervent royalist , and remained so throughout his life , also believing in the unity of Belgium . In his early life , Hergé was " close to the traditional right @-@ wing " of Belgian society . According to Harry Thompson , such political ideas were not unusual in middle @-@ class circles in Belgium of the 1920s and early 1930s , where " patriotism , Catholicism , strict morality , discipline and naivety were so inextricably bound together in everyone 's lives that right @-@ wing politics were an almost inevitable by @-@ product . It was a world view shared by everyone , distinguished principally by its complete ignorance of the world . " When Hergé took responsibility for Le Petit Vingtième , he followed Wallez 's instruction and allowed the newspaper to contain explicitly pro @-@ fascist and anti @-@ semitic sentiment . Literary critic Jean @-@ Marie Apostolidès noted that the character of Tintin was a personification of the " New Youth " concept which was promoted by the European far right . Under Wallez 's guidance , the early Adventures of Tintin contained explicit political messages for its young readership . Tintin in the Land of the Soviets was a work of anti @-@ socialist propaganda , while Tintin in the Congo was designed to encourage colonialist sentiment toward the Belgian Congo , and Tintin in America was designed as a work of anti @-@ Americanism heavily critical of capitalism , commercialism , and industrialisation . 
 Michael Farr asserted that Hergé had " an acute political conscience " during his earlier days , as exemplified by his condemnation of racism in the United States evident in Tintin in America . Literary critic Tom McCarthy went further , remarking that Tintin in America represented the emergence of a " left @-@ wing counter tendency " in Hergé 's work that rebelled against his right @-@ wing milieu and which was particularly critical of wealthy capitalists and industrialists . This was furthered in The Blue Lotus , in which Hergé rejected his " classically right @-@ wing " ideas to embrace an anti @-@ imperialist stance , and in a contemporary Quick & Flupke strip in which he lampooned the far right leaders of Germany and Italy , Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini . Although many of his friends and colleagues did so in the mid @-@ 1930s , Hergé did not join the far @-@ right Rexist Party , later asserting that he " had always had an aversion to it " and commenting that " to throw my heart and soul into an ideology is the opposite of who I am . " 
 = = = Accusations of racism = = = 
 Hergé has faced repeated accusations of racism due to his portrayal of various ethnic groups throughout The Adventures of Tintin . According to McCarthy , in Tintin in the Congo Hergé represented the Congolese as " good at heart but backwards and lazy , in need of European mastery . " Thompson commented that Hergé had not written the book to be " deliberately racist " , arguing that it reflected the average early 20th century Belgian view of the Congolese , one which was more " patronising " than malevolent . Indeed , it provoked no controversy at the time , only coming to be perceived as racist in the latter 20th century . In the following adventure , Tintin in America , Hergé depicted members of the Blackfoot tribe of Native Americans as " gullible , even naive " , though it was nevertheless " broadly sympathetic " to their culture and plight , depicting their oppression at the hands of the U.S. army . In The Blue Lotus , he depicted the Japanese as militaristic and buck @-@ toothed , which has also drawn accusations of racism . 
 Hergé has also been accused of utilising anti @-@ semitic stereotypes . The character of Rastapopoulos has been claimed to be based on anti @-@ semitic stereotypes , despite Hergé 's protestations that the character was Italian , and not Jewish . 
 In contrast to his racial stereotyping , from his early years , Hergé was openly critical of racism . He lambasted the pervasive racism of U.S. society in a prelude comment to Tintin in America published in Le Petit Vingtième on 20 August 1931 , and ridiculed racist attitudes toward the Chinese in The Blue Lotus . Peeters asserted that " Hergé was no more racist than the next man " , an assessment shared by Farr , who after meeting Hergé in the 1980s commented that " you couldn 't have met someone who was more open and less racist " . In contrast , President of the International Bande Dessinée Society Laurence Grove opined that Hergé adhered to prevailing societal trends in his work , and that " When it was fashionable to be a Nazi , he was a Nazi . When it was fashionable to be a colonial racist , that 's what he was . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Assouline described Hergé as " the personification of Belgium " . 
 = = = Awards and recognition = = = 
 1971 : Adamson Awards , Sweden 
 1972 : Yellow Kid " una vita per il cartooning " ( lifetime award ) at the Festival of Lucca 
 1973 : Grand Prix Saint Michel of the city of Brussels 
 1999 : Included in the Harvey Award Jack Kirby Hall of Fame 
 2003 : Included in the Eisner Award Hall of Fame as the Judge 's choice 
 2006 : The Dalai Lama bestowed the International Campaign for Tibet 's Light of Truth Award upon the character of Tintin . 
 2007 : Selected as the main motif for a Belgian commemorative coin with a face value of € 20 in honour of his 100th birthday . 
 According to the UNESCO 's Index <unk> , Hergé is the ninth @-@ most @-@ often @-@ translated French @-@ language author , the second @-@ most @-@ often @-@ translated Belgian author after Georges Simenon , and the second @-@ most @-@ often @-@ translated French @-@ language comics author behind René Goscinny . He also had an asteroid , 1652 Hergé , within the main belt , named after him in 1953 . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 A cartoon version of Hergé makes a number of cameo appearances in Ellipse @-@ Nelvana 's The Adventures of Tintin TV cartoon series . An animated version of Hergé also makes a cameo appearance at the start of the 2011 performance capture film , The Adventures of Tintin : The Secret of the Unicorn , directed by Steven Spielberg and produced by Peter Jackson , where he is depicted as a street cartoonist drawing a portrait of Tintin at the start of the film . 
 = = = Hergé Museum = = = 
 The Musée Hergé is located in the centre of Louvain @-@ la @-@ Neuve , a city to the south of Brussels . This location was originally chosen for the Museum in 2001 . The futuristic building was designed by Pritzker Prize @-@ winning French architect Christian de <unk> and cost € 15 million to build . On the centenary of the birth of Hergé , 22 May 2007 , the museum 's first stone was laid . The museum opened its doors in June 2009 . 
 The idea of a museum dedicated to the work of Hergé can be traced back to the end of the 1970s , when Hergé was still alive . After his death in 1983 , Hergé 's widow , Fanny , led the efforts , undertaken at first by the Hergé Foundation and then by the new Studios Hergé , to catalogue and choose the artwork and elements that would become part of the Museum 's exhibitions . 
 The Hergé Museum contains eight permanent galleries displaying original artwork by Hergé , and telling the story of his life and career which had not previously been visible to the public . The Museum also houses a temporary exhibition gallery . Although Tintin features prominently in the museum , Hergé 's other comic strip characters , such as Jo , Zette and Jocko , and Quick and Flupke , as well as his work as a graphic designer , are also present . 
 = Joker ( comics ) = 
 The Joker is a fictional supervillain created by Bill Finger , Bob Kane , and Jerry Robinson who first appeared in the debut issue of the comic book Batman ( April 25 , 1940 ) published by DC Comics . Credit for the Joker 's creation is disputed ; Kane and Robinson claimed responsibility for the Joker 's design , while acknowledging Finger 's writing contribution . Although the Joker was planned to be killed off during his initial appearance , he was spared by editorial intervention , allowing the character to endure as the archenemy of the superhero Batman . 
 In his comic book appearances , the Joker is portrayed as a criminal mastermind . Introduced as a psychopath with a warped , sadistic sense of humor , the character became a goofy prankster in the late 1950s in response to regulation by the Comics Code Authority , before returning to his darker roots during the early 1970s . As Batman 's nemesis , the Joker has been part of the superhero 's defining stories , including the murder of Jason Todd — the second Robin and Batman 's ward — and the paralysis of one of Batman 's allies , Barbara Gordon . The Joker has had various possible origin stories during his decades of appearances . The most common story involves him falling into a tank of chemical waste which bleaches his skin white , turns his hair green , and his lips bright red ; the resulting disfigurement drives him insane . The antithesis of Batman in personality and appearance , the Joker is considered by critics to be his perfect adversary . 
 The Joker possesses no superhuman abilities , instead using his expertise in chemical engineering to develop poisonous or lethal concoctions , and thematic weaponry , including razor @-@ tipped playing cards , deadly joy buzzers , and acid @-@ spraying lapel flowers . Although the Joker sometimes works with other supervillains such as the Penguin and Two @-@ Face , and groups like the Injustice Gang and Injustice League , these relationships often collapse due to the Joker 's desire for unbridled chaos . The 1990s introduced a romantic interest for the Joker in his former psychiatrist , Harley Quinn , who becomes his villainous sidekick . Although his primary obsession is Batman , the Joker has also fought other heroes including Superman and Wonder Woman . 
 One of the most iconic characters in popular culture , the Joker has been listed among the greatest comic book villains and fictional characters ever created . The character 's popularity has seen him appear on a variety of merchandise , such as clothing and collectable items , inspire real @-@ world structures ( such as theme park attractions ) , and be referenced in a number of media . The Joker has been adapted to serve as Batman 's adversary in live @-@ action , animated and video game incarnations , including the 1960s Batman television series ( played by Cesar Romero ) and in film by Jack Nicholson in Batman ( 1989 ) , Heath Ledger in The Dark Knight ( 2008 ) , and Jared Leto in Suicide Squad ( 2016 ) . Mark Hamill , Troy Baker , and others have provided the character 's voice . 
 = = Creation and development = = 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 Bill Finger , Bob Kane , and Jerry Robinson are credited with creating the Joker , but their accounts of the character 's conception differ , each providing his own version of events . Finger 's , Kane 's , and Robinson 's versions acknowledge that Finger produced an image of actor Conrad Veidt in character as Gwynplaine ( a man with a disfigured face , giving him a perpetual grin ) in the 1928 film The Man Who Laughs as an inspiration for the Joker 's appearance , and Robinson produced a sketch of a joker playing card ( right ) . 
 Robinson claimed that it was his 1940 card sketch that served as the character 's concept , and which Finger associated with Veidt 's portrayal . Kane hired the 17 @-@ year @-@ old Robinson as an assistant in 1939 , after he saw Robinson in a white jacket decorated with his own illustrations . Beginning as a letterer and background inker , Robinson quickly became primary artist for the newly created Batman comic book series . In a 1975 interview in The Amazing World of DC Comics , Robinson said he wanted a supreme arch @-@ villain who could test Batman , but not a typical crime lord or gangster designed to be easily disposed . He wanted an exotic , enduring character as an ongoing source of conflict for Batman ( similar to the relationship between Sherlock Holmes and Professor Moriarty ) , designing a diabolically sinister @-@ but @-@ clownish villain . Robinson was intrigued by villains ; his studies at Columbia University taught him that some characters are made up of contradictions , leading to the Joker 's sense of humor . He said that the name came first , followed by an image of a playing card from a deck he often had at hand : " I wanted somebody visually exciting . I wanted somebody that would make an indelible impression , would be bizarre , would be memorable like the Hunchback of Notre Dame or any other villains that had unique physical characters . " He told Finger about his concept by telephone , later providing sketches of the character and images of what would become his iconic Joker playing @-@ card design . Finger thought the concept was incomplete , providing the image of Veidt with a ghastly , permanent rictus grin . 
 Kane countered that the Robinson 's sketch was produced only after Finger had already shown the Gwynplaine image to Kane , and that it was only used as a card design belonging to the Joker in his early appearances . Finger said that he was also inspired by an image in Steeplechase Park at Coney Island that resembled a Joker 's head , which he sketched and later shared with future editorial director Carmine Infantino . In a 1994 interview with journalist Frank Lovece , Kane stated his position : 
 Bill Finger and I created the Joker . Bill was the writer . Jerry Robinson came to me with a playing card of the Joker . That 's the way I sum it up . [ The Joker ] looks like Conrad Veidt – you know , the actor in The Man Who Laughs , [ the 1928 movie based on the novel ] by Victor Hugo . ... Bill Finger had a book with a photograph of Conrad Veidt and showed it to me and said , ' Here 's the Joker ' . Jerry Robinson had absolutely nothing to do with it , but he 'll always say he created it till he dies . He brought in a playing card , which we used for a couple of issues for him [ the Joker ] to use as his playing card . 
 Robinson credited himself , Finger and Kane for the Joker 's creation . He said he created the character as Batman 's larger @-@ than @-@ life nemesis when extra stories were quickly needed for Batman # 1 , and he received credit for the story in a college course : 
 In that first meeting when I showed them that sketch of the Joker , Bill said it reminded him of Conrad Veidt in The Man Who Laughs . That was the first mention of it ... He can be credited and Bob himself , we all played a role in it . The concept was mine . Bill finished that first script from my outline of the persona and what should happen in the first story . He wrote the script of that , so he really was co @-@ creator , and Bob and I did the visuals , so Bob was also . 
 Although Kane adamantly refused to share credit for many of his characters ( and refuted Robinson 's claim until Kane 's death ) , many comic historians credit Robinson with the Joker 's creation and Finger with the character 's development . By 2011 , Finger , Kane , and Robinson had died , leaving the story unresolved . 
 = = = Golden Age = = = 
 The Joker debuted in Batman # 1 ( 1940 ) as the eponymous character 's first villain , shortly after Batman 's debut in Detective Comics # 27 ( May 1939 ) . The Joker initially appeared as a remorseless serial killer , modeled after a joker playing card with a mirthless grin , who killed his victims with " Joker venom " : a toxin which left their faces smiling grotesquely . The character was intended to be killed in his second appearance in Batman # 1 , after being stabbed in the heart . Finger wanted the Joker to die because of his concern that recurring villains would make Batman appear inept , but was overruled by then @-@ editor Whitney Ellsworth ; a hastily drawn panel , indicating that the Joker was still alive , was added to the comic . The Joker went on to appear in nine of Batman 's first twelve issues . 
 The character 's regular appearances quickly defined him as the archenemy of the dynamic duo , Batman and Robin ; he killed dozens of people , and even derailed a train . By issue # 13 , Kane 's work on the syndicated Batman newspaper strip left him little time for the comic book ; artist Dick Sprang assumed his duties , and editor Jack Schiff collaborated with Finger on stories . Around the same time , DC Comics found it easier to market its stories to children without the more mature pulp elements that had originated many superhero comics . During this period , the first changes in the Joker began to appear , portraying him more as a prankster than threat ; when he kidnaps Robin , Batman pays the ransom by check , meaning that the Joker cannot cash it without being arrested . Comic book writer Mark Waid suggests that the 1942 story " The Joker Walks the Last Mile " was the beginning point for the character 's transformation into a more goofy incarnation , a period that Grant Morrison considered lasted the following thirty years . 
 The 1942 cover of Detective Comics # 69 , known as " Double Guns " ( with the Joker emerging from a genie lamp , aiming two guns at Batman and Robin ) , is considered one of the greatest superhero comic covers of the Golden Age and is the only image of the character using traditional guns . Robinson said that other contemporary villains used guns , and the creative team wanted the Joker — as Batman 's adversary — to be more resourceful . 
 = = = Silver Age = = = 
 The Joker was one of the few popular villains appearing regularly in Batman comics from the Golden Age into the Silver Age , as the series continued during the rise in popularity of mystery and romance comics . In 1951 , Finger wrote an origin story for the Joker in Detective Comics # 168 , which introduced the characteristic of him formerly being the criminal Red Hood , and his disfigurement the result of a fall into a chemical vat . 
 By 1954 , the Comics Code Authority had been established in response to increasing public disapproval of comic book content . The backlash was inspired by Frederic Wertham , who hypothesized that mass media ( especially comic books ) was responsible for the rise in juvenile delinquency , violence and homosexuality , particularly in young males . Parents forbade their children from reading comic books , and there were several mass burnings . The Comics Code banned gore , innuendo and excessive violence , stripping Batman of his menace and transforming the Joker into a goofy , thieving trickster without his original homicidal tendencies . 
 The character appeared less frequently after 1964 , when Julius Schwartz ( who disliked the Joker ) became editor of the Batman comics . The character risked becoming an obscure figure of the preceding era until this goofy prankster version of the character was adapted into the 1966 television series Batman , in which he was played by Cesar Romero . The show 's popularity compelled Schwartz to keep the comics in a similar vein . As the show 's popularity waned , however , so did that of the Batman comics . After the TV series ended in 1968 , the increase in public visibility had not stopped the comic 's sales decline ; editorial director Carmine Infantino resolved to turn things around , moving stories away from schoolboy @-@ friendly adventures . The Silver Age introduced several of the Joker 's defining character traits : lethal joy buzzers , acid @-@ squirting flowers , trick guns , and goofy , elaborate crimes . 
 = = = Bronze Age = = = 
 In 1973 , after a four @-@ year disappearance , the Joker was revived ( and revised ) by writer Dennis O 'Neil and artist Neal Adams . Beginning with Batman # 251 's " The Joker 's Five @-@ Way Revenge " , the character returns to his roots as an impulsive , homicidal maniac who matches wits with Batman . This story began a trend in which the Joker was used , sparingly , as a central character . O 'Neil said his idea was " simply to take it back to where it started . I went to the DC library and read some of the early stories . I tried to get a sense of what Kane and Finger were after . " O 'Neil 's 1973 run introduced the idea of the Joker being legally insane , to explain why the character is sent to Arkham Asylum ( introduced by O 'Neil in 1974 as Arkham Hospital ) instead of to prison . Adams modified the Joker 's appearance , changing his more average figure by extending his jaw and making him taller and leaner . 
 DC Comics was a hotbed of experimentation during the 1970s , and in 1975 the character became the first villain to feature as the title character in a comic book series , The Joker . The series followed the character 's interactions with other supervillains , and the first issue was written by O 'Neil . Stories balanced between emphasizing the Joker 's criminality and making him a likable protagonist whom readers could support . Although he murdered thugs and civilians , he never fought Batman ; this made The Joker a series in which the character 's villainy prevailed over rival villains , instead of a struggle between good and evil . Because the Comics Code Authority mandated punishment for villains , each issue ended with the Joker being apprehended , limiting the scope of each story . The series never found an audience , and The Joker was cancelled after nine issues ( despite a " next issue " advertisement for an appearance by the Justice League ) . The complete series became difficult to obtain over time , often commanding high prices from collectors . In 2013 , DC Comics reissued the series as a graphic novel . 
 When Jenette Kahn became DC editor in 1976 , she redeveloped the company 's struggling titles ; during her tenure , the Joker would become one of DC 's most popular characters . While O 'Neil and Adams ' work was critically acclaimed , writer Steve Englehart and penciller Marshall Rogers 's eight @-@ issue run in Detective Comics # 471 @-@ 476 ( August 1977 @-@ April 1978 ) defined the Joker for decades to come with stories emphasizing the character 's insanity . In " The Laughing Fish " , the Joker disfigures fish with a rictus grin resembling his own ( expecting copyright protection ) , and is unable to understand that copyrighting a natural resource is legally impossible . Englehart and Rogers ' work on the series influenced the 1989 film Batman , and was adapted for 1992 's Batman : The Animated Series . Rogers expanded on Adams ' character design , drawing the Joker with a fedora and trench coat . Englehart outlined how he understood the character by saying that the Joker " was this very crazy , scary character . I really wanted to get back to the idea of Batman fighting insane murderers at 3 a.m. under the full moon , as the clouds scuttled by . " 
 = = = Modern Age = = = 
 Years after the end of the 1966 television series , sales of Batman continued to fall and the title was nearly canceled . Although the 1970s restored the Joker as an insane , lethal foe of Batman , it was during the 1980s that the Batman series started to turn around and the Joker came into his own as part of the " dark age " of comics : mature tales of death and destruction . The shift was derided for moving away from tamer superheroes ( and villains ) , but comic audiences were no longer primarily children . Several months after Crisis on Infinite Earths launched the era by killing off Silver @-@ Age icons such as the Flash and Supergirl and undoing decades of continuity , Frank Miller 's The Dark Knight Returns ( 1986 ) re @-@ imagined Batman as an older , retired hero and the Joker as a lipstick @-@ wearing celebrity who cannot function without his foe . The late 1980s saw the Joker exert a significant impact on Batman and his supporting cast . In the 1988 – 89 story arc " A Death in the Family " , the Joker murders Batman 's sidekick ( the second Robin , Jason Todd ) . Todd was unpopular with fans ; rather than modify his character , DC opted to let them vote for his fate and a 28 @-@ vote plurality had the Joker beat Todd to death with a crowbar . This story altered the Batman universe : instead of killing anonymous bystanders , the Joker murdered a core character in the Batman fiction ; this had a lasting effect on future stories . Written at the height of tensions between the United States and Iran , the story 's conclusion had Iranian leader Ayatollah Khomeini appoint the Joker his country 's ambassador to the United Nations ( allowing him to temporarily escape justice ) . 
 Alan Moore and Brian Bolland 's 1988 graphic novel The Killing Joke expands on the Joker 's origins , describing the character as a failed comedian who adopts the identity of Red Hood to support his pregnant wife . Unlike The Dark Knight Returns , The Killing Joke takes place in mainstream continuity . The novel is described by critics as one of the greatest Joker stories ever written , influencing later comic stories ( including the forced retirement of then @-@ Batgirl Barbara Gordon after she is paralyzed by the Joker ) and films such as 1989 's Batman and 2008 's The Dark Knight . Grant Morrison 's 1989 Arkham Asylum : A Serious House on Serious Earth explores the psychoses of Batman , the Joker and other rogues in the eponymous facility . 
 The 1992 animated series introduced the Joker 's female sidekick : Harley Quinn , a psychiatrist who falls for — and ends up in an abusive relationship with — the Joker , becoming his supervillain accomplice . The character was popular , and was adapted into the comics as the Joker 's romantic interest in 1999 . In the same year , Alan Grant and Norm Breyfogle 's comic book Anarky concluded with the revelation that the titular character was the Joker 's son . Breyfogle conceived the idea as a means to expand on Anarky 's characterization , but O 'Neil ( by then the editor for the Batman series of books ) was opposed to it , and only allowed it to be written under protest , and with a promise that the revelation would eventually be revealed incorrect . However , the Anarky series was cancelled before the rebuttal could be published . The Joker 's first major storyline in The New 52 , DC Comics ' 2011 reboot of story continuity , was 2012 's " Death of the Family " by writer Scott Snyder and artist Greg Capullo . The story arc explores the symbiotic relationship between Joker and Batman , and sees the villain shatter the trust between Batman and his adopted family . Capullo 's Joker design replaced his traditional outfit with a utilitarian , messy , and disheveled appearance to convey that the character was on a mission ; his face ( surgically removed in 2011 's Detective Comics # 1 ) was reattached with belts , wires , and hooks , and he was outfitted with mechanics overalls . The Joker 's face was restored in Snyder 's and Capullo 's " Endgame " ( 2014 ) , the concluding chapter to " Death of the Family " , which featured the deaths of Joker and Batman . 
 = = Character biography = = 
 The Joker has undergone many revisions since his 1940 debut . The most common interpretation of the character is that he is disguised as the criminal Red Hood , and pursued by Batman . The Joker falls into a vat of chemicals which bleaches his skin , colors his hair green and his lips red , and drives him insane . The reasons why the Joker was disguised as the Red Hood , and his identity before his transformation have changed over time . 
 The character was introduced in Batman # 1 ( 1940 ) , in which he announces that he will kill three of Gotham 's prominent citizens ( including Mayor Henry Claridge ) . Although the police protect Claridge , the Joker had poisoned him before making his announcement and Claridge dies with a ghastly grin on his face ; Batman eventually defeats him , sending him to prison . The Joker commits whimsical , brutal crimes for reasons that , in Batman 's words , " make sense to him alone " . Detective Comics # 168 ( 1951 ) introduced the Joker 's first origin story as Red Hood : a criminal who , during his final heist , vanishes after leaping into a vat of chemicals to escape Batman . His resulting disfigurement led him to adopt the name " Joker " , from the playing card figure he came to resemble . The Joker 's Silver @-@ Age transformation into a figure of fun was established in 1952 's " The Joker 's Millions " . In this story the Joker is obsessed with maintaining his illusion of wealth and celebrity as a criminal folk hero , afraid to let Gotham 's citizens know that he is penniless and was tricked out of his fortune . The 1970s redefined the character as a homicidal psychopath . " The Joker 's Five @-@ Way Revenge " has the Joker taking violent revenge on the former gang members who betrayed him ; in " The Laughing Fish " the character chemically adds his face to Gotham 's fish ( hoping to profit from a copyright ) , killing bureaucrats who stand in his way . 
 Batman : The Killing Joke ( 1988 ) built on the Joker 's 1951 origin story , portraying him as a failed comedian pressured into committing crime as the Red Hood to support his pregnant wife . Batman 's interference causes him to leap into a chemical vat , which disfigures him . This , combined with the trauma of his wife 's earlier accidental death , causes him to go insane and become the Joker . However , the Joker says that this story may not be true and prefers his past to be " multiple choice " . In this graphic novel , the Joker shoots and paralyzes Barbara Gordon and tortures her father , Commissioner James Gordon , to prove that it only takes one bad day to drive a normal man insane . After Batman rescues Gordon and subdues the Joker , he offers to rehabilitate his old foe and end their rivalry . Although the Joker refuses , he shows his appreciation by sharing a joke with Batman . 
 The character 's maiming of Barbara arguably turned her into a more @-@ important character in the DC Universe : Oracle , a data gatherer and superhero informant who has her revenge in Birds of Prey by shattering the Joker 's teeth and destroying his smile . In the 1988 story " A Death in the Family " , the Joker beats Jason Todd with a crowbar and leaves him to die in an explosion . Todd 's death haunts Batman , and for the first time he considers killing the Joker . The Joker temporarily escapes justice when Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini appoints him the Iranian ambassador to the United Nations , giving him diplomatic immunity . However , when he tries to poison the UN membership , he is brought down by Batman and Superman . 
 In the 1999 " No Man 's Land " storyline , the Joker murders Commissioner Gordon 's second wife , Sarah , as she shields a group of infants . He taunts Gordon , who shoots him in the kneecap . The Joker , lamenting that he may never walk again , collapses with laughter when he realizes that the commissioner has avenged Barbara 's paralysis . This story also introduced the Joker 's girlfriend , Harley Quinn . 
 The 2000s began with the crossover story " Emperor Joker " , in which the Joker steals Mister Mxyzptlk 's reality @-@ altering power and remakes the universe in his image ( torturing and killing Batman daily , before resurrecting him ) . When the supervillain then tries to destroy the universe , his reluctance to eliminate Batman makes him lose control and Superman defeats him . Broken by his experience , Batman 's experiences of death are transferred to Superman by the Spectre so he can heal mentally . In " Joker 's Last Laugh " ( 2001 ) , the doctors at Arkham Asylum convince the character that he is dying in an attempt to rehabilitate him . Instead , the Joker ( flanked by an army of " <unk> " supervillains ) launches a final crime spree . Believing that Robin ( Tim Drake ) has been killed in the chaos , Dick Grayson beats the Joker to death ( although Batman revives his foe to keep Grayson from being a murderer ) and the character succeeds in making a member of the Bat @-@ family break their rule against killing . 
 In " Under the Hood " ( 2005 ) , a resurrected Todd tries to force Batman to avenge his death by killing the Joker ( who enjoys their conflict more than killing Todd ) . Batman refuses , arguing that if allows himself to kill the Joker , he will not be able to stop killing other criminals . The Joker kills Alexander Luthor in Infinite Crisis ( 2005 ) for excluding him from the Secret Society of Super Villains , which considers him too unpredictable for membership . In Morrison 's " Batman and Son " ( 2006 ) , a deranged police officer who impersonates Batman shoots the Joker in the face , scarring and disabling him . The supervillain returns in " The Clown at Midnight " ( 2007 ) as a cruel , enigmatic force who awakens and tries to kill Harley Quinn to prove to Batman that he has become more than human . In the 2008 story arc " Batman R.I.P. " the Joker is recruited by the Black Glove to destroy Batman but betrays the group , killing its members one by one . After Batman 's apparent death in " Final Crisis " ( 2008 ) , Grayson investigates a series of murders ( which leads him to a disguised Joker ) . The Joker is arrested , and then @-@ Robin Damian Wayne beats him with a crowbar ( paralleling Todd 's murder ) . When the Joker escapes , he attacks the Black Glove , burying its leader ( Simon Hurt ) alive after the supervillain considers him a failure as an opponent ; the Joker is then defeated by the recently returned Batman . 
 In DC 's New 52 , a 2011 relaunch of its titles following Flashpoint , the Joker has his own face cut off . He disappears for a year , returning to launch an attack on Batman 's extended family in " Death of the Family " so he and Batman can be the best hero and villain they can be . At the end of the storyline , the Joker falls off a cliff into a dark abyss . The Joker returns in the 2014 storyline " Endgame " , the Joker , believing that Batman has betrayed their relationship , mind controls the Justice League into attacking Batman . The story implies that the Joker is immortal — having existed for centuries in Gotham causing tragedies — and is able to regenerate from mortal injuries . " Endgame " restores the Joker 's face , and also reveals that he knows Batman 's secret identity . The story ends with the deaths of Batman and the Joker at each other 's hands . 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Though a number of backstories have been given , a definitive one has not yet been established for the Joker . An unreliable narrator , the character is uncertain of who he was before and how he became the Joker : " Sometimes I remember it one way , sometimes another ... if I 'm going to have a past , I prefer it to be multiple choice ! " A story about the Joker 's origin appeared in Detective Comics # 168 ( February 1951 ) , nearly a decade after the character 's debut . Here , the character is a laboratory worker who becomes the Red Hood ( a masked criminal ) to steal a million dollars from his employer and retire . He falls into a vat of chemical waste when his heist is thwarted by Batman , emerging with bleached white skin , red lips , green hair and a permanent grin . 
 This story was the basis for the most often @-@ cited origin tale , Moore 's one @-@ shot The Killing Joke . The Joker quits his job as a Lab assistant , becoming a stand @-@ up comedian to support his pregnant wife . Unsuccessful , he agrees to help mobsters with a robbery and dons the Red Hood . The heist goes awry ; the comedian leaps into a chemical vat to escape Batman , surfacing disfigured . This , combined with the earlier accidental death of his wife and unborn child , drives the comedian insane and he becomes the Joker . This version has been cited in many stories , including Batman : The Man Who Laughs ( in which Batman deduces that the Red Hood survived his fall and became the Joker ) , Batman # 450 ( in which the Joker dons the Red Hood to aid his recovery after the events in A Death in the Family , but finds the experience too traumatic ) and " Death of the Family " . Other stories have expanded on this origin ; " <unk> " explains that the Joker 's wife was murdered by a corrupt policeman working for the mobsters , and " Payback " gives the Joker 's first name as " Jack " . 
 However , the Joker 's unreliable memory has allowed writers to develop other origins for the character . " Case Study " , a Paul Dini @-@ Alex Ross story , describes the Joker as a sadistic gangster who creates the Red Hood identity to continue the thrill of small @-@ time criminality . He has his fateful first meeting with Batman , which results in his disfigurement . It is suggested that the Joker is sane , and feigns insanity to avoid the death penalty . In Batman Confidential ( # 7 @-@ 12 ) , the character , Jack , is a talented criminal who is bored with his work . He encounters ( and becomes obsessed with ) Batman during a heist , embarking on a crime spree to attract his attention . After Jack injures Batman 's girlfriend , Batman scars Jack 's face with a permanent grin and betrays him to a group of mobsters , who torture him in a chemical plant . Jack escapes , but falls into an empty vat as gunfire punctures chemical tanks above him . The flood of chemicals ( used in anti @-@ psychotic medication ) alters his appearance and completes his transformation . The superhero Atom sees the Joker 's memory of burning his parents alive ( after they find him killing animals ) in The Brave and the Bold # 31 , and Snyder 's " Zero Year " ( 2013 ) suggests that the pre @-@ disfigured Joker was a criminal mastermind leading a gang of Red Hoods . 
 The Joker has claimed a number of origins , including being the child of an abusive father who broke his nose and the long @-@ lived jester of an Egyptian pharaoh . As Batman says , " Like any other comedian , he uses whatever material will work " . 
 = = = Alternative versions = = = 
 A number of alternate universes in DC Comics publications allow writers to introduce variations on the Joker , in which the character 's origins , behavior , and morality differ from the mainstream setting . The Dark Knight Returns depicts the final battle between an aged Batman and Joker ; others portray the aftermath of the Joker 's death at the hands of a number of characters , including Superman . Still others describe distant futures in which the Joker is a computer virus or a hero trying to defeat the era 's tyrannical Batman . In some stories , the Joker is someone else entirely ; " Flashpoint " features Batman 's mother Martha Wayne as the Joker in response to her son 's murder , and in Superman : Speeding Bullets Lex Luthor becomes the Joker in a world where Superman is Batman . 
 = = Characterization = = 
 Renowned as Batman 's greatest enemy , the Joker is known by a number of nicknames , including the Clown Prince of Crime , the Jester of Genocide , the Harlequin of Hate , and the Ace of <unk> . During the evolution of the DC Universe , interpretations and versions of the Joker have taken two forms . The original , dominant image is that of an extreme psychopath , with genius @-@ level intelligence and a warped , sadistic sense of humor . The other version , popular in comic books from the late 1940s to the 1960s and in the 1960s television series , is an eccentric , harmless prankster and thief . Like other long @-@ lived characters , the Joker 's character and cultural interpretations have changed with time , however unlike other characters who may need to reconcile or ignore previous versions to make sense , more than any other comic book character , the Joker thrives on his mutable and irreconcilable identities . The Joker is typically seen in a purple suit with a long @-@ tailed , padded @-@ shoulder jacket , a string tie , gloves , striped pants and spats on pointed @-@ toe shoes ( sometimes with a wide @-@ brimmed hat ) . This appearance is such a fundamental aspect of the character that when the 2004 animated series The Batman placed the Joker in a straitjacket , it quickly redesigned him in his familiar suit . 
 The Joker is obsessed with Batman , the pair representing a yin @-@ yang of opposing dark and light force ; although it is the Joker who represents humor and color and Batman who dwells in the dark . Murder , theft , and terrorism , no crime is beyond the Joker , and his exploits are a theatrical performance that are funny to him alone . Spectacle is more important than success for the Joker , and if it is not spectacular it is boring . Although the Joker claims indifference to everything , he secretly craves Batman 's attention and validation . The character was described as having killed over 2 @,@ 000 people in The Joker : Devil 's Advocate ( 1996 ) . Despite this body count , he is always found not guilty by reason of insanity and sent to Arkham Asylum , avoiding the death penalty . Many of the Joker 's acts attempt to force Batman to kill ; if the most orderly and self @-@ controlled of humans can murder , anyone is capable of becoming a monster like the Joker . The villain displays no instinct for self @-@ preservation , and is willing to die to prove his point . The Joker is the " personification of the irrational " , and represents " everything Batman [ opposes ] " . 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 The Joker 's main characteristic is his apparent insanity , although he is not described as having any particular psychological disorder . Like a psychopath , he lacks empathy , a conscience , and concern over right and wrong . In A Serious House on Serious Earth , the Joker is described as capable of processing outside sensory information only by adapting to it . This enables him to create a new personality every day ( depending on what would benefit him ) and explains why , at different times , he is a mischievous clown or a psychopathic killer . In " The Clown at Midnight " ( Batman # 663 , 2007 ) , the Joker enters a meditative state where he evaluates his previous selves to consciously create a new personality , effectively modifying himself for his needs . 
 The Killing Joke ( in which the Joker is the unreliable narrator ) explains the roots of his insanity as " one bad day " : losing his wife and unborn child and being disfigured by chemicals , paralleling Batman 's origin in the loss of his parents . He tries ( and fails ) to prove that anyone can become like him after one bad day by torturing Commissioner Gordon , physically and psychologically . Batman offers to rehabilitate his foe ; the Joker apologetically declines , believing it too late for him to be saved . Other interpretations show that the Joker is fully aware of how his actions affect others and that his insanity as merely an act . Comics scholar Peter Coogan describes the Joker as trying to reshape reality to fit himself by imposing his face on his victims ( and fish ) in an attempt to make the world comprehensible by creating a twisted parody of himself . Englehart 's " The Laughing Fish " demonstrates the character 's illogical nature : trying to copyright fish which bear his face , and not understanding why threatening the copyright clerk cannot produce the desired result . 
 The Joker is alternatively depicted as sexual and asexual . In The Dark Knight Returns and Arkham Asylum : A Serious House on Serious Earth , the Joker is seductive toward Batman ; it is uncertain if their relationship has homoerotic undertones or if the Joker is simply trying to manipulate his nemesis . Frank Miller interpreted the character as fixated on death and uninterested in sexual relationships , while Robinson believes that the Joker is capable of a romantic relationship . His relationship with Harley Quinn is abusively paradoxical ; although the Joker keeps her at his side , he heedlessly harms her ( for example , throwing her out a window without seeing if she survives ) . Harley loves him but the Joker does not reciprocate her feelings , chiding her for distracting him from other plans . 
 Snyder 's " Death of the Family " describes the Joker as in love with Batman , although not in a traditionally romantic way . The Joker believes that Batman has not killed him because he makes Batman better , and he loves the villain for that . Batman comic book writer Peter Tomasi concurred , stating that the Joker 's main goal is to make Batman the best that he can be . The Joker and Batman represent opposites : the extroverted Joker wears colorful clothing and embraces chaos , while the introverted , monochromatic Batman represents order and discipline . The Joker is often depicted as defining his existence through his conflict with Batman . In 1994 's " Going Sane " the villain tries to lead a normal life after Batman 's ( apparent ) death , reverting when Batman reappears ; in " Emperor Joker " , an apparently omnipotent Joker cannot destroy Batman without undoing himself . Since the Joker is simply " the Joker " , he believes that Batman is " Batman " ( with or without the costume ) and has no interest in what is behind Batman 's mask , ignoring opportunities to learn Batman 's secret identity . Given the opportunity to kill Batman , the villain demurs ; he believes that without their game , winning is pointless . The character has no desire for typical criminal goals like money or power ; his criminality is designed only to continue his game with Batman . 
 The Joker does not express any fears , showing no effect when exposed to the supervillain Scarecrow 's fear gas in Knightfall ( 1993 ) . The villain has been temporarily rendered sane by several means , including telepathic manipulation by the Martian Manhunter and being resurrected in a life @-@ restoring Lazarus Pit ( an experience typically inducing temporary insanity in the subject ) . At these moments , the Joker is depicted as expressing remorse for his acts ; however , during a medically induced period of partial sanity in Batman : <unk> he tells his opponent : " I don 't hate you ' cause I 'm crazy . I 'm crazy ' cause I hate you " and confirms that he will only stop murdering when Batman is dead . 
 = = = Skills and equipment = = = 
 The Joker has no inherent superhuman abilities . He commits crimes with a variety of weaponized thematic props such as a deck of razor @-@ tipped playing cards , rolling marbles , Jack @-@ in @-@ the @-@ boxes with unpleasant surprises and exploding cigars capable of leveling a building . The flower in his lapel sprays acid , and his hand often holds a lethal joy buzzer conducting a million volts of electricity , although both items were introduced in 1952 as harmless joke items . However , his chemical genius provides his most @-@ notable weapon : Joker venom , a liquid or gaseous toxin which sends its targets into fits of uncontrollable laughter ; higher doses can lead to paralysis , coma or death , leaving its victim with a ghoulish , pained rictus grin . The Joker has used venom since his debut ; only he knows the formula , and is shown to be gifted enough to manufacture the toxin from ordinary household chemicals . Another version of the venom ( used in " Joker 's Last Laugh " ) makes its victims resemble the Joker , susceptible to his orders . The villain is immune to venom and most poisons ; in Batman # 663 ( 2007 ) , Morrison writes that being " an avid consumer of his own chemical experiments , the Joker 's immunity to poison concoctions that might kill another man in an instant has been developed over years of dedicated abuse . " 
 The character 's arsenal is inspired by his nemesis ' weaponry , such as batarangs . In " The Joker 's Utility Belt " ( 1952 ) , he mimicked Batman 's utility belt with non @-@ lethal items , such as Mexican jumping beans and sneezing powder . In 1942 's " The Joker Follows Suit " the villain built his versions of the Batplane and Batmobile , the <unk> and Jokermobile ( the latter with a large Joker face on its hood ) , and created a Joker signal with which criminals could summon him for their heists . The Jokermobile lasted for several decades , evolving with the Batmobile . His technical genius is not limited by practicality , allowing him to hijack Gotham 's television airwaves to issue threats , transform buildings into death traps , launch a gas attack on the city and rain poisoned glass shards on its citizens from an airship . 
 The Joker is portrayed as skilled in melee combat , from his initial appearances when he defeats Batman in a sword fight ( nearly killing him ) , and others when he overwhelms Batman but declines to kill him . He is talented with firearms , although even his guns are theatrical ; his long @-@ barreled revolver often releases a flag reading " Bang " , and a second trigger @-@ pull launches the flag to skewer its target . Although formidable in combat , the Joker 's chief asset is his mind . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 The Joker 's unpredictable , homicidal nature makes him one of the most feared supervillains in the DC Universe ; the Trickster says in the 2005 mini @-@ series Underworld Unleashed , " When super @-@ villains want to scare each other , they tell Joker stories " . Gotham 's villains also feel threatened by the character ; depending on the circumstances , he is as likely to fight with his rivals for control of the city as he is to join them for an entertaining outcome . The Joker interacts with other supervillains who oppose Batman , whether he is on the streets or in Arkham Asylum . He has collaborated with criminals like the Penguin , the Riddler and Two @-@ Face , although these partnerships rarely end well due to the Joker 's desire for unbridled chaos , and uses his stature to lead others ( such as Killer Croc and the Scarecrow ) . The Joker 's greatest rival is the smartest man in the world , Lex Luthor . Although they have a friendly partnership in 1950 's World 's Finest Comics # 88 , later unions emphasized their mutual hostility and clashing egos . 
 Despite his tendency to kill subordinates on a whim , the Joker has no difficulty attracting henchmen with a seemingly infinite cash supply and intimidation : they are too afraid of their employer to refuse his demands that they wear red clown noses or laugh at macabre jokes . Even with his unpredictability and lack of superhuman powers , the 2007 limited series Salvation Run sees hundreds of villains fall under his spell because they are more afraid of him than the alternative : Luthor . Batman # 186 ( 1966 ) introduced the Joker 's first sidekick : the one @-@ shot character , <unk> <unk> , who is short , and dressed like a clown ; the character was later resurrected as an enemy of his replacement , Harley Quinn . Introduced in the 1992 animated series , Quinn is the Joker 's former Arkham psychiatrist who develops an obsessive infatuation with him and dons a red @-@ and @-@ black harlequin costume to join him in the 1999 graphic novel Batman : Harley Quinn . Although Quinn loves the Joker , he is obsessed with Batman and uses her to achieve his goals at her expense . Despite violent abuse , she returns to him . The Joker is sometimes shown to keep hyenas as pets ; this trait was introduced in the 1977 animated series The New Adventures of Batman . A 1976 issue of Batman Family introduced <unk> Dent as the Joker 's daughter , though her parentage claim was later proven to be false . 
 Although his chief obsession is Batman , the character has occasionally ventured outside Gotham City to fight Batman 's superhero allies . In " To Laugh and Die in Metropolis " ( 1987 ) the character kidnaps Lois Lane , distracting Superman with a nuclear weapon . The story is notable for the Joker taking on a ( relative ) god and the ease with which Superman defeats him — it took only 17 pages . Asked why he came to Metropolis , the Joker replies simply : " Oh Superman , why not ? " In 1995 , the Joker fought his third major DC hero : Wonder Woman , who drew on the Greek god of trickery to temper the Joker 's humor and shatter his confidence . The character has joined supervillain groups like the Injustice Gang and the Injustice League , to take on superhero groups like the Justice League . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 The Joker is considered one of , if not , the most @-@ recognizable and iconic fictional characters in popular culture ( Batman 's arguable equal ) , one of the best comic villains , and one of the greatest villains of all @-@ time . The character was well @-@ liked following his debut , appearing in nine out of the first twelve Batman issues , and remained one of Batman 's most popular foes throughout his publication . The character is considered one of the four top comic book characters , alongside Batman , Superman , and Spider @-@ Man . Indeed , when DC Comics released the original series of Greatest Stories Ever Told ( 1987 @-@ 1988 ) featuring collections of stories about heroes like Batman and Superman , the Joker was the only villain included alongside them . The character has been the focus of ethical discussion on the desirability of Batman ( who adheres to an unbreakable code forbidding killing ) saving lives by murdering the Joker ( a relentless dealer of death ) . These debates weigh the positive ( stopping the Joker permanently ) against its effect on Batman 's character and the possibility that he might begin killing all criminals . 
 In 2006 , the Joker was number one on Wizard magazine 's " 100 Greatest Villains of All Time " . In 2008 Wizard 's list of " 200 Greatest Comic Book Characters of All Time " placed the Joker fifth , and the character was eighth on Empire 's list of " 50 Greatest Comic Book Characters " ( the highest @-@ ranked villain on both lists ) . In 2009 the Joker was second on IGN 's list of " Top 100 Comic Book Villains " , and in 2011 Wired named him " Comics ' Greatest Supervillain " . Complex , CollegeHumor and WhatCulture named the Joker the greatest comic book villain of all time while IGN listed him the top DC Comics villain in 2013 , and Newsarama as the greatest Batman villain . 
 The Joker 's popularity ( and his role as Batman 's enemy ) has involved the character in most Batman @-@ related media , from television to video games . These adaptations of the character have been received positively on film , television , and in video games . As in the comics , the character 's personality and appearance shift ; he is campy , ferocious or unstable , depending on the author and the intended audience . 
 The character inspired theme @-@ park roller coasters ( The Joker 's Jinx , The Joker in Mexico and California , and The Joker Chaos Coaster ) , and featured in story @-@ based rides such as Justice League : Battle for Metropolis . The Joker is one of the few comic book supervillains to be represented on children 's merchandise and toys , appearing on items including action figures , trading cards , board games , money boxes , pajamas , socks , and shoes . The Jokermobile was a popular toy ; a Corgi die @-@ cast metal replica was successful during the 1950s , and in the 1970s a Joker @-@ styled , Flower power @-@ era Volkswagen <unk> was manufactured by <unk> . In 2015 , " The Joker : A Serious Study of the Clown Prince of Crime " became the first academic book to be published about a supervillain . 
 = = = Literary analysis = = = 
 Since the Bronze Age of Comics , the Joker has been interpreted as an archetypal trickster , displaying talents for cunning intelligence , social engineering , pranks , theatricality , and idiomatic humor . Like the trickster , the Joker alternates between malicious violence and clever , harmless whimsy . He is amoral and not driven by ethical considerations , but by a shameless and insatiable nature , and although his actions are condemned as evil , he is necessary for cultural robustness . The trickster employs amoral and immoral acts to destabilize the status quo and reveal cultural , political , and ethical hypocrisies that society attempts to ignore . However , the Joker differs in that his actions typically only benefit himself . The Joker possesses abnormal body imagery , reflecting an inversion of order . The trickster is simultaneously subhuman and superhuman , a being that indicates a lack of unity in body and mind . In Arkham Asylum : A Serious House on Serious Earth , the Joker serves as Batman 's trickster guide through the hero 's own psyche , testing him in various ways before ultimately offering to cede his rule of the Asylum to Batman . 
 Rather than the typical anarchist interpretation , others have analysed the character as a Marxist ( opposite to Batman 's capitalist ) , arguing that anarchism requires the rejection of all authority in favor of uncontrolled freedom . The Joker rejects most authority , but retains his own , using his actions to coerce and consolidate power in himself and convert the masses to his own way of thinking , while eliminating any that oppose him . In The Killing Joke , the Joker is an abused member of the underclass who is driven insane by failings of the social system . The Joker rejects material needs , and his first appearance in Batman # 1 sees him perpetrate crimes against Gotham 's wealthiest men and the judge who had sent him to prison . Batman is wealthy , yet the Joker is able to triumph through his own innovations . 
 Ryan <unk> described the Joker as an example of a " Nietzschean Superman " , arguing that a fundamental aspect of Friedrich Nietzsche 's Superman , the " will to power " , is exemplified in all of the Joker 's actions , providing a master morality to Batman 's slave morality . The character 's indomitable " will to power " means he is never discouraged by being caught or defeated and he is not restrained by guilt or remorse . Joker represents the master , who creates rules and defines them , who judges others without needing approval , and for whom something is good because it benefits him . He creates his own morality and is bound only by his own rules without aspiring to something higher than himself , unlike Batman , the slave , who makes a distinction between good and evil , and is bound to rules outside of himself ( such as his avoidance of killing ) , in his quest for justice . The Joker has no defined origin story that requires him to question how he came to be , as like the Superman he does not regret or assess the past and only moves forward . 
 The Joker 's controlling and abusive relationship with Harley Quinn has been analysed as a means of the Joker reinforcing his own belief in his power in a world where he may be killed or neutralized by another villain or Batman . Joker mirrors his identity through Harley in her appearance , and even though he may ignore or act indifferent towards her , he continues to try and subject her to his control . When Harley successfully defeats Batman in Mad Love ( 1994 ) , the Joker , emasculated by his own failure , severely injures her out of fear of what the other villains will think of him . However , while Harley recovers , the Joker sends her flowers which she accepts , reasserting his control over her . 
 Harley 's co @-@ creator , Paul Dini , describes their relationship as Harley being someone who makes the Joker feel better about himself , and who can do the work that he does not want to do himself . In the 1999 one @-@ shot comic Batman : Harley Quinn , the Joker decides to kill Harley , after admitting that he does care for her , that their relationship is romantic , and that these feelings prevent him from fulfilling his purpose . Removing the traditional male @-@ female relationship , such as in the Batman : Thrillkiller storyline where the Joker ( Bianca Steeplechase ) is a female and involved in a lesbian relationship with Harley , their relationship lacks any aspects of violence or subjugation . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 The Joker has appeared in a variety of media , including television series , animated and live @-@ action films . WorldCat ( a catalog of libraries in 170 countries ) records over 250 productions featuring the Joker as a subject , including films , books , and video games , and Batman films featuring the character are typically the most successful . The character 's earliest on @-@ screen adaptation was in the 1966 television series Batman , in which he was played as a cackling prankster by Cesar Romero ( reflecting his contemporary comic counterpart ) . The Joker then appeared in the animated television shows The Adventures of Batman ( 1968 , voiced by Larry Storch ) , The New Adventures of Batman ( 1977 , voiced by Lennie Weinrib ) and The Super Powers Team : Galactic Guardians ( 1985 , voiced by Frank Welker ) . A darker version of the Joker ( played by Jack Nicholson ) made his film debut in 1989 's Batman , which earned over $ 400 million at the worldwide box office . The role was a defining performance in Nicholson 's career and was considered to overshadow Batman 's , with film critic Roger Ebert saying that the audience must sometimes remind themselves not to root for the Joker . Batman 's success led to the 1992 television series , Batman : The Animated Series . Voiced by Mark Hamill , the Joker retained the darker tone of the comics in stories acceptable for young children . Hamill 's Joker is considered a defining portrayal , and he voiced the character in spin @-@ off films ( 1993 's Batman : Mask of the Phantasm and 2000 's Batman Beyond : Return of the Joker ) , video games ( 2001 's Batman : Vengeance ) , related series ( 1996 's Superman : The Animated Series , 2000 's Static Shock and 2001 's Justice League ) , action figures , toys and amusement @-@ park voiceovers . A redesigned Joker , voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson , appeared in 2004 's The Batman ; Richardson was the first African @-@ American to play the character . 
 After Christopher Nolan 's successful 2005 Batman film reboot , Batman Begins , which ended with a teaser for the Joker 's involvement in a sequel , the character appeared in 2008 's The Dark Knight , played by Heath Ledger as an avatar of anarchy and chaos . While Batman Begins earned a worldwide total of $ 370 million ; The Dark Knight earned over $ 1 billion and was the highest @-@ grossing film of the year , setting several box @-@ office records ( including highest @-@ grossing midnight opening , opening day and opening weekend ) . Ledger won a posthumous Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance , the first acting Oscar ever won for a superhero film . The Joker has featured in a number of animated projects , such as 2009 's Batman : The Brave and the Bold ( voiced by Jeff Bennett ) and 2011 's Young Justice ( voiced by Brent Spiner ) , and comic book adaptations ( including 2010 's Batman : Under the Red Hood , in which he is voiced by John DiMaggio ) . In 2012 , Michael Emerson voiced the character in a two @-@ part animated adaptation of The Dark Knight Returns . The Joker is scheduled to appear in the 2016 film Suicide Squad , portrayed by Jared Leto . 
 The Joker has also been featured in video games . Hamill returned to voice the character in 2009 's critically acclaimed Batman : Arkham Asylum , its equally praised 2011 sequel Batman : Arkham City and the multiplayer DC Universe Online . Hamill was replaced by Troy Baker for the 2013 prequel , Batman : Arkham Origins , and the Arkham series ' animated spin @-@ off Batman : Assault on Arkham , returning for the 2015 series finale , Batman : Arkham Knight . Richard Epcar voiced the Joker in the 2008 fighting game , Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe , and 2013 's Injustice : Gods Among Us . The character also appeared in Lego Batman : The Videogame ( 2008 ) , Lego Batman 2 : DC Super Heroes ( 2012 ) and its animated adaptation , and Lego Batman 3 : Beyond Gotham ( 2014 ) ( the latter three voiced by Christopher Corey Smith ) . 
 = Maryland Route 135 = 
 Maryland Route 135 ( MD 135 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . Known for most of its length as Maryland Highway , the state highway runs 29 @.@ 00 miles ( 46 @.@ 67 km ) from U.S. Route 219 ( US 219 ) in Oakland in Garrett County east to US 220 in McCoole in Allegany County . MD 135 is the main link between the towns of Oakland , Mountain Lake Park , Loch Lynn Heights , and Deer Park on the Appalachian Plateau and the communities of Bloomington , Luke , Westernport , and McCoole in the upper valley of the Potomac River . These groups of towns are separated by Backbone Mountain . 
 MD 135 was originally built in the early 1930s as a link between McCoole and Westernport . In the late 1930s , the state highway was extended west to Bloomington . In addition , a separate segment of MD 135 was completed around Swanton in the mid @-@ 1930s . These separate segments were unified in the early 1950s when the highway over Backbone Mountain was completed . In the late 1950s , MD 135 was extended west over a portion of MD 38 and all of Maryland Route 41 to Oakland , and was mostly rebuilt over its entire length , bypassing Bloomington , Swanton , Deer Park , and Mountain Lake Park . MD 135 remains notorious for the eastbound descent from Backbone Mountain , which has claimed many lives . The Maryland State Highway Administration has instituted many measures to get trucks down the mountain safely and to avoid the downgrade if possible . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 135 begins at an intersection with US 219 on the eastern edge of Oakland . Northbound US 219 ( Oak Street ) continues straight west into downtown Oakland , southbound US 219 ( Garrett Highway ) heads south toward Red House , and 9th Street heads north along the alignment of the future Oakland Bypass . MD 135 heads east through Mountain Lake Park as Maryland Highway , a controlled access two @-@ lane highway . Oakland Drive , which is unsigned MD <unk> , splits to the northeast to serve residential areas on the north side of town . The old alignment rejoins MD 135 at G Street before access controls cease upon crossing the Little Youghiogheny River . The state highway intersects MD 560 ( Paull Street ) , which heads south into Loch Lynn Heights . After crossing the river again , MD 135 leaves Mountain Lake Park . The state highway passes scattered residences , farms , and businesses before entering Deer Park . After passing Deer Park Hotel Road , which passes the Pennington Cottage , MD 135 intersects the old alignment of MD 38 , which is Sand Flat Road to the north and Main Street to the south . The state highway passes the historic home Glamorgan and Edgewood Drive , part of the old alignment of MD 38 , before leaving Deer Park . Upon reaching the hamlet of Altamont , MD 495 ( Swanton Road ) continues straight northeast toward Swanton while MD 135 turns to the southeast . 
 MD 135 heads straight southeast toward a grade @-@ separated crossing of CSX 's Mountain Subdivision very close to the railroad 's crossing of the Eastern Continental Divide . The state highway curves to the northeast and gently ascends Backbone Mountain . A scenic overlook marks the highest point on MD 135 ( 2 @,@ 969 feet ( 905 m ) ) shortly before the intersection with MD 38 ( Kitzmiller Road ) . The state highway continues northeast along the ridgeline through Potomac @-@ Garrett State Forest and intersects Swanton Road and a few roads on the south side of the highway that access Jennings Randolph Lake . Upon leaving the state forest , MD 135 begins to pass scattered residences ahead of the descent of Backbone Mountain , which has grades as steep as 9 % . Trucks are required to stop at three different brake check locations and obey a posted speed limit of 10 mph ( 16 km / h ) . After Bloomington Hill Road splits to the north and the state highway passes the third brake check stop , a runaway truck ramp splits to the south . The downhill grade eases as MD 135 enters Bloomington , where the name of the highway changes to Bloomington Road . After passing through residential areas , the state highway crosses the Mountain Subdivision and the Savage River before meeting Savage Hillside Road at a T intersection in front of Franklin Hill . 
 MD 135 turns southeast into Allegany County and enters the town of Luke as Pratt Street . The state highway immediately intersects <unk> Road , which is unsigned MD <unk> and meets the eastern end of the western segment of West Virginia Route 46 ( WV 46 ) at the Potomac River . At a bend in the river , MD 135 makes a sharp turn to the north around the mountain and the road passes the large <unk> Corporation paper mill . The state highway turns east and its name changes to Church Street upon entering Westernport , where the highway intersects MD 36 ( New Georges Creek Road ) , which crosses the Potomac River to become the eastern segment of WV 46 . MD 135 crosses Georges Creek and meets the Georges Creek Railway at @-@ grade before intersecting Main Street , which is unsigned MD 937 . Upon leaving Westernport , the road 's name changes to McCoole – Westernport Road . MD 135 parallels the Potomac River and Georges Creek Railway as it passes scattered residences and businesses . Upon reaching McCoole , the highway passes unsigned MD 135A , which provides an alternate access route to US 220 north . Shortly after , MD 135 reaches Paxton Street , which is officially MD 135B but is marked as MD 135 . Paxton Street leads to a junction with US 220 ( McMullen Highway ) . MD 135 itself continues east under the McCoole – Keyser bridge to its eastern terminus at the intersection of Queens Point Road and Golden Cross Street . 
 = = History = = 
 The present course of MD 135 consists of the original course of the state highway and its extensions westward , and assumption of a portion of MD 38 and all of MD 41 . MD 135 also followed a segment of what is today MD 495 . The original segment of MD 135 was under construction between McCoole and Westernport in 1930 and completed by 1931 . The state highway was constructed between Bloomington and Luke in 1936 and 1937 , including the bridge over the Savage River . This segment was connected to Westernport in 1940 by carving a roadbed out of the cliffs of Franklin Hill . MD 38 was paved from its original northern terminus to Altamont between 1924 and 1926 and to the top of Backbone Mountain by 1930 . The present segment of MD 38 south to Kitzmiller was under construction by 1930 and completed by 1933 . MD 41 included the first section of what is now MD 135 to be constructed ; the segment of the state highway between Oakland and Mountain Lake Park was paved between 1916 and 1919 . The state highway was extended past Loch Lynn Heights in 1933 and to MD 38 in Deer Park by 1938 . 
 A second , disconnected segment of MD 135 was constructed in two sections between MD 38 in Altamont and Swanton that were completed in 1933 and 1935 . This road was extended east to the top of Backbone Mountain in 1939 . The discontinuous segments of MD 135 were unified in 1953 when the pre @-@ existing Bloomington Road was reconstructed between the eastern end of the western MD 135 on top of Backbone Mountain and the western end of the eastern MD 135 in Bloomington . When the present US 220 bridge over the Potomac River was completed in 1951 , MD 135 was extended east from its old intersection with US 220 , which is today the intersection with MD 135A , to its present eastern terminus . 
 MD 135 attained its present alignment through several projects in the mid to late 1950s , concurrent with MD 135 's extension west over part of MD 38 and all of MD 41 to Oakland in 1956 . The segment of MD 38 in Deer Park was bypassed by the newly extended state highway in 1956 . The state highway between McCoole and Westernport was relocated , and Bloomington Hill Road was bypassed with a straighter highway featuring a grade @-@ separated crossing of the railroad in Bloomington in 1956 and 1957 . The present section of MD 135 between MD 38 and Swanton Road was built in 1955 and 1956 ; MD 135 was then removed through Swanton and partially replaced by MD 495 . The segment between Swanton Road and Bloomington Hill Road was upgraded between 1953 and 1956 . Finally , the portion of MD 135 between Deer Park and Oakland , including the bypass of Mountain Lake Park , was rebuilt between 1957 and 1959 . 
 Since the present alignment of MD 135 was completed west of Bloomington in the late 1950s , the descent of Backbone Mountain has become notorious due to its steep grade and the 90 degree turn at the bottom to avoid a mountain dead ahead . A retaining wall at the bottom of the mountain features white crosses in memoriam of those who lost their lives ; there were 24 crosses painted as of 2009 . After five people had been killed on the descent by 1965 , the State Roads Commission responded in 1967 by enacting the truck speed limit of 10 mph ( 16 km / h ) , marking the three mandatory stopping areas , and installing ample warning signage , including the infamous " If Brakes Fail Ditch Truck Immediately " sign . In 1997 , signs were installed on Interstate 68 , US 219 , and US 40 advising truckers to use MD 36 instead of MD 135 to access Luke and Westernport . The runaway truck ramp was installed by 2005 and supplemented with a runaway truck warning system and updated signage in 2007 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = = Auxiliary routes = = 
 MD 135A is the unsigned designation for the unnamed 0 @.@ 78 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 26 km ) connector between MD 135 in McCoole and US 220 north of McCoole . The state highway heads north from MD 135 on the western edge of McCoole and passes under US 220 . MD 135A curves northwest and intersects Burke Hill Road before reaching its northern terminus at an oblique intersection with US 220 opposite Red Rock Lane . MD 135A is part of the original alignment of US 220 through McCoole prior to the completion of the present alignment in 1951 . 
 MD 135B is the designation for Paxton Street and Chesapeake Avenue , a 0 @.@ 11 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 18 km ) connector between MD 135 and US 220 in McCoole . MD 135B is signed as MD 135 . 
 MD <unk> is the unsigned designation for an unnamed 0 @.@ 03 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 048 km ) connector between MD 135 and MD <unk> , itself an unsigned and unnamed highway , on top of Backbone Mountain east of MD 38 . MD <unk> provides access to a salt dome . 
 MD <unk> is the unsigned designation for <unk> Road , a 0 @.@ 02 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 032 km ) connector between MD 135 in Luke and the western segment of WV 46 across the Potomac River in Beryl . 
 MD 135E is the designation for Chesapeake Avenue , a 0 @.@ 09 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 14 km ) connector between MD 135 and US 220 in McCoole . MD 135E was designated in 2013 . 
 = USS Princess Matoika ( ID @-@ 2290 ) = 
 USS Princess Matoika ( ID @-@ 2290 ) was a transport ship for the United States Navy during World War I. Before the war , she was a Barbarossa @-@ class ocean liner that sailed as SS Kiautschou for the Hamburg America Line and as SS Princess Alice ( sometimes spelled Prinzess Alice ) for North German Lloyd . After her World War I Navy service ended , she served as the United States Army transport ship USAT Princess Matoika . In post @-@ war civilian service she was SS Princess Matoika until 1922 , SS President Arthur until 1927 , and SS City of Honolulu until she was scrapped in 1933 . 
 Built in 1900 for the German Far East mail routes , SS Kiautschou traveled between Hamburg and Far East ports for most of her Hamburg America Line career . In 1904 , she was traded to competitor North German Lloyd for five freighters , and renamed SS Princess Alice . She sailed both transatlantic and Far East mail routes until the outbreak of World War I , when she was interned in the neutral port of Cebu in the Philippines . Seized by the U.S. in 1917 , the newly renamed USS Princess Matoika carried over 50 @,@ 000 U.S. troops to and from France in U.S. Navy service from 1918 to 1919 . As an Army transport after that , she continued to return troops and repatriated the remains of Americans killed overseas in the war . In July 1920 , she was a last @-@ minute substitute to carry a large portion of the United States team to the 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp . From the perspective of the Olympic team , the trip was disastrous and a majority of the team members published a list of grievances and demands of the American Olympic Committee in an action known today as the Mutiny of the Matoika . 
 After her Army career ended , Princess Matoika was transferred to the United States Mail Steamship Line for European passenger service in early 1921 . After that company 's financial troubles resulted in her seizure , Princess Matoika was assigned to the newly formed United States Lines and resumed passenger service . In 1922 , the ship was renamed SS President Arthur , in honor of the 21st U.S. President , Chester A. Arthur . When changes in U.S. laws severely curtailed the number of immigrants that could enter the country in the early 1920s , the ship was laid up in Baltimore in late 1923 . 
 President Arthur was purchased in October 1924 by the Jewish @-@ owned American Palestine Line to begin regular service between New York , Naples , and Palestine . On her maiden voyage to Palestine , she reportedly became the first ocean liner to fly the Zionist flag at sea and the first ocean liner ever to have female officers . Financial difficulties for American Palestine ended the service after three roundtrips , and the liner was sold to the Los Angeles Steamship Company for Los Angeles – Honolulu service . Following three years of carrying tourists and freight , the liner burned in Honolulu Harbor in 1930 . She was deemed too expensive to repair and was eventually scrapped in Japan in 1933 . 
 = = Hamburg America Line = = 
 In March 1900 the Hamburg America Line ( German : Hamburg @-@ Amerikanische <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ Gesellschaft or HAPAG ) announced the plans for 22 new ships totaling 150 @,@ 000 gross register tons ( GRT ) at a cost of $ 11 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . One of the two largest ships announced was SS Kiautschou at an announced 10 @,@ 200 GRT . The ship was laid down at AG Vulcan Stettin in Stettin , Germany ( present @-@ day Szczecin , Poland ) . During her construction , HAPAG renamed the ship twice before finally settling on Kiautschou , the German colony in China , as her namesake . Built , along with sister ship Hamburg , for HAPAG 's entry into the Deutsche <unk> 's Far East routes , Kiautschou was launched on 14 September 1900 , and sailed on her maiden voyage from Hamburg to the Far East on 22 December 1900 . 
 The ship was 525 feet ( 160 m ) long and featured twin screws powered by two quadruple expansion steam engines that generated 9 @,@ 000 horsepower ( 6 @,@ 700 kW ) . The liner also featured bilge keels that helped stabilize her ride . On the interior , Kiautschou 's first @-@ class state rooms were described as " light and large " and located in the center of the ship . She had two large promenade decks , a music room , and a library . Her smoking room was at the rear of the upper promenade deck , and her large dining room featured a balcony where the ship 's orchestra could serenade diners . 
 Kiautschou sailed on the Hamburg – Far East route until May 1902 . For one round trip that month , Kiautschou replaced fellow HAPAG steamer Deutschland on Hamburg – New York service , calling at Southampton and Cherbourg on her eastbound trip , and at Cherbourg and Plymouth on her westbound return . After this one transatlantic excursion , Kiautschou was returned to Hamburg – Far East service . On 20 February 1904 , in exchange for abandoning the mail routes shared with North German Lloyd , HAPAG traded Kiautschou for Lloyd freighters Bamberg , Königsberg , Nürnberg , Stolberg , and Strassburg . 
 = = North German Lloyd = = 
 North German Lloyd renamed the newly acquired ship Princess Alice , though the German spelling Prinzess Alice was widely used in contemporary press coverage and , often , by the Lloyd themselves . There is some confusion as to who exactly was the namesake of the ship . Edwin Drechsel , in his two @-@ volume work Norddeutscher Lloyd , Bremen , 1857 – 1970 , reports that the ship was named equally for Princess Alice of Albany and Alice Roosevelt . Princess Alice of Albany was a granddaughter of Victoria , Queen of the United Kingdom , and the new bride of Prince Alexander of Teck in Württemberg . Alice Roosevelt , daughter of the then @-@ current U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt , was nicknamed " Princess Alice " by the press , and had launched the racing yacht of Kaiser Wilhelm II , Meteor , at Staten Island two years before . William Lowell Putnam gives the namesake as Princess Alice of the United Kingdom , the daughter of Queen Victoria . 
 Princess Alice departed her new homeport of Bremen on 22 March 1904 for her maiden voyage under her new owners . After arriving in New York draped in flags and bunting , her dining room was the site of a press luncheon thrown by Lloyd staff celebrating her first arrival in that city . Princess Alice made four more roundtrips through early August , then shifted to Bremen – Suez Canal – Far East service , making her first Lloyd voyage on that route 31 August . Princess Alice would continue this pattern — sailing the North Atlantic during the heaviest @-@ trafficked season and shifting to the Far East runs for the balance of the year — through 1910 . 
 Throughout the rest of her Lloyd North Atlantic career she carried some notable passengers to and from Europe . In May 1905 , for example , noted Baltimore gynecologist Howard Atwood Kelly , one of the co @-@ founders of Johns Hopkins Hospital , sailed from New York ; author Hamilton Wright <unk> and his wife sailed from New York the following month . American botanist Charles Frederick Millspaugh returned to New York aboard the German liner in June 1906 , and retired U.S. Navy Rear admiral Alfred Thayer Mahan did the same in June 1907 . Senator Augustus O. Bacon ( D @-@ GA ) , sailed for Europe on 1 August 1908 . 
 Prompted by the successful use of wireless in saving lives during the sinking of RMS Republic in January 1909 , and by proposed U.S. legislation ( later passed as the Wireless Ship Act of 1910 ) requiring wireless for ships calling at U.S. ports , Princess Alice received her first wireless set in February 1909 . Operating with call letters " <unk> " on the 300 m band , her radio had a 250 @-@ mile ( 400 km ) range . 
 At 10 : 00 on 27 May 1909 , loaded with over 1 @,@ 000 passengers headed for Europe , Princess Alice departed the Lloyd pier in Hoboken , New Jersey . As she neared The Narrows in a heavy fog , she steamed to stay clear of outbound French Line steamer La Bretagne and ran hard aground on a submerged rocky ledge near the seawall of Fort Wadsworth a few minutes after 11 : 00 . After the fog lifted , it was revealed that the bow of Princess Alice had stopped some 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) from the outer walls of the Staten Island fort . Lighthouse tender Larkspur was the first ship to come to the aid of the Princess , followed by U.S. Army Quartermaster 's ship General Meigs and revenue cutter Seneca . No passengers were hurt in the incident and it was determined there was no damage to the hull of the liner . But , despite the effort of attending ships , she remained stuck on the ledge . Eventually , after offloading 500 short tons ( 450 t ) of cargo from her front hold onto lighters called to the scene , ten steam tugs and power from Princess Alice 's own engines freed the ship at 01 : 47 on 28 May , almost 15 hours after running aground . The force required to free the liner was great enough that she was then propelled into SS Marken , at anchor some distance away , damaging one of that ship 's fenders . After then making her way to the nearby New York City Quarantine Station , Princess Alice anchored to reload her cargo , and by 09 : 05 , she was underway again . However , she ran aground again in soft mud in Ambrose Channel at 10 : 15 . This time she was able to free herself and proceeded on to Bremen , a little more than 24 hours late . This voyage was further marred by the apparent suicide of a despondent New York attorney on 30 May . The man , headed to the spa town of Bad Nauheim in Hesse , had previously suffered a nervous breakdown and was under the care of a doctor on board the ship at the time he jumped overboard . 
 In May 1910 , Princess Alice sailed her last North Atlantic passage for her German owners . Put permanently on the Far East route , she plied Pacific waters for North German Lloyd until the outbreak of World War I. In late July 1914 , as war spread across Europe , Princess Alice neared her destination of Hong Kong with £ 850 @,@ 000 of gold from India . Rather than face seizure of the ship and her cargo by British authorities there , Princess Alice instead sped to the Philippines and deposited the gold with the German Consul at Manila . Leaving the neutral port in under 24 hours , the ship then rendezvoused with German cruiser Emden at Angaur before returning to the Philippines in early August and putting in at Cebu where she was interned . 
 = = USS Princess Matoika = = 
 On 6 April 1917 the United States declared war and immediately seized interned German ships at U.S. and territorial ports , but unlike most other German ships interned by the United States , Princess Alice had not been sabotaged by her German crew before her seizure . Assigned the Identification Number of 2290 , she was soon renamed Princess Matoika . Sources disagree about the identity of the ship 's namesake , who is often reported as either a member of the Philippine Royal Family , or a Japanese princess . Putnam , however , provides another answer : one of the given names of Pocahontas was <unk> , which was sometimes spelled Matoika . The newly renamed ship was taken to Olongapo City , 60 miles ( 97 km ) north of Manila and placed in the drydock Dewey at Subic Bay where temporary repairs were made . She then made her way to San Francisco , and eventually to the east coast . Princess Matoika was the last ex @-@ German ship to be commissioned . 
 = = = Transporting troops to France = = = 
 Placed under the command of William D. Leahy in April 1918 , the ship was readied for her first transatlantic troop run . At Newport News , Virginia , elements of the 4th Infantry Division boarded on 9 May . Sailing at 18 : 30 the next day , Princess Matoika was accompanied by American transports Pastores , Wilhelmina , Lenape , Antigone , and Susquehanna , the British steamer Kursk , and the Italian Duca d 'Aosta . The group rendezvoused with a similar group that left New York the same day , consisting of President Lincoln , Covington , Rijndam , British troopship Dwinsk , and Italian steamers Caserta and Dante Alighieri . American cruiser Frederick served as escort for the assembled ships , which were the 35th U.S. convoy of the war . During the voyage — because of the inability to finish serving three meals for all the men during daylight hours — mess service was curtailed to two daily meals , a practice continued on later voyages . On 20 May , the convoy sighted and fired on a " submarine " that turned out to be a bucket ; the next day escort Frederick left the convoy after being relieved by nine destroyers . Three days later the convoy sighted land at 06 : 30 and anchored at Brest that afternoon . Princess Matoika sailed for Newport News and arrived there safely on 6 June with Pastores and Lenape . Fate , however , was not as kind to former convoy mates President Lincoln and Dwinsk . On their return journeys they were sunk by German submarines U @-@ 90 and U @-@ 151 , respectively . 
 After loading officers and men from the 29th Infantry Division on 13 June , Princess Matoika set sail from Newport News the next day with Wilhelmina , Pastores , Lenape , and British troopship Czar . On the morning of 16 June , lookouts on Princess Matoika spotted a submarine and , soon after , a torpedo heading directly for the ship . The torpedo missed her by a few yards and gunners manning the ship 's 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) guns claimed a hit on the sub with their second shot . Later that morning , the Newport News ships met up with the New York portion of the convoy — which included DeKalb , Finland , Kroonland , George Washington , Covington , Rijndam , Dante Alighieri , and British steamer <unk> — and set out for France . The convoy was escorted by cruisers North Carolina and Frederick , and destroyers Stevens and Fairfax ; battleship Texas and several other destroyers joined in escort duties for the group for a time . The convoy had a false alarm when a floating barrel was mistaken for submarine , but otherwise uneventfully arrived at Brest on the afternoon of 27 June . Princess Matoika , Covington , Lenape , Rijndam , George Washington , DeKalb , Wilhelmina , and Dante Alighieri left Brest as a group on 30 June . The following evening at 21 : 15 , Covington was torpedoed by U @-@ 86 and sank the next afternoon . Princess Matoika and Wilhelmina arrived back at Newport News on 13 July . 
 Around this time , Commander Leahy left Princess Matoika to serve as Director of Gunnery Exercises and Engineering Performance in Washington . For his service on Princess Matoika , though , Leahy was awarded the Navy Cross . He was cited for distinguished service as commander of the ship while " engaged in the important , exacting and hazardous duty of transporting and escorting troops and supplies through waters infested with enemy submarines and mines " . 
 In the next months , Princess Matoika successfully completed two additional roundtrips from Newport News . On the first trip , she left Newport News with DeKalb , Dante <unk> , Wilhelmina , Pastores , and British troopship Czaritza on 18 July . The group joined a New York contingent and arrived in France on 30 July . Departing soon after , the Princess returned to Newport News on 13 August . Nine days later she departed in the company of the same ships from her last convoy — with French steamer Lutetia replacing DeKalb — and arrived in France on 3 September . Princess Matoika returned stateside two weeks later . 
 On 23 September , Princess Matoika departed New York with 3 @,@ 661 officers and men accompanied by transports President Grant , Mongolia , Rijndam , Wilhelmina , British steamer Ascanius , and was escorted by battleship Georgia , cruisers Montana and North Carolina , and destroyer Rathburne . As with other Navy ships throughout 1918 , Princess Matoika was not immune to the worldwide Spanish flu pandemic . On this particular crossing , two of her crewmen were felled by the disease as her convoy reached Saint @-@ Nazaire on 6 October . After her return to the U.S. on 21 October , she departed New York once again on 28 October , arriving in France on 9 November , two days before the Armistice . In all , she carried 21 @,@ 216 troops to France on her six trips overseas . 
 = = = Returning troops home = = = 
 With the fighting at an end , the task of bringing home American soldiers began almost immediately . Princess Matoika did her part by carrying home 30 @,@ 110 healthy and wounded men in eight roundtrips . On 20 December , 3 @,@ 000 troops boarded her and departed France for Newport News , arriving there on 1 January 1919 . Among those carried were Major General Charles T. Menoher , the newly appointed chief of the air service , and elements of the 39th Infantry Division . The Matoika arrived with another 2 @,@ 000 troops on 11 February . 
 In March 1919 , Princess Matoika and Rijndam raced each other from Saint @-@ Nazaire to Newport News in a friendly competition that received national press coverage in the United States . Rijndam , the slower ship , was just able to edge out the Princess — and cut two days from her previous fastest crossing time — by appealing to the honor of the soldiers of the 133rd Field Artillery ( returning home aboard the former Holland America liner ) and employing them as extra stokers for her boilers . 
 On her next trip , the veteran transport loaded troops at Saint @-@ Nazaire that included nine complete hospital units . After two days delay because of storms in the Bay of Biscay , Princess Matoika departed on 16 April , and arrived at Newport News on 27 April with 3 @,@ 500 troops . Shifting south to Charleston , South Carolina , the Matoika embarked 2 @,@ 200 former German prisoners of war ( POWs ) and hauled them to Rotterdam . This trip was followed up in May with the return of portions of the 79th Infantry Division from Saint @-@ Nazaire to New York . 
 In mid @-@ July , Princess Matoika delivered another load of 1 @,@ 900 former German POWs from Charleston to Rotterdam ; most of these prisoners were officers and men from interned German passenger liners and included Captain <unk> the former commander of Vaterland . One former POW , shortly after debarking in Europe , presciently commented that " this [ was ] no peace ; only a temporary truce " . After loading American crews of returned Dutch ships , Princess Matoika called at Antwerp and Brest before returning to New York on 1 August . 
 The ship departed New York on 8 August for her final roundtrip as a Navy transport . She departed Brest 23 August and returned to New York on 10 September . She was decommissioned there on 19 September , and handed over to the War Department for use as a United States Army transport . 
 = = USAT Princess Matoika = = 
 As her career as an Army transport began , Princess Matoika picked up where her Navy career had ended and continued the return of American troops from Europe . After returning to France she loaded 2 @,@ 965 troops at Brest — including Brigadier General W. P. Richardson and members of the Polar Bear Expedition , part of the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War — for a return to New York on 15 October . In December , Congressman Charles H. Randall ( Prohibitionist @-@ CA ) and his wife sailed on the Matoika to Puerto Rico and the Panama Canal . 
 On 5 April , Princess Matoika carried a group of 18 men and three officers of the U.S. Navy who were to attempt a transatlantic flight in the rigid airship <unk> , being built in England for the Navy . Several of the group that traveled on the Matoika were among the 45 men killed when the airship crashed on 24 August 1921 . 
 In May 1920 Princess Matoika took on board the bodies of ten female nurses and over 400 soldiers who died while on duty in France during the war . The ship then transited the Kiel Canal and picked up 1 @,@ 600 U.S. residents of Polish descent at Danzig , all of whom had enlisted in the Polish Army at the outset of the war . Also included among the passengers were 500 U.S. soldiers who had been released from occupation duty at Koblenz . The ship arrived at New York on 23 May with little fanfare and no ceremony ; bodies returned but not claimed by families were buried at Arlington National Cemetery . On 21 July , Princess Matoika arrived in New York after a similar voyage with 25 war brides , many repatriated Polish troops among its 2 @,@ 094 steerage passengers , and the remains of 881 soldiers . In between these two trips , the Belgian Ambassador to the United States , Baron Emile de Cartier de <unk> , sailed from New York to Belgium on board the Matoika . It was , however , Princess Matoika 's next trip to Belgium that was the most infamous . 
 = = = " Mutiny of the Matoika " = = = 
 Beginning 26 July 1920 , a majority of the U.S. Olympic contingent destined for the 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp , Belgium , endured a troubled transatlantic journey aboard Princess Matoika . The voyage and the events onboard — later called the " Mutiny of the Matoika " — were still being discussed in the popular press years later . The Matoika was a last @-@ minute substitute for another ship and , according to the athletes , did not have adequate accommodations or training facilities on board . Near the end of the voyage , the athletes published a list of grievances and demands and distributed copies of the document to the United States Secretary of War , the American Olympic Committee members , and the press . The incident received wide coverage in American newspapers at the time . 
 After the contingent of athletes debarked at Antwerp on 8 August , Princess Matoika made one more voyage of note while under U.S. Army control . The Matoika sailed for New York on 24 August and arrived on 4 September carrying a portion of the returning Olympic team , American Boy Scouts returning from the International Boy Scout Jamboree in London , and the remains of 1 @,@ 284 American soldiers for repatriation . 
 = = U.S. Mail Line = = 
 At the conclusion of her Army service , Princess Matoika was handed over to the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) , who chartered the vessel to the United States Mail Steamship Company for service from New York to Italy . This solution of how to use the Princess for civilian service was the culmination of efforts by the USSB to find a suitable civilian use for her . In 1919 , she was one of the ships suggested for a proposed service from New Orleans , Louisiana , to Valparaiso , Chile , and in November 1919 , tentative plans were announced for her service with the Munson Line between New York and Argentina beginning in mid @-@ 1920 , but both of these proposals fell through . 
 Princess Matoika — outfitted for 350 cabin @-@ class and 500 third @-@ class passengers and at 10 @,@ 421 gross register tons ( GRT ) — kicked off her U.S. Mail Line service on 20 January 1921 when she sailed from New York to Naples and Genoa on her first of three roundtrips between these ports . After a storm damaged the Matoika 's steering gear , she had to be towed back in to New York on 28 January . 
 After repairs and a successful eastbound crossing , Princess Matoika had an encounter with an iceberg off Newfoundland while carrying some 2 @,@ 000 Italian immigrants on her first return trip from Italy . On the night of 24 February , the fully laden ship struck what was reported in The New York Times as either " an iceberg or a submerged wreck " off Cape Race . The ship 's steering gear was damaged in the collision , leaving the ship adrift for over seven hours before repairs were effected . The Matoika 's captain indicated that no passengers were hurt in the collision . According to the story of one third @-@ class passenger , she , suspecting there was something seriously amiss , made inquiry after the commotion . A crew member told her that the Matoika had only stopped to greet a ship passing in the night . When she went on deck , insistent on seeing the other ship herself , she saw the iceberg and observed the first @-@ class passengers queued up to board the already @-@ lowered lifeboats . She took her daughter with her to join one of the queues , and , though initially rebuffed , was allowed to remain . The lifeboats were never deployed , however , and the Matoika arrived in Boston , where she had been diverted due to a typhus scare , on 28 February without further incident . 
 On the Matoika 's third and final return voyage from Italy , begun on 17 May , U.S. Customs Service agents at New York seized $ 150 @,@ 000 worth of cocaine — along with valuable silks and jewels — being smuggled into the United States . Officials speculated that because of a maritime strike , members of a smuggling ring were able to infiltrate the crew of the ship . 
 After her withdrawal from the Italian route , Princess Matoika was transferred to New York – Bremen service , sailing on her first commercial trip to Germany since before World War I on 14 June . In July , during her second roundtrip on the Bremen route , late rental payments to the USSB resulted in action to seize the nine ships chartered by the U.S. Mail Line , including the Matoika , after its return from Bremen . The ships were turned over to United American Lines — W. Averell Harriman 's steamship company — for temporary operation . After some legal wrangling by both the USSB and the U.S. Mail Line — and in light of financial irregularities by the U.S. Mail Line that were uncovered — the ships were permanently retained by the USSB in August . 
 = = United States Lines = = 
 Upon the formation of the United States Lines in August 1921 , Princess Matoika and the eight other ex @-@ German liners formerly operated by the U.S. Mail Line were transferred to the new company for operation . The Princess , still on New York – Bremen service , sailed on her first voyage for the new steamship line on 15 September . In October , Matoika crewmen were reported as taking advantage of the German inflation by consuming champagne available for $ 1 @.@ 00 per quart and mugs of " the best beer " for an American penny . In November , United States Lines announced that Princess Matoika would be replaced on the Bremen route in order to better compete with North German Lloyd , the liner 's former owner , but that never came about . The Princess continued on runs to Bremen , calling at the additional ports of Queenstown , Southampton , and Danzig , as her schedule shifted from time to time . 
 On 28 January 1922 , the Matoika departed with 400 passengers , among them , 312 Polish orphans headed for repatriation in their homeland . Two days and 100 nautical miles ( 190 km ) out of New York , the liner experienced a heavy gale that disabled her steering gear , and forced her return to New York after temporary repairs failed . The captain was able to steer her through the use of the ship 's engines , and arrived safely back in port on 31 January . This incident was the yet another misfortune that had befallen the young Poles . After being orphaned by the fighting between Polish and Soviet forces , the orphans had been taken across Siberia , evacuated to Japan , transported to Seattle , Washington , and taken by rail to Chicago , Illinois , where they were enrolled in school while searches for relatives in Poland were conducted . 
 After four Bremen roundtrips for United States Lines , Princess Matoika had sailed her last voyage under that name . When newly built Type 535 vessels named for American presidents came into service for the company in May 1922 , the Princess was renamed SS President Arthur in honor of the 21st U.S. President , Chester A. Arthur , matching the naming style of the new ships . 
 After her rename , she continued plying the North Atlantic between New York and Bremen , and was involved in a few episodes of note during this time . In June 1922 , two years into Prohibition in the United States , President Arthur was raided while at her dock in Hoboken , New Jersey , which netted 150 cases of smuggled spirits . Officials involved denied reports that the raid was conducted as a legal test case intended to test the determination of USSB chair Albert Lasker that United States @-@ flagged ships could carry and sell alcohol outside the three @-@ mile territorial limit of the United States . Congressman James A. Gallivan ( D @-@ MA ) , an anti @-@ prohibition leader , publicly demanded to know why the ship had not been seized for violating U.S. laws . 
 In September , President Arthur carried Irish republicans Muriel MacSwiney , widow of the recently deceased Lord Mayor of Cork Terence MacSwiney , and Linda Mary Kearns , who had been jailed for murder under the Black and Tans , to New York . Wearing buttons with pictures of Harry Boland , an anti @-@ treaty Irish nationalist who had been killed the previous month , the two women were there to raise funds for orphans of Anti @-@ Treaty IRA forces , who were then fighting in southern Ireland . In October , a Hoboken man , after securing a last @-@ minute court order , was able to halt the deportation of his German niece on President Arthur ; she was retrieved from the ship ten minutes before sailing time . 
 In November 1922 , U.S. Customs Service agents , seized a cache of Colt magazine guns aboard President Arthur . The entire crew was questioned but all denied any knowledge of the eight weapons found stowed behind a bulkhead . In August the following year , President Arthur took on board a seaman suffering from pneumonia from the Norwegian freighter Eastern Star in a mid @-@ ocean transfer . The ship 's doctor and nurse attended to the sailor but were unable to save him . 
 President Arthur sailed on her last transatlantic voyage from Bremen on 18 October 1923 , carrying 656 passengers to New York . Anchoring off Gravesend Bay on 30 October , President Arthur was one of 15 passenger ships whose arrival in New York was timed to coincide with the opening of the November immigration quota period . Under the Emergency Quota Act passed in 1921 , numerical limits on European immigration were imposed which created nationality quotas . At the conclusion of this voyage , President Arthur was laid up in Baltimore , Maryland , for almost a year . 
 = = American Palestine Line = = 
 On 9 October 1924 , the newly formed American Palestine Line announced that it had purchased President Arthur from the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) , with plans to inaugurate service between New York and Palestine the following March . The American Palestine Line was formed in 1924 for the purpose of providing direct passenger service from New York to Palestine and was reportedly the first steamship company owned and operated by Jews . The company had negotiated to purchase three ocean liners from the USSB but was only able to purchase President Arthur . After refurbishing the liner , the company inaugurated service between New York and Palestine in March 1925 , when President Arthur sailed on her maiden voyage . A crowd of 15 @,@ 000 witnessed ceremonies that included songs , prayers , and speeches in English and Yiddish . The company claimed that President Arthur was the first ocean liner to fly the Zionist flag at sea , and the first ocean liner ever to have female officers . 
 The line had labor difficulties and financial difficulties throughout its existence . Rumors of a mutiny during President Arthur 's first trip were reported in The New York Times , and several crew members got into an altercation with members of the Blackshirts , the Italian fascist paramilitary group , when the liner made an intermediary stop in Naples . On her second voyage , the ship 's master @-@ at @-@ arms was killed by a fellow crew member . Financial difficulties included unpaid bills and resultant court actions , and accusations of fraud against company officers that were leveled in the press . In late 1925 the company was placed in the hands of a receiver , President Arthur — after a two @-@ alarm fire in her forward cargo hold — ended up back in the hands of the USSB , and the company 's office furniture and fixtures were sold at auction in early 1926 . 
 = = Los Angeles Steamship Company = = 
 In August 1926 the Los Angeles Steamship Company ( LASSCO ) announced the acquisition of President Arthur from the USSB . The liner would be extensively rebuilt and then sail opposite of City of Los Angeles ( the former North German Lloyd liner Grosser Kurfürst ) on a Los Angeles – Hawaii route . Arriving from New York on 24 September , the ship was docked at Los Angeles Shipbuilding and Drydock to immediately begin a $ 2 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 refit . Although initially planned to be ready for February 1927 sailings , progress was slowed by drydock access , and her completion date was pushed to May . During her refit , the ship was renamed City of Honolulu , becoming the second LASSCO ship of that name . At the conclusion of her reconstruction in May , City of Honolulu sailed on a 24 @-@ hour shakedown cruise . 
 = = = Maiden voyage = = = 
 City of Honolulu was rebuilt to 10 @,@ 680 GRT and had accommodations for around 450 first @-@ class and 50 third @-@ class passengers . Her hull was painted all white for LASSCO service , and she sported period designs in her common areas . The dining room , large enough to seat 300 in a single sitting , was decorated in a Grecian theme , and featured 18 stained glass windows designed by San Diego architect Carleton Winslow . The smoking room was done up in a Tudor style ; the music room was decorated in a combined French and Italian Renaissance manner ; and the writing room was in Adam style . The suites were all done in either Adam , Queen Anne , or Louis XVI styles . The ship featured six passenger elevators , and a swimming pool patterned on a Pompeian design . One of the few remaining traces of her pre @-@ war German decoration was the rosewood railing on her grand staircase . 
 On 4 June 1927 , a crowd of 7 @,@ 000 well @-@ wishers saw City of Honolulu depart on her maiden voyage . The festivities were also broadcast on radio station <unk> , a portable station operating form the front cargo deck of the ship . During the journey , broadcasts of the City of Honolulu 's orchestra , along with radio personalities and musicians from Los Angeles station KHJ , entertained both passengers and listeners on shore ( while the ship was in range ) . 
 Several notable passengers sailed on the liner 's maiden voyage . Jay Gould II , tennis champion and grandson of railroad tycoon Jay Gould , sailed for a three @-@ month stay at his Hawaiian home . Also sailing were movie star Laura La Plante and her husband , director William A. Seiter , and , Western Auto founder George Pepperdine , who began a three @-@ month tour of the Orient with his daughters . On arrival in Honolulu on 10 June , City of Honolulu was adorned with flowers and received a welcome from airplanes and a flotilla of outrigger canoes that escorted her into the harbor . After a ten @-@ day stay in the islands , she departed for Los Angeles , returning there on 26 June . 
 = = = Career = = = 
 After completion of her maiden voyage , City of Honolulu began regular service from Los Angeles to Honolulu and Hilo on what LASSCO called the " Great Circle Route of Sunshine " . After arriving at Honolulu , the ship would sail southeast to Hilo , passing the islands of Molokai and Maui on their north sides . On the return from Hilo , the liner would traverse the <unk> , the <unk> , and the <unk> Channels , taking the ship between Maui and Molokai on the north and the islands of Kahoolawe and Lanai on the south . 
 Throughout her career , City of Honolulu transported many notable passengers to Hawaii . In July 1927 , for example , Henry Smith Pritchett , president of the Carnegie Foundation , sailed to Hawaii en route to a meeting with the Institute of Pacific Relations . In June 1928 , movie stars Norma Talmadge , Gilbert Roland , and Lottie Pickford began a Hawaiian vacation , and on 28 July , Jane Addams , the founder of Hull House and a pioneer of the settlement movement , headed there as well . Addams was on her way to attend the Pan @-@ Pacific Women 's Conference and the congress of the Women 's International League for Peace and Freedom ; a former Governor of Hawaii , Walter F. Frear , returned to the islands on that same voyage . In December , Al Jolson and his wife , Ruby Keeler , sailed on the liner for a vacation , and early the next February , the reigning British Open golf champion , Walter Hagen , sailed to start a four @-@ month golfing tour and exhibition in Australia . Hagan was accompanied by Australian golfer Joe Kirkwood ; Arctic explorer Donald B. MacMillan also left for Hawaii on the same sailing . 
 City of Honolulu also carried notable visitors to the mainland . Farris M. Brown , a dealer in Stradivarius instruments , arrived in Los Angeles in May 1928 with three of the famous maker 's violins , including the Baron Knoop Stradivarius . In April 1929 , Swedish swimmer Arne Borg , accompanied by his wife , arrived in Los Angeles on a world swimming tour , and in May , Sir James <unk> , a former Mayor of Auckland , arrived for a one @-@ month visit to promote increased trade between California and New Zealand . The next January , Herbert Hagerman , former Governor of New Mexico Territory ; author Basil Woon , who had been doing research for a Hawaiian story ; and aviation promoter and chewing gum magnate William <unk> all sailed stateside on the ship . 
 Apart from notable passengers carried during her tenure , City of Honolulu also frequently served as a conveyance for newlyweds heading for Hawaiian honeymoons . She also carried , in addition to passengers , cargo in both directions , transporting commodities , such as fertilizer and oil , to Hawaii , and Hawaiian goods , like sugar and fresh and canned pineapple to the mainland . 
 = = = Fire and scrapping = = = 
 City of Honolulu 's career as a tropical liner , however , was short @-@ lived . On the afternoon of 25 May 1930 , just shy of completing three years of LASSCO service , a fire broke out on her B deck while she was docked in her namesake city . Although aided by fireboat <unk> and U.S. Navy submarine rescue ship Widgeon , firefighters were unable to bring the blaze under control quickly , and it spread to 100 short tons ( 91 t ) of potash aboard the liner . Fears that her cargo of 16 @,@ 000 barrels ( 2 @,@ 500 m3 ) of oil would explode caused firefighters to intentionally sink the liner at her pier in order to help extinguish the conflagration . Through firefighters ' efforts , the fire was contained to the upper three decks , leaving the ship 's power plant relatively undamaged . All crew members and LASSCO employees on board the ship got off safely ; no passengers were on the ship at the time of the fire . 
 The ship was pumped out and raised on 9 June , and taken to the naval drydock at Pearl Harbor for inspection on 12 June . While remaining in Hawaii , one engine was restored to working order and the ship departed for Los Angeles under her own power on 30 October . After her arrival , further inspections were conducted , and it was determined that repairs would be too expensive , especially given the global economic conditions . City of Honolulu was declared a total loss , and was laid up in the West Basin of Los Angeles Harbor for almost three years . During her lay up , fittings and fixtures stripped from the vessel were auctioned in July 1932 , and in December , film crews from Columbia Pictures Corporation spent ten days filming on board the ship . 
 City of Honolulu was sold to Japanese shipbreakers in mid 1933 , and — in the company of <unk> , another LASSCO ship destined for the scrap heap — the City of Honolulu departed Los Angeles in late August under her own power . Manned by a Filipino crew , the 33 @-@ year @-@ old liner developed a problem with one of her boilers almost immediately and had to put in to San Francisco for repairs . Getting underway after a lengthy delay , one of her engines failed in mid @-@ ocean , leaving her to plod on to Japan on one engine . She eventually arrived in Osaka at the shipbreaker in mid @-@ December , and was scrapped shortly thereafter . 
 = Pacific Aviation Museum Pearl Harbor = 
 Pacific Aviation Museum Pearl Harbor is a non @-@ profit founded in 1999 to develop an aviation museum in Hawaii . Part of Senator Daniel Inouye 's vision for a rebirth of Ford Island , the museum hosts a variety of aviation exhibits with a majority relating directly to the attack on Pearl Harbor and World War II . The first section of the museum , hangar 37 , opened with the museum on December 7 , 2006 , and features much of the museum 's static exhibits . The museum 's hangars show damage from the attacks on Pearl Harbor from December 7 , 1941 . 
 The museum has been involved in community events ranging from preservation of historical landmarks to educational tours throughout Hawai 'i . The focus devoted efforts to restoring the Ford Island control tower and signed a lease with the Navy to begin repairs . Visitors to the museum gain access via tour bus from the Pearl Harbor Historic Sites on Halawa landing or use a US Military ID card at the Admiral Clarey bridge gate . The museum has received awards for their efforts to restore historical buildings and is listed as a top 10 aviation museum on TripAdvisor . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1983 , the Pacific Aerospace Museum was formed inside Honolulu International Airport after pressure from the Hawaiian Chamber of Commerce to create an aviation museum in Hawaii succeeded . The first phase of the museum opened in 1991 and was founded by Frank Der Yuen . The idea for the Pacific Aviation Museum began on the anniversary of the victory over Japan in 1995 . After the September 11 attacks , the Pacific Aerospace Museum operation was suspended by the state and finally removed two years later . A few of the exhibits were salvaged by the Pacific Aviation Museum Pearl Harbor foundation as well as responsibility for the education and scholarship programs . 
 Prior to the completion of the Admiral Clarey Bridge in 1998 , access to Ford Island was provided via ferry boat only to those residing on Ford Island and their guests . Senator Inouye proposed a $ 500 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 " rebirth " of Ford Island through special legislation 2814 U. S. Code to authorize the Navy to sell land to fund the rebirth . The plan included 500 new homes for Navy personnel , a new child development center , a new Navy lodge , and the Pacific Aviation Museum Pearl Harbor . The original museum was called the Military Aviation Museum of the Pacific . The foundation sought funds to raise the original $ 46 million goal from various sources including the US State of Hawaii , the United States Congress , the United States Navy , and fundraising dinners . It received support from former US astronaut Captain Walter Schirra . While executive director of the San Diego Air & Space Museum , Allan Palmer was hired by the United States Air Force to conduct a feasibility study on an aviation museum in Hawaii and then hired as its executive direction and chief executive operating officer . 
 A groundbreaking ceremony was held March 21 , 2006 for the $ 75 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 construction of the museum . It opened on December 7 , 2007 on the 65th anniversary of the attack on Pearl Harbor . Its board consists of former United States president George H.W. Bush , Brigadier General Chuck Yeager , and formerly Brigadier General Paul Tibbets . The museum occupies hangars 37 , 54 , and 79 on Ford Island and covers 16 acres . In 2012 , the Pacific Aviation Museum Pearl Harbor was named an affiliate of the Smithsonian Institution as part of the Smithsonian Affiliations program . On April 4 , 2013 , the museum received its millionth visitor . 
 = = = Facilities = = = 
 Due to its historical significance , as the location of the first radio alert of the attack on Pearl Harbor , the museum plans to spend over $ 7 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 repairing the Ford Island control tower . It was registered as a category 1 structure in the 1978 Pearl Harbor Naval Base Historic Preservation Plan and is being restored by Kiewit Building Group ; the same contractor who built the museum . The 70 @-@ year @-@ old 158 feet ( 48 m ) tower suffers from deteriorating steel stairs , landing , and beams that require repair or replacement . A grant through the United States Department of Defense appropriations for the stabilization and restoration of a historical landmark was given to the museum for $ 3 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 which provided the initial funds to start the project . The control tower , as well as the runway , has been designated a national historic landmark since 1964 . In 2010 , records filed with Congress shows that defense firms had donated nearly $ 449 @,@ 000 to the museum during efforts to raise money to restore the tower . The tower was considered a personal issue for Senator Inouye and many of these donations were made in his memory . The tower was featured in the films Tora ! Tora ! Tora ! and Pearl Harbor . 
 Hangar 37 , a former seaplane hangar and one of the few survivors of the attack on Pearl Harbor , was the first hangar developed for the museum . The 7 @.@ 25 acres ( 2 @.@ 93 ha ) facility consists of nine exhibits , a movie theater , flight simulators , a store and a restaurant . The renovation cost was $ 11 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 and was raised by federal and state grants and through donations by local corporations . Built in 1939 and at over 87 @,@ 000 square feet ( 8 @,@ 100 m2 ) , Hangar 79 is the restoration hangar but also contains many of the museums exhibits including the flying tigers exhibit , MiG Alley exhibit , and various helicopters , jets , and civil aircraft . The hangar 's glass windows are still riddled with bullet holes from Japanese aircraft from the day of the attack . Tawani Foundation donated $ 82 @,@ 500 for the renovation of Hangar 79 . 
 = = Exhibits = = 
 In 2009 , former McDonalds CEO Fred L. Turner sponsored the restoration of a Douglas SBD Dauntless . The Boeing <unk> @-@ 3 Stearman used by former President George H.W. Bush for flight training and used for his first solo flight is an exhibit at the museum . 
 The remains of the Japanese A6M2 Zero " B11 @-@ 120 " from the carrier Hiryu piloted by Airman First Class Shigenori <unk> , who crash landed on Ni <unk> after the second wave of the attack on Pearl Harbor , are stored at the museum . It is displayed exactly as it was after the crash . The remains of the tractor used to create trenches to prevent such a landing are stored at the museum . The trenches were created after the island was warned that the Japanese had planned to use the island as a forward operating base . 
 A Japanese A6M2 @-@ 21 Zero similar to the aircraft used in the attack on Pearl Harbor was salvaged in 1968 and restored to flying condition in 1985 . Originally , it flew with the Japanese air group 201 in the Solomon Islands . It was sold to the Confederate Air Force for use in air shows and later sold to the museum in 2006 . 
 On April 11 , 2013 , the remains of a B @-@ 17 bomber arrived at the Pacific Aviation Museum Pearl Harbor almost 70 years after avoiding destruction during the attack on Pearl Harbor . The restoration project is expected to cost $ 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . The plane , called " Swamp Ghost " , was supposed to fly to Hickam Field on December 7 , 1941 but was delayed due to engine trouble and avoided the attack . Later , it was used in the February 22 , 1942 bombing of Rabaul . After the bombing , the plane was attacked by nine Japanese fighters on its return to base , was struck on the wing , and crashed in marsh water . The plane remained there for 64 years , earning its nickname , and the wreckage was used as a navigational aid . It appeared in National Geographic in 1992 and several attempts were made to recover the aircraft , but it was not successfully recovered until 2006 and arrived back in the United States in 2010 . It was purchased by the museum in 2011 . It was delivered in seven separate shipment containers and is being restored outside of hangar 79 . 
 In June 2012 , the museum debuted a 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) tall , 40 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) wide diorama of the Battle of Midway . The diorama was commissioned in 2008 for $ 400 @,@ 000 on the advice of Turner and took three years to complete by former US Navy pilot Karl Lau . 
 = = = Collection = = = 
 = = = East , Wind , Rain = = = 
 In 2008 , the Hawaii Pacific University documentary and corporate video class completed development of a 12 @-@ minute film titled East , Wind , Rain to replace the older film shown to visitors at the museum . The film explains the surprise attack on Pearl Harbor to museum guests and won the 2010 Pixie Gold Award from American Pixel Academy . 
 = = Public reception = = 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 In 2013 , the Navy was concerned about plans by the museum to host 1 @,@ 500 Chinese nationals from Amway China on Ford Island , as it remains an active military installation , who were particularly interested in the Flying Tigers exhibit . Despite these concerns , the Navy approved the event and erected a 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) tall fence . 
 In March 2013 , the museum 's online ticketing service was hacked , the museum 's service provider , <unk> , believed that none of the data of its customers was accessed . 
 In June 2013 , the museum fought the US Navy 's plan to install 60 @,@ 000 photovoltaic panels over 28 acres on the Ford Island runway . The Navy had intended to comply with Congressional and Defense Department mandates to reduce dependence on fossil fuels and offset the cost of Hawaiian energy costs , which are the highest in the United States . The plan deviated from a 2009 proposal which would use the panels to define the historic runway in favor of panels which would produce twice the power . The Navy offered the museum $ 250 @,@ 000 toward renovation of the control tower 's elevator in exchange for their support of the plan which the museum declined . It organized an internet campaign to oppose the plan based on historical significance . Instead , the Navy decided to install the panels on existing structures around Pearl Harbor . 
 = = = Community involvement = = = 
 In 2008 , the museum received a grant from BAE Systems to fund its Barnstorming program to build wind tunnels and plane props that will tour local schools to teach aerospace education to sixth graders . In 2012 , the program was credited with teaching 3 @,@ 500 students from 40 schools . 
 In 2013 , the U.S. State Department awarded the museum the " Museums Connect " grant for the " Past to Present : U.S. <unk> Bridge of Connections " program . The program allowed students from Kaiser High School to participate in a cultural heritage exchange with students in Chengdu , China and conduct research into 1940s American @-@ Chinese relations . 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 During the 2013 federal budget sequestration in the United States , the Pacific Aviation Museum Pearl Harbor received an increase in tourists , due to limited ferry trips to the USS Arizona Memorial which are operated by active duty United States Navy personnel . Because Ford Island is still part of the active military base Joint Base Pearl Harbor @-@ Hickam , tourists gain access via the National Park Service 's Halawa Landing , now known as the Pearl Harbor Historic Sites , for tickets to the museum and then are transported via tour bus onto the installation for the museum and the USS Missouri . 
 = = Recognition and awards = = 
 Pacific Aviation Museum Pearl Harbor was listed as the eighth top aviation attraction in the United States by TripAdvisor . In 2007 , the museum was awarded a preservation award from the Historic Hawaii foundation for " a specific project that preserved , rehabilitated or restored a historic building , object , site or district " in the redevelopment of hangar 37 . 
 = Columbus ( Providence , Rhode Island ) = 
 Columbus is an historic statue in Providence , Rhode Island , United States on Elmwood Avenue . Columbus is a bronze cast of a sterling silver statue which was created by Rhode Island 's Gorham Manufacturing Company for the 1892 Columbian Exposition in Chicago . The original silver statue was not meant for permanent exhibition , but rather as a demonstration of the skills of the Gorham Company , and was later melted down . The bronze cast was dedicated November 8 , 1893 as a gift from the Elmwood Association to the City of Providence . It stands upon a granite base at the center of a grassy triangle at the intersection of Reservoir Avenue and Elmwood Avenue . The statue features Christopher Columbus , was created in 1893 by Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi and added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2001 . 
 = = History = = 
 Cast in 1893 , the statue of Columbus that stands on Elmwood Avenue was produced by the Gorham Manufacturing Company who commissioned master sculptor , Auguste Bartholdi . The bronze statue is a cast of the original made of sterling silver , which was commissioned for the 1892 Columbian Exposition in Chicago , Illinois . For the upcoming exposition , Gorham wanted a demonstration piece to show the skill of its foundry and commissioned Bartholdi to create a statue of Columbus . The completed model was shipped across the Atlantic Ocean to be cast from 30 @,@ 000 ounces of silver at Providence , Rhode Island . The casting was a ceremonial affair , where guests " were feted as they watched the process " . Gorham officials accompanied and shipped the statue to Chicago via rail . It served as a demonstration piece at the exposition , showcasing the skill of its foundry in the technically difficult task of casting a work in sterling silver . After the exposition , the statue was returned to Providence where it was melted down : a silver statue was impractical as a permanent outdoor sculpture and the piece had already served its celebratory and advertisement purpose . 
 In 1893 , a bronze Columbus was cast by the Gorham company and gifted to the City of Providence by the Elmwood Association , a civic group from a neighborhood near Gorham . It is known that Bartholdi visited Newport , Rhode Island in 1893 , but it is unknown if he was involved in the production of the bronze cast . The statue was dedicated on November 8 , 1893 at 2 : 30 p.m. Professor Alonzo Williams was the presenter of the statue to the city and Mayor Potter acted as " response on behalf the city " . Music was provided by the Reeves American Band and the song Columbus was performed . The oration was given by Reverend H. W. Rugg and a chorus of children lead the crowd in singing My Country , ' Tis of Thee . The site of the statue was originally deeded to the Town of Cranston by Joseph Cooke on May 24 , 1824 . The Town of Cranston deeded it to Providence in 1868 and renamed it Columbus Park in 1893 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The bronze cast depicts a 6 @.@ 6 feet ( 2 @.@ 0 m ) by 4 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) wide and deep , " larger @-@ than @-@ life size " standing figure of Christopher Columbus atop a 5 @.@ 25 feet ( 1 @.@ 60 m ) by 5 @.@ 33 feet ( 1 @.@ 62 m ) plain square base of grey Westerly , Rhode Island granite . The National Historic Register of Places nomination describes the statue : " The explorer is caught in mid @-@ stride , his left foot stepping off the base . In his left hand he holds a globe ; his right arm is raised , his index finger pointing , as if giving an order or sighting land . Columbus wears a short tunic ; a wide belt wraps the waist ; a second belt across the hip holds a sword . A short full cloak billows out around the figure , and he wears a brimmed hat . There is a coil of line at his feet . " The square base is inscribed with " Columbus " on the front , " 1492 " on the right side and " 1893 " on the left side . 
 The statue is in good overall condition , but has some very small cracks in the figure and the tail ends of the bronze swag are missing . The base is also in good condition with only some chipping on the lower edge of the base being noted in the nomination . In 2010 , the statue was defaced on Columbus Day with red paint and a sign which read " murderer " hanging from its waist . The statue has also been the subject of graffiti " tagging " vandalism . 
 = = Importance = = 
 The National Register of Historic Places nomination lists the Columbus statue under both criteria A and C. Criterion A requires that the property must make a contribution to the major pattern of American history , and criterion C concerns the distinctive characteristics of its architecture and construction , including having great artistic value or being the work of a master . The basis for meeting criterion A is that the work is an example of the Gorham Manufacturing Company 's large statue . Columbus was listed under criterion C as an example of the work of Auguste Bartholdi 's work . The statue has not been moved from its original location , but the " significance of the work is not dependent upon its setting but is encompassed within the object itself . " Columbus was added to the National Register of Historic Places on October 19 , 2001 . 
 Though it is a bronze cast copy of the original silver work , the sculpture itself was declared a masterpiece because " [ l ] <unk> and vigor are implied in every line and feature , and the general effect is one of great beauty . " In relation to the original silver cast , James Wilson Pierce declared it as an exemplary work of art that surpasses all other Christopher Columbus sculptures in the United States . 
 = Homogenic = 
 Homogenic is the third international solo album by Icelandic musician Björk , released in September 1997 . Produced by Björk , Mark Bell , Guy Sigsworth , Howie B and Markus Dravs , it was released on One Little Indian Records . The music of Homogenic was a new style for Björk , focusing on similar sounding music combining electronic beats and string instruments with songs in tribute to her native country Iceland . Homogenic was originally to be produced in her home in London , but was later recorded in Spain . Homogenic marked the first of several production collaborations between Björk and Mark Bell , whom Björk would cite as a major influence on her musical career . The album peaked at number twenty @-@ eight on the Billboard 200 , and at number four on the UK Albums Chart . 
 Five singles were released from Homogenic : " Jóga " , " Bachelorette " , " Hunter " , " Alarm Call " and " All Is Full of Love " . Homogenic was highly acclaimed on its initial release and continues to be praised by critics , with Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine stating that " if not the greatest electronic album of all time , it 's certainly the greatest of its decade " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Maida Vale sessions = = = 
 After an extensive tour in 1996 , Björk returned to her home in Maida Vale with an urgent need to write new songs as a form of therapy . Björk would let audio engineer Markus Dravs into her home studio to start creating new songs . Björk wanted to create an album with " a simple sound " and " only one flavour " . The album began with the working title of Homogeneous , but Björk shortly afterwards changed it to Homogenic . 
 The sessions with Dravs and Björk were casual , with Björk allowing Dravs freedom with the album . Björk only left the studio to cook meals for the both of them . One of the first songs created during the sessions was " 5 Years " which Dravs created the fast beat for . The progress of Homogenic in these sessions was halted due to a media sensation caused by the suicide of Björk 's stalker Ricardo López . To deal with the stress of being at home during this incident , Björk imagined herself as the protagonist in a Spanish soap opera . The character 's image inspired a song titled " So Broken " which she sang to herself in her kitchen . The song was later included on the Japanese import of the album . 
 = = = Málaga sessions = = = 
 To record in privacy away from the sudden unwanted media interest , Björk 's tour drummer Trevor Morais offered his studio in Spain . Björk went to Málaga and arranged to meet with flamenco guitarist Raimundo Amador . Björk had originally intended to stay in Málaga only briefly , but later decided to record the entirety of Homogenic there . Björk made a final trip out of the country before staying in Spain . As she had done since moving to London , Björk returned to Iceland for Christmas . While there , she wrote more new songs for Homogenic , including " Jóga " . Before returning to Spain to record , Björk was sidetracked by a two @-@ week worldwide press tour for the promotion of her remix album Telegram , which had just been released . 
 After returning to the studio in Spain in late January , Björk decided that producer Nellee Hooper , who had produced both Debut and Post , would not return , as Björk stated that they had " both stopped surprising each other " . Björk had intended to produce the album alone , but she abandoned the idea and sought out a group of close collaborators including Dravs , Howie B , Guy Sigsworth and LFO 's Mark Bell . Howie B had worked with Björk previously on Debut and Post and Sigsworth had played harpsichord on Post . The American hip hop group Wu @-@ Tang Clan almost contributed to the production of Homogenic , but were unable due to their production on the album Wu @-@ Tang Forever , which had taken longer than planned . Most of the melodies on the album were created by Björk , who then composed string sections on a Casio keyboard and brought them to programmers who would add suitable rhythmic patterns . Björk desired to have Mark Bell contribute to her albums Debut and Post , only finding him available for Homogenic . Mark Bell was credited for the majority of the album 's production , including the songs " Pluto " , " Alarm Call " , and the bass line in " Jóga " . Björk stated about her collaboration with Bell that she " trusts and respects what [ Bell ] does for me . If I were to say who has influenced me most it would be Stockhausen , Kraftwerk , Brian Eno and Mark Bell " . Other unorthodox methods of recording were used during the production , including Björk wanting to record outside on the porch and using non @-@ professionals to help with production , such as Rebecca Storey , who was hired as a babysitter but added to the production staff after showing interest in the equipment . 
 String arrangements were added late in the recording process . Björk had friend <unk> Deodato conduct , transcribe and compose original pieces for the few songs that Björk did not arrange for herself . To keep with the Icelandic theme of the album , Björk ordered the services of the Icelandic String Octet . By June 1997 , the album was behind schedule and Björk was uncertain of the final track listing and unhappy with some of the recorded vocals . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Before production began on Homogenic , Björk wanted to create an album with " a simple sound " and " only one flavour " . Heather Phares of Allmusic described the sound of Homogenic as a " fusion of chilly strings ( courtesy of the Icelandic String Octet ) , stuttering , abstract beats , and unique touches like accordion and glass harmonica " . The album differs from her previous two releases stylistically , and Neva Chonin of Rolling Stone stated the album was " certain to be rough going for fans looking for the sweet melodies and peppy dance collages of her earlier releases " . 
 Björk wanted Homogenic to have a conceptual focus on her native Iceland . Producer Markus Dravs recalled Björk wanting it to sound like " rough volcanoes with soft moss growing all over it ... " In an interview for <unk> , Björk explained that " in Iceland , everything revolves around nature , 24 hours a day . Earthquakes , snowstorms , rain , ice , volcanic eruptions , geysers ... Very elementary and uncontrollable . But at the other hand , Iceland is incredibly modern ; everything is hi @-@ tech . The number of people owning a computer is as high as nowhere else in the world . That contradiction is also on Homogenic . The electronic beats are the rhythm , the heartbeat . The violins create the old @-@ fashioned atmosphere , the colouring . " 
 Björk 's vocals on Homogenic range from primitive sounding screams to a traditional singing method used by Icelandic choir men , a combination of speaking and singing as illustrated in the song " <unk> " . The majority of songs on Homogenic have lyrics about love and failed relationships . The song " Jóga " was written as a tribute to her best friend and tour masseuse of the same name . Björk called " All is Full of Love " a song about " believing in love " and that " Love isn 't just about two persons . It 's everywhere around you " . " All Neon Like " contains snippets of a poem Björk wrote called " Techno Prayer " in 1996 . The song " 5 Years " appeared in live form a few weeks after her breakup with musician Tricky and music journalists considered it a response to it . " Bachelorette " was originally written for director Bernardo Bertolucci for his film Stealing Beauty . Björk later faxed Bertolucci , informing him the song would be used for her album instead . " Bachelorette " and " Jóga " were written with Icelandic poet Sjón , because Björk wanted to use epic lyrics . " Immature " was written about mistakes in past relationships , shortly after the breakup with Goldie . Björk described " Pluto " as about " being plastered , that need to destroy everything so you can start again " . " <unk> " is a song about lamenting love , with brief flashes of hope . 
 = = Release = = 
 The album was released later than One Little Indian Records had intended . Björk was behind schedule and the album 's cover design by Nick Knight needed a reshoot . Towards the end of August 1997 , One Little Indian delayed the album by a month . Homogenic was released on September 22 , 1997 on One Little Indian in the United Kingdom and on September 23 Elektra Records in North America on compact disc and cassette . The album was later issued on vinyl and DualDisc formats . The Japanese version of Homogenic included several bonus tracks and remixed versions of songs . The DualDisc release featured the full album on the CD side and the DVD side included the album with superior sound quality and the music videos for the singles . 
 On the album 's initial release , it charted in the United States on October 11 , 1997 , and stayed in the charts for nine weeks peaking at number 28 . Homogenic entered the charts in Canada for one week at number 20 . In the United Kingdom , Homogenic entered the charts on October 4 , 1997 , stayed in the charts for thirteen weeks and peaked at number four . Of the ten songs on Homogenic , five were released as singles . A music video for " Jóga " directed by Michel Gondry was filmed in the middle of 1997 and was the first single for the album . " Bachelorette " was released in December 1997 with another music video directed by Gondry . In 1998 , two singles were released : " Hunter " , which had a music video directed by Paul White , and " Alarm Call " , which had a video directed by Alexander McQueen . The final single from Homogenic was " All Is Full of Love " , released in 1999 with a music video directed by Chris Cunningham . " Jóga " was the only single to not chart in the United Kingdom and " All Is Full of Love " was the only single to chart in the United States , peaking at number eight the Hot Dance Singles Sales chart . In Canada , the Canadian Recording Industry Association certified Homogenic as a gold record on June 12 , 1998 , and in the United States the RIAA certified the album as Gold on August 31 , 2001 . 
 = = = Album cover = = = 
 The themes of the album are reflected in the album cover designed by Alexander McQueen . Björk approached McQueen explaining to him the person who wrote Homogenic 's songs was someone who " had to become a warrior . A warrior who had to fight not with weapons , but with love . I had 10 kilos of hair on my head , and special contact lenses and a manicure that prevented me from eating with my fingers , and gaffer tape around my waist and high clogs so I couldn 't walk easily " . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 When the release of Homogenic was delayed by a month , its tour began with the audience not being familiar with the album 's songs since it had not been released yet . The tour started at the beginning of September with a backing band that consisted only of Mark Bell and made stops in Germany , the Netherlands , France , Belgium , Spain , and England . These shows were brief live shows lasting about half an hour consisting of only new material . Another tour took place in late October and lasted less than four weeks . Stops on this tour included Italy , Switzerland , France , England , Scotland , Germany , Ireland , and Denmark . In late November , Björk was diagnosed with a kidney infection and while she was still healthy she was advised to take a three @-@ week rest and was forced to cancel her American tour . In 1998 , a North American tour with Radiohead was announced but canceled later due to difficulty of changing the stage between performances of the acts . Björk had another tour in the middle of 1998 through Europe , and outside of the continent through other countries , including Chile , Brazil and Argentina . Opening acts for portions of the tour included electronic musician µ @-@ <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Homogenic has been met with unanimous critical acclaim since its initial release , winning multiple awards , as well as being placed on several " best of " charts . The album was nominated in the Best Alternative Music Performance category at the 1998 Grammy Awards , losing to Radiohead 's OK Computer . Michel Gondry 's music video for " Bachelorette " was nominated for best Best Short Form Music Video at the 1999 Grammy Awards , but lost to Jonas Åkerlund 's video for the Madonna song " Ray of Light " . Homogenic landed Björk the award for Best International Female at the BRIT Awards where she accepted the award stating " I am grateful grapefruit " . 
 Initial critical reception was very positive . David Browne of Entertainment Weekly stated that " Homogenic could have been stuffy and dull — Sting with a sex @-@ change operation . It 's a testament to Bjork 's continued weirdness that even overtures toward adulthood come out delightfully skewed " . Neva Chonin of Rolling Stone cited it as " one of the boldest – and most exciting – albums of the year " . NME 's Ted Kessler praised Homogenic as Björk 's best album and " her most emotional , highly charged and groovy record , as well as a stinging triumph for the spirit of adventure . " Heather Phares of AllMusic cited the album as being more emotionally deep than any of Björk 's previous work and called it a " seamless fusion of chilly strings , stuttering , abstract beats , and unique touches like an accordion and glass harmonica . " 
 A more negative review came from Stephen Thompson of The A.V. Club , who said " Homogenic is stylish enough , and it 's as restlessly creative as you 'd expect , but the album rarely gives Björk 's songs a chance to assert themselves " . Robert Christgau of The Village Voice assigned the album a two @-@ star honorable mention rating , indicating a " likable effort consumers attuned to its overriding aesthetic or individual vision may well enjoy . " 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 The album debuted at number six on the Australian Albums Chart on 12 October 1997 . The album descended to number 45 after five weeks in the chart . Homogenic debuted at number eight on the New Zealand Albums Chart on 12 October 1997 . The album peaked at number six on 19 October 1997 , but descended after six weeks on the chart . 
 The album was released in North America digitally on August 3 , 2004 . The album debuted at number twenty @-@ eight on the Billboard 200 . The stayed a total of nine weeks inside the top 200 , where its last position was at number 164 . The album was certified gold on August 1 , 2001 by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies . The album debuted at twenty on the Canadian Albums Chart , becoming Bjork 's first album to chart on the Canada Billboard chart and spent a sole week there . The album was certified gold by the Canadian Music Industry on June 12 , 1998 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 American critics rated Homogenic highly in end of the year polls . In Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop critics ' poll of 1997 , the album placed at number nine . Spin ranked the album at number four on their list of " Top 20 Albums of the Year " . British critics listed the album in similar polls , with Melody Maker ranking the album at number thirty @-@ three on their list of " Albums of the Year " and NME placed the album at number fifteen in its Critics ' Poll . Later reception to the album has also been generally positive . Ryan Schrieber of Pitchfork Media gave Homogenic a 9 @.@ 9 out of 10 rating , claiming the album was " absolutely brilliant " . In 2002 , Homogenic placed at number ten on Slant Magazine 's list of " The Greatest Electronic Albums of the 20th Century " . In 2003 , Homogenic placed on number 21 on the music webzine Pitchfork Media 's list of the top one hundred albums of the 1990s , claiming it as " one of the most perfectly formed records of any era , and it is entirely possible that Björk will never approach this level of consistently <unk> beauty again " . In 2007 , Slant Magazine gave the highest possible rating of five out of five stars , describing the album as " gorgeous and evocative " and praising it as one of the best albums of the 1990s . In a career retrospective in 2007 , Spin gave the album five out of five stars . In 2011 , Slant Magazine placed the album at number one on their list of best albums of the 1990s . According to Tiny Mix Tapes , Homogenic is " one of the most groundbreaking albums of all @-@ time , an album that assuredly caused countless hearts to soar . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Björk and produced by Björk and Mark Bell , except where otherwise noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Charles L. McNary = 
 Charles Linza McNary ( June 12 , 1874 – February 25 , 1944 ) was a United States Republican politician from Oregon . He served in the Senate from 1917 to 1944 and was Senate Minority Leader from 1933 to 1944 . In the Senate , McNary helped to pass legislation that led to the construction of Bonneville Dam on the Columbia River , and worked on agricultural and forestry issues . He also supported many of the New Deal programs at the beginning of the Great Depression . Until Mark O. Hatfield surpassed his mark in 1993 , he was Oregon 's longest @-@ serving senator . 
 McNary was the Republican vice presidential candidate in 1940 , on the ticket with presidential candidate Wendell Willkie . They lost to the Democratic ticket , composed of Franklin D. Roosevelt , who was running for his third term as president , and Henry A. Wallace in a landslide . McNary was a justice of the Oregon Supreme Court from 1913 to 1915 and was dean of Willamette University College of Law , in his hometown of Salem , from 1908 to 1913 . Before that , he was a deputy district attorney under his brother , John Hugh McNary , who later became a federal judge for the District of Oregon . 
 McNary died in office after unsuccessful surgery on a brain tumor . Oregon held a state funeral for him , during which his body lay in state at the Oregon State Capitol in Salem . McNary Dam , McNary Field , McNary High School , and McNary Country Club ( on land he owned ) in Oregon are named in his honor . 
 = = Early life = = 
 McNary was born on his maternal grandfather 's family farm north of Salem on June 12 , 1874 . He was the ninth of ten children , and the third son , born to Hugh Linza McNary and Mary Margaret McNary ( née <unk> ) . When the two married in 1860 , Hugh McNary 's father @-@ in @-@ law gave him a 112 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 45 km2 ) farm in what is now the city of Keizer . Charles McNary 's paternal grandfather , James McNary , moved to Oregon Country from Kentucky in 1845 , while his maternal grandfather and namesake , Charles <unk> , moved from Missouri in 1852 . 
 McNary 's father helped on the family farm , then taught school for a few years before returning to farming near Salem . When McNary 's mother died in 1878 , his father moved the family to Salem where he bought a general merchandise store after being unable to run the family farm because of declining health . Charles , known as Tot , began his education at a one @-@ room school in Keizer and later attended Central School in Salem , living on North Commercial Street . Hugh McNary died in 1883 , making Charlie an orphan at the age of nine . 
 Nina McNary became the head of the household , while other siblings took jobs in order to provide for the family . As a boy , Charles worked as a paperboy , in an orchard , and at other farming tasks . He met Herbert Hoover , a future U.S. president , who moved to Salem in 1888 . He later worked in the county recorder 's office for his brother John Hugh McNary , who had been elected as county recorder in 1890 , and for a short time attended the Capital Business College . After leaving that school , he enrolled in college preparatory classes at Willamette University , with an eye towards attending Stanford University or the University of California . During this time he met Jessie Breyman , whom he began dating , at a social club he helped start . Another member of the club was Oswald West , a future governor of Oregon . 
 = = = Legal career = = = 
 In the autumn of 1896 , McNary moved to California to attend Stanford , where he studied law , economics , science , and history while working as a waiter to pay for his housing . He left Stanford and returned to Oregon in 1897 after his family asked him to come home . Back in Salem , he read law under the supervision of his brother John and Samuel L. Hayden , and passed the bar in 1898 . The brothers practiced law together in Salem as McNary & McNary , while John also served as deputy district attorney for Marion County . At this time , Charles bought the old family farm and returned it to the family . From 1909 to 1911 he served as president of the Salem Board of Trade , and in 1909 helped to organize the Salem Fruit Union , an agricultural association . 
 While still partnered with his brother , McNary began teaching property law at Willamette University College of Law in the spring of 1899 and courting Jessie Breyman . In 1908 , he was hired as its dean to replace John W. Reynolds . As dean , he worked to enlarge the school and secure additional classroom space . He recruited prominent local attorneys to serve on the faculty and increased the size of the school from four graduates in 1908 to 36 in 1913 , his last year as dean . In his drive to make Willamette 's law school one of the top programs on the West Coast , he had it re @-@ located from leased space in office buildings to the university campus . 
 On November 19 , 1902 , he married Jessie Breyman , the daughter of successful Salem businessman Eugene Breyman . Jessie died on July 3 , 1918 , in an automobile accident south of Newberg on her way home to Salem . She had been in Oregon to attend the funeral of her mother and was returning from Portland in the Boise family 's car when it flipped and crushed her . McNary spent several days in Oregon for her funeral and then returned to Washington . Charles and Jessie had no children . 
 = = State politics = = 
 McNary first held public office in 1892 when he became Marion County 's deputy recorder , remaining in the position until 1896 . In 1904 he managed successful campaign of his brother , John , for district attorney for the third judicial district of Oregon . John then appointed Charles as his deputy , who served until 1911 . 
 Steve Neal , McNary 's biographer , describes McNary as a progressive who stuck with the Republican Party in 1910 even when many progressives left the party in favor of West , a Democrat . McNary backed the Progressive Era reforms ( the initiative , recall , referendum , primary elections , and the direct election of US senators ) of Oregonian William Simon U <unk> , and he was an early supporter of public , rather than private , power companies . After West won the election , he chose McNary to be special legal counsel to Oregon 's railroad commission , who urged lower passenger and freight rates . Meanwhile , McNary maintained friendly relations with both progressive and conservative factions of the Oregon Republicans and with West . 
 In 1913 , West appointed McNary to the Oregon Supreme Court to fill a new position , created by the legislature 's expansion of the court from five justices to seven . The youngest of the justices , at 38 , McNary left law school and private practice behind . He quickly " established himself as a judicial activist and strong advocate of progressive reform . " A supporter of organized labor , McNary " consistently defended the rights of injured workers and was not hesitant about using the bench as an instrument for social change " such as an eight @-@ hour day for public employees . Unions supported McNary throughout his political career . 
 Several criminal convictions resulted from the Portland vice scandal in November 1912 surrounding the city 's gay male subculture . By the time McNary was seated , some convictions had been appealed to the court . He wrote the dissenting opinion in the reversal of the conviction of prominent Portland attorney Edward McAllister . The dissent was emotionally charged and " revealed a deeply seated personal discomfort with same @-@ sex eroticism . " 
 In 1914 , the court moved into the new Oregon Supreme Court Building , and McNary filed to run for a full six @-@ year term on the bench . At that time the office was partisan , and McNary lost the Republican primary , by a single vote , to Henry L. Benson , after several recounts and the discovery of uncounted ballots . After his defeat , he served the remainder of his partial term and left the court in 1915 . On July 8 , 1916 , after a close , <unk> contest , with several contenders , the Republican State Committee elected McNary to be the chair . He was seen as someone who could unify the progressive and conservative wings of the party in Oregon . 
 = = Federal politics = = 
 As chairman of the state 's Republican Party , McNary campaigned to get the Republican presidential nominee , Charles Evans Hughes , elected in the 1916 presidential election . Hughes , a former US Supreme Court justice and future chief justice , carried Oregon but lost the presidency to the incumbent , Woodrow Wilson . When US Senator Harry Lane died in office , on May 23 , 1917 , it created an opportunity for McNary to redeem himself after his failed bid for election to the Oregon Supreme Court . McNary was among several possible successors considered by Oregon Governor James Withycombe . The governor preferred someone who supported national women 's suffrage and Prohibition , and he shared with McNary an interest in farming . Furthermore , McNary supporters argued that both progressive and conservative factions of the Republican Party would accept McNary and that unity would give the party the best chance of retaining the Senate seat in the next election . Withycombe appointed McNary to the unexpired term on May 29 . 
 After resigning as state party chairman , McNary prepared to campaign for a full term in the Senate . He faced Speaker of the Oregon House of Representatives Robert N. Stanfield in the May 1918 Republican primary . McNary defeated Stanfield 52 @,@ 546 to 30 @,@ 999 . In the November general election , he defeated a friend and former governor , Oswald West , 82 @,@ 360 to 64 @,@ 303 , to win a full , six @-@ year term in the Senate . Meanwhile , Frederick W. Mulkey won the election to replace McNary and finished Lane 's original term , which would end in January 1919 , and Mulkey took office on November 6 , 1918 , replacing McNary in that seat . 
 Shortly after taking office , Mulkey resigned the seat effective December 17 , 1918 , and McNary was then reappointed to the Senate on December 12 , 1918 , and took office on December 18 , instead of taking office in January , when his term he was elected to would have started . Mulkey resigned in order to give McNary a slight seniority edge over other new members of the Senate . In 1920 , former adversary Stanfield defeated incumbent Democrat George Earle Chamberlain for Oregon 's other Senate seat , making McNary the state 's senior senator . McNary won re @-@ election four times , in 1924 , 1930 , 1936 , and 1942 , serving in Washington , D.C. , until his death . 
 = = = Senate years = = = 
 After World War I , Wilson sought Senate approval of the Treaty of Versailles . Because the treaty included provisions for establishing and joining the League of Nations , one of Wilson 's Fourteen Points , Republicans opposed it . Going against much of his party , McNary , part of a group of senators known as " <unk> , " proposed minor changes to support the United States entry into the League . Ultimately , the Senate never ratified the Treaty of Versailles , and the United States never joined the League . 
 One of the prime opponents of Wilson and the League was Senate Majority Leader Henry Cabot Lodge . After McNary demonstrated his skill in the debate over the League , Lodge took him under his wing , and the two formed a longtime friendship . The friendship helped McNary secure favorable committee assignments and ushered him into the inner power circle of the Senate . Early in his career , he served as chairman of the Irrigation and Reclamation of Arid Lands Committee , and as a member of the Agriculture and Forestry Committee . In 1922 , President Warren G. Harding asked McNary to be the Secretary of the Interior to replace Albert B. Fall because of Fall 's involvement in the ongoing Teapot Dome scandal . McNary declined , preferring to stay in the Senate . 
 In 1933 , McNary was selected as the Senate Minority Leader by fellow Republicans , while the Senate was under Democratic control during the New Deal era . He remained Minority Leader for the rest of his time in office and " hovered most of the time on the periphery of the Republican left " and opposed disciplining Republican senators who supported Roosevelt . He supported many of the New Deal programs , at the beginning of Roosevelt 's presidency . As World War II approached , he favored " all aid to England and France short of war . " He voted to keep an arms embargo in place but supported the Lend @-@ Lease agreement with the British in 1941 and the reinstatement of Selective Service in 1940 , in preparation for military conscription of civilian men . 
 As early as the 1920s , McNary supported the development of federal hydroelectric power dams , and in 1933 , he introduced legislation that led to the building of the Grand Coulee and Bonneville dams on the Columbia , as public works projects . He voted for the US joining the World Court in 1926 . He favored buying more National Forest lands , reforestation , fire protection for forests via the Clarke – McNary Act , and farm support . Although vetoed by President Calvin Coolidge , the McNary – Haugen Farm Relief Bill was the forerunner of the farm legislation of the New Deal . 
 = = = Vice presidential nomination = = = 
 In 1940 , he was the Republican nominee for vice president , as a western farm leader chosen to balance the ticket of presidential nominee Wendell Willkie , a pro @-@ business leader from the east . 
 The two men differed on many issues . Writing for Life magazine shortly before the general election in 1940 , Richard L. Neuberger said , " Whether as Vice President of the U.S. Charley McNary can keep on endorsing Government @-@ power projects , isolation , high tariffs and huge outlays for farm relief under a President who believes in none of these things remains to be seen . " McNary 's acceptance speech reiterated his support for the Tennessee Valley Authority , a federally owned power @-@ producing corporation that Willkie , as " the head of a far @-@ flung [ private ] utilities empire , " had opposed . During the campaign , McNary promoted farming issues and criticized foreign trade agreements , which , he said , had " closed European markets to our grain , meat , fruits and fiber . " The Willkie – McNary ticket lost massively to that of Roosevelt – Wallace . 
 = = Family and legacy = = 
 On December 29 , 1923 , McNary married for the second time , to Cornelia Woodburn Morton . He met Morton at a dinner party during World War I , in her hometown of Washington , D.C. Before the marriage , she had worked as his private secretary . As with his first marriage , his second did not produce children , but Charles and Cornelia adopted a daughter , Charlotte , in 1935 . 
 In 1926 , McNary built a new $ 6 @,@ 000 ranch @-@ style house , which he designed himself , along two creeks on his farm north of Salem . His estate , called " Fir Cone , " featured a putting green , rose garden , tennis court , fishpond , and arboretum , and more than 250 acres ( 1 @.@ 0 km2 ) of trees . Fir Cone was described as Oregon 's Monticello by later Senator Richard L. Neuberger , as it hosted many meetings with politicians from the national stage . The farm included 110 acres ( 0 @.@ 45 km2 ) of nut and fruit orchards , through which McNary helped establish the filbert industry in Oregon and on which he developed the Imperial prune . 
 After complaining of headaches and suffering slurred speech beginning in early 1943 , McNary went to the Bethesda , Maryland , Naval Hospital on November 8 , 1943 , where doctors diagnosed a malignant brain tumor . They removed it that week , and McNary was released from the hospital on December 2 , but the cancer had already spread to other parts of his body . He and his family departed for Fort Lauderdale , Florida , to spend the winter . He partly recovered from the surgery , but by February 24 , 1944 , when he was re @-@ elected as Republican Senate leader , he was comatose . Charles L. McNary died in Fort Lauderdale , and he was buried in Belcrest Memorial Cemetery in Salem . He was given a state funeral during which his body lay in state in the chamber of the Oregon House of Representatives at the Oregon State Capitol , Salem . 
 McNary 's running mate , Willkie , died six months later . It was the only time both members of a major @-@ party presidential ticket died during the term for which they sought election . At the time of his death , McNary held the record for longest @-@ serving senator from Oregon , a record he kept until 1993 , when Mark O. Hatfield surpassed his mark of <unk> days in office . 
 McNary Dam on the Columbia River between Oregon and Washington is named after him , as is McNary Field , Salem 's airport . McNary High School in Keizer and McNary Residence Hall at Oregon State University are also named in his honor . 
 = Interstate 496 = 
 Interstate 496 ( I @-@ 496 ) is an auxiliary Interstate Highway that passes through downtown Lansing in the US state of Michigan . Also a component of the State Trunkline Highway System , the freeway connects I @-@ 96 to the downtown area . It has been named the R.E. Olds Freeway ( sometimes just Olds Freeway ) for Ransom E. Olds , the founder of Oldsmobile and the REO Motor Car Company . I @-@ 496 runs east – west from I @-@ 96 / I @-@ 69 near the downtown area and north – south along a section that runs concurrently with US Highway 127 ( US 127 ) . The trunkline also passes a former assembly plant used by Oldsmobile and runs along or crosses parts of the Grand and Red Cedar rivers . 
 Construction of I @-@ 496 started in 1963 , and the freeway opened on December 18 , 1970 . Segments of the freeway south of downtown Lansing were built in the location of a historically black neighborhood . This neighborhood was formed based on the segregationist practices of the early 20th century . Community leaders worked for different housing opportunities for the black residents displaced by I @-@ 496 rather than fight the freeway . As the trunkline neared completion , competing proposals to name it resulted in two similar , but separate designations applied to I @-@ 496 . The city originally approved one name in honor of a former mayor . The local historical society proposed that the state name it as a memorial to Olds after the demolition of the Olds Mansion . The city renamed it the Oldsmobile Expressway , the name under which it opened in December 1970 . Two years later , the Michigan Legislature restored its preferred name and it has been the Olds Freeway since . 
 = = Route description = = 
 I @-@ 496 starts at an interchange with I @-@ 96 / I @-@ 69 at that freeway 's exit 95 in Delta Township in Eaton County . The freeway runs eastward through suburban areas of the township adjacent to some residential subdivisions . Continuing eastward , there is an interchange for <unk> Road before I @-@ 496 angles to the northeast . At the interchange with Waverly Road , I @-@ 496 crosses into Ingham County . The freeway then runs parallel to the Grand River . Near a partial interchange with Lansing Road ( old US 27 ) , the freeway gains a pair of service drives : St. Joseph Street runs one @-@ way westbound on the north side , and Malcolm X Street runs eastbound to the south . The next interchange is for the connection to the Capitol Loop and M @-@ 99 , both of which run along Martin Luther King Boulevard . The Capitol Loop , also internally numbered Connector 496 , is a signed connector that provides access to various state government buildings like the Michigan State Capitol . South of this interchange , M @-@ 99 connects to the Lansing Car Assembly plant , a former facility for Oldsmobile . 
 Continuing eastward , I @-@ 496 passes north of the assembly plant complex and south of the central business district . East of a partial interchange with Walnut Street , the freeway passes the Michigan Women 's Hall of Fame , which is located on I @-@ 496 's southern service drive . The south side of the freeway is adjacent to Cooley Gardens near the confluence of the Grand and Red Cedar rivers . I @-@ 496 crosses the Grand River downstream from the confluence and meets the eastern terminus of the Capitol Loop . This interchange with Cedar and Larch streets is also a connection to Business Loop I @-@ 96 ( BL I @-@ 96 ) and Pennsylvania Avenue . St. Joseph Street ends after the connection to Pennsylvania Avenue . The main freeway crosses a rail line owned by CSX Transportation . I @-@ 496 runs parallel to the north side of the rail line while Malcolm X Street follows to the south as far as the Clemens Avenue overpass . The freeway then crosses into East Lansing near the Red Cedar Natural Area . 
 After crossing the city line , I @-@ 496 turns southward and merges with US 127 . The two highways run concurrently , and they cross a line of the Canadian National Railway . The freeway runs along the western edge of the campus of Michigan State University . South of campus , I @-@ 496 / US 127 crosses back into Lansing and has an interchange with Jolly Road before entering Delhi Township . About two @-@ thirds of a mile ( 1 @.@ 1 km ) south of Jolly Road , I @-@ 496 meets I @-@ 96 and terminates ; US 127 continues southward as a freeway toward Jackson . 
 Like other state highways in Michigan , I @-@ 496 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) . In 2011 , the department 's traffic surveys showed that on average , 61 @,@ 082 vehicles used the freeway between BL I @-@ 96 and the Trowbridge Road interchange south of US 127 , the highest traffic count along I @-@ 496 . West of <unk> Road , 17 @,@ 600 vehicles did so each day , which was the lowest count along the trunkline . As an Interstate Highway , all of I @-@ 496 is listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads deemed important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 An east – west freeway was originally planned as an Interstate Highway allowing traffic to access downtown Lansing in the 1955 General Location of National System of Interstate Highways ( Yellow Book ) , an early proposal for what would become the Interstate Highway System . As originally proposed by the Michigan State Highway Department in 1958 , the freeway was to be called I @-@ 296 . The department was waiting on approval of a final numbering scheme the next year , before the first Interstates were signed in the state in 1959 . By the time construction started on the Lansing freeway , it was numbered I @-@ 496 . 
 The section near downtown was to be built through a historically African @-@ American neighborhood . The neighborhood was formed through " unwritten rules of segregation " as real estate agents and mortgage brokers guided black residents to the area when they were looking to buy homes . When the state and federal governments were planning the freeway , the area was chosen for the path of I @-@ 496 . The neighborhood boasted a community center and several businesses that catered to the black population of Lansing , including the only record store that sold rhythm and blues music . Community leaders did not fight the freeway and instead lobbied for affordable housing and relocation assistance . The construction spurred integration of blacks into the wider community ; some were able to move into neighborhoods previously closed to them , purchasing " newer houses near better schools . " In total , the construction of the freeway required the demolition or removal of nearly 600 homes , 60 businesses , and 15 farms . 
 The first section of I @-@ 496 was opened in December 1963 , and ran from I @-@ 96 northerly to M @-@ 43 / M @-@ 78 ( Saginaw and Kalamazoo streets ) between Lansing and East Lansing . The freeway , comprising the southern two @-@ thirds , was designated I @-@ 496 / M @-@ 78 / BL I @-@ 96 while the northern portion was on city streets as M @-@ 78 / BL I @-@ 96 . Some 50 men completed the work by year 's end ; they went entirely without vacation time to accomplish the feat . Another section of freeway was opened in 1966 , and US 127 was rerouted to follow I @-@ 496 / M @-@ 78 . BL I @-@ 96 was removed from I @-@ 496 / US 127 / M @-@ 78 and routed along the former US 127 . The freeway segment north of the Trowbridge Road interchange continuing northward as part of US 127 was opened in 1969 . Another section opened at the same time was the western section from I @-@ 96 to Lansing Road ( then US 27 ) in 1969 . The remaining section between M @-@ 99 ( then Logan Street , now Martin Luther King , Jr . Boulevard ) and I @-@ 496 / US 127 opened on December 18 , 1970 , completing construction . 
 The freeway underwent a $ 42 @.@ 4 million reconstruction ( equivalent to $ 63 @.@ 5 million in 2015 ) between April and November 2001 which included the rehabilitation or reconstruction of 35 bridges , 8 @.@ 5 miles ( 13 @.@ 7 km ) of freeway , and the addition of a weave @-@ merge lane between Pennsylvania Avenue and US 127 . Speed limits were raised along I @-@ 496 from 55 to 70 miles per hour ( 89 to 113 km / h ) in 2007 to reflect the speeds motorists were driving during studies conducted by MDOT and the Michigan State Police . 
 The name applied to the freeway was not without controversy . The Lansing City Council named it in September 1966 after Ralph W. Crego , a former city council member and the longest @-@ serving mayor in the city 's history . The Historical Society of Greater Lansing wanted it named the " R.E. Olds Expressway " , in part because the new road brought about the demolition of the Olds Mansion , which was listed on the National Register of Historic Places , and to " <unk> [ e ] the contributions of R.E. Olds to the industries of the city . " The society approached the Michigan Legislature , which introduced House Resolution 48 in February 1970 using the historical society 's preferred name . The city council realized that they had been bypassed and conveniently discovered that their original resolution was not " formally adopted " . They named a park for Crego instead in October 1970 and adopted a resolution to name I @-@ 496 the " Oldsmobile Expressway " . The Legislature approved its resolution resulting in two names , one for the founder of the car company , and one for the company itself . The council member who introduced the city 's resolution criticized the Legislature for taking action without consultation . The state resolution was intercepted before it could be sent to the Michigan Department of State Highways , and the freeway opened on December 18 , 1970 , with the " Oldsmobile Expressway " name . On August 21 , 1972 , during the celebrations for the 75th anniversary of Oldsmobile , Senate Concurrent Resolution 345 renamed I @-@ 496 the " R.E. Olds Freeway " . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = = Related trunkline = = 
 The Capitol Loop is a state trunkline highway running through Lansing that was commissioned on October 13 , 1989 . It forms a loop route off I @-@ 496 through downtown near the Michigan State Capitol complex , home of the state legislature and several state departments . However , unlike other business loops in Michigan , it has unique reassurance markers — the signs that serve as regular reminders of the name and number of the highway . It is known internally at MDOT as Connector 496 for inventory purposes . The highway follows a series of one @-@ way and two @-@ way streets through downtown Lansing , directing traffic downtown to the State Capitol and other government buildings . Unlike the other streets downtown , the seven streets composing the Capitol Loop are under state maintenance and jurisdiction . 
 The loop was originally proposed in 1986 as part of a downtown revitalization effort . Almost from the beginning before the highway was commissioned in 1989 , it was affected by controversial proposals . The first was related to suggestions by community leaders to rename city streets in honor of Martin Luther King , Jr . Another controversy dealt with rebuilding the streets as part of a downtown beautification project ; the downtown business community protested the original scope of construction , and the Lansing City Council threatened to cancel the project in response to the controversy . In 2010 , additional controversies surfaced regarding the posting and enforcement of speed limits on city streets in Michigan , including the streets that make up the Capitol Loop . 
 = Pterosaur = 
 Pterosaurs ( / <unk> , <unk> / ; meaning " winged lizard " ) are flying reptiles of the extinct clade or order Pterosauria . They existed from the late Triassic to the end of the Cretaceous Period ( 228 to 66 million years ago ) . Pterosaurs are the earliest vertebrates known to have evolved powered flight . Their wings were formed by a membrane of skin , muscle , and other tissues stretching from the ankles to a dramatically lengthened fourth finger . Early species had long , fully toothed jaws and long tails , while later forms had a highly reduced tail , and some lacked teeth . Many sported furry coats made up of hair @-@ like filaments known as pycnofibers , which covered their bodies and parts of their wings . Pterosaurs spanned a wide range of adult sizes , from the very small <unk> to the largest known flying creatures of all time , including Quetzalcoatlus and <unk> . 
 Pterosaurs are often referred to in the popular media and by the general public as " flying dinosaurs " , but this is scientifically incorrect . The term " dinosaur " is restricted to just those reptiles descended from the last common ancestor of the groups Saurischia and Ornithischia ( clade Dinosauria , which includes birds ) , and current scientific consensus is that this group excludes the pterosaurs , as well as the various groups of extinct marine reptiles , such as ichthyosaurs , plesiosaurs , and mosasaurs . Like the dinosaurs , and unlike these other reptiles , pterosaurs are more closely related to birds than to crocodiles or any other living reptile . Pterosaurs are also colloquially referred to as pterodactyls , particularly in fiction and by journalists . Technically , " <unk> " refers only to members of the genus Pterodactylus , and more broadly to members of the suborder Pterodactyloidea of the pterosaurs . 
 = = Description = = 
 The anatomy of pterosaurs was highly modified from their reptilian ancestors by the adaption to flight . Pterosaur bones were hollow and air @-@ filled , like the bones of birds . They had a keeled breastbone that was developed for the attachment of flight muscles and an enlarged brain that shows specialised features associated with flight . In some later pterosaurs , the backbone over the shoulders fused into a structure known as a <unk> , which served to stiffen the torso during flight , and provide a stable support for the scapula ( shoulder blade ) . 
 = = = Wings = = = 
 Pterosaur wings were formed by membranes of skin and other tissues . The primary membranes attached to the extremely long fourth finger of each arm and extended along the sides of the body to the ankles . 
 While historically thought of as simple , leathery structures composed of skin , research has since shown that the wing membranes of pterosaurs were highly complex and dynamic structures suited to an active style of flight . The outer wings ( from the tip to the elbow ) were strengthened by closely spaced fibers called actinofibrils . The actinofibrils themselves consisted of three distinct layers in the wing , forming a crisscross pattern when superimposed on one another . The function of the actinofibrils is unknown , as is the exact material from which they were made . Depending on their exact composition ( keratin , muscle , elastic structures , etc . ) , they may have been stiffening or strengthening agents in the outer part of the wing . The wing membranes also contained a thin layer of muscle , fibrous tissue , and a unique , complex circulatory system of looping blood vessels . 
 As evidenced by cavities in the wing bones of larger species and soft tissue preserved in at least one specimen , some pterosaurs extended their system of respiratory air sacs ( see Paleobiology section below ) into the wing membrane itself . 
 = = = = Parts of the wing = = = = 
 The pterosaur wing membrane is divided into three basic units . The first , called the <unk> ( " first membrane " ) , was the forward @-@ most part of the wing and attached between the wrist and shoulder , creating the " leading edge " during flight . This membrane may have incorporated the first three fingers of the hand , as evidenced in some specimens . The <unk> ( " arm membrane " ) was the primary component of the wing , stretching from the highly elongated fourth finger of the hand to the hind limbs ( though where exactly on the hind limbs it anchored is controversial and may have varied between species , see below ) . Finally , at least some pterosaur groups had a membrane that stretched between the legs , possibly connecting to or incorporating the tail , called the uropatagium ; the extent of this membrane is not certain , as studies on Sordes seem to suggest that it simply connected the legs but did not involve the tail ( rendering it a <unk> ) . It is generally agreed though that non @-@ pterodactyloid pterosaurs had a broader <unk> / <unk> , with pterodactyloids only having membranes running along the legs . 
 A bone unique to pterosaurs , known as the pteroid , connected to the wrist and helped to support a forward membrane ( the <unk> ) between the wrist and shoulder . Evidence of webbing between the three free fingers of the pterosaur forelimb suggests that this forward membrane may have been more extensive than the simple pteroid @-@ to @-@ shoulder connection traditionally depicted in life restorations . The position of the pteroid bone itself has been controversial . Some scientists , notably Matthew Wilkinson , have argued that the pteroid pointed forward , extending the forward membrane . This view was contradicted in a 2007 paper by Chris Bennett , who showed that the pteroid did not articulate as previously thought and could not have pointed forward , but rather inward toward the body as traditionally thought . Peters ( 2009 ) proposed that the pteroid articulated with the ‘ saddle ' of the <unk> ( proximal syncarpal ) and both the pteroid and <unk> carpal were migrated <unk> . This view of the articulation of the pteroid has since been supported by specimens of <unk> pani and Darwinopterus <unk> , both of which show the pteroid in articulation with the proximal syncarpal . 
 The pterosaur wrist consists of two inner ( proximal ) and four outer ( distal ) carpals ( wrist bones ) , excluding the pteroid bone , which may itself be a modified distal carpal . The proximal carpals are fused together into a " syncarpal " in mature specimens , while three of the distal carpals fuse to form a distal syncarpal . The remaining distal carpal , referred to here as the medial carpal , but which has also been termed the distal lateral , or pre @-@ axial carpal , articulates on a vertically elongate biconvex facet on the anterior surface of the distal syncarpal . The medial carpal bears a deep concave fovea that opens anteriorly , ventrally and somewhat medially , within which the pteroid articulates . 
 There has been considerable argument among paleontologists about whether the main wing membranes ( <unk> ) attached to the hind limbs , and if so , where . Fossils of the <unk> Sordes , the <unk> Jeholopterus , and a pterodactyloid from the Santana Formation seem to demonstrate that the wing membrane did attach to the hindlimbs , at least in some species . However , modern bats and flying squirrels show considerable variation in the extent of their wing membranes and it is possible that , like these groups , different species of pterosaur had different wing designs . Indeed , analysis of pterosaur limb proportions shows that there was considerable variation , possibly reflecting a variety of wing @-@ plans . 
 Many , if not all , pterosaurs also had webbed feet . 
 = = = Skull , teeth and crests = = = 
 Most pterosaur skulls had elongated jaws with a full complement of needle @-@ like teeth . In some cases , fossilized keratinous beak tissue has been preserved , though in toothed forms , the beak is small and restricted to the jaw tips and does not involve the teeth . Some advanced beaked forms were toothless , such as the <unk> and azhdarchids , and had larger , more extensive , and more bird @-@ like beaks . 
 Unlike most archosaurs , the nasal and antorbital openings of pterodactyloid pterosaurs merged into a single large opening , called the <unk> fenestra . This feature likely evolved to lighten the skull for flight . 
 Some species of pterosaurs featured elaborate crests . The first and perhaps best known of these is the distinctive backward @-@ pointing crest of some Pteranodon species , though a few pterosaurs , such as the tapejarids and Nyctosaurus , sported extremely large crests that often incorporated keratinous or other soft tissue extensions of the bony crest base . 
 Since the 1990s , new discoveries and more thorough study of old specimens have shown that crests are far more widespread among pterosaurs than previously thought , due mainly to the fact that they were frequently extended by or composed completely of keratin , which does not fossilize as often as bone . In the case of pterosaurs like <unk> and Pterodactylus , the true extent of these crests has only been uncovered using ultraviolet photography . The discovery of <unk> and <unk> , both crested " <unk> " , showed that even primitive pterosaurs had crests ( previously , crests were thought to be restricted to the more advanced pterodactyloids ) . 
 = = = Pycnofibers = = = 
 At least some pterosaurs had hair @-@ like filaments known as pycnofibers on the head and body , similar to , but not homologous ( sharing a common structure ) with , mammalian hair . A fuzzy integument was first reported from a specimen of Scaphognathus crassirostris in 1831 by Goldfuss , and recent pterosaur finds and the technology for histological and ultraviolet examination of pterosaur specimens have provided incontrovertible proof : pterosaurs had <unk> coats . Pycnofibers were not true hair as seen in mammals , but a unique structure that developed a similar appearance . Although , in some cases , actinofibrils ( internal structural fibers ) in the wing membrane have been mistaken for pycnofibers or true hair , some fossils , such as those of Sordes <unk> ( which translates as " hairy demon " ) and Jeholopterus <unk> , do show the unmistakable imprints of pycnofibers on the head and body , not unlike modern @-@ day bats , another example of convergent evolution . The head @-@ coats do not cover the pterosaur 's large jaws in many of the specimens found so far . 
 Some ( Czerkas and Ji , 2002 ) have speculated that pycnofibers were an antecedent of proto @-@ feathers , but the available impressions of pterosaur integuments are not like the " quills " found on many of the bird @-@ like maniraptoran specimens in the fossil record . Pterosaur pycnofibers were structured similarly to theropod proto @-@ feathers . Pycnofibers were flexible , short filaments , " only 5 @-@ <unk> in some specimens " and rather simple , " apparently lacking any internal detail aside from a central canal " . Pterosaur " pelts " found " preserved in concentrated , dense mats of fibers , similar to those found surrounding fossilized mammals " suggest coats with a thickness comparable to many Mesozoic mammals , at least on the parts of the pterosaur covered in pycnofibers . The coat thickness , and surface area covered , definitely varied by pterosaur species . 
 The presence of pycnofibers ( and the demands of flight ) imply that pterosaurs were endothermic ( warm @-@ blooded ) . The absence of pycnofibers on pterosaur wings suggests that the coat did not have an aerodynamic function , lending support to the idea that pycnofibers evolved to aid pterosaur thermoregulation , as is common in warm @-@ blooded animals , insulation being necessary to conserve the heat created by an endothermic metabolism . 
 Pterosaur " hair " was so obviously distinct from mammalian fur and other animal integuments , it required a new , separate name . The term " <unk> " , meaning " dense filament " , was first coined in a paper on the soft tissue impressions of Jeholopterus by palaeontologist Alexander W.A. Kellner and colleagues in 2009 . Research into the genetic code of American alligator embryos could suggest that <unk> , crocodile scutes and avian feathers are developmentally homologous , based on the construction of their beta @-@ keratin . 
 = = History of discovery = = 
 The first pterosaur fossil was described by the Italian naturalist Cosimo Alessandro Collini in 1784 . Collini misinterpreted his specimen as a seagoing creature that used its long front limbs as paddles . A few scientists continued to support the aquatic interpretation even until 1830 , when the German zoologist Johann Georg Wagler suggested that Pterodactylus used its wings as flippers . Georges Cuvier first suggested that pterosaurs were flying creatures in 1801 , and coined the name " <unk> @-@ <unk> " in 1809 for the specimen recovered in Germany . However , due to the standardization of scientific names , the official name for this genus became Pterodactylus , though the name " pterodactyl " continued to be popularly and incorrectly applied to all members of Pterosauria . Paleontologists now avoid using " pterodactyl " and prefer the term " pterosaur " . They relegate the term " pterodactyl " specifically for members of the genus Pterodactylus or more broadly for members of the suborder Pterodactyloidea . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 = = = Flight = = = 
 The mechanics of pterosaur flight are not completely understood or modeled at this time . 
 <unk> Sato , a Japanese scientist , did calculations using modern birds and concluded that it was impossible for a pterosaur to stay aloft . In the book Posture , Locomotion , and Paleoecology of Pterosaurs it is theorized that they were able to fly due to the oxygen @-@ rich , dense atmosphere of the Late Cretaceous period . However , both Sato and the authors of Posture , Locomotion , and Paleoecology of Pterosaurs based their research on the now outdated theories of pterosaurs being seabird @-@ like , and the size limit does not apply to terrestrial pterosaurs , such as azhdarchids and tapejarids . Furthermore , Darren Naish concluded that atmospheric differences between the present and the Mesozoic were not needed for the giant size of pterosaurs . 
 Another issue that has been difficult to understand is how they took off . Earlier suggestions were that pterosaurs were largely cold @-@ blooded gliding animals , deriving warmth from the environment like modern lizards , rather than burning calories . In this case , it was unclear how the enormously large giant pterosaurs , with an inefficient cold @-@ blooded metabolism , could manage a bird @-@ like takeoff strategy , using only the hind limbs to generate thrust for getting airborne . Later research shows them instead as being warm @-@ blooded and having powerful flight muscles , and using the flight muscles for walking as quadrupeds . Mark Witton of the University of Portsmouth and Mike Habib of Johns Hopkins University suggested that pterosaurs used a vaulting mechanism to obtain flight . The tremendous power of their winged forelimbs would enable them to take off with ease . Once aloft , pterosaurs could reach speeds of up to 120 kilometres per hour ( 75 mph ) and travel thousands of kilometres . 
 In 1985 , the Smithsonian Institution commissioned aeronautical engineer Paul MacCready to build a half @-@ scale working model of Quetzalcoatlus <unk> . The replica was launched with a ground @-@ based winch . It flew several times in 1986 and was filmed as part of the Smithsonian 's IMAX film On the Wing . However , the model was not anatomically correct and embodied vertical and horizontal tail stabilizers that pterosaurs did not have . It also had a longer tail , changing the weight distribution . 
 = = = Size = = = 
 Pterosaurs had a wide range of sizes , with wingspans ranging from 250 mm ( 10 in ) at their smallest , to 10 – 11 m ( 33 – 36 ft ) at their largest . 
 = = = Air sacs and respiration = = = 
 A 2009 study showed that pterosaurs had a lung @-@ air sac system and a precisely controlled skeletal breathing pump , which supports a flow @-@ through pulmonary ventilation model in pterosaurs , analogous to that of birds . The presence of a subcutaneous air sac system in at least some pterodactyloids would have further reduced the density of the living animal . 
 Like modern crocodilians , pterosaurs appeared to have had a hepatic piston , seeing as their shoulder @-@ pectoral girdles were too inflexible to move the sternum as in birds , and they possessed strong gastralia . Thus , their respiratory system had characteristics comparable to both modern archosaur clades . 
 = = = Nervous system = = = 
 An X @-@ ray study of pterosaur brain cavities revealed that the animals ( Rhamphorhynchus <unk> and <unk> <unk> ) had massive flocculi . The flocculus is a brain region that integrates signals from joints , muscles , skin and balance organs . 
 The pterosaurs ' flocculi occupied 7 @.@ 5 % of the animals ' total brain mass , more than in any other vertebrate . Birds have unusually large flocculi compared with other animals , but these only occupy between 1 and 2 % of total brain mass . 
 The flocculus sends out neural signals that produce small , automatic movements in the eye muscles . These keep the image on an animal 's retina steady . Pterosaurs may have had such a large flocculus because of their large wing size , which would mean that there was a great deal more sensory information to process . The low relative mass of the flocculi in birds is also a result of birds having a much larger brain overall , indicating that pterosaurs lived in a structurally simpler environment , and had less complex behaviour compared to birds . 
 = = = Ground movement = = = 
 Pterosaurs ' hip sockets are oriented facing slightly upwards , and the head of the femur ( thigh bone ) is only moderately inward facing , suggesting that pterosaurs had an erect stance . It would have been possible to lift the thigh into a horizontal position during flight , as gliding lizards do . 
 There was considerable debate whether pterosaurs <unk> as quadrupeds or as bipeds . In the 1980s , paleontologist Kevin Padian suggested that smaller pterosaurs with longer hindlimbs , such as <unk> , might have walked or even run bipedally , in addition to flying , like road runners . However , a large number of pterosaur trackways were later found with a distinctive four @-@ toed hind foot and three @-@ toed front foot ; these are the unmistakable prints of pterosaurs walking on all fours . 
 Unlike dinosaurs , which walk on their toes with their heels held off the ground ( digitigrade ) , fossil footprints show that pterosaurs stood with the entire foot in contact with the ground ( plantigrade ) , in a manner similar to many mammals like humans and bears . Footprints from azhdarchids and several unidentified species show that pterosaurs walked with an erect posture with their four limbs held almost vertically beneath the body , an energy @-@ efficient stance used by most modern birds and mammals , rather than the sprawled limbs of modern reptiles . Indeed , erect @-@ limbs may be omnipresent in pterosaurs . 
 Though traditionally depicted as ungainly and awkward when on the ground , the anatomy of some pterosaurs ( particularly pterodactyloids ) suggests that they were competent walkers and runners . Early pterosaurs have long been considered particularly cumbersome <unk> due to the presence of large <unk> , but they too appear to have been generally efficient on the ground . 
 The forelimb bones of azhdarchids and ornithocheirids were unusually long compared to other pterosaurs , and , in azhdarchids , the bones of the arm and hand ( metacarpals ) were particularly elongated . Furthermore , as a whole , azhdarchid front limbs were proportioned similarly to fast @-@ running ungulate mammals . Their hind limbs , on the other hand , were not built for speed , but they were long compared with most pterosaurs , and allowed for a long stride length . While azhdarchid pterosaurs probably could not run , they would have been relatively fast and energy efficient . 
 The relative size of the hands and feet in pterosaurs ( by comparison with modern animals such as birds ) may indicate what type of lifestyle pterosaurs led on the ground . Azhdarchid pterosaurs had relatively small feet compared to their body size and leg length , with foot length only about 25 % – 30 % the length of the lower leg . This suggests that azhdarchids were better adapted to walking on dry , relatively solid ground . Pteranodon had slightly larger feet ( 47 % the length of the tibia ) , while filter @-@ feeding pterosaurs like the <unk> had very large feet ( 69 % of tibial length in Pterodactylus , 84 % in Pterodaustro ) , adapted to walking in soft muddy soil , similar to modern wading birds . 
 Though clearly forelimb @-@ based launchers , basal pterosaurs have hindlimbs well adapted for hopping , suggesting a connection with archosaurs such as Scleromochlus . 
 = = = Natural predators = = = 
 Pterosaurs are known to have been eaten by theropods . In the 1 July 2004 edition of Nature , paleontologist Eric Buffetaut discusses an early Cretaceous fossil of three cervical vertebrae of a pterosaur with the broken tooth of a <unk> embedded in it . The vertebrae are known not to have been eaten and exposed to digestion , as the joints are still articulated . 
 = = = Reproduction and life history = = = 
 Very little is known about pterosaur reproduction , and pterosaur eggs are very rare . The first known pterosaur egg was found in the quarries of Liaoning , the same place that yielded feathered dinosaurs . The egg was squashed flat with no signs of cracking , so evidently the eggs had leathery shells , as in modern lizards . This was supported by the description of an additional pterosaur egg belonging to the genus Darwinopterus , described in 2011 , which also had a leathery shell and , also like modern reptiles but unlike birds , was fairly small compared to the size of the mother . In 2014 five <unk> eggs from the species <unk> <unk> were found in an Early Cretaceous deposit in northwest China . Examination of the shells by scanning electron microscopy showed the presence of a thin calcareous eggshell layer with a membrane underneath . A study of pterosaur eggshell structure and chemistry published in 2007 indicated that it is likely pterosaurs buried their eggs , like modern crocodiles and turtles . Egg @-@ burying would have been beneficial to the early evolution of pterosaurs , as it allows for more weight @-@ reducing adaptations , but this method of reproduction would also have put limits on the variety of environments pterosaurs could live in , and may have disadvantaged them when they began to face ecological competition from birds . 
 A Darwinopterus specimen showcases that at least some pterosaurs had a pair of functional ovaries , as opposed to the single functional <unk> in birds , dismissing the reduction of functional ovaries as a requirement for powered flight . 
 Wing membranes preserved in pterosaur embryos are well developed , suggesting that pterosaurs were ready to fly soon after birth . Fossils of pterosaurs only a few days to a week old ( called " flaplings " ) have been found , representing several pterosaur families , including <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and azhdarchids . All preserve bones that show a relatively high degree of hardening ( ossification ) for their age , and wing proportions similar to adults . In fact , many pterosaur flaplings have been considered adults and placed in separate species in the past . Additionally , flaplings are normally found in the same sediments as adults and juveniles of the same species , such as the Pterodactylus and Rhamphorhynchus flaplings found in the Solnhofen limestone of Germany , and Pterodaustro flaplings from Brazil . All are found in deep aquatic environment far from shore . 
 It is not known whether pterosaurs practiced any form of parental care , but their ability to fly as soon as they emerged from the egg and the numerous flaplings found in environments far from nests and alongside adults has led most researchers , including Christopher Bennett and David Unwin , to conclude that the young were dependent on their parents for a relatively short period of time , during a period of rapid growth while the wings grew long enough to fly , and then left the nest to fend for themselves , possibly within days of hatching . Alternatively , they may have used stored yolk products for nourishment during their first few days of life , as in modern reptiles , rather than depend on parents for food . 
 Growth rates of pterosaurs once they hatched varied across different groups . In more primitive , long @-@ tailed pterosaurs ( " <unk> " ) , such as Rhamphorhynchus , the average growth rate during the first year of life was 130 % to 173 % , slightly faster than the growth rate of alligators . Growth in these species slowed after sexual maturity , and it would have taken more than three years for Rhamphorhynchus to attain maximum size . In contrast , the more advanced , large pterodactyloid pterosaurs , such as Pteranodon , grew to adult size within the first year of life . Additionally , pterodactyloids had determinate growth , meaning that the animals reached a fixed maximum adult size and stopped growing . 
 = = = Daily activity patterns = = = 
 Comparisons between the scleral rings of pterosaurs and modern birds and reptiles have been used to infer daily activity patterns of pterosaurs . The pterosaur genera Pterodactylus , Scaphognathus , and <unk> have been inferred to be diurnal , Ctenochasma , Pterodaustro , and Rhamphorhynchus have been inferred to be nocturnal , and <unk> has been inferred to be cathemeral , being active throughout the day for short intervals . As a result , the possibly fish @-@ eating Ctenochasma and Rhamphorhynchus may have had similar activity patterns to modern nocturnal seabirds , and the filter @-@ feeding Pterodaustro may have had similar activity patterns to modern <unk> birds that feed at night . The differences between activity patterns of the Solnhofen pterosaurs Ctenochasma , Rhamphorhynchus , Scaphognathus , and Pterodactylus may also indicate niche partitioning between these genera . 
 = = Evolution and extinction = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Because pterosaur anatomy has been so heavily modified for flight , and immediate transitional fossil predecessors have not so far been described , the ancestry of pterosaurs is not fully understood . Several hypotheses have been advanced , including links to the <unk> @-@ like Scleromochlus , an ancestry among the basal <unk> , like <unk> , or among the protorosaurs . 
 Two researchers , Chris Bennett ( 1996 ) and David Peters ( 2000 ) , have found pterosaurs to be protorosaurs or closely related to them . Peters used a technique called DGS , which involves applying the digital tracing features of photo editing software to images of pterosaur fossils . Bennett only recovered pterosaurs as close relatives of the protorosaurs after removing characteristics of the hind limb from his analysis , in an attempt to test the idea that these characters are the result of convergent evolution between pterosaurs and dinosaurs . However , subsequent analysis by Dave Hone and Michael Benton ( 2007 ) could not reproduce this result . Hone and Benton found pterosaurs to be closely related to dinosaurs even without hind limb characters . They also criticized previous studies by David Peters , raising questions about whether conclusions reached without access to the primary evidence , that is , pterosaur fossils , can be held to have the same weight as conclusions based strictly on first @-@ hand interpretation . Hone and Benton concluded that , although more primitive <unk> are needed to clarify their relationships , pterosaurs are best considered archosaurs , and specifically ornithodirans , given current evidence . In Hone and Benton 's analysis , pterosaurs are either the sister group of Scleromochlus or fall between it and <unk> on the <unk> family tree . Sterling Nesbitt ( 2011 ) found strong support for a clade composed of Scleromochlus and pterosaurs . 
 More recent studies on basal pterosaur hindlimb morphology seem to vindicate a connection to Scleromochlus . Like this archosaur , basal pterosaur lineages have plantigrade hindlimbs that show adaptations for <unk> . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 In phylogenetic taxonomy , the clade Pterosauria has usually been defined as node @-@ based and anchored to several extensively studied taxa as well as those thought to be primitive . One 2003 study defined Pterosauria as " The most recent common ancestor of the <unk> , <unk> and Quetzalcoatlus and all their descendants . " However , these types of definition would inevitably leave any related species that are slightly more primitive out of the Pterosauria . To remedy this , a new definition was proposed that would anchor the name not to any particular species but to an anatomical feature , the presence of an enlarged fourth finger that supports a wing membrane . A broader clade , <unk> , has been defined as all ornithodirans more closely related to pterosaurs than to dinosaurs . 
 The internal classification of pterosaurs has historically been difficult , because there were many gaps in the fossil record . Starting from the 21st Century , new discoveries are now filling in these gaps and giving a better picture of the evolution of pterosaurs . Traditionally , they were organized into two suborders : the <unk> , a " primitive " group of long @-@ tailed pterosaurs , and the Pterodactyloidea , " advanced " pterosaurs with short tails . However , this traditional division has been largely abandoned . <unk> is a paraphyletic ( unnatural ) group , since the pterodactyloids evolved directly from them and not from a common ancestor , so , with the increasing use of cladistics , it has fallen out of favor among most scientists . 
 The precise relationships between pterosaurs is still unsettled . Many studies of pterosaur relationships in the past have included limited data and were highly contradictory . However , newer studies using larger data sets are beginning to make things clearer . The cladogram ( family tree ) below follows a phylogenetic analysis presented by Andres & Myers in 2013 . 
 = = = Extinction = = = 
 It was once thought that competition with early bird species might have resulted in the extinction of many of the pterosaurs . By the end of the Cretaceous , only large species of pterosaurs are known . The smaller species seem to have become extinct , their niche filled by birds . However , pterosaur decline ( if actually present ) seems unrelated to bird diversity , as ecological overlap between the two groups appears to be minimal . At the end of the Cretaceous period , the Cretaceous – Paleogene extinction event , which wiped out all non @-@ avian dinosaurs and most avian dinosaurs as well , and many other animals , seems also to have taken the pterosaurs . Alternatively , some pterosaurs may have been specialised for an ocean @-@ going lifestyle . Consequently , when the Cretaceous – Paleogene extinction event severely affected the marine life on which these pterosaurs fed , they became extinct . However , forms like azhdarchids and <unk> were not marine in habits . 
 In the early 2010s , several new pterosaur taxa were discovered dating to the Campanian / Maastrichtian , such as the ornithocheirids <unk> and " <unk> " , possible pteranodontids and <unk> , several tapejarids and the indeterminate non @-@ azhdarchid <unk> . This suggests that late Cretaceous pterosaur faunas were far more diverse than previously thought , possibly not even having declined significantly from the early Cretaceous . 
 It appears that pterodactyloid diversity seemingly " stalled " after the initial radiation in the Early Cretaceous , apparently not diversifying much afterwards . This would have made pterosaur diversities specialised , and thus vulnerable to minor extinction events . Nonetheless , azhdarchids appear to have radiated in diversity towards the end of the Cretaceous , exploring several unusual ecological niches and increasing species wise , dismissing notions of authentic decline . 
 Small sized pterosaur species apparently were present in the <unk> Formation , indicating a higher diversity of Late Cretaceous pterosaurs than previously accounted for . 
 At least some non @-@ <unk> pterosaurs survived into the Late Cretaceous , postulating a <unk> taxa situation for late Cretaceous pterosaur faunas . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Pterosaurs have been a staple of popular culture for as long as their cousins the dinosaurs , though they are usually not featured as prominently in films , literature or other art . Additionally , while the depiction of dinosaurs in popular media has changed radically in response to advances in paleontology , a mainly outdated picture of pterosaurs has persisted since the mid 20th century . 
 While the generic term " pterodactyl " is often used to describe these creatures , the animals depicted frequently represent either Pteranodon or Rhamphorhynchus , or a fictionalized hybrid of the two . Many children 's toys and cartoons feature " pterodactyls " with Pteranodon @-@ like crests and long , Rhamphorhynchus @-@ like tails and teeth , a combination that never existed in nature . However , at least one type of pterosaur did have the Pteranodon @-@ like crest and teeth — for example , the <unk> , a name that means " toy finger " for its resemblance to old , inaccurate children 's toys . Also , some depictions of pterosaurs incorrectly identify them as " birds " , when in real life they were flying reptiles , and birds are actually descended from theropod dinosaurs . 
 Pterosaurs were used in fiction in Arthur Conan Doyle 's 1912 novel The Lost World , and subsequent 1925 film adaptation . They have been used in a number of films and television programs since , including the 1933 film King Kong , and 1966 's One Million Years B.C .. In the latter , animator Ray Harryhausen had to add inaccurate bat @-@ like wing fingers to his stop motion models in order to keep the membranes from falling apart , though this particular error was common in art even before the film was made . Pterosaurs were mainly absent from notable film appearances until 2001 , with Jurassic Park III . However , paleontologist Dave Hone has noted that , even after the 40 intervening years , the pterosaurs in this film had not been significantly updated to reflect modern research . Among the errors he noted as persisting from the 1960s to the 2000s , were teeth even in toothless species ( the Jurassic Park III pterosaurs were intended to be Pteranodon , which translates as " toothless wing " ) , nesting behavior that was known to be inaccurate by 2001 , and leathery wings , rather than the taut membranes of muscle fiber that was actually present and required for pterosaur flight . 
 In most media appearances , pterosaurs are depicted as aerial predators similar to birds of prey , grasping human victims with their taloned feet . No pterosaur species known so far possesses prehensile feet ; all known pterosaurs have flat , plantigrade feet with no opposable toes , often poorly muscled and , in the case of <unk> , generally proportionally small . However , some pterosaurs might have had raptorial tendencies ; <unk> possesses powerful jaws akin to those of <unk> , and <unk> 's short neck and more powerful jaws have been interpreted as a speciation on larger prey . 
 = Mark Hammett = 
 Mark Garry ' Hammer ' Hammett ( born 13 July 1972 ) is a New Zealand rugby union coach and former player . Haven represented Canterbury provincially 76 times , and the Crusaders 81 times and the All Blacks 30 times – including 29 Test matches , Hammett later went on to coach both Canterbury and Crusaders as a forwards / assistant coach . He is currently the head coach of Japanese Super Rugby franchise the <unk> and will return to New Zealand in mid @-@ 2016 to join the coaching staff at Tasman Makos . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Early career : 1989 – 97 = = = 
 Hammett first represented New Zealand , while he was a pupil at St Thomas of Canterbury College , when selected for the New Zealand Under 17 team in 1989 . He then captained the Under 19 team in 1991 , before making his first appearance for Canterbury in 1992 . Although his one game for Canterbury in 1992 was as a replacement , he played seven games the following season . As hooker , he played mainly as backup to Matt Sexton in 1993 ; however , by 1994 they were sharing the role . By 1995 , Hammett played more games than Sexton . 
 Rugby turned professional in late 1995 , and in 1996 the Canterbury Crusaders ( now called the Crusaders ) franchise was established . Hammett became a founding member of the side , which struggled in the inaugural Super 12 , finishing in last place . The 1997 season went better for Hammett ; the Crusaders finished sixth , and the Canterbury provincial team won the National Provincial Championship ( NPC ) after beating Counties in the final . Although Hammett was receiving more and more game time , he still only participated in the NPC final as a replacement . 
 = = = Super 12 success : 1998 – 2001 = = = 
 Hammett started regularly for both Canterbury , and the Crusaders in 1998 , with the latter he won his first Super 12 title . The 1998 Super 12 final was played against the Blues at Eden Park ; Hammett said of the match " If we 'd been polled in that week , and had to give an honest answer , most of the boys , deep down , would probably have thought that the Blues would beat us . " Despite this , the Crusaders defeated the reigning champions 20 – 13 . Hammett was rewarded with a New Zealand trial , where he captained his team . He was subsequently selected for New Zealand A and played against Tonga . 
 The Crusaders achieved more success in 1999 as they finished the round @-@ robin in fourth place , then won their semi @-@ final , and final ( both away from home ) to take another championship . Hammett 's achievements with the Crusaders were rewarded by being called into the All Blacks in 1999 , at the age of 26 . His first game was against New Zealand ' A ' , on 11 June in Christchurch , quickly followed by his first Test against France on 26 June . Hammett eventually played in the 1999 Tri Nations Series , and was selected for the 1999 Rugby World Cup . 
 After winning a third title with the Crusaders in 2000 , he was again selected for the All Blacks ; getting a start against Tonga , and in that years Tri @-@ Nations . After returning from All Blacks duty , he played for Canterbury and contributed to a Ranfurly Shield win over <unk> . Canterbury then reached the NPC final , giving Hammett the opportunity to be part of a Super 12 , Ranfurly Shield , and NPC winning team , all in the same year . Wellington won the NPC final however , and the opportunity was lost . Hammett was then selected for the end @-@ of @-@ year All Blacks tour , and played against France and Italy ( both as a substitute ) . 
 Hammett 's 2001 Super 12 season was marred by a shoulder injury , and the Crusaders eventually finished tenth . Due to injury , Hammett only played one game for the All Blacks , as a substitute against Argentina in June . He missed the entire NPC campaign due to injury : an ankle problem which required surgery and causes him to also miss the 2001 end @-@ of @-@ year All Black tour . 
 = = = Final seasons : 2002 – 03 = = = 
 After the 2001 NPC , Crusaders ' captain Todd Blackadder left New Zealand to play rugby in Scotland . During the 2002 Super 12 pre @-@ season , half @-@ back Justin Marshall questioned which of the senior players were going to step into Blackadder 's leadership role for the tough matches . Hammett took the comment " as a slap in the face " , as " one player doesn 't make a team . " Hammett later said " I took it that way , and I think a lot of the others must have as well , because we all ended up stepping up ! " Subsequently , the Crusaders went through the season unbeaten , including a 96 – 19 victory over the New South Wales Waratahs . He again played for the All Blacks in 2002 , starting against Australia and South Africa in the Tri @-@ Nations . The 2002 NPC season was Hammett 's last , and although Canterbury were knocked out in their semi @-@ final , they managed to retain the Ranfurly Shield . Hammett 's last match was his 76th for Canterbury . 
 The 2003 Super 12 season was Hammett 's last . The team ended the round @-@ robin second on the table , and eventually travelled to Eden Park to face the Blues in the final . Although the Crusaders lost the final , Hammett scored two tries , becoming one of only three players to score two tries in a Super 12 final . Despite the two tries , Hammett calls the match the biggest disappointment of his career . Hammett was again chosen for the All Blacks , and eventually played in the 2003 Rugby World Cup . The All Blacks call @-@ up made Hammett reconsider his retirement plans . He planned to continue playing after 2003 , however a neck injury during the 2004 pre @-@ season ended his playing career . 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 = = = In New Zealand : 2006 – 2014 = = = 
 Two years after his playing career ended with the Crusaders , Hammett was back with the Crusaders , working as a forwards coaching adviser for the 2006 Super 14 season . He went on to fulfill the same role for Canterbury in the 2006 Air New Zealand Cup . He was later appointed as the new Crusaders assistant coach in November 2006 as a replacement for Vern Cotter who departed to France . Hammett remained as assistant coach from 2007 to 2010 , and was not appointed as Crusaders ' head coach when Robbie Deans left to coach Australia in 2008 ; Todd Blackadder was given the head coach role instead . During his time at the Crusaders , he helped guide the team to the semi @-@ finals of every single season he was at the franchise , before securing their sixth and seventh title in 2006 and 2008 . In later 2010 , he was appointed coach of the Wellington @-@ based Hurricanes ahead of the 2011 Super Rugby season . After the 2011 Super Rugby season – his first season in charge – Hammett decided controversially not to renew the contracts of All Blacks Ma 'a <unk> and then Hurricanes ' captain Andrew Hore . In the three years at the helm in Wellington , the Hurricanes failed to progress to the knock @-@ out phase of the competition , only getting as high as seventh on the table ; in 2014 Super Rugby season . In April 2014 Hammett indicated he would not be seeking to renew his contract when it expired at the end of the 2014 season . 
 = = = Outside New Zealand : 2014 – 2016 = = = 
 On 18 May 2014 , Hammett was named Director of Rugby for Wales @-@ based team Cardiff Blues , working alongside Dale McIntosh and Paul John . The Mark Hammett era was a slow start , losing both the pre @-@ season friendlies . However , the first round saw Cardiff defeat <unk> 41 – 26 . Despite only winning one game in his first competitive 6 games , Hammett lead Cardiff to a surprise victory over French side Grenoble and an easy victory over Rovigo Delta in the 2014 – 15 European Rugby Challenge Cup . These games were backed @-@ up by a narrow loss to Irish giants Munster . On 24 January 2015 , Hammett led the Blues to an away victory over Grenoble , to see the side through to the quarter @-@ finals of the 2014 – 15 European Rugby Challenge Cup . On 20 February 2015 , Cardiff were beaten by Benetton Treviso 40 – 24 in Treviso , which later turned out to be Hammett 's last game in charge of the Welsh side . On 25 February 2015 , after six months of a three year contract , Cardiff Blues agreed to release Hammett at his request for personal reasons , to allow him to return home to New Zealand . 
 On 21 December 2015 , the Japan Rugby Football Union announced Hammett as the head coach of the newly formed Japanese Super Rugby franchise , the <unk> . In their debut season , the side finished bottom of the newly expanded table , with 1 win . Ironically , their win came against the other newly formed team , the <unk> , a team made up predominantly of the successful Argentine side from the 2015 Rugby World Cup . On 27 June , it was announced that Hammett would be leaving the Japanese side to return to New Zealand . It had previously been announced that Hammett would be joining the Tasman Makos in 2016 as their new assistant coach for the 2016 Mitre 10 Cup . While in June 2016 , it was announced that Mark Hammett will remain in Super Rugby , but as as an assistant coach at the Highlanders . 
 In March 2016 , Hammett was named as the caretaker coach for the Japanese national team , while Jamie Joseph closes out his contract with the Highlanders . Hammett led the Brave Blossoms to a 26 – 22 win over Canada , before losing 2 – 0 to Scotland during their two @-@ test series . 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 Crusaders ( as assistant coach ) 
 Super 14 / Super Rugby 
 Winners : 2006 , 2008 
 Runners @-@ up : 2011 
 = Early life of Jan Smuts = 
 Jan Christian Smuts ( aka Jan Christiaan Smuts ) , OM , CH , ED , KC , FRS ( 24 May 1870 – 11 September 1950 ) was a prominent South African and Commonwealth statesman , military leader , and philosopher . He served as a Boer General during the Boer War , a British General during the First World War and was appointed Field Marshal by King George VI during the Second World War . In addition to various cabinet appointments , he served as Prime Minister of the Union of South Africa from 1919 until 1924 and from 1939 until 1948 . From 1917 to 1919 he was one of five members of the British War Cabinet , helping to create the Royal Air Force . He played a leading part in the post @-@ war settlements at the end of both world wars , making significant contributions towards the creation of the League of Nations and the United Nations . He did much to redefine the relationship between Britain and the Dominions and Colonies , leading to the formation of the British Commonwealth . 
 Jan Smuts was born in 1870 , the second son of a traditional Boer farming family . By rural tradition , the eldest son would be the only child to receive a full formal education ; however , on the death of his elder brother in 1882 , 12 @-@ year @-@ old Jan was sent to school for the first time . After four years of education he had made exceptional progress , gaining admission to study at Victoria College in Stellenbosch . He graduated in 1891 with first @-@ class honours in Literature and Science . With this strong academic background , he applied for , and won , the Ebden scholarship for overseas study , electing to read Law at Christ 's College , Cambridge . After further academic success , and the recipient of many prestigious academic awards , he graduated in 1894 with double First @-@ class honours . After graduating , Smuts passed the examinations for the Inns of Court , entering the Middle Temple . In 1895 , despite the prospect of a bright future in the United Kingdom , the homesick Smuts returned to South Africa . 
 = = In South Africa = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 On 24 May 1870 , at the Smuts family farm , Bovenplaats , in the district of Malmesbury , Cape Colony , a child was born to Jacobus Smuts and his wife Catharina . This child , their second son in what was to become a family of four sons and two daughters , was christened Jan Christiaan after his maternal grandfather , Jan Christiaan de Vries 
 The Smuts family were prosperous yeoman farmers , long @-@ established in the area . For four generations , since 1786 , they had farmed in the Malmesbury district , settling on the farm <unk> , of which Bovenplaats was a part , in 1818 . This area was part of the so @-@ called Swartland , the chief wheat @-@ growing area of the Cape Colony . 
 1870 found Bovenplaats under the care of Jacobus Abraham Smuts and his wife Catharina Petronella . Jacobus Smuts lived in much the same manner as his forefathers — a hard @-@ working farmer , a pillar of the Church , and one who took a leading part in the social and political affairs of the neighbourhood . Such was the regard in which he was held that he was later to be elected as the Member for Malmesbury in the Cape Parliament . Smuts 's mother , born Catharina Petronella de Vries , was the sister of Boudewijn Homburg de Vries , the predikant of the nearby town of Riebeek West , some three miles ( 5 km ) from Bovenplaats . The de Vries family originated from the area around Worcester , Cape Colony . Catharina accompanied her brother as his housekeeper when he took up his appointment at Riebeek West , eventually meeting and marrying her husband in 1866 . She was a woman of considerable education and culture , at least according to the standards of the area , having studied music and French in Cape Town . 
 When Jan was six years of age the family moved from Bovenplaats to a new farm some thirteen miles ( 19 km ) away . This farm , Klipfontein , was a bequest to Jacobus Smuts , who , keen to have a farm of his own rather than one under the supervision of his father , moved his family there in 1876 . 
 = = = = Family life = = = = 
 The Smuts family were traditional Afrikaner farmers . As such , questions of property and family affairs were extensively governed by custom . Custom dictated that it was upon the first son that family expectations fell ; the family would strive , so far as their means allowed , to provide him with the best possible education with the goal of paving the way for his entry into one of the professions . As for the others , they would be put to work on the farm , while at the same time receiving a rudimentary home education . As the second son this was to be Jan 's role . While he remained at the farm , his elder brother , Michiel , was sent to begin his schooling in Riebeek West , destined , like his uncle <unk> , for a future as a predikant in the Dutch Reformed Church . 
 <unk> combined with lessons from his mother — such was the order of Jan 's life for the next few years . During his early childhood , still too young to be given formal responsibilities on the farm , Jan accompanied the Coloured farm labourers as they went about their daily work . At this time the relations between master and servant , between black and white , were certainly not based on social equality ; nevertheless , on these Swartland farms there was little of the rigid segregation which was already emerging elsewhere in South Africa and which was later to have such profound consequences . Since 1828 the Cape had enshrined in law the principle of strict legal equality between the races . Unlike the rest of South Africa , all adult males , were entitled to vote and to stand for election to the Colonial legislature , subject only to a property qualification . In these country districts therefore , there existed a certain intimacy between the farm owners and their labourers . At harvest times it was common to find both working together to gather in the crops and it was also commonplace to find the farm 's children playing with one another , irrespective of race . 
 In this relatively liberal environment Jan accompanied the servants in their work , listening to their stories , learning the ways of the countryside , and trying to help as best he could . As his knowledge and confidence increased Jan began to go out into the countryside by himself , exploring the hills and valleys which surrounded him . Later , as an older boy , his chief responsibility was as a herd — first of the pigs and poultry in the farmyard , and later of the cattle out on the veld . The same laws of custom which had preordained Jan 's role as a farmer also had their beneficial aspect ; Boer farmers customarily allotted their sons a share of the natural increase of the beasts under their care . As time passed Jan gradually built up a respectable holding of livestock . 
 At home , away from the work of the farm , his education was not neglected . Although restricted to rudimentary home schooling , his mother 's own notable education placed him and his siblings at an advantage compared with other children in similar circumstances . 
 = = = = Outside influence = = = = 
 The Smuts family lived in an almost exclusively Afrikaner world . Nevertheless , this cultural identity , unlike that of the Boer republics to the north , did not define itself on opposition to Britain or the British . Swartland farmers had been largely insulated from the causes of discontent of earlier years , discontent which eventually culminated in the mass Boer migrations of the Great Trek . As a result , Jacobus Smuts largely unmoved by the Afrikaner nationalism preached by such organisations as the Afrikaner Bond , founded by Rev. SJ du Toit in 1877 . After 1884 , having come under the leadership of Jan Hendrik Hofmeyr , the Bond became more to the Smuts ' taste . Hofmeyr changed the fundamental basis of the organisation , from one preaching Afrikaner separatism to one which combined a pragmatic policy of economic protectionism for Cape farmers and their produce with a call for unity between the English and Dutch @-@ speaking populations and cooperation with the Colonial authorities . As a member of the Cape legislature Jacobus Smuts pledged his support to Hofmeyr and the reformed Bond . 
 Unlike many parts of South Africa , conflict was an element largely absent from Jan Smuts 's early life . Whether conflict between Briton and Boer , or conflict between Black and White — it had been many years since the farmers of the Swartland had had to deal with turmoil on their doorsteps . The absence of conflict , along with its inevitable counterpart , development of prejudice , had its effect upon Smuts . 
 In later years Smuts was to look upon this time with the uttermost fondness . Of all his childhood experiences it was the time spent out on the veld , whether tending the cattle or out on excursions of his own , which seemed to have the most marked effects on him , developing an attachment which was almost spiritual in nature . As he wrote in 1902 , aged 32 : 
 In ordinary circumstances Jan Smuts would have , in time , taken over the running of the family farm , spending his life as a farmer as his father , grandfather , and great @-@ grandfather had before him . However this was not to be ; events were to conspire to change this predetermined fate . 
 = = = Schooldays = = = 
 In 1882 tragedy struck the Smuts family . Their eldest son , Michiel , suddenly succumbed to typhoid while attending school at Riebeek West . This time of family grief and upheaval had a direct effect upon Jan ; now , as the eldest son , the weight of family expectation fell squarely upon his shoulders . 
 Within weeks Jan was sent from the familiar surroundings of Klipfontein to a boarding house at Riebeek West , to take his brother 's place at the school of Mr TC Stoffberg . As had been the case with his brother , his parents had already mapped out his future ; like his brother Jan was destined for a future in the Dutch Reformed Church , to be ordained as a predikant at the conclusion of his studies . This vocation , though imposed upon him by his parents , was by no means regarded as an imposition by Jan , growing up as he had in an environment where adherence to the Church and piety of deeds counted for a good deal . This upbringing had turned twelve @-@ year @-@ old Jan into a deeply religious , serious @-@ minded boy . Now , attending school for the first time , he faced a number of obstacles . Foremost amongst these was his rudimentary grasp of English , at a time when it was the main medium of instruction and crucial for any Afrikaner who wished to play a role in wider Cape society . Thanks to his mother 's <unk> in this as well as in other subjects , he was better prepared than most children in similar circumstances , but nevertheless he was to start his schooling alongside children many years younger than himself with many years of study separating him from his contemporaries . 
 Even so , despite these disadvantages , Jan proved himself an outstanding scholar . He surpassed the other children both in terms of innate ability and in terms of dedication to his work . It was not for nothing that his headmaster , Mr Stoffberg , described him as " one of the most brilliant pupils he had ever taught , and the most hard @-@ working boy he had ever met . " Within three years Jan had made sufficient progress to have caught up with his age group , children with up to ten years of formal education behind them . He compounded this remarkable achievement when the time came for him to sit the Cape Colony elementary examination in 1885 ; Jan was placed ninth in the entire colony . The next year he surpassed even this , coming second in the School Higher examination . 
 During these few years at Riebeek West Jan worked assiduously at his studies — self @-@ evidently , given his achievements . His academic abilities were soon noted by his headmaster , who went out of his way to provide Jan with further curricular reading . Yet this was to prove insufficient to meet what was becoming an almost insatiable thirst for knowledge . Jan borrowed books and yet more books from the headmaster , poring over them at all times rather than engaging in the childish pursuits of the other children , separated from them by his strong work ethic . A few weeks before the School Higher examination this had its consequences — Jan fell ill , an illness exacerbated by his unremitting study . With a strict injunction from his doctor , ordering a complete rest with an absolute prohibition on work and reading , Jan was packed off to bed . Nevertheless , despite the doctor 's orders , Jan went to strenuous lengths to evade the ban . One story told of him during this enforced convalescence describes how he used to involve the headmaster 's youngest son in his subterfuges , bribing the four @-@ year @-@ old child to bring him books from his father 's study . This enjoyed considerable success until the day of an unannounced visit from the headmaster 's wife . In his sparsely furnished room there were few possibilities , but Jan made the best job that he could of concealing his by now substantial collection of books . The headmaster 's wife upon entering the room found Jan , as expected , in bed . However the boy did not look to be comfortably resting as he ought , in fact he looked positively uncomfortable . She offered to make Jan 's bed for him , he declined , insisting that he was perfectly comfortable ; she insisted and , being the headmaster 's wife , got her way . Embarking upon her deed of kindness she found , to her astonishment , the real reason for Jan 's restlessness — underneath his bedclothes he was making a valiant effort to conceal an immense pile of contraband books ! 
 This dedication to reading and study might , in another boy , have been nothing more than a reaction to the impending examinations — but not in Jan 's case . What made this particular episode revealing was that the books found under his bedclothes were largely unconnected with his studies . In Riebeek West he developed a lifelong habit , that of reading avidly outside the prescribed curriculum , seeking knowledge for its own sake . 
