 In 1886 , at the age of sixteen , Jan embarked on the next stage of his education . Jan applied to , and was accepted by , Victoria College , Stellenbosch — one of the most prominent institutes of higher education in the Cape . In late 1886 he bade farewell to Riebeek West , ready to embark upon a new stage in life . 
 = = = Life in Stellenbosch = = = 
 Mr Stoffberg 's school did not take its pupils to the final stage of secondary education . Before Jan could set his schooldays behind him and commence his higher education he would have to sit the Matriculation exam . Jan duly moved from Riebeek West to Stellenbosch , spending early 1886 to late 1886 preparing for this test . 
 At Riebeeck West Jan had been a hard @-@ working , deeply religious child , with a strongly reserved , almost solitary , nature . This disposition , a legacy of his pious , rural upbringing , is manifest in what is his earliest surviving letter . This letter , written to Professor C Murray , a tutor at Victoria College , was for the most part a run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill enquiry into the administrative arrangements for the forthcoming term . Yet in amongst this mundane request for information on such matters as textbooks and school fees Jan found himself confiding his innermost motive forces to this stranger . As he wrote : 
 In the event , Smuts 's resolution to " make the proper use of my precious time " overcame such moral and religious temptations as a small town like Stellenbosch was capable of providing . Religion and his studies – these remained unchallenged as the twin poles of his existence during his matriculation year . In the seclusion of Mr Ackermann 's boarding house Jan studied assiduously , attended Church with zeal , and ignored the blandishments of the " puerile element " . 
 The Matriculation exam tested candidates on five subjects : Latin , Greek , Mathematics , Science , and English Literature . By exam @-@ time this dedication to his studies had paid off spectacularly ; the 1887 Cape lists placed Jan third overall , with the highest marks in the Colony in Greek . In what had been by any standards a year of tremendous success the latter achievement was especially outstanding ; a misunderstanding at the start of the year led Jan to believe that he would be exempted from the Greek exam – as a result it was a subject which he largely disregarded . Six days before the exam this potentially devastating oversight was exposed – there was now less than a week in which to catch up with a year ’ s study . Jan immediately shut himself away in his rooms , spending the next days in total seclusion , working from sunrise to sunset in the attempt to master the grammar and vocabulary upon which he was shortly to be tested . By the time of the exam this hard work had paid off . Within a relatively short period Jan had largely memorised his books and had mastered the Greek language to a remarkable degree . 
 Without doubt Smuts 's determined work ethic played a central role in these successes , yet he was also aided in no small part by his formidable memory . At that age Jan found himself able to memorise large portions of book simply by reading through them , and though this ability gradually diminished as the years passed , it never entirely disappeared . As his son was later to recount : 
 With the hurdle of Matriculation behind him the start of the 1887 term finally saw Smuts admitted as a student of Victoria College and enrolled as an undergraduate of the University of the Cape of Good Hope . 
 = = = = Victoria College = = = = 
 Victoria College proved fertile grounds for Smuts 's imagination . As his biographer WK Hancock was to write : 
 Smuts thrived in this environment . With these new vistas of knowledge and learning now revealed that he spared no effort in his attempts to master them . His surviving notebooks from this period reveal the range and breadth of his studies : Latin , Greek , German , the Classics , Optical Physics , Inorganic Chemistry and Metallurgy , Organic Chemistry and Agriculture , and Geology - to name but a few . Once again , as had been the case at Riebeek West , this was not merely study for the sake of exams - as ever , Smuts continued to study avidly outside the confines of the curriculum . 
 Over the next few years at Victoria College , Smuts 's religion continued to be of crucial importance . On Sundays he would attend both morning and evening church services , also leading a Bible study class for local Coloured boys , and during the week he was an assiduous attendee at evening prayer meetings . Within Victoria College , one of the strongest friendships he formed was with Professor JI Marais , the head of the Theology faculty . 
 Smuts 's religious observance was unsurprising in one who whose moral outlook was based exclusively upon Biblical teachings and who was destined for a future in the Church . Yet , though religion continued to serve in this central role , his studies at Stellenbosch , with their decidedly scientific bias , led Smuts towards a more critical examination of his faith . From this time onwards Smuts was , by gradual degrees , to start to move away from the uncompromisingly Calvinist outlook within which he had been raised . 
 If Stellenbosch marked Smuts 's intellectual awakening , it also was where he came to mature socially . Here he began to cast off the shyness and reserve which afflicted him , joining the local militia , becoming a regular contributor to the college magazine , and becoming leader of the Victoria College debating society . For the first time , in both verbal and literary debate , Smuts began to grapple with the political and social issues facing South Africa . 
 Though Smuts did much to cast off his shyness and reserve , he made few hard @-@ and @-@ fast friendships at Stellenbosch . Yet it was here that he met the woman who was to play a central role in his life thereafter . <unk> Margaretha Krige , known to all as <unk> , was the daughter of <unk> Krige , a prominent local wine and dairy farmer . Six months younger than Smuts , she had shared a similar upbringing with much the same resulting character traits . As their son , also name Jan Christian , was later to write : 
 <unk> was an intelligent young woman who , like Smuts , had scored highly in her Matriculation exam . It was thought , as a girl , a future in higher education was largely closed to her . The time spent in her company , whether reading poetry and singing together at the piano , or walking together in the mornings and evenings on the journey to and from Victoria College , did much to break down Smuts 's social isolation , enabling him to cast some of those protective prejudices which he had harboured of the " puerile element " , that is to say his peers . As he wrote in his diary some years later : " [ She ] , less idealistic than I , but more human , recalled me from my intellectual isolation and made me return to my fellows . " 
 = = = = Political Awakening = = = = 
 In 1888 Cecil Rhodes paid a visit to Victoria College . As the leader of the College debating society , Smuts was called upon to deliver the welcoming address on behalf of the student body . Rhodes , on the verge of becoming Prime Minister of Cape Colony , was a vocal advocate of Southern African political and economic unity . Now , on the occasion of this visit , Smuts chose to give his address on the theme of Pan @-@ Africanism . 
 Smuts 's engagement with politics was very much a product of his time at Stellenbosch . While his parent 's political moderation and rejection of Afrikaner exclusivism had left him largely unencumbered by any innate prejudices , it was his time at Victoria College which saw him develop his own independent political outlook . These views developed in tandem with another of Smuts 's fixations , his philosophical pursuit of the embodiment of unity . This intellectual quest was later to develop into his philosophy of Holism , but even at this early undeveloped stage he brought these ideas to bear in shaping his political opinions . So it was that Smuts emerged as an outspoken supporter of South African unity , and , by extension , a supporter of Rhodes . 
 Two essays written during this time foreshadow Smuts 's later views , both political and philosophical . The first of these , entitled South African Customs Union , was written in 1890 in competition for the JB Ebden prize offered by the University of the Cape of Good Hope . This essay , an examination of the economic relations of the colonies and states of South Africa , though ' Highly Commended ' by the judges , failed to win the prize . Nevertheless , despite achieving only modest success , it is unsurpassed as a clear and authoritative statement of Smuts 's political outlook at this time . 
 Within the essay Smuts considered the vexed question of the political and economic relations of the colonies and states of South Africa . Though close in terms of geographical proximity , their troubled relations over the preceding quarter century had done much to create an atmosphere of political estrangement . Smuts considered that this estrangement had come about largely as the result of petty jealousies , fostered by politicians interested more in their own parochial concerns than those of South Africa as a whole . And it was to South Africa as a whole that Smuts looked ; he did not take the side of one colony or state over the others , but rather treated the region as one single unity . In his own words he summed this up : 
 A call for unity was his emotional response to the question . Coming down to earth , he proposed two concrete policies as steps towards its ultimate realisation - expansion of a pan @-@ South African railway system , fostering greater commercial links and binding the region together , combined with the elimination of all regional tariffs and trade barriers with the formation of a South African customs union . 
 The writing of this essay was an important formative experience for Smuts . For the first time he had seriously grappled with questions of contemporary politics , and in doing so came to comprehend something of his own political role in resolving them . As he was to write : 
 Seminal though this moment was , it was just a start . As his biographer , WK Hancock , noted : " All the same , [ Smuts ] knew that nations are not made by administrative arrangements alone " . In The Conditions of Future South African Literature , his next essay of significance , he dealt with the other significant factor in nation @-@ building - the cultural and emotional ties needed to form a united community . Within this essay , not at first sight written on an overtly political topic , Smuts declared that a true South African literature did not and could not exist until a true South African nation had been born . The question then arose - what was hindering this development ? Smuts identified the inhibiting factor as the relations between Briton and Boer - particularly the effect of the influx of British emigrants to the gold mines of the Transvaal on the deeply conservative Afrikaner population . The relations between these two groups were fraught ; the discover of gold and the rapid industrialisation of the Transvaal had done much to disturb the settled ways of the Boer population . With its vast mineral wealth the Transvaal was rapidly becoming the most significant economic unit of South Africa , but the sudden tide of primarily British immigrants caused a great deal of unrest , with the established population decrying the immorality and degeneracy they perceived in the new mineworkers . These divisions , though strongest in the Transvaal , existed to one degree or another throughout South Africa . Smuts , though sympathising with the concerns of the old population , fearful their established ways and traditions would be swamped in a flood of migration , urged the Afrikaners to embrace the new spirit of dynamism which he saw the new migrants injecting . Likewise he exhorted the new population to integrate with the old , to consolidate the white population both for the sake of a future South African nation but also to secure their survival in the face of the vastly greater Native population . 
 = = A New Direction = = 
 In later years Smuts summed up this period : 
 In the examinations of 1891 , Smuts took a double @-@ First in Literature and Science . He applied for , and won , the Ebden scholarship for overseas study offered by the University of the Cape of Good Hope . On 23 September 1891 he departed the Cape , on board the ship Roslyn Castle , bound for the United Kingdom and a place at Cambridge University . 
 = = = Cambridge = = = 
 Smuts was admitted to Christ 's College , where he elected to study Law . 
 The choice of Law marked the start of a new chapter for Smuts . The preceding years at Stellenbosch had been ones of tremendous intellectual development . From the narrow focus of his upbringing , his outlook had now expanded , awakening within him a consciousness of the breadth of knowledge now open before him . Smuts , though remaining an adherent of the Church , and respectful of the Bible and its teachings , had developed a more questioning and critical outlook during the course of his studies . Whereas at the outset of his university career he was content to follow his parents ' wishes and be ordained into the Church , as his time at Victoria College came to an end he found himself more and more unwilling to commit to this path . Though he had now as yet wholly rejected the idea of ordination , he wished for a period of more diversified study before making that decision . So it was that Smuts came to select Law , rather than Divinity or Philosophy - the logical choices for a future Minister of Religion . 
 During his time at Cambridge Smuts maintained a regular correspondence with his old friend and tutor Professor Marais . Smuts 's choice of Law gave rise to a lively discussion between the two , with Marais regretting Smuts 's choice , declaring Law to be ' simply classified humbug ' and accusing ' those who pore over legal tomes ' of having a ' contracted view of life ' . In response Smuts published an essay in Christ 's College Magazine in defence of Law . Entitled ' Law - A Liberal Study ' , it attempted to rebut these criticisms , declaring that from Moses onwards lawyers had been the ' great lights and ornaments of the Church ' and identifying within Law ' ... as it develops through the ages of human history , ... the deepest , truest , most permanent thought and social achievement of progressive <unk> 
 Aside from friendship on this intellectual level , Marais was also able to come to Smuts 's rescue at a time of awkward crisis . 
 Smuts came to Cambridge at the age of twenty @-@ one , three or more years older than the typical university undergraduate . He was isolated from the other men of his year by a different social background , different upbringing , and different attitudes . Smuts 's disdain for frivolity and laxity combined with his lack of interest in sports and his decision to take up lodgings outside the college , did much to divide him from the other students . During his first year at Cambridge , Smuts suffered from tremendous homesickness , describing himself as being ' utterly desolate ' . Yet during this time Smuts had not found himself without social opportunities - as his biographer WK Hancock wrote : 
 This could of course have simply been a case of Smuts 's diffidence and reserve re @-@ asserting itself in the face of new and unfamiliar surrounding ; however Smuts 's biographers almost universally ascribe it to the poverty Smuts endured during this first year . 
 The Ebden scholarship was usually worth £ 200 per year . However , in 1891 , due to a failure of the fund 's investments , it was worth only £ 100 . The sale of Smuts 's personal livestock holdings on the family farm had enabled him to pay his sea passage and left him with a small residue to bank , yet despite this there remained a substantial gap between his resources ad his essential needs as a student . During his first term Christ 's College provided him with a small scholarship , but the gap remained . This was a crippling burden for Smuts , yet it was Professor Marais who was to come to his rescue . Smuts , having confided his difficulties to Marais towards the end of 1891 received by immediate return a cheque for £ 50 . Marais urged Smuts to write to him whenever he felt himself in need , in return of which Smuts took out a life insurance policy naming Marais as beneficiary . Should Smuts have died this policy would cover the loans , but while he lived , Smuts 's integrity was Marais 's only cover . 
 With Marais 's loans combined with the Ebden scholarship , Smuts began to enjoy a degree of financial security . Though far from affluent he was at least able to meet his basic expenses . From his second year onwards Smuts began to enter more into the social arena of the university . He ceased to be lonely , making a number of friends and acquaintances , principally amongst the other colonial students . Though no longer so reclusive as he had been during his first year , he remained extremely serious and devoted to his work ; an attitude which served as a barrier separating him from the English undergraduates , though not from the Fellows at Cambridge , with many of whom he struck up friendships . 
 In respect of his studies , he achieved the unique distinction of sitting both parts of the Law Tripos in the same year , passing both with first @-@ class honours . Over the course of his studies at Cambridge Smuts won many academic awards and accolades , culminating , in 1893 , with the award of the prestigious George Long prize in Roman Law and Jurisprudence - a particular honour given that the prize was very rarely awarded as the rigorous academic standard required was very rarely met . This was all combined with extensive extracurricular reading and private research into various topics including poetry , philosophy , botany , and archaeology . As his biographer WK Hancock wrote : 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Smuts 's time at Cambridge had been one of outstanding success ; his tutor Professor FW Maitland , himself one of the most eminent legal minds of the time , described Smuts as the most brilliant Law student he had ever taught . With testimonials such as this , in summer 1894 Smuts was able to persuade the Ebden trustees to award him £ 100 for a further year 's study . After a short holiday in Strasbourg , spent studying English conveyancing and German philosophy , Smuts returned to England . For a short time he contemplated moving to the Netherlands to seek a Dutch degree , but by October 1894 he had instead decided to read for the Bar . In December 1894 he passed the Honours Examination of the Inns of Court , passing first in his year . Smuts was called to the Middle Temple and soon received an offer of a fellowship in Law from his old college , Christ 's . The possibility of a distinguished legal career in England , whether in practice or in academia , now lay before him . Instead , he rejected both paths ; in June 1895 , as his Ebden funding came to an end , the homesick Smuts returned to the Cape , determined to make his future there . 
 = = Select bibliography = = 
 = = = Smuts , General = = = 
 Cameron , T - Jan Smuts : An Illustrated Biography , ( 1994 ) 
 Hancock , WK - Smuts : 1 . The Sanguine Years , 1870 – 1919 , ( 1962 ) 
 Ingham , K - Jan Christian Smuts : The Conscience of a South African , ( 1986 ) 
 Millin , SG - General Smuts , ( 2 vols ) , ( 1933 ) 
 Smuts , JC - Jan Christian Smuts , ( 1952 ) 
 = Filton Abbey Wood railway station = 
 Filton Abbey Wood railway station serves the town of Filton in South Gloucestershire , England , inside the Bristol conurbation . It is 4 @.@ 4 miles ( 7 @.@ 1 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads . Its three letter station code is FIT . There are three platforms but minimal facilities . The station is managed by Great Western Railway , the seventh company to be responsible for the station , and the third franchise since privatisation in 1997 . They provide most train services at the station , with two trains per day operated by CrossCountry . The general service level is eight trains per hour - two to South Wales , two to Bristol Parkway , two toward Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare and two toward Westbury . 
 Filton Abbey Wood is the third station on the site . The first station , Filton , was opened in 1863 by the Bristol and South Wales Union Railway . The station had a single platform , with a second added in 1886 to cope with traffic from the Severn Tunnel . The station was closed in 1903 , replaced by a new station , Filton Junction , 0 @.@ 15 miles ( 0 @.@ 24 km ) further north , which was built at the junction with the newly constructed Badminton Line from Wootton Bassett . The new station had four platforms , each with waiting rooms and large canopies . 
 Services at Filton Junction declined in the second half of the twentieth century , with the station buildings and Badminton Line platforms demolished in 1976 . The station was closed completely in 1996 , replaced by the current station , Filton Abbey Wood . This was built 0 @.@ 3 miles ( 0 @.@ 48 km ) south of the original station , adjacent to a new Ministry of Defence office development . The station was built with two platforms , but a third was added in 2004 . 
 The line through Filton Abbey Wood is not electrified , but will be as part of the planned modernisation of the Great Western Main Line . A new platform will also be built , allowing increased services between Bristol Parkway and Bristol Temple Meads . 
 = = Description = = 
 Filton Abbey Wood railway station is located in the Filton area of South Gloucestershire , within the Bristol conurbation . The area to the west of the station is primarily residential , while to the east is a large commercial area , including MoD Abbey Wood which is adjacent to the station . The main access to the station is via a long footpath ( a slope of approximately 1 in 8 ) and bridge from Emma @-@ Chris Way to the north , which has a small car park . There is also foot access from MoD Abbey Wood to the east . The station is on the Cross Country Route between Bristol Temple Meads and Bristol Parkway , and just off the South Wales Main Line south of Patchway and the eastern end of the Henbury Loop Line . It is 4 miles 30 chains ( 7 @.@ 0 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads and 113 miles 21 chains ( 182 @.@ 3 km ) from London Paddington ( via Bristol Parkway ) . The station is just north of Filton South Junction , where the northbound line to South Wales and the westbound line to Avonmouth split from the line to Bristol Parkway , and just south of Filton Junction No. 1 , where the southbound lines from South Wales and Parkway converge . The next station south is Stapleton Road , the next station north is Patchway , and the next station east is Bristol Parkway . 
 The station is on an alignment of 032 degrees , curving towards the west . There are three active platforms : platform 1 is the easternmost , separated from platforms 2 and 3 , which share an island , by two running lines . Platform 1 is for southbound trains and has a speed limit of 70 miles per hour ( 110 km / h ) . Platform 2 is for northbound trains towards Bristol Parkway , but can be used by trains towards South Wales . Platform 3 is for northbound trains towards South Wales . Both platforms 2 and 3 have a speed limit of 60 miles per hour ( 97 km / h ) , and all three platforms are 108 metres ( 118 yd ) long . 
 Facilities at the station are minimal - there are metal and glass shelters on each platform , and some seating . A small ticket office operates on platform 1 on weekday afternoons , but there are no other facilities for buying tickets and the station is generally unstaffed . There are customer help points , giving next train information for both platforms , as well as dot @-@ matrix displays showing the next trains on each platform . A small pay and display car park with 30 spaces is to the north of the station , as are racks for eight bicycles . CCTV cameras are in operation at the station . A number of buses stop by the station car park . 
 Over the decade 2002 – 2012 , passenger numbers at Filton Abbey Wood almost doubled , from 395 @,@ 000 to 771 @,@ 000 . In the 2006 / 07 financial year , over 50 @,@ 000 passengers used Filton Abbey Wood to travel to or from Bristol Temple Meads . The line through Filton Abbey Wood has a loading gauge of W8 , and the line handles over 15 million train tonnes per year . It is not electrified , though it is planned that it will be electrified as part of the 21st @-@ century modernisation of the Great Western Main Line . 
 = = Services = = 
 Filton Abbey Wood is managed by Great Western Railway who operate most services from the station . The basic service Monday to Friday is four trains per hour in each direction , split between four services . These are the hourly services each way between Bristol Parkway and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare ; Taunton and Cardiff Central ; Portsmouth Harbour and Cardiff Central ; and finally Gloucester and Westbury . The Taunton service has occasional extensions to Exeter St David 's and beyond , while the Gloucester to Westbury has alternate hour extensions to Great Malvern ( via Worcester ) in the north , to Weymouth in the south , and one daily extension to Brighton . Combined , there are two trains per hour to Bristol Parkway , two trains per hour to Cardiff Central and four trains per hour to Bristol Temple Meads . A single direct service from London Paddington calls at Filton Abbey Wood in the morning , continuing to Swansea , but there are no direct services to London . All services are operated by Great Western Railway , with the exception of one morning and one evening service operated by CrossCountry from Cardiff Central to Manchester Piccadilly via Bristol Temple Meads and Birmingham New Street . The morning service operates to Manchester Piccadilly whilst the evening service returns to Cardiff Central . Other CrossCountry services pass non @-@ stop throughout the day , operating two trains per hour each direction between the South West , Bristol , Manchester and Scotland . 
 The local services described above are formed using Class 150 , 153 and 158 diesel multiple @-@ unit trains . Until 2012 , Class 143 Pacer units were a regular sight , but these have been moved south to work in Devon and Cornwall following a cascade of Class 150 / 1 units from London Midland and London Overground . The London to Swansea service is operated by an HST set , and CrossCountry services are operated using Class 220 and 221 Voyager diesel @-@ electric multiple units . 
 The standard journey time to Bristol Temple Meads is 8 minutes , to Bristol Parkway is 4 minutes , and to Cardiff Central is 50 minutes . 
 = = History = = 
 There have been three different stations in the area of Filton Abbey Wood . The first , Filton , opened in 1863 just north the site of the current Filton Abbey Wood , and was closed in 1903 . A second station was opened a few hundred yards to the north , and was known as Filton Junction . This station closed in 1996 , replaced by Filton Abbey Wood . 
 = = = First station : Filton = = = 
 The first station at Filton opened on 8 September 1863 when services began on the Bristol and South Wales Union Railway ( BSWUR ) , which ran from Bristol Temple Meads to New Passage Pier , north of Bristol on the banks of the River Severn . At New Passage , passengers were transferred to a ferry to cross the Severn to continue on in to Wales . The line , engineered by Isambard Kingdom Brunel , was built as single track 7 ft 1 ⁄ 4 in ( 2 @,@ 140 mm ) broad gauge , with a platform on the western side of the line . The station was situated in the county of Gloucestershire , 4 miles 53 chains ( 7 @.@ 5 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads and immediately south of the modern bridge over the A4174 Avon Ring Road . The BSWUR was amalgamated with the Great Western Railway , who had from the beginning operated all BSWUR services , in 1868 ; and in 1873 the line was converted to 1 @,@ 435 mm ( 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ) standard gauge . Although the line made travel from Bristol to Wales easier , the change from train to ferry to train was inconvenient , and so a tunnel was built under the River Severn . To cope with the anticipated increase in demand , the line through Filton was doubled , with a new platform built on the eastern side of the new track , complete with waiting room . The new track was first used on 1 September 1886 when the Severn Tunnel opened . The station continued in use until 1 July 1903 , when it was closed and replaced by a new station 11 chains ( 0 @.@ 22 km ) further north . There is no trace remaining of the original station . 
 = = = Second station : Filton Junction = = = 
 In 1900 , almost all trains from London to Wales travelled via Bath and Bristol , with some still routed via Gloucester . However , the final 15 miles ( 24 km ) to Bristol were relatively slow and congested , so a new route was built further north , the GWR 's Badminton Line , now part of the South Wales Main Line , running from Wootton Bassett to Patchway . The new line opened in 1903 , and allowed faster services to Wales . There was a new triangular junction between Patchway and Filton , with the new line coming in from the east . The new station , opened on 1 July 1903 , was on an embankment at the southern apex of the junction , just north of the present A4174 . It was 11 chains ( 0 @.@ 22 km ) north of the first station , 4 miles 64 chains ( 7 @.@ 7 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads and 112 miles 67 chains ( 181 @.@ 6 km ) from London Paddington via the new line . 
 The new station had four platform faces - two outer platforms , and two inner platforms sharing an island between the southbound line from Patchway and the westbound line to London . The western platforms served trains between Bristol and Wales , while the eastern platforms served trains on the new line . The platforms were linked by a subway which led to the booking office , situated on ground level by the main entrance on the east side of the station . The approach road led south from the main entrance , towards the A4174 . There were waiting rooms and large canopies on each of the platforms . There were goods facilities to the south of the road , on the west side of the line and covering the site of the first station . There was a goods shed with a loading platform on a passing loop , as well as a north @-@ facing covered loading platform and a south @-@ facing siding . An additional south @-@ facing siding for coal traffic was added after the First World War . Opposite the goods yard was Filton Junction Signal Box , which controlled the junction and by 1948 had more than 70 levers . 
 Following the opening of the Henbury Loop Line , which diverged from the line towards Wales 3 chains ( 60 m ) to the north , the station was renamed Filton Junction on 1 May 1910 . Trains on this line used the western platforms , and often operated loop services to and from Bristol Temple Meads via Clifton Down . From 1928 , trains could also run loop services via Clifton Down , Severn Beach and Patchway . As well as being useful for passengers changing trains ( due to its junction status ) , Filton Junction was also used by workers at the nearby Filton Aerodrome and the attendant aircraft works . 
 When the railways were nationalised in 1948 , Filton Junction came under the aegis of the Western Region of British Railways . Following the publication of the Beeching Report , the Henbury Line was closed to passengers in 1964 , and service levels began to decline . The line between Pilning and Severn Beach was also closed , putting an end to loop services . The goods yard was closed in July 1965 , and the station 's name reverted to Filton from 6 May 1968 . Much of the station buildings were demolished in 1976 , as were the platforms serving Badminton Line trains , as no trains on this line called at Filton anymore . The remaining two platforms had small replacement shelters built on them . 
 In 1974 , when the Local Government Act 1972 came into effect , the southern part of Gloucestershire , including the district of Filton , became part of the new county of Avon . British Rail was split into business @-@ led sectors in the 1980s , at which time operations at Filton passed to Regional Railways . 
 In the 1990s , plans were made to build a new station in Filton and close the 1903 station . The last train called on 8 March 1996 , with services moving to the new Filton Abbey Wood from 11 March , with two intervening days of no service due to a closure of the Severn Tunnel . The remains of Filton Junction can still be seen from passing trains , and the two western platforms are still present , albeit overgrown . The subway has been blocked off , and the access road is now a residential street called " The Sidings " . 
 = = = Third station : Filton Abbey Wood = = = 
 In the early 1990s , the Ministry of Defence procurement division was consolidated into a major office development in Filton , known as MoD Abbey Wood . As part of this development , a new station was built in Filton , primarily to serve the MoD workers . Construction began in 1995 , and cost £ 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 . The station , named Filton Abbey Wood , was opened to the public on 11 March 1996 and officially opened on 19 March by Minister for Transport Steven Norris MP and the Chair of Avon County Council . Shortly after the station was opened , the county of Avon was disbanded , with the Filton region now governed by South Gloucestershire council . 
 The new station was situated 23 chains ( 460 m ) south of the first Filton station , and 34 chains ( 680 m ) south of Filton Junction . There were two platforms , each 108 metres ( 118 yd ) long , separated by two running lines . A ramped footbridge connected the platforms at the north end , and each platform had ground @-@ level access from the sides : the eastern , southbound platform from MoD Abbey Wood ; the western , northbound platform via a footpath from the car park to the north . There were metal and glass shelters on each platform and a small , rarely used booking office on the southbound platform . 
 Initial services at the station included local stopping services from Bristol to South Wales , and services between Gloucester and Westbury . Services towards Bath were of particular importance to the MoD , as many of their staff had been based there prior to the construction of MoD Abbey Wood . South Gloucestershire council provided a subsidy for half @-@ hourly services to Bath . The station proved popular with MoD workers , local residents commuting into central Bristol , and also students and staff at the University of the West of England . 
 When the railway was privatised in 1997 , local services were franchised to Wales & West , which was succeeded by Wessex Trains , an arm of National Express , in 2001 . The line through Filton closed for two weeks in June 2004 to enable the construction of a new platform and third running line on the west side of the station , separating trains towards Bristol Parkway from trains towards Wales before the station , and so allowing through @-@ trains to pass stopping trains . The project cost £ 16 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , and caused the complete suspension of Severn Beach Line services to allow longer @-@ distance services to use it as a diversion . 
 The Wessex franchise was amalgamated with the Great Western franchise into the Greater Western franchise from 2006 , and responsibility passed to First Great Western , a subsidiary company of FirstGroup , and rebranded as Great Western Railway in 2015 . First introduced new services between Bristol Parkway and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , and between Cardiff Central and Taunton , each calling at Filton Abbey Wood . From December 2006 , Virgin CrossCountry began operating a single daily service Newcastle Central to Cardiff Central via Bristol Temple Meads and Filton Abbey Wood . This service was taken over by Arriva CrossCountry when the CrossCountry franchise changed hands in 2007 , and then replaced by a daily service each direction between Cardiff Central and Manchester Piccadilly . 
 = = Future = = 
 First Great Western declined a contractual option to continue the Greater Western passenger franchise beyond 2013 , citing a desire for a longer @-@ term contract due to the impending upgrade to the Great Western Main Line . The franchise was put out to tender , but the process was halted and later scrapped due to the fallout from the collapse of the InterCity West Coast franchise competition . A two @-@ year franchise extension until September 2015 was agreed in October 2013 , and subsequently extended until March 2019 . The CrossCountry franchise is also due to expire in 2019 . 
 The line through Filton Abbey Wood is due to be electrified by 2017 as part of the Great Western Main Line electrification project . However , the Cross Country Route , the Bristol to Exeter Line and the Heart of Wessex Line will not be electrified , so services at Filton Abbey Wood will still be provided by diesel trains , with " Sprinter " units expected to be replaced by Class 165 and 166 " Turbo " units . The group Friends of Suburban Bristol Railways supports the electrification continuing beyond the main lines , as does MP for Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare John Penrose . The electrification scheme also includes the four @-@ tracking of the line through Filton to allow more services between Bristol Parkway and Bristol Temple Meads and to separate fast inter @-@ city services from local stopping services . 
 Filton Abbey Wood is on the Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare / Yate corridor , one of the main axes of the Greater Bristol Metro , a rail transport plan which aims to enhance transport capacity in the Bristol area . The plan will also see the reopening of the Henbury Loop Line and the opening of a new station between Filton and Stapleton Road . 
 = Posting system = 
 The posting system ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a baseball player transfer system that operates between Japan 's Nippon Professional Baseball ( NPB ) and the United States ' Major League Baseball ( MLB ) , or between the Korea Baseball Organization ( KBO ) and MLB . Despite the drafting of the United States – Japanese Player Contract Agreement , unveiled in 1967 to regulate NPB players moving to MLB , problems began to arise in the late 1990s . Some NPB teams lost star players without compensation , an issue highlighted when NPB stars Hideo Nomo and Alfonso Soriano left to play in MLB after using loopholes to void their existing contracts . A further problem was that NPB players had very little negotiating power if their teams decided to deal them to MLB , as when pitcher Hideki Irabu was traded to an MLB team for which he had no desire to play . In 1998 , the Agreement was rewritten to address both problems ; the result was dubbed the " posting system " . 
 Under this system , when an NPB player is " posted " , his NPB team notifies the MLB Commissioner and sets a posting fee not exceeding $ 20 million . The player is then given 30 days to negotiate with any MLB team willing to pay the NPB team 's set posting fee . If the player agrees on contract terms with a team before the 30 @-@ day period has expired , the NPB team receives the posting fee from the signing MLB team as a transfer fee , and the player is free to play in MLB . If no MLB team comes to a contract agreement with the posted player , then no fee is paid , and the player 's rights revert to his NPB team . The current process replaced one in which MLB held a silent auction during which MLB teams submitted sealed , uncapped bids in an attempt to win the exclusive negotiating rights with the posted player for a period of 30 days . Once the highest bidding MLB team was determined , the player could then only negotiate with that team . 
 Up to the end of the 2014 – 15 posting period , 20 NPB players had been posted using the system . Of these , 11 signed Major League contracts , three signed minor league contracts , four were unsuccessful in attracting any MLB interest , and two could not come to a contract agreement during the 30 @-@ day negotiation period . The four highest @-@ profile players that have been acquired by MLB teams through the posting system are Ichiro Suzuki , Daisuke Matsuzaka , Yu Darvish , and Masahiro Tanaka . The first three attracted high bids of $ 13 @.@ 125 million , $ 51 @.@ 1 million , and $ 51 @.@ 7 million respectively . Tanaka was the first player posted under the current procedure ; he was posted for the maximum $ 20 million allowed under the new rules . However , since its implementation the posting system has been criticized by the media and baseball insiders from both countries . 
 = = History = = 
 The first instance of a Japanese @-@ born player playing in Major League Baseball was in 1964 , when the <unk> Hawks , an NPB team , sent three exchange prospects to the United States to gain experience in MLB 's minor league system . One of the players , pitcher Masanori Murakami , was named the California League Rookie of the Year while playing for the Fresno Giants ( the San Francisco Giants ' Class @-@ A team ) . Giants executives were impressed with his talent and on September 1 , 1964 Murakami was promoted , thus becoming the first Japanese player to play in MLB . After Murakami put up good pitching statistics as a reliever , Giants executives sought to exercise a clause in their contract with the Hawks that , they claimed , allowed them to buy up an exchange prospect 's contract . NPB officials objected , stating that they had no intention of selling Murakami 's contract to the Giants and telling them that Murakami was merely on loan for the 1964 season . After a two @-@ month stalemate the Giants eventually agreed to send Murakami back to the Hawks after the 1965 season . Thus , after pitching one more season for the Giants , Murakami returned to Japan to play for the Hawks . This affair led to the 1967 United States – Japanese Player Contract Agreement , also known as the " working agreement " , between MLB and NPB , which was basically a hands @-@ off policy . 
 = = = Complications = = = 
 MLB and NPB officials created the posting system as a combined reaction to three cases in the 1990s , involving NPB players who moved to MLB . The first of these occurred in the winter of 1994 when pitcher Hideo Nomo , with the help of agent Don Nomura , became the second Japanese @-@ born player to play in MLB , 30 years after Murakami . Nomo , who was not yet eligible for free agency in Japan , was advised by Nomura that the Japanese Uniform Players Contract 's reserve clause limited the <unk> Buffaloes ' control over him to Japan only . Nomo utilized this loophole by voluntarily retiring from NPB to terminate his contract with the Buffaloes , circumvent its reserve clause and play in MLB . He announced his retirement from NPB in late 1994 and signed with the Los Angeles Dodgers in February 1995 , where he won the National League Rookie of the Year award . The following year , the Dodgers signed Nomo to a three @-@ year , $ 4 @.@ 3 million contract . 
 In early 1997 , after months of negotiations , the San Diego Padres signed a working agreement with the Chiba Lotte Marines that gave the Padres exclusive signing rights to another Nomura client , Hideki Irabu . Although both Irabu and Nomura stated that Irabu would only sign with the New York Yankees , neither the Padres nor the Marines consulted Irabu before finalizing their deal . The Major League Baseball Players Association ( MLBPA ) sided with Irabu , stating that the arrangement unfairly disregarded a player 's expressed wishes . However , MLB 's executive council ruled that the Padres had not violated any existing rule , and therefore legally held the rights to Irabu . Following this decision , Irabu contemplated a number of different options , including playing in NPB until he became a free agent , and taking the matter to the U.S. judicial system . By May , however , the Padres gave in and traded Irabu to the Yankees , who signed him for $ 12 @.@ 8 million over four years . 
 The final incident occurred in 1998 , when Alfonso Soriano was unable to leave the Hiroshima Toyo Carp due to contract restrictions . Soriano disliked the intense Japanese practice schedule , and the Carp denied him a salary increase from $ 45 @,@ 000 ( the league 's minimum ) to $ 180 @,@ 000 per year . Like Nomo and Irabu , Soriano hired Nomura to help his situation . After first attempting to void Soriano 's NPB contract by unsuccessfully arguing that the player was legally a minor when he signed it Nomura advised him , like Nomo , to retire from NPB and pursue a career in MLB . This prompted Carp executives to file an injunction against Soriano and send letters to MLB teams demanding that they cease all negotiations with him . NPB officials claimed that after the Nomo case they had privately amended the Player Contract to give NPB teams the right to prohibit a player from signing a new contract anywhere after voluntarily retiring . Since MLB officials were not consulted and they did not agree to any changes , MLB Commissioner Bud Selig declared that MLB would recognize Soriano as a free agent on July 13 , 1998 , and the Carp backed down . He signed a 5 @-@ year , $ 3 @.@ 1 million contract with the New York Yankees the same year . 
 = = = Resolution = = = 
 In 1998 , Orix <unk> general manager Shigeyoshi Ino rewrote the 1967 United States – Japanese Player Contract Agreement , when he drafted the " posting system " . Selig and NPB Commissioner <unk> Kawashima signed this new agreement in December 1998 . It sought to address each of the problems brought up by the Nomo , Irabu and Soriano cases , by requiring MLB teams to place " bids " for NPB players . These bids became the basis of transfer fees that are paid as compensation to NPB teams whose star players sign with MLB . NPB players are also allowed to negotiate with MLB teams over the terms of their new contracts . Through the 2013 season , the agreement was in effect on a year @-@ to @-@ year basis , <unk> at the option of either the MLB Commissioner or the NPB Commissioner provided notice to terminate is given by June 18 of any given year . A new agreement between MLB and NPB , with significantly different rules , was announced on December 16 , 2013 and took effect immediately ; it will continue through the 2016 MLB and NPB seasons . 
 The system only applies to players currently under contract with a Japanese team , although players who have nine or more years of playing service with NPB are exempt . It does not apply to free agents or to amateur players who have never played in NPB . Mac Suzuki , Micheal Nakamura , Kazuhito <unk> , and Junichi <unk> are the only Japanese players to have debuted in MLB without having played in NPB . The system does not work in reverse ; it does not regulate MLB players , such as Alex Cabrera , who moved to NPB . 
 = = Process = = 
 When a player under contract with a Nippon Professional Baseball team wishes to play in Major League Baseball , he must notify his current team 's management and request that they make him available for posting during the next posting period ( November 1 – March 1 through the 2013 season , and November 1 – February 1 in the current agreement ) . The NPB team can reject this request , and the player will not be posted . However , if the team consents , the player is presented to the MLB Commissioner , who then notifies all MLB teams of the posted player . 
 In the original process , MLB held a four @-@ day @-@ long silent auction during which interested MLB teams submitted sealed bids in U.S. dollars to the Commissioner 's Office . After the allotted four days passed , the Commissioner closed the bidding process and notified the posted player 's NPB team of the highest bid amount but not who the bidding team was . The NPB team then had four days to either accept or reject the non @-@ negotiable bid amount . 
 If the bid was rejected , the NPB team retained rights to the player . If it was accepted , the successful MLB team was granted the exclusive rights to negotiate with the player for 30 days . If the player and the MLB team agreed on contract terms before the 30 @-@ day period expired , the NPB team received the bid amount as a transfer fee within five business days . The player was then free to play for his new MLB team in the coming season . The transfer fee was not included when calculating an MLB team 's total payroll , which is subject to a luxury tax when it exceeds $ 155 million . If the MLB team could not come to a contract agreement with the posted player , then no fee was paid and the rights to the player reverted to his NPB team . A player could request to be posted again in subsequent years , and the process would be repeated with no advantage to the club that had won the bidding the previous year . 
 Under the current process , when the NPB team notifies the MLB Commissioner of a posting , it also sets the posting fee , which is now capped at a maximum of $ 20 million . Once the MLB Commissioner announces the posting and the fee , the player has 30 days to sign with an MLB team . Unlike the past system , in which only the team that won the bidding process had negotiating rights , the current system allows the posted player to negotiate with any MLB team willing to pay the posting fee . As in the previous process , if the player signs with an MLB team during the negotiating window , the signing team will pay the posting fee ; otherwise , his rights revert to his NPB team . Also mirroring the past system , an unsuccessfully posted player can request a posting in a later year , with the process repeated . 
 = = Past postings = = 
 Of the 53 Japanese @-@ born players who have played in MLB , 14 have entered the league using the posting system . Since the system 's creation in 1998 , the 20 players that have used it have experienced a range of success . Of these twenty , ten were immediately signed to Major League contracts and one player who drew no bids on his first posting was signed to a Major League contract on his second posting . These contracts range from $ 1 @.@ 4 million to $ 155 million . Of the remaining nine , three were signed to Minor League contracts , two were unable to reach a contract agreement and four were unsuccessful in drawing bids from any Major League clubs ( one player failed to draw bids during two separate postings ) . The following tables outline each posting and its outcome . 
 ^ § This was Otsuka 's second attempt to play in MLB after an unsuccessful posting the previous year . 
 ^ ψ Though MLB teams traditionally disclose bid amounts after negotiating rights have been won , the Dodgers chose not to publicly reveal their amount . 
 ^ † This specific amount was chosen by Red Sox owner John Henry because he deemed it lucky . 
 ^ ‡ The final three digits , 194 , represent Igawa 's total strikeout count for his 2006 season . 
 ^ € The final four digits represent two significant player numbers — 34 was the number that Nolan Ryan , then Rangers principal owner and CEO , wore when he played for the team , and 11 was Darvish 's number with the Fighters . 
 ^ P This player is a pitcher . 
 ^ § This is the only instance that a player has posted more than once in the same posting period . 
 ^ P This player is a pitcher . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 Since its implementation in late 1998 the posting system has been heavily criticized . Ichiro Suzuki 's agent remarked that " the player literally gets zero advantage from [ the posting system ] ... the Japanese teams benefit by holding the players hostage " . Don Nomura called the process a " slave auction " . Much of the criticism of the system stems from its forcing NPB players to negotiate their contracts solely with the MLB team that submitted the highest bid . The Japan Times columnist Marty <unk> believes that since no other team is allowed to submit competitive counter @-@ offers , negotiations result in salaries below the player 's market value . <unk> also believes the system fosters a " take @-@ it @-@ or @-@ leave @-@ it " situation ; if the team and the player have not finalized contract negotiations by the end of a 30 @-@ day period , the team can make a low offer knowing that the player 's only other option is to play in Japan for another year . It has been suggested that this is a violation of the Anti @-@ Monopoly Act , a Japanese antitrust law that prohibits parties from signing " an international agreement or international contract which contains such matters as constitute an unreasonable restraint of trade or unfair business practices " . 
 The Japanese Professional Baseball Players Association ( JPBPA ) was not consulted before the system was implemented by NPB club owners , and did not subsequently ratify it . Since its introduction JPBPA has expressed many concerns , likening the process to " human trafficking " . Agreeing that the system takes unfair advantage of NPB players , the Major League Baseball Players Association ( MLBPA ) offered to help JPBPA fight the posting system in court . However , according to one JPBPA official , the Japanese court process is too long and involved ; therefore , the " problem can 't be helped " . 
 Yomiuri Giants club representative Hidetoshi Kiyotake has expressed dislike of the system , because it enables Major League Baseball to poach players from Japan . By using the posting system , he says , Japanese teams make a profit in the short term , but by allowing Japan 's best players to be sold to MLB , NPB teams and Japanese baseball suffer in the longer term . When Giants pitcher Koji Uehara asked to be posted in 2005 , Kiyotake denied his request , saying : " We don 't recognize the posting system . I 've said from the beginning that this is out of the question . " 
 In the middle of the 2012 – 13 posting season , MLB approached NPB seeking to change the way MLB teams bid for the right to negotiate with NPB players . Instead of using a silent auction in which teams bid blindly , MLB would prefer its teams to participate in a traditional , open auction where the bids are known and teams can knowingly outbid each other . Such a change would likely lower the price of the transfer fees paid to NPB teams . MLB and the players ' unions agree that they 'd prefer to see the players receive more money for the transfer rather than the teams . The Japan Times columnist Jason <unk> also believed that these talks provided the JPBPA an opportunity to voice their concerns about the posting system and attempt to gain more leverage for themselves during the posting process . The new agreement , as noted , was announced on December 16 , 2013 , with most of the changes desired by MLB and players from both leagues . 
 = = = 2006 – 07 controversy = = = 
 The posting system was criticized by MLB insiders and by the U.S. media , after the controversial 2006 – 07 posting period . Before the posting of the period 's first player , Daisuke Matsuzaka , in early November 2006 , there was speculation that he might draw bids as high as $ 30 million — more than twice the previous record bid that Ichiro Suzuki had garnered in 2000 – 01 . After his silent auction was closed , it was revealed that Matsuzaka had drawn a bid of $ 51 @.@ 1 million , shocking American and Japanese baseball executives . The Boston Red Sox 's winning bid was more than $ 11 million higher than the next largest . 
 With the negotiations between Matsuzaka and the Red Sox at a stalemate as the negotiation period neared its close , The Washington Post 's Dave Sheinin questioned both parties ' intentions . Sheinin believed that the Red Sox had foreseen the contractual stalemate and had submitted a high bid simply to deny the New York Yankees an opportunity to negotiate with Matsuzaka . However , after Matsuzaka 's agent Scott Boras threatened to take Matsuzaka back to NPB if his price was not met , Sheinin theorized that Boras intentionally wanted to hinder contract negotiations . ESPN The Magazine 's Tim Kurkjian described the situation as " the most obvious game of chicken ever . " Sheinin suggested that , should the negotiations fail , Boras could take legal action on the grounds that the requirement of MLB teams to pay large transfer fees to NPB teams artificially depressed the player 's personal contract . Boras did not believe that the transfer fee should affect the player 's compensation . 
 Despite the negotiation difficulties , the Boston Red Sox eventually signed Matsuzaka . The team paid approximately $ 103 @.@ 1 million in total , including the transfer fee and contract , to acquire the pitcher . Kurkjian believes that with fees and contracts this high , small @-@ market teams could not afford to compete with large @-@ market teams for the rights to negotiate with some posted Japanese players . Kurkjian blames the posting system 's use of a blind bidding system as the cause of Matsuzaka 's " outrageous offer . " He also postulates that Matsuzaka 's high bid amount helped to inflate the bids for Kei Igawa who was posted two weeks later , perpetuating the problem further . After winning the negotiation rights to Igawa , Yankees ' general manager Brian Cashman told reporters that " the posting system , clearly with what took place this winter , might not necessarily be the best system " . Kurkjian claims that other MLB executives already believe that a traditional free agent structure , where the highest bidder wins , would be better than the current system . Cashman and Yankees team president Randy Levine met with NPB team officials in early 2007 to discuss the posting system , among other things . These meetings did not result in any immediate changes . 
 = Thistle , Utah = 
 Thistle is a ghost town in Utah County , Utah , United States , about 65 miles ( 105 km ) southeast of Salt Lake City . During the era of steam locomotives , the town 's primary industry was servicing trains for the Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad ( often shortened to D & RG , D & RGW , or Rio Grande ) . The fortunes of the town were closely linked with those of the railroad until the changeover to diesel locomotives , when the town started to decline . 
 In April 1983 , a massive landslide ( specifically a complex <unk> ) dammed the Spanish Fork River . The residents were evacuated as nearly 65 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 80 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) of water backed up , flooding the town . Thistle was destroyed ; only a few structures were left partially standing . Federal and state government agencies have said this was the most costly landslide in United States history , the economic consequences of which affected the entire region . The landslide resulted in the first presidentially declared disaster area in Utah . 
 U.S. Route 6 ( US @-@ 6 ) , US @-@ 89 and the railroad ( now part of Union Pacific Railroad 's Central Corridor ) were closed for several months , until they were rebuilt on a higher alignment overlooking the area . The remains of Thistle are visible from a rest area along US @-@ 6 or from the California Zephyr passenger train . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Thistle is about 65 miles ( 105 km ) southeast of Salt Lake City , at the confluence of the two primary tributaries to the Spanish Fork River , Thistle Creek and Soldier Creek . This confluence , at an elevation of 5 @,@ 043 feet ( 1 @,@ 537 m ) , is also the junction of two naturally formed routes across the mountains of central Utah . The primary route crosses the Wasatch Mountains , via the Wasatch Plateau and Soldier Summit . This route was carved by the tributaries of the Price River on the eastern side of the mountains and the Spanish Fork River on the west . In addition , Thistle Creek provides a route south from Thistle towards the communities of the Sanpete and Sevier Valleys . The Spanish Fork River flows northwest from Thistle , towards the city of Spanish Fork , before reaching Utah Lake . 
 These natural paths have provided the route of several transcontinental trails , highways and railroads since their discovery . The named transportation arteries passing through Thistle include : US @-@ 6 ( originally numbered US @-@ 50 ) , US @-@ 89 , the Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad 's Utah Division ( now part of Union Pacific Railroad 's Central Corridor ) and D & RGW 's Marysvale branch line ( abandoned because of the landslide ) . 
 = = History = = 
 The trade route on which Thistle lies was used by Native American tribes before the arrival of European settlers ; two Ute chiefs , <unk> and <unk> , led seasonal migrations through the canyon each spring and fall . The first recorded journey by Europeans to modern Thistle was the Dominguez – Escalante Expedition , which was escorted through the territory by Indian guides . A small group of Utes inhabiting the canyon frequently clashed with newcomers , and as a result were forcibly relocated in the 1870s . 
 Most of Thistle 's residents were railroad employees sent to live in the town , but there were some who had settled before the railroads arrived . The first Europeans were part of the Mormon migration to Utah , and the first of these was the Pace family , who migrated from Nauvoo , Illinois , reaching Thistle in 1848 . Fifth @-@ generation descendants of the Pace settlers continued to operate a family @-@ owned cattle ranch until the town was evacuated . Other settlers included Mormons who originally settled elsewhere in Utah but subsequently arrived to homestead fertile ground on Billies Mountain , on the north wall of the canyon . Among them was the mountain 's presumed namesake , William Johnson . <unk> was practiced in Thistle until the early 1900s . Until the arrival of the railroads , the town 's economy was based mainly on farming and ranching , although there was also some mining activity in the region , including a vein of <unk> that was mined between 1892 and 1914 . 
 = = = Railroads = = = 
 The first railroad track laid through Thistle was a narrow @-@ gauge spur line servicing coal mines near today 's Scofield Reservoir , built in 1878 by the Utah and Pleasant Valley Railway . By 1890 , the Denver and Rio Grande Western , which acquired the line in a foreclosure sale in 1882 , had rebuilt the line to standard gauge . The D & RGW connected this line with one they had built west from Colorado , completing a link from Salt Lake City to Denver . 
 The railroad built several facilities in Thistle to service and prepare trains for the change in grade and curvature of the line . The railroad placed helper engines on eastbound trains at Thistle for the ascent to Soldier Summit . The town provided a meal service for the trains until the use of on @-@ board dining cars eliminated the need for meal stops . 
 Thistle saw more rail traffic with the construction of the Marysvale branch line . This line branched from the main at Thistle , following modern US @-@ 89 towards mines near Marysvale . Another line through Thistle , paralleling the D & RGW main , was built by the Utah Railway . The two lines were later combined into a dual @-@ track main line , as part of a trackage rights agreement between the two companies . 
 Rail traffic through Thistle continued to increase as the Rio Grande cooperated with connecting railroads , making the rail line through Thistle a bridge line for transcontinental rail traffic . The growth of Thistle was closely tied to the success of the Denver and Rio Grande Railroad throughout the era of steam locomotives . 
 At its peak , around 1917 , Thistle had about 600 residents . The town 's railroad infrastructure included a five @-@ stall roundhouse , depot , machine shop , and structures to restock passing trains with sand , coal and water . Non @-@ railroad infrastructure included general stores , a post office , barber shop , saloon , pool hall , bakeries and restaurants . The largest building was a two @-@ story schoolhouse , built in 1911 . 
 In the 1950s , the Denver & Rio Grande Western began to phase out steam locomotives in favor of diesel locomotives , which require less maintenance . With the change in technology , Thistle faded in importance . Gradually the town shrank in population ; the passenger depot was torn down in 1972 and the post office closed in 1974 . By 1983 , only a few families remained in Thistle . 
 = = = Landslide = = = 
 Rio Grande maintenance personnel began noticing unstable ground downstream from Thistle years before the landslide occurred . Maintenance crews repaired the track on several occasions , but they did not fully investigate the problem . Beginning with the remnants of Hurricane Olivia , the autumn and winter of 1982 – 83 featured record @-@ breaking snow and rainfall . As the spring thaw melted the winter snow , the mountains in the area became saturated with water . 
 By April 1983 , track deformation was a serious issue . On April 13 , the division <unk> flew to Denver to explain the situation at a specially @-@ called staff meeting . On the same day , a Utah Highway Patrol officer struck a newly created buckle in the highway that threw him against the roof of his vehicle . By the end of the day , a full maintenance crew was struggling to keep US @-@ 6 open . All trains were limited to speeds less than 10 miles per hour ( 16 km / h ) , and were accompanied by maintenance personnel who had to continually work to keep the tracks in line . The last train to pass through downtown Thistle was the westbound Rio Grande Zephyr , on April 14 , 1983 at about 8 : 30 p.m. That night , both US @-@ 6 and the rail line were closed . One westbound freight train that had already left Denver was turned back . All through trains between Denver and Salt Lake City were rerouted to Union Pacific Railroad 's Overland Route through Wyoming . By April 16 , the tracks were completely buried and a voluntary evacuation order was issued for the town . 
 On April 17 , a final attempt to keep the landslide from blocking the flow of the river failed . That day , the Utah Department of Transportation and the Rio Grande announced plans to abandon the existing transportation arteries and build new corridors . Both the highway and railroad would be re @-@ routed by blasting a path scaling the north wall of Spanish Fork Canyon . The new arteries would pass the slide by dynamiting through Billies Mountain , also along the north canyon wall . Engineers estimated the dam created by the toe of the landslide would eventually reach between 200 feet ( 60 m ) and 300 feet ( 90 m ) tall . The evacuation order was changed from voluntary to mandatory . Volunteers transported as many people and belongings as possible to the small town of Birdseye , about 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) south . Most residents were able to recover only a fraction of their belongings ; some had less than two hours ' notice before the water reached their house . Thistle 's oldest resident celebrated her 90th birthday at the evacuation center in Birdseye . By the 18th , the waterline had reached the rooftops of the 22 previously occupied houses . By the 19th , an entire mountain was moving at about 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) per hour and US @-@ 6 was buried by 50 feet ( 15 m ) of soil . 
 Governor Scott Matheson requested federal aid to deal with the situation . After a visit to the area by the director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency , U.S. president Ronald Reagan issued the first presidential disaster area declaration for the state of Utah . The landslide eventually formed a dam that created a lake 3 miles ( 5 km ) long and over 200 feet ( 60 m ) deep . Concerned the dam could fail , the state of Utah decided to build a tunnel to re @-@ route the flow of the Spanish Fork River . The residents of downstream Spanish Fork were told to be prepared to evacuate . Engineers estimated that if the dam failed , they would have 30 to 45 minutes notice before the water reached the city . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Thistle was almost completely destroyed . Most wooden buildings were carried away in the floodwaters . The state installed a temporary pumping station to prevent the lake from overflowing the dam ; patrol boats skimmed up the floating remains of the town to prevent the debris from blocking the pumps . Most remains were either naturally deposited or placed on the eastern shore of the lake . 
 By autumn , the tunnels to restore the flow of the river and drain the lake were operational . Shortly after , debates between former residents , neighboring residents , and government agencies began on what to do with the dam created by the landslide ; some wanted to make the lake permanent . The state engineer commissioned a study to determine if the landslide dam could be used to retain water ; it recommended building a new dam upstream from the landslide , rather than attempting engineering work on the landslide dam . 
 In the years following , the former residents of Thistle filed various lawsuits to recover their losses . In one , they claimed that their property was taken to rebuild the road and railroad without just compensation . Another lawsuit claimed negligence on the part of the D & RGW . The residents argued that the railroad 's maintenance workers knew the ground was unstable ; however , they only repaired the track . The residents contended the slide could have been prevented by using a water drainage system to relieve pressure at the head of the unstable area . They further contended that such a system could have been put in place had the railroad thoroughly investigated the problem upon first noticing it . The engineering firm employed by the Rio Grande said that their studies indicated the crown of the landslide was about 300 feet ( 90 m ) above the level of the tracks , and that the Rio Grande did not know the true size of the unstable area until the slide was in motion . A jury absolved the D & RGW of responsibility . The plaintiffs appealed the decision , and a second trial in 1993 resulted in a $ 1 @.@ 1 million award for the landowners ( equivalent to $ 2 million in 2016 ) . The D & RGW filed suit against the Utah Railway over sharing the costs from the landslide . The Utah Railway had an ownership interest in the line , based on a track @-@ sharing agreement . 
 = = = = Economic effects = = = = 
 The landslide closed the main railroad for three months , and U.S. Route 6 and U.S. Route 89 for eight months , during which time the communities of eastern and southeastern Utah were cut off from the rest of the state . Security for the isolated part of Utah County was temporarily assigned to the Utah Highway Patrol . 
 The economic effects of the closure of these transportation arteries were felt throughout the western United States ; the closure devastated rural Utah . The operations of coal mines , uranium mines , turkey farms , animal feed companies , gypsum mines , and cement and clay factories were severely impacted . At least two trucking firms and one oil @-@ producing firm suspended or ceased operations . Southeastern Utah 's tourism industry suffered without access for visitors from the north and west . Some people who lived and worked on opposite sides of the landslide area suddenly had commutes exceeding 100 miles ( 160 km ) . The highway patrol temporarily closed a weigh station at Peerless ( a location along the US @-@ 6 corridor near Helper ) and built a temporary weigh station near Salina ( along I @-@ 70 about 90 miles ( 140 km ) south of Thistle ) , which saw a sudden increase in truck traffic . The highway patrol estimated the temporary facilities inspected 57 @,@ 000 trucks and made 80 arrests . 
 The direct cost of the landslide was estimated at $ 200 million ( equivalent to $ 475 million in 2016 ) . However , some estimates of the total cost reached as high as $ 400 million ( equivalent to $ 950 million in 2016 ) . The D & RGW estimated the slide cost them $ 80 million in lost revenue ( equivalent to $ 190 million in 2016 ) , averaging $ 1 million for each day that the tracks were out @-@ of @-@ service . This figure included $ 19 million in payments to the Union Pacific for the use of their lines . The United States Geological Survey and the state of Utah have called the Thistle landslide the most costly ever in the United States . 
 = = = = Railroad = = = = 
 To expedite construction , the railroad had crews in Utah focused on grading the new path and boring a 3 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 910 m ) tunnel , while crews in Colorado built track segments that were transported to site . On July 4 , 1983 , at 3 : 05 p.m. , safety inspectors declared the line ready for operation . At 3 : 12 p.m. , the centralized traffic control signals gave a green light to the first train to pass through the Thistle area since the slide began , an eastbound freight train coming from the Southern Pacific Railroad at Ogden , destined for Herington , Kansas . Although the line 's re @-@ opening on Independence Day was coincidental , the first train became part of the local holiday celebrations . The first passenger train to use the new alignment was the California Zephyr , on July 16 . 
 Debates ensued over the fate of the Marysvale branch line . The mines at the end of the line had long closed ; the last train to traverse the entire length of the line passed through in 1970 . Still , farmers and industry in the Sevier and Sanpete Valleys generated enough traffic that the line broke even most years . However , this line was severely damaged , with several washed @-@ out bridges and railroad tracks draping over the sides of newly created cliffs . The railroad determined that at best it would take years to recover the cost of rebuilding the line . 
 The residents of Richfield pressured the Rio Grande to use the portion of the line that was still intact and build a connection to an existing Union Pacific line near Nephi , roughly parallel to State Route 28 . However , the railroad determined that including land acquisition , the cost would be comparable to rebuilding the old route . In addition , the Rio Grande would have to pay trackage rights to the Union Pacific for the connection from Nephi , which would further erode profits on a line that was barely profitable . In the end , the Rio Grande sold the line to a scrap dealer who dismantled it . A 2002 study placed the cost of rebuilding the modified routing of the Marysvale branch line at $ 80 million ( equivalent to $ 105 million in 2016 ) . 
 = = = = Highways = = = = 
 The new alignment of US @-@ 6 was opened on December 30 , 1983 . The dedication was planned for the next day , but lines of cars formed at the barricades as soon as news broke that the highway was complete . Some were residents anxious to see the area or visit relatives they had not seen since the slide ; others were truck drivers frustrated by long detours . The Highway Patrol requested the ceremony be canceled and the highway opened early , as they were unable to disperse the crowds . 
 When the first traffic flowed , crews had not finished some final tasks , such as painting stripes . Motorists saw a relocation with several mountain cuts built high up the canyon wall , with a view of the slide and former lake . The roadbed was not expected to last , as weather conditions had been unfavorable when the asphalt was laid . Two mountain cuts were unstable , requiring several months of work before they could be left unattended . During this time , the state stationed two full @-@ time watches at the cuts , who would close the road while falling rocks were cleared . The cut through Billies Mountain was described by the construction crews as a new , man @-@ made mountain pass . 
 The pending completion of the again @-@ rebuilt US @-@ 6 , with properly laid asphalt and stable rock cuts , was announced in November 1984 , 18 months after the closure of the original alignment . Starting in 1993 , the Utah Department of Transportation began discussions with former Thistle residents to build a memorial to the town . The department maintains a view area overlooking the townsite along US @-@ 6 . 
 = = Geology and climate = = 
 The landslide area near Thistle is a <unk> formed in a depression in an area of bedrock known as the Charleston – Nebo thrust plate . The rock in this plate dates from the Permian and Pennsylvanian to the Jurassic periods , but the plate appears to have formed elsewhere and moved to the modern Thistle area during the Late Cretaceous epoch . The layers of sedimentary rock above the thrust plate are younger , dating to the Cretaceous and Tertiary periods . The rock debris in the landslide itself comes from the North Horn and <unk> formations . 
 The area around Thistle has always been prone to landslides . Pre @-@ historic landslides created the more gentle slopes that made the area usable as a transportation corridor across the Wasatch Mountains . Minor landslides have been frequently observed , and continue to occur . The largest recorded landslides are the 1983 slide which destroyed the town , and a smaller one in 1998 . 
 The climate at downstream Spanish Fork is classified as arid with four distinct seasons . Temperatures range from an average high of 92 ° F ( 33 ° C ) in July and an average low of 20 ° F ( − 7 ° C ) in January . Except for the spring months , precipitation averages less than 2 inches ( 5 @.@ 1 cm ) per month . 
 = The Cham @-@ Cham = 
 " The Cham @-@ Cham " is the 25th episode of Thunderbirds , a British 1960s Supermarionation television series co @-@ created by Gerry and Sylvia Anderson . The penultimate instalment of series one , it first aired on 24 March 1966 on ATV Midlands . Alan Pattillo both wrote and directed the episode , which opens with a United States Air Force ( USAF ) aircraft being shot down during the radio transmission of a popular instrumental music track . International Rescue suspects sabotage , and Lady Penelope , Tin @-@ Tin and Parker are dispatched to investigate the band 's current tour venue — a hotel in the Swiss Alps . There , it is discovered that the attacks are being co @-@ ordinated with the aid of a " Cham @-@ Cham " , an advanced computer sensitive to microtones and ultrasonic harmonics . 
 Filmed in late 1965 , " The Cham @-@ Cham " inspired innovation in AP Films ' use of puppet characters ; towards the end of the episode , the Penelope character performs a carefully choreographed cabaret dance , despite of the difficulties inherent in producing movement from the marionettes . Additionally , the episode marks the first occasion in any Supermarionation series that characters are seen skiing . Scripted to incorporate themes of espionage and show business , the filming of " The Cham @-@ Cham " entailed the collaboration of singer Ken Barrie , who wrote the lyrics to series composer Barry Gray 's Latin rhythm " Dangerous Game " . 
 The episode has attracted positive critical reception , with the production design and the soundtrack singled out for particular praise . Sylvia Anderson values " The Cham @-@ Cham " for its " charm " , as well as its visualisation of the Paradise Peaks resort , but considers the plot " far @-@ fetched " ; Stephen La Rivière compliments the episode for its technical accomplishments , in addition to its writing . Cultural historian Nicholas J. Cull comments on the undertones of some of the episode 's characterisations in the context of the Cold War . " The Cham @-@ Cham " was adapted for audio in the 1960s . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A succession of RTL2 cargo aircraft running missile shipments have been shot down by enemy fighters shortly after take @-@ off from Matthews Field USAF Base . On Tracy Island , Alan ( voiced by Matt Zimmerman ) points out that all the attacks have coincided with a live performance of " Dangerous Game " from the hit band Cass Carnaby Five , broadcast on Radio Maxwell ; with Brains ( David Graham ) , he examines a recording of the latest transmission to determine whether the tune contains a hidden code inserted to disrupt the RTL2 flights . 
 Meanwhile , Jeff ( Peter Dyneley ) dispatches Tin @-@ Tin ( Christine Finn ) and Lady Penelope ( Sylvia Anderson ) — the latter posing as a singer , " Wanda Lamour " — undercover to Paradise Peaks , a deluxe Swiss Alps hotel that is currently playing host to Carnaby and his group . Parker ( Graham ) secures a job at the bar . Carnaby 's manager is the mysterious Mr Olsen , who regularly makes last @-@ minute changes to the arrangement of " Dangerous Game " before the band perform on @-@ air . Ski @-@ ing down the mountain to Olsen 's private lodge , Penelope and Tin @-@ Tin film him working at an unidentified computer , which is decrypting musical notation into a typed message revealing the date and time of the next RTL2 flight . 
 Realising that he has had uninvited guests , Olsen contacts his associate — Banino , a waiter — with orders to dispose of the International Rescue agents . Parker overhears the telephone conversation and thwarts Banino 's attempt to assassinate Penelope and Tin @-@ Tin using a sniper rifle , tumbling down the mountainside with his adversary ( and forming a giant snowball in the process ) until Banino is knocked unconscious . On Tracy Island , Brains identifies the device in Penelope and Tin @-@ Tin 's film as an <unk> @-@ sensitive supercomputer known as a " Cham @-@ Cham " . Jeff contacts Washington , D.C. to report IR 's findings , but the Matthews Field Commander refuses to postpone the upcoming missile run . 
 That evening , the Cass Carnaby Five start to perform Olsen 's latest arrangement of " Dangerous Game " . It seems that the next flight of the RTL2 is doomed until Penelope , in the guise of Wanda Lamour , steps out onto the stage to sing a lyrical version of Brains ' own composition . Accepting without question the new coordinates encoded in Radio Maxwell 's transmission , the airbase that launched the previous attacks misdirects its own fighters , which quickly find themselves in the airspace above Matthews Field . Landing at the scene in Thunderbird 1 , Scott ( Shane Rimmer ) alerts the Commander and USAF interceptors are scrambled to shoot down the enemy . 
 Fearing Olsen 's next move , Jeff dispatches Virgil ( David Holliday ) and Alan to fly Tin @-@ Tin , Penelope and Parker back from the Alps in Thunderbird 2 . The IR agents depart from Paradise Peaks in the hotel 's cable car , only to find themselves speeding uncontrollably down the mountainside when Olsen sabotages the terminus . With Thunderbird 2 's electromagnetic grabs unable to connect with the car chassis , Parker climbs onto the roof to hook the wires with the end of Penelope 's umbrella and attach them himself . When the braking force of Virgil and Alan 's retro @-@ rockets throws the butler into the air , he uses the umbrella to parachute back down . All are treated to a private piano recital of " Dangerous Game " from Cass before leaving Paradise Peaks . 
 = = Production = = 
 The penultimate episode to be filmed for series one , " The Cham @-@ Cham " was written by Alan Pattillo , who attempted to imitate classic Hollywood musicals with his script 's show business plot and the exotic setting of the Paradise Peaks resort . As an in @-@ joke , Pattillo named Penelope 's alias , Wanda Lamour , after one of the Thunderbirds puppet operators , Wanda Brown . Production was completed in November and December 1965 . 
 Since convincing walking movements had always been difficult to accomplish with the unevenly weighted Supermarionation puppets , the common practice at AP Films Studios was to allow walking to be implied , rather than seen , by having the hand of a puppeteer move a marionette 's legs using a " bobbing motion " . The scene in which Lady Penelope sings Brains ' lyrical version of " Dangerous Game " required the puppet to waltz through the Paradise Peaks ballroom set , necessitating that Brown move the character 's legs out of shot while fellow operator Christine Glanville controlled the upper body from the overhead gantry . 
 Gerry Anderson remembered that AP Films had never attempted to film ski @-@ ing sequences previously , but judged the scenes of Penelope and Tin @-@ Tin travelling to Olsen 's lodge to be suitably realistic . Anderson himself conceived the " ski thrusters " that the agents use to power their ascent up the mountainside while returning to Paradise Peaks . Praising production designer Bob Bell 's visuals , he opined that the episode " gave our art and design departments a chance to show what they could really do , and they didn 't let us down . " 
 Series composer Barry Gray devised a Latin rhythm track for the centrepiece of the episode 's soundtrack : " Dangerous Game " . Although singer Ken Barrie was commissioned to sing the lyrics to the tune , the production staff ultimately substituted Gray 's alternative instrumental version whenever the Cass Carnaby Five are seen to be playing . For the scene featuring Penelope 's rendition , Sylvia Anderson based her singing voice on that of Marlene Dietrich . An incidental music track composed for the Supercar episode " Amazonian Adventure " , titled " Happy Flying " , accompanies the shots of Penelope and Tin @-@ Tin ski @-@ ing to Olsen 's lodge . 
 As with " Attack of the Alligators ! " , the episode that had been filmed immediately prior , the technical complexity of " The Cham @-@ Cham " resulting in the production finishing nearly a week past the deadline and considerably overspending its budget . To compensate for wasted time and costs , the Thunderbirds scriptwriters re @-@ wrote the series one finale as a clip show , " Security Hazard " , which would make extensive use of flashback footage to limit the requirement for new scenes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Sylvia Anderson considers " The Cham @-@ Cham " to be one of the best episodes of Thunderbirds , and a rival to " Attack of the Alligators ! " in terms of quality . On her website , she comments : " Even though the plot is far @-@ fetched , it has charm and , because of the lovely Swiss mountain setting , has credibility . " Simon Archer and Marcus Hearn , writers of What Made Thunderbirds Go ! The Authorised Biography of Gerry Anderson , describe " The Cham @-@ Cham " as " perhaps the most lavish @-@ looking episode of the series " , citing Lady Penelope 's deep @-@ cover cabaret performance and the skiing sequences as examples of the instalment 's " unforgettable images " . Tom Fox of Starburst magazine is broadly complimentary , awarding the episode a score of 4 out of 5 . He comments positively on the production design and the Thunderbird 2 rescue , both of which – in his view – help to " make up " for the plot , which is judged to be " tenuous at best " . While expressing puzzlement at Brains and Penelope 's tactics for the diversion of the enemy fighters , like Archer and Hearn he praises the entertainment value of Parker 's unusual descent by umbrella . 
 Fox 's reception to " Dangerous Game " is similarly positive . Reviewing the CD release of the original Thunderbirds soundtrack , Morag Reavley of BBC Online describes Anderson 's rendition as " slinky , sexy and slightly off @-@ key , like a hung @-@ over Zsa Zsa Gabor " . For Heather Phares of Allmusic , the tune is a highlight of the album : while the " Latin Rhythm Instrumental " " [ reflects ] the ' 60s ' ongoing fascination with exotica and Latin pop " , the lyrical version " could be a kissing cousin to seductive spy themes like ' Goldfinger ' . " Stephen La Rivière , writer of Filmed in Supermarionation : A History of the Future , praises the technical proficiency of the production staff , characterising the skiing and dancing scenes as " [ flying ] in the face of what puppets can and can 't do . " He sums up the episode as " a glorious example of Thunderbirds at its best , combining all the elements that made the show so popular : the characters , the adventure , the rescues and , of course , the humour . " Expanding on his last point , La Rivière emphasises the family appeal of the episode 's comedy , arguing that the subtlety of Parker 's occasional double entendres is counter @-@ acted by his slapstick moments , such as the innovative use of Penelope 's umbrella ( described as " doing a ' Mary Poppins ' " ) . 
 Historian Nicholas J. Cull interprets " The Cham @-@ Cham " as a product of its Cold War context , noting the " Central / Eastern European accents " of the hostile airbase personnel . The episode achieved ratings of 2 @.@ 82 million viewers when it was repeated on BBC2 in 1992 . 
 = = Adaptation = = 
 An audio adaptation of " The Cham @-@ Cham " , narrated by voice actor David Graham in character as Parker , is included on the 1960s Century 21 mini @-@ LP Lady Penelope . 
 = XCOM : Enemy Unknown = 
 XCOM : Enemy Unknown is a turn @-@ based tactical video game developed by Firaxis Games and published by 2K Games . The game is a " reimagined " remake of the 1994 cult classic strategy game UFO : Enemy Unknown ( also known as X @-@ COM : UFO Defense ) and a reboot of MicroProse 's 1990s X @-@ COM series . 
 XCOM : Enemy Unknown was released in North America , Europe , and Australia for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 , and Xbox 360 in October 2012 . An " Elite Edition " , containing all previously released downloadable content , was released as a Mac OS X exclusive by Feral Interactive in April 2013 . In June 2014 , Feral released both XCOM : Enemy Unknown and its expansion pack XCOM : Enemy Within for Linux . A port for iOS was released in June 2013 and an Android conversion was released in May 2014 . An expansion pack , titled XCOM : Enemy Within , was released in November 2013 . A bundle containing both Enemy Unknown and Enemy Within was launched on the PlayStation Store for PlayStation Vita in March 2016 under the title XCOM : Enemy Unknown Plus . 
 Set in the near future during an alien invasion of Earth , the game puts the player in control of an elite multinational paramilitary organization called XCOM and is tasked with defending the Earth . The player commands troops in the field in a series of turn @-@ based tactical missions ; between missions , the player directs the research and development of new technologies from recovered alien technology and captured prisoners , expands XCOM 's base of operations , manages XCOM 's finances , and monitors and responds to alien activity . 
 XCOM : Enemy Unknown was critically acclaimed , with several reviewers commenting on the game 's difficulty , replayability , and addictiveness . A number of publications , including GameSpy , GameTrailers and Giant Bomb , named it Game of the Year . A sequel to the game , titled XCOM 2 , was released on February 5 , 2016 for Microsoft Windows , OS X , and Linux . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The game 's campaign begins in the spring of 2015 , as a global alien invasion begins . Prior to the start of the game , a group of countries called the Council of Nations has banded together to create XCOM ( short for Extraterrestrial Combat Unit ) , the most elite military and scientific organization in human history , tasked with defending them from the alien attack . The player assumes the role of the commander of XCOM , and proceeds to engage in a war against an extraterrestrial enemy with overwhelming technological superiority . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 After success with shooting down alien scout ships and securing the crash sites from surviving alien crews , as well as interdicting alien attempts to abduct human civilians for unknown purposes , XCOM manages to also obtain the corpses of various different alien troops . Autopsies reveal that all these types have been genetically and / or cybernetically altered , which seems to indicate they are merely foot @-@ soldiers for unseen leaders . XCOM 's head of research , Dr. Vahlen , requests that a live alien be captured for interrogation . This also involves developing a specialized weapon capable of capturing a live alien , and constructing a facility in XCOM 's subterranean base capable of safely holding a live alien prisoner . 
 Capturing one of the alien troops and conducting the interrogation reveals vague information about another type of alien called the Outsiders , artificially @-@ created crystalline beings encountered aboard UFOs , that appear to serve as pilots and navigators . Dr. Vahlen then requests that XCOM capture an Outsider for study . Upon capturing one of these , the examination reveals that the Outsiders ' exotic crystalline structures behave in a manner similar to antennas , receiving a signal broadcast from a location buried underground on Earth . XCOM dispatches a team to investigate the signal ; it is found to be coming from a base that the aliens have secretly established on Earth , where experiments are performed on abducted humans . 
 XCOM develops a method for gaining entry to the alien base and assaults it . During the mission , the alien serving as the base commander is discovered to have psychic abilities , but is nevertheless defeated by the soldiers . The commander 's psychic communication device is recovered and reverse engineered . Tapping into the aliens ' communications reveals a previously hidden , stealth " Overseer " UFO making rounds across the Earth . When the UFO is shot down , it is found to hold an alien species that had not been previously encountered , as well as a strange psionic artifact . The newly discovered species , called Ethereals , possess powerful psionic abilities . 
 Once the Overseer ship is shot down and the psionic artifact recovered , the massive enemy " Temple Ship " reveals itself in low Earth orbit and attacks the Earth , causing earthquakes even as far away as XCOM HQ . The reverse @-@ engineering efforts enable XCOM to unlock and develop latent psionic powers that are present in certain human beings , thus enhancing their human soldiers . Out of these psychic human soldiers , the most powerful becomes the Volunteer , using the psionic artifact recovered from the Overseer UFO to tap into the aliens ' psychic communication " hive " , an experience that also increases his or her psionic strength . This allows them to attack and board the Temple Ship to seek out the Uber Ethereal , the leader of the alien invasion . 
 During the final battle aboard the ship , the Uber Ethereal reveals that , because of their own failure to improve their own race further , they have been testing and experimenting on other species throughout the universe in an attempt to identify a race worthy of being " <unk> " , searching for a race that is strong in both mind and body ; the various species of alien troops that the player has encountered have all been failures in the Ethereals ' experiments . By allowing humans to obtain their technology a few steps at a time , the Ethereals allowed humans to evolve to a fuller potential , and believe that humanity may be the culmination of their search , to find the perfect species to move on and prepare for " what lies ahead " , a vaguely worded destiny that they do not describe further . 
 After slaying the Uber Ethereal , the Temple Ship begins to collapse into a black hole , which would destroy the Earth due to its close proximity . While the <unk> gifted Volunteer urges the other XCOM soldiers to rush back to their transport and escape the doomed ship , the Volunteer stays behind , using the psychic gift to take control of the ship and fly it further away from the planet , finally causing it to self @-@ destruct and save Earth , though at cost of [ what was thought to be ] the Volunteer 's own life . In 2014 , Jake Solomon , lead designer of XCOM , revealed that the Volunteer in fact did not die , and instead disappeared before the temple ship explodes . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Much like its predecessor , XCOM : Enemy Unknown casts the player as the commander of an elite military organization . As commander , the player directs their soldiers in turn @-@ based combat missions against alien enemies . Between missions , the player directs the organization 's research and engineering divisions in creating new technologies and improving XCOM 's base of operations , and manages the organization 's finances . 
 The turn @-@ based ground combat uses a top @-@ down 3D perspective . The player controls a squad of between one and six human soldiers or robotic units as they hunt the aliens on the map and attempt to complete other objectives dependent on the mission . Map layouts are not randomly generated , but enemy placement is . Fog of war hides the aliens and their actions from view until the player 's soldiers are in range and have line of sight on them , and enemies normally do not act at all until the squad initially comes within line of sight . Soldiers can carry items and perform special abilities ; use of these items and abilities is controlled through a toolbar on the head @-@ up display ( HUD ) . A few examples of abilities include firing on enemies automatically after they emerge , launching explosives , and healing allies . 
 Soldiers can take cover behind walls and objects in the environment to gain a measure of protection . Units can use suppressive fire to disadvantage enemies , and use active camouflage to maneuver around opponents . Cutscenes and dynamic camera movements emphasise particularly exciting gameplay moments , such as kill sequences and use of special abilities . The game includes some tactical role @-@ playing elements , whereby the player 's soldiers can gain new abilities as they survive more battles . 
 The game 's strategy element occurs between missions . XCOM 's underground headquarters is presented in a view dubbed the " ant farm " . From this view , the player manages construction , manufacturing and research projects underway , and directs how the scientists and engineers use resources recovered from missions and received from XCOM 's sponsors . A holographic view of the Earth called the " <unk> " allows the player to keep track of the situation around the world , ordering aircraft to intercept UFOs and dispatching soldiers to engage aliens on the ground . 
 This also influences the panic level of XCOM 's member nations . Responding to situations in certain areas decreases panic , and ignoring them results in a rise in panic and potential for the nation to pull out of XCOM . The " ant farm " also allows the player to observe the team of soldiers relaxing or exercising at the base 's gym . A memorial wall to soldiers killed in action is also viewable . Passive bonuses are provided depending on which continent the player chooses for a base location . The player can better detect alien activity by launching satellites and positioning them over territories of interest . 
 The game can be played on higher difficulty levels : Classic ( in a reference to the original game ) and Impossible , each with the option to enable the " Ironman " option ( which limits players to a single save file ) separately for each . Jake Solomon , lead developer , stated on numerous occasions that he believes that the " truest XCOM experience " is playing without the ability to reload saved games . On the higher difficulty levels , the random nature of battles , where soldiers under the player 's command can permanently die from one enemy attack , the against @-@ all @-@ odds nature of combat against the unknown and technologically superior enemy , and the requirement to sacrifice some resources – including soldiers and even entire countries – for the greater good combine to create a bleak atmosphere where the player feels the weight of command . 
 The game also features a multiplayer mode for one @-@ on @-@ one tactical battles . Players spend a predefined points budget on assembling a squad of up to six humans , aliens , or a mixture of both . Human units are customizable in terms of weaponry , armor and gadgets . A simplified version of the single @-@ player perk system is also present . Alien units may not be customized but possess the abilities of corresponding aliens types in the single @-@ player mode of the game . 
 <unk> combat from the original 1994 game is retained , but some gameplay features of the original have been removed or adapted . The time units system , the always @-@ visible grid map and the inventory system of the original have been removed . The initial mission phase of disembarking from the transport has also been removed – missions now begin with troops deployed outside the craft . Unlike in the 1994 game , only one XCOM base exists , the location of which is chosen at the beginning of the game . 
 Although there are some differences in the interface between platforms , unlike other games such as Firaxis ' Civilization Revolution , the content is not simplified for the console versions . The PC version features a mouse @-@ driven UI and " the ability for <unk> " . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game went into development in early 2008 as a " very , very big budget " project with about 50 – 60 team members led by Jake Solomon . Its prototype was a straightforward remake of the original 1994 game UFO : Enemy Unknown with all the classic gameplay features . The game subsequently went through many revisions , and features were added , tested or removed to create the final result . 
 XCOM : Enemy Unknown was developed independently of 2K Marin 's XCOM ( later rebranded as The Bureau : XCOM Declassified ) , and although the two games are set in entirely different universes , the developers of both games were in contact with one another , As in the expansion Enemy Within , after researching Meld it says Dr. Vahlen discovered some records from the 60s which shows that maybe they were in the same universe . Enemy Unknown was also the first title developed by Firaxis Games not to feature the name of Sid Meier , who served as the director of creative development but was not directly involved in the game 's development day to day . The designers also made an internal board game to help get the " feel " of the game right . 
 The interface team was split into halves to develop separate GUIs for the PC and console releases . All members of the development team played and finished the original Enemy Unknown game – they were required to do so if they had not already when they joined the team . Roland Rizzo , who has been working with the X @-@ COM series since the beginning , became the audio lead for the game and was tasked with reimagining and updating John Broomhall 's famous original music score . Michael McCann , composer for Deus Ex : Human Revolution , was also involved in creating the game 's musical score . The Civilization series ' art director Greg Foertsch was given the task of reimagining the look of X @-@ COM , including redesigning the classic alien species . The aim was to have the characters resemble action figures , and the result was a stylized , bright , flat @-@ textured look . 
 = = Release = = 
 XCOM : Enemy Unknown was first revealed on January 5 , 2012 by Game Informer . A playable demo of the game was available at Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) in June 2012 . Pre @-@ order bonuses included the " Classic X @-@ COM Soldier " ( a haircut for the player 's male soldier based on the model for troops in the original 1994 X @-@ COM ) and the option to customize the aesthetic design of soldiers ' armor . Those pre @-@ ordering the PC version on Steam also received bonus items for Valve 's Team Fortress 2 and a free copy of Firaxis ' 2010 strategy game Civilization V. The game 's playable demo version was released on September 24 , 2012 for Steam , on October 9 for the Xbox Live ( available for the Gold subscribers of the Xbox Marketplace ) and on October 10 for the PlayStation Network . 
 Eight custom promotional XCOM : Enemy Unknown arcade cabinets were produced in August 2011 by 2K Games and Bespoke Arcades . The machines were used to run tournaments of the game at various exhibitions including <unk> , London MCM Expo , Play Expo and Eurogamer Expo with the machines being awarded as prizes . 
 XCOM : Enemy Unknown was released in stores on October 9 , 2012 for North American consumers and on October 12 , 2012 for Australian and European consumers . The game was released for digital distribution via Steam on October 9 , 2012 . On PC , two editions were released : a normal edition and a special edition which includes a variety of unique items , including an art book , a fold @-@ out poster of the XCOM headquarters , an XCOM insignia patch , and a collection of digital bonus assets such as desktop wallpapers , soundtrack and more . 
 An " Elite Edition " , containing all previously released DLC , was announced as a Mac OS X exclusive by Feral Interactive on February 26 , 2013 and was released on April 25 , 2013 . An iOS port , scheduled to be released in the summer of 2013 , was announced during a PAX East panel on March 23 , 2013 . The game was released on June 20 , 2013 at the App Store for $ 19 @.@ 99 , at the time one of the most expensive iOS games ever released . 
 The game was available digitally between June 16 and June 30 , 2016 on the Xbox 360 as part of Xbox Live 's Games with Gold . 
 = = XCOM : Enemy Within = = 
 An expansion pack , XCOM : Enemy Within was announced to be released on November 15 , 2013 . Like the numerous expansions of the Civilization series the pack retains the core storyline but adds a broad variety of content , including new weapons , special missions and the ability to enhance soldiers via genetic engineering or cybernetic implants . Both options consume an elusive substance called " Meld " that can be obtained during battles . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 XCOM : Enemy Unknown greatly impressed the public and media at E3 2012 , where it won a number of awards from a variety of gaming publications , such as the title of " Best Strategy Game " from GameSpy , Game Informer , IGN , and Machinima . The game also won the titles " Best PC Game " and " Best Strategy Game " in the 2012 E3 Game Critics Awards . 
 A pre @-@ release version of XCOM : Enemy Unknown received highly positive previews by , among others , PlayStation Official Magazine , Official Xbox Magazine and Rock , Paper , Shotgun . The full version of the game also received a high praise from critics . Adam Biessener of Game Informer called it " a singular achievement that every gamer deserves to experience . " Ian Dransfield of PLAY called the game " a phenomenal reimagining of a classic title and an instant classic in its own right . " It was also described as " a hallmark of excellence " by Destructoid and " an exemplary turn @-@ based strategy game " by Joystiq . 
 Dan Stapleton of GameSpy wrote : " I consider the 1994 turn @-@ based tactical masterpiece X @-@ COM : UFO Defense to be the single best videogame ever made . Compared directly to that impossibly high standard , Firaxis ' 2012 remake , XCOM : Enemy Unknown , does remarkably well . " GamesTM called it " a worthy reboot of the franchise , easily the most addictive game this year , and one of our favourite Firaxis games ever , " with the final verdict of it being " fresh , yet authentic – a stunning reboot . " Josh Harmon of Electronic Gaming Monthly ( EGM ) stated that " to say that XCOM : Enemy Unknown is a phenomenal remake would be selling Firaxis ’ monumental accomplishment short . The developer hasn ’ t just managed to capture the spirit of the original ; they ’ ve also tweaked , trimmed , and innovated enough to deliver the freshest , most engaging strategy game in recent memory , if not ever . " 
 Eurogamer 's review by Rich Stanton described XCOM : Enemy Unknown as " a winner " and " a fantastic game " that " brings back and <unk> a classic . " Alex Rubens of G4 called it " an exceptionally solid return for the series , and one that every turn @-@ based tactics fan should experience , " adding that " even if you never played the original , XCOM : Enemy Unknown is turn @-@ based tactics and management at its finest , and a perfect introduction to the genre . " 
 David Houghton of Game Revolution said that despite its flaws , the game " feels like the revival of not just a brand , but a genre . " Polygon 's Russ Pitts criticized the " weird dichotomy " of the game 's strategy component , but praised the tactical gameplay , calling it " one of the best and most artfully designed strategy games in recent memory . " Edwin Evans @-@ Thirlwell of Official Xbox Magazine stated that it " isn 't just Xbox 360 's finest strategy experience – it 's also a strategy game which changes how you think about strategy games . " 
 The game 's difficulty received both praise and concern . G4 's review noted that " the extreme difficulty of the game might not be welcomed by all players " and Official Xbox Magazine described the game as " reliably unforgiving " . According to EGM , " XCOM hates you . XCOM wants you dead . And XCOM will see you dead , over and over again . " Game Informer called it " one of the most challenging , intense gaming experiences of this generation . " PLAY 's review stated , " dying is back in fashion . " 
 Several reviews also commented on how addictive the game can be for the player . David Houghton of PlayStation Official Magazine called XCOM " one of the most unique and endlessly compulsive games of the year so far . " Erik Kain of Forbes called it " one of the most addictive games I ’ ve ever played " that " falls somewhere between chocolate and crack on the scale of addictive substances . " Allistair Pinsof of Destructoid , in pointing out how easily one could be absorbed in the game , told readers to " take the act of me wiping XCOM from my hard drive as high praise . It speaks volumes on how addictive and replayable XCOM is . " 
 In a retrospective article about the original from 1994 , Alec Meer of Eurogamer compared both games , coming to conclusion that " X @-@ COM and XCOM are completely different games , both ingenious and both flawed in their own ways . " According to Chris Schilling of VideoGamer.com , " Enemy Unknown is respectful of Julian Gollop 's 1994 turn @-@ based strategy classic , but it 's not reverential . " Charlie Hall of Ars Technica wrote that " in the end , this is not the X @-@ Com that everyone was expecting . It ’ s more . It ’ s better . If you ’ re merely looking for a highly competent re @-@ skin of the original X @-@ Com , keep your eyes peeled for the upcoming <unk> . " Gollop himself said : 
 " I think Firaxis did a terrific job with the new XCOM . They have made a very console friendly and accessible game , but it still has a lot of strategic and tactical depth . The character progression is done very well , and the tactical combat system is great . I would have done things differently for sure . I was a bit disappointed that the <unk> is basically irrelevant , with no strategy involved about positioning of bases , detection ranges , base attacks and so on . It is also a shame that there is no random map generation . The development of the alien menace seems to be driven by specific events , such as the first alien base assault , rather than the aliens own development agenda as in the original X @-@ Com . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Multiple publications including Giant Bomb , Kotaku , MTV and GameTrailers gave XCOM : Enemy Unknown their overall Game of the Year award for 2012 . GameSpy also gave XCOM its Game of the Year award ( " Achievements : Game of the Year , High Tension , Making Turn @-@ Based Cool Again " ) , commenting that " few games can deliver the thrill of victory and the agony of defeat in the way that XCOM does . " 
 XCOM : Enemy Unknown was chosen by the 2012 Spike TV Video Game Awards as a nominee in the category Best PC Game . At the 16th Annual D.I.C.E. Awards , it was nominated for three awards , including Game of the Year , and ended up winning two for 2012 's Strategy / Simulation Game of the Year and Outstanding Achievement in Gameplay Engineering . Awarding the game its title of Strategy Game of the Year , PC Gamer wrote it can be " forging player memories that ’ ll live as long as you play and care about games . " 
 = = Sequel = = 
 A sequel to XCOM : Enemy Unknown , XCOM 2 , was released on February 5 , 2016 . It was developed by Firaxis Games and was released on Microsoft Windows , OS X and Linux . At release it was a PC only game . The game takes place 20 years after the events of Enemy Unknown , with the aliens having taken over the human race . It is implied that the events of XCOM : Enemy Unknown were mostly tactical simulations being run inside the Commander 's brain after his capture by the aliens following a very early defeat of the XCOM Project . The player controls a small resistance movement fighting against the alien conquerors . 
 = Wah @-@ Wah ( song ) = 
 " Wah @-@ Wah " is a song by English musician George Harrison , released on his 1970 triple album All Things Must Pass . Harrison wrote the song following his temporary departure from the Beatles in January 1969 , during the troubled Get Back sessions that resulted in their Let It Be album and film . The lyrics reflect his frustration with the atmosphere in the group at that time – namely , Paul McCartney 's over @-@ assertiveness and criticism of his guitar playing , John Lennon 's lack of engagement with the project and dismissal of Harrison as a songwriter , and Yoko Ono 's constant involvement in the band 's activities . Music critics and biographers recognise the song as Harrison 's statement of personal and artistic freedom from the Beatles . Its creation contrasted sharply with his rewarding collaborations outside the group in the months before the Get Back project , particularly with Bob Dylan and the Band in upstate New York . 
 Recorded shortly after the Beatles ' break @-@ up in 1970 , " Wah @-@ Wah " was the first track taped for All Things Must Pass . The recording features a dense production treatment from Phil Spector and backing from a large cast of musicians including Eric Clapton , Ringo Starr , Billy Preston , Bobby Keys and the band Badfinger . On release , Rolling Stone magazine described it as " a grand cacophony of sound in which horns sound like guitars and vice versa " . While several reviewers find the heavy production appropriate for the song , Harrison considered the recording overproduced and the sound too cluttered . 
 " Wah @-@ Wah " was the first song Harrison played live as a solo artist when he performed it as his opener for the Western @-@ music portion of the Concert for Bangladesh , in August 1971 . Viewed by some commentators as superior to the studio recording , this version re @-@ created Spector 's Wall of Sound treatment in a live setting , using many of the participants from the 1970 album sessions . At the Concert for George in November 2002 , a year after Harrison 's death , " Wah @-@ Wah " was performed by an all @-@ star band that included Clapton , Jeff Lynne , Starr and McCartney . Ocean Colour Scene , Buffalo Tom , Beck and the Tedeschi Trucks Band are among the other artists who have covered the song . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = October – December 1968 US visit = = = 
 When discussing the song " Wah @-@ Wah " and George Harrison 's temporary departure from the Beatles in January 1969 , several commentators note the importance of his recent two @-@ month visit to America , which followed the completion of the band 's 1968 double album The Beatles , commonly known as the White Album . In Los Angeles , where he was producing a Jackie Lomax solo album for the Beatles ' Apple record label , Harrison directed top session players such as Hal Blaine and Larry Knechtel , and met two American musicians with whom he would soon collaborate in London , Delaney Bramlett and Leon Russell . Later in the US trip , Harrison stayed in upstate New York , where he established a musical bond with Bob Dylan and thrived among what author Simon Leng calls the " group ethic and camaraderie " of the Band . Throughout this period , Harrison continued to bloom as a songwriter , having contributed four songs to The Beatles that , in the words of author Nicholas Schaffner , " firmly established him as a contender " beside bandmates John Lennon and Paul McCartney . In addition , he had recently co @-@ written Cream 's single " Badge " with Eric Clapton , as well as collaborating with Dylan in Bearsville . 
 = = = January 1969 at Twickenham Film Studios = = = 
 Harrison later recalled his two months in the United States as having been " such a good time " , yet " the moment I got back with the Beatles [ for their Get Back film project ] , it was just too difficult " . These difficulties included having to endure McCartney 's habit of dictating how the others should play their instruments and Lennon 's increasing withdrawal from the band and emotional dependence on his ever @-@ present partner , Yoko Ono . The couple had recently descended into heroin addiction , leaving Lennon , in author Peter Doggett 's words , " emotionally removed and artistically bankrupt " . In their study of the Get Back project , Doug Sulpy and Ray Schweighardt write that , as another frustration for Harrison , Lennon and McCartney regularly overlooked his compositions , even when they were " far better than their own " . 
 On 6 January 1969 , the band 's third day at Twickenham Film Studios , in south @-@ west London , an argument was captured on film where McCartney criticised Harrison 's guitar playing on the song " Two of Us " . A resigned Harrison told him : " I 'll play what you want me to play , or I won 't play at all if you don 't want me to play . " With the sessions being recorded by film director Michael Lindsay @-@ Hogg , tapes reveal Beatles associates Neil Aspinall and George Martin sympathising with Harrison 's position , recognising that McCartney and Lennon " don 't offer him enough freedom within their compositions " . Ringo Starr , who had quit the band briefly during the White Album sessions , partly as a result of McCartney 's hectoring of his drumming , recalled of Harrison 's refusal to be " dominated " by McCartney any longer : " Paul [ typically ] wanted to point out the solo to George , who would say , ' Look , I 'm a guitarist . I 'll play the solo . ' And he always did , he always played fine solos . " 
 Over the first three days at Twickenham , Harrison had presented new compositions such as " All Things Must Pass " , " Let It Down " and " Hear Me Lord " for consideration ; these and other " numerous beautiful songs " , music journalist Martin O 'Gorman writes , " received derision and disinterest from Lennon or heavy @-@ handed interference from McCartney " . On 8 January , Harrison debuted " I Me Mine " , a song inspired by the bickering and negativity within the band . It was met with ridicule by Lennon and an argument ensued between the two musicians , during which Lennon dismissed Harrison 's abilities as a songwriter . According to Sulpy and Schweighardt , Lennon 's resentment was most likely a reaction to Harrison 's productivity throughout the sessions , since he himself was " unable to write a decent new song " . In addition , Harrison had been alone in voicing his objections to Ono 's presence , telling the couple how , in Lennon 's later recollection , " Dylan and a few people said she 's got a lousy name in New York " . 
 On Friday , 10 January , a more severe argument took place in which Harrison berated Lennon for contributing nothing positive to the rehearsals . During the lunch break , Harrison walked out of the Beatles , saying that the others should advertise in the NME for his replacement . He then drove to his home , Kinfauns , in Surrey , and wrote " Wah @-@ Wah " that same afternoon . Despite the animosity between himself and Lennon on the day he quit the group , Harrison later confirmed a suggestion made by music journalist Timothy White that , just like Lennon 's " How Do You Sleep ? " and " Crippled Inside " , the song was a " swipe " at McCartney . 
 = = = Harrison 's return to the Beatles = = = 
 Harrison 's diary records that Lennon and Ono " diverted " him at home over breakfast the following morning , but even after a subsequent band meeting at Starr 's house , author Barry Miles writes , their " feud " remained " intractable " . At the meeting , much to Harrison 's annoyance , Lennon once more chose to have Ono speak on his behalf . Harrison then went to his parents ' home in Warrington for a few days before imposing terms for his return to the band – namely , that McCartney 's plans for a live concert be abandoned and the project be relocated to the Beatles ' own Apple Studio , at London 's Savile Row . Commentators have remarked on a change in Harrison 's standing within the band as a result of his walkout , and later in 1969 , Lennon and McCartney would be speaking admiringly of Harrison 's growth as a songwriter . In an article for Mojo magazine 's July 2001 " Solo Beatles Special " , John Harris wrote that although Harrison " nominally " remained a Beatle , he was " serving out his notice " after 10 January 1969 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 In his autobiography , I , Me , Mine , Harrison explains that the song title was a reference to " a ' headache ' as well as a <unk> " , the wah @-@ wah pedal being a guitar effect that he favoured for much of the early Get Back sessions . The message of the song , according to Harrison , was : " you 're giving me a bloody headache . " Leng identifies " Wah @-@ Wah " as being directed at the " artifice " and " pretense " surrounding the Beatles . 
 The song is based around an electric guitar riff that Leng describes as " snarling " . Written in the key of E , the tune incorporates chord changes that musicologist Wilfrid Mellers once admired as " audacious " ; musically , Harrison biographer Elliot Huntley suggests , the composition mirrors the " intense atmosphere " at Twickenham in January 1969 . Referring to the released recording , author Ian Inglis views " Wah @-@ Wah " as a hard rock song where the " forceful rhythm " conveys " the momentum of [ Harrison 's ] anger " . 
 Like " Run of the Mill " , which Harrison also wrote in early 1969 , the lyrics touch on the failure of friendships within the band , which in the case of Harrison , McCartney and Lennon dated back to school years . Harrison later spoke of their familiarity with one another resulting in McCartney , especially , failing to recognise his artistic growth ; in I , Me , Mine , he refers to " Wah @-@ Wah " as reflecting " that concept of how everybody sees and treats everybody else , allowing no consideration for the fact that we are changing all the time " . 
 The second verse reflects Harrison 's frustration at being viewed by Lennon and McCartney as subservient to their ambitions , just as his 1968 composition " Not Guilty " had found Harrison defending himself for supposedly leading his fellow Beatles " astray " to the Maharishi 's meditation retreat in India . In " Wah @-@ Wah " , he states sarcastically : 
 You 've made me such a big star 
 Being there at the right time 
 Cheaper than a dime ... 
 Over the song 's two middle eights , Harrison laments that his bandmates never take the time to notice his sorrow or " hear me sighing " . 
 Religious academic Joshua Greene has written of Harrison being " too sure of his life 's higher purpose " by January 1969 , through his dedication to Hindu spirituality , to continue devoting time to the group 's " petty squabbles " . In the song 's final verse , Harrison provides what AllMusic critic Bill Janovitz terms a " simple , spiritual sentiment " , which serves as a statement of his independence from the Beatles : 
 Now I don 't need no wah @-@ wah 
 And I know how sweet life can be 
 If I keep myself free … 
 " Wah @-@ Wah " was never offered to the Beatles once Harrison joined the proceedings at Apple Studio . The choice of Harrison songs that would end up on the Let It Be album in May 1970 – " I Me Mine " and " For You Blue " – has led some authors to speculate that he deliberately withdrew his higher @-@ quality compositions rather than risk having them played without the attention they deserved . Leng lists " Wah @-@ Wah " among a number of solo Beatles songs that are " self @-@ referential " in their lyrical theme and serve as episodes in what he calls " the Beatles soap opera " . Harrison 's bitterness at the restrictions imposed on him during the Beatles years resurfaced explicitly in " Who Can See It " , a song written in 1972 . 
 = = Recording = = 
 McCartney 's refusal to have the release of his eponymous first solo album delayed until after Let It Be led to him announcing his departure from the band on 9 April 1970 , and to Harrison finally deciding to make an album of his many unused songs from the Beatles ' later years . He subsequently described the process of recording his songs with outside musicians as " a breath of fresh air " . Shortly before starting work on the album , Harrison gave a radio interview to Village Voice reporter Howard Smith , and explained that , although he had some ideological differences with Lennon , his objection to any possible Beatles reunion was based solely on his musical differences with McCartney . 
 In the same 1970 radio interview , Harrison announced that he would be co @-@ producing the album with Phil Spector , whose work on the Let It Be album had recently enraged McCartney . " Wah @-@ Wah " was the first song taped for All Things Must Pass , recording for which began at Abbey Road Studios in late May that year . In keeping with Spector 's signature production style , a large group of musicians took part in the sessions . According to Leng and author Bruce Spizer , the musicians on the track were : Harrison and Eric Clapton on electric guitars , three members of Badfinger on acoustic rhythm guitars , Billy Preston and Gary Wright on keyboards , the former Delaney & Bonnie horn section of Jim Price and Bobby Keys , bassist Klaus Voormann , Starr on drums , and Badfinger 's Mike Gibbins playing tambourine . While Leng consulted Voormann , Badfinger 's Joey Molland and orchestral arranger John Barham for his chapter discussing the recording of All Things Must Pass , Bobby Whitlock , another former sideman with Delaney & Bonnie , has stated that he played electric piano on " Wah @-@ Wah " . Whitlock recalls that , having arrived at the session late due to traffic , and finding that the other musicians were all playing on the downbeat on the song , he was left to play alone in the obvious " open spot " – on the upbeat . 
 Speaking in 2000 about this first session , Harrison said that the music sounded " really nice " in the room , " with all these nice acoustics and piano , and no echo on anything " , but he was shocked during the playback when he heard how Spector had recorded the track . In Leng 's words , Spector " [ unleashed ] his full armory of reverb @-@ flooded production values " on " Wah @-@ Wah " . Harrison dismissed the result as " horrible " , and recalled that when Clapton said he liked the way it sounded , he replied , " Well , you can have it on your album , then . " Although Harrison said " I grew to like it " , he subsequently reverted to his original opinion that the song , like much of All Things Must Pass , was overproduced . Overdubs on many of the album 's basic tracks were carried out at either Abbey Road or Trident Studios , without Spector 's assistance , and completed by 12 August . After receiving Harrison 's initial mixes , Spector wrote back with suggestions for each song ; in the case of " Wah @-@ Wah " , these included the addition of a saxophone solo by Keys , and backing vocals . As well as overdubbing his slide guitar solos , Harrison sang all the various vocal parts , crediting himself as " the George O 'Hara @-@ Smith Singers " on the album sleeve . 
 The recording begins with Harrison 's guitar riff , which is then joined by Clapton 's guitar , played through a wah @-@ wah pedal . Leng suggests that the musical arrangement was influenced by the Delaney & Bonnie song " Comin ' Home " , following Clapton and Harrison 's guest roles on the band 's European tour in December 1969 . " Wah @-@ Wah " also features prominent percussion , including uncredited maracas and congas , and , in Leng 's description , a " rollicking horn chart " from Price that helps define the middle @-@ eight sections . Adding to the musical tension , Janovitz notes , Harrison sings high in his range throughout , " almost drowned out " by Spector 's Wall of Sound , which sees keyboards , horns and the many guitar parts competing for space in the mix . The song fades out on the single @-@ chord main riff , accompanied by the sound of a car engine changing gear . 
 = = Release = = 
 Apple Records issued All Things Must Pass on 27 November 1970 with " Wah @-@ Wah " sequenced as the third track , between " My Sweet Lord " and " Isn 't It a Pity " . Despite its unusually high retail price , as one of rock music 's first studio triple LP sets , the album was a significant commercial success worldwide , and comfortably outperformed Lennon and McCartney 's respective solo releases over 1970 – 71 . Music journalist Anthony DeCurtis later wrote of the album representing " [ the ] bracing air of creative liberation " for Harrison . 
 Like " Isn 't It a Pity " , the song " All Things Must Pass " , and Barry Feinstein 's cover photo of Harrison surrounded by four comical @-@ looking garden gnomes , " Wah @-@ Wah " was recognised as a comment by Harrison on his Beatle past . In February 1971 , he , Lennon and Starr united in the British high court to challenge McCartney 's suit to dissolve the band 's legal partnership , all three of them submitting affidavits that mentioned their difficult experiences of working with him , particularly during the Get Back sessions . In the context of this post @-@ breakup unity , " Wah @-@ Wah " was widely assumed to be directed at McCartney only , just as Harrison 's walkout two years before was thought to have been due solely to McCartney . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 In his book on the Beatles ' first decade as solo artists , Robert Rodriguez includes " Wah @-@ Wah " among the " essential components " of All Things Must Pass , and he recalls the " buzz " surrounding the release as having been " about a major talent unleashed , one who 'd [ previously ] been hidden in plain sight " behind Lennon and McCartney . In a contemporary review for Rolling Stone , Ben Gerson suggested that the album was the rock @-@ music equivalent of Tolstoy 's epic novel War and Peace , while describing " Wah @-@ Wah " as a " vintage Beatle song " and " a grand cacophony of sound in which horns sound like guitars and vice versa " . By contrast , Alan Smith of the NME found the dense sound oppressive and regarded the song as " inconsequential … one of the weaker tracks , although it 's not short on dressing " . 
 AllMusic 's Bill Janovitz sums up the track as " a glorious rocker ... [ that 's ] as edgy as anything Harrison ever sang while in the Beatles , if not more so " , and " a driving , majestic song on the edge of being out of control " . John Bergstrom of PopMatters opines that the best moments on All Things Must Pass " involve Harrison addressing his former band " ; of these , the " raucous , killer jam " of " Wah @-@ Wah " dismisses the Beatles ' strife @-@ filled final years as " so much white noise " . While the song is " cutting " , Bergstrom adds , " the sense of liberation is almost palpable . " Writing for Rough Guides , Chris Ingham considers that without Spector 's Wall of Sound excesses , All Things Must Pass " wouldn 't be the magnificently overblown item that it is " , and he writes of " the sheer size of the sound … threatening to trample both song and singer " in the case of " the thunderous Wah @-@ Wah " . Former Mojo editor Paul Du Noyer describes the album as " Harrison 's handful of earth upon the Beatle coffin " , but , less impressed with the composition , he cites " Wah @-@ Wah " as a rare example where " the material is probably too slight to carry the colossal weight of Spector 's production " . 
 Among Harrison biographers , Simon Leng writes that the song " trashes the roseate memory of the Beatles " . He concludes his discussion of this " unusually heavy chunk of rock " with the observation : " It 's a song of anger and alienation , redolent of betrayal and hostility . To that extent , it 's a good @-@ time number to rival Delaney & Bonnie , with a heart of pure stone . " Noting the production 's " layer upon layer of sonic bombast " , Elliot Huntley opines that " Spector fans must have been in seventh heaven " when they first heard " Wah @-@ Wah " . Huntley refers to it as " one of the outstanding tracks " of Harrison 's career , and a welcome though rare " flat @-@ out , kick @-@ ass rocker " in the singer 's canon . 
 Still dissatisfied with Spector 's " <unk> " -like production on " Wah @-@ Wah " , when All Things Must Pass was reissued in January 2001 , Harrison admitted that he had been tempted to remix many of the tracks rather than simply remaster the album 's original mixes . In an interview with Guitar World magazine to promote the reissue , he also revealed that McCartney had " long since " apologised for his behaviour towards him during the Beatles years . In the 2000 book The Beatles Anthology , Harrison comments : " It 's important to state that a lot of water has gone under the bridge ... But talking about what was happening at that time [ with McCartney , Lennon and Ono ] , you can see it was strange . " 
 = = Live version = = 
 On 1 August 1971 , Harrison performed " Wah @-@ Wah " as the opening song for the rock @-@ music portion of the two Concert for Bangladesh shows , held at Madison Square Garden in New York . It was therefore the first song he ever played live as a solo artist and , given the humanitarian cause behind the event , Alan Clayson writes , the New York audience " loved him ... before he 'd even plucked a string " . The running order of the Concert for Bangladesh live album follows the setlist for the second show that day , about which Joshua Greene remarks on the " logical chronology " in Harrison 's three @-@ song opening segment : " Wah @-@ Wah " " declared his independence from the Beatles , followed by ' My Sweet Lord , ' which declared his internal discovery of God and spirit , and then ' Awaiting on You All , ' which projected his message to the world . " Re @-@ creating the Wall of Sound from All Things Must Pass , Harrison was backed by a large band that again included Clapton , Starr , Preston , Voormann and Badfinger , together with musicians such as Leon Russell , saxophonist Jim Horn and drummer Jim Keltner , and a group of seven backing singers . 
 The recording of " Wah @-@ Wah " that appears on the live album was a composite of the audio from both the afternoon and evening shows – one of the few examples of studio manipulation on an otherwise faithful record of the concert . Due to technical problems with the film footage , the " Wah @-@ Wah " segment in Saul Swimmer 's concert documentary was created through a series of edits and cuts between visuals from the first and second shows . 
 Harrison 's staging of the two benefit concerts enhanced his standing as the most popular of the former Beatles ; Doggett describes him as having become " arguably music 's most influential figure " over this period . In a laudatory review of the Concert for Bangladesh album , for Rolling Stone , Jon Landau described " Wah @-@ Wah " as " a simple statement by a musician who knows who he is and what he wants to play " . Like Rodriguez , who considers that the song " truly [ came ] into its own " that day , Andrew Grant Jackson views this live reading as superior to the studio recording . He writes : " The live version is a notch slower , and the cleaner mix allows breathing room to hear the space between the instruments . And more importantly , there 's the euphoria of the performance itself . " 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 On 29 November 2002 , exactly a year after his death from cancer , " Wah @-@ Wah " was the last Harrison composition performed at the Concert for George , held at London 's Royal Albert Hall . Jeff Lynne , Eric Clapton and Andy Fairweather @-@ Low shared lead vocals on the song . The band also featured Harrison 's son Dhani and many other close musical friends – Starr , Voormann , Keltner , Horn , Ray Cooper , Gary Brooker and Tom Petty among them – as well as Paul McCartney . This performance was released on the album of the concert ; although left off the theatrical release of David Leland 's Concert for George documentary film , it was subsequently included on the DVD release . 
 Alternative band <unk> covered " Wah @-@ Wah " on their 1988 album Bird , as part of their parody of early 1970s rock stars such as the former Beatles . Buffalo Tom recorded " Wah @-@ Wah " live on <unk> in Cambridge , Massachusetts in January 1991 , a version that appeared on the band 's Fortune Teller EP later that year . Ocean Colour Scene covered the song on their 2005 album A <unk> Workout for the Flying Squad , and in 2011 former Jefferson Starship vocalist Mickey Thomas released a version on his album Marauder . 
 The Tedeschi Trucks Band have often included " Wah @-@ Wah " in their live performances . Beck performed the song on the US television show Conan in September 2014 , as part of a week @-@ long promotion for Harrison 's The Apple Years box set . Nick Valensi of the Strokes covered " Wah @-@ Wah " at the George Fest tribute concert that same month , with Matt Sorum , of Guns N ' Roses and Velvet Revolver . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following musicians are believed to have played on the studio version of " Wah @-@ Wah " : 
 George Harrison – vocals , electric guitar , slide guitar , backing vocals 
 Eric Clapton – electric guitar 
 Billy Preston – electric piano 
 Gary Wright – piano 
 Pete Ham – acoustic guitar 
 Tom Evans – acoustic guitar 
 Joey Molland – acoustic guitar 
 Klaus Voormann – bass 
 Ringo Starr – drums 
 Bobby Keys – saxophones 
 Jim Price – trumpet , horn arrangement 
 Mike Gibbins – tambourine 
 uncredited – maracas , congas 
 = Web ( web browser ) = 
 Web ( originally called Epiphany from 2003 to 2012 ) is a free software web browser for the GNOME desktop environment . 
 The browser was forked from Galeon , after developers ' disagreements about Galeon 's growing complexity . Since then Web has been developed as part of the GNOME project and uses most of GNOME 's technology and settings when applicable . It is part of the GNOME Core Applications . As required by the GNOME Human Interface Guidelines ( <unk> ) , Web maintains the clean and simple graphical user interface with only a required minimum number of features exposed to users by default . The browser 's functionality and <unk> can be extended with official and third @-@ party extensions . 
 Instead of developing a custom web browser engine Epiphany originally used the Gecko layout engine until version 2 @.@ 28 and <unk> + starting with version 2 @.@ 20 . This approach allows the relatively small developer community to maintain a sufficient level of modern web standards support . The features of Web include reuse of GNOME configuration settings , smart bookmarks and web application integration into user desktop . Web extensions add support for ad filtering , Greasemonkey user scripts support and other smaller , yet useful , options . 
 Web 's source code is available under the GNU General Public License from the GNOME project . The binary builds of the browser are available in the package repositories of most Linux distributions and BSD releases . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Galeon fork = = = 
 Marco <unk> Gritti , the initiator of Galeon , originally developed Epiphany in 2002 as a fork of Galeon . The fork occurred because of the divergent aims of Gritti and the rest of Galeon development team about new features . While Gritti regarded Galeon 's monolithic design and the number of user @-@ configurable features as factors limiting Galeon 's maintainability and user base expansion , the rest of the Galeon developers wanted to see more features added . At the same time the GNOME project created the GNOME human interface guidelines , which promoted simplification of user interfaces . As Galeon was oriented towards power users , most developers saw the implementation of those guidelines as unacceptable . As a result , Gritti created a new browser based on Galeon 's codebase , with most of the non @-@ mission @-@ critical features removed . He intended Epiphany to comply fully with the GNOME human interface guidelines , with a very simple user @-@ interface . As such , Epiphany does not have its own theme settings and uses GNOME 's settings , which are specified in the GNOME Control Center . 
 Gritti explained his motivations : 
 While Mozilla has an excellent rendering engine , its default <unk> @-@ based interface is considered to be overcrowded and bloated . Furthermore , on slower processors even trivial tasks such as pulling down a menu is less than responsive . Epiphany aims to utilize the simplest interface possible for a browser . Keep in mind that simple does not necessarily mean less powerful . We believe the commonly used browsers of today are too big , buggy , and bloated . Epiphany addresses simplicity with a small browser designed for the web — not mail , newsgroups , file management , instant messaging or coffee making . The Unix philosophy is to design small tools that do one thing , and do it well . 
 Galeon continued after the fork , but lost its momentum due to the remaining developers ' failure to keep up with the new features and changes Mozilla introduced . Galeon development finally stalled and the developers decided to work on a set of extensions to bring Galeon 's advanced features to Epiphany instead . 
 Epiphany 's early philosophy included a commitment to creating a web browser specifically for GNOME : 
 Epiphany 's main goal is to be integrated with the gnome desktop . We don 't aim to make Epiphany usable outside Gnome . If someone will like to use it anyway , it 's just a plus . For example : Making people happy that don 't have control center installed is not a good reason to have mime configuration in Epiphany itself . 
 Gritti ended his work on the Epiphany project and a GNOME team led by Xan Lopez , Christian <unk> and Jean @-@ François Rameau now direct the project . Gritti died of cancer on 23 May 2015 . 
 While some promote Epiphany as the default web browser in Linux distributions with GNOME as the default desktop environment , most <unk> offer Firefox instead . In most minimalist distributions , Epiphany is installed with the GNOME meta @-@ package or packages group . 
 = = = Gecko @-@ based = = = 
 The first version of Epiphany was released on December 24 , 2002 . 
 Epiphany initially used the Gecko layout engine from the Mozilla project to display web pages . It provided a GNOME integrated graphical user interface for Gecko , instead of the Mozilla <unk> interface . 
 The development process of Epiphany was mainly focused on numerous small usability improvements . The most notable of them was the new text entry widget , which first appeared in 1 @.@ 8 stable version series . The new widget supported icons inside the text area reduced the amount of screen space needed to present the information and improved GNOME integration . 
 The second major milestone ( after version 1 @.@ 0 ) in Epiphany development was the 2 @.@ 14 release . This was the first Epiphany release which followed GNOME 's version numbering . It also featured network awareness using <unk> , smart bookmarks @-@ related improvements and the possibility of being compiled against <unk> . The latter was critical , as previously Epiphany could only use Firefox or Mozilla / <unk> as a layout engine provider , so it could only be installed alongside one of those browsers . The <unk> support made it possible to install Epiphany as the sole web browser on the system . 
 = = = WebKit @-@ based = = = 
 The development process heavily suffered from multiple problems , related to the Gecko backend . To address these issues in July 2007 the Epiphany team added support for WebKit as an alternative rendering engine for Epiphany . As the backend development advanced , on <unk> @-@ 04 @-@ 01 @-@ <unk> 1 , 2008 the Epiphany team announced that it would stop using the Gecko rendering engine and proceed using just WebKit . 
 The size of the development team and the complexity of porting the whole browser to a new backend caused Epiphany to re @-@ release version 2 @.@ 22 with bugfixes instead of the actual development code , so browser development remained stagnant until <unk> @-@ 07 @-@ 01 @-@ <unk> 1 , 2009 , when the project team announced that Epiphany 2 @.@ 26 would be the final Gecko @-@ based version . Eventually , in September 2009 the Webkit @-@ powered Epiphany 2 @.@ 28 was released , as part of GNOME 2 @.@ 28 . 
 With GNOME 3 @.@ 4 release Epiphany was renamed Web . However , the name Epiphany is still used internally for development , such as for bug tracking and in the source code . The package remains epiphany @-@ browser . 
 = = = Release history = = = 
 = = Features = = 
 Web is based on the WebKit web browser engine , which provides support for HTML 4 and <unk> , CSS 1 and 2 , substantial degree of implementation of HTML5 and CSS 3 features , Web Inspector ( HTML and JavaScript debugging tool ) and <unk> , including Adobe Flash and <unk> plug @-@ ins support . 
 = = = GNOME integration = = = 
 Web reuses GNOME frameworks and settings . Therefore , its user interface theme is the GNOME default theme , the network settings with GNOME <unk> configuration , printing with the GNOME printing system , settings with <unk> and GNOME default applications settings are used for internet media types handling . 
 The built @-@ in preference manager for Web is designed to present user only basic browser @-@ specific settings . All the advanced configuration is done with the stand @-@ alone <unk> <unk> tools such as GNOME 's default <unk> ( command line ) and <unk> @-@ editor ( graphical ) . 
 Web follows the GNOME Human Interface Guidelines and follows the platform @-@ wide design changes . For example , in Web 3 @.@ 4 release the menu for application @-@ wide actions was moved to the GNOME Shell 's top panel application menu and the <unk> was replaced with " super menu " button , which triggers the display of window @-@ specific menu entries . 
 = = = Bookmarks = = = 
 While most browsers feature a hierarchical folder @-@ based bookmark system , Web uses categorized bookmarks , where a single bookmark ( such as " Web " ) can exist in multiple categories ( such as " Web Browsers " , " GNOME " , and " Computer Software " ) . A special category includes bookmarks that have not yet been categorized . Another innovative concept supported by Web ( though originally from Galeon ) is " smart bookmarks " . These take a single argument specified from the address bar , or from a <unk> in a toolbar . Bookmarks , along with browsing history , are accessed from the address bar in find @-@ as @-@ you @-@ type manner . 
 = = = Modularity = = = 
 Up until version 3 @.@ 6 , Web was extensible with a plugin system called Web extensions . This package was distributed by the developers of Web and contained the official extensions . For version 3 @.@ 8 , this system was removed because of problems with stability and maintainability , with some popular extensions being moved to the core application instead . A new , out @-@ of @-@ process plugin system is planned for the future . 
 Previously extensions could be written in either C or Python , but the Python support was dropped with WebKit adoption . 
 A list of Web extensions before version 3 @.@ 8 include : 
 Several unofficial extensions exist , though most of them are not currently supported . 
 = = = Web Applications mode = = = 
 Since GNOME 3 @.@ 2 Web allows creating application launchers for web applications . The subsequent invocation of a launcher brings up a plain single instance of Web limited to one domain , with off @-@ site links opening in a normal browser . The launcher created this way is accessible from the desktop and is not limited to GNOME Shell . For instance it may be used with Unity , used on Ubuntu . This feature facilitates the integration of the desktop and World Wide Web , which is a goal of Web 's developers . Similar features can be found in the Windows version of Google Chrome . For the same purpose Mozilla Foundation previously developed a standalone application Mozilla Prism , which was superseded by the project <unk> . 
 Web applications are managed within Epiphany 's main instance . The applications can be deleted from the page , accessible with a special URI about : applications . This approach was supposed to be a temporary solution and a common GNOME @-@ wide application management was intended to be implemented in GNOME 3 @.@ 4 , but was not rolled out . 
 = = System requirements = = 
 Being a component of GNOME desktop environment , Web has neither software , nor hardware dependencies beyond the GNOME platform . Though the GNOME Project does not list the minimum system requirements , it states that GNOME 3 should run on any modern computer . 
 Web is only released as source code or with Linux distributions and BSDs making binary packages . Thus the availability of Web depends on the distributor . Web can be run on many hardware platforms , including i386 , amd64 and several other processor architectures . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In reviewing the Webkit @-@ powered Epiphany 2 @.@ 28 in September 2009 , Ryan Paul of Ars Technica said " Epiphany is quite snappy in GNOME 2 @.@ 28 and scores 100 / 100 on the Acid3 test . Using WebKit will help differentiate Epiphany from Firefox , which is shipped as the default browser by most of the major Linux distributors . " 
 In reviewing Epiphany 2 @.@ 30 in July 2010 Jack Wallen described it as " efficient , but different " and noted its problem with crashes . " When I first started working with Epiphany it crashed on most sites I visited . After doing a little research ( and then a little debugging ) I realized the issue was with javascript . Epiphany ( in its current release ) , for some strange reason , doesn 't like javascript . The only way around this was to disable javascript . Yes this means a lot of features won 't work on a lot of sites – but this also means those same sites will load faster and won 't be so prone to having issues ( like crashing my browser ) . " Wallen concluded positively about the browser , " Although Epiphany hasn 't fully replaced Chrome and Firefox as my one @-@ stop @-@ shop browser , I now use it much more than I would have previously . [ It has a ] small footprint , fast startup , and clean interface . " 
 In March 2011 Veronica Henry reviewed Epiphany 2 @.@ 32 , saying " To be fair , this would be a hard sell as a primary desktop browser for most users . In fact , there isn 't even a setting to let you designate it as your default browser . But for those instance where you need to fire up a lighting @-@ fast browser for quick surfing , Epiphany will do the trick . " She further noted , " Though I still use Firefox as my primary browser , lately it seems to run at a snail 's pace . So , one of the first things I noticed about Epiphany is how quickly it launches . And subsequent page loads on my system are equally as fast . " Henry criticized Epiphany for its short list of extensions , singling out the lack of <unk> as a deficiency . Web instead supports Web Inspector offered by the Webkit engine , which has similar functionality . 
 In April 2012 Ryan Paul of Ars Technica used Web as an example to his criticism of GNOME 3 @.@ 4 design decisions : " Aside from the poor initial <unk> of the panel menu , this model works reasonably well for simple applications . [ ... ] Unfortunately , it doesn 't scale well in complex applications . The best example of where this approach can pose difficulties is in GNOME 's default Web browser . [ ... ] Having the application 's functionality split across two completely separate menus does not constitute a usability improvement . " This was addressed in later versions , with a single unified menu . 
 = 4 in the Morning = 
 " 4 in the Morning " is a song by American singer and songwriter Gwen Stefani from her second studio album The Sweet Escape ( 2006 ) . It was written by Stefani and co @-@ written and produced by Tony Kanal , with additional production by Mark " Spike " Stent . Interscope Records serviced the song to US mainstream radio on May 8 , 2007 , as the album 's third single ; elsewhere it was released in June 2007 . Described as one of her favorite songs on the album , Stefani began writing the song while pregnant and finished with Kanal , having Roberta Flack and Billy Idol hits as influences to build the track . 
 " 4 in the Morning " was defined as a 1980s @-@ inspired midtempo synthpop ballad , with its instrumentation of a light keyboard during its intro through its break , a guitar , synthetic strings and a slick sheen . Lyrically , the song talks about a relationship on the edge , with the protagonist trying to save her love . The song received generally positive reviews from music critics , who noted it as an improvement over her last singles , while praising its tempo and highlighting her vocals . 
 Commercially , it failed to replicate the commercial success of previous singles in the United States , peaking at number 54 ; it proved to be successful elsewhere , reaching the top @-@ ten in New Zealand and Australia , while reaching the top 20 in several European countries . Its accompanying music video was directed by Stefani 's longtime collaborator Sophie Muller and features the singer lying in bed and walking around her apartment while performing the song in a melancholic mood . The song was performed during The Sweet Escape Tour and in some concerts Stefani made during 2015 . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 Stefani began working with No Doubt bassist Tony Kanal for her second solo album just after finishing the Harajuku Lovers Tour in late @-@ 2005 , referring to him as her " comfort zone " . They two wrote " 4 in the Morning " based on a tape of melodies left from working on Stefani 's debut album Love . Angel . Music . Baby . ( 2004 ) . In a webisode for the recording process of the album , Stefani admitted that she was inspired on ballads such as Roberta Flack 's " Killing Me Softly with His Song " and Billy Idol 's " Eyes Without a Face " , because she wanted a " nice ballad " on the record . It was one of the last songs recorded for the album , and during a Q & A she as one of her favorite songs on the new album , because it " brings pleasure to [ her ] ears . " The song was serviced to US mainstream radio on May 8 , 2007 as the album 's third single . Its CD single , containing the album version , two remixes and its music video , was released elsewhere from June 22 , 2007 . 
 " 4 in the Morning " was written by Stefani and Kanal , who was also responsible for its production , while Mark " Spike " Stent provided additional production . Described as a " 1980s @-@ inspired " midtempo synthpop ballad , the track 's instrumentation includes a " light " keyboard , which " runs tie the song together from intro through break " , a guitar , synthetic strings and a slick sheen . " 4 in the Morning " has a midtempo beat , which according to some critics is " perfect for a slow dance " . Stefani 's vocals throughout the song 's chorus presents a " fast @-@ talking " approach . Lyrically , " 4 in the Morning " talks about transparency in a romantic relationship , with the protagonist pleading for a lover to make up his mind . Bill Lamb of About.com added that the song also deals with a relationship on the edge , which can be seen in the lines : " I 'm lying here in the dark , I 'm watching you sleep , it hurts a lot . " In the chorus , she sings : " I give you everything that I am / I 'm handing over everything that I 've got / ' cause I wanna have a really true love . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " 4 in the Morning " was generally well received by contemporary pop music critics . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic called it " coolly sensual " , noting that " those celebrations of cool synths and stylish pop hooks that work the best for Stefani . " Billboard editor Chuck Taylor called it " a melodic retro ballad that could have come from 1983 's Flashdance soundtrack " , praising the track for " pay [ ing ] homage to a time when hooks were more meaningful than aligning with hostage @-@ taking producers . " Gary Graff of the same publication wrote that " Stefani 's Madonna reverence remains intact " on the song , with Washington Post ' s J. Freedom du Lac agreeing , noting a " <unk> " on the track . Amanda Murray of Sputnikmusic also thought that the song " recalls a ' Crazy for You ' -era Madonna , " also noting that it is " pure Stefani - and understandably , [ it 's ] far superior to any of her attempts at mimicking other artists . " Norman Mayers of Prefix Magazine wrote that the song " soar [ s ] thanks to Stefani 's girlish vocals and brilliant hook that reference iconic moments from Madonna and Tears for Fears . " Bianca Gracie of Idolator called it " a breezy yet emotive ’ 80s @-@ ballad that highlights her tender vocals . " Alex Miller from NME described the song as " an expertly conceived tear @-@ jerker " , stating that " [ i ] t feels like the kind of song a teenage Stefani , miming along to Talk Talk , would have dreamt of singing one day . " 
 Bill Lamb from About.com cited " 4 in the Morning " as the best song from The Sweet Escape , calling it " beautifully performed and produced " and noting that Stefani " allows her signature vocals to sensually float and glide through the lyrical content . " In a similar mode , a write for CBBC enjoyed that the song is " a melancholy and reflective ballad about relationships , which is a breath of fresh air for Gwen , " praising its " catchy melody and woeful lyrics . " Nick Levine of Digital Spy compared it to Robert Palmer 's " Addicted To Love " , writing that " it confirms what is rapidly becoming a universal truth : Gwen Stefani is far more likeable when she channels her new wave roots than when she tries to mould herself into a ghetto fabulous urban <unk> . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine praised Kanal 's production for making the song " less forced and much less self @-@ conscious . " Quentin B. Huff of PopMatters referred to it as one of the " few real compositions " from the album . John Murphy of musicOMH agreed , writing that " she sounds great " on " the lovelorn ballad . " Pitchfork Media 's Mark Pytlik , however , disapproved of the song , commenting that it destroyed " the <unk> cred that Stefani accrued with L.A.M.B. ' s impeccable ' Cool ' . " Spence D. of IGN was also critical with the song , calling it " the most generic , mainstream , and <unk> ¿ <unk> pop song on the entire album . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , " 4 in the Morning " debuted at number 76 on the US Billboard Hot 100 for the week of June 9 , 2007 , before peaking at number 54 on the issue dated August 4 , becoming Stefani 's lowest @-@ peaking solo single on the chart at the time and her first to miss the top 50 . It was somewhat more successful in the mainstream market , reaching number 30 on the Pop 100 chart and the top 20 of the Mainstream Top 40 and Pop 100 Airplay charts . The song was successful at the clubs and reached number two on the Hot Dance Club Play . The single fared better on the Canadian Hot 100 , where it peaked at number 17 , but was more successful outside of North America . In Australia , the song debuted and peaked at number nine on the ARIA Singles Chart , meanwhile it debuted at number 36 and three weeks later it peaked at number five on the New Zealand Singles Chart . It became the album 's third top @-@ ten single in both countries . 
 In the United Kingdom , the song peaked at number 22 on the UK Singles Chart and remained on the chart for 10 weeks . It fared better in the rest of Europe , reaching the top five in Romania , the top @-@ ten in Finland , and the top 20 in Austria , Germany , Ireland , Italy , the Netherlands , Norway , Slovakia , and Switzerland . In France , the song managed to reach number 21 , which was her first solo single to miss the top 20 since " Cool " , which peaked 11 places lower . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was directed by Sophie Muller and features a tearful and distraught Stefani , lying in bed as she begins to sing to the camera . In a white inside @-@ out L.A.M.B. T @-@ shirt , she wanders around her apartment lost and questioning her lover , who is in fact absent from the video . The lyrics describe an argument , which she has with an off @-@ screen lover throughout the video . After lying around her apartment and crying during a bath , she leaves her house at night and travels in a car , as she sits tearfully in the back . The video ends with Stefani rolling on the bed . 
 " 4 in the Morning " was given a " First Look " on MTV 's Total Request Live on April 27 , 2007 and peaked at number seven on May 9 . On MuchMusic 's Countdown , it became Stefani 's second least successful charting video ( next to " Early Winter " , which peaked at number 23 ) since 2005 's " Luxurious " , peaking at number seven for two consecutive weeks after a slow ascent . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 UK and German CD single 
 " 4 in the Morning " ( Album Version ) – 4 : 51 
 " 4 in the Morning " ( Thin White Duke Edit ) – 4 : 55 
 Australian and German CD maxi single 
 " 4 in the Morning " ( Album Version ) – 4 : 51 
 " 4 in the Morning " ( Thin White Duke Edit ) – 4 : 55 
 " 4 in the Morning " ( Oscar the Punk Remix ) – 5 : 41 
 " 4 in the Morning " ( video ) – 4 : 24 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of The Sweet Escape 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Battle of Flint River = 
 The Battle of Flint River was a failed attack by Spanish and Apalachee Indian forces against Creek Indians in October 1702 in what is now the state of Georgia . The battle was a major element in ongoing frontier hostilities between English traders from the Province of Carolina and Spanish Florida , and it was a prelude to more organized military actions of Queen Anne 's War . 
 The Creeks , assisted by a small number of Englishmen led by trader Anthony Dodsworth , ambushed the invaders on the banks of the Flint River . More than half of the Spanish @-@ Indian force was killed or captured . Both English and Spanish authorities reacted to the battle by accelerating preparations that culminated in the Siege of St. Augustine in November 1702 . 
 = = Background = = 
 English and Spanish colonization efforts in southeastern North America began coming into conflict as early as the middle of the 17th century . The English founding of the Province of Carolina in 1663 and Charles Town ( present @-@ day Charleston , South Carolina ) in 1670 significantly raised tensions with the Spanish who had long been established in Florida . Traders and slavers from the new province penetrated into Spanish Florida , leading to raiding and reprisal expeditions on both sides . In 1700 , Carolina 's governor , Joseph Blake , threatened the Spanish that English claims to Pensacola , established by the Spanish in 1698 , would be enforced . Carolina traders such as Anthony Dodsworth and Thomas Nairne had established alliances with Creek Indians in the upper watersheds of rivers draining into the Gulf of Mexico , who they supplied with arms and from whom they purchased slaves and animal pelts . 
 The Spanish population of Florida at the time was fairly small . Since its founding in the 16th century , the Spanish had set up a network of missions whose primary purpose was to pacify the local Indian population and convert them to Roman Catholicism . In the Apalachee region ( roughly present @-@ day western Florida and southwestern Georgia ) there were 14 mission communities with a total population in 1680 of about 8 @,@ 000 . Many , but not all , of these communities were populated by the Apalachee ; others were from different tribes that had migrated southward to the area . The Spanish had a policy of not arming these Indians with muskets , and the Apalachee missions suffered from English and Creek raids in 1701 . 
 In January 1702 Pierre Le Moyne d 'Iberville , the French founder of Mobile , warned the Spanish commander at Pensacola that he should properly arm the Apalachees and engage in a vigorous defense against English incursions into Spanish territory . D 'Iberville even offered equipment and supplies for the purpose . Following the destruction by raiders of the Timucuan mission of Santa Fé de <unk> in May 1702 , Spanish Florida 's Governor Joseph de Zúñiga y <unk> authorized an expedition into the Creek territories . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Zúñiga ordered Don Francisco Romo de Uriza , a Spanish captain , to San Luis de Apalachee , where he raised a force of about 800 Apalachee and Spanish from the surrounding mission communities . Uriza 's report has not been found , so a breakdown of his force is not presently known . Word of this reached the Apalachicola community of <unk> , where Carolina trader Anthony Dodsworth ( referred to in Spanish documents as " Don Antonio " ) was meeting with the local tribes . According to a report an Indian woman made to Manuel Solano , the deputy governor at San Luis , about 400 warriors , principally Apalachicolas and <unk> , went with Dodsworth , two other white men , and two blacks , to meet the Uriza 's force . They left <unk> on roughly October 7 , the same day Uriza left Apalachee . The exact date of the battle is unknown ; the woman reporting to Solana saw the battlefield on October 18 , the day Uriza and the remnants of his force returned to the Apalachee town of <unk> . 
 Dodsworth assembled his force , which numbered about 500 , with the blessing of the Apalachicola chief Emperor <unk> . The two forces met near the Flint River when the Apalachee made a predawn attack on the Apalachicola camp . Anticipating the possibility of this sort of attack , Dodsworth and the Apalachicolas had arranged their blankets to appear occupied and concealed themselves near the camp . When the Apalachee attacked the false camp , the Apalachicolas fell upon them . With the superiority of their weapons , the British @-@ supported Indians routed the Spanish force . Uriza was reported to have only 300 men when he returned to Apalachee . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The defeat immediately put Zúñiga on the defensive . He ordered the fort at San Luis to be completed and adequate supplies for a siege laid in . The battle further stirred up passions in Charles Town , where Governor James Moore had already secured approval for an expedition against St. Augustine after learning that war had formally been declared in Europe between England and Spain . His expedition departed Charles Town in November and failed in its objective , although Spanish @-@ Indian mission communities in Guale Province were destroyed in the process . Moore , in 1704 , led an expedition against the Apalachee missions that virtually wiped them out . By the end of Queen Anne 's War in 1713 , the English had practically depopulated present @-@ day Georgia of Spaniards and their allied Indian tribes , leaving the Spanish in control of little more than St. Augustine and Pensacola . 
 Two widely separated highway markers have been erected in Georgia to commemorate the battle . The Georgia Historical Commission erected a highway marker in central Georgia at 31 @.@ <unk> ° N 83 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 31 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> in Crisp County near Georgia Veterans State Park in 1965 , and the Historic Chattahoochee Commission , in 1985 , placed a marker at 30 @.@ <unk> ° N 84 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 30 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> in the southern Georgia town of Bainbridge . 
 = Episode 210 = 
 The untitled tenth episode of the second season of the television series 30 Rock was first broadcast in the United States on January 10 , 2008 , on the NBC network . The episode was written by show runner Robert Carlock and Donald Glover , and was directed by Richard Shepard . Guest stars include James Arden , Julia Barnett , Kevin Brown , James Cavanagh Burke , Grizz Chapman , Edie Falco , Toby Huss and Gladys Knight , who appeared as herself . The episode focuses on Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) and her decision to invest in real @-@ estate , Jack Donaghy 's ( Alec Baldwin ) choice between his job and his girlfriend , and Kenneth Parcell 's ( Jack McBrayer ) addiction to coffee . 
 The production and broadcasting of this episode was heavily affected by the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . Despite never being officially named by NBC , Episode 210 has been unofficially titled " Liz the Business Woman " and " Coffee & TV " . Although not unanimously praised by critics , the episode attracted generally positive reviews and was particularly appreciated for its cast rendition of the 1973 Gladys Knight & the Pips hit " Midnight Train to Georgia " . Liz also sings a snippet of Alanis Morissette 's " You Oughta Know " when leaving a message for the co @-@ op board . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Liz takes Jack 's advice to invest in real estate , and Jenna Maroney tells Liz that her business manager is selling his apartment . The sale is subject to the approval of the building 's cooperative board , but Liz makes a bad impression and her purchase offer is rejected . Liz gets herself drunk and makes numerous phone calls to the board . 
 Jack is involved in negotiations to acquire a German cable television network , but is struggling to juggle his job and his relationship with C.C. , whose work has taken her to Washington DC . Unable to see each other when they want to , the couple decide to " meet in the middle " ( in a betting parlor in Pennsylvania ) , but this arrangement proves unsuitable and they later decide to break up . Jack , in conversation with Liz , compares his relationship to Liz 's previous relationship with Floyd , and Liz declares in song that she has to go . 
 Tracy Jordan buys a coffee machine and puts it on Kenneth Parcell 's desk , causing him to develop a caffeine addiction . Comparing New York to Sodom , Kenneth claims that he has been " sodomized , " and feels guilty that he has let New York change him , contrary to a promise he made to his mother . He therefore decides to return to Georgia on the midnight train ; however , he quickly returns , explaining that the train was actually departing at 11 : 45 and he missed it . 
 = = Production = = 
 Parts of this episode were filmed during the week of November 5 , 2007 , which coincided with the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . The strike , which began at 00 : 01 EST on November 5 , 2007 , did not affect the episode as it had been written earlier and filming was finished on November 9 . Members of Writers Guild of America , East and Writers Guild of America , West voted to end the writers ' strike on February 12 , 2008 , and although writers were allowed to return to work on the same day , Robert Carlock returned to work on February 11 . The remaining writers resumed work on February 13 , which began the production of the next episode , " MILF Island " . During the filming , actor and executive producer Tina Fey had to balance her duties in order not to breach WGA strike rules . Fey also took to the picket lines along with co @-@ star Jack McBrayer . Alec Baldwin wrote blogs on The Huffington Post website in order to demonstrate his support for the WGA writers . 
 Episode 210 was broadcast on January 10 , 2008 and was the final episode , including repeats , of 30 Rock to be broadcast until the episode " MILF Island " in April . This episode is also notable for being officially unnamed ; NBC billed this episode on its press releases as " Episode 210 " . This led some critics to give it the unofficial title of " Liz the Business Woman " , while others named it " Coffee & TV " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On its original broadcast in the United States , Episode 210 was viewed by 6 @.@ 0 million viewers and earned a 2 @.@ 8 / 7 in the 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 8 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 7 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . 
 Entertainment Weekly 's Jeff Labrecque wrote " the episode really finished strong with a fabulous Gladys Knight musical number " . Matt Webb Mitovich of TV Guide also praised the musical number , saying " that ' Midnight Train to Georgia ' number at the end of tonight 's episode ... Wow . So out of nowhere and so fun . " Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad said that the episode " was a good episode to go into the hiatus with , if that makes things better " . He criticized the fact that the fictional TGS writing staff was not present in this episode , even though they could have been effectively used . Michael Neal of Television Without Pity awarded the episode a grading of A + . The Boston Globe 's Joanna Weiss reviewed the episode positively , saying " [ the episode ] concluded with a musical interlude that was both hilarious and wistful " . 
 Despite the good reviews , there was no universal acclaim from critics as a whole . Robert Canning of IGN said that " [ this episode ] wasn 't the most spectacular half @-@ hour from this truncated season " and " unfortunately , there wasn 't all that much that was funny about it . Sure , there were a couple of decent one @-@ liners , but overall [ Kenneth 's storyline ] offered up nothing new . " Despite these criticisms , Canning added further praise to the " Midnight Train to Georgia " performance . Canning gave this episode a rating of 8 @.@ 4 out of 10 . 
 Edie Falco was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series for this episode . 
 = Ross Island Penal Colony = 
 Ross Island Penal Colony was a convict settlement that was established in 1858 in the remote Andaman Islands by the British colonial government in India , primarily to jail a large number of prisoners from the Indian Rebellion of 1857 , also known as the Indian Mutiny . With the establishment of the penal colony at Ross Island , the British administration made it the administrative headquarters for the entire group of Andaman and Nicobar Islands and built bungalows and other facilities on the site . This colony was meant as " manageable models of colonial governance and rehabilitation " . The Chief Commissioner 's residence was located at the highest point on the island . 
 The penal colony became infamous as " <unk> " or " black water " for the brutalities inflicted by the British authorities on the political prisoners from India , and most of whom had died by 1860 due to illness and torture suffered during the initial stages of the clearance of the forest to establish the colony . In later years the colony experimented for a short time with civilizing the indigenous people of Andamans . The penal colony was used as an experimental station for various methods of torture and medical tests . During the Second World War the island was invaded by the Japanese army , forcing the British to evacuate . The administrative buildings were destroyed but the penal colony remained . After the Allied forces reoccupied the island the penal colony was disbanded on 7 October 1945 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Ross Island , one of the islands chosen for establishing the penal colony , is located near the entrance to the harbour at Port Blair in South Andamans . It is a small island which has a circumference of one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) only . Once called " Paris of the East " for its exciting social life and tropical forests , the island was devastated by the invading army of the Japanese and also by an earthquake which had struck the island in 1941 , and it now appears more like a " jungle @-@ clad Lost City . " 
 = = History = = 
 The earliest known effort to establish a penal colony was by Archibald Blair who found the remoteness of the island as ideal for such a colony . But his initiative failed to go beyond 1796 as malaria prevented it . The First Indian War of Indian Independence in 1857 rekindled the interest of the British Administration in India to establish a penal colony in the Andaman Islands for political prisoners . 
 The first group of 200 prisoners were transported under the control of Dr James Pattison Walker from Calcutta . <unk> included many prominent leaders of the Wahabi movement ( an Islamic " reform movement " ) and the subsequent revolution . ) The prisoners landed at the Andaman Islands on 10 March 1858 . Walker soon put the convicts on the arduous task of clearing the dense forest of Ross Island , building their own shelters and other buildings , and laying roads . The prisoners were chained and collared around the neck with identity tags , and were in a poor state of health . In the beginning there were no basic amenities . During the rainy season they had to live in tents . In November 1858 temporary barrack @-@ type huts with walls made of mats and with leaking thatched roofs provided accommodation for about 1 @,@ 000 prisoners . 
 At one stage , of the 8 @,@ 000 prisoners who had been transported to the islands under the penal project , 3 @,@ 500 had died due to sickness . Sir Robert Napier , who came to Port Blair to investigate , found the conditions " beyond comprehension " as there was no food , clothing and shelter provided to the convicts . However , Ross Island was comparatively a better place than in the earlier initial years as Colonel RC Tytler and his wife Harriet had improved the facilities for the community . Tytler had been posted as Superintendent of the Convict Settlement , also known as the " British gulag " , from April 1862 to February 1864 . He tried to improve the conditions at the camp , where the death rate of the prisoners was 700 per year . At that time the doctors at the camp reported that only 45 prisoners out of the 10 @,@ 000 were considered medically fit . 
 According to reports in the 1870s , intense rain , malaria , pneumonia and dysentery caused many deaths . During this time the authorities also embarked on testing of pharmaceutical drugs like quinine ( cinchona alkaloid ) by forcibly feeding it to 10 @,@ 000 prisoners which resulted in severe side effects such as nausea , diarrhea and depression ; as result the prisoners started injuring each other so that authorities would hang them . Instead , a new system of " flogging and a reduced diet " was introduced and they were made to sleep in a kind of " trellis @-@ work cage " . The prisoners also faced hardships from the indigenous tribes , some of whom were cannibals , who tortured and killed them while working in the field , and also attacked the colony . 
 In 1891 , there were 12 @,@ 197 convicts who had been exported from British India . Some of the convicts who were freed were engaged in agriculture , and those who were forced to do service were given monetary compensation of US $ 25 per month . However , even then escape from the penal colony was impossible and any escapee who tried was killed . 
 At the beginning of World War I in 1914 , Dr. Robert Heindl of Germany had noted that the 15 @,@ 000 political prisoners at the penal colony could create an undesirable revolution and therefore their release in one stage , following capture of the island by a German ship by bombardment , was risky . He suggested that after due care and adequate security had been put in place the convicts of the penal colony could be shifted to the mainland in small boats . 
 From the time of its establishment in 1858 till it was disbanded on 7 October 1945 , the penal colony was administered by 24 Chief Commissioners . This deserted fortress is now a tourist attraction . 
 = = Notable events = = 
 Four days after their first landing on the island , one of the convicts , Narain , who had been convicted for sedition , tried to escape but was caught and shot dead . Another prisoner , <unk> Singh , who was a deserter , committed suicide by hanging . When 81 out of the 288 inmates tried to escape they were savagely attacked by the aboriginal people of Andamans which made them turn back to the prison camp seeking medical help . However , all of them were summarily put to death by hanging in one single day . JP Grant , President in Council in Calcutta complained to the higher authorities , but Walker was not reprimanded ; instead , he put the convicts at the Penal Colony into an " iron collar " to prevent them from escape . Finally , on 3 October 1859 he was removed from the penal settlement as he had suggested branding the convicts on their forearms with information of the crime and sentence that they had been given . 
 On 23 April 1858 , out of the 91 escapees one person who was saved by the <unk> people was <unk> Tiwari , a political prisoner . He was absorbed into the aboriginal culture , married two of their girls , and learned their language . However , when the <unk> were on the verge of mounting a massive attack on the penal colony on 16 May 1859 , he ran away and secretly conveyed this information to the Superintendent . The aboriginals attacked the camp with bows and arrows but were completely routed by the superior weapons of the British . This battle came to be known as the " Battle of Aberdeen " , the first initiative by the local people to seek independence from the British rule . This resulted in change of approach by the British to handle the local people : steps were initiated to seek peace with them and a British officer was appointed to look after their welfare . 
 A notable incident that occurred was the assassination of Lord Mayo , the Viceroy of India who had visited the islands on an inspection tour . He had visited the Ross Island penal settlement . The attack on Lord Mayo was carried out by Sher Ali , one of the convicts of the penal colony who was on a sick leave ; the assassination was carried out while Mayo was returning after a pleasant trip to Mount Harriet on the evening of 8 February 1872 . Another political prisoner who suffered the longest period of 47 years of incarceration was <unk> Singh who was released for good behavior in July 1907 on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of India 's First War of Independence in 1857 . 
 Fazal Haq Khairabadi , a renowned poet and intellectual in the Mughal court , a friend of Urdu poet Ghalib and a mentor of David Ochterlony , was accused of inflaming the Muslims of Delhi to wage " jihad " against the British Raj during the First War of Independence . He refused to plead not guilty and seek amnesty , and was thus transported to the penal colony . He was at the penal colony from 8 October 1859 till his death in 1861 . His son made efforts to have his father released but could only take part in his father 's funeral at Port Blair . One of the notable actions Khairabadi did while in the penal colony was to write on the details of the First War of Independence and his experience of the " <unk> " , using charcoal sticks and rags of cloth ; these were later published in Arabic as Al @-@ Surat @-@ ul Hindia and Al @-@ <unk> @-@ ul @-@ Hindia . 
 = SM U @-@ 69 = 
 SM U @-@ 69 was a Type U 66 submarine or U @-@ boat for the German Imperial Navy ( German : Kaiserliche Marine ) during the First World War . She had been laid down in February 1914 as U @-@ 10 the fourth boat of the U @-@ 7 class for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ( German : Kaiserliche und Königliche Kriegsmarine or K.u.K. Kriegsmarine ) but was sold to Germany , along with the others in her class , in November 1914 . 
 The submarine was ordered as U @-@ 10 from Germaniawerft of Kiel as the first of five boats of the U @-@ 7 class for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . After the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy became convinced that none of the submarines of the class could be delivered to the Adriatic via Gibraltar . As a consequence , the entire class , including U @-@ 10 , was sold to the German Imperial Navy in November 1914 . Under German control , the class became known as the U 66 type and the boats were renumbered ; U @-@ 10 became U @-@ 69 , and all were redesigned and reconstructed to German specifications . U @-@ 69 was launched in June 1915 and commissioned in September . As completed , she displaced 791 tonnes ( 779 long tons ) , surfaced , and 933 tonnes ( 918 long tons ) , submerged . The boat was 69 @.@ 50 metres ( 228 ft ) long and was armed with five torpedo tubes and a deck gun . 
 As a part of the 4th Flotilla , U @-@ 69 sank 31 ships with a combined gross register tonnage of 102 @,@ 875 in five war patrols . U @-@ 69 left Emden on her sixth patrol on 9 July 1917 for operations off Ireland . On 11 July , U @-@ 69 reported her position off Norway but neither she nor any of her crew were ever heard from again . British records say that U @-@ 69 was sunk by destroyer HMS Patriot on 12 July , but a German postwar study cast doubt on this . U @-@ 69 's fate is officially unknown . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 After the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy had competitively evaluated three foreign submarine designs , it selected the Germaniawerft 506d design , also known as the Type UD , for its new U @-@ 7 class of five submarines . The Navy ordered five boats on 1 February 1913 . 
 The U @-@ 7 class was seen by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy as an improved version of its U @-@ 3 class , which was also a Germaniawerft design . As designed for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , the boats were to displace 695 tonnes ( 684 long tons ) on the surface and 885 tonnes ( 871 long tons ) while submerged . The doubled @-@ hulled boats were to be 69 @.@ 50 metres ( 228 ft ) long overall with a beam of 6 @.@ 30 metres ( 20 @.@ 7 ft ) and a draft of 3 @.@ 79 metres ( 12 @.@ 4 ft ) . The Austrian specifications called for two shafts with twin diesel engines ( 2 @,@ 300 metric horsepower ( 2 @,@ 269 bhp ; 1 @,@ 692 kW ) total ) for surface running at up to 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) , and twin electric motors ( 1 @,@ 240 PS ( 1 @,@ 223 shp ; 912 kW ) total ) for a maximum of 11 knots ( 20 km / h ; 13 mph ) when submerged . The boats were designed with five 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes ; four located in the bow , one in the stern . The boats ' armament was to also include a single 6 @.@ 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) deck gun . 
 U @-@ 10 was laid down on 7 February 1914 , and her construction was slated to be complete within 29 to 33 months . 
 Neither U @-@ 10 nor any of her sister boats were complete when World War I began in August 1914 . With the boats under construction at Kiel , the Austrians became convinced that it would be impossible to take delivery of the boats , which would need to be towed into the Mediterranean past Gibraltar , a British territory . As a result , U @-@ 10 and her four sisters were sold to the Imperial German Navy on 28 November 1914 . 
 U @-@ 10 was renumbered by the Germans as U @-@ 69 when her class was redesignated as the Type U 66 . The Imperial German Navy had the submarines redesigned and reconstructed to German standards , which increased the surface displacement by 96 tonnes ( 94 long tons ) and the submerged by 48 tonnes ( 47 long tons ) . The torpedo load was increased by a third , from 9 to 12 , and the deck gun was upgraded from the 6 @.@ 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) gun originally specified to an 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) one . 
 = = Service career = = 
 U @-@ 69 was launched on 24 June 1915 . On 4 September , SM U @-@ 69 was commissioned into the Imperial German Navy under the command of Kapitänleutnant Ernst Wilhelms . On 4 March 1916 , U @-@ 69 was assigned to the IV . U @-@ Halbflotille . 
 U @-@ 69 successfully completed five war patrols in which she sank 31 ships with a combined a total of 102 @,@ 875 gross register tons ( GRT ) . U @-@ 69 's most successful month for number of ships sunk was April 1916 , when she sank eight ships of 21 @,@ 051 tons in a span of six days . The month with the highest tonnage sunk was June 1917 when she sank five ships of 28 @,@ 808 tons in a nine @-@ day span ; nearly half of that total came from one ship , the 13 @,@ 441 @-@ ton British armed merchant cruiser Avenger sunk on 14 June . Avenger had been patrolling off the Shetland Islands and was returning to Scapa Flow , when she was struck by a single torpedo on the port side . The ship began listing heavily and non @-@ essential crew were evacuated while destroyers arrived and took her under tow . Despite strenuous efforts to save her , Avenger foundered ten hours after being hit when her internal bulkheads collapsed . One man was killed in the attack . 
 U @-@ 69 began her sixth and final patrol on 9 July when she departed from Emden , destined for operations off Ireland . U @-@ 69 's position report at 02 : 30 on 11 July reported that she was 35 nautical miles ( 65 km ; 40 mi ) south of <unk> , Norway , and was the last known contact with U @-@ 69 . According to author Dwight Messimer , two British sources report that HMS Patriot sank U @-@ 69 at position 60 ° 25 ′ N 1 ° 32 ′ E on 12 July . An observer in a kite balloon deployed by Patriot spotted a surfaced U @-@ boat at 07 : 00 . The U @-@ boat submerged and Patriot hunted the submarine until noon , when it loosed two depth charges that brought thick brown oil to the surface . A postwar study by Germany cast doubt on whether or not the submarine attacked by Patriot was U @-@ 69 . Officially , her fate remains unknown . 
 = = Summary of raiding history = = 
 = Resident Evil : Extinction = 
 Resident Evil : Extinction is a 2007 action horror film and the third installment in the Resident Evil film series based on the Capcom survival horror series Resident Evil . The film follows the heroine Alice , along with a group of survivors from Raccoon City , as they attempt to travel across the Mojave desert wilderness to Alaska and escape a zombie apocalypse . The film was directed by Russell Mulcahy and produced by Paul W. S. Anderson . 
 The film received mixed reviews from critics . It was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray in North America on January 1 , 2008 . 
 This film was initially titled Resident Evil : Afterlife according to the leaked script . For unknown reasons , it was renamed to Resident Evil : Extinction . The title Afterlife was used for the fourth installment of the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Alice ( Milla Jovovich ) wakes up disoriented in a mansion . She wanders through the halls , where she defeats several obstacles , including a deadly laser beam obstacle and a giant blade that falls from the ceiling . However , she is eventually killed by a bounding mine . Her body is dumped into a pit filled with hundreds of Alice clones . The camera zooms out to show a shack camouflaging the facility 's above @-@ ground entrance - with the rest of the facility located underground , surrounded by a high fence and thousands of zombies . 
 Despite the best efforts of the bio @-@ tech company Umbrella Corporation to cover up the contamination of The Hive and the release of the T @-@ virus to the surface , going so far as to authorize the bombing of Raccoon City , the T @-@ virus has spread around the world . As the virus spread , it affected not only humans , but other animals as well , and the environment deteriorated , turning cities into desolate landscapes and the wilderness into wastelands . The real Alice ( from whom the clones are made ) wanders the wastelands of the Southwestern U.S. She responds to a group asking for help on the radio . It turns out that they are bandits who attempt to rape and kill her , but she manages to kill them all . On her travels , she finds a dead man 's diary which states that there is an uninfected area in Alaska . 
 Meanwhile , Dr. Sam Isaacs , former head of Project Alice and the head of the North American Umbrella facility , operated in Nevada , considers Alice 's recapture be a top priority , since she has the ability to bond with the T @-@ virus and not suffer mutation . He tries to persuade the Umbrella board , operating via holograms from the world @-@ wide Umbrella facility , that he can use her blood to develop a permanent cure as well as tame the infected zombies . The new Umbrella chairman Albert Wesker ( Jason O 'Mara ) orders Isaacs to use the clones to create a cure , and he refuses to authorize Alice 's recapture until they are informed of her location . 
 Meanwhile , a convoy of survivors led by Claire Redfield ( Ali Larter ) travels across the country in search of supplies . The convoy includes Raccoon City survivors Carlos Oliveira ( Oded Fehr ) and L.J. ( Mike Epps ) , along with new survivors K @-@ Mart ( Spencer Locke ) , Mikey ( Christopher Egan ) , Chase ( Linden Ashby ) and Nurse Betty ( Ashanti Douglas ) and others . 
 While searching a motel for supplies , L.J. is bitten by a zombie , which he keeps secret . The next morning the convoy is attacked by crows that had been feeding on the infected . The crows almost overwhelm the convoy , killing Nurse Betty and Otto and taking out the flamethrower operator , causing the weapon to careen out of control . Alice appears and saves Carlos and the others from a fiery death , using her telekinesis powers to fill the sky with fire , killing the crows . Alice is introduced to Claire and gives her a diary she found . Alice and Carlos convince Claire to take her convoy to Alaska . They agree to go to Las Vegas to search for gasoline and supplies for their trip to Alaska . 
 Dr. Isaacs ' attempts to domesticate the infected have led to a new zombie breed that remembers basic things , such as how to use phones and cameras . Wesker 's security officer , Captain Alexander Slater ( Matthew Marsden ) , is adamant about Isaacs ' disregard for Umbrella 's regulations . Slater does admit that the " super zombies " would be useful , but reiterates that Isaacs is out of control . Wesker , in private , informs Slater to keep watch on Isaacs ' actions , and tells Slater that if <unk> disobeys orders , Slater should fire Isaacs . 
 Umbrella <unk> Alice 's location based on the signal sent out by her telekinesis abilities . Dr. Isaacs has a crate of his new zombies sent to ambush the convoy , against Wesker 's specific orders . L.J. succumbs to his infection and bites Carlos . Most of the convoy , including Chase and Mikey , are killed in the ambush . Umbrella tries to shut Alice down remotely , but she breaks free from their programming and continues to fight . She finds Isaacs at the scene , and he becomes infected as he tries to flee . Alice and K @-@ Mart use Isaacs ' computer to track the helicopter 's flight path , leading them to Umbrella 's underground location . 
 The convoy goes to the site , which is surrounded by zombies . Carlos sacrifices himself by plowing his truck into the zombie mob and blowing them all up , giving Alice and Claire time to load survivors into the helicopter . Alice decides to stay behind . Ordered by Wesker to terminate Isaacs , Slater arrives with a group of commandos , and finds the scientist locked in his lab , injecting himself with massive doses of anti @-@ virus in an attempt to counteract the infection , explaining that the zombies are enhanced and as such , he requires a bigger dosage of the anti @-@ virus ; he disobeys Slater 's command to stop , since it will only increase his mutation . Isaacs refuses , and Slater reveals that his employment is terminated and shoots him , triggering his mutation into a monstrous Tyrant . Despite retaining his intelligence and thought , Isaacs kills Slater and all the facility employees , but is confined to the lab 's lower levels . 
 Entering the facility , Alice meets a holograph of the Red Queen 's sister AI , the White Queen ( Madeline Carroll ) . The White Queen informs Alice that her blood is the cure to the T @-@ virus , defending the Red Queen 's actions as well . She then tells Alice about Dr. Isaacs . Alice agrees to deal with him . On her way to the lab 's lower levels , Alice discovers one of her clones , still in development . The clone awakens , but seems to die from shock upon seeing Alice . Alice finds a replica of the mansion she lived in and finds Isaacs , who fights her with equal strength and telekinesis . Finding themselves in a replica of The Hive 's laser corridor , Alice awaits for the grid 's arrival , watching Isaacs getting sliced into cubes . Just as Alice is about to meet the same fate , the system is deactivated by her clone , which has inexplicably revived . 
 Later , in Tokyo , Japan , Wesker , who is the head of the Tokyo Umbrella facility , informs the rest of the Umbrella chairmen , all holograms , that the North American facility has been lost . Alice 's hologram makes an appearance , declaring that she is coming for him , and she 's bringing some of her " friends . " Standing beside her clone , Alice looks out onto a huge number of pods containing her developing clones . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Milla Jovovich as Alice and the clones : A former Umbrella security operative who being tracked down by the Umbrella Corporation in order to develop a serum from her blood . Since being exposed to the T @-@ Virus outbreak in Raccoon City , Alice has been captured and subjected to experiments . 
 Ali Larter as Claire Redfield : Based on the video game character of the same name , she plays a prominent role in Resident Evil 2 , Resident Evil Code : Veronica , and Resident Evil : The Darkside Chronicles . In the film , she leads the convoy of survivors alongside Carlos . 
 Oded Fehr as Carlos Oliveira : A former <unk> commando elite soldier , based on the video game character of the same name in Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis . He is a survivor of the Nemesis program as well as the destruction of Raccoon City . He also serves as Alice 's love interest . Eventually , after bitten by a zombified L.J. , Carlos sacrifices himself by blowing up the zombie mob on a truck for clearing the path to Alice & the remaining survivors on Nevada desert to escape . Since the events of Resident Evil : Apocalypse , he has helped lead Claire 's convoy of survivors . 
 Iain Glen as Dr. Sam Isaacs : The head scientist of the North American facility . Dr. Isaacs had been involved in the creation of the Nemesis program as well as the creation of Program Alice in Apocalypse . He is turned into the Tyrant monster as a result of a bite by a " super @-@ zombie " and from then injecting himself with too much anti @-@ virus . He is based on William Birkin from the video games . 
 Ashanti as Nurse Betty : A tough young woman who acts as the medical unit in Claire 's convoy . She is a nurse , helping to aid members of the group to full recovery . Betty drives the paramedic vehicle and is a love interest of L.J. She sacrifices herself by locking herself inside the bus with the crows when they attack . 
 Mike Epps as L.J. Wade : Former citizen of Raccoon City , who survived the Nemesis program and Raccoon City 's destruction in the previous film . He also travels with Claire 's convoy . He is Betty 's love interest . He is bitten by a zombie in the motel near the beginning of the film and later turns into a zombie himself when super @-@ zombies attack . 
 Spencer Locke as K @-@ Mart : A girl found by Claire 's companions hiding out in a K @-@ Mart store prior to the outbreak . 
 Christopher Egan as Mikey : A young mature computer junkie who drives the " computer station " portion of the convoy . Mikey is responsible for monitoring the radio in search of other survivors as well as monitoring the motion sensor perimeter cameras . He is killed by the super zombies . 
 Jason O 'Mara as Albert Wesker : Based on the video game character of the same name , he is a prominent antagonist in many of the video games . In the film , he is the Chairman of Umbrella , and through holographic technology ( him being in Tokyo ) , he has regular meetings with committee members including Dr. Isaacs who gave the order to find and capture Alice . 
 Madeline Carroll as The White Queen : The sister computer of the original Red Queen . She is designed to protect and preserve human life and monitor the Umbrella facility , like her sister computer . However , the White Queen has more advanced holographic technology . 
 Matthew Marsden as Captain Slater : Wesker 's second @-@ in @-@ command after Dr. Isaacs . 
 Linden Ashby as Chase : A cowboy and ex @-@ cop whose expertise is with a rifle . 
 Joe Hursley as Otto : a survivor who drives the school bus , is later pecked to death by the infected crows . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 Resident Evil : Extinction was first discussed by Resident Evil franchise writer Paul W. S. Anderson after Resident Evil : Apocalypse opened at number 1 on the US box office in 2004 , earning more than $ 23 @.@ 7 million dollars on its opening weekend . Anderson told SciFi Wire that he would like to oversee a third installment , under the original title of Resident Evil : Afterlife . Shortly after , the film and another planned sequel were officially announced by Sony Screen Gems on June 13 , 2005 . 
 On November 7 , 2005 , Davis Film , Constantin Film and Screen Gems announced their distribution rights worldwide with the film 's title being changed from Resident Evil : Afterlife to Resident Evil : Extinction . Impressed with Russell Mulcahy 's work on Highlander , Highlander II : The Quickening , The Shadow and Ricochet , Anderson signed Mulcahy on as director , stating , " Russell pioneered a very distinct visual style , a lot of moving camera and crane work , lots of very fast cutting . He ’ s got a very cool eye and sees great ways to shoot . His work certainly had a big influence on me as a filmmaker and that ’ s why I was very excited to work with him on this movie . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 On June 12 , 2005 , Milla Jovovich was announced to reprise her role as the heroine Alice . In an interview with BlackFilm.com on September 9 , 2005 , Mike Epps confirmed that he would be reprising his role from Resident Evil : Apocalypse as L.J. Wayne , noting that " Black people die in these movies and [ Anderson ] was like , ' Well Mike , I kinda like you . ' So then I asked him , ' Are you setting me up to die because if there 's a fourth movie , I 'm as good as dead . ' " Sienna Guillory was planned to reprise her role as Jill Valentine ; however , she passed on the role , citing commitments to Eragon . On May 9 , 2006 , Oded Fehr was confirmed to reprise his role of Carlos Olivera , as well as Iain Glen , Spencer Locke and Ashanti Douglas who were added to the cast . It was rumored that Debra Marshall was originally cast as Cindy Lennox . However , it was proven to be only a rumor . Chris Redfield was rumored to appear in the film portrayed by Australian actor Charlie Clausen and Leon S. Kennedy was also rumored to be played by Jensen Ackles . 
 = = = Story development = = = 
 The film 's story takes place in Death Valley , where the large scale action sequences take place amid post @-@ apocalyptic landscapes of Las Vegas in broad daylight . Drawing inspirations from western films and post @-@ apocalyptic movies , including the Mad Max series , Extinction manages to reference such predecessors , with plot elements revolving around the shortage of oil , the shortage of supplies , a convoy traveling across a desert , and the desert taking over civilized land . 
 Anderson stated that the film 's story is original and unfolds in a world that fans of the game recognize : " It 's all part of trying to deliver a movie @-@ going experience that satisfies the fans of the game but also provides a fun cinematic experience for a broader audience that has never played a Resident Evil game . " The story takes place five years after the events of Resident Evil : Apocalypse . While previous installments in the series had minor changes to plot and characters , Extinction branches completely away from the video game series as evidenced by the fact that Resident Evil 4 takes place six years after the events portrayed in Resident Evil 2 and the world has not become overrun with zombies . References to Code Veronica are made , such as the replica mansion and the viral outbreak itself . A common element used throughout each Resident Evil film is the climactic battle which occurs in the finale . Extinction marked the first appearance of herbs , a healing item in the video game series , as seen in Dr. Isaac 's lab , and it also referenced the first film with the inclusion of a replica Hive facility designed after the one in Raccoon City , the Raccoon City Hospital , a holographic computer database known as the White Queen , and the replica Spencer Mansion . 
 Numerous references to the video game series have been made , including zombies being unleashed through a T @-@ virus mutation . While the concept of the undead remains the same , this film includes " Super Undead " . As Anderson explains , these are " a result of Umbrella experimenting with the Undead and attempting to give them back some of their reasoning power , some of their intelligence and a little of their humanity . Unfortunately , these experiments don 't quite work and the side effect is the Super Undead , which are Undead that are faster , stronger and [ a ] more cunning foe . " Other creatures from the video game series have also made appearances in the film , including the Tyrant , a swarm of crows , and a pack of Dobermans ( although Belgian Shepherd Dogs were used during production ) . 
 Two main characters were added to the film 's cast : the main antagonist Albert Wesker ( portrayed by Jason O 'Mara ) and secondary protagonist Claire Redfield ( portrayed by Ali Larter ) from Resident Evil 2 . 
 Horror magazine Fangoria featured the film in its August 2007 issue and also on the cover of its September 2007 issue , talking with director Russell Mulcahy . The following details reported were inaccurate , possibly indicating to a change in the storyline : 
 Alice 's convoy are traveling across the Nevada desert trying to reach sanctuary in Alaska to meet Chris Redfield and other survivors . In the film , however , there is no mention of Chris , and the convoy is headed by Claire . 
 The film would feature new " super zombies " that had been " pumped up on some sort of alter @-@ essence steroids " . The final " super zombies " are created using blood taken from clones of Alice . 
 Mulcahy stated concerning the ( what was then considered to be ) ending of the film trilogy , " As far as I 'm aware , this is indeed supposed to close the book . " 
 Resident Evil : Extinction takes place eight years after Resident Evil : Apocalypse . In the film , this was contradicted when characters stated that it had been five years since the outbreak . 
 The character of Claire Redfield did not exist in the early draft scripts for the film and previously Jill Valentine ( who appeared in Resident Evil : Apocalypse played by Sienna Guillory ) would continue the role in Resident Evil : Extinction . Later , producers Paul W. S. Anderson and Jeremy Bolt decided to have a separate game character appear alongside Alice , saying , " We thought , rather than bring Jill back , put her with another game heroine . " 
 = = = Filming and post @-@ production = = = 
 Resident Evil : Extinction began principal photography with a budget of $ 45 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in Mexicali , Baja California , Mexico in May , 2006 after filming locations had to be changed from the Australian Outback to Mexico , causing production dates to be pushed back repeatedly from November 2005 to May 2006 . Numerous sets were designed by production designer Eugenio Caballero including Umbrella 's underground laboratory , the Las Vegas Strip , the New York @-@ New York Hotel & Casino , Paris Las Vegas , <unk> Ponte , Luxor Hotel and the replica of the Spencer Mansion . The film entered post @-@ production in late July 2006 with details about production being kept secret and with the film 's special effects being covered by Tatopoulos Studios and Mr. X Inc . , whom both worked on the 2006 film Silent Hill . 
 In late June 2006 , Sony released the film 's first two production stills which included Alice wearing a costume designed by her fashion company Jovovich @-@ Hawk and Claire Redfield . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 The film 's teaser trailer was shown with Ghost Rider on February 16 , 2007 , and was structured in the same manner of the " Regenerate " teaser trailer for Resident Evil : Apocalypse . The film 's website was launched by Sony on February 17 , 2007 with confirmation of its September 21 , 2007 release date . 
 The film 's teaser poster was leaked onto the internet via a fansite in May 2007 , before appearing on IGN , whereas a German website leaked concept art for Extinction including vehicle and numerous set designs . The film 's theatrical trailer premiered on Yahoo ! Movies in late July 2007 , with NBC releasing several scenes including the crow attack sequence . The social networking website Myspace also featured numerous clips of four of the main characters — Claire Redfield , Carlos Olivera , Nurse Betty , and Alice . The official website for Extinction launched an online game titled Resident Evil Extinction : Online Convoy Game in August 2007 . On September 12 , 2007 Sony released numerous promotional clips and television spots and on September 17 , 2007 the film 's soundtrack was released , whereas the film 's score was released on December 18 , 2007 . 
 On July 31 , 2007 , a full two months before the film 's release , a novelization by Keith R. A. DeCandido was published . At 368 pages , it is the longest of all of the Resident Evil novels . DeCandido also wrote the novelizations of the first ( subtitled as Genesis ) and second films . 
 Resident Evil : Extinction was released on DVD , UMD , and high @-@ definition Blu @-@ ray Disc in North America on January 1 , 2008 . A Blu @-@ ray release of the Resident Evil trilogy , featuring the three films in one package was also released on January 1 . A 3 @-@ disc DVD set of the Resident Evil trilogy was also made available in 2008 . Milla Jovovich and Oded Fehr filmed a commentary while Jovovich was pregnant , which Fehr expects to be shown " in a little square box in the corner " of the Blu @-@ ray version . The DVD and Blu @-@ ray versions of the film showed previews for Resident Evil : Degeneration , a trailer of Devil May Cry 4 , and a video of Resident Evil 5 . Resident Evil : Extinction was released on DVD in Australia on February 13 , 2008 and in the UK on the February 18 , 2008 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film was the number one movie at the North American box office on its opening weekend , grossing $ 23 million in 2 @,@ 828 theaters , averaging $ 8 @,@ 372 per theater . It opened more strongly than the two previous films in the series , and as of January 1 , 2008 , the film had grossed $ 50 @,@ 648 @,@ 679 domestically and $ 97 million overseas for a worldwide total of $ 147 million . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Extinction received a Rotten Tomatoes score of 22 % based on 95 reviews and Metacritic gave it a " mixed or average " score of 41 out of 100 . 
 Steven Hyden of The Onion 's A.V. Club said that " the movie delivers some simple @-@ minded thrills " and praised the " solidly effective killer @-@ ravens sequence " but felt the film was too predictable , saying : " Anybody who has ever seen a zombie movie can figure out what happens next . Somebody will get bit without telling the others , which will inevitably backfire . Survivors will be forced to shoot suddenly undead friends in the head . One of them dastardly science folk will protect the monsters in order to study them , which will also inevitably backfire . And legions of undead will be re @-@ killed in surprisingly easy fashion . " 
 Kevin Crust of the Los Angeles Times praised the film , saying that " the story and characters are surprisingly engaging , with fight scenes and scares effectively placed between plot turns " although he felt that the ending was too " open @-@ ended " . Kyle Smith of the New York Post gave Extinction half a star out of a possible four , saying that the film was " no more interesting than watching someone else play with his Playstation " . Scott Brown of Entertainment Weekly said that Extinction " plays like a flabby middle chapter , full of nerdy details but fraudulently short on the ruined Vegas @-@ scape that ads have been promising . " Jack Mathews of the New York Daily News gave the film a score of one and a half stars out of five , calling the action scenes " monotonous " and urging audiences to " flee this yawn of the dead . " Helen O 'Hara of Empire gave Extinction a score of two stars out of five , saying that while the film was " better than Resident Evil : Apocalypse " and had " an effectively creepy empty world setting " , she felt that it was " nevertheless scuppered by a lack of coherence . " 
 Frank Scheck says that as the film is " fast @-@ paced and filled with brisk action sequences " , it should " reasonably <unk> the devotees . " Maitland McDonagh of TV Guide gave the film a score of two and a half stars out of four , saying : " Equal parts Mad Max and Day of the Dead , [ Extinction ] is no less derivative than its predecessors but moves along at a brisk clip . " Pete Vonder Haar of Film Threat gave Extinction a score of three out of five , saying that the film had " rather lazy pacing " but added that " the way Anderson keeps upping the ante with regard to Alice 's ultimate fate continues to amuse . " 
 A common complaint was the noticeable digital airbrushing on numerous close @-@ up shots of Jovovich 's face , for which reviewers were confused at the use of , or found unnecessary . The film won the Golden Trailer Award for Best Action Poster and was nominated for Best TV Spot . 
 = What 'd I Say = 
 " What 'd I Say " ( or " What I Say " ) is an American Rhythm and blues song , by Ray Charles released in 1959 . As single divided into two parts , it was one of the first soul songs . The composition was improvised one evening late in 1958 when Charles , his orchestra , and backup singers had played their entire set list at a show and still had time left ; the response from many audiences was so enthusiastic that Charles announced to his producer that he was going to record it . 
 After his run of R & B hits , this song finally broke Charles into mainstream pop music and itself sparked a new subgenre of R & B titled soul , finally putting together all the elements that Charles had been creating since he recorded " I Got a Woman " in 1954 . The gospel and rhumba influences combined with the sexual innuendo in the song made it not only widely popular but very controversial to both white and black audiences . It earned Ray Charles his first gold record and has been one of the most influential songs in R & B and rock and roll history . For the rest of his career , Charles closed every concert with the song . It was added to the National Recording Registry in 2002 and ranked at number 10 in Rolling Stone 's " The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Ray Charles was 28 years old in 1958 , with ten years of experience recording primarily rhythm and blues music for the <unk> and <unk> record labels , in a style similar to that of Nat King Cole and Charles Brown . Charles signed with Atlantic Records in 1954 where producers Ahmet Ertegun and Jerry Wexler encouraged him to broaden his repertoire . Wexler would later remember that Atlantic Records ' success came not from the artists ' experience , but the enthusiasm for the music : " We didn 't know shit about making records , but we were having fun " . Ertegun and Wexler found that a hands @-@ off approach was the best way of encouraging Charles . Wexler later said , " I realized the best thing I could do with Ray was leave him alone " . 
 From 1954 into the 1960s Charles toured for 300 days a year with a seven @-@ piece orchestra . He employed another Atlantic singing trio named the Cookies and renamed them the Raelettes when they backed him up on the road . In 1954 Charles began merging gospel sounds and instruments with lyrics that addressed more secular issues . His first attempt was in the song " I Got a Woman " , based either on the melodies of gospel standards " My Jesus Is All the World to Me " or an uptempo " I Got a Savior ( Way Across Jordan ) " . It was the first Ray Charles record that got attention from white audiences , but it made some black audiences uncomfortable with its black gospel derivatives ; Charles later stated that the joining of gospel and R & B was not a conscious decision . 
 In December 1958 , he had a hit on the R & B charts with " Night Time Is the Right Time " , an ode to carnality that was sung between Charles and one of the Raelettes , Margie Hendricks , with whom Charles was having an affair . Since 1956 Charles had also included a Wurlitzer electric piano on tour because he did not trust the tuning and quality of the pianos provided him at every venue . On the occasions he would play it , he was derided by other musicians . 
 = = Composition and recording = = 
 According to Charles ' autobiography , " What 'd I Say " was accidental when he improvised it to fill time at the end of a concert in December 1958 . He asserts that he never tested songs on audiences before recording them , but " What 'd I Say " is an exception . Charles himself does not recall where the concert took place , but Mike Evans in Ray Charles : The Birth of Soul places the show in Brownsville , Pennsylvania . Shows were played at " meal dances " which typically ran four hours with a half @-@ hour break , and would end around 1 or 2 in the morning . Charles and his orchestra had exhausted their set list after midnight , but had 12 minutes left to fill . He told the Raelettes , " Listen , I 'm going to fool around and y 'all just follow me " . 
 Starting on the electric piano , Charles played what felt right : a series of riffs , switching then to a regular piano for four choruses backed up by a unique Latin conga <unk> rhythm on drums . The song changed when Charles began singing simple , improvised unconnected verses ( " Hey Mama don 't you treat me wrong / Come and love your daddy all night long / All right now / Hey hey / All right " ) . Charles used gospel elements in a twelve @-@ bar blues structure . Some of the first lines ( " See the gal with the red dress on / She can do the Birdland all night long " ) are influenced by a boogie @-@ woogie style that Ahmet Ertegun attributes to Clarence " Pinetop " Smith who used to call out to dancers on the dance floor instructing what to do through his lyrics . In the middle of the song , however , Charles indicated that the Raelettes should repeat what he was doing , and the song transformed into a call and response between Charles , the Raelettes , and the horn section in the orchestra as they called out to each other in ecstatic shouts and moans and blasts from the horns . 
 The audience reacted immediately ; Charles could feel the room shaking and bouncing as the crowd was dancing . Many audience members approached Charles at the end of the show to ask where they could purchase the record . Charles and the orchestra performed it again several nights in a row with the same reaction at each show . He called Jerry Wexler to say he had something new to record , later writing , " I don 't believe in giving myself advance notices , but I figured this song merited it " . 
 The Atlantic Records studio had just purchased an 8 @-@ track recorder , and recording engineer Tom Dowd was familiarizing himself with how it worked . In February 1959 Charles and his orchestra finally recorded " What 'd I Say " at Atlantic 's small studio . Dowd recalled that it did not seem special at the time of recording . It was second of two songs during the session and Charles , the producers , and the band were more impressed with the first one at the session , " Tell the Truth " : " We made it like we made all the others . Ray , the gals , and the band live in the small studio , no overdubs . Three or four takes , and it was done . Next ! " In retrospect , Ahmet Ertegun 's brother Nesuhi credits the extraordinary sound of the song to the restricted size of the studio and the technologically advanced recording equipment used ; the sound quality is clear enough to hear Charles slapping his leg in time with the song when the music stops during the calls and responses . The song was recorded in only a few takes because Charles and the orchestra had perfected it while touring . 
 Dowd , however , had two problems during the recording . " What 'd I Say " lasted over seven and a half minutes when the normal length of radio @-@ played songs was around two and a half minutes . Furthermore , although the lyrics were not obscene , the sounds Charles and the Raelettes made in their calls and responses during the song worried Dowd and the producers . A previous recording called " Money Honey " by Clyde McPhatter had been banned in Georgia and Ahmet Ertegun and Wexler released McPhatter 's song despite the ban , risking arrest . Ray Charles was aware of the controversy in " What 'd I Say " : " I 'm not one to interpret my own songs , but if you can 't figure out ' What I Say ' , then something 's wrong . Either that , or you 're not accustomed to the sweet sounds of love . " 
 Dowd solved the recording issues by mixing three versions of the song . Some call @-@ outs of " Shake that thing ! " were removed , and the song was split into two three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minute sides of a single record , titling the song " What 'd I Say Part I " and " What 'd I Say Part II " . The recorded version divides the parts with a false ending where the orchestra stops and the Raelettes and orchestra members beg Charles to continue , then goes on to a frenzied finale . Dowd later stated after hearing the final recording that not releasing the record was never an option : " we knew it was going to be a hit record , no question . " It was held for the summer and released in June 1959 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Billboard magazine initially gave " What 'd I Say " a tepid review : " He shouts out in percussive style ... Side two is the same . " The secretary at Atlantic Records started getting calls from distributors , however . Radio stations refused to play it because it was too sexually charged , but Atlantic refused to take the records back from stores . A slightly sanitized version was released in July 1959 in response to the complaints and the song hit number 82 . A week later it was at 43 , then 26 . In contrast to their earlier review , Billboard several weeks later wrote that the song was " the strongest pop record that the artist has done to date " . Within weeks " What 'd I Say " topped out at number one on Billboard 's R & B singles chart , number six on the Billboard Hot 100 , and it became Charles ' first gold record . It also became Atlantic Records ' best @-@ selling song at the time . 
 " What 'd I Say " was banned by many black and white radio stations because of , as one critic noted , " the dialogue between himself and his backing singers that started in church and ended up in the bedroom " . The erotic nature was obvious to listeners , but a deeper aspect of the fusion between black gospel music and R & B troubled many black audiences . Music , as was much of American society , was also segregated , and some critics complained that gospel was not only being appropriated by secular musicians , but it was being marketed to white listeners . During several concerts in the 1960s , the crowds became so frenetic and the shows so resembled revival meetings while Charles performed " What 'd I Say " that the police were called in , when the organizers became worried that riots might break out . The moral controversy surrounding the song has been attributed to its popularity ; Charles later acknowledged in an interview that the beat was catchy , but it was the suggestive lyrics that attracted listeners : " ' See the girl with the diamond ring . She knows how to shake that thing . ' It wasn 't the diamond ring that got ' em . " " What 'd I Say " was Ray Charles ' first crossover hit into the growing genre of rock and roll . He seized the opportunity of his immense newfound success and announced to Ertegun and Wexler that he was considering signing with ABC @-@ Paramount Records ( later renamed ABC Records ) later in 1959 . While he was in negotiations with ABC @-@ Paramount , Atlantic Records released an album of his hits , titled What 'd I Say . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Michael Lydon , another of Charles ' biographers , summarized the impact of the song : " ' What 'd I Say ' was a monster with footprints bigger than its numbers . <unk> different , wildly sexy , and fabulously danceable , the record riveted listeners . When ' What 'd I Say ' came on the radio , some turned it off in disgust , but millions turned the volume up to blasting and sang ' <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ' along with Ray and the <unk> . [ It ] became the life of a million parties , the spark of as many romances , and a song to date the Summer by . " The song 's impact was not immediately seen in the U.S. ; it was particularly popular in Europe . Paul McCartney was immediately struck by the song and knew when he heard it that he wanted to be involved in making music . George Harrison remembered an all @-@ night party he attended in 1959 where the song was played for eight hours non @-@ stop : " It was one of the best records I ever heard . " While the Beatles were developing their sound in Hamburg , they played " What 'd I Say " at every show , trying to see how long they could make the song last and using the audience in the call and response , with which they found immense popularity . The opening electric piano in the song was the first John Lennon had ever heard , and he tried to replicate it with his guitar . Lennon later credited Charles ' opening of " What 'd I Say " to the birth of songs dominated by guitar riffs . 
 When Mick Jagger sang for the first time with the band that would become the Rolling Stones , he performed a duet of " What 'd I Say " . Eric Burdon from the Animals , Steve Winwood of the Spencer Davis Group , Brian Wilson of the Beach Boys , and Van Morrison counted the song as a major influence on why they were interested in music and incorporated it into their shows . Music historian Robert Stephens attributes the birth of soul music to " What 'd I Say " when gospel and blues were successfully joined ; the new genre of music was matured by later musicians such as James Brown and Aretha Franklin . " In an instant , the music called Soul comes into being . Hallelujah ! " wrote musician Lenny Kaye in a retrospective of Atlantic Records artists . 
 In the late 1950s , rock and roll was faltering as its major stars dropped from public view . Elvis Presley was drafted , Buddy Holly and Eddie Cochran died in 1959 and 1960 respectively , Chuck Berry was in jail , and Jerry Lee Lewis had been disgraced by press reports that he married his 13 @-@ year @-@ old cousin . Music and culture critic Nelson George disagrees with music historians who attest the last two years of the 1950s were barren of talent , pointing to Charles and this song in particular . George writes that the themes in Charles ' work were very similar to the young rebels who popularized rock and roll , writing 
 By breaking down the division between pulpit and bandstand , recharging blues concerns with transcendental fervor , unashamedly linking the spiritual and the sexual , Charles made pleasure ( physical satisfaction ) and joy ( divine enlightenment ) seem the same thing . By doing so he brought the realities of the Saturday @-@ night sinner and Sunday @-@ morning worshipper — so often one and the same — into raucous harmony . 
 " What 'd I Say " has been covered by many artists in many different styles . Elvis Presley used the song in a large dance scene in his 1964 film Viva Las Vegas and released it as a single with the title song on the B @-@ side . It became a gold record . Cliff Richard , Eric Clapton with John Mayall & the Bluesbreakers , the Big Three , Eddie Cochran , Bobby Darin , Alvin and the Chipmunks , Nancy Sinatra , Sammy Davis , Jr . , Trini Lopez , Roy Orbison , Johnny Cash and June Carter , Rare Earth and The Ronettes all put their own style on the song . <unk> , Ltd. released a version of the song as part of a medley on their 1967 debut album , Live ! At Caesar 's Palace . Jerry Lee Lewis found particular success with his rendition in 1961 , which peaked at number 30 and spent eight weeks on the charts . Charles noticed , later writing " I saw that many of the stations which had banned the tune started playing it when it was covered by white artists . That seemed strange to me , as though white sex was cleaner than black sex . But once they began playing the white version , they lifted the ban and also played the original . " 
 Charles later spoofed this double standard on the television comedy show Saturday Night Live in 1977 . He hosted an episode and had the original band he toured with in the 1950s to join him . In one skit , he tells a producer that he wants to record the song , but the producer tells him that a white band named the " Young Caucasians " , composed of beaming white teenagers , are to record it first , which they do on the show , in a chaste , sanitized , and unexciting performance . When Charles and his band counter with their original version , Garrett Morris tells them , " Sorry . That 'll never make it . " 
 Charles closed every show he played for the rest of his career with the song , later stating , " ' What 'd I Say ' is my last song onstage . When I do ' What 'd I Say ' , you don 't have to worry about it — that 's the end of me ; there ain 't no encore , no nothin ' . I 'm finished ! " 
 It was ranked tenth on Rolling Stone 's list of " The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " , with the summary , " Charles ' <unk> ' n ' <unk> exchanges with the <unk> were the closest you could get to the sound of orgasm on Top Forty radio during the Eisenhower era " . In 2000 , it ranked number 43 on VH1 's 100 Greatest Songs in Rock and Roll and number 96 on VH1 's 100 Greatest Dance Songs , being the oldest song in the latter ranking . The same year it was chosen by National Public Radio as one of the 100 most influential songs of the 20th century . A central scene in the 2004 biopic Ray features the improvisation of the song performed by Jamie Foxx , who won an Academy Award for his portrayal of Charles . For its historical , artistic , and cultural significance , the Library of Congress added it to the U.S. National Recording Registry in 2002 . The Rock & Roll Hall of Fame featured it as one of 500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll in 2007 . 
 = 2007 Canadian Grand Prix = 
 The 2007 Canadian Grand Prix was a Formula One motor race held on 10 June 2007 at Circuit Gilles Villeneuve in Montreal , Canada . It was the sixth race of the 2007 Formula One season . The race was won by Lewis Hamilton , starting from pole position , in his first season in the top formula . It was Hamilton 's first win in Formula One and the first Formula One race won by a black driver . Nick Heidfeld finished second and Alexander Wurz was third , making it the first Grand Prix of the 2007 season that drivers from teams other than Ferrari and McLaren achieved podium positions . 
 The safety car was deployed an unprecedented four times during the course of the race . One of these periods was due to Robert Kubica 's crash , which resulted in him suffering a sprained ankle and concussion . During the race Felipe Massa and Giancarlo Fisichella were disqualified for failing to stop at the end of the pit lane when the exit was closed . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 A test session was held on May 17 and 18 at the Paul Ricard circuit in France , with the track configured to replicate the characteristics of the Circuit Gilles Villeneuve for the final two days after it had been in the style of the Monaco for the first two . Despite the fact that the McLaren team had dominated on the Monaco set up of the circuit , Ferrari were better on the Canadian set up . 
 Kimi Räikkönen had the fastest time on the first day , with a time of 1 : 28 @.@ 833 . Rain after lunch caused the test to be halted , when the test resumed Räikkönen was forced to finish early when his car experienced electronic problems . Scott Speed achieved the second fastest time , two tenths of a second behind Räikkönen , with Seven tenths separating the first eight drivers . The Red Bull team focused on testing their suspension . Rubens Barrichello and Christian Klien shared testing for the Honda team over the day , however Klien 's engine failed on his first lap . James Rossiter in the Super Aguri completed the most laps with 115 . 
 Räikkönen was also the fastest on the second day with a time of 1 : 28 @.@ 624 , with Renault driver Giancarlo Fisichella ending the day with the second fastest time . Fisichella also completed 111 laps , the second most of the day , behind James Rossiter 's 131 . Pedro de la Rosa was third fastest despite completing fewer laps than other drivers due to his engine failing early in the day . The testing session was stopped twice , when Adrian Sutil 's and Jenson Button 's engines failed . Red Bull continued to perform high and low downforce work and BMW performed low and medium downforce work . Fisichella was optimistic about the race after these tests saying " he had more grip , the brakes were good and the front suspension gave him a better turn @-@ in " . 
 During the two weeks leading up to the Grand Prix , Räikkönen and Felipe Massa released statements to the press saying they believed that everything would be different in Canada because of the very different conditions — as shown at Paul Ricard . Fernando Alonso believed McLaren had momentum from their win in Monaco , and Martin Whitmarsh said that they were realistic about dominating the race . 
 = = = Practice = = = 
 Practice started on the Friday with Alonso leading at the end of both the two practice sessions . In both sessions , he outpaced his team mate and the closest Ferrari driven by Felipe Massa . BMW Sauber were pleased with 5th place in the first session and 7th in the second from Nick Heidfeld despite his report that the car was " very difficult to drive " . But Robert Kubica 's car suffered a fuel leak resulting in him being unable to post a timed lap in the morning session , Kubica also told the press after the fuel leak , " the car has been quite difficult to drive . " Both Red Bull drivers finished in the top ten of the morning practice . Honda were slower than its customer team Super Aguri in the first practice , but Barrichello was faster than Takuma Sato in the second practice . Toyota 's suspension problems meant that their second practice was cut short , but not before Ralf Schumacher narrowly missed a groundhog that ran across the track . After experiencing problems with Jarno Trulli 's suspension , Toyota stopped both drivers for 45 minutes as a precautionary measure . By the time they got the cars back on the track , they only managed a few extra laps until the problem recurred . Heikki Kovalainen ended his practice day by going into the wall at turn 7 , damaging the suspension . His team mate , Fisichella , performed better , staying in the top 8 in both sessions . At the end of the afternoon practice , Mark Webber slowed down unexpectedly before turn 8 causing Scott Speed to drive into the back of the Red Bull . Webber had overtaken Speed just before this incident . 
 The Saturday morning practice session was 17 minutes shorter than the scheduled 60 minutes , due to Kovalainen 's Renault having a suspected engine failure . The failure caused oil to be split on the track , this failure persisted during the race weekend . This resulted in a red flag period , from 10 : 33 am until 10 : 50 am local time . Hamilton led the practice with the fastest lap ; with Räikkönen , Alonso and Massa posting the second , third and fourth fastest laps respectively . Sato finished the session with the fifth fastest lap in the Super Aguri car , outpacing the Honda works team for the second time during the race weekend . Toyota continued a disappointing race weekend , with the 14th and 16th fastest laps . Their suspension problems from the day before had not been resolved , and the two drivers were given instructions to avoid the kerbs at turn 8 to minimise further damage to the suspension . Red Bull came back with both of the two repaired cars entering the top ten . 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 In qualifying Hamilton took his first pole position as part of a McLaren one @-@ two . Heidfeld improved on his practice performance to take third position , in front of the Ferraris of Räikkönen and Massa . Massa shared the third row with Mark Webber , who did not seem to be suffering the same braking problem that almost put team mate David Coulthard out in the first session of qualifying , he had only one attempt at a lap in the second session as a result . Nico Rosberg , Robert Kubica , Giancarlo Fisichella and Jarno Trulli completed the top ten . 
 Consistent with previous form , the Hondas of Barrichello and Button failed to make it into the top ten ; they qualified 13th and 15th respectively . Takuma Sato , once again out @-@ qualified the two Honda cars , just missing out on the top ten , in front of Vitantonio Liuzzi . He made it through to the second session of qualifying by 94 hundredths of a second , where he qualified in 14th . Scott Speed was the slowest car in the second session of qualifying putting him in 16th position . 
 Anthony Davidson missed out on the second session of qualifying , putting his Super Aguri in 17th position , 3 places behind his team mate Sato . Ralf Schumacher and his team were disappointed with qualifying in 18th . Heikki Kovalainen crashed into the wall at turn 5 , damaging his rear suspension and losing his rear wing , resulting in the session being stopped temporarily . Once the debris had been cleared , Kovalainen in his repaired car managed one impressive lap that put him in 13th , after which six drivers outqualified him . Kovalainen then had to make an engine change due to an engine failure and was demoted to the back of the grid . Wurz , Sutil and Albers qualified in 19th , 20th and 21st respectively after being pushed up a place by Kovalainen 's engine change . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Lewis Hamilton led from the start , preventing Fernando Alonso from overtaking at turn one . Alonso ran wide allowing Nick Heidfeld to overtake him and move into second place . Alonso damaged his car in the process and subsequently ran off the track at turn one a further three times during the race . Jenson Button had a gearbox problem at the start of the race and was unable to select first gear causing him stall on the grid . Christijan Albers started from pit lane . The first accident of the race involved Scott Speed who clipped the rear wing of Wurz ' Williams and went into the hairpin with a broken suspension . 
 Alonso ran across the grass at turn one again on lap 15 , which resulted in him falling further behind Hamilton . Three laps later he made a similar mistake at the same turn , resulting in him sliding across the grass for the third time in the race . This caused him to drop back to fourth as it allowed Massa to go round the inside of Alonso into third . Massa moved into second when Heidfeld pitted on lap 20 . Hamilton pitted on lap 22 , rejoining the race in third place . 
 On lap 22 Adrian Sutil crashed at turn four and the safety car had to be deployed ; Hamilton had pitted just before the incident . Thus the pit lane was closed but Alonso and Nico Rosberg were forced to pit in order to avoid running out of fuel , and were given ten @-@ second stop @-@ and @-@ go penalties . When the pit lane was re @-@ opened and the rest of the field pitted , Massa and Giancarlo Fisichella left the pit lane while the red light was still on . Both were later disqualified from the race on lap 51 . 
 The race was restarted on lap 26 , and on the approach to the hairpin later in the lap Robert Kubica hit the back of Jarno Trulli 's Toyota . The impact forced Kubica onto the grass at the edge of the track , where a bump launched his car into and along the concrete wall just before the hairpin . After losing three wheels , the nose and suffering major damage to the sidepods in the initial impact , the BMW flipped back across the track and came to rest against the barrier in the run @-@ off area on the other side of the track . Although initial reports said that he had broken his leg , Kubica only suffered a sprained ankle and concussion . The safety car was deployed again after this crash . The safety car was also deployed on lap 50 , due to debris from a crash involving Christijan Albers on the previous lap , and on lap 55 due to Vitantonio Liuzzi crashing into the wall of champions once again . On Lap 58 , Jarno Trulli was trying to pass Wurz but later his front track rod clipped away causing him to crash . Cement was placed at the hairpin around Kubica 's accident . Räikkönen ran wide after he misjudged the braking on the dust . The Super Aguri of Takuma Sato went past him as a result and moved into 10th place . On lap 37 , Trulli and Nico Rosberg were battling for position going into turn 1 . Both span off the track in almost synchronised fashion without touching each other . This occurrence amused reporters due to it resembling a form of dance . Both drivers were able to keep going . Also on this lap Anthony Davidson made an unscheduled pit stop . He claimed after the race that a beaver had damaged his front wing although Canadian reports said it more likely to have been a groundhog . One lap later David Coulthard was forced to retire due to a gearbox problem . Ralf Schumacher also stopped on this lap and this allowed Massa , Fisichella and Sato to move ahead of both of them . Räikkönen had his second pit stop on lap 52 at the same time as Alonso . The latter was able to pass him just after they had exited the pits side @-@ by @-@ side . This moved him into 5th . 
 Including the two disqualifications , ten drivers failed to finish the race , six of them because of accidents including Kubica . Four of them gearbox failures . Several cars were damaged during the race : Wurz 's rear wing was damaged in the incident that took out Speed , while Davidson hit a groundhog on the racetrack . This meant that the safety car had to be deployed on four occasions . At the final restart on lap sixty , all of the remaining twelve cars were on the same lap creating some close racing and a lot of overtaking . Hamilton sustained his consistent pace throughout all of the incidents and pulled clear of Heidfeld in the closing stages , taking his first race win relatively comfortably . Barrichello dropped ten places on his final pit stop . Hamilton 's championship lead was strengthened when Sato overtook the reigning world champion to move into sixth place around the outside of the final chicane , having switched to the harder tyres on his final stop . 
 Austria 's Alexander Wurz drove through the field in his Williams from 19th at the start to finish third by taking one pitstop , completing 40 laps on super soft tires . By finishing third Wurz , recorded his third career podium , in the race that marked ten years since his debut race in F1 . Nick Heidfeld finished in second place after trailing Hamilton for the majority of the race . The safety car deployments also allowed Heikki Kovalainen to move up to fourth after starting at the back of the grid . The race was the first time in the 2007 season where a driver from a team other than Ferrari or McLaren made the podium . 
 Sato overtook the McLaren @-@ Mercedes of world champion Fernando Alonso on lap 67 , just after overtaking Ralf Schumacher and having overtaken Ferrari 's Kimi Räikkönen earlier in the race . He finished sixth after having a race that had seen him move from the middle of the grid ; to the back of the pack and to a high of fifth before a pit @-@ stop error caused him to move back to eleventh ; were moved up 5 places in the last 15 laps . Sato was voted " Driver of the Day " on the ITV website over Hamilton 's first win . This was the last time that Super Aguri scored Formula One points , and its biggest single points haul . The team 's only other point came at the 2007 Spanish Grand Prix . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Reaction to the race was mainly focused on Hamilton and the fact that it was his first Grand Prix victory , making him the first black driver to ever win a Formula One race . It was also thought impressive that it had taken only six races for him to win and , in the process , take the lead in the drivers ’ championship at the age of 22 . Niki Lauda said he was " stunned " by the victory and Damon Hill believed " People should not underestimate what he had achieved in a short space of time " . Speculation began about the possibility of him winning the drivers championship . 
 Alonso and the Ferrari team were disappointed with the outcome of the race . Alonso was now eight points behind Hamilton in the drivers championship , as a result of finishing 7th . Ferrari lost ground in both the constructors and driver championship , after gaining a total of just four points from the race . Alonso believed Hamilton to have been " very lucky " to have won the race and did not congratulate his team @-@ mate after the race . Hamilton 's performance was felt to have been faultless and all the more impressive due to four separate deployments of the Safety Car . 
 As a result of his crash Kubica was unable to race at the next Grand Prix in the United States . The decision to not allow him to race was made by the sport 's governing body the FIA , as they believed it was a too much of a risk for him to race in case of another crash so soon after this one . This was despite the fact Kubica had said in a statement that he was " ready to race " . He was replaced by Sebastian Vettel for the next race . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Notes 
 ^ 1 – Heikki Kovalainen was given a ten @-@ place grid penalty after he made an unscheduled engine change . This was due to an engine failure during the Saturday practice session ( P3 ) . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = El Camino ( The Black Keys album ) = 
 El Camino is the seventh studio album by American rock duo the Black Keys . It was co @-@ produced by Danger Mouse and the group , and was released on Nonesuch Records on December 6 , 2011 . The record was the band 's follow @-@ up to their commercial breakthrough , Brothers ( 2010 ) , and was their third collaboration with Danger Mouse . El Camino draws from popular genres of the 1950s to 1970s , such as rock and roll , glam rock , rockabilly , surf rock and soul . Danger Mouse contributed as a co @-@ writer on each of the 11 songs alongside guitarist Dan Auerbach and drummer Patrick Carney . 
 The album was recorded from March to May 2011 in Nashville , Tennessee , at Easy Eye Sound Studio , which Auerbach opened the year prior . The band approached writing and recording differently than on previous albums , as they entered the studio without having written any material and deliberated longer on how to structure songs . After struggling to translate the slower songs from Brothers to a live setting , the band wrote more uptempo , hook @-@ laden tracks for El Camino . The album 's cover art depicts a minivan similar to one the group toured in early in their career , but in an inside joke , they named the record after the El Camino muscle car . A faux newspaper advertisement and parody car commercial playing on this joke were used to promote the record prior to release . 
 " Lonely Boy " was released as the lead single in October 2011 and became the group 's highest @-@ charting single in several countries , including the United States , Australia , and Canada . The album received positive reviews from critics and was ranked by many publications as one of the year 's best albums . It debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 and reached the top five of the album charts in Australia , Canada , Belgium ( Flanders ) , and New Zealand . The album was certified platinum in France , Ireland , the United Kingdom , and the US , as well as multi @-@ platinum in Australia , Canada , and New Zealand . The Black Keys supported the album with the El Camino Tour , their first headlining arena tour . Four additional singles were released , including " Gold on the Ceiling " and " Little Black Submarines " , which were rock radio successes . Among other accolades , El Camino won the award for Best Rock Album at the 55th Annual Grammy Awards , while " Lonely Boy " received honors for Best Rock Performance and Best Rock Song . The album has sold 1 @.@ 4 million copies in the US . 
 = = Background = = 
 From 2001 to 2009 , the Black Keys experienced underground success , but after the release of their critically acclaimed sixth studio album , Brothers , the group achieved a commercial breakthrough . The single " Tighten Up " was a sleeper hit on radio , eventually spending 10 weeks at number one on Billboard 's Alternative Songs chart in the United States and becoming their first song to enter the Billboard Hot 100 . The album debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 chart and sold 1 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide , including 870 @,@ 000 copies in the US . The band also gained additional exposure by continuing to license their songs in popular media , making them Warner Bros. Records ' most @-@ licensed band of the year . At the 53rd Annual Grammy Awards in February 2011 , the band won awards for Best Alternative Music Album ( for Brothers ) and Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal ( for " Tighten Up " ) . 
 The band 's sudden success proved overwhelming , as they found themselves booking additional promotional commitments and facing demand for additional touring dates . In January 2011 , the group canceled concerts in Australia , New Zealand , and Europe , citing exhaustion , thus clearing out most of their touring schedule into April . Drummer Patrick Carney said , " We 've been touring long enough to know when we 're about to hit our breaking point . " The desire to record another album soon after Brothers also led to the decision . Carney said , " We could have waited another year or so , and milked the Brothers album and kept touring , but we like bands , and our favourite bands growing up and even today , are bands that put out a lot of music and every album is different from the last . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 El Camino was recorded in Nashville , Tennessee , at Easy Eye Sound Studio , which was opened by guitarist / vocalist Dan Auerbach in mid @-@ 2010 after he relocated from the group 's long @-@ time hometown of Akron , Ohio . Carney spoke of how the success of Brothers impacted the follow @-@ up record : " For me , there were physical jitters about everything that was going on . Seeing how big the shows were getting , feeling like people were paying attention , kind of made me anxious , and I think that 's part of the reason [ El Camino 's ] songs are so fast . I think we wanted to just muscle through it . " Despite the growing expectations of the band , Carney said that the El Camino recording sessions were much more relaxed than those for Brothers , during which he had been dealing with his divorce . 
 The band hired Danger Mouse to co @-@ produce the record with them , based on their experience with him producing their 2008 album Attack & Release and the single " Tighten Up " . Danger Mouse served as co @-@ writer for all of the songs on El Camino . Speaking of their willingness to involve him in the songwriting process , Carney said , " It took us a long time to be able to trust somebody like that , and not be arrogant little kids about it . " Auerbach said , " It was difficult at times . Some days it worked great . Some days it was just infuriating . You gotta lose any kind of insecurity . It was a totally different way of thinking for me . " 
 Recording for El Camino began on March 3 , 2011 . In contrast to their previous records , the Black Keys entered the studio for their new album without having developed any new material , with the exception of the lyrics to " Little Black Submarines " , which Auerbach and Danger Mouse had pre @-@ written . Each day , the band began from scratch and in Auerbach 's words , " brainstormed until we had songs and we did a song every two days or so " . The material was then refined over several days , and after arrangements were agreed upon , the group quickly finished recording the songs , often in just one or two takes . Each song was recorded in a live take of guitar and drums before overdubs were added . This was done to give the music what Auerbach called " that human element , that live feel " . Similarly , the group eschewed playing to a click track , despite a tendency to speed up during choruses , to keep a natural feel in the performance . " Dead and Gone " was the first song to be completed . 
 The band recorded using a Quad @-@ 8 mixing console that was first installed in Nashville 's Creative Workshop studio in 1969 and later bought by Auerbach from a man in North Carolina . During the sessions , the band listened to playback of their progress on a speaker they purchased from Muscle Shoals Sound Studio after the last day of recording Brothers . Guitar and drums tracks were recorded in the studio 's " live room " , while vocals were recorded in the control room . The studio 's bathrooms served as an echo chamber for recording vocals and handclaps . 
 For the first time , the band deliberated over the musical details of each song . Auerbach said , " we were getting into the nuances of each song by asking ourselves , ' How long should this intro be ? How long should the pre @-@ chorus be ? Should there even be a pre @-@ chorus ? ' We were playing with tempos and BPMs , seeing how a vocal hook does or doesn 't work at a faster speed . And usually , we went with the faster option . " Differing from the band 's lyrics @-@ first approach on Brothers , the lyrics for El Camino were written after the music , often being improvised at the microphone . Explaining their focus on melody , Auerbach said , " the words had to fit in this pre @-@ existing space . It was really confining and totally different from anything I 'd done before . " 
 The sessions for El Camino lasted through May 26 , 2011 , and overall , the band spent 41 days recording , the longest time spent on any of their albums . Mixing and mastering were completed in mid @-@ June . 
 = = Composition = = 
 El Camino follows the Black Keys ' garage rock style but places less emphasis on blues than the group 's previous records . The album instead draws more influence from other popular genres from the 1950s to the 1970s , including rock and roll , glam rock , rockabilly , surf rock and soul . Carney explained the album 's direction , " After the first three or four songs were recorded , it kind of became apparent that they 're all rooted in this early rock and roll feel . It was around that time that we decided to make a whole album that was built around that . " The band cited several older musical acts as musical influences on the album , including the Clash , the Cramps , T. Rex , Johnny Burnette , Ramones , the Beatles , Sweet , and the Cars . Following the sonic expansion on their previous two albums , Attack & Release and Brothers , for El Camino they sought to strip @-@ down their sound by writing an album of " efficient rock @-@ and @-@ roll songs and minimal instrumentation " . 
 In contrast to some of the slower , quieter tracks from Brothers , the songs on El Camino are more uptempo and employ more hooks and guitar riffs . During the tour for Brothers , the Black Keys realized that many of that album 's songs were too slow to effectively translate to a live setting , leading them to write more fast @-@ paced material for El Camino . Carney said , " This record stemmed from that , the fact that it 's easier for our songs to come across well live if they are fast . So we were just trying to make a guitar rock album that was more upbeat than anything we 've ever recorded . " Realizing halfway through the recording sessions that all the songs they had written to that point were uptempo , the group decided to maintain the faster pace as a common thread throughout the album . 
 = = Packaging and title = = 
 The album was named after the Chevrolet El Camino , a coupé utility car . The inspiration came from the band sighting an El Camino while on tour in Canada in 2010 ; Carney admitted that the title was selected " as a joke " . " El camino " is Spanish for " the road " or " the path " . The band found out the phrase 's meaning after selecting it as an album title , and they joked about the record taking on deeper meaning afterwards . Andy Gill of The Independent said of the title , " it 's a nod to the pilgrimage of dues @-@ paying , the months of one @-@ night @-@ stands in tiny Midwest towns which hone raw talent into rock 'n'roll gold . " Michael Carney , the duo 's art director and Patrick 's brother , was initially hesitant about the title . Patrick recounted the conversation with his brother about selecting the title and artwork : 
 I told my brother the idea and my brother was like , " You know , if you name the record El Camino , everybody 's going to think of the car the El Camino . " And I was like , " Yeah exactly . That 's the fucking point ! " And he was like , " OK , but why don 't we just put a car on the cover that 's not an El Camino ? " And I said , " OK , what kind of car ? " He says , " Just put the first car you guys ever toured in on the cover . " 
 The vehicle in the cover image is a Plymouth Grand Voyager similar to the navy blue one that the group toured in for the first year and a half of their career . Commenting on the puzzled reaction the group received to putting an image of a used van on the cover of an album named for a muscle car , Michael said , " That 's the reaction we were going for . It didn 't work in Europe because they don 't know what an El Camino is over there , so it made perfect sense to them . " Patrick compared the appearance of Akron to the cover image , calling his hometown " A busted up parking lot with a busted up car . " The interior sleeve booklet for the album features images of various vans from Akron , Ohio , including those produced under the brands Ford , Chevrolet , Chrysler , and Dodge . Each copy of the album bears a sticker on the exterior that says " Play loud " . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 Prior to the release of El Camino , promotional copies were limited to a small pressing of just 50 , given mostly to music labels and the Black Keys ' manager . Preview listens for journalists were strictly controlled to only one @-@ time listens and they were held within the duo 's manager 's office , an uncommon practice within the music industry . The group opted to not put the record on music streaming services , citing financial reasons . Patrick Carney said that streaming services are not yet " at a point where you 're able to replace royalties from record sales with the royalties from streams . For a band that makes a living selling music , it 's not at a point where it 's feasible for us . " As is common practice for the band , several songs from the album were licensed for use in popular media , including ESPN 's Band of the Month for December , Lifetime 's TV drama Army Wives , and the video game MLB 12 : The Show . The group noted though that they were planning to reduce the amount of licensing in comparison to previous records to avoid overexposure . Carney said , " When no one 's buying your records , it 's easy to justify selling a song . But once you start selling records , you can 't really justify having two songs in Cadillac commercials . It looks greedy . " 
 According to Michael Carney , the promotional strategy for the album embraces " the spirit of doing it the wrong way " . Warner Bros. Records COO Livia <unk> elaborated that " They 've latched onto that idea at a time when the real spirit of alternative has , in many ways , gone away from our music . The spirit of rock should be that : outside of the norm , not just mainstream and predictable . " The music video originally shot for their lead single " Lonely Boy " employed a big budget and several people , but the band decided instead to release a one @-@ shot video consisting solely of footage of an extra – actor and part @-@ time security guard Derrick Tuggle – dancing . The video went viral , garnering more than 400 @,@ 000 views on YouTube in 24 hours . On October 9 , 2011 , the band placed an ad in the Akron Beacon Journal advertising their used tour van as a " 1994 El Camino " for sale . The ad read , " 1994 El Camino : 273 @,@ 000 mi . 200 cubic @-@ in . <unk> <unk> V @-@ 6 engine , 3 @-@ speed turbo <unk> shift , sapphire stylus , some ticks / pops , light surface noise . Working AM / FM radio , tan <unk> / <unk> panels , some rust . Black vinyl seats . Priced to sell – Grab the Keys and go ! Contact Pat or Dan at ( 330 ) 510 – 1206 . " The phone number in the ad led to a recorded message of Patrick Carney describing the car and asking for the caller to leave a message . The band launched the promotional website <unk> with a video parodying a low @-@ budget used car commercial for the same van . Actor / comedian Bob Odenkirk plays the salesman in the video trying to pass off the van as an El Camino . 
 The album 's release date of December 6 , 2011 , contrasts with the conventional record release strategy within the music industry . Carney said , " There 's a rule you release albums in February – March , then you tour the summer . Then there 's the September – October schedule . Our new album is out on December 6 . I asked the label for a list of major rock bands that had released albums in December . In the last 10 years there 's maybe four . But our manager said it 's a shame more bands don 't , ' cos it would force the industry not to shut down . " The group had intended to release El Camino in September but decided to push it until December to allow for a three @-@ month break . Ultimately , they booked this free time up with additional concerts and a promotional tour . 
 A week prior to the release date , the duo decided to stream five tracks from El Camino on their website after the album leaked online . The Black Keys appeared as the musical guest on Saturday Night Live on December 3 , 2011 , for the second time that year , and they performed " Lonely Boy " and " Gold on the Ceiling " . Two days later , the group held an album release concert at Webster Hall in New York City that was streamed live on <unk> The group made several appearances on late @-@ night talk shows , including Late Show with David Letterman and The Colbert Report , as well as at the 2011 Spike Video Game Awards . The group was the subject of a cover story in Rolling Stone for their issue dated January 19 , 2012 ; in a widely publicized quote , Carney criticized Canadian rock band Nickelback , saying that " rock and roll is dying because people became OK with Nickelback being the biggest band in the world " . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Lonely Boy " was released as the album 's lead single on October 26 , 2011 , and became one of the group 's most successful singles . It topped several rock radio charts , including the Alternative Songs and Rock Songs charts in the US , and the Alternative Rock and Active Rock charts in Canada . On the singles charts , " Lonely Boy " was the group 's highest @-@ charting song in several countries , peaking at number 64 on the Billboard Hot 100 , number 2 on the Australian Singles Chart , and number 33 on the Canadian Hot 100 . " Lonely Boy " was certified nine @-@ times platinum in Canada , triple @-@ platinum in Australia , platinum in New Zealand , and gold in Denmark . " Gold on the Ceiling " was released as the album 's second single , and like its predecessor , it topped the US Alternative Songs chart and the Canadian Alternative Rock and Active Rock charts . On the singles charts , the song reached number 94 on the Hot 100 , number 34 on the Australian Singles Chart , and number 51 on the Canadian Hot 100 . The song was certified platinum in Australia and Canada . " Dead and Gone " was released as a third single in Europe , while " Run Right Back " was released as a fourth single in the United Kingdom . " Little Black Submarines " was released as the record 's fifth single on October 8 , 2012 , and was a rock radio success ; it peaked at number two on the US Alternative Songs chart and the Canadian Alternative Rock and Active Rock charts , as well as number 54 on the Canadian Hot 100 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reaction = = = 
 El Camino received high praise from music critics . According to review aggregator website Metacritic , the album received an average review score of 84 / 100 based on 37 reviews , indicating " Universal acclaim " . Critics mainly praised the instrumentation of the songs on the album , as well as the album production . Spin gave the record an 8 / 10 rating , calling it " irresistibly gaudy " and " catchier , <unk> , ballsier " . The reviewer said the songs contain " classic cock @-@ rock sonic <unk> : handclaps , talk @-@ box guitar breaks , rainbow keyboards . The overall effect is something akin to ZZ Top with glitter in their beards . " Melissa Maerz of Entertainment Weekly gave the record an " A – " , writing that the group " make a small @-@ room racket that sounds massive enough for a bigger @-@ is @-@ better world " . Maerz said that " El Camino trades the soulful stylings of Brothers for harder @-@ driving , faster @-@ riffing rock & roll " . James Lachno of The Daily Telegraph rated the album four @-@ stars @-@ out @-@ of @-@ five , praising Danger Mouse for " sharpen [ ing ] up the sweet , melodic choruses that offset the duo 's unholy racket " and give each song a " timeless quality , as suited to a Seventies mid @-@ west saloon as a students ' indie disco " . Despite what Lachno judged to be " tawdry " lyrics , he said that " the Black Keys are here to rock , not talk . On this evidence , few bands right now do it better . " Randall Roberts of the Los Angeles Times assigned the album a maximum four @-@ star rating , calling it " butt @-@ shaking music " and " an album with lyrics that are both unpretentious and un @-@ dumb " . Roberts praised the nostalgic elements of the group 's music and said that the album " scratches an itch you didn 't even know you had " . 
 Michael Hann of The Guardian gave the record a maximum rating of five stars , writing that it is " dripping with an easy , attractive confidence " . Commenting on the various musical influences on the album , Hann said , " they stride fearlessly into areas that might once have been off @-@ limits " . His review concluded , " They sound like a band who think they 've made the year 's best rock 'n'roll album , probably because that 's exactly what they 've done . " Rob Harvilla of Pitchfork Media scored El Camino a 7 @.@ 4 / 10 and called it " their best and ( not coincidentally ) goofiest album " . Describing the music , he said , " The riffs are glam @-@ nasty , the lyrics sublimely <unk> , the basslines nimble and bombastic , the mood frivolous and fun and unabashedly corny . " Will Hermes of Rolling Stone rated the album four stars and called it their " grandest pop gesture yet , augmenting dark @-@ hearted fuzz blasts with sleekly sexy choruses and Seventies @-@ glam flair " . AllMusic writer Stephen Thomas Erlewine rated the album four stars and said , " More than any other Black Keys album , El Camino is an outright party , playing like a collection of 11 lost 45 singles , each one having a bigger beat or dirtier hook than the previous side . " Kitty Empire of The Observer was more critical of the album ; in a three @-@ star review , Empire commented that it sounded like Danger Mouse " tightened up the Black Keys ' act rather than loosened it " and that " El Camino may be fast and fun , but it is also somewhat undemanding . " The reviewer noted that the album had " increased vigour " , but that it came at the expense of " the subtleties that made Brothers such an intriguing ride . " 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 In the US , El Camino debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 and sold 206 @,@ 000 copies in its first week on sale . This marks the highest single @-@ week album sales and , to that point , charting position that the group had achieved in the country . In Canada , the album debuted at number three on the Canadian Albums Chart and sold 27 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . In its first two weeks on sale , El Camino sold nearly 293 @,@ 000 copies in the US . The album has been certified : triple @-@ platinum in Canada ; double @-@ platinum in Australia and New Zealand ; platinum in the U.S. , United Kingdom , and Ireland ; and gold in Belgium , the Netherlands , and France . As of April 2014 , the album has sold 1 @.@ 4 million copies in the United States . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 El Camino appeared on several end @-@ of @-@ year rankings by music publications and critics . The album was ranked by Mojo as the sixth @-@ best album of 2012 , even though it was released in 2011 . American Songwriter ranked it as the ninth @-@ best album of 2011 , while Rolling Stone ranked it as the 12th @-@ best . The album placed 21st on the " Best Albums " list from The Village Voice 's 2011 Pazz & Jop critics ' poll . Paste ranked the record as the 22nd @-@ best of the year before it had been released . Spin placed it at number 36 on its list of the 50 best albums of the year , writing , " Glam @-@ <unk> guitar , poppy melodies , and hockey @-@ rink keyboards fit the Keys like vintage denim . " Claire Suddath of Time magazine and Andrew Leahey of The Washington Times both named El Camino one of the Top 10 Albums of 2011 , while the staff of AllMusic selected the album as one of their favorites of the year . In end @-@ of @-@ year polls , writers for Rolling Stone selected " Little Black Submarines " as the 18th @-@ best song of 2011 , while the publication 's readers voted " Lonely Boy " the year 's third @-@ best song . 
 At the 55th Annual Grammy Awards , The Black Keys won the award for Best Rock Album for El Camino , and Best Rock Performance and Best Rock Song for " Lonely Boy " . Auerbach was honored as Producer of the Year , Non @-@ Classical for co @-@ producing El Camino and producing records by Hacienda and Dr. John . The Black Keys also received nominations for Album of the Year for El Camino and Record of the Year for " Lonely Boy " . 
 = = Tour = = 
 In December 2011 , The Black Keys announced a 2012 concert tour , their first playing arenas as a headlining act . The tour opened in Europe on January 23 , 2012 with three weeks of shows , before visiting North America from March to May . The tour made multiple return visits to Europe and North America throughout the year , while also visiting Australasia from October through November . In total , the group played 112 shows in 2012 . Among the support acts that accompanied the band were Band of Skulls , Arctic Monkeys , and Tegan and Sara . After tickets went on sale , The Black Keys ' concert at Madison Square Garden in New York City sold out in 15 minutes , resulting in the addition of a second date at the venue to satisfy demand . The tour grossed $ 12 @.@ 7 million in 2012 , and after 129 shows , it ended on July 13 , 2013 . 
 Just as it did on its previous tour , the group added bassist Gus <unk> and keyboardist / guitarist John Wood as touring musicians in order to perform songs as close to their studio arrangements as possible . Auerbach explained the decision for the expanded live band : " It wasn 't about the size of the venue . It was just that we could afford to do it and our songs deserved it . We wanted to finally present the songs like we 'd written them . " During the middle portion of each concert , Auerbach and Carney played older material as a duo without the backing musicians . Many critics singled these performances out as the shows ' highlights . 
 The concert stage used a setup with a lighting system and video projections designed by Karl Lemieux . The lighting comprised four banks of on @-@ stage vintage spotlights , along with two disco balls and a lighted sign bearing the band 's name that were lowered for the encores . Lemieux 's video , which was projected onto a white sheet at the stage 's rear , incorporated black @-@ and @-@ white footage of junkyards , deserts , and open highways . Carney explained that the band was aiming for a retro aesthetic , saying , " We kind of wanted to make the whole stage look like an old @-@ school rock ' n ' roll show , as much as possible . We 're referencing bands in the ' 70s , what they were doing when they were playing arenas . " Moreover , the footage was meant to pay homage to the group 's origins . Auerbach said , " We wanted it to represent our music and the Midwest where we 're from , the Rust Belt and open spaces . We find that stuff beautiful and uplifting . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Dan Auerbach , Patrick Carney , and Brian " Danger Mouse " Burton . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Single charts = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = French battleship Mirabeau = 
 Mirabeau was one of the six Danton class semi @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the French Navy ( <unk> navale ) in the first decade of the twentieth century . The ship spent most of World War I blockading the Straits of Otranto and the Dardanelles to prevent German , Austro @-@ Hungarian and Turkish warships from breaking out into the Mediterranean . She did , however , participate in the attempt to ensure Greek acquiescence to Allied operations in Macedonia in late 1916 . Mirabeau briefly participated in the occupation of Constantinople after the end of the war and was deployed in the Black Sea in early 1919 during the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War . She ran aground in February 1919 off the coast of the Crimea and could not be refloated until some of her guns and armor were removed . After returning to France , the ship was used as an accommodation hulk until she was condemned in 1921 . Mirabeau was later sold for scrap and broken up in 1928 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Although the Danton @-@ class battleships were a significant improvement from the preceding Liberté class , they were outclassed by the advent of the dreadnought well before they were completed . They were not well liked by the French Navy , although their numerous rapid @-@ firing guns were of some use in the Mediterranean . 
 Mirabeau was 146 @.@ 6 meters ( 481 ft 0 in ) long overall and had a beam of 25 @.@ 8 meters ( 84 ft 8 in ) and a full @-@ load draft of 9 @.@ 2 meters ( 30 ft 2 in ) . She displaced 19 @,@ 736 metric tons ( 19 @,@ 424 long tons ) at deep load and had a crew of 681 officers and enlisted men . The ship was powered by four Parsons steam turbines that used steam generated by twenty @-@ six Belleville boilers . The turbines were rated at 22 @,@ 500 shaft horsepower ( 16 @,@ 800 kW ) and provided a top speed of around 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . Mirabeau , however , reached a top speed of 19 @.@ 7 knots ( 36 @.@ 5 km / h ; 22 @.@ 7 mph ) on her sea trials . She carried a maximum of 2 @,@ 027 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 995 long tons ) of coal which allowed her to steam for 3 @,@ 370 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 240 km ; 3 @,@ 880 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Mirabeau 's main battery consisted of four 305mm / 45 Modèle 1906 guns mounted in two twin gun turrets , one forward and one aft . The secondary battery consisted of twelve 240mm / 50 Modèle 1902 guns in twin turrets , three on each side of the ship . A number of smaller guns were carried for defense against torpedo boats . These included sixteen 65 @-@ caliber 75 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns and ten 47 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Hotchkiss guns . She was also armed with two submerged 450 @-@ millimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes . The ship 's waterline armor belt was 270 millimeters ( 10 @.@ 6 in ) thick and the main battery was protected by up to 300 millimeters ( 11 @.@ 8 in ) of armor . The conning tower also had 300 @-@ millimeter thick sides . 
 = = = Wartime modifications = = = 
 During the war , 75 @-@ millimeter anti @-@ aircraft guns were installed on the roofs of the ship 's two forward 240 @-@ millimeter ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) gun turrets . During 1918 , the elevation of her 240 @-@ millimeter guns was increased which extended their range to 18 @,@ 000 meters ( 20 @,@ 000 yd ) . 
 = = Career and construction = = 
 The ship was named after Honoré <unk> , comte de Mirabeau , an early leader of the French Revolution . Construction of Mirabeau began on 8 May 1906 by the Arsenal de Lorient and the ship was laid down on 4 May 1908 . She was launched on 28 October 1909 and was completed on 1 August 1911 . Mirabeau , together with four of her sisters , participated in a large naval review by the President of France , Armand Fallières , off Cap Brun on 4 September 1911 . The ship was assigned to the Second Division of the First Squadron ( escadre ) of the Mediterranean Fleet when she was commissioned . The ship participated in combined fleet maneuvers between Provence and Tunisia in May – June 1913 and the subsequent naval review conducted by the President of the Council , Raymond Poincaré , on 7 June 1913 . Afterwards , Mirabeau joined her squadron in its tour of the Eastern Mediterranean in October – December 1913 , making port visits in Egypt , Syria , and Greece , and participated in the grand fleet exercise in the Western Mediterranean in May 1914 . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 In August 1914 , the ship was being refitted at Toulon . During 1915 – 16 , the ship participated in the distant blockade of the Straits of Otranto while based in Corfu , Malta , and Bizerte . In November 1916 , she transported landing parties from the other ships of her division to Athens . In the Noemvriana , on 1 December 1916 , those landing parties , formed into a provisional battalion , participated in the Allied attempt to ensure Greek acquiescence to Allied operations in Macedonia . Greek resistance to the Allied action ended after Mirabeau fired four rounds from her main armament into the city , one of which landed near the Royal Palace . Afterwards , she spent 1917 based at Corfu or at Mudros to prevent the German battlecruiser SMS Goeben from breaking out into the Mediterranean . In April 1918 , Mirabeau accompanied her sisters Diderot and Vergniaud to Mudros where they remained for the rest of the war . 
 = = = Postwar = = = 
 After the Armistice of Mudros was signed on 30 October between the Allies and the Ottoman Empire , the ship participated in the early stage of the occupation of Constantinople from 12 November to 18 December . At the very end of the year , she was deployed to the Black Sea to support White Russian forces in Sevastopol and deter Soviet forces who were advancing on the city during the Russian Civil War . Mirabeau ran aground during a snowstorm on 18 February 1919 off the Crimean coast . She could not be refloated until her forward 305 @-@ millimeter ( 12 in ) gun turret , its barbette and her forward belt armor was removed . The ship was towed to Toulon by the battleship Justice in April . Mirabeau was subsequently used as an accommodation hulk until she was condemned on 27 October 1921 . She was later scrapped in 1928 . 
 = 1999 Baltimore Orioles – Cuban national baseball team exhibition series = 
 The 1999 Baltimore Orioles – Cuban national baseball team exhibition series consisted of two exhibition games played between the Baltimore Orioles of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) and the Cuban national baseball team on March 28 and May 3 , 1999 . The first game took place in Havana , while the second was held in Baltimore . This series marked the first time that the Cuban national team had faced a squad composed solely of major league players and the first time an MLB team played in Cuba since 1959 . 
 Fidel Castro overthrew American ally Fulgencio Batista in the Cuban Revolution and established a Communist government in 1959 . Castro broke off diplomatic relations with the United States . The United States instituted an embargo against Cuba in an attempt to weaken Castro 's regime . MLB stopped holding exhibitions in Cuba . 
 In the 1990s , Orioles ' owner Peter Angelos lobbied the United States Government to gain permission to hold this series for three years . Various politicians , including members of the United States House of Representatives , opposed the idea and attempted to block the series . Eventually , Angelos secured the approval in 1999 , after a change in United States foreign policy to Cuba under President Bill Clinton , which eased travel restrictions and increased cultural exchange . 
 The Orioles won the first game , which was held in Havana , by a score of 3 – 2 in extra innings . The Cuban national team defeated the Orioles 12 – 6 in the second game , which was held in Baltimore . The series introduced José Contreras to the American baseball audience ; Contreras defected from Cuba in 2002 to pitch in MLB . The United States and Cuba now compete with each other and other nations in the World Baseball Classic . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Cuban Revolution led to the overthrow of Fulgencio Batista , an ally of the United States , in 1959 . Fidel Castro severed Cuba 's formerly strong ties with the United States . The United States soon instituted a embargo against Cuba , which has made it illegal for United States corporations to enter into business with Cuba . The Baltimore Orioles , who were slated to hold an 1960 exhibition series against the Cincinnati Reds in Havana , moved the games to Miami , Florida . 
 No Major League Baseball ( MLB ) team had played in Cuba since March 21 , 1959 . Castro made attempts to lure American baseball teams back to Cuba to no avail . In the 1970s , George McGovern , a United States Senator , pushed the idea of an exchange of MLB and college basketball teams as a way to bridge the impasse between the two governments , similar to the ping @-@ pong diplomacy that aided US @-@ China relations ; however , this was blocked by the United States Department of State . 
 In the 1980s , Scott Armstrong attempted to convince Edward Bennett Williams , then the owner of the Baltimore Orioles , to play a game of Cuban All @-@ Stars against his Orioles . Williams declined , as he had a position on an advisory board in the Reagan Administration , which opposed having any business with Cuba . Armstrong discussed the idea with MLB Commissioner Bart Giamatti and MLB Players Association ( MLBPA ) chair Donald Fehr . Though Giamatti was interested , he died before he could pursue the idea . Fehr visited Cuba during the 1994 @-@ 95 MLB strike , but could not secure an antitrust exemption . 
 In 1996 , Peter Angelos , the new owner of the Orioles , met with Armstrong and Saul Landau , who convinced him to pursue an exhibition series between his Orioles and the Cuban national baseball team . Angelos petitioned the United States Government to permit a series . United States Representative Ileana Ros @-@ Lehtinen wrote to the State Department , asking that the series be prevented . The United States Department of the Treasury denied Angelos ' request on the grounds that American money may not be spent in Cuba under the Trading with the Enemy Act of 1917 . 
 In January 1999 , President Bill Clinton eased travel restrictions and increased cultural exchange between the United States and Cuba , leading Angelos to again seek permission to play an exhibition game in Cuba . Angelos met with Sandy Berger , Clinton 's National Security Advisor , to discuss a potential exhibition . Bud Selig , the MLB Commissioner , allowed for the exploration of the series , though it still required the approval of MLB owners and the MLBPA . The MLBPA insisted on a second game to be held in the United States . A contingent of United States Representatives , including Ros @-@ Lehtinen , Robert Menendez , Dan Burton , Lincoln Diaz @-@ Balart , and Rick Lazio , lobbied Fehr to try to block the series . 
 Ongoing negotiations through March yielded an agreement on March 7 , 1999 , over the objections of the State Department . The proceeds of the series were a major sticking point in negotiations , as it violated the United States embargo against Cuba . Instead of going to the Cuban Government , it was agreed that proceeds would fund baseball programs in Cuba . 
 The series created a good deal of criticism , especially among the Cuban American community . MLB umpire Rich Garcia , who is of Cuban descent , opposed the series . MLB umpires filed a grievance against MLB attempting to block them from being sent to umpire the game in Cuba , and refused to officiate the game in Baltimore . Rafael Palmeiro , an Oriole player of Cuban descent , also opposed the series and did not make the trip to Cuba . The Cuban American National Foundation protested the series . 
 = = Games = = 
 = = = Game one = = = 
 Game one took place at Estadio <unk> in Havana , Cuba , on March 28 , 1999 . Tickets were distributed by invitation only . Angelos , Selig , and Castro sat together in box seats . One hundred schoolchildren from the Baltimore and Washington , D.C. area also traveled to Cuba on a plane chartered by Angelos . Before the game , players and coaches on both teams <unk> in a flag ceremony . Castro greeted the Orioles on the field , and gave his Cuban team a pep talk . Cuban baseball legend Conrado Marrero threw out the first pitch . 
 Orioles ' starting pitcher Scott Erickson allowed one run on five hits in seven innings pitched . Cuban starter José Ibar allowed a home run to Charles Johnson and was relieved in the third inning by José Contreras . Contreras pitched eight innings without allowing a run . Orioles ' manager Dave Miller brought in his closer , Mike Timlin , in the eighth inning . This backfired , as Omar Linares tied the game for Cuba with a run batted in single . 
 Tied after nine innings , the game went into extra innings . Cuba had two runners on base in the 10th inning , but Mike Fetters retired Cuba without allowing a run . The Orioles won the game when Harold Baines hit a single off of Pedro Luis Lazo that scored Will Clark with the go @-@ ahead run in the top of the 11th inning . Jesse Orosco recorded the final three outs in the bottom of the 11th , as the Orioles won by a score of 3 – 2 . 
 Line score 
 Box score 
 = = = Game two = = = 
 The second game was held at Oriole Park at Camden Yards in Baltimore on May 3 , 1999 , in front of 47 @,@ 940 fans . By May 3 , the Orioles had a 7 – 17 win @-@ loss record in the 1999 MLB season . The Cuban national team , meanwhile , was stronger than during the first game , as the 1998 – 99 Cuban National Series had concluded and players who were not available for the first game of the exhibition joined the Cuban team . A 300 @-@ person delegation accompanied the Cuban team , including members of the Cuban media , students , and retired players . MLB requested the Federal Aviation Administration clear the airspace above Camden Yards for the game , in response to an attempt by a Miami @-@ based pilot and veteran of the Bay of Pigs invasion , to drop anti @-@ Castro leaflets over Estadio <unk> during the first game . 
 The start of the game was delayed by rain for 56 minutes . The game was further interrupted by protesters , one of whom ran onto the field during the fifth inning and had to be thrown to the ground by César Valdez , a Cuban umpire . Contreras started the game for Cuba , and he allowed a two @-@ run double by Baines in the first inning . Orioles ' starting pitcher Scott <unk> , who was on the MLB disabled list at the time , allowed four runs in the second inning to give Cuba the lead . 
 Norge Luis Vera entered the game for Cuba in the third inning and pitched 6 2 ⁄ 3 innings in relief without allowing a hit , retiring 20 of the first 22 batters he faced . His hitless streak ended when he allowed a home run to <unk> <unk> in the ninth inning . Gabe Molina , who had made his MLB debut on May 1 , allowed Cuba to score five runs in the ninth inning , including a three @-@ run home run hit by Andy Morales . The Cuban national team defeated the Orioles 12 – 6 . 
 <unk> Castro batted 4 @-@ for @-@ 5 for Cuba , including a two run batted in ( RBI ) triple , and scored four runs . Calvin Pickering , a rookie first baseman for the Orioles who had been promoted from the minor leagues the day prior , committed three errors . 
 <unk> 
 Box score 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Rigoberto Herrera , a member of the Cuban national team who had retired and accompanied the team from Cuba as a guest , defected to the United States during the visit . Though six retired players overslept the day after the game in Baltimore and missed their flight back to Cuba , no other members of the delegation defected . 
 To discourage defections during the exhibition in Baltimore , Cuba maintained strict security around their young players , not allowing sports agents to speak with them . Though no active Cuban players defected during the trip to Baltimore , members of the Cuban national team did defect in the years following the series . Andy Morales defected in 2000 . Contreras , who was considered Cuba 's best pitcher , gained international fame after the series and defected from Cuba in 2002 . Nelson Díaz , a Cuban umpire who officiated the game in Baltimore , defected from Cuba to the United States in 2009 . 
 MLB and the Major League Umpires Association engaged in a dispute regarding the amount of pay owed to umpires for officiating the game that took place in Baltimore . This was one factor that led to the mass resignation of MLB umpires that took place on September 2 , 1999 . 
 In 2000 , Syd Thrift , the Orioles ' general manager , told The Washington Times that the team had a practice of not signing players who had defected from Cuba , which he attributed to Angelos ' desire to avoid doing " anything that could be interpreted as being disrespectful or ... encouraging players to defect " . Investigations by Major League Baseball and the United States Department of Justice did not find evidence that the absence of Cuban players on the Orioles ' roster or in its minor league system was due to discrimination . 
 The Cuban national team next played in the United States during the 2006 World Baseball Classic ( WBC ) . President George W. Bush attempted to prevent the Cuban team from participating in the tournament , but other nations promised to withdraw if Cuba was barred . The next American team to travel to Cuba were the Tampa Bay Rays , who will play an exhibition against the Cuban national team in March 2016 . 
 = History of Gibraltar = 
 The history of Gibraltar , a small peninsula on the southern Iberian coast near the entrance of the Mediterranean Sea , spans over 2 @,@ 900 years . The peninsula has evolved from a place of reverence in ancient times into " one of the most densely fortified and fought @-@ over places in Europe " , as one historian has put it . Gibraltar 's location has given it an outsized significance in the history of Europe and its fortified town , established in medieval times , has hosted garrisons that sustained numerous sieges and battles over the centuries . 
 Gibraltar was first inhabited over 50 @,@ 000 years ago by Neanderthals and may have been one of their last places of habitation before they died out around 24 @,@ 000 years ago . Gibraltar 's recorded history began around 950 BC with the Phoenicians , who lived nearby . The Carthaginians and Romans later worshipped Hercules in shrines said to have been built on the Rock of Gibraltar , which they called Mons Calpe , the " Hollow Mountain " , and which they regarded as one of the twin Pillars of Hercules . 
 Gibraltar became part of the Visigothic Kingdom of Hispania following the collapse of the Roman Empire and came under Muslim Moorish rule in 711 AD . It was permanently settled for the first time by the Moors and was renamed Jebel Tariq – the Mount of Tariq , later corrupted into Gibraltar . The Christian Kingdom of Castile annexed it in 1309 , lost it again to the Moors in 1333 and finally regained it in 1462 . Gibraltar became part of the unified Kingdom of Spain and remained under Spanish rule until 1704 . It was captured during the War of the Spanish Succession by an Anglo @-@ Dutch fleet in the name of Charles VI of Austria , the Habsburg contender to the Spanish throne . At the war 's end , Spain ceded the territory to Britain under the terms of the Treaty of Utrecht of 1713 . 
 Spain tried to regain control of Gibraltar , which Britain had declared a Crown colony , through military , diplomatic and economic pressure . Gibraltar was besieged and heavily bombarded during three wars between Britain and Spain but the attacks were repulsed on each occasion . By the end of the last siege , in the late 18th century , Gibraltar had faced fourteen sieges in 500 years . In the years after Trafalgar , Gibraltar became a major base in the Peninsular War . The colony grew rapidly during the 19th and early 20th centuries , becoming one of Britain 's most important possessions in the Mediterranean . It was a key stopping point for vessels en route to India via the Suez Canal . A large British naval base was constructed there at great expense at the end of the 19th century and became the backbone of Gibraltar 's economy . 
