 British control of Gibraltar enabled the Allies to control the entrance to the Mediterranean during the Second World War . It was attacked on several occasions by German , Italian and Vichy French forces , though without causing much damage . The Spanish dictator General Francisco Franco declined to join a Nazi plan to occupy Gibraltar but revived Spain 's claim to the territory after the war . As the territorial dispute intensified , Spain closed its border with Gibraltar between 1969 and 1985 and communications links were severed . Spain 's position was supported by Latin American countries but was rejected by Britain and the Gibraltarians themselves , who vigorously asserted their right to self @-@ determination . Discussions of Gibraltar 's status have continued between Britain and Spain but have not reached any conclusion . 
 Since 1985 , Gibraltar has undergone major changes as a result of reductions in Britain 's overseas defence commitments . Most British forces have left the territory , which is no longer seen as a place of major military importance . Its economy is now based on tourism , financial services , shipping and Internet gambling . Gibraltar is largely self @-@ governed , with its own parliament and government , though the UK maintains responsibility for defence and foreign policy . Its economic success has made it one of the wealthiest areas of the European Union . 
 = = Geographical background = = 
 The history of Gibraltar has been driven by its strategic position near the entrance of the Mediterranean Sea . It is a narrow peninsula at the eastern side of the Bay of Gibraltar , 6 kilometres ( 4 mi ) from the city of Algeciras . Gibraltar is on the far south coast of Spain at one of the narrowest points in the Mediterranean , only 24 kilometres ( 15 mi ) from the coast of Morocco in North Africa . Its position on the bay makes it an advantageous natural anchorage for ships . As one writer has put it , " whoever controls Gibraltar also controls the movement of ships into and out of the Mediterranean . In terms of military and naval power , few places have a more strategic location than Gibraltar . " 
 The territory 's area measures only 6 @.@ 7 square kilometres ( 2 @.@ 6 sq mi ) . Most of the land area is occupied by the steeply sloping Rock of Gibraltar which reaches a height of 426 metres ( 1 @,@ 398 ft ) . The town of Gibraltar lies at the base of the Rock on the west side of the peninsula . A narrow , low @-@ lying isthmus connects the peninsula to the Spanish mainland . The North Face of the Rock is a nearly vertical cliff 396 metres ( 1 @,@ 299 ft ) high overlooking the isthmus ; the only land access to the town is via a coastal strip about 350 metres ( 1 @,@ 150 ft ) wide , which was considerably narrower before the reclamation of land from the sea during the 20th century . 
 Gibraltar 's geography has thus given it considerable natural defensive advantages . It is virtually impossible to scale the eastern or northern sides of the Rock , which are either vertical or nearly so . To the south , the relatively flat area around Europa Point is surrounded by cliffs which are up to 30 metres ( 98 ft ) high . The western side is the only practicable area for a landing , but even here the steep slopes on which the town is built work to the advantage of a defender . These factors have given it an enormous military significance over the centuries . 
 = = Prehistory and ancient history = = 
 Gibraltar 's appearance in prehistory was very different . Whereas today it is surrounded by sea , the water level was much lower in prehistoric times , when the polar ice caps were larger . The current peninsula was surrounded by a fertile coastal plain , with marshes and sand dunes supporting an abundant variety of animals and plants . 
 Neanderthals are known to have lived in caves around the Rock of Gibraltar ; in 1848 the first known adult Neanderthal skull , and only the second Neanderthal fossil ever found , was excavated at Forbes ' Quarry on the north face of the Rock . Had the skull been recognised for what it was , the species might have been named Gibraltarians rather than Neanderthals . The date of the skull is unclear but it has been attributed to around the start of the last glacial period about 50 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 More Neanderthal remains have been found elsewhere on the Rock at Devil 's Tower and in Ibex , Vanguard and Gorham 's Caves on the east side of Gibraltar . Excavations in Gorham 's Cave have found evidence of Neanderthal occupation dated as recently as 28 @,@ 000 – 24 @,@ 000 years ago , well after they were believed to have died out elsewhere in Europe . The caves of Gibraltar continued to be used by Homo sapiens after the final extinction of the Neanderthals . Stone tools , ancient hearths and animal bones dating from around 40 @,@ 000 years ago to about 5 @,@ 000 years ago have been found in deposits left in Gorham 's Cave . Numerous potsherds dating from the Neolithic period have been found in Gibraltar 's caves , mostly of types typical of the <unk> culture found elsewhere in Andalusia , especially around the town of Almería , from which it takes its name . There is little evidence of habitation in the Bronze Age , when people had largely abandoned the tradition of living in caves . 
 During ancient times , Gibraltar was regarded by the peoples of the Mediterranean as a place of religious and symbolic importance . The Phoenicians were present for several centuries , apparently using Gorham 's Cave as a shrine to the genius loci of the place , as did the Carthaginians and Romans after them . Excavations in the cave have shown that pottery , jewellery and Egyptian scarabs were left as offerings to the gods , probably in the hope of securing safe passage through the dangerous waters of the Strait of Gibraltar . 
 The Rock was revered by the Greeks and Romans as one of the two Pillars of Hercules , created by the demigod during his tenth labour when he smashed through a mountain separating the Atlantic and the Mediterranean . According to a <unk> Greek traveller who visited in the sixth century BC , there were temples and altars to Hercules on the Rock where passing travellers made sacrifices . The Spanish later symbolised the importance of the Pillars of Hercules with a heraldic device consisting of a pair of columns with a scroll wrapped around them – a symbol that became the $ sign and the related Portuguese <unk> ( ) . 
 To the Ancient Romans , Gibraltar was known as Mons Calpe , a name perhaps derived from the Phoenician word <unk> , " hollowed out " , presumably in reference to the many limestone caves in the Rock . It was well @-@ known to ancient geographers , but there is no known archaeological evidence of permanent settlements from the ancient period . According to the Roman writer Avienus , the ancient Greek traveller Euctemon recorded that 
 thirty stadia separate [ the Pillars of Hercules ] ; [ Euctemon ] says that they bristle with woods all over and are always unwelcoming to seamen . Indeed he says that on those are both temples and altars to Hercules . He says that strangers sail there by boat to make offerings to the gods and depart hot foot thinking it wrong to linger ... 
 There were more mundane reasons not to settle , as Gibraltar had many disadvantages that were to hinder later settlers . It lacked easily accessible fresh water , fertile soil or a safe natural anchorage on the shoreline . Avienus cited the " shallow draft and dense mud of the shore " as reasons not to land there . Its geographical location , which later became its key strategic asset , was not a significant factor during the Classical period as the entrance to the Mediterranean was not contested by the states of the day . 
 For these reasons the ancients instead settled at the head of the bay in what is today known as the Campo ( hinterland ) of Gibraltar . The town of Carteia , near the location of the modern Spanish town of San Roque , was founded by the Phoenicians around 950 BC on the site of an early settlement of the native <unk> people . The Carthaginians took control of the town by 228 BC and it was captured by the Romans in 206 BC . It subsequently became Pompey 's western base in his campaign of 67 BC against the pirates that menaced the Mediterranean Sea at the time . Carteia appears to have been abandoned after the Vandals sacked it in 409 AD during their march through Roman Hispania to Africa . The region subsequently fell under the rule of the Christianised Visigoths . 
 = = Moorish rule ( 711 – 1309 , 1333 – 1462 ) = = 
 By 681 the armies of the Umayyad Caliphate had expanded from their original homeland of Arabia to conquer North Africa , the Middle East and large parts of West Asia , bringing Islam in their wake and converting local peoples to the new religion . The Berbers of North Africa , called Moors by the Christians , thereby became Muslims . The Strait of Gibraltar became the frontier between Muslim North Africa and Christian Hispania and thus gained a new strategic significance . Hispania descended into civil war in the 8th century as rival Visigothic factions fought for control of the throne . This gave the Moors the opportunity to invade Hispania and pursue a course of dividing @-@ and @-@ conquering the Christian factions . 
 Following a raid in 710 , a predominately Berber army under the command of Tariq ibn Ziyad crossed from North Africa in April 711 and landed somewhere in the vicinity of Gibraltar ( though most likely not in the bay or at the Rock itself ) . Although Tariq 's expedition was an outstanding success and led to the Islamic conquest of most of the Iberian peninsula , he ended his career in disgrace after falling out with the Arab general Musa bin <unk> . His conquest nonetheless left a long @-@ lasting legacy for Gibraltar : Mons Calpe was renamed Jebel Tariq , the Mount of Tariq , subsequently corrupted into Gibraltar . 
 Gibraltar was fortified for the first time in 1160 by the Almohad Sultan Abd al @-@ Mu 'min in response to the coastal threat posed by the Christian kings of Aragon and Castile . Gibraltar was renamed Jebel al @-@ Fath ( the Mount of Victory ) , though this name did not persist , and a fortified town named Medinat al @-@ Fath ( the City of Victory ) was laid out on the upper slopes of the Rock . It is unclear how much of Medinat al @-@ Fath was actually built , as the surviving archaeological remains are scanty . 
 In the late thirteen and early fourteenth centuries Castile fought with the Marinids of Morocco and the Nasrids of Granada for control of the Strait of Gibraltar . This conflict ( Spanish : la Cuestión del <unk> ) is a major chapter in the history of the Christian reconquest of Spain . Although no documentary account of Gibraltar is available for the period following the creation of Madinat al @-@ Fath , there are reasons to believe that a small fortified town existed in Gibraltar , and that its existence was the direct consequence of the fall of Tarifa in 1292 . After the capture of the city , it was expected that the Castilian king Sancho IV would lay siege to Algeciras ( though in the event , he did not do so ) to hinder the Marinids ' communications with the Iberian peninsula . The threatening presence of a Christian stronghold to the west would have made it necessary to set up a garrison to the east of Algeciras . That way , Gibraltar would protect the rearguard of Algeciras and provided a fallback position if the town fell . At the same time , the heights of the Rock of Gibraltar provided an excellent vantage point for monitoring the activities of the Christian fleets in the Straits . 
 It was not until 1309 when Gibraltar 's defences were put to the test for the first time in the First Siege of Gibraltar . That year Ferdinand IV of Castile and James II of Aragon joined forces to attack the Muslim Emirate of Granada , targeting Almería in the east and Algeciras , across the bay from Gibraltar , in the west . In July 1309 the Castilians laid siege to both Algeciras and Gibraltar . By this time the latter had a modest population of around 1 @,@ 200 people , a castle and rudimentary fortifications . They proved unequal to the task of keeping out the Castilians and Gibraltar 's Nasrid defenders surrendered after a month . Ferdinand gave up the siege of Algeciras the following February but held on to Gibraltar , expelling the Moors and repopulating it with Christians . A keep and dockyard were built on his orders to secure Castile 's hold on the peninsula . Ferdinand also issued a letters patent granting privileges to the inhabitants to encourage people to settle , as it was initially not regarded as a particularly hospitable place to live . 
 In 1315 the Nasrid Moors of Granada attempted to recapture Gibraltar but abandoned a brief siege when a Castilian relief force appeared . Eighteen years later , the Nasrid Sultan of Granada , Muhammed and the Marinid Sultan of Fez , Abu al @-@ Hasan Ali ibn Othman , united to besiege Gibraltar with a large army and naval force . This time the king of Castile , Alfonso XI , was unable to raise a relief force for several months because of the threat of rebellions within his kingdom . The relief force eventually arrived in June 1333 but found that the starving inhabitants of Gibraltar had already surrendered to the Moors of Fez . The Castilians now found themselves having to besiege an entrenched enemy , but they were unable to break through the Moorish defences and , faced with a stalemate , the two sides agreed to disengage in exchange for mutual concessions and a four @-@ year truce . 
 Abu al @-@ Hasan refortified Gibraltar with what the Arab chroniclers called " strong walls as a halo surrounds a crescent moon " in anticipation of renewed war , which duly broke out in 1339 . However , his forces suffered a disastrous defeat at the Battle of Río Salado in October 1340 and fell back to Algeciras . The Castilians besieged the city for two years and eventually forced its surrender , though Gibraltar remained in Moorish hands . The peninsula 's defences had been greatly improved by Abu al @-@ Hasan 's construction of new walls , towers , magazines and a citadel , making its capture a much more difficult endeavour . Alfonso XI once again laid siege in 1349 following the death of Abu al @-@ Hasan but was thwarted by the arrival of the Black Death in 1350 , which killed many of his soldiers and claimed his own life . 
 Gibraltar remained in Moorish hands until 1462 but was disputed between the Nasrids of Granada and Marinids of Fez . In 1374 the latter handed the peninsula to the former , apparently in payment for Granadan military support in suppressing rebellions in Morocco . Gibraltar 's garrison rebelled against the Nasrids in 1410 but a Granadan army retook the place the following year after a brief siege . Gibraltar was subsequently used by the <unk> as the base for raids into Christian territory , prompting Enrique de Guzmán , second Count of Niebla , to lay siege in 1436 . The attempt ended in disaster ; the attack was repelled with heavy casualties and Enrique himself was drowned while trying to escape by sea . His body was recovered by the Moors , decapitated and hung on the walls of Gibraltar for the next twenty @-@ two years . 
 Moorish rule over Gibraltar came to an end in August 1462 when a small Castilian force under the command of Alonso de Arcos , the governor of Tarifa , launched a surprise attack . The Castilians mounted their attack while Gibraltar 's senior commanders and townspeople were away paying homage to the new sultan of Granada . After a short assault which inflicted heavy losses on the defenders , the garrison surrendered to Enrique de Guzmán 's son Juan Alonso , now the first Duke of Medina Sidonia . The Moorish inhabitants were once again expelled en masse , to be replaced by Christians . 
 = = Castilian and Spanish rule ( 1462 – 1704 ) = = 
 Shortly after Gibraltar 's recapture , King Henry IV of Castile declared it Crown property and reinstituted the special privileges which his predecessor had granted during the previous period of Christian rule . Four years after visiting Gibraltar in 1463 , he was overthrown by the Spanish nobility and clergy . His half @-@ brother Alfonso was declared king and rewarded Medina Sidonia for his support with the lordship of Gibraltar . The existing governor , a loyalist of the deposed Henry IV , refused to surrender Gibraltar to Medina Sidonia . After a fifteen @-@ month siege from April 1466 to July 1467 , Medina Sidonia took control of the town . He died the following year but his son Enrique was confirmed as lord of Gibraltar by the reinstated Henry IV in 1469 . In 1474 the new Duke of Medina Sidonia sold Gibraltar to a group of 3150 Jewish conversos from Cordova and Seville led by Pedro de Herrera in exchange for maintaining the garrison of the town for two years , after which time the 4 @,@ 350 conversos were evicted by the Duke , returning to their hometowns or moving on to other parts of Spain and possibly the still independent Kingdom of Granada . His status was further enhanced by Isabella I of Castile in 1478 with the granting of the <unk> of Gibraltar . 
 On 2 January 1492 , after five years of war , the Moorish emirate in Spain came to an end with the Catholic Monarchs ' capture of Granada . The Jews of Gibraltar were , like those elsewhere in the kingdom forced to choose between conversion to Catholicism or exile , by order of the monarchs in March that year . Gibraltar was used by Medina Sidonia as a base for the Spanish capture of Melilla in North Africa in 1497 . Two years later , the majority Muslim population of Granada was ordered to convert to Christianity . Although the vast majority remained in Spain as part of its sizeable Morisco population , some of its aristocracy chose exile , a few passing to North Africa through the town of Gibraltar . 
 Gibraltar became Crown property again in 1501 at the order of Isabella and the following year it received a new set of royal arms , which is still used by modern Gibraltar , replacing those of Medina Sidonia . In the Royal Warrant accompanying the arms , Isabella highlighted Gibraltar 's importance as " the key between these our kingdoms in the Eastern and Western Seas [ the Mediterranean and Atlantic ] " . The metaphor was represented on the royal arms by a golden key hanging from the front gate of a battlemented fortress . The warrant charged all future Spanish monarchs to " hold and retain the said City for themselves and in their own possession ; and that no alienation of it , nor any part of it , nor its jurisdiction ... shall ever be made from the Crown of Castile . " 
 At this point in history , " Gibraltar " meant not just the peninsula but the entire surrounding area including the land on which the towns of La Línea de la Concepción , San Roque , Los Barrios and Algeciras now stand . To the east , Gibraltar was bounded by the <unk> River , and its northern boundaries lay in the vicinity of Castellar de la Frontera , Jimena de la Frontera , Alcalá de los <unk> , Medina @-@ Sidonia and Tarifa . From the 16th century , the modern meaning of the name came to be adopted – specifically referring only to the town of Gibraltar and the peninsula on which it stands . 
 Under Spanish Crown rule , the town of Gibraltar fell into severe decline . The end of Muslim rule in Spain and the Christian capture of the southern ports considerably decreased the peninsula 's strategic value . It derived some minor economic value from tuna @-@ fishing and wine @-@ producing industries but its usefulness as a fortress was now limited . It was effectively reduced to the status of an unremarkable stronghold on a rocky promontory and Marbella replaced it as the principal Spanish port in the region . 
 Gibraltar 's inhospitable terrain made it an unpopular place to live . To boost the population , convicts from the kingdom of Granada were offered the possibility of serving their sentence in the Gibraltar garrison as an alternative to prison . Despite its apparent unattractiveness , Juan Alfonso de Guzmán , third Duke of Medina Sidonia , nonetheless sought to regain control of the town . In September 1506 , following Isabella 's death , he laid siege in the expectation that the gates would quickly be opened to his forces . This did not happen , and after a fruitless four @-@ month blockade he gave up the attempt . Gibraltar received the title of " Most Loyal " from the Spanish crown in recognition of its faithfulness . 
 = = = Barbary pirate raids and wars with other European powers = = = 
 Despite continuing external threats Gibraltar was neglected by the Spanish crown and its fortifications fell into disrepair . Barbary pirates from North Africa took advantage of the weak defences in September 1540 by mounting a major raid in which hundreds of Gibraltar 's residents were taken as hostages or slaves . The Shrine of Our Lady of Europe was sacked and all its valuables were stolen . Many of the captives were subsequently released when a Spanish fleet commanded by Bernardino de Mendoza intercepted the pirate ships near <unk> as they were bringing ransomed hostages back to Gibraltar . The Spanish crown belatedly responded to Gibraltar 's vulnerability by building the Charles V Wall to control the southern flank of the Rock and commissioning the Italian engineer Giovanni Battista Calvi to strengthen other parts of the fortifications . 
 The seas around Gibraltar continued to be dangerous for decades to come as Barbary pirate raids continued ; although a small squadron of Spanish galleys was based at the port to counter pirate raids , it proved to be of limited effectiveness and many inhabitants were abducted and sold into slavery by the pirates . The problem worsened significantly after 1606 , as a result of the Expulsion of the <unk> – Spanish Muslims who had converted to Christianity . Many of those permanently expelled settled in North Africa , some passing through Gibraltar and joining the fleets of the Ottoman Empire and the Morisco @-@ founded Republics of Salé and Bou Regreg raiding as far afield as England . 
 The threat of the Barbary pirates was soon joined by that of Spain 's enemies in northern Europe . On 5 May 1607 , during the Eighty Years ' War , a Dutch fleet under Admiral Jacob van <unk> ambushed a Spanish fleet at anchor in the Bay of Gibraltar . The Dutch won an overwhelming victory in the Battle of Gibraltar , losing no ships and very few men while the entire Spanish fleet was destroyed with the loss of 3 @,@ 000 men . The Spanish and Dutch declared a temporary truce in 1609 ( the Twelve Years ' Truce ) and resumed hostilities in 1621 , when a joint Dutch and Danish fleet arrived in the Strait to attack Spanish shipping . This time the Spanish succeeded in capturing and sinking a number of the attackers ' ships in the Battle of Gibraltar , driving away the rest . 
 An English military presence was briefly established at Gibraltar for the first time in 1620 . The Spanish granted permission for the English fleet to use Gibraltar 's port as a base for operations against the Barbary pirates , who were raiding the British and Irish coasts . Some in England had ambitions to turn the fleet against Spain rather than the Barbary coast . However , James I successfully resisted Parliamentary pressure to declare war on Spain and the fleet returned to England . After Charles I ascended the throne in 1625 , a second English fleet was sent to the region with instructions to " take or spoil a town " on the Spanish coast . Gibraltar was one of the proposed targets on the basis that it was small , could easily be garrisoned , supplied and defended , and was in a highly strategic location . The English fleet instead attacked Cadiz in the belief that its sacking would be more immediately profitable , but the raid turned into a fiasco . The landing force looted the town 's wine stores and was evacuated after four days of mass drunkenness without anything useful having been achieved . 
 The presence of Spain 's enemies in the Straits prompted the Spanish king Philip IV to order Gibraltar 's defences to be strengthened . A new mole and gun platforms were built , though the latter 's usefulness was limited due to a lack of gunners . The town was an unsanitary , crowded place , which probably contributed to the outbreak in 1649 of an epidemic – reportedly plague but possibly typhoid – which killed a quarter of the population . English fleets returned to Gibraltar in 1651 – 52 and again in 1654 – 55 as temporary allies of the Spanish against French and Dutch shipping in the Straits . 
 In 1654 , Oliver Cromwell decided to turn on Spain ( which had been the first state to recognise the Commonwealth of England ) and seize the island of Hispaniola to make it a base for English expansion in the Caribbean . To do so , two fleets were fitted out : one set out to America and another to the western Mediterranean with the ostensible objective of fighting the Barbary pirates . The fleet in the Caribbean failed to seize Hispaniola but took over Jamaica instead in May 1655 . The fleet in the Mediterranean sailed off Cadiz trying to intercept the Spanish treasure fleet with no success . With the arrival of the winter , the fleet went back to England . However , Spain did not declare war on England until February 1656 . Shortly after , a fleet of 49 English warships manned by 10 @,@ 000 sailors and soldiers sailed through the Straits and reconnoitred Gibraltar . Although they lacked a viable landing force and took no action , Oliver Cromwell expressed interest in its capture : " if possessed and made tenable by us , would it not be both an advantage to our trade , and an annoyance to the Spaniards , and enable us [ to ] ... ease our own charge ? " In 1693 , during the Nine Years ' War , in which Spain and England were allies , the remnants of an English @-@ Dutch escort squadron under the command of Admiral Sir George Rooke took refuge at Gibraltar , pursued by the French , after losing the Battle of Lagos Bay . Eleven years later , Rooke was to return to Gibraltar to capture it . 
 = = = War of the Spanish Succession ( 1701 – 14 ) = = = 
 In November 1700 , Charles II of Spain died childless . The dispute over who should succeed him – the Bourbon Prince Philip of Anjou , grandson of Louis XIV of France , or the Habsburg Archduke Charles of Austria – soon plunged Europe into a major war . Louis XIV supported Philip . England , the Netherlands , Austria , Portugal , Savoy and some of the German states supported Charles , fearing that Philip 's accession would result in French domination of Europe and the Americas . In accordance with Charles II 's will , Philip was proclaimed king as Philip V of Spain and allied his new kingdom with France . The following February , the War of the Spanish Succession broke out when French forces arrived in the Spanish Netherlands and expelled the Dutch from the barrier towns . In May 1702 , England 's Queen Anne formally declared war on France . 
 Spain thus became a target for the Anglo @-@ Dutch @-@ Austrian alliance . The confederates ' campaign was pursued by land and by sea . The main land offensive was pursued in the Low Countries by the Duke of Marlborough , while naval forces under the command of Admiral Sir George Rooke harassed French and Spanish shipping in the Atlantic . In 1703 , Marlborough devised a plan under which his forces would launch a surprise attack against the French and their Bavarian allies in the Danube basin while Rooke carried out a diversionary naval offensive in the Mediterranean . Rooke was instructed to attack French or Spanish coastal towns , though the choice of target was left to his discretion . 
 When Rooke arrived in the region several targets were considered . An attempt to incite the inhabitants of Barcelona to revolt against Philip V failed , and a plan to assault the French naval base at Toulon was abandoned , and an earlier attempt to take Cadiz had failed . Casting around for an easier target , Rooke decided to attack Gibraltar for three principal reasons : it was poorly garrisoned and fortified , it would be of major strategic value to the war effort , and its capture might encourage the inhabitants of southern Spain to reject Philip . 
 The attack was launched on 1 August 1704 as a combined operation between the naval force under Rooke 's command and a force of Dutch and English marines under the command of Prince George of Hesse @-@ Darmstadt and Captain Edward Whitaker of HMS Dorsetshire . After a heavy naval bombardment on 2 August , the marines launched a pincer attack on the town , advancing south from the isthmus and north from Europa Point . Gibraltar 's defenders were well stocked with food and ammunition but were heavily outnumbered and outgunned . The Spanish position was untenable and on the morning of 4 August , the governor , Diego de Salinas , agreed to surrender . 
 The terms of surrender made it clear that Gibraltar had been taken in the name of Charles III of Spain , described in the terms as " legitimate Lord and King " . The inhabitants and garrison of Gibraltar were promised freedom of religion and the maintenance of existing rights if they wished to stay , on condition that they swore an oath of loyalty to Charles as King of Spain . As had happened two years previously in the raid on Cadiz , the discipline of the landing forces soon broke down . There were numerous incidents of rape , all Catholic churches but one ( the Parish Church of St. Mary the Crowned , now the Cathedral ) were desecrated or converted into military storehouses , and religious symbols such as the statue of Our Lady of Europe were damaged and destroyed . Angry Spanish inhabitants took violent reprisals against the occupiers . English and Dutch soldiers and sailors were attacked and killed , and their bodies were thrown into wells and cesspits . 
 When the Spanish garrison marched out on 7 August almost all of the inhabitants , some 4 @,@ 000 people in total , evacuated the town . They had reason to believe that their exile would not last long , as fortresses and towns changed hands frequently at the time . Many settled nearby in the ruins of Algeciras or around an old hermitage at the head of the bay in the expectation of a prompt return . They took with them the records of the city council including Gibraltar 's banner and royal warrant . In time the refugee settlement at the hermitage developed into the town of San Roque . It was regarded by the Spanish , as Philip V put it in 1706 , as being the " City of Gibraltar resident in its Campo " . A small population of around seventy neutral Genoese people stayed behind in Gibraltar . 
 The Grand Alliance 's control of Gibraltar was challenged on 24 August when a French fleet entered the Straits . In the subsequent Battle of Vélez @-@ Málaga , both sides sustained heavy crew casualties but lost no ships , enabling each side to claim the engagement as a victory . The French withdrew to Toulon without attempting to assault Gibraltar . In early September a Franco @-@ Spanish army arrived outside Gibraltar and prepared for a siege which they commenced on 9 October . Around 7 @,@ 000 French and Spanish soldiers , aided by refugees from Gibraltar , were pitted against a force of 2 @,@ 000 defenders consisting of English and Dutch marines and Spanish soldiers and miquelets loyal to Charles . 
 The defenders were aided from late October by a naval squadron under Admiral Sir John Leake . A further 2 @,@ 200 English and Dutch reinforcements arrived by sea with fresh supplies of food and ammunition in December 1704 . With morale falling in the Franco @-@ Spanish camp amid desertions and sickness , Louis XIV despatched Marshal de Tessé to take command in February 1705 . A Franco @-@ Spanish assault was beaten back with heavy casualties and on 31 March , de Tessé gave up the siege , complaining of a " want of method and planning " . 
 During the War of Spanish Succession , Gibraltar was governed by the British commandant as a possession of Duke Charles of Austria as Charles III of Spain . The British commandant , Major General John Shrimpton , was appointed by Charles as Gibraltar 's governor in 1705 on the advice of Queen Anne . The Queen subsequently declared Gibraltar a free port at the insistence of the Sultan of Morocco , though she had no formal authority to do so . Shrimpton was replaced in 1707 by Colonel Roger Elliott , who was replaced in turn by Brigadier Thomas Stanwix in 1711 ; this time the appointments were made directly by London with no claim of authority from Charles . Stanwix was ordered to expel all foreign troops from Gibraltar to secure its status as an exclusively British possession but failed to evict the Dutch , apparently not considering them " foreign " . 
 The War of the Spanish Succession was finally settled in 1713 by a series of treaties and agreements . Under the Treaty of Utrecht , which was signed on 13 July 1713 and brought together a number of sub @-@ treaties and agreements , Philip V was accepted by Britain and Austria as King of Spain in exchange for guarantees that the crowns of France and Spain would not be unified . Various territorial exchanges were agreed : although Philip V retained the Spanish overseas empire , he ceded the Southern Netherlands , Naples , Milan , and Sardinia to Austria ; Sicily and some Milanese lands to Savoy ; and Gibraltar and Minorca to Great Britain . In addition he granted the British the exclusive right to non @-@ Spanish slave trading in Spanish America for thirty years , the so @-@ called <unk> . With regard to Gibraltar ( Article X ) , the town , fortifications and port ( but not the hinterland ) were ceded to Britain " for ever , without any exception or impediment whatsoever . " The treaty also stipulated that if Britain was ever to dispose of Gibraltar it would first have to offer the territory to Spain . 
 = = British rule ( 1713 – present ) = = 
 = = = Consolidation and sieges = = = 
 Despite its later importance to Britain , Gibraltar was initially seen by the British Government as more of a bargaining counter than a strategic asset . Its defences continued to be neglected , its garrisoning was an unwelcome expense , and Spanish pressure threatened Britain 's vital overseas trade . On seven separate occasions between 1713 and 1728 the British Government proposed to exchange Gibraltar for concessions from Spain , but on each occasion the proposals were vetoed by the British Parliament following public protests . 
 Spain 's loss of Gibraltar and <unk> was resented by the Spanish public and monarchy alike . In 1717 Spanish forces retook Sardinia and in 1718 Sicily , both of which had been ceded to Austria under the Treaty of Utrecht . The effective Spanish repudiation of the treaty prompted the British initially to propose handing back Gibraltar in exchange for a peace agreement and , when that failed , to declare war on Spain . The Spanish gains were quickly reversed , a Spanish expedition to Scotland in 1719 supporting the Jacobites was defeated and peace was eventually restored by the Treaty of The Hague . 
 In January 1727 , Spain declared the nullification of the Treaty of Utrecht 's provisions relating to Gibraltar on the grounds that Britain had violated its terms by extending Gibraltar 's fortifications beyond the permitted limits , allowing Jews and Moors to live there , failing to protect Catholics and harming Spain 's revenues by allowing smuggling . Spanish forces began a siege and bombardment of Gibraltar the following month , causing severe damage through intensive cannon fire . The defenders withstood the threat and were reinforced and resupplied by a British naval force . Bad weather and supply problems caused the Spanish to call off the siege at the end of June . 
 Britain 's hold on Gibraltar was reconfirmed in 1729 by the Treaty of Seville , which satisfied neither side ; the Spanish had wanted Gibraltar returned , while the British disliked the continuation of the restrictions imposed by the Treaty of Utrecht . Spain responded the following year by constructing a line of fortifications across the upper end of the peninsula , cutting off Gibraltar from its hinterland . The fortifications , known to the British as the Spanish Lines , and to Spain as La Línea de <unk> ( the Lines of <unk> ) , were later to give their name to the modern town of La Línea de la Concepción . Gibraltar was effectively blockaded by land but was able to rely on trade with Morocco for food and other supplies . 
 Gibraltar 's civilian population increased steadily through the century to form a disparate mixture of Britons , Genoese , Jews , Spaniards and Portuguese . By 1754 there were 1 @,@ 733 civilians in addition to 3 @,@ 000 garrison soldiers and their 1 @,@ 426 family members , bringing the total population to 6 @,@ 159 . The civilian population increased to 3 @,@ 201 by 1777 , including 519 Britons , 1 @,@ 819 Roman Catholics ( meaning Spanish , Portuguese , Genoese etc . ) and 863 Jews . Each group had its own distinctive niche in the fortress . The Spanish historian López de Alaya , writing in 1782 , characterised their roles thus : 
 The richest mercantile houses are English ... The Jews , for the most part , are shop keepers and brokers ... They have a synagogue and openly practice the ceremonies of their religion , notwithstanding the terms of the Treaty of Utrecht ... The Genoese are traders , but the greater part of them are fishermen , traders and gardeners . 
 Life for the ordinary soldiers of the garrison was tedious and harsh , with corporal punishment administered for even the most trivial offences . Suicide and desertions were common due to boredom , shortages of food and the poor living conditions . At Middle Hill Battery , guards had to be posted to prevent soldiers from deserting by lowering themselves on ropes down the cliff face . 
 The fortifications of Gibraltar were modernised and upgraded in the 1770s with the construction of new batteries , bastions and curtain walls . The driving force behind this programme was the highly experienced Colonel ( later Major General ) William Green , who was to play a key role a few years later as chief engineer of Gibraltar . He was joined in 1776 by Lieutenant General George Augustus Elliott , a veteran of earlier wars against France and Spain who took over the governorship of Gibraltar at a key moment . 
 Britain 's successes in the Seven Years ' War had left it with expensive commitments in the Americas that had to be paid for and had catalysed the formation of an anti @-@ British coalition in Europe . The British Government 's attempt to levy new taxes on the Thirteen Colonies of British America led to the outbreak of the American War of Independence in 1776 . Spain declared war on Britain and started the Anglo @-@ Spanish War and then tried to recover Gibraltar with French aid . 
 The Great Siege of Gibraltar lasted from 24 June 1779 to 7 February 1783 and remains one of the longest sieges endured by the British Armed Forces , as well as being one of the longest continuous sieges in history . A combined Spanish and French fleets blockaded Gibraltar from the sea , while on the land side an enormous army was engaged in constructing forts , redoubts , entrenchments , and batteries from which to attack Gibraltar . The Spanish committed increasing number of troops and ships to the siege , postponing the planned invasion of England by the Armada of 1779 . The first relief of the siege came in the spring of 1780 when Admiral George Rodney captured a Spanish convoy off Cape <unk> and defeated a Spanish fleet at the Battle of Cape St. Vincent , delivering reinforcements of 1 @,@ 052 men and an abundance of supplies . 
 The British defenders continued to resist every attempt to capture Gibraltar by assault but supplies again began to run low . On 12 April 1781 Vice Admiral George Darby 's squadron of 29 ships of the line escorting 100 store ships from England laden for Gibraltar entered the bay . The Spanish fleet was unable to intercept Darby 's relief . The Spanish frustrated by this failure began a barrage of the town causing great panic and terror among the civilian population . Deliberate targeting of civilians was unprecedented at the time and was to continue for 2 years obliterating any architectural heritage from the Spanish period . Unable to starve the garrison out the French and Spanish attempted further attacks by land and sea , the night before the Grand Attack on 27 November 1781 , the British garrison filed silently out of their defence works and made a surprise sortie routing the besieging infantry in their trenches and postponed the grand assault on The Rock for some time . 
 On 13 September 1782 the Bourbon allies launched their great attack ; <unk> fighting men , both French and Spanish , aboard ten of the newly engineered ' floating batteries ' with 138 heavy guns , as well as 18 ships of the line , 40 Spanish gunboats and 20 bomb @-@ vessels with a total of 30 @,@ 000 sailors and marines . They were supported by 86 land guns and 35 @,@ 000 Spanish and French troops ( 7 @,@ 000 – 8 @,@ 000 French ) on land intending to assault the fortifications once they had been demolished . The 138 guns opened fire from floating batteries in the Bay and the 86 guns on the land side , directed on the fortifications after weeks of preparatory artillery fire . But the garrison replied with red @-@ hot shot to set fire to and sink the attacker 's floating batteries and warships in the Bay . The British destroyed three of the floating batteries , which blew up as the ' red @-@ hot shot ' did its job . The other seven batteries were scuttled by the Spanish . In addition 719 men on board the ships ( many of whom drowned ) were casualties . 
 In Britain the Admiralty considered plans for a major relief of Gibraltar , opting to send a larger , but slower fleet , rather than a smaller faster one . In September 1782 a large fleet left Spithead under Richard Howe , arriving off Cape St. Vincent on 9 October . The following evening a gale blew up , scattering the Spanish and French fleet allowing Howe to sail unopposed into Gibraltar . A total of 34 ships of the line escorted 31 transport ships which delivered supplies , food , and ammunition . The fleet also brought the 25th , 59th , and 97th regiments of foot bringing the total number of the garrison to over 7 @,@ 000 Howe then sailed out and fought an indecisive battle with the combined allied fleet before withdrawing to Britain in line with his orders . 
 The siege was continued for some months longer , but in the spring of 1783 a preliminary peace agreement brought the cessation of hostilities . Finally , in February 1783 the siege was lifted . The outcome of the Great Siege made it politically impossible for the British government to again consider trading away Gibraltar , even though King George III warned that it would be the source " of another war , or at least of a constant lurking enmity " and expressed his wish " if possible to be rid of Gibraltar ... I shall not think peace complete if we do not get rid of Gibraltar . " General Eliott and the garrison were lauded for their heroism , and the tenacity of their defence of Gibraltar acquired , as one writer puts it , " a sort of cult status " . The British public acquired " an emotional , albeit irrational , attachment to the place . " The reputed impregnability of Gibraltar gave rise to the expression , which is still current today , of something being as " strong as the Rock of Gibraltar " . 
 = = = Gibraltar as a colony = = = 
 Following the Great Siege , the civilian population of Gibraltar – which had fallen to under a thousand – expanded rapidly as the territory became both a place of economic opportunity and a refuge from the Napoleonic Wars . Britain 's loss of North American colonies in 1776 led to much of her trade being redirected to new markets in India and the East Indies . The favoured route to the east was via Egypt , even before the Suez Canal had been built , and Gibraltar was the first British port reached by ships heading there . The new maritime traffic gave Gibraltar a greatly increased role as a trading port . At the same time , it was a haven in the western Mediterranean from the disruption of the Napoleonic Wars . Many of the new immigrants were Genoese people who had fled Napoleon 's annexation of the old Republic of Genoa . By 1813 nearly a third of the population consisted of Genoese and Italians . Portuguese made up another 20 per cent , Spaniards 16 @.@ 5 per cent , Jews 15 @.@ 5 per cent , British 13 per cent and <unk> 4 per cent . The young Benjamin Disraeli described the inhabitants of Gibraltar as a mixture of " Moors with costumes as radiant as a rainbow or Eastern melodrama , Jews with <unk> and skull @-@ caps , Genoese , Highlanders and Spanish . " The inhabitants had a clear pecking order , with British officers at the top and Jews at the bottom . The American naval officer Alexander Slidell Mackenzie , writing in 1829 , described the market traders and shoppers in what is now John Mackintosh Square : 
 The high handed hauteur of his majesty 's officer , as he lounges at a corner in utter scorn of the busy crew of <unk> ; the supple <unk> [ <unk> ] who bows breast low to him in hope of a nod of condescension ... ; a rough skipper , accustomed to bang and bully and be a little king upon his own quarter @-@ deck ; the sullen demeanour of the turbaned Moor , who sits <unk> at a shady corner ... ; the filthy , slipshod , abject Jew , who sells slippers or oranges , or serves officers , merchants , sailors , or Moors , as a beast of burden ... 
 Gibraltar was an unhealthy place to live due to its poor sanitation and living conditions . It was repeatedly ravaged by epidemics of yellow fever and cholera , which killed thousands of the inhabitants and members of the garrison . An epidemic in the second half of 1804 killed more than a third of the entire population , civilian and military . Lord Nelson wrote the following March that he hoped that Gibraltar " will escape the dreadful scourge of last autumn , and I hope that General Fox has burnt down all the small houses at the back of the Town ; and perhaps if half the Town went with them , it would be better for the Rock . " 
 During the wars against Napoleonic France , Gibraltar served first as a Royal Navy base from which blockades of the ports of Cadiz , Cartagena and Toulon were mounted , then as a gateway for British forces and supplies in the Peninsular War between 1807 and 1814 . In July 1801 a French and Spanish naval force fought the two Battles of Algeciras off Gibraltar , which ended in disaster for the Spanish when two of their largest warships each mistook the other for the enemy , engaged each other , collided , caught fire and exploded , killing nearly 2 @,@ 000 Spanish sailors . Two years later Gibraltar served as a base for Lord Nelson in his efforts to bring the French Admiral Pierre @-@ Charles Villeneuve to battle , which culminated in the Battle of Trafalgar in which Nelson was killed and Villeneuve captured . Nelson sailed to Gibraltar in June 1803 to launch the Trafalgar Campaign and oversee the blockades against France and Spain , though he spent little time ashore . On 28 October 1805 , a week after the Battle of Trafalgar , the badly damaged HMS Victory returned to Gibraltar with Nelson 's body aboard ; Admiral Collingwood 's dispatch to General Fox , announcing the victory and Nelson 's death , was printed in the pages of the Gibraltar Chronicle . It thus became the first newspaper in the world to report the victory at Trafalgar , two weeks ahead of The Times . 
 In the years after Trafalgar , Gibraltar became a major supply base for supporting the Spanish uprising against Napoleon . The French invasion of Spain in 1808 prompted Gibraltar 's British garrison to cross the border and destroy the ring of Spanish fortresses around the bay , as well as the old Spanish fortified lines on the isthmus , to deny the French the ability to besiege Gibraltar or control the bay from shore batteries . French forces reached as far as San Roque , just north of Gibraltar , but did not attempt to target Gibraltar itself as they believed that it was impregnable . The French besieged Tarifa , further down the coast , in 1811 – 12 but gave up after a month . Gibraltar faced no further military threat for a century . 
 After peace returned , Gibraltar underwent major changes during the reformist governorship of General Sir George Don , who took up his position in 1814 . The damage caused by the Great Siege had long since been repaired , but Gibraltar was still essentially a medieval town in its layout and narrow streets . A lack of proper drainage had been a major contributing factor in the epidemics that had frequently ravaged the fortress . Don implemented improved sanitation and drainage as well as introducing street lighting , rebuilding St Bernard 's Hospital to serve the civilian population and initiating the construction of the Cathedral of the Holy Trinity to serve Gibraltar 's Protestant civilians . For the first time , civilians began to have a say in the running of Gibraltar . An Exchange and Commercial Library was founded in 1817 , with the Exchange Committee initially focused on furthering the interests of merchants based in the fortress . The Committee evolved into a local civilian voice in government , although it had no real powers . A City Council was established in 1821 , and in 1830 Gibraltar became a Crown colony . In the same year , the Gibraltar Police Force was established , modelled on London 's pioneering Metropolitan Police Service , and a Supreme Court was set up to try civil , criminal and mixed cases . 
 The economic importance of Gibraltar changed following the invention of steamships ; the first one to reach Gibraltar 's harbour arrived there in 1823 . The advent of steamships caused a major shift in trade patterns in the Mediterranean . <unk> , which had previously been Gibraltar 's principal economic mainstay , was largely replaced by the much less lucrative work of servicing visiting steamships through coaling , victualling and ferrying of goods . Although Gibraltar became a key coaling station where British steamships refuelled on the way to Alexandria or Cape Horn , the economic changes resulted in a prolonged depression that lasted until near the end of the century . The demand for labour for coaling was such that Gibraltar instituted the practice of relying on large numbers of imported Spanish workers . A shanty town sprang up on the site of the old Spanish fortifications just across the border , which became the workers ' town of La Línea de la Concepción . The poor economy meant that Gibraltar 's population barely changed between 1830 and 1880 , but it was still relatively more prosperous than the severely impoverished south of Spain . As a consequence , La Línea 's population doubled over the same period and then doubled again in the following 20 years . 
 Visiting Gibraltar in the mid @-@ 19th century , the English writer Richard Ford wrote in his Handbook for Travellers in Spain that " the differences of nations and costumes are very curious : a motley masquerade is held in this halfway house between Europe , Asia , and Africa , where every man appears in his own dress and speaks his own language . Civilization and barbarism clash here indeed ... or the Rock , like Algeria , is a refuge for destitute <unk> , and is the asylum for people of all nations who expatriate themselves for their country 's good . " He described the town 's Main Street as " the antithesis of a Spanish town " , lined with " innumerable pot – houses " which made it a " den of gin and intemperance ; every thing and body is in motion ; there is no quiet , no repose ; all is hurry and scurry , for time is money and Mammon is the god of Gib , as the name is vulgarized ... The entire commerce of the Peninsula seems condensed into this <unk> , where all creeds and nations meet , and most of them adepts at the one grand game of beggar my neighbour . " 
 Relations with Spain during the 19th century were generally amicable . Regular British soldiers were forbidden to cross the border but officers could cross freely into Spain , as could the inhabitants of Gibraltar , some of whom had second houses in the town of San Roque about 10 kilometres ( 6 mi ) away . The garrison introduced the very British activity of fox hunting in the form of the Royal Calpe Hunt , started in 1812 , which saw British officers and local Spanish gentry pursuing foxes across the Campo de Gibraltar . A major bone of contention during this period was the issue of smuggling across the border . The problem arose after Spain imposed tariffs on foreign manufactured goods in a bid to protect Spain 's own fledgling industrial enterprises . Tobacco was also heavily taxed , providing one of the government 's principal sources of revenue . The inevitable result was that Gibraltar , where cheap tobacco and goods were readily available , became a centre of intensive smuggling activity . The depressed state of the economy caused smuggling to become a mainstay of Gibraltar 's trade ; the mid @-@ 19th @-@ century Irish traveller Martin <unk> described Gibraltar as " the grand smuggling depot for Spain " . General Sir Robert Gardiner , who served as Governor between 1848 and 1855 , described the daily scene in a letter to British Prime Minister Lord Palmerston : 
 From the first early opening of the gates there is to be seen a stream of Spanish men , women and children , horses and a few <unk> , passing into the town where they remain moving about from shop to shop until about noon . The human beings enter the Garrison in their natural sizes , but quit it swathed and swelled out with our cotton manufactures , and padded with tobacco , while the carriages and beasts , which come light and springy into the place , quit it scarcely able to drag or bear their burdens . The Spanish authorities bear part in this traffic , by receiving a bribe from every individual passing the Lines , their persons and their purposes being thoroughly known to them . Some of these people take hardware goods , as well as cotton and tobacco , into Spain . 
 The problem was eventually reduced by imposing duties on imported goods , which made them much less attractive to smugglers and raised funds to make much @-@ needed improvements to sanitation . Despite the improvements made earlier in the century , living conditions in Gibraltar were still dire . A Colonel Sayer , who was garrisoned at Gibraltar in the 1860s , described the town as " composed of small and crowded dwellings , ill ventilated , badly drained and crammed with human beings . Upwards of 15 @,@ 000 persons are confined within a space covering a square mile [ 2 @.@ 5 km2 ] . " Although there were sewers , a lack of water made them virtually useless in summer and the poorer inhabitants were sometimes unable to afford enough water even to wash themselves . One doctor commented that " the open street is much more desirable than many of the lodgings of the lower orders of Gibraltar . " The establishment of a Board of Sanitary Commissioners in 1865 and work on new drainage , sewerage and water supply systems prevented further major epidemics . A system of underground reservoirs capable of containing 5 million gallons ( 22 @.@ 7 million litres ) of water was constructed within the Rock of Gibraltar . Other municipal services arrived as well – a gas works in 1857 , a telegraph link by 1870 and electricity by 1897 . Gibraltar also developed a high @-@ quality school system , with as many as 42 schools by 1860 . 
 By the end of the 19th century , the " Gibraltarians " were given an official identity for the first time . It was only in the 1830s that Gibraltar @-@ born residents began to outnumber foreign @-@ born , but by 1891 nearly 75 % of the population of 19 @,@ 011 people were Gibraltar @-@ born . The emergence of the Gibraltarians as a distinct group owed much to the pressure on housing in the territory and the need to control the numbers of the civilian population , as Gibraltar was still first and foremost a military fortress . Two Orders in Council of 1873 and 1885 stipulated that no child of alien parent could be born in Gibraltar , no foreigners could claim a right of residence and that only Gibraltar @-@ born inhabitants were entitled to reside there ; everyone else needed permits , unless they were employees of the British Crown . In addition to the 14 @,@ 244 Gibraltarians , there were also 711 British people , 695 Maltese and 960 from other British dominions . There were 1 @,@ 869 Spaniards ( of whom 1 @,@ 341 were female ) with smaller numbers of Portuguese , Italians , French and Moroccans . 
 = = = Gibraltar at war and peace = = = 
 By the end of the 19th century and beginning of the 20th , Gibraltar 's future as a British colony was in serious doubt . Its economic value was diminishing , as a new generation of steamships with a much longer range no longer needed to stop there to refuel en route to more distant ports . Its military value was also increasingly in question due to advances in military technology . New long @-@ range guns firing high @-@ explosive shells could easily reach Gibraltar from across the bay or in the Spanish hinterland , while the development of torpedoes meant that ships at anchor in the bay were also vulnerable . The garrison could hold out for a long time , but if the Spanish coast was held by an enemy , Gibraltar could not be resupplied in the fashion that had saved it in the Great Siege 120 years earlier . 
 A Spanish proposal to swap Gibraltar for Ceuta on the other side of the Strait was considered but was eventually rejected . It was ultimately decided that Gibraltar 's strategic position as a naval base outweighed its potential vulnerability from the landward side . From 1889 , the Royal Navy was greatly expanded and both Gibraltar and Malta were equipped with new , torpedo @-@ proof harbours and expanded , modernised dockyards . The works at Gibraltar were carried out by some 2 @,@ 200 men at the huge cost of £ 5 million ( £ 485 @,@ 968 @,@ 723 in 2013 prices ) . Under the reforming leadership of First Sea Lord Admiral John " Jacky " Fisher , Gibraltar became the base for the Atlantic Fleet . In the British public 's imagination , Gibraltar was seen as " a symbol of British naval power [ and ] a symbol of the empire which has been built and , more than the British lion or even John Bull himself , has come to represent Britain 's power and prestige across the world . " 
 The value of the naval base was soon apparent when the First World War broke out in August 1914 . Only a few minutes after the declaration of war went into effect at midnight on 3 / 4 August , a German liner was captured by a torpedo boat from Gibraltar , followed by three more enemy ships the following day . Although Gibraltar was well away from the main battlefields of the war – Spain remained neutral and the Mediterranean was not contested as it was in the Second World War – it played an important role in the Allied fight against the German U @-@ boat campaign . The naval base was heavily used by Allied warships for resupplying and repairs . The Bay of Gibraltar was also used as a forming @-@ up point for Allied convoys , while German U @-@ boats stalked the Strait looking for targets . On two occasions , Gibraltar 's guns unsuccessfully fired on two U @-@ boats travelling through the Strait . Anti @-@ submarine warfare was in its infancy and it proved impossible to prevent U @-@ boats operating through the Strait . Only two days before the end of the war , on 9 November 1918 , SM UB @-@ 50 torpedoed and sank the British battleship HMS Britannia off Cape Trafalgar to the west of Gibraltar . 
 The restoration of peace inevitably meant a reduction in military expenditure , but this was more than offset by a large increase in liner and cruise ship traffic to Gibraltar . British liners travelling to and from India and South Africa customarily stopped there , as did French , Italian and Greek liners travelling to and from America . Oil bunkering became a major industry alongside coaling . An airfield was established in 1933 on the isthmus linking Gibraltar to Spain . Civil society was reformed as well ; in 1921 an Executive Council and an elected City Council were established to advise the governor , in the first step towards self @-@ government of the territory . 
 The outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in July 1936 presented Gibraltar with major security concerns , as it was initially on the front lines of the conflict . The ultimately successful rebellion led by General Francisco Franco broke out across the Strait in Morocco , and the Spanish Republican government sought on several occasions to regain control of the Nationalist @-@ controlled area around Algeciras . Although Gibraltar was not directly affected by the fighting , the war caused significant disruption . An undetermined number of Spanish refugees , perhaps as many as 10 @,@ 000 persons , fled to Gibraltar , resulting in severe overcrowding . A Non @-@ Intervention Patrol was mounted by the Royal Navy , operating from Gibraltar , to prevent foreign military aid reaching the belligerents in Spain . In May 1937 , one of the ships involved in the patrol , the destroyer HMS Hunter , hit a Nationalist mine and had to be towed back to Gibraltar with eight of her crew dead . The Spanish Civil War had a deep impact on Gibraltarian society . On one hand , the British authorities , the Anglican and Catholic churches and the Gibraltarian moneyed class supported the Nationalists in the War , while the working class sided with the Republicans . With Europe sliding towards a general war , the British Government decided to strengthen Gibraltar 's defences and upgrade the naval base to accommodate the latest generation of battleships and aircraft carriers . A Gibraltar Defence Force ( now the Royal Gibraltar Regiment ) was established in March 1939 to assist with home defence . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 The outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939 did not initially cause much disruption in Gibraltar , as Spain and Italy were neutral at the time . The situation changed drastically after April 1940 when Germany invaded France , with Italy joining the invasion in June 1940 . The British Government feared that Spain would also enter the war and it was decided to evacuate the entire civilian population of Gibraltar in May 1940 . Most went to the United Kingdom and others to Madeira and Jamaica , while some made their own way to Tangier and Spain . An intensive programme of tunnelling and refortification was undertaken ; over 50 kilometres ( 30 mi ) of tunnels were dug in the Rock , and anti @-@ aircraft batteries were installed in numerous locations in the territory . A new and powerful naval group called Force H was established at Gibraltar to control the entrance to the Mediterranean and support Allied forces in North Africa , the Mediterranean and the Atlantic . The airfield , which was now designated RAF North Front , was also extended using soil from the tunnelling works so that it could accommodate bomber aircraft being ferried to North Africa . The garrison was greatly expanded , reaching a peak of 17 @,@ 000 in 1943 with another 20 @,@ 000 sailors and airmen accommodated in Gibraltar at the same time . 
 During the Battle of the Atlantic , Gibraltar played a key role . The Ocean Convoy System adopted by Britain after the fall of France in June 1940 ran on two routes – an east – west route between the UK and North America , and a north – south route between the UK , Gibraltar and Freetown in British @-@ ruled Sierra Leone . Even before the war , Gibraltar had been designated as one of the main assembly points for convoys heading inbound to Europe . From late 1942 , Gibraltar was the destination of the Central Atlantic convoy route between the United States and the Mediterranean in support of Allied operations in North Africa , Sicily , Italy and elsewhere in the region . A huge number of Allied troops and ships travelled this route ; between November 1942 and August 1945 , 11 @,@ 119 ships travelled in 189 convoys between Gibraltar and the United States and vice versa , and between December 1942 and March 1945 , 536 @,@ 134 troops were transported from the United States to Gibraltar . 
 Gibraltar was directly attacked , both overtly and covertly , on several occasions during the war . Vichy French aircraft carried out bombing attacks in 1940 after the surprise attack of their fleet by the royal navy and there were sporadic raids from Italian and German long @-@ range aircraft , though the damage caused was not significant . Franco 's position changed subtly from one of neutrality to " non @-@ belligerence " , which in practice meant allowing the Axis powers to operate covertly against Gibraltar from Spanish territory . Despite Franco 's willingness to overlook German and Italian activities in and around the Bay of Gibraltar , he decided not to join Hitler 's planned Operation Felix to seize the territory . A major factor influencing his decision was the vulnerability of Spain 's food supplies , as the country was unable to feed itself after the destruction of the Civil War . It relied on grain imports from the Americas , which would certainly have been cut off had Franco gone to war with the Allies . Hitler eventually abandoned Felix to pursue other priorities such as the invasions of Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union . 
 German and Italian spies kept a constant watch on Gibraltar and sought to carry out sabotage operations , sometimes successfully . The Italians repeatedly carried out raids on Gibraltar 's harbour using human torpedoes and divers operating from the Spanish shore , damaging a number of merchant ships and sinking one . Three Spaniards being run as spies and saboteurs by the German Abwehr were caught in Gibraltar in 1942 – 43 and hanged . The threat to Gibraltar was greatly reduced after the collapse of Italy in September 1943 . 
 = = = Post @-@ war Gibraltar = = = 
 Although Gibraltar 's civilian inhabitants had started to return as early as April 1944 , the last evacuees did not arrive back home until as late as February 1951 . The immediate problem after VJ Day was a lack of shipping , as all available vessels were needed to bring troops home , but the longer @-@ term problem was a lack of civilian housing . The garrison was relocated to the southern end of the peninsula to free up space and military accommodation was temporarily reused to house the returning civilians . A programme to build housing projects was implemented , though progress was slow due to shortages of building materials . By 1969 , over 2 @,@ 500 flats had either been built or were under construction . 
 In the war 's aftermath , Gibraltar took decisive steps towards implementing civilian self @-@ governance over most issues of public policy . The Association for the Advancement of Civil Rights ( AACR ) , led by Gibraltarian lawyer Joshua Hassan , won all of the seats in the first post @-@ war City Council elections in 1945 . Women were given the right to vote in 1947 , and in 1950 a Legislative Council was established . A two @-@ party system had emerged by 1955 with the creation of the Commonwealth Party as a rival to the AACR . That same year Hassan became the first Mayor of Gibraltar . The Governor still retained overall authority and could overrule the Legislative Council . This inevitably caused tension and controversy if the Governor and Legislative Council disagreed , but in 1964 the British Government agreed to confine the powers of the Governor to matters of defence , security and foreign relations . A new constitution was decided on in 1968 and promulgated in 1969 , merging the City Council and Legislative Council into a single House of Assembly ( known as the Gibraltar Parliament since 2006 ) with 15 elected members , two non @-@ elected officials and a speaker . The old title of " Colony of Gibraltar " was dropped and the territory was renamed as the City of Gibraltar . 
 Gibraltar 's post @-@ war relationship with Spain was marred by an intensification of the long @-@ running dispute over the territory 's sovereignty . Although Spain had not attempted to use military force to regain Gibraltar since 1783 , the question of sovereignty was still present . Disputes over smuggling and the sea frontier between Gibraltar and Spain had repeatedly caused diplomatic tensions during the 19th century . The neutral zone between Spain and Gibraltar had also been a cause of disputes during the 19th and 20th centuries . This originally had been an <unk> strip of sand on the isthmus between the British and Spanish lines of fortifications , about 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) wide – the distance of a cannon shot in 1704 . Over the years , however , Britain took control of most of the neutral zone , much of which is now occupied by Gibraltar 's airport . This expansion provoked repeated protests from Spain . 
 Spain 's push to regain sovereignty over Gibraltar was fuelled by the decolonisation agenda of the United Nations , which had been initiated in 1946 . In that year , Britain had listed Gibraltar among other " Overseas Dependent Territories " in conjunction with the drive towards decolonisation , but it was not appreciated at the time that Gibraltar was in a unique position ; due to the terms of the Treaty of Utrecht , it could only be British or Spanish and could not gain independence . Franco 's government calculated that Britain would be willing to give up an expensive possession that no longer had a great deal of military value , but this turned out to be a fundamental misjudgement . The British government followed a policy of allowing its colonies to become self @-@ governing entities before giving them the option of independence . Almost all took it , choosing to become independent republics . That option was not available to Gibraltar under the terms of the Treaty of Utrecht , which required that if Britain ever relinquished control it was to be handed back to Spain . The Gibraltarians strongly opposed this and organised a referendum in September 1967 in which 12 @,@ 138 voters opted to remain with Britain and only 44 supported union with Spain . Spain dismissed the outcome of the referendum , calling the city 's inhabitants " pseudo @-@ Gibraltarians " and stating that the " real " Gibraltarians were the descendants of the Spanish inhabitants who had resettled elsewhere in the region over 250 years earlier . 
 The dispute initially took the form of symbolic protests and a campaign by Spanish diplomats and the state @-@ controlled media . From 1954 , Spain imposed increasingly stringent restrictions on trade and the movements of vehicles and people across the border with Gibraltar . Further restrictions were imposed in 1964 , and in 1966 the frontier was closed to vehicles . In 1969 , after the passing of the Gibraltar Constitution Order , to which Spain strongly objected , the frontier was closed completely and Gibraltar 's telecommunications links through Spain were cut . 
 The Spanish decision had major consequences not only for the political relationship between Spain and the United Kingdom , but for the people of Gibraltar , many of whom had relatives or homes in Spain . As one of the Gibraltarians who suffered the closure of the frontier explains : 
 The saddest sight was seeing people behind the wire fences on both sides of the land frontier yelling at the top of their voices across the wide dividing space to enquire about the state of relatives , as telephone communications had been cut by the Spaniards . Local housewives with Spanish relatives in the Campo area kept their radios tuned to the nearby Spanish stations for news of family members who were gravely ill . In critical cases the parties concerned would rush to Spain via Tangiers but unfortunately sometimes the patient was dead and buried by the time they arrived . The Spanish authorities would not allow access across the land frontier even on compassionate grounds . 
 Franco 's death in 1975 led to the beginnings of diplomatic movement between Britain and Spain on the Gibraltar issue , though not immediately . Spain applied to join the European Economic Community ( EEC ) and NATO , for which it needed British support . In 1980 , talks between British and Spanish ministers led to the Lisbon Agreement , a statement on co @-@ operation between the two countries which committed them to starting negotiations on Gibraltar 's future and lifting the Spanish restrictions on communications with Gibraltar . Although Britain promised to " honour the freely and democratically expressed wishes of the people of Gibraltar " , Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher indicated in the House of Commons that sovereignty would be on the table , in a change from the previous policy . However , the border was not reopened due to " technical issues " – code for unresolved issues between the two governments – and the agreement was strongly opposed by many Gibraltarians , who did not wish their sovereignty to be under discussion and objected to the lack of Gibraltarian representatives at the talks . The outbreak of the Falklands War in 1982 caused a further delay . Argentina carried out an unsuccessful sabotage operation , kept secret at the time , that was intended to sink a Royal Navy frigate in Gibraltar 's harbour ; the saboteurs were captured by the Spanish police in Algeciras before they could carry out their attack . A further agreement was reached in Brussels in 1984 which clarified the Lisbon Agreement and required that Britain allow Spaniards to live and work in Gibraltar , which they would have the right to do anyway as EEC citizens . The border was finally fully reopened on 4 – 5 February 1985 . 
 = = = Modern Gibraltar = = = 
 After the border reopened , the British government reduced the military presence in Gibraltar by closing the naval dockyard . The RAF presence was also downgraded ; although the airport officially remains an RAF base , military aircraft are no longer permanently stationed there . The British garrison , which had been present since 1704 , was withdrawn in 1990 following defence cutbacks at the end of the Cold War . A number of military units continue to be stationed in Gibraltar under the auspices of British Forces Gibraltar ; the garrison was replaced with locally recruited units of the Royal Gibraltar Regiment , while a Royal Navy presence is continued through the Gibraltar Squadron , responsible for overseeing the security of Gibraltar 's territorial waters . In March 1988 a British military operation against members of the Provisional IRA ( PIRA ) planning a car bomb attack in Gibraltar ended in controversy when the Special Air Service shot and killed all three PIRA members . 
 The military cutbacks inevitably had major implications for Gibraltar 's economy , which had up to that point depended largely on defence expenditure . It prompted the territory 's government to shift its economic orientation and place a much greater emphasis on encouraging tourism and establishing self @-@ sufficiency . Tourism in Gibraltar was encouraged through refurbishing and <unk> key areas of the city , building a new passenger terminal to welcome cruise ship visitors and opening new marinas and leisure facilities . By 2011 , Gibraltar was attracting over 10 million visitors a year compared to a population of 29 @,@ 752 , giving it one of the highest tourist @-@ to @-@ resident ratios in the world . 
 The government also encouraged the development of new industries such as financial services , duty @-@ free shopping , casinos and Internet gambling . Branches of major British chains such as Marks & Spencer were opened in Gibraltar to encourage visits from British expatriates on the nearby Costa del Sol . To facilitate the territory 's economic expansion , a major programme of land reclamation was carried out ; a tenth of Gibraltar 's present @-@ day land area was reclaimed from the sea . These initiatives proved enormously successful . By 2007 , Chief Minister Peter Caruana was able to boast that Gibraltar 's economic success had made it " one of the most affluent communities in the entire world . " As of 2013 , Gibraltar is ranked as the second most prosperous territory within the European Union and the 18th most prosperous worldwide in terms of gross domestic product by purchasing power parity per capita ( the United Kingdom , for comparison , is 33rd worldwide and Spain is 44th ) . Today , Gibraltar has one Big Four accounting firm office per 10 @,@ 000 people , the second highest in the world after the British Virgin Islands , and a bank per 1 @,@ 700 people , the fifth most banks per capita in the world . 
 Gibraltar 's relationship with Spain continued to be a sensitive subject . By 2002 , Britain and Spain had proposed an agreement to share sovereignty over Gibraltar . However , it was opposed by the government of Gibraltar , which put it to a referendum in November 2002 . The agreement was rejected by 17 @,@ 000 votes to 187 – a majority of 98 @.@ 97 % . Although both governments dismissed the outcome as having no legal weight , the outcome of the referendum caused the talks to stall and the British government accepted that it would be unrealistic to try to reach an agreement without the support of the people of Gibraltar . 
 The tercentenary of the capture of Gibraltar was celebrated in the territory in August 2004 but attracted criticism from some in Spain . In September 2006 , tripartite talks between Spain , Gibraltar and the UK resulted in a deal ( known as the Cordoba Agreement ) to make it easier to cross the border and to improve transport and communications links between Spain and Gibraltar . Among the changes was an agreement to lift restrictions on Gibraltar 's airport to enable airlines operating from Spain to land there and to facilitate use of the airport by Spanish residents . It did not address the vexed issue of sovereignty , but this time the government of Gibraltar supported it . A new Constitution Order was promulgated in the same year , which was approved by a majority of 60 @.@ 24 % in a referendum held in November 2006 . 
 = Ratchet & Clank : Up Your Arsenal = 
 Ratchet & Clank : Up Your Arsenal ( known as Ratchet & Clank 3 in Europe and Japan and Ratchet & Clank 3 : Up Your Arsenal in Australia ) is a 2004 3D platform video game developed by Insomniac Games and published by Sony Computer Entertainment for the PlayStation 2 . It is the third installment in the Ratchet & Clank series and was released in North America on November 3 , 2004 . Shortly after it was released in Japan on November 25 , the first volume of the Ratchet & Clank manga , drawn by Shinbo Nomura , was released . A demo of this game was included in Sly 2 : Band of Thieves . 
 The gameplay is similar to previous games in the series but introduces new features such as a new control system and more levels in the upgrade system for weapons . It follows Ratchet and Clank 's adventure through a fictional universe to defeat a robotic villain , Dr. Nefarious , who intends to destroy all organic life . Characters such as Dr. Nefarious and Sasha , a <unk> starship captain who helps Ratchet throughout the game , are introduced , and a number of characters return from the original Ratchet & Clank . 
 Up Your Arsenal is the first in the series to offer online multiplayer as well as single @-@ player . The service was terminated in June 2012 , however the PlayStation 3 HD version features the online mode . Multiplayer features three different modes of play available on all of the maps and has a selection of the weapons from the single @-@ player game . As well as the multiplayer mode , it has many other differences compared to its predecessors such as higher quality graphics , larger worlds , and drivable vehicles . The voice cast from the previous game return as their respective characters , and new actors were hired to voice the new characters . 
 The game was met with critical acclaim upon release , earning an average review score of 91 % at Metacritic . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Despite straying further from a classic platform game , Ratchet & Clank : Up Your Arsenal still offers some of the basic features of a platform game but with a strong mix of action and shooting ; <unk> Media has dubbed it a " combat @-@ platformer " . It offers melee and long range combat and boasts a large , varied arsenal as one of its primary features as it has been in previous games . 
 As the player progresses through the game new weapons and upgrades can be obtained . As well as the 20 weapons available to the player , each weapon ( apart from the <unk> ) has eight levels of strength , which is different to the previous game 's four levels of strength . Five upgrades are available after a weapon 's purchase and then three after that once the game has been completed , the player starts " challenge mode " , and purchases the weapon 's upgrade . Alongside the weapons , which are primarily used in combat , there are ten gadgets that can be collected for use in other situations . 
 For most of the game the player will be in control of Ratchet but in some areas the player takes control of Clank , Ratchet 's ally . Clank can give commands to smaller robots called <unk> to perform tasks with the use of a command menu to solve puzzles and attack enemies . Clank also features in " Giant Clank " scenarios where Clank transforms into a larger and more advanced form and can battle similar size enemies ; in this form he gains increased firepower with rockets and bombs and a large amount of health . During the single @-@ player game , the player can also play as Captain Qwark in 2D side @-@ scrolling levels ( called " Vid Comics " ) , which build upon the history of Captain Qwark and his previous conflicts with Dr. Nefarious . 
 The game offers a large range of enemies and different stages . It also features online multiplayer modes , such as Deathmatch , Capture The Flag , and Siege ( in which the player storms the opponent 's base and tries to destroy the power core inside ) . It supports up to eight players at a time and supports voice chat through a PS2 @-@ compatible headset . Internet connection is needed if playing online against other players . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The player character and main protagonist is Ratchet , a Lombax from the planet Veldin ( voiced by James Arnold Taylor ) . He wields a wrench as a melee weapon and can use a large arsenal of weapons . Clank , Ratchet 's robotic sidekick and co @-@ protagonist ( voiced by David Kaye ) , is usually attached to Ratchet 's back and uses attachments to help Ratchet 's movements . Dr. Nefarious , the main antagonist of the game ( voiced by Armin Shimerman ) , is the robotic form of a former organic life form . He has a hatred for organic life and tries to destroy it . At the end of the game , Doctor Nefarious is left stranded on an asteroid , eventually making cameos and reappearances in later titles . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 While playing chess in Clank 's penthouse , Ratchet receives word that his home planet , Veldin , is under attack by an army of aliens known as <unk> . Posing as an officer in the Galactic Rangers , he leads an assault that drives off the invaders , who appear to use very sophisticated weapons and equipment . At a post @-@ victory briefing , the Galactic President informs the duo that a villain known as Dr. Nefarious is believed to be responsible for organizing the invasion . As very little is known about Nefarious , the Rangers decide to track down the only man to have ever beaten him : Captain Qwark . Ratchet discovers Qwark living with an indigenous tribe on planet <unk> and takes him to the Starship Phoenix , where he meets Ranger Captain Sasha . Upon regaining his sanity , Qwark forms the " Q @-@ Force " , an " elite " squad that answers only to him , and orders Ratchet , Clank , and Q @-@ Force operative Skidd <unk> to infiltrate Nefarious 's base on planet <unk> . Hacking his database , Clank obtains a map of <unk> , the Tyhrranoid home world . After the Q @-@ Force succeeds in destroying the Tyhrranoid queen , Dr. Nefarious sends them a mocking transmission ; Ratchet 's friend Al traces it to a munitions factory on planet <unk> . 
 There , Ratchet and Clank learn that Nefarious has constructed a weapon called the Biobliterator , but are unable to find any information on it . They also find a music video produced by pop star Courtney Gears ( a parody of Britney Spears ) , in which she instructs robots to destroy organic lifeforms . Clank sets up a meeting with Gears , but she renders him unconscious and turns him over to Dr. Nefarious . Aware of Clank 's fame as the star of " Secret Agent Clank " , Nefarious asks him to serve as the face of his plan to wipe out all organic races , but he refuses . In response , Nefarious creates an evil double named Klunk and has him take Clank 's place . Unaware of the deception , Ratchet undertakes a mission with Skidd to investigate enemy activity on the <unk> Moons . When Ratchet returns to the Phoenix , Gears abducts Skidd and turns him into a robot . Ratchet confronts and disables her in combat , then gets Skidd to safety . Meanwhile , Sasha locates Nefarious 's ship , the Leviathan , at a remote spaceport , and sends him and Qwark to apprehend the doctor . Nefarious reveals that the whole encounter is a trap , and he activates the Leviathan 's self @-@ destruct system before escaping . Qwark refuses to leave , citing the need to gather intel , and seemingly perishes when the ship explodes . 
 After a brief memorial for Qwark on the Phoenix , Ratchet goes to assist Ranger forces battling a Tyhrranoid invasion in the city of Metropolis . Unveiling his newly @-@ completed Biobliterator , Nefarious uses it to turn both Metropolis 's citizens and his Tyhrranoid soldiers into robots . Making yet another escape , he orders Klunk to kill Ratchet . After besting the clone , Ratchet and Clank are reunited and vow to stop Nefarious . While searching the remains of the Leviathan , they find evidence that Qwark faked his death . A secret message hidden onboard the Phoenix reveals the location of a secret hideout , where Qwark , overcome with cowardice , refuses to fight any longer . After fighting off an attack on the Phoenix , the duo intercept the Biobliterator and Clank destroys it with an ion cannon . However , Sasha informs them that a second , more advanced , Biobliterator is being prepped for launch at Nefarious 's main command center on planet <unk> , Ratchet and Clank locate Nefarious and defeat him , but he activates the Biobliterator , which transforms into a giant , heavily armed robot . Before he can crush Ratchet , Qwark flies in to distract him , giving the duo an opening to destroy the Biobliterator . Nefarious 's teleporter malfunctions , stranding him and his butler Lawrence on a distant asteroid . With the galaxy safe once again , the Q @-@ Force and their allies attend a private screening of the latest Secret Agent Clank <unk> . 
 = = Development = = 
 Ratchet & Clank : Up Your Arsenal was the main focus of the Insomniac Team during development . The team of around 115 people were aiming to create a new Ratchet and Clank game that would differ significantly from its predecessors and almost end up being two games in one . Insomniac believed that one of the key processes in the development process was the rigorous testing . Working closely with Sony and listening to fans of the Ratchet and Clank series , they gathered feedback and made improvements to the game . They felt that they had created a game that would appeal to a number of genres with the inclusion of elements of platform , action and side @-@ scrolling gameplay . 
 At the same time , Jak 3 was being developed by Naughty Dog , a company closely tied with Insomniac . Naughty Dog 's Jak & Daxter series and the Ratchet & Clank series are in similar genres ; each game in both series ' has been released at a similar time and both contain references to each other . Ryan Schneider , an employee of Insomniac , said , " The analogy that I like to use is that at Insomniac we like to look at it as how Tiger Woods and Michael Jordan and Kobe Bryant act when it comes to their professions . We don 't really look at it as how we compare to other athletes or other games , we just try to do the best that we can and elevate the sport . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Before its release , IGN was highly anticipating the final version of the game as they had played two previous versions of the game already . Concentrating on the multiplayer aspect of the game , they praised the developers for moving a solely platform game into the multiplayer genre so well . Ratchet & Clank : Up Your Arsenal was featured at the E3 games festival in 2004 , where there was a playable demo . Only the multiplayer Siege mode and a single @-@ player demo were available but they were enough to get 1UP.com 's award for best action game at E3 . 
 Soon after its release , Ratchet & Clank : Up Your Arsenal received critical acclaim . GameSpy awarded it 5 stars out of 5 , and IGN said that " You MUST buy this immediately " due to its extensive line @-@ up of weaponry , high quality graphics and polished sound effects . IGN did , however , believe it was easier than the previous game , Going Commando , while GameSpot thought that the gameplay was too similar to the previous title , but both reviewers considered these as minor issues and they made little difference to the overall score . Gaming magazines GamesTM and Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine both mentioned that the offbeat comedy that was apparent throughout the majority of the game was one of the points that made it unique . X @-@ Play said " A mixture of excellent gameplay tweaks and new activities make the third one easily the strongest game in the series and one of the best games of this year " and giving it a full five star rating . According to Metacritic 's collection of reviews , 12 separate reviewers gave the game the highest possible score . In 2006 , Edge Magazine featured a " Time Extend " article on Ratchet & Clank : Up your Arsenal and among other points , focused on the amount and variety of weapons available to the player . In August 2005 Up Your Arsenal entered the Greatest Hits line @-@ up . Since its release , it has sold over 2 @.@ 15 million copies in the US alone . IGN listed the game 18th on their list of " The Top 25 PS2 Games of All Time " . 
 = Maze Prison escape = 
 The Maze Prison escape ( known to Irish republicans as the Great Escape ) took place on 25 September 1983 in County Antrim , Northern Ireland . HM Prison Maze ( also known as Long Kesh ) was a maximum security prison considered to be one of the most escape @-@ proof prisons in Europe , and held prisoners convicted of taking part in armed paramilitary campaigns during the Troubles . In the biggest prison escape in UK history , 38 Provisional Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) prisoners escaped from H @-@ Block 7 ( H7 ) of the prison . One prison officer died of a heart attack as a result of the escape and twenty others were injured , including two who were shot with guns that had been smuggled into the prison . The escape was a propaganda coup for the IRA , and a British government minister faced calls to resign . The official inquiry into the escape placed most of the blame onto prison staff , who in turn blamed the escape on political interference in the running of the prison . 
 = = Previous IRA escapes = = 
 During the Troubles , Irish republican prisoners had escaped from custody en masse on several occasions . On 17 November 1971 , nine prisoners dubbed the " Crumlin Kangaroos " escaped from Crumlin Road Jail when rope ladders were thrown over the wall . Two prisoners were recaptured , but the remaining seven managed to cross the border into the Republic of Ireland and appeared at a press conference in Dublin . On 17 January 1972 , seven internees escaped from the prison ship HMS Maidstone by swimming to freedom , resulting in them being dubbed the " Magnificent Seven " . On 31 October 1973 , three leading IRA members , including former Chief of Staff Seamus Twomey , escaped from Mountjoy Prison in Dublin when a hijacked helicopter landed in the exercise yard of the prison . Irish band The Wolfe Tones wrote a song celebrating the escape called The Helicopter Song , which topped the Irish popular music charts . 19 IRA members escaped from Portlaoise Jail on 18 August 1974 after overpowering guards and using gelignite to blast through gates , and 33 prisoners attempted to escape from Long Kesh on 6 November 1974 after digging a tunnel . IRA member Hugh Coney was shot dead by a sentry , 29 other prisoners were captured within a few yards of the prison , and the remaining three were back in custody within 24 hours . In March 1975 , ten prisoners escaped from the courthouse in Newry while on trial for attempting to escape from Long Kesh . The escapees included Larry Marley , who would later be one of the masterminds behind the 1983 escape . ( Marley was shot dead by loyalists in 1987 . ) On 10 June 1981 , eight IRA members on remand , including Angelo Fusco , Paul Magee and Joe Doherty , escaped from Crumlin Road Jail . The prisoners took prison officers hostage using three handguns that had been smuggled into the prison , took their uniforms and shot their way out of the prison . 
 = = 1983 escape = = 
 HM Prison Maze was considered one of the most escape @-@ proof prisons in Europe . In addition to 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) fences , each H @-@ Block was encompassed by an 18 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) concrete wall topped with barbed wire , and all gates on the complex were made of solid steel and electronically operated . Prisoners had been planning the escape for several months . Bobby Storey and Gerry Kelly had started working as orderlies in H7 , which allowed them to identify weaknesses in the security systems , and six handguns had been smuggled into the prison . Shortly after 2 : 30 pm on 25 September , prisoners seized control of H7 by simultaneously taking the prison officers hostage at gunpoint in order to prevent them from triggering an alarm . One officer was stabbed with a craft knife , and another was knocked down by a blow to the back of the head . One officer who attempted to prevent the escape was shot in the head by Gerry Kelly , but survived . By 2 : 50 pm the prisoners were in control of H7 without an alarm being raised . A dozen prisoners also took uniforms from the officers , and the officers were also forced to hand over their car keys and details of where their cars were , for possible later use during the escape . A rearguard was left behind to watch over hostages and keep the alarm from being raised until they believed the escapees were clear of the prison , when they returned to their cells . At 3 : 25 pm , a lorry delivering food supplies arrived at the entrance to H7 , whereupon Brendan McFarlane and other prisoners took the occupants hostage at gunpoint and took them inside H7 . The lorry driver was told the lorry was being used in the escape , and he was instructed what route to take and how to react if challenged . Storey told the driver , " This man [ Gerry Kelly ] is doing 30 years and he will shoot you without hesitation if he has to . He has nothing to lose . " 
 At 3 : 50 pm the prisoners left H7 , and the driver and a prison orderly were taken back to the lorry , and the driver 's foot tied to the clutch . 37 prisoners climbed into the back of the lorry , while Kelly lay on the floor of the cab with a gun pointed at the driver , who was also told the cab had been booby trapped with a hand grenade . At nearly 4 : 00 pm the lorry drove towards the main gate of the prison , where the prisoners intended to take over the gatehouse . Ten prisoners dressed in guards ' uniforms and armed with guns and chisels dismounted from the lorry and entered the gatehouse , where they took the officers hostage . At 4 : 05 pm the officers began to resist , and an officer pressed an alarm button . When other staff responded via an intercom , a senior officer said while being held at gunpoint that the alarm had been triggered accidentally . By this time the prisoners were struggling to maintain control in the gatehouse due to the number of hostages . Officers arriving for work were entering the gatehouse from outside the prison , and each was ordered at gunpoint to join the other hostages . Officer James Ferris ran from the gatehouse towards the pedestrian gate attempting to raise the alarm , pursued by Dermot Finucane . Ferris had already been stabbed three times in the chest , and before he could raise the alarm he collapsed . 
 Finucane continued to the pedestrian gate where he stabbed the officer controlling the gate , and two officers who had just entered the prison . This incident was seen by a soldier on duty in a watch tower , who reported to the British Army operations room that he had seen prison officers fighting . The operations room telephoned the prison 's Emergency Control Room ( ECR ) , which replied that everything was all right and that an alarm had been accidentally triggered earlier . At 4 : 12 pm the alarm was raised when an officer in the gatehouse pushed the prisoner holding him hostage out of the room and telephoned the ECR . However , this was not done soon enough to prevent the escape . After several attempts the prisoners had opened the main gate , and were waiting for the prisoners still in the gatehouse to rejoin them in the lorry . At this time two prison officers blocked the exit with their cars , forcing the prisoners to abandon the lorry and make their way to the outer fence which was 25 yards away . Four prisoners attacked one of the officers and hijacked his car , which they drove towards the external gate . They crashed into a car near the gate and abandoned the car . Two escaped through the gate , one was captured exiting the car , and another was captured after being chased by a soldier . At the main gate , a prison officer was shot in the leg while chasing the only two prisoners who had not yet reached the outer fence . The prisoner who fired the shot was captured after being shot and wounded by a soldier in a watch tower , and the other prisoner was captured after falling . The other prisoners escaped over the fence , and by 4 : 18 pm the main gate was closed and the prison secured , after 35 prisoners had breached the prison perimeter . The escape was the biggest in both British and Irish history , and the biggest in Europe since World War II . 
 Outside the prison the IRA had planned a logistical support operation involving 100 armed members , but due to a miscalculation of five minutes the prisoners found no transport waiting for them and were forced to flee across fields or hijack vehicles . 
 The British Army and Royal Ulster Constabulary immediately activated a contingency plan and by 4 : 25 pm a cordon of vehicle check points were in place around the prison , and others were later in place in strategic positions across Northern Ireland , resulting in the recapture of one prisoner at 11 : 00 pm . Twenty prison officers were injured during the escape , thirteen were kicked and beaten , four stabbed , and two shot . One prison warder , James Ferris , who had been stabbed , died after suffering a heart attack during the escape . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 The escape was a propaganda coup and morale boost for the IRA , with Irish republicans dubbing it the " Great Escape " . Leading unionist politician Ian Paisley called on Nicholas Scott , the Parliamentary Under @-@ Secretary of State for Northern Ireland , to resign . The British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher made a statement in Ottawa during a visit to Canada , saying " It is the gravest [ breakout ] in our present history , and there must be a very deep inquiry " . The day after the escape , Secretary of State for Northern Ireland James Prior announced an inquiry would be headed by Her Majesty 's Chief Inspector of Prisons , James Hennessy . The Hennessy Report was published on 26 January 1984 placing most of the blame for the escape on prison staff , and made a series of recommendations to improve security at the prison . The report also placed blame with the designers of the prison , the Northern Ireland Office and successive prison governors who had failed to improve security . Prior announced that the prison 's governor had resigned , and that there would be no ministerial resignations as a result of the report 's findings . Four days after the Hennessy Report was published , then Minister for Prisons Nicholas Scott dismissed allegations from the Prison Governors Association and the Prison Officers Association that the escape was due to political interference in the running of the prison . 
 On 25 October 1984 , nineteen prisoners appeared in court on charges relating to the death of prison officer James Ferris , sixteen charged with his murder . A pathologist determined that the stab wounds Ferris suffered would not have killed a healthy man . The judge acquitted all sixteen as he could not correlate the stabbing to the heart attack . 
 = = Escapees = = 
 Fifteen escapees were captured on the day , including four who were discovered hiding underwater in a river near the prison using reeds to breathe . Four more escapees were captured over the next two days , including Hugh Corey and Patrick McIntyre who were captured following a two @-@ hour siege at an isolated farmhouse . Out of the remaining 19 escapees , 18 ended up in the republican stronghold of South Armagh where two members of the IRA 's South Armagh Brigade were in charge of transporting them to <unk> , and given the option of either returning to active service in the IRA 's armed campaign or a job and new identity in the United States . 
 <unk> Kieran Fleming drowned in the <unk> River near Kesh in December 1984 , while attempting to escape from an ambush by the Special Air Service ( SAS ) in which fellow IRA member Antoine Mac Giolla <unk> was killed . Gerard McDonnell was captured in Glasgow in June 1985 along with four other IRA members , including Brighton bomber Patrick Magee , and convicted of conspiring to cause sixteen explosions across England . Séamus <unk> was killed by the SAS in <unk> in April 1986 , and Kelly and McFarlane were returned to prison in December 1986 after being extradited from the Netherlands where they had been arrested in January 1986 , leaving twelve escapees still on the run . Pádraig <unk> was killed by the SAS along with seven other members of the IRA 's East Tyrone Brigade in <unk> in May 1987 , the IRA 's biggest single loss of life since the 1920s . In November 1987 Paul Kane and one of the masterminds of the escape , Dermot Finucane – a brother of Belfast solicitor Pat Finucane , who would be shot dead by the legal Ulster Defence Association in 1989 – were arrested in <unk> , County Longford on extradition warrants issued by the British authorities . Robert Russell was extradited back to Northern Ireland in August 1988 after being captured in Dublin in 1984 , and Paul Kane followed in April 1989 . In March 1990 the Supreme Court of Ireland in Dublin blocked the extradition of James Pius Clarke and Dermot Finucane on the grounds they " would be probable targets for ill @-@ treatment by prison staff " if they were returned to prison in Northern Ireland . 
 Kevin Barry <unk> , <unk> Brennan , James Smyth and Terrence Kirby , collectively known as the " H @-@ Block 4 " , were arrested in the United States between 1992 and 1994 and fought lengthy legal battles against extradition . Smyth was extradited back to Northern Ireland in 1996 and returned to prison , before being released in 1998 . <unk> Brennan , who had married a US citizen , was detained and removed from the United States to the Republic of Ireland on either 20 or 21 August 2009 . Tony Kelly was arrested in Letterkenny , County Donegal in October 1997 but was not extradited . In 2000 the British government announced that the extradition requests for Brennan , <unk> and Kirby were being withdrawn as part of the Good Friday Agreement . The men officially remain fugitives , but in 2003 Her Majesty 's Prison Service said they were not being " actively pursued " . Dermot McNally , who had been living in the Republic of Ireland and was tracked down in 1996 , and Dermot Finucane , received an amnesty in January 2002 , allowing them to return to Northern Ireland if they wished to . However , Tony McAllister was not granted a similar amnesty . As of 2008 , two escapees , Gerard Fryers and Séamus Campbell , had not been traced since the escape . Up to 800 republicans held a party at a hotel in Letterkenny in September 2003 to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the escape , which was described by Ulster Unionist Party MP Jeffrey Donaldson as " insensitive , inappropriate and totally unnecessary " . 
 = = Subsequent escape attempts = = 
 On 10 August 1984 loyalist prisoner Benjamin Redfern , a member of the Ulster Defence Association , attempted to escape from HM Prison Maze by hiding in the back of a refuse lorry , but died after being caught in the crushing mechanism . On 7 July 1991 , IRA prisoners <unk> <unk> and Pearse McAuley escaped from HM Prison Brixton , where they were being held on remand . They escaped using a gun that had been smuggled into the prison , wounding a motorist as they fled . On 9 September 1994 six prisoners including an armed robber , Danny McNamee and four IRA members including Paul Magee , escaped from HM Prison Whitemoor . The prisoners , in possession of two guns that had been smuggled into the prison , scaled the prison walls using knotted sheets . A guard was shot and wounded during the escape , and the prisoners were captured after being chased across fields by guards and the police . In March 1997 a 40 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) tunnel was discovered in H7 at the Maze Prison . The tunnel was fitted with electric lights , and was 80 feet ( 24 m ) from the outside wall , having already breached the block 's perimeter wall . On 10 December 1997 IRA prisoner Liam Averill , serving a life sentence after being convicted of the murder of two Protestants , escaped from the Maze dressed as a woman . Averill mingled with a group of prisoners ' families attending a Christmas party , and escaped on the coach taking the families out of the prison . He was never apprehended . 
 = Platypus = 
 The platypus ( Ornithorhynchus anatinus ) , also known as the duck @-@ billed platypus , is a semiaquatic egg @-@ laying mammal endemic to eastern Australia , including Tasmania . Together with the four species of echidna , it is one of the five extant species of monotremes , the only mammals that lay eggs instead of giving birth . The animal is the sole living representative of its family ( <unk> ) and genus ( Ornithorhynchus ) , though a number of related species have been found in the fossil record . 
 The unusual appearance of this egg @-@ laying , duck @-@ billed , beaver @-@ tailed , otter @-@ footed mammal baffled European naturalists when they first encountered it , with some considering it an elaborate hoax . It is one of the few venomous mammals , the male platypus having a spur on the hind foot that delivers a venom capable of causing severe pain to humans . The unique features of the platypus make it an important subject in the study of evolutionary biology and a recognisable and iconic symbol of Australia ; it has appeared as a mascot at national events and is featured on the reverse of its 20 @-@ cent coin . The platypus is the animal emblem of the state of New South Wales . 
 Until the early 20th century , it was hunted for its fur , but it is now protected throughout its range . Although captive breeding programs have had only limited success and the platypus is vulnerable to the effects of pollution , it is not under any immediate threat . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 When the platypus was first encountered by Europeans in 1798 , a pelt and sketch were sent back to Great Britain by Captain John Hunter , the second Governor of New South Wales . British scientists ' initial hunch was that the attributes were a hoax . George Shaw , who produced the first description of the animal in the Naturalist 's Miscellany in 1799 , stated it was impossible not to entertain doubts as to its genuine nature , and Robert Knox believed it might have been produced by some Asian taxidermist . It was thought that somebody had sewn a duck 's beak onto the body of a beaver @-@ like animal . Shaw even took a pair of scissors to the dried skin to check for stitches . 
 The common name " platypus " is the latinisation of the Greek word <unk> ( <unk> ) , " flat @-@ footed " , from <unk> ( <unk> ) , " broad , wide , flat " and πούς ( pous ) , " foot " . Shaw assigned the species the Linnaean name Platypus anatinus when he initially described it , but the genus term was quickly discovered to already be in use as the name of the wood @-@ boring ambrosia beetle genus Platypus . It was independently described as Ornithorhynchus paradoxus by Johann Blumenbach in 1800 ( from a specimen given to him by Sir Joseph Banks ) and following the rules of priority of nomenclature , it was later officially recognised as Ornithorhynchus anatinus . The scientific name Ornithorhynchus anatinus is derived from <unk> ( <unk> ) , which literally means " bird snout " in Greek ; and anatinus , which means " duck @-@ like " in Latin . 
 There is no universally agreed plural of " platypus " in the English language . Scientists generally use " platypuses " or simply " platypus " . Colloquially , the term " <unk> " is also used for the plural , although this is technically incorrect and a form of pseudo @-@ Latin ; the correct Greek plural would be " <unk> " . Early British settlers called it by many names , such as " <unk> " , " duckbill " , and " <unk> " . The name platypus is often prefixed with the adjective " duck @-@ billed " to form duck @-@ billed platypus , which distinguishes the modern platypus from the extinct Riversleigh platypuses . 
 = = Description = = 
 In David Collins 's account of the new colony 1788 – 1801 , he describes coming across " an amphibious , mole like " animal . His account includes a drawing of the animal . 
 The body and the broad , flat tail of the platypus are covered with dense , brown fur that traps a layer of insulating air to keep the animal warm . The fur is waterproof , and the texture is akin to that of a mole . The platypus uses its tail for storage of fat reserves ( an adaptation also found in animals such as the Tasmanian devil and fat @-@ tailed sheep ) . It has webbed feet and a large , rubbery duck @-@ like snout . The webbing is more significant on the front feet and is folded back when walking on land . Unlike a bird 's beak ( in which the upper and lower parts separate to reveal the mouth ) , the snout of the platypus is a sensory organ with the mouth on the underside . The nostrils are located on the dorsal surface of the snout , while the eyes and ears are located in a groove set just back from it ; this groove is closed when swimming . Platypuses have been heard to emit a low growl when disturbed and a range of other vocalisations have been reported in captive specimens . 
 Weight varies considerably from 0 @.@ 7 to 2 @.@ 4 kg ( 1 @.@ 5 to 5 @.@ 3 lb ) , with males being larger than females ; males average 50 cm ( 20 in ) in total length , while females average 43 cm ( 17 in ) , with substantial variation in average size from one region to another , and this pattern does not seem to follow any particular climatic rule and may be due to other environmental factors , such as predation and human encroachment . 
 The platypus has an average body temperature of about 32 ° C ( 90 ° F ) rather than the 37 ° C ( 99 ° F ) typical of placental mammals . Research suggests this has been a gradual adaptation to harsh environmental conditions on the part of the small number of surviving monotreme species rather than a historical characteristic of monotremes . 
 Modern platypus young have three teeth in each of the maxillae ( one premolar and two molars ) and dentaries ( three molars ) , which they lose before or just after leaving the breeding burrow ; adults have heavily keratinised pads in their place . The first upper and third lower cheek teeth of platypus nestlings are small , each having one principal cusp , while the other teeth have two main cusps . The platypus jaw is constructed differently from that of other mammals , and the jaw @-@ opening muscle is different . As in all true mammals , the tiny bones that conduct sound in the middle ear are fully incorporated into the skull , rather than lying in the jaw as in cynodonts and other <unk> synapsids . However , the external opening of the ear still lies at the base of the jaw . The platypus has extra bones in the shoulder girdle , including an <unk> , which is not found in other mammals . As in many other aquatic and semiaquatic vertebrates , the bones show <unk> , increasing their density to provide ballast . It has a reptilian gait , with the legs on the sides of the body , rather than underneath . When on land , it engages in knuckle @-@ walking on its front feet , to protect the webbing between the toes . 
 = = = Venom = = = 
 While both male and female platypuses are born with ankle spurs , only the male 's spurs deliver venom , composed largely of defensin @-@ like proteins ( DLPs ) , three of which are unique to the platypus . The DLPs are produced by the immune system of the platypus . The function of defensins is to cause lysis in pathogenic bacteria and viruses , but in platypuses they also are formed into venom for defense . Although powerful enough to kill smaller animals such as dogs , the venom is not lethal to humans , but the pain is so excruciating that the victim may be incapacitated . <unk> rapidly develops around the wound and gradually spreads throughout the affected limb . Information obtained from case histories and anecdotal evidence indicates the pain develops into a long @-@ lasting <unk> ( a heightened sensitivity to pain ) that persists for days or even months . Venom is produced in the <unk> glands of the male , which are kidney @-@ shaped alveolar glands connected by a thin @-@ walled duct to a calcaneus spur on each hind limb . The female platypus , in common with echidnas , has rudimentary spur buds that do not develop ( dropping off before the end of their first year ) and lack functional <unk> glands . 
 The venom appears to have a different function from those produced by <unk> species ; its effects are not life @-@ threatening to humans , but nevertheless powerful enough to seriously impair the victim . Since only males produce venom and production rises during the breeding season , it may be used as an offensive weapon to assert dominance during this period . 
 Similar spurs are found on many archaic mammal groups , indicating that this is an ancient characteristic for mammals as a whole , and not exclusive to the platypus or other monotremes . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> ( for the other species , see Echidna ) are the only mammals ( apart from at least one species of dolphin ) known to have a sense of electroreception : they locate their prey in part by detecting electric fields generated by muscular contractions . The platypus ' electroreception is the most sensitive of any monotreme . 
 The electroreceptors are located in <unk> rows in the skin of the bill , while mechanoreceptors ( which detect touch ) are uniformly distributed across the bill . The electrosensory area of the cerebral cortex is contained within the tactile <unk> area , and some cortical cells receive input from both electroreceptors and mechanoreceptors , suggesting a close association between the tactile and electric senses . Both electroreceptors and mechanoreceptors in the bill dominate the <unk> map of the platypus brain , in the same way human hands dominate the Penfield homunculus map . 
 The platypus can determine the direction of an electric source , perhaps by comparing differences in signal strength across the sheet of electroreceptors . This would explain the characteristic side @-@ to @-@ side motion of the animal 's head while hunting . The cortical convergence of electrosensory and tactile inputs suggests a mechanism that determines the distance of prey that , when they move , emit both electrical signals and mechanical pressure pulses . The platypus uses the difference between arrival times of the two signals to sense distance . 
 The platypus feeds by neither sight nor smell , closing its eyes , ears , and nose each time it dives . Rather , when it digs in the bottom of streams with its bill , its electroreceptors detect tiny electric currents generated by muscular contractions of its prey , so enabling it to distinguish between animate and inanimate objects , which continuously stimulate its mechanoreceptors . Experiments have shown the platypus will even react to an " artificial shrimp " if a small electric current is passed through it . 
 = = = Eyes = = = 
 In recent studies it has been suggested that the eyes of the platypus are more similar to those of Pacific hagfish or Northern Hemisphere lampreys than to those of most tetrapods . The eyes also contain double cones , which most mammals do not have . 
 Although the platypus ' eyes are small and not used under water , several features indicate that vision played an important role in its ancestors . The corneal surface and the adjacent surface of the lens is flat while the posterior surface of the lens is steeply curved , similar to the eyes of other aquatic mammals such as otters and sea @-@ lions . A temporal ( ear side ) concentration of retinal ganglion cells , important for binocular vision , indicates a role in predation , while the accompanying visual acuity is insufficient for such activities . Furthermore , this limited acuity is matched by a low cortical magnification , a small lateral geniculate nucleus and a large optic tectum , suggesting that the visual midbrain plays a more important role than the visual cortex like in some rodents . These features suggest that the platypus has adapted to an aquatic and nocturnal lifestyle , developing its electrosensory system at the cost of its visual system ; an evolutionary process paralleled by the small number of electroreceptors in the short @-@ beaked echidna , who dwells in dry environments , whilst the long @-@ beaked echidna , who lives in moist environments , is intermediate between the other two monotremes . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 The platypus is semiaquatic , inhabiting small streams and rivers over an extensive range from the cold highlands of Tasmania and the Australian Alps to the tropical rainforests of coastal Queensland as far north as the base of the Cape York Peninsula . Inland , its distribution is not well known ; it is extinct in South Australia ( apart from an introduced population on Kangaroo Island ) and is no longer found in the main part of the Murray @-@ Darling Basin , possibly due to the declining water quality brought about by extensive land clearing and irrigation schemes . Along the coastal river systems , its distribution is unpredictable ; it appears to be absent from some relatively healthy rivers , and yet maintains a presence in others , for example , the lower Maribyrnong , that are quite degraded . 
 In captivity , platypuses have survived to 17 years of age , and wild specimens have been recaptured when 11 years old . Mortality rates for adults in the wild appear to be low . Natural predators include snakes , water rats , goannas , hawks , owls , and eagles . Low platypus numbers in northern Australia are possibly due to predation by crocodiles . The introduction of red foxes in 1845 for hunting may have had some impact on its numbers on the mainland . The platypus is generally regarded as nocturnal and crepuscular , but individuals are also active during the day , particularly when the sky is overcast . Its habitat bridges rivers and the riparian zone for both a food supply of prey species , and banks where it can dig resting and nesting burrows . It may have a range of up to 7 km ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) , with a male 's home range overlapping those of three or four females . 
 The platypus is an excellent swimmer and spends much of its time in the water foraging for food . When swimming , it can be distinguished from other Australian mammals by the absence of visible ears . Uniquely among mammals , it propels itself when swimming by an alternate rowing motion of the front feet ; although all four feet of the platypus are webbed , the hind feet ( which are held against the body ) do not assist in propulsion , but are used for steering in combination with the tail . The species is endothermic , maintaining its body temperature at about 32 ° C ( 90 ° F ) , lower than most mammals , even while foraging for hours in water below 5 ° C ( 41 ° F ) . 
 Dives normally last around 30 seconds , but can last longer , although few exceed the estimated aerobic limit of 40 seconds . Recovery at the surface between dives commonly takes from 10 to 20 seconds . 
 When not in the water , the platypus retires to a short , straight resting burrow of oval cross @-@ section , nearly always in the riverbank not far above water level , and often hidden under a protective tangle of roots . 
 The average sleep time of a platypus is said to be as long as 14 hours per day , possibly because it eats crustaceans , which provide a high level of calories . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The platypus is a carnivore : it feeds on annelid worms , insect larvae , freshwater shrimp , and freshwater <unk> that it digs out of the riverbed with its snout or catches while swimming . It uses cheek @-@ pouches to carry prey to the surface , where it is eaten . The platypus needs to eat about 20 % of its own weight each day , which requires it to spend an average of 12 hours daily looking for food . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 When the platypus was first encountered by European naturalists , they were divided over whether the female laid eggs . This was not confirmed until 1884 , when W. H. Caldwell was sent to Australia , where , after extensive searching assisted by a team of 150 Aborigines , he managed to discover a few eggs . Mindful of the high cost per word , Caldwell famously but tersely wired London , " <unk> oviparous , ovum <unk> . " That is , monotremes lay eggs , and the eggs are similar to those of reptiles in that only part of the egg divides as it develops . 
 The species exhibits a single breeding season ; mating occurs between June and October , with some local variation taking place between different populations across its range . Historical observation , mark @-@ and @-@ recapture studies , and preliminary investigations of population genetics indicate the possibility of both resident and transient members of populations , and suggest a polygynous mating system . Females are thought likely to become sexually mature in their second year , with breeding confirmed still to take place in animals over nine years old . 
 Outside the mating season , the platypus lives in a simple ground burrow , the entrance of which is about 30 cm ( 12 in ) above the water level . After mating , the female constructs a deeper , more elaborate burrow up to 20 m ( 66 ft ) long and blocked at intervals with plugs ( which may act as a safeguard against rising waters or predators , or as a method of regulating humidity and temperature ) . The male takes no part in caring for its young , and retreats to his year @-@ long burrow . The female softens the ground in the burrow with dead , folded , wet leaves , and she fills the nest at the end of the tunnel with fallen leaves and reeds for bedding material . This material is dragged to the nest by tucking it underneath her curled tail . 
 The female platypus has a pair of ovaries , but only the left one is functional . The platypus ' genes are a possible evolutionary link between the mammalian XY and bird / reptile ZW sex @-@ determination systems because one of the platypus ' five X chromosomes contains the <unk> gene , which birds possess on their Z chromosome . It lays one to three ( usually two ) small , leathery eggs ( similar to those of reptiles ) , about 11 mm ( 0 @.@ 43 in ) in diameter and slightly rounder than bird eggs . The eggs develop in utero for about 28 days , with only about 10 days of external incubation ( in contrast to a chicken egg , which spends about one day in tract and 21 days externally ) . After laying her eggs , the female curls around them . The incubation period is divided into three phases . In the first phase , the embryo has no functional organs and relies on the yolk sac for sustenance . The yolk is absorbed by the developing young . During the second phase , the digits develop , and in the last phase , the egg tooth appears . 
 Most mammal zygotes go though holoblastic cleavage , meaning that following fertilization the ovum is split due to cell divisions into multiple , divisible daughter cells . This is in comparison to <unk> division in birds and platypuses , which causes the ovum to split but not completely . This causes the cells at the edge of the yolk to be <unk> continuous with the egg ’ s cytoplasm . This allows the yolk , which contains the embryo , to exchange waste and nutrients with the cytoplasm . 
 The newly hatched young are vulnerable , blind , and hairless , and are fed by the mother 's milk . Although possessing mammary glands , the platypus lacks teats . Instead , milk is released through pores in the skin . The milk pools in grooves on her abdomen , allowing the young to lap it up . After they hatch , the offspring are suckled for three to four months . During incubation and weaning , the mother initially leaves the burrow only for short periods , to forage . When doing so , she creates a number of thin soil plugs along the length of the burrow , possibly to protect the young from predators ; pushing past these on her return forces water from her fur and allows the burrow to remain dry . After about five weeks , the mother begins to spend more time away from her young and , at around four months , the young emerge from the burrow . A platypus is born with teeth , but these drop out at a very early age , leaving the horny plates it uses to grind food . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 The platypus and other monotremes were very poorly understood , and some of the 19th century myths that grew up around them — for example , that the monotremes were " inferior " or <unk> — still endure . In 1947 , William King Gregory theorised that placental mammals and marsupials may have diverged earlier , and a subsequent branching divided the monotremes and marsupials , but later research and fossil discoveries have suggested this is incorrect . In fact , modern monotremes are the survivors of an early branching of the mammal tree , and a later branching is thought to have led to the marsupial and placental groups . Molecular clock and fossil dating suggest platypuses split from echidnas around 19 – 48 million years ago . 
 The oldest discovered fossil of the modern platypus dates back to about 100 @,@ 000 years ago , during the Quaternary period . The extinct monotremes <unk> and <unk> were closely related to the modern platypus . The fossilised <unk> was discovered in New South Wales and is composed of an <unk> lower jawbone with three molar teeth ( whereas the adult contemporary platypus is toothless ) . The molar teeth were initially thought to be tribosphenic , which would have supported a variation of Gregory 's theory , but later research has suggested , while they have three cusps , they evolved under a separate process . The fossil is thought to be about 110 million years old , which means the platypus @-@ like animal was alive during the Cretaceous period , making it the oldest mammal fossil found in Australia . <unk> <unk> , another fossil relative of the platypus , has been found in Argentina , indicating monotremes were present in the supercontinent of Gondwana when the continents of South America and Australia were joined via Antarctica ( up to about 167 million years ago ) . A fossilized tooth of a giant platypus species , <unk> <unk> , was dated 5 – 15 million years ago . Judging by the tooth , the animal measured 1 @.@ 3 meters long , making it the largest platypus on record . 
 Because of the early divergence from the therian mammals and the low numbers of extant monotreme species , the platypus is a frequent subject of research in evolutionary biology . In 2004 , researchers at the Australian National University discovered the platypus has ten sex chromosomes , compared with two ( XY ) in most other mammals ( for instance , a male platypus is always <unk> ) , The platypuses sex chromosomes have been found to have great homology to the bird Z chromosome . The platypus genome also has both reptilian and mammalian genes associated with egg fertilisation . Though the platypus lacks the mammalian sex @-@ determining gene <unk> , a study found that the mechanism of sex determination is the AMH gene on the oldest Y chromosome . A draft version of the platypus genome sequence was published in Nature on 8 May 2008 , revealing both reptilian and mammalian elements , as well as two genes found previously only in birds , amphibians , and fish . More than 80 % of the platypus ' genes are common to the other mammals whose genomes have been sequenced . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Except for its loss from the state of South Australia , the platypus occupies the same general distribution as it did prior to European settlement of Australia . However , local changes and fragmentation of distribution due to human modification of its habitat are documented . Its current and historical abundance , however , are less well @-@ known and it has probably declined in numbers , although still being considered as common over most of its current range . The species was extensively hunted for its fur until the early years of the 20th century and , although protected throughout Australia since 1905 , until about 1950 it was still at risk of drowning in the nets of inland fisheries . The platypus does not appear to be in immediate danger of extinction , because conservation measures have been successful , but it could be affected by habitat disruption caused by dams , irrigation , pollution , netting , and trapping . The IUCN lists the platypus on its Red List as least concern . 
 Platypuses generally suffer from few diseases in the wild ; however , public concern in Tasmania is widespread about the potential impacts of a disease caused by the fungus Mucor amphibiorum . The disease ( termed <unk> ) affects only Tasmanian platypuses , and has not been observed in platypuses in mainland Australia . Affected platypuses can develop skin lesions or ulcers on various parts of their bodies , including their backs , tails , and legs . <unk> can kill platypuses , death arising from secondary infection and by affecting the animals ' ability to maintain body temperature and forage efficiently . The Biodiversity Conservation Branch at the Department of Primary Industries and Water are collaborating with NRM north and University of Tasmania researchers to determine the impacts of the disease on Tasmanian platypuses , as well as the mechanism of transmission and current spread of the disease . 
 Much of the world was introduced to the platypus in 1939 when National Geographic Magazine published an article on the platypus and the efforts to study and raise it in captivity . The latter is a difficult task , and only a few young have been successfully raised since , notably at Healesville Sanctuary in Victoria . The leading figure in these efforts was David Fleay , who established a <unk> — a simulated stream in a tank — at the Healesville Sanctuary , where breeding was successful in 1943 . In 1972 , he found a dead baby of about 50 days old , which had presumably been born in captivity , at his wildlife park at Burleigh Heads on the Gold Coast , Queensland . Healesville repeated its success in 1998 and again in 2000 with a similar stream tank . Taronga Zoo in Sydney bred twins in 2003 , and breeding was again successful there in 2006 . 
 = = = Platypus in wildlife sanctuaries = = = 
 The platypus is kept , for conservation purposes , in special aquariums at the following Australian wildlife sanctuaries : 
 = = = = Queensland = = = = 
 David Fleay Wildlife Park , Gold Coast , Queensland . 
 Lone Pine Koala Sanctuary , Fig Tree Pocket , Brisbane , Queensland . 
 Walkabout Creek Wildlife Centre , The Gap , Brisbane , Queensland . 
 The Australian Platypus Park at <unk> Lakes , Millaa Millaa , Queensland 
 = = = = New South Wales = = = = 
 Taronga Zoo , Sydney , New South Wales 
 Sydney Aquarium , Sydney , New South Wales 
 Australian Reptile Park , Foster , New South Wales 
 = = = = Victoria = = = = 
 Healesville Sanctuary , near Melbourne , Victoria , where the platypus was first bred in captivity by naturalist David Fleay in 1943 . The first platypus " born " in captivity was named " Corrie " and was quite popular with the public . In 1955 , three months before a new " <unk> " ( after " aviary " ) was opened , she unfortunately escaped from her pen into the nearby Badger Creek and apparently was never recovered . 
 = = = = International = = = = 
 As of 2013 , there is no platypus in captivity outside of Australia . Three attempts were made to bring the animals to the Bronx Zoo , in 1922 , 1947 , and 1958 ; of these , only two of the three animals introduced in 1947 lived longer than eighteen months . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The platypus has been featured in the Dreamtime stories of indigenous Australians , who believed the animal was a hybrid of a duck and a water rat . According to one story , the major animal groups , the land animals , water animals and birds , all competed for the platypus to join their respective groups , but the platypus ultimately decided to not join any of them , feeling that he did not need to be part of a group to be special . 
 The platypus has been used several times as a mascot : " Syd " the platypus was one of the three mascots chosen for the Sydney 2000 Olympics along with an echidna and a kookaburra , " Expo Oz " the platypus was the mascot for World Expo 88 , which was held in Brisbane in 1988 , and <unk> the platypus is the mascot for Apple Computer 's BSD @-@ based Darwin operating system , Mac OS X. 
 The platypus has also been featured in songs , such as Green Day 's " Platypus ( I Hate You ) " and Mr. Bungle 's " Platypus " . It is the subject of a children 's poem by Banjo Paterson . 
 The platypus has frequently appeared in Australian postage stamps and coins . The earliest appearance is the 9d Australian stamp from 1937 . The platypus re @-@ appeared in the 1960 – 64 Australian Native Animal Series . Souvenir sheet of " from " Laos and Equatorial Guinea has also featured the animal . The platypus has appeared on a 1987 36 cent stamp and an Australian 1996 95 cent stamp . The 2006 Australian Bush Babies stamp series features a $ <unk> stamp of a young platypus . A 5 cent stamp also produced in 2006 features the platypus also . Since the introduction of decimal currency to Australia in 1966 , the embossed image of a platypus , designed and sculpted by Stuart Devlin , has appeared on the reverse ( tails ) side of the 20 @-@ cent coin , making it a most notable depiction of the animal . 
 = Kenny Roberts = 
 Kenneth Leroy Roberts ( born December 31 , 1951 in Modesto , California ) is an American former professional motorcycle racer and racing team owner . In 1978 , he became the first American to win a Grand Prix motorcycle racing world championship . He was also a two @-@ time winner of the A.M.A. Grand National Championship . Roberts is one of only four riders in American Motorcyclist Association ( AMA ) racing history to win the AMA Grand Slam , representing Grand National wins at a mile , half @-@ mile , short @-@ track , TT Steeplechase and road race events . 
 Roberts left his mark on Grand Prix motorcycle racing as a world championship winning rider , an advocate for increased safety standards in racing , and as a racing team owner and a motorcycle engine and chassis constructor . His dirt track @-@ based riding style changed the way Grand Prix motorcycles were ridden . Roberts ' proposal to create a rival motorcycle championship in 1979 broke the Fédération Internationale de <unk> ( FIM ) hegemony and increased the political clout of Grand Prix racers , which subsequently led to improved safety standards and a new era of professionalism in the sport . In 2000 , Roberts was named a Grand Prix Legend by the FIM . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Kenny Roberts ' parents were Alice and Melton " Buster " Roberts . As a child growing up in the rural agriculture area just off highway 132 near the West side vineyards of E & J Gallo Winery of Modesto , Roberts was originally interested in horseback riding . He rode his first motorcycle at the age of 12 when a friend dared him to ride a mini bike . Roberts accepted the challenge and the experience thrilled him . He built his own motorcycle by attaching his father 's lawn mower engine to a bicycle frame . Roberts began his career in dirt track racing after attending a local race in Modesto and deciding that he wanted to compete himself . His father purchased a <unk> bike for him , but once it proved itself uncompetitive as a race bike , he moved up to a more powerful <unk> motorcycle . 
 Roberts showed a natural talent for dirt track racing and began winning local races . In 1968 , his race results drew the attention of a local Suzuki dealer Bud <unk> , who offered to sponsor Roberts aboard a Suzuki motorcycle . He made the decision to drop out of high school before his senior year to pursue a career in motorcycle racing . Roberts was allowed to compete professionally when he turned 18 , and on the day after his eighteenth birthday , he entered his first professional race at San Francisco 's Cow Palace , finishing in fourth place . 
 = = Racing history = = 
 = = = A.M.A. Grand National Championship = = = 
 Realizing that Roberts needed more help if his racing career was going to progress , <unk> introduced Roberts to airline pilot and amateur motorcycle racer Jim Doyle , who would become Roberts ' personal manager . In 1971 , Doyle and Roberts approached Triumph 's American distributor to ask about the possibility of a sponsored ride , but were told that Roberts was too small for one of their bikes . They then turned to the American Yamaha importer 's team , who agreed to make Roberts a factory sponsored rider at the age of 19 . Yamaha asked the head of their American racing program , former 250 cc world champion Kel Carruthers to help guide Roberts ' racing career . It marked the beginning of a long and productive relationship between the two men . Carruthers ended his riding career after the 1973 season to concentrate full @-@ time on managing Roberts ' and Yamaha 's efforts in the A.M.A. Grand National Championship , a series which encompassed events in four distinctive dirt track disciplines plus road racing . 
 In 1971 , Roberts won the AMA Rookie of the Year Award . In his first professional race as an expert class rider in 1972 , Roberts rode to victory at the Grand National short @-@ track race in the Houston Astrodome . Roberts made a name for himself that year by battling the dominant Harley @-@ Davidson factory dirt track team aboard an underpowered Yamaha XS 650 motorcycle , making up for his lack of horsepower with sheer determination . He finished the season ranked fourth in the country . In 1973 , in just his second season as an expert , Roberts won the national championship , amassing a record 2 @,@ 014 points in the 25 @-@ race series . 
 While Roberts had a natural talent for riding motorcycles on dirt surfaces , on paved road circuits , the motorcycle felt unsettled beneath him while negotiating a turn . After observing Finnish rider Jarno Saarinen win the 1973 Daytona 200 using a riding style where he shifted his body weight towards the inside of a turn , Roberts tried the technique and found that it helped settle the motorcycle . He adopted the cornering style and exaggerated the body shift to a greater extent than Saarinen had by extending his knee out until it skimmed the track surface . With his new riding technique , Roberts began to excel in road race events . Yamaha motorcycles performed very well in road racing , where the Yamaha <unk> was the dominant motorcycle of the era . 
 In the 1974 Daytona 200 , after early leader Gary Nixon retired , Roberts battled for the lead with former 500 cc world champion , Giacomo Agostini before an overheated engine forced him to settle for second place . In April 1974 , Roberts ventured to Europe for the first time to compete in the prestigious Imola 200 road race for 750 cc motorcycles . He made a positive impression competing against the best road racers in the world , once again finishing second to Agostini . He then traveled to England with a team of American riders to compete against a British riding team in the 1974 Transatlantic Match races . The conventional wisdom at the time was that American riders , who competed mostly in dirt track races , could not race on asphalt at the same level as the British riders , who specialized in road racing events . Roberts dispelled any such notions by winning three of the six races and finishing second in the remaining three races . Roberts was the top individual points scorer in the event with 93 points , five more than Barry Sheene , the top British rider . 
 Roberts returned to compete in the 1974 Grand National championship and won his first national road race at Road Atlanta on June 2 , 1974 . On August 18 , Roberts won the Peoria TT race to complete a Grand Slam with victories in each of the five different events on the Grand National calendar . He claimed his second consecutive Grand National championship , winning six races and surpassing his 1973 points record by scoring 2 @,@ 286 points in the 23 race series , collecting points in all 23 races . Roberts also entered his first world championship road racing event , winning the pole position before finishing third in the 1974 250 cc Dutch TT . 
 Roberts continued his road racing successes in 1975 , winning three out of four races in the 1975 Transatlantic Match races . After having won the national championship in 1974 , Roberts faced an increasingly difficult battle in dirt track races as , Harley @-@ Davidson continued to improve their XR @-@ 750 dirt tracker while Yamaha struggled to maintain the pace . Roberts made up for his bike 's lack of power with an almost fearless , determined riding style . He battled Harley @-@ Davidson factory rider Gary Scott throughout the 1975 season but mechanical breakdowns hampered his title defense . He had been leading the Daytona 200 when mechanical problems yielded the victory to his Yamaha teammate Gene Romero . At the Ascot TT , Roberts battled from 17th place to take the lead before a broken sprocket ended his race . Roberts ' fearless riding style was highlighted at the Indy Mile Grand National . In a desperate effort to keep Scott within reach in the points chase , Yamaha wedged a Yamaha <unk> two @-@ stroke road racing engine inside a dirt track frame . On a bike that was considered unrideable due to its excessive horsepower , Roberts came from behind on the two @-@ stroke , and overtook the factory Harley @-@ Davidson duo of Corky Keener and Jay Springsteen on the last lap for one of the most famous wins in American dirt track racing history . Afterward , Roberts was famously quoted as saying , " They don 't pay me enough to ride that thing " . Despite accomplishing another Grand Slam , this time in only one season , Roberts lost his crown , finishing second to Gary Scott in the 1975 national championship . 
 Although Roberts won four Grand Nationals in 1976 , he continued to experience mechanical misfortunes as well as a horsepower deficit to the Harley @-@ Davidson motorcycles in the mile and half @-@ mile dirt track events . He had been leading the Daytona 200 once again when tire troubles forced him to make a lengthy pit stop , and Johnny Cecotto went on to win the race . He dropped to third in the national championship as Jay Springsteen claimed the title for the Harley @-@ Davidson team . He returned to England in April 1977 , winning four out of six races at the 1977 Transatlantic Match races . Roberts then travelled to Italy where he raced in the Imola 200 , leaving no doubt he was capable of competing at the international level by winning both legs and setting a new track record . He returned to the United States to compete in the Grand National championship where he won five of the six road races that made up the pavement portion of the series . In the road race event at Sears Point , Roberts started the race at the back of the pack and passed the entire field within four laps to win the race . Despite being in contention for much of the season , Roberts was unable to win any of the dirt track events and eventually finished the year in fourth place . 
 = = = First American world champion = = = 
 When it became apparent that Yamaha could not develop a dirt track motorcycle capable of competing with the dominant Harley @-@ Davidson dirt track team , the American Yamaha importer , Yamaha USA , offered to send Roberts to Europe in 1978 to compete in the World Championship Grand Prix road racing series , along with Kel Carruthers to act as his mentor and crew chief . Roberts also secured the financial backing of the Goodyear tire company . The team planned to compete in the 250 cc world championship as well as the Formula 750 series in order to have more practice time to learn the tracks , but their main focus would be on the 500 cc class , considered the premier class at the time . His main competition in the 500 cc world championship would come from Suzuki rider Barry Sheene , winner of the two previous titles . Roberts said that he was initially indifferent about competing in Europe , but when he read that Sheene had labeled him as , " no threat " , he made up his mind to compete . Few observers gave Roberts any chance of winning the championship , citing the reasoning that it would take him at least one season to learn the European circuits . 
 The motorcycle technology of the late 1970s featured engines with power in excess of what the frames and tires of the day could accommodate . Roberts ' riding style , bred on the dirt tracks of America , revolutionized road racing . Prior to his arrival in Europe , riders focused on attaining high entry speeds into corners , leaving braking until the last possible moment then , carving graceful arcs through the corners with both wheels in line . Roberts did just the opposite , braking early then , quickly applying the throttle which resulted in the rear tire breaking traction and spinning . The resulting tire spin caused the motorcycle to buck and shake as it continually lost then regained traction , creating a brutal , violent riding style that no one had ever seen before on the racetracks of Europe . His riding style was reminiscent of dirt track riding , where sliding the rear tire to one side is used as a method to steer the motorcycle around a corner . Because of his early application of the throttle , he was able to attain top speed faster than his competitors . 
 The 1978 season started with Roberts winning the Daytona 200 in a dominating fashion . After several near misses forced him to retire while leading the event , Roberts lapped the entire field en route to his first Daytona victory . He then won a rain @-@ shortened Imola 200 race and was the second highest individual scorer behind Pat <unk> at the 1978 Transatlantic Match races . The 1978 world championship chase did not start well for Roberts at the season @-@ opening round in Venezuela . 
 Although Roberts won the 250 cc Grand Prix , Sheene claimed the victory in the 500 cc Venezuelan Grand Prix while Roberts ' Yamaha suffered a mechanical failure on the starting line . In the second round at the Spanish Grand Prix , Roberts was leading the race by eight seconds when his throttle stuck , forcing him to settle for second place behind fellow American Pat <unk> . Roberts then won his first @-@ ever 500 cc Grand Prix with a win in Austria , quickly followed by two more victories in France and Italy , along with two second @-@ place finishes in the Netherlands and Belgium . At the 1978 Swedish Grand Prix , Roberts crashed during practice for the 250 cc race , sustaining a concussion and a thumb injury . Shaken up by the accident , he could do no better than seventh place in the 500 cc race . Sheene had come down with a debilitating virus at the Venezuelan round , but a string of podium finishes and a victory at the Swedish Grand Prix combined with Roberts ' failure to score any points in the Finnish Grand Prix , allowed him to close the points gap . 
 The two championship contenders arrived in England for the British Grand Prix with only three points separating them . The race ended in controversy when torrential rains during the race , along with pit stops for tire changes by both Roberts and Sheene , created confusion among official scorers . Eventually , Roberts was declared the winner with Sheene being awarded third place behind privateer Steve Manship , who did not stop for a tire change . In the final race of the season at the daunting , 14 @.@ 2 miles ( 22 @.@ 9 km ) long Nürburgring racetrack in Germany , Roberts finished in third place , ahead of Sheene in fourth place to claim the first world championship for an American rider in Grand Prix road racing history . He also scored four victories to finish second behind Johnny Cecotto in the Formula 750 world championship , and won two races to finish fourth in the 250 cc world championship . 
 = = = The rebel leader = = = 
 The 1979 season began disastrously for Roberts when he suffered career @-@ threatening back injuries and a ruptured spleen in a pre @-@ season crash while testing a motorcycle in Japan . His injuries caused him to miss the season opening Grand Prix in Venezuela , but he completed an impressive recovery by winning the second round in Austria , followed by a second place in Germany , and another victory in Italy . Controversy again surrounded Roberts at the Spanish Grand Prix when Spanish race organisers , knowing that Roberts had to race to maintain his points lead , refused to pay him starting money as guaranteed by FIM regulations . An angered Roberts proceeded to win the race , and then refused to accept the winner 's trophy . The FIM initially suspended the championship points leader for his actions , but the suspension was later reduced to probation . 
 Further controversy ensued at the Belgian Grand Prix at the Spa circuit . The circuit had been paved just days before the race , creating a track that many of the racers felt was unsafe due to diesel fuel seeping to the surface . Roberts and the new championship points leader , Virginio Ferrari , instigated a riders ' revolt and refused to race . Once again , the FIM responded by suspending Roberts and Ferrari . The FIM later reduced this to another probation . The event highlighted the animosity between Roberts and the FIM concerning track safety . Roberts further irritated the FIM when he began talking to the press about forming a rival racing series to compete against the FIM 's monopoly . 
 The series then moved on to Britain , where Roberts would be involved in one of the closest races in Grand Prix history . Roberts ' battle with Sheene at the 1979 British Grand Prix at Silverstone has been cited as one of the greatest races of the 1970s . Minutes before the start of the race , Roberts ' Yamaha blew a seal and sprayed the bike with oil . His crew managed to replace the seal in time , but Roberts went to the starting line with his gloves coated with oil , causing his hand to slip on the throttle during the race . The race began with Roberts , Sheene and Dutch rider Wil Hartog breaking away from the rest of the field of riders . Hartog eventually fell behind as Roberts and Sheene continued to battle for the lead . The event featured numerous lead changes throughout the 28 lap race , with Roberts winning ahead of Sheene by a narrow margin of just three @-@ tenths of a second . A third @-@ place finish in the season @-@ ending French Grand Prix , along with a crash by his main championship rival Ferrari , secured his second consecutive world championship . 
 In December 1979 , Roberts made good on his threats when he , along with the other top world championship riders , released a letter to the press announcing their intention to break away from the FIM and create a rival race series called the World Series . When Roberts first arrived on the Grand Prix scene , motorcycle racers were competing for as little prize money as $ 200 , at venues such as <unk> in Finland that featured railroad crossings and hay bales wrapped around telephone poles . In 1956 , the reigning 500 cc world champion , Geoff Duke and thirteen other riders were given six @-@ month suspensions for merely threatening to strike . Roberts adopted a confrontational , sometimes belligerent stance with race promoters , challenging the previously accepted poor treatment that motorcycle racers of the day were accustomed to receiving . Although the competing series failed to take off due to difficulties in securing enough venues , it forced the FIM to take the riders ' demands seriously and make changes regarding their safety . During the 1979 FIM Congress , new rules were passed increasing prize money substantially and in subsequent years , stricter safety regulations were imposed on race organizers . 
 = = = A third world championship = = = 
 In February 1980 , Roberts made a remarkable return to the American Grand National Championship for two races at the season opening Houston TT and short @-@ track events held in the Houston Astrodome over two evenings . After more than a year away from dirt track competitions , Roberts won the Houston TT race to tie Bart Markel 's career record of 28 Grand National victories . He followed that the next evening with a third place in the Houston short @-@ track national . Returning to England once again for the 1980 Transatlantic Match races , Roberts was once again the top individual points scorer as he led the American team to victory over the British . 
 For the 1980 Grand Prix season , the Yamaha factory made the Yamaha USA team of Roberts and Carruthers the de facto factory racing team . The season got underway two months late due to cancellation of Austrian and Venezuelan rounds . Barry Sheene had been replaced by Randy Mamola as the top Suzuki rider as , Sheene had been dissatisfied with the Suzuki 's efforts and had turned to a privateer Yamaha team . Roberts won the first three races as the Suzuki team appeared to be in disarray , but by the third race , the <unk> of Mamola and Marco Lucchinelli were making things more difficult for Roberts . Roberts ' Yamaha suffered a deflating front tire and a faulty rear shock absorber in the Netherlands forcing him to pull out of the race , but his main championship rivals also suffered setbacks with Cecotto , Ferrari and Hartog all missing races due to injuries and Sheene suffering mechanical breakdowns . Suzuki riders went on to win the last four races , but Roberts had built up a sufficient point lead to hold on and clinch his third consecutive 500 cc world championship . 
 = = = A reversal of fortune = = = 
 In 1981 , Yamaha introduced a new square @-@ four cylinder bike , similar to Suzuki 's <unk> . Roberts raced to a second @-@ place finish behind Marco <unk> at the non @-@ championship Imola 200 race . Roberts ' bike had a suspension failure in the Grand Prix season opener at Austria , but he rebounded to win the next two races in Germany and Italy . Roberts ' title hopes suffered a setback at the Dutch TT at Assen when his Yamaha 's front brake pads were installed incorrectly causing his front wheel to lock up on the starting line , ending his race before it had started . He came back to score a second place behind Lucchinelli in Belgium , but was once again struck by misfortune when a bad case of food poisoning forced him to miss the San Marino Grand Prix . He then narrowly lost the British Grand Prix to Jack Middelburg by three @-@ tenths of a second before ending his season with a seventh place in Finland and a retirement in Sweden . Suzuki team riders Mamola and Lucchinelli battled to the final race of the season before the Italian claimed the championship with a total of five Grand Prix victories , with Mamola finishing in second and Roberts in third place . 
 Roberts switched to Dunlop tires for the 1982 season , as Goodyear pulled out of motorcycle racing . New competition had arrived as Honda entered their new two @-@ stroke <unk> ridden by defending champion Lucchinelli , former 350 cc world champion , <unk> Katayama and newcomer Freddie Spencer . Roberts won the season @-@ opening round in Argentina on the old square @-@ four Yamaha , but then switched to the new <unk> <unk> V4 engined bike . He came in third at the Austrian Grand Prix then , sat out the French Grand Prix at <unk> as he and the other top riders boycotted the race over unsafe track conditions . Roberts then won the Spanish Grand Prix at Jarama ahead of Sheene , and scored a second place behind Suzuki rider Franco <unk> in the Netherlands . In a portent of things to come , Roberts was leading the Belgian Grand Prix when his Dunlop tires lost their grip and he had to settle for fourth place as Spencer went on to win his first Grand Prix for Honda . Roberts then injured his knee and finger at the British Grand Prix and had to miss the Swedish round , but by then the world championship had been claimed by <unk> with a total of five victories while Roberts fell to fourth place . By the end of the 1982 season , Roberts had won sixteen 500 cc Grand Prix races , more than double that of any of his contemporaries . 
 = = = Roberts versus Spencer = = = 
 Roberts announced that the 1983 season would be his final year in Grand Prix competition . Yamaha team manager Giacomo Agostini had been unable to agree on a contract with rider Graeme Crosby , so AMA Superbike champion Eddie Lawson was brought in as Roberts ' new teammate . The 1983 battle for the championship between Roberts and Honda 's Spencer would be considered one of the greatest seasons in motorcycle Grand Prix history , along with the 1967 500 cc duel between Mike Hailwood and Giacomo Agostini . Roberts began the season with his <unk> having problems with overheating and rear suspension , while Spencer started strongly , winning the first three races and five out of the first seven . Roberts was leading the second race in France , when his Yamaha split an expansion chamber causing it to lose power as Spencer won , with Roberts falling to fourth place . In Round 3 at Monza , Roberts crashed while leading Spencer three laps from the finish . Roberts came back to win the German Grand Prix , but then finished second to Spencer in Spain in a race Spencer called one of the toughest of his career . Things began to go Roberts ' way at the Austrian Grand Prix as Roberts won while Spencer 's Honda suffered a crankshaft failure . In the Yugoslavian Grand Prix , Roberts ' Yamaha failed to start immediately , while Spencer charged to an early lead , leaving Roberts to fight through the field to finish in fourth place . Roberts then went on a three @-@ race winning streak with victories in the Netherlands , Belgium and England , while Spencer stayed close with a third place and two second @-@ place finishes . 
 The championship then moved to the penultimate round at the Swedish Grand Prix with Spencer holding a two @-@ point lead over Roberts . Roberts led Spencer going into the last lap of the race . Heading down the back straight , Spencer placed his Honda right behind Roberts ' Yamaha as they reached the second to the last corner , a ninety degree right @-@ hander . As both riders applied their brakes , Spencer came out of Roberts ' slipstream and managed to get inside of the Yamaha . As they exited the corner , both riders ran wide off the track and into the dirt . Spencer was able to get back on the track and back on the power first , crossing the finish line just ahead of Roberts for a crucial victory . Roberts considered Spencer 's pass to be foolish and dangerous , and exchanged angry words with him on the podium . Roberts would have to win the final round at the San Marino Grand Prix with Spencer finishing no better than third place in order for Roberts to win his fourth world championship . In a fitting end to a great career , Roberts won his last @-@ ever Grand Prix race , however Spencer was able to secure second place to claim the world championship . The two riders dominated the season with each claiming six victories in the 12 race series . 
 Roberts continued to ride in selected events in 1984 . In March , he battled Spencer to win his second consecutive Daytona 200 and third win overall . In July , Roberts won the first leg of the Laguna Seca 200 , then finished second to Randy Mamola in the second leg , as Mamola was declared the winner based on aggregate times . In September 1985 , he appeared at the Springfield Mile Grand National dirt track race riding a Mert <unk> @-@ prepared Harley @-@ Davidson <unk> , but failed to make the final . 
 In July 1985 , Roberts won the pole position at the prestigious Suzuka 8 Hours endurance race , held in Japan . <unk> with <unk> Taira , the duo were leading the race until the final hour , when mechanical problems dropped them back to seventeenth place . Roberts returned to compete in the 1986 Suzuka 8 Hours , this time teaming up with American Mike Baldwin . He qualified second behind Wayne Gardner , but failed to finish the race . 
 = = = Career statistics = = = 
 In a 13 @-@ year professional racing career , Roberts won two Grand National Championships and three 500 cc world championships including 32 Grand Nationals and 24 Grand Prix road races . He also won the Daytona 200 three times and was a six @-@ time winner of the Laguna Seca 200 . He was the second AMA rider after Dick Mann to accomplish the Grand Slam of winning all five events of the Grand National Championship . 
 = = Race team manager and owner = = 
 After his Grand Prix racing career ended in 1983 , Roberts briefly considered an auto racing career before deciding to field a Grand Prix team . In 1984 , he entered a team into the 250 cc world championship with riders Wayne Rainey and Alan Carter using Yamaha bikes . In 1986 he moved up to the 500 cc world championship with riders Randy Mamola and Mike Baldwin . After returning to the United States to compete in the AMA Superbike championship , Wayne Rainey re @-@ joined the team in 1988 , finishing in third place in his inaugural 500 cc season then , improving to second place behind Eddie Lawson in 1989 . In 1990 , Roberts secured the financial support of the Marlboro cigarette company , and his team became the official Yamaha factory racing team . Rainey and John <unk> won the 500 cc and 250 cc world championships in 1990 , making Roberts the most successful team manager in Grand Prix racing at the time . Rainey went on to win three consecutive 500 cc world championships for Roberts ' team . After Rainey was left paralyzed in a crash at the 1993 Italian Grand Prix , the Roberts team continued racing with Luca <unk> as their main rider , but struggled during a period dominated by Honda and their rider , Mick Doohan . 
 In 1997 , Roberts stunned the racing world when he left Yamaha after more than 25 years to start his own motorcycle company . Roberts had grown weary of battling over the direction he felt the Yamaha team needed to pursue . Basing his new company in England to take advantage of the Formula 1 industry , Roberts built a three @-@ cylinder , two @-@ stroke engine with the engineering assistance of Tom Walkinshaw Racing . He decided to take advantage of rules allowing lighter weights for three @-@ cylinder motorcycles after observing the agility and handling advantage of Spencer 's Honda <unk> during the 1983 season . Unfortunately , by the time the motorcycle had been developed , tire technology had improved to the point where any advantage over four @-@ cylinder bikes had been negated . The motorcycle did manage to win a pole position with rider Jeremy McWilliams taking the top qualifying position at the 2002 Australian Grand Prix against the new breed of 990 cc four @-@ stroke MotoGP motorcycles . 
 With the introduction of the MotoGP class in 2002 , Roberts ' team developed a five @-@ cylinder bike called the <unk> . The team was originally well @-@ funded by Proton of Malaysia , but by the middle of the 2004 season , it became apparent that the Roberts team was not able to field an engine capable of competing with the dominant Japanese factories . Roberts turned to the KTM factory to provide engines for the 2005 season , however after ten races KTM abruptly withdrew their support on the eve of the Czech Republic Grand Prix , forcing the team to miss several races . Honda stepped in to help Roberts ' team for the 2006 season by providing five @-@ cylinder engines , as Robert 's son , Kenny Roberts , Jr . , rode the Team Roberts <unk> bike to a sixth place in the championship including two podium results . The 2007 season saw the introduction of a new MotoGP engine formula using 800 cc four @-@ stroke engines . Roberts would once again secure engines from Honda for the Team Roberts <unk> race bike , but the results were not as hoped , and funding for the team faded . After the 2007 season , Roberts pulled out of MotoGP competition due to the lack of sponsorship . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Roberts ' riding style in which he forced the motorcycle 's rear wheel to break traction to steer around a corner , essentially riding on paved surfaces as if they were dirt tracks , changed the way Grand Prix motorcycles were ridden . From 1983 to 1999 , every 500 cc world championship was won by a rider with a dirt track racing background . Roberts ' cornering method of hanging off the motorcycles with his knee extended forced him to use duct tape as knee pads , and eventually led to the introduction of purpose @-@ built knee pucks used by all motorcycle road racers today . His battles with the Grand Prix establishment eventually led to the adoption of stricter safety standards for Grand Prix race organizers . He was one of the first riders to challenge the FIM over the way they treated competitors and helped improve prize money as well as the professionalism of the sport . It was not until Roberts planned his rival race series in 1980 that the FIM was forced to change the way in which they dealt with motorcycle racers . 
 Throughout his career , Roberts has been a strong proponent of raising the image of motorcycle racing among the general public . During his riding career , he made a point of returning to the United States during the mid @-@ season break in the Grand Prix calendar to race in the Laguna Seca 200 as a way to increase the profile of the event in order for it to gain Grand Prix status . The race eventually attained Grand Prix status in 1988 and in 1993 , Roberts took on the role of promoter , providing financial backing for the 1993 United States Grand Prix . In the 1990s when Grand Prix racing faced diminishing numbers of competitors due to increasing costs , Roberts demanded that Yamaha provide engines to privateer teams in order to bolster the number of racers . 
 Roberts ' son , Kenny Roberts , Jr . , won the 2000 500 cc World Championship , making them the only father and son duo to have won the title . Ironically , Roberts has stated that he considers himself a dirt tracker at heart and only took up road racing because it was necessary to do so if a rider was going to compete for the Grand National championship . He also said that he would have preferred to remain in the United States to compete in the Grand National championship if Yamaha or another manufacturer had been able to construct a dirt track racer capable of competing with Harley @-@ Davidson . 
 = = Honors = = 
 Inducted into the Motorsports Hall of Fame of America in 1990 . 
 Inducted into the International Motorsports Hall of Fame in 1992 . 
 Inducted into the AMA Motorcycle Hall of Fame in 1998 . 
 The FIM named him a Grand Prix " Legend " in 2000 . 
 = = Motorcycle Grand Prix results = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position ; races in italics indicate fastest lap ) 
 = White House FBI files controversy = 
 The White House FBI files controversy of the Clinton Administration , often referred to as Filegate , arose in June 1996 around improper access in 1993 and 1994 to Federal Bureau of Investigation security @-@ clearance documents . Craig Livingstone , director of the White House 's Office of Personnel Security , improperly requested , and received from the FBI , background reports concerning several hundred individuals without asking permission . The revelations provoked a strong political and press reaction because many of the files covered White House employees from previous Republican administrations , including top presidential advisors . Under criticism , Livingstone resigned from his position . Allegations were made that senior White House figures , including First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton , may have requested and read the files for political purposes , and that the First Lady had authorized the hiring of the underqualified Livingstone . 
 The matter was investigated by the House Government Reform and Oversight Committee , the Senate Judiciary Committee , and the Whitewater Independent Counsel . In 1998 , Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr exonerated President Bill Clinton and First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton of any involvement in the matter . In 2000 Independent Counsel Robert Ray issued his final report on Filegate , stating that there was no credible evidence of any criminal activity by any individual in the matter and no credible evidence that senior White House figures or the First Lady had requested the files or had acted improperly or testified improperly regarding Livingstone 's hiring . A separate lawsuit on the matter brought by Judicial Watch , a conservative watchdog group , lingered on for years and was dismissed by a federal judge in 2010 . 
 = = Improper use of files issue = = 
 " Filegate " began on June 5 , 1996 , when Republican Pennsylvania Congressman William F. Clinger , Jr . , chair of the House Committee on Government Reform and Oversight , announced that the committee had found , during their ongoing " Travelgate " investigations , that FBI background reports on Travelgate figure Billy Dale had been delivered to the White House . The following day , the White House delivered to the committee hundreds of other such files related to White House employees of the Reagan Administration and George H. W. Bush Administration , for which Craig Livingstone , director of the White House 's Office of Personnel Security , had improperly requested and received background reports from the FBI in 1993 and 1994 , without asking permission of the subject individuals . Estimates ranged from 400 to 700 to 900 unauthorized file disclosures . The incident caused an intense burst of criticism because many of the files covered White House employees from previous Republican administrations , including top figures such as James Baker , Brent Scowcroft , and Marlin <unk> . 
 Initial White House explanations for what had happened varied , but generally characterized it as a series of mistakes made without bad intent and offered apologies to those affected . President Clinton said that , " It appears to have been a completely honest bureaucratic snafu . " However his Republican opponent in the ongoing 1996 presidential election , Senator Bob Dole , compared it to the enemies list kept by the Nixon administration . Republicans made other charges , including that the White House was trying to dig up damaging information about Republicans in general and that the file transfer was motivated by a desire to slander Dale and other White House Travel Office officials , thereby justifying their dismissal . 
 On June 18 , 1996 , Attorney General Janet Reno asked the FBI to look into it ; FBI Director Louis Freeh acknowledged that both the FBI and especially the White House had committed " egregious violations of privacy " ( in some cases the background reports contained information about extramarital affairs , <unk> with the law , and medical issues ) . On June 21 Reno decided it was a conflict of interest for the U.S. Department of Justice to further investigate the matter , and thus recommended that it be folded into the overall umbrella of the Whitewater investigations , under charge of Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr . In any case , Starr had already begun looking into it . 
 On June 26 , 1996 , Clinger 's Government Reform and Oversight Committee held hearings on the matter . Livingstone , who announced his resignation at the start of his testimony that day , and his assistant , Anthony Marceca , insisted during the committee 's hearings that the mishandled files were a result of a bureaucratic mixup and that no improper motivations were behind it . They said that when the George H. W. Bush administrative staff left the White House in January 1993 , they had taken all the files of the Office of Personnel Security with them for use in the Bush Library , as they were permitted to do under law . The OPS staff were trying to rebuild these records to include those of permanent White House employees who remained to work in the Clinton administration ; Marceca , a civilian investigator for the Army , had been hired for this task . In doing so , they received an outdated list from the Secret Service of White House employees , which included many names who were no longer employees . This list was then given to the FBI and the personnel background files returned as a result . Lisa <unk> , another assistant , testified that she discovered the mistake in mid @-@ 1994 and destroyed the request list . 
 Also called to testify were former White House counsel Bernard Nussbaum and former associate counsel William Kennedy III . Livingstone , Nussbaum , and Kennedy all offered apologies to those whose files had been obtained . On September 24 , 1996 , the Government Reform and Oversight Committee approved , on party lines , an interim report on the affair , blasting the Clinton Administration for a " cavalier approach " towards sensitive security procedures and saving that further investigation was necessary to determine if the events surrounding the files handling were " a blunder , the result of colossal incompetence , or whether they are established to be more serious or even criminal . " The Committee does not seem to have ever issued a final report . 
 The Senate Judiciary Committee was also involved in investigating the matter , holding hearings beginning June 29 , 1996 , and focussing on allegations that White House was engaged in a " dirty tricks " operation reminiscent of the Nixon administration . Looking into accusations that senior White House officials or First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton may have inappropriately perused the files , in October 1996 Republican committee chair Orrin Hatch requested that the FBI do a fingerprint analysis of them . On November 3 , 1996 , the FBI informed the committee that no fingerprints of either the First Lady or any other named senior official were on the files . 
 = = Who hired Livingstone issue = = 
 A secondary question of the Filegate controversy revolved around what the Office of Personnel Security was , who had authorized the hiring of Livingstone , and whether he was qualified for the job . The Office was not responsible for actual White House security , as that was the charge of the United States Secret Service , nor did it perform background checks on potential White House employees , a task done by the FBI , nor did it keep the regular personnel files of employees , which were held in a different office within the White House . Rather , its role was to keep track of who was employed by the White House , make sure their security clearances were up to date , and give security briefings to new hires . Nevertheless , Livingstone seemed to lack qualifications for even this position ; he had worked on a number of Democratic Party campaigns and transitions , including being an advance man for the Clinton @-@ Gore 1992 campaign , and his only prior job in the " security " field was that of a local bar bouncer at a Washington , D.C. , night club . ( At the congressional hearings , Livingstone objected to " false and unfair caricatures of who I am . [ ... ] I have worked hard for little or no pay in political campaigns for candidates who I felt would make this country a better place to live . " In later years Livingstone would continue to maintain on the Internet that he had been qualified for the position , that the First Lady had signed off on hiring him , and that his character had been maligned by the general media . ) Clinton opponents stated that Livingstone had the highest level of security clearances in the U.S. government . White House officials could not explain why Livingstone was hired , nor who had hired him . 
 An FBI document suggested that Livingstone had been given his position because First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton was a friend of Livingstone 's mother and recommended him . Hillary Clinton stated that while she was once photographed with the mother in a large group , she did not know her . Hillary Clinton was briefly deposed at the White House by the Independent Counsel regarding this matter on January 14 , 1998 . ( That same day , the same Office of the Independent Counsel staff were listening to taped conversations of Linda Tripp and Monica Lewinsky ; the Lewinsky scandal was soon to break . ) In 1999 , Clinton gave a sworn statement that she had nothing to do with Livingstone 's hiring . Livingstone also stated under oath there was no truth to the supposed hiring relationship . Hillary Clinton would later refer to the whole files matter as a " <unk> " . 
 = = Official findings = = 
 On November 19 , 1998 , Independent Counsel Starr testified before the House Judiciary Committee in connection with the Impeachment of Bill Clinton over charges related to the Lewinsky scandal . Here , for the first time , Starr exonerated both President Clinton and the First Lady of complicity in the FBI files matter , saying " while there are outstanding issues that we are attempting to resolve with respect to one individual [ we ] found no evidence that anyone higher [ than Livingstone or Marceca ] was in any way involved in ordering the files from the FBI . Second , we have found no evidence that information contained in the files of former officials was used for an improper purpose . " ( Starr also chose this occasion to clear President Clinton in the Travelgate matter , and to say that he had not committed impeachable wrongdoing in the Whitewater matter ; Democrats on the committee immediately criticized Starr for withholding all these findings until after the 1998 Congressional elections . ) 
 In March 2000 , Independent Counsel Robert Ray , Starr 's successor , issued the office 's final report on the matter , as part of a concerted effort to wrap up all Whitewater @-@ related cases before the end of Bill Clinton 's term . Ray determined that there was no credible evidence of any criminal activity by any individual in the matter . It attributed the improper collection of the files by Marceca due to his having an outdated Secret Service list of White House passes , as Marceca had originally claimed . It stated that even though Marceca 's statements were sometimes " contradictory and misleading " , they were " sufficiently transparent " and there was insufficient evidence to prove that Anthony Marceca had made false statements to Congress during his testimony . The report ascribed the FBI files matter to " a failure of process at many levels , " saying that the Secret Service had provided critically erroneous data , and that this was compounded by the White House 's informal process of requesting sensitive information by " inexperienced , untrained , and unsupervised personnel with backgrounds as political operatives . " 
 Based on an investigation that included the prior fingerprint analysis , the report further stated that : 
 there was no substantial and credible evidence that any senior White House official , or First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton , was involved in seeking confidential Federal Bureau of Investigation background reports of former White House staff from prior administrations of President Bush and President Reagan . 
 Ray 's report also concluded that there was no credible evidence that Bernard Nussbaum testified falsely about not having discussed Livingstone 's hiring with the First Lady , and found as well that there was no personal relationship between the First Lady and Livingstone that had formed the basis for his hiring . 
 = = Judicial Watch lawsuit = = 
 Separately from the Independent Counsel investigation , Judicial Watch , a conservative watchdog group , engaged in long @-@ running litigation over the White House personnel file controversy . Judicial Watch 's Cara Leslie Alexander et al. vs. Federal Bureau of Investigation et al. class action lawsuit , filed on behalf of several members of the Reagan and George H. W. Bush Administrations , alleged that Livingstone , along with Anthony Marceca and William Kennedy , obtained the files and then rifled through them . Judicial Watch founder and Clintons antagonist <unk> Larry Klayman attracted enough attention with the case to have the recurring Larry Claypool character modeled after him on the television series The West Wing . As late as January 2000 , Judicial Watch was filing affidavits in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia under Judge Royce C. Lamberth related to the case . In their $ 90 million lawsuit , they claimed that the First Lady did , despite her denials , know Livingstone – indeed , that Livingstone had bragged to associates he was very close to both the president and his wife – and that Clinton had personally hired him for the security job . ( White House defenders pointed out that Livingstone had a long history of exaggerating his importance and connections . ) Judicial Watch also said they had five sources who claimed Livingstone had been hired by and worked under the First Lady , and also discovered some photographs of Livingstone in the vicinity of the First Lady ( but not talking with him ) . In December 2002 Judicial Watch obtained a ruling from Judge Lamberth that recently uncovered White House e @-@ mails be searched for possible evidence in the lawsuit . Klayman said , " Hillary Clinton was the mastermind of Filegate . She will not escape justice . " Klayman and Judicial Watch had a severe falling out in 2003 , however , and several years went by with little or nothing happening in the lawsuit . 
 On March 9 , 2010 , Judge Lamberth dismissed the case . The judge asserted that the plaintiffs , despite years of opportunity , had failed to provide any evidence that the affair was a grand conspiracy rather than a bureaucratic mistake , and said that " this court is left to conclude that with the lawsuit , to quote Gertrude Stein , ' there 's no there there . ' " Nussbaum , one of the defendants , derisively said " No kidding " when informed of the dismissal . Media reports concluded that , fourteen years after the initial events were set in motion , Filegate was finally over . In May 2010 , Judicial Watch filed an appeal of the dismissal with the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit , but the Court of Appeals affirmed the dismissal on November 14 , 2011 , finally bringing the case to an end . 
 = Canada = 
 Canada ( / <unk> / ; French : [ <unk> ] ) is a country in the northern half of North America . Its ten provinces and three territories extend from the Atlantic to the Pacific and northward into the Arctic Ocean , covering 9 @.@ 98 million square kilometres ( 3 @.@ 85 million square miles ) , making it the world 's second @-@ largest country by total area and the fourth @-@ largest country by land area . Canada 's border with the United States is the world 's longest land border . Canada is sparsely populated , the majority of its land territory being dominated by forest and tundra and the Rocky Mountains ; about four @-@ fifths of the country 's population of 35 million people live near the southern border . The majority of Canada has a cold or severely cold winter climate , but southerly areas are warm in summer . 
 Canada has been inhabited for millennia by various Aboriginal peoples . Beginning in the 15th and 16th centuries , British and French claims were made on the area , with the colony of Canada first being established by the French in 1537 . As a consequence of various conflicts , the United Kingdom gained and lost territories within British North America until it was left , in the late 18th century , with what mostly geographically comprises Canada today . Pursuant to the British North America Act , on July 1 , 1867 , the colonies of Canada , New Brunswick , and Nova Scotia joined to form the semi @-@ autonomous federal Dominion of Canada . This began an accretion of provinces and territories to the mostly self @-@ governing Dominion to the present ten provinces and three territories forming modern Canada . 
 In 1931 , Canada achieved near total independence from the United Kingdom with the Statute of Westminster 1931 , and full sovereignty was attained when the Canada Act 1982 removed the last remaining ties of legal dependence on the Parliament of the United Kingdom . Canada is a federal parliamentary democracy and a constitutional monarchy , with Queen Elizabeth II being the head of state . The country is officially bilingual at the federal level . It is one of the world 's most ethnically diverse and multicultural nations , the product of large @-@ scale immigration from many other countries . Its advanced economy is the eleventh largest in the world , relying chiefly upon its abundant natural resources and well @-@ developed international trade networks . Canada 's long and complex relationship with the United States has had a significant impact on its economy and culture . 
 Canada is a developed country and has the tenth highest nominal per capita income globally as well as the ninth highest ranking in the Human Development Index . It ranks among the highest in international measurements of government transparency , civil liberties , quality of life , economic freedom , and education . Canada is a Commonwealth Realm member of the Commonwealth of Nations , a member of the Francophonie , and part of several major international and intergovernmental institutions or groupings including the United Nations , the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , the G8 , the Group of Ten , the G20 , the North American Free Trade Agreement and the Asia @-@ Pacific Economic Cooperation forum . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 While a variety of theories have been postulated for the etymological origins of Canada , the name is now accepted as coming from the St. Lawrence Iroquoian word <unk> , meaning " village " or " settlement " . In 1535 , indigenous inhabitants of the present @-@ day Quebec City region used the word to direct French explorer Jacques Cartier to the village of Stadacona . Cartier later used the word Canada to refer not only to that particular village , but the entire area subject to <unk> ( the chief at Stadacona ) ; by 1545 , European books and maps had begun referring to this small region along the St Lawrence River as Canada . 
 From the 16th to the early 18th century " Canada " referred to the part of New France that lay along the St. Lawrence River . In 1791 , the area became two British colonies called Upper Canada and Lower Canada collectively named The Canadas ; until their union as the British Province of Canada in 1841 . Upon Confederation in 1867 , Canada was adopted as the legal name for the new country , and the word Dominion was conferred as the country 's title . The transition away from the use of Dominion was formally reflected in 1982 with the passage of the Canada Act , which refers only to Canada . Later that year , the national holiday was renamed from Dominion Day to Canada Day . The term Dominion is also used to distinguish the federal government from the provinces , though after the Second World War the term federal had replaced dominion . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Aboriginal peoples = = = 
 Aboriginal peoples in present @-@ day Canada include the First Nations , Inuit , and Métis , the latter being a mixed @-@ blood people who originated in the mid @-@ 17th @-@ century when First Nations and Inuit people married European settlers . The first inhabitants of North America migrated from Siberia by way of the Bering land bridge and arrived at least 15 @,@ 000 years ago , though increasing evidence suggests an even earlier arrival . The Paleo @-@ Indian archeological sites at Old Crow Flats and Bluefish Caves are two of the oldest sites of human habitation in Canada . The characteristics of Canadian Aboriginal societies included permanent settlements , agriculture , complex societal hierarchies , and trading networks . Some of these cultures had collapsed by the time European explorers arrived in the late 15th and early 16th centuries and have only been discovered through archeological investigations . 
 The aboriginal population at the time of the first European settlements is estimated to have been between 200 @,@ 000 and two million , with a figure of 500 @,@ 000 accepted by Canada 's Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples . As a consequence of contact with European diseases , Canada 's aboriginal peoples suffered from repeated outbreaks of newly introduced infectious diseases , such as influenza , measles , and smallpox ( to which they had no natural immunity ) , resulting in a forty to eighty percent population decrease in the centuries after the European arrival . 
 Although not without conflict , European Canadians ' early interactions with First Nations and Inuit populations were relatively peaceful . The Crown and Aboriginal peoples began interactions during the European colonialization period , though , the Inuit , in general , had more limited interaction with European settlers . From the late 18th century , European Canadians encouraged Aboriginals to assimilate into their own culture . These attempts reached a climax in the late 19th and early 20th centuries with forced integration and relocations . A period of redress is underway , which started with the appointment of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada by the Canadian government . 
 = = = European colonization = = = 
 The first known attempt at European colonization began when Norsemen settled briefly at L 'Anse aux Meadows in Newfoundland around 1000 AD . No further European exploration occurred until 1497 , when Italian seafarer John Cabot explored and claimed Canada 's Atlantic coast in the name of King Henry VII of England . Then Basque and Portuguese mariners established seasonal whaling and fishing outposts along the Atlantic coast in the early 16th century . In 1534 , French explorer Jacques Cartier explored the Saint Lawrence River , where , on July 24 , he planted a 10 @-@ metre ( 33 ft ) cross bearing the words " Long Live the King of France " and took possession of the territory ( known as the colony of Canada ) in the name of King Francis I. In general the settlements appear to have been short @-@ lived , possibly due to the similarity of outputs producible in Scandinavia and northern Canada and the problems of navigating trade routes at that time . 
 In 1583 , Sir Humphrey Gilbert , by the royal prerogative of Queen Elizabeth I , founded St. John 's , Newfoundland , as the first North American English colony . French explorer Samuel de Champlain arrived in 1603 and established the first permanent European settlements at Port Royal ( in 1605 ) and Quebec City ( in 1608 ) . Among the colonists of New France , Canadiens extensively settled the Saint Lawrence River valley and Acadians settled the present @-@ day Maritimes , while fur traders and Catholic missionaries explored the Great Lakes , Hudson Bay , and the Mississippi watershed to Louisiana . The Beaver Wars broke out in the mid @-@ 17th @-@ century over control of the North American fur trade . 
 The English established additional colonies in Cupids and Ferryland , Newfoundland , beginning in 1610 . The Thirteen Colonies to the south were founded soon after . A series of four wars erupted in colonial North America between 1689 and 1763 ; the later wars of the period constituted the North American theatre of the Seven Years ' War . Mainland Nova Scotia came under British rule with the 1713 Treaty of Utrecht and the 1763 Treaty of Paris ceded Canada and most of New France to Britain after the Seven Years ' War . 
 The Royal Proclamation of 1763 created the Province of Quebec out of New France , and annexed Cape Breton Island to Nova Scotia . St. John 's Island ( now Prince Edward Island ) became a separate colony in 1769 . To avert conflict in Quebec , the British parliament passed the Quebec Act of 1774 , expanding Quebec 's territory to the Great Lakes and Ohio Valley . It re @-@ established the French language , Catholic faith , and French civil law there . This angered many residents of the Thirteen Colonies , fuelling anti @-@ British sentiment in the years prior to the 1775 outbreak of the American Revolution . 
 The 1783 Treaty of Paris recognized American independence and ceded the newly added territories south ( but not north ) of the Great Lakes to the new United States . New Brunswick was split from Nova Scotia as part of a reorganization of Loyalist settlements in the Maritimes . To accommodate English @-@ speaking Loyalists in Quebec , the Constitutional Act of 1791 divided the province into French @-@ speaking Lower Canada ( later Quebec ) and English @-@ speaking Upper Canada ( later Ontario ) , granting each its own elected legislative assembly . 
 The Canadas were the main front in the War of 1812 between the United States and Britain . Peace came in 1815 ; no boundaries were changed . Immigration now resumed at a higher level , with over 960 @,@ 000 arrivals from Britain 1815 @-@ 50 . New arrivals included Irish refugees escaping the Great Irish Famine as well as Gaelic @-@ speaking Scots displaced by the Highland Clearances . Infectious diseases killed between 25 and 33 per cent of Europeans who immigrated to Canada before 1891 . 
 The desire for responsible government resulted in the abortive Rebellions of 1837 . The Durham Report subsequently recommended responsible government and the assimilation of French Canadians into English culture . The Act of Union 1840 merged the Canadas into a united Province of Canada and responsible government was established for all provinces of British North America by 1849 . The signing of the Oregon Treaty by Britain and the United States in 1846 ended the Oregon boundary dispute , extending the border westward along the 49th parallel . This paved the way for British colonies on Vancouver Island ( 1849 ) and in British Columbia ( 1858 ) . 
 = = = Confederation and expansion = = = 
 Following several constitutional conferences , the 1867 Constitution Act officially proclaimed Canadian Confederation on July 1 , 1867 , initially with four provinces : Ontario , Quebec , Nova Scotia , and New Brunswick . Canada assumed control of Rupert 's Land and the North @-@ Western Territory to form the Northwest Territories , where the Métis ' grievances ignited the Red River Rebellion and the creation of the province of Manitoba in July 1870 . British Columbia and Vancouver Island ( which had been united in 1866 ) joined the confederation in 1871 , while Prince Edward Island joined in 1873 . 
 The Canadian parliament passed a bill introduced by the Conservative Cabinet that established a National Policy of tariffs to protect the nascent Canadian manufacturing industries . To open the West , parliament also approved sponsoring the construction of three transcontinental railways ( including the Canadian Pacific Railway ) , opening the prairies to settlement with the Dominion Lands Act , and establishing the North @-@ West Mounted Police to assert its authority over this territory . In 1898 , during the Klondike Gold Rush in the Northwest Territories , parliament created the Yukon Territory . The Cabinet of Liberal Prime Minister Wilfrid Laurier fostered continental European immigrants settling the prairies and Alberta and Saskatchewan became provinces in 1905 . 
 = = = Early 20th century = = = 
 Because Britain still maintained control of Canada 's foreign affairs under the Confederation Act , its declaration of war in 1914 automatically brought Canada into World War I. Volunteers sent to the Western Front later became part of the Canadian Corps , which played a substantial role in the Battle of Vimy Ridge and other major engagements of the war . Out of approximately 625 @,@ 000 Canadians who served in World War I , some 60 @,@ 000 were killed and another 172 @,@ 000 were wounded . The Conscription Crisis of 1917 erupted when the Unionist Cabinet 's proposal to augment the military 's dwindling number of active members with conscription was met with vehement objections from French @-@ speaking Quebecers . The Military Service Act brought in compulsory military service , though , it , coupled with disputes over French language schools outside Quebec , deeply alienated Francophone Canadians and temporarily split the Liberal Party . In 1919 , Canada joined the League of Nations independently of Britain , and the 1931 Statute of Westminster affirmed Canada 's independence . 
 The Great Depression in Canada during the early 1930s saw an economic downturn , leading to hardship across the country . In response to the downturn , the Co @-@ operative Commonwealth Federation ( CCF ) in Saskatchewan introduced many elements of a welfare state ( as pioneered by Tommy Douglas ) in the 1940s and 1950s . On the advice of Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King , war with Germany was declared effective 10 September 1939 by King George VI , seven days after the United Kingdom . The delay underscored Canada 's independence . 
 The first Canadian Army units arrived in Britain in December 1939 . In all , over a million Canadians served in the armed forces during World War II and approximately 42 @,@ 000 were killed and another 55 @,@ 000 were wounded . Canadian troops played important roles in many key battles of the war , including the failed 1942 Dieppe Raid , the Allied invasion of Italy , the Normandy landings , the Battle of Normandy , and the Battle of the Scheldt in 1944 . Canada provided asylum for the Dutch monarchy while that country was occupied and is credited by the Netherlands for major contributions to its liberation from Nazi Germany . The Canadian economy boomed during the war as its industries manufactured military materiel for Canada , Britain , China , and the Soviet Union . Despite another Conscription Crisis in Quebec in 1944 , Canada finished the war with a large army and strong economy . 
 = = = Modern times = = = 
 The financial crisis of the great depression had led the Dominion of Newfoundland to relinquish responsible government in 1934 and become a crown colony ruled by a British governor . After two bitter referendums , Newfoundlanders voted to join Canada in 1949 as a province . 
 Canada 's post @-@ war economic growth , combined with the policies of successive Liberal governments , led to the emergence of a new Canadian identity , marked by the adoption of the current Maple Leaf Flag in 1965 , the implementation of official bilingualism ( English and French ) in 1969 , and the institution of official multiculturalism in 1971 . Socially democratic programs were also instituted , such as Medicare , the Canada Pension Plan , and Canada Student Loans , though provincial governments , particularly Quebec and Alberta , opposed many of these as incursions into their jurisdictions . Finally , another series of constitutional conferences resulted in the 1982 patriation of Canada 's constitution from the United Kingdom , concurrent with the creation of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . In 1999 , Nunavut became Canada 's third territory after a series of negotiations with the federal government . 
 At the same time , Quebec underwent profound social and economic changes through the Quiet Revolution of the 1960s , giving birth to a modern nationalist movement . The radical Front de libération du Québec ( FLQ ) ignited the October Crisis with a series of bombings and kidnappings in 1970 and the sovereignist Parti Québécois was elected in 1976 , organizing an unsuccessful referendum on sovereignty @-@ association in 1980 . Attempts to accommodate Quebec nationalism constitutionally through the Meech Lake Accord failed in 1990 . This led to the formation of the Bloc Québécois in Quebec and the <unk> of the Reform Party of Canada in the West . A second referendum followed in 1995 , in which sovereignty was rejected by a slimmer margin of 50 @.@ 6 to 49 @.@ 4 percent . In 1997 , the Supreme Court ruled that unilateral secession by a province would be unconstitutional and the Clarity Act was passed by parliament , outlining the terms of a negotiated departure from Confederation . 
 In addition to the issues of Quebec sovereignty , a number of crises shook Canadian society in the late 1980s and early 1990s . These included the explosion of Air India Flight 182 in 1985 , the largest mass murder in Canadian history ; the École Polytechnique massacre in 1989 , a university shooting targeting female students ; and the Oka Crisis of 1990 , the first of a number of violent confrontations between the government and Aboriginal groups . Canada also joined the Gulf War in 1990 as part of a US @-@ led coalition force and was active in several peacekeeping missions in the 1990s , including the UNPROFOR mission in the former Yugoslavia . 
 Canada sent troops to Afghanistan in 2001 , but declined to join the US @-@ led invasion of Iraq in 2003 . In 2009 , Canada 's economy suffered in the worldwide Great Recession , but it has since largely rebounded . In 2011 , Canadian forces participated in the NATO @-@ led intervention into the Libyan civil war , and also became involved in battling the Islamic State insurgency in Iraq in the mid @-@ 2010s . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 Canada occupies much of the continent of North America , sharing land borders with the contiguous United States to the south , and the US state of Alaska to the northwest . Canada stretches from the Atlantic Ocean in the east to the Pacific Ocean in the west ; to the north lies the Arctic Ocean . Greenland is to the northeast . By total area ( including its waters ) , Canada is the second @-@ largest country in the world , after Russia . By land area alone , however , Canada ranks fourth , the difference being due to it having the worlds largest proportion of fresh water lakes . 
 Since 1925 , Canada has claimed the portion of the Arctic between 60 ° and 141 ° W longitude , but this claim is not universally recognized . Canada is home to the world 's northernmost settlement , Canadian Forces Station Alert , on the northern tip of Ellesmere Island – latitude 82 @.@ 5 ° N – which lies 817 kilometres ( 508 mi ) from the North Pole . Much of the Canadian Arctic is covered by ice and permafrost . Canada has the longest coastline in the world , with a total length of 243 @,@ 042 kilometres ( 151 @,@ 019 mi ) ; additionally , its border with the United States is the world 's longest land border , stretching 8 @,@ 891 kilometres ( 5 @,@ 525 mi ) . 
 Since the end of the last glacial period , Canada has consisted of eight distinct forest regions , including extensive boreal forest on the Canadian Shield . Canada has over 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 lakes ( 563 greater than 100 km2 ( 39 sq mi ) ) , more than any other country , containing much of the world 's fresh water . There are also fresh @-@ water glaciers in the Canadian Rockies and the Coast Mountains . 
 Canada is geologically active , having many earthquakes and potentially active volcanoes , notably Mount Meager , Mount Garibaldi , Mount Cayley , and the Mount Edziza volcanic complex . The volcanic eruption of the Tseax Cone in 1775 was among Canada 's worst natural disasters , killing 2 @,@ 000 Nisga 'a people and destroying their village in the Nass River valley of northern British Columbia . The eruption produced a 22 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometre ( 14 @.@ 0 mi ) lava flow , and , according to Nisga 'a legend , blocked the flow of the Nass River . Canada 's population density , at 3 @.@ 3 inhabitants per square kilometre ( 8 @.@ 5 / sq mi ) , is among the lowest in the world . The most densely populated part of the country is the Quebec City – Windsor Corridor , situated in Southern Quebec and Southern Ontario along the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River . 
 Average winter and summer high temperatures across Canada vary from region to region . Winters can be harsh in many parts of the country , particularly in the interior and Prairie provinces , which experience a continental climate , where daily average temperatures are near − 15 ° C ( 5 ° F ) , but can drop below − 40 ° C ( − 40 ° F ) with severe wind chills . In <unk> regions , snow can cover the ground for almost six months of the year , while in parts of the north snow can persist year @-@ round . Coastal British Columbia has a temperate climate , with a mild and rainy winter . On the east and west coasts , average high temperatures are generally in the low 20s ° C ( 70s ° F ) , while between the coasts , the average summer high temperature ranges from 25 to 30 ° C ( 77 to 86 ° F ) , with temperatures in some interior locations occasionally exceeding 40 ° C ( 104 ° F ) . 
 = = Government and politics = = 
 Canada has a parliamentary system within the context of a constitutional monarchy , the monarchy of Canada being the foundation of the executive , legislative , and judicial branches . The sovereign is Queen Elizabeth II , who is also monarch of 15 other Commonwealth countries and each of Canada 's 10 provinces . As such , the Queen 's representative , the Governor General of Canada ( at present David Johnston ) , carries out most of the federal royal duties in Canada . 
 The direct participation of the royal and <unk> figures in areas of governance is limited . In practice , their use of the executive powers is directed by the Cabinet , a committee of ministers of the Crown responsible to the elected House of Commons and chosen and headed by the Prime Minister of Canada ( at present Justin Trudeau ) , the head of government . The governor general or monarch may , though , in certain crisis situations exercise their power without ministerial advice . To ensure the stability of government , the governor general will usually appoint as prime minister the person who is the current leader of the political party that can obtain the confidence of a plurality in the House of Commons . The Prime Minister 's Office ( PMO ) is thus one of the most powerful institutions in government , initiating most legislation for parliamentary approval and selecting for appointment by the Crown , besides the aforementioned , the governor general , lieutenant governors , senators , federal court judges , and heads of Crown corporations and government agencies . The leader of the party with the second @-@ most seats usually becomes the Leader of Her Majesty 's Loyal Opposition and is part of an adversarial parliamentary system intended to keep the government in check . 
 Each of the 338 members of parliament in the House of Commons is elected by simple plurality in an electoral district or riding . General elections must be called by the governor general , either on the advice of the prime minister , within four years of the previous election , or if the government loses a confidence vote in the House . The 105 members of the Senate , whose seats are apportioned on a regional basis , serve until age 75 . Five parties had representatives elected to the federal parliament in the 2015 election : the Liberal Party of Canada , the Conservative Party of Canada ( governing party and soon to be Official Opposition ) , the New Democratic Party , the Bloc Québécois , and the Green Party of Canada . The list of historical parties with elected representation is substantial . 
 Canada 's federal structure divides government responsibilities between the federal government and the ten provinces . Provincial legislatures are unicameral and operate in parliamentary fashion similar to the House of Commons . Canada 's three territories also have legislatures , but these are not sovereign and have fewer constitutional responsibilities than the provinces . The territorial legislatures also differ structurally from their provincial counterparts . 
 The Bank of Canada is the central bank of the country . In addition , the Minister of Finance and Minister of Industry utilize the Statistics Canada agency for financial planning and economic policy development . The Bank of Canada is the sole authority authorized to issue currency in the form of Canadian bank notes . The bank does not issue Canadian coins ; they are issued by the Royal Canadian Mint . 
 = = = Law = = = 
 The Constitution of Canada is the supreme law of the country , and consists of written text and unwritten conventions . The Constitution Act , 1867 ( known as the British North America Act prior to 1982 ) , affirmed governance based on parliamentary precedent and divided powers between the federal and provincial governments . The Statute of Westminster 1931 granted full autonomy and the Constitution Act , 1982 , ended all legislative ties to the UK , as well as adding a constitutional amending formula and the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . The Charter guarantees basic rights and freedoms that usually cannot be over @-@ ridden by any government — though a notwithstanding clause allows the federal parliament and provincial legislatures to override certain sections of the Charter for a period of five years . 
 The Indian Act , various treaties and case laws were established to mediate relations between Europeans and native peoples . Most notably , a series of eleven treaties known as the Numbered Treaties were signed between Aboriginals in Canada and the reigning Monarch of Canada between 1871 and 1921 . These treaties are agreements with the Canadian Crown @-@ in @-@ Council , administered by Canadian Aboriginal law , and overseen by the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development . The role of the treaties and the rights they support were reaffirmed by Section Thirty @-@ five of the Constitution Act , 1982 . These rights may include provision of services , such as health care , and exemption from taxation . The legal and policy framework within which Canada and First Nations operate was further formalized in 2005 , through the First Nations – Federal Crown Political Accord . 
 Canada 's judiciary plays an important role in interpreting laws and has the power to strike down Acts of Parliament that violate the constitution . The Supreme Court of Canada is the highest court and final arbiter and has been led since 2000 by the Chief Justice Beverley McLachlin ( the first female Chief Justice ) . Its nine members are appointed by the governor general on the advice of the prime minister and minister of justice . All judges at the superior and appellate levels are appointed after consultation with nongovernmental legal bodies . The federal Cabinet also appoints justices to superior courts in the provincial and territorial jurisdictions . 
 Common law prevails everywhere except in Quebec , where civil law predominates . Criminal law is solely a federal responsibility and is uniform throughout Canada . Law enforcement , including criminal courts , is officially a provincial responsibility , conducted by provincial and municipal police forces . However , in most rural areas and some urban areas , policing responsibilities are contracted to the federal Royal Canadian Mounted Police . 
 = = = Foreign relations and military = = = 
 Canada is recognized as a middle power for its role in international affairs with a tendency to pursue multilateral solutions . Canada 's foreign policy based on international peacekeeping and security is carried out through coalitions and international organizations , and through the work of numerous federal institutions . Canada 's peacekeeping role during the 20th century has played a major role in its global image . The strategy of the Canadian government 's foreign aid policy reflects an emphasis to meet the Millennium Development Goals , while also providing assistance in response to foreign humanitarian crises . 
 Canada was a founding member of the United Nations and has membership in the World Trade Organization , the G20 and the Organisation for Economic Co @-@ operation and Development ( OECD ) . Canada is also a member of various other international and regional organizations and forums for economic and cultural affairs . Canada acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in 1976 . Canada joined the Organization of American States ( OAS ) in 1990 and hosted the OAS General Assembly in 2000 and the 3rd Summit of the Americas in 2001 . Canada seeks to expand its ties to Pacific Rim economies through membership in the Asia @-@ Pacific Economic Cooperation forum ( APEC ) . 
 Canada and the United States share the world 's longest undefended border , co @-@ operate on military campaigns and exercises , and are each other 's largest trading partner . Canada nevertheless has an independent foreign policy , most notably maintaining full relations with Cuba since , and declining to officially participate in the 2003 invasion of Iraq . Canada also maintains historic ties to the United Kingdom and France and to other former British and French colonies through Canada 's membership in the Commonwealth of Nations and the Francophonie . Canada is noted for having a positive relationship with the Netherlands , owing , in part , to its contribution to the Dutch liberation during World War II . 
 Canada 's strong attachment to the British Empire and Commonwealth led to major participation in British military efforts in the Second Boer War , World War I and World War II . Since then , Canada has been an advocate for multilateralism , making efforts to resolve global issues in collaboration with other nations . During the Cold War , Canada was a major contributor to UN forces in the Korean War and founded the North American Aerospace Defense Command ( NORAD ) in co @-@ operation with the United States to defend against potential aerial attacks from the Soviet Union . 
 During the Suez Crisis of 1956 , future Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson eased tensions by proposing the inception of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force , for which he was awarded the 1957 Nobel Peace Prize . As this was the first UN peacekeeping mission , Pearson is often credited as the inventor of the concept . Canada has since served in over 50 peacekeeping missions , including every UN peacekeeping effort until 1989 , and has since maintained forces in international missions in Rwanda , the former Yugoslavia , and elsewhere ; Canada has sometimes faced controversy over its involvement in foreign countries , notably in the 1993 Somalia Affair . 
 In 2001 , Canada deployed troops to Afghanistan as part of the US stabilization force and the UN @-@ authorized , NATO @-@ led International Security Assistance Force . In February 2007 , Canada , Italy , the United Kingdom , Norway , and Russia announced their joint commitment to a $ 1 @.@ 5 @-@ billion project to help develop vaccines for developing nations , and called on other countries to join them . In August 2007 , Canada 's territorial claims in the Arctic were challenged after a Russian underwater expedition to the North Pole ; Canada has considered that area to be sovereign territory since 1925 . 
 Canada currently employs a professional , volunteer military force of 92 @,@ 000 active personnel and approximately 51 @,@ 000 reserve personnel . The unified Canadian Forces ( CF ) comprise the Canadian Army , Royal Canadian Navy , and Royal Canadian Air Force . In 2013 , Canada 's military expenditure totalled approximately C $ 19 billion , or around 1 % of the country 's GDP . 
 = = = Provinces and territories = = = 
 Canada is a federation composed of ten provinces and three territories . In turn , these may be grouped into four main regions : Western Canada , Central Canada , Atlantic Canada , and Northern Canada ( Eastern Canada refers to Central Canada and Atlantic Canada together ) . Provinces have more autonomy than territories , having responsibility for social programs such as health care , education , and welfare . Together , the provinces collect more revenue than the federal government , an almost unique structure among federations in the world . Using its spending powers , the federal government can initiate national policies in provincial areas , such as the Canada Health Act ; the provinces can opt out of these , but rarely do so in practice . Equalization payments are made by the federal government to ensure that reasonably uniform standards of services and taxation are kept between the richer and poorer provinces . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Canada is the world 's eleventh @-@ largest economy as of 2015 , with a nominal GDP of approximately US $ 1 @.@ 79 trillion . It is a member of the Organisation for Economic Co @-@ operation and Development ( OECD ) and the Group of Eight ( G8 ) , and is one of the world 's top ten trading nations , with a highly globalized economy . Canada is a mixed economy , ranking above the US and most western European nations on the Heritage Foundation 's index of economic freedom , and experiencing a relatively low level of income disparity . The country 's average household disposable income per capita is over US $ 23 @,@ 900 , higher than the OECD average . Furthermore , the Toronto Stock Exchange is the seventh largest stock exchange in the world by market capitalization , listing over 1 @,@ 500 companies with a combined market capitalization of over US $ 2 trillion as of 2015 . 
 In 2014 , Canada 's exports totalled over C $ 528 billion , while its imported goods were worth over $ 523 billion , of which approximately $ 349 billion originated from the United States , $ 49 billion from the European Union , and $ 35 billion from China . The country 's 2014 trade surplus totalled C $ 5 @.@ 1 billion , compared with a C $ 46 @.@ 9 billion surplus in 2008 . 
 Since the early 20th century , the growth of Canada 's manufacturing , mining , and service sectors has transformed the nation from a largely rural economy to an urbanized , industrial one . Like many other developed nations , the Canadian economy is dominated by the service industry , which employs about three @-@ quarters of the country 's workforce . However , Canada is unusual among developed countries in the importance of its primary sector , in which the forestry and petroleum industries are two of the most prominent components . 
 Canada is one of the few developed nations that are net exporters of energy . Atlantic Canada possesses vast offshore deposits of natural gas , and Alberta also hosts large oil and gas resources . The vastness of the Athabasca oil sands and other assets results in Canada having a 13 % share of global oil reserves , comprising the world 's third @-@ largest share after Venezuela and Saudi Arabia . Canada is additionally one of the world 's largest suppliers of agricultural products ; the Canadian Prairies are one of the most important global producers of wheat , canola , and other grains . Canada 's Ministry of Natural Resources provides statistics regarding its major exports ; the country is a leading exporter of zinc , uranium , gold , nickel , aluminum , steel , iron ore , coking coal and lead . Many towns in northern Canada , where agriculture is difficult , are sustainable because of nearby mines or sources of timber . Canada also has a sizeable manufacturing sector centred in southern Ontario and Quebec , with automobiles and aeronautics representing particularly important industries . 
 Canada 's economic integration with the United States has increased significantly since World War II . The Automotive Products Trade Agreement of 1965 opened Canada 's borders to trade in the automobile manufacturing industry . In the 1970s , concerns over energy self @-@ sufficiency and foreign ownership in the manufacturing sectors prompted Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau 's Liberal government to enact the National Energy Program ( NEP ) and the Foreign Investment Review Agency ( FIRA ) . In the 1980s , Prime Minister Brian Mulroney 's Progressive Conservatives abolished the NEP and changed the name of FIRA to Investment Canada , to encourage foreign investment . The Canada – United States Free Trade Agreement ( FTA ) of 1988 eliminated tariffs between the two countries , while the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) expanded the free @-@ trade zone to include Mexico in 1994 . In the mid @-@ 1990s , Jean Chrétien 's Liberal government began to post annual budgetary surpluses , and steadily paid down the national debt . 
 The global financial crisis of 2008 caused a major recession , which led to a significant rise in unemployment in Canada . By October 2009 , Canada 's national unemployment rate had reached 8 @.@ 6 percent , with provincial unemployment rates varying from a low of 5 @.@ 8 percent in Manitoba to a high of 17 percent in Newfoundland and Labrador . Between October 2008 and October 2010 , the Canadian labour market lost 162 @,@ 000 full @-@ time jobs and a total of 224 @,@ 000 permanent jobs . Canada 's federal debt was estimated to total $ 566 @.@ 7 billion for the fiscal year 2010 – 11 , up from $ 463 @.@ 7 billion in 2008 – 09 . In addition , Canada 's net foreign debt rose by $ 41 billion to $ 194 billion in the first quarter of 2010 . However , Canada 's regulated banking sector ( comparatively conservative among G8 nations ) , the federal government 's pre @-@ crisis budgetary surpluses , and its long @-@ term policies of lowering the national debt , resulted in a less severe recession compared to other G8 nations . As of 2015 , the Canadian economy has largely stabilized and has seen a modest return to growth , although the country remains troubled by volatile oil prices , sensitivity to the Eurozone crisis and higher @-@ than @-@ normal unemployment rates . The federal government and many Canadian industries have also started to expand trade with emerging Asian markets , in an attempt to diversify exports ; Asia is now Canada 's second @-@ largest export market after the United States . Widely debated oil pipeline proposals , in particular , are hoped to increase exports of Canadian oil reserves to China . 
 = = = Science and technology = = = 
 In 2012 , Canada spent approximately C $ 31 @.@ 3 billion on domestic research and development , of which around $ 7 billion was provided by the federal and provincial governments . As of 2015 , the country has produced thirteen Nobel laureates in physics , chemistry , and medicine , and was ranked fourth worldwide for scientific research quality in a major 2012 survey of international scientists . It is furthermore home to the headquarters of a number of global technology firms . Canada has one of the highest levels of Internet access in the world , with over 33 million users , equivalent to around 94 percent of its total 2014 population . 
 The Canadian Space Agency operates a highly active space program , conducting deep @-@ space , planetary , and aviation research , and developing rockets and satellites . Canada was the third country to launch a satellite into space after the USSR and the United States , with the 1962 Alouette 1 launch . In 1984 , Marc Garneau became Canada 's first male astronaut . Canada is a participant in the International Space Station ( ISS ) , and is a pioneer in space robotics , having constructed the Canadarm , <unk> and <unk> robotic manipulators for the ISS and NASA 's Space Shuttle . Since the 1960s , Canada 's aerospace industry has designed and built numerous marques of satellite , including Radarsat @-@ 1 and 2 , ISIS and MOST . Canada has also produced one of the world 's most successful and widely used sounding rockets , the Black Brant ; over 1 @,@ 000 Black Brants have been launched since the rocket 's introduction in 1961 . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The 2011 Canadian census counted a total population of 33 @,@ 476 @,@ 688 , an increase of around 5 @.@ 9 percent over the 2006 figure . By December 2012 , Statistics Canada reported a population of over 35 million , signifying the fastest growth rate of any G8 nation . Between 1990 and 2008 , the population increased by 5 @.@ 6 million , equivalent to 20 @.@ 4 percent overall growth . The main drivers of population growth are immigration and , to a lesser extent , natural growth . Canada has one of the highest per @-@ capita immigration rates in the world , driven mainly by economic policy and , to a lesser extent family reunification . The Canadian public as @-@ well as the major political parties support the current level of immigration . In 2010 , a record 280 @,@ 636 people immigrated to Canada . The Canadian government anticipated between 280 @,@ 000 and 305 @,@ 000 new permanent residents in 2016 , a similar number of immigrants as in recent years . New immigrants settle mostly in major urban areas such as Toronto , Montreal and Vancouver . Canada also accepts large numbers of refugees , accounting for over 10 percent of annual global refugee <unk> . 
 About four @-@ fifths of the population lives within 150 kilometres ( 93 mi ) of the contiguous United States border . Approximately 50 percent of Canadians live in urban areas concentrated along the Quebec City – Windsor Corridor , with an additional 30 percent living along the British Columbia Lower Mainland , and the Calgary – Edmonton Corridor in Alberta . Canada spans <unk> from the 83rd parallel north to the 41st parallel north , and approximately 95 % of the population is found below the 55th parallel north . In common with many other developed countries , Canada is experiencing a demographic shift towards an older population , with more retirees and fewer people of working age . In 2006 , the average age was 39 @.@ 5 years ; by 2011 , it had risen to approximately 39 @.@ 9 years . As of 2013 , the average life expectancy for Canadians is 81 years . The majority of Canadians ( 69 @.@ 9 % ) live in family households , 26 @.@ 8 % report living alone , and those living with unrelated persons reported at 3 @.@ 7 % . The average size of a household in 2006 was 2 @.@ 5 people . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 According to a 2012 report by the Organisation for Economic Co @-@ operation and Development ( OECD ) , Canada is the most educated country in the world ; the country ranks first worldwide in the number of adults having tertiary education , with 51 percent of Canadian adults having attained at least an undergraduate college or university degree . Canada spends about 5 @.@ 3 % of its GDP on education . The country invests heavily in tertiary education ( more than 20 000 USD per student ) . As of 2014 , 89 percent of adults aged 25 to 64 have earned the equivalent of a high @-@ school degree , compared to an OECD average of 75 percent . 
 Since the adoption of section 23 of the Constitution Act , 1982 , education in both English and French has been available in most places across Canada . Canadian provinces and territories are responsible for education provision . The mandatory school age ranges between 5 – 7 to 16 – 18 years , contributing to an adult literacy rate of 99 percent . In 2002 , 43 percent of Canadians aged 25 to 64 possessed a post @-@ secondary education ; for those aged 25 to 34 , the rate of post @-@ secondary education reached 51 percent . The Programme for International Student Assessment indicates that Canadian students perform well above the OECD average , particularly in mathematics , science , and reading . 
 = = = Ethnicity = = = 
 According to the 2006 census , the country 's largest self @-@ reported ethnic origin is Canadian ( accounting for 32 % of the population ) , followed by English ( 21 % ) , French ( 15 @.@ 8 % ) , Scottish ( 15 @.@ 1 % ) , Irish ( 13 @.@ 9 % ) , German ( 10 @.@ 2 % ) , Italian ( 4 @.@ 6 % ) , Chinese ( 4 @.@ 3 % ) , First Nations ( 4 @.@ 0 % ) , Ukrainian ( 3 @.@ 9 % ) , and Dutch ( 3 @.@ 3 % ) . There are 600 recognized First Nations governments or bands , encompassing a total of 1 @,@ 172 @,@ 790 people . Canada 's aboriginal population is growing at almost twice the national rate , and four percent of Canada 's population claimed aboriginal identity in 2006 . Another 16 @.@ 2 percent of the population belonged to a non @-@ aboriginal visible minority . In 2006 , the largest visible minority groups were South Asian ( 4 @.@ 0 % ) , Chinese ( 3 @.@ 9 % ) and Black ( 2 @.@ 5 % ) . Between 2001 and 2006 , the visible minority population rose by 27 @.@ 2 percent . In 1961 , less than two percent of Canada 's population ( about 300 @,@ 000 people ) were members of visible minority groups . By 2007 , almost one in five ( 19 @.@ 8 % ) were foreign @-@ born , with nearly 60 percent of new immigrants coming from Asia ( including the Middle East ) . The leading sources of immigrants to Canada were China , the Philippines and India . According to Statistics Canada , visible minority groups could account for a third of the Canadian population by 2031 . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Canada is religiously diverse , encompassing a wide range of beliefs and customs . Canada has no official church , and the government is officially committed to religious pluralism . Freedom of religion in Canada is a constitutionally protected right , allowing individuals to assemble and worship without limitation or interference . The practice of religion is now generally considered a private matter throughout society and the state . With Christianity in decline after having once been central and integral to Canadian culture and daily life , Canada has become a post @-@ Christian , secular state . The majority of Canadians consider religion to be unimportant in their daily lives , but still believe in God . According to the 2011 census , 67 @.@ 3 % of Canadians identify as Christian ; of these , Roman Catholics make up the largest group , accounting for 38 @.@ 7 % of the population . The largest Protestant denomination is the United Church of Canada ( accounting for 6 @.@ 1 % of Canadians ) , followed by Anglicans ( 5 @.@ 0 % ) , and Baptists ( 1 @.@ 9 % ) . Secularization has been growing since the 1960s . In 2011 , 23 @.@ 9 % declared no religious affiliation , compared to 16 @.@ 5 % in 2001 . The remaining 8 @.@ 8 % are affiliated with non @-@ Christian religions , the largest of which are Islam ( 3 @.@ 2 % ) and Hinduism ( 1 @.@ 5 % ) . 
 = = = Languages = = = 
 A multitude of languages are used by Canadians , with English and French ( the official languages ) being the mother tongues of approximately 60 % and 20 % of Canadians respectively . Nearly 6 @.@ 8 million Canadians listed a non @-@ official language as their mother tongue . Some of the most common non @-@ official first languages include Chinese ( mainly Cantonese ; 1 @,@ 072 @,@ 555 first @-@ language speakers ) , Punjabi ( 430 @,@ 705 ) , Spanish ( 410 @,@ 670 ) , German ( 409 @,@ 200 ) , and Italian ( 407 @,@ 490 ) . Canada 's federal government practices official bilingualism , which is applied by the Commissioner of Official Languages in consonance with Section 16 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms and the Federal Official Languages Act . English and French have equal status in federal courts , parliament , and in all federal institutions . Citizens have the right , where there is sufficient demand , to receive federal government services in either English or French and official @-@ language minorities are guaranteed their own schools in all provinces and territories . 
 The 1977 Charter of the French Language established French as the official language of Quebec . Although more than 85 percent of French @-@ speaking Canadians live in Quebec , there are substantial Francophone populations in New Brunswick , Alberta , and Manitoba ; Ontario has the largest French @-@ speaking population outside Quebec . New Brunswick , the only officially bilingual province , has a French @-@ speaking Acadian minority constituting 33 percent of the population . There are also clusters of Acadians in southwestern Nova Scotia , on Cape Breton Island , and through central and western Prince Edward Island . 
 Other provinces have no official languages as such , but French is used as a language of instruction , in courts , and for other government services , in addition to English . Manitoba , Ontario , and Quebec allow for both English and French to be spoken in the provincial legislatures , and laws are enacted in both languages . In Ontario , French has some legal status , but is not fully co @-@ official . There are 11 Aboriginal language groups , composed of more than 65 distinct dialects . Of these , only the Cree , Inuktitut and Ojibway languages have a large enough population of fluent speakers to be considered viable to survive in the long term . Several aboriginal languages have official status in the Northwest Territories . Inuktitut is the majority language in Nunavut , and is one of three official languages in the territory . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Canada 's culture draws influences from its broad range of constituent nationalities , and policies that promote a " just society " are constitutionally protected . Canada has placed emphasis on equality and inclusiveness for all its people . Multiculturalism is often cited as one of Canada 's significant accomplishments , and a key distinguishing element of Canadian identity . In Quebec , cultural identity is strong , and many commentators speak of a culture of Quebec that is distinct from English Canadian culture . However , as a whole , Canada is in theory a cultural mosaic — a collection of several regional , aboriginal , and ethnic subcultures . 
 Canada 's approach to governance emphasizing multiculturalism , which is based on selective immigration , social integration , and suppression of far right politics , has wide public support . Government policies such as publicly funded health care , higher taxation to redistribute wealth , the outlawing of capital punishment , strong efforts to eliminate poverty , strict gun control , and the legalization of same @-@ sex marriage are further social indicators of Canada 's political and cultural values . Canadians also identify with the countries institutions of health care , peacekeeping , the National park system and the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
 Historically , Canada has been influenced by British , French , and aboriginal cultures and traditions . Through their language , art and music , aboriginal peoples continue to influence the Canadian identity . During the 20th @-@ century Canadians with African , Caribbean and Asian nationalities have added to the Canadian identity and its culture . Canadian humour is an integral part of the Canadian Identity and is reflected in its folklore , literature , music , art and media . The primary characteristics of Canadian humour are irony , parody , and satire . Many Canadian comedians have archived international success in the American TV and film industries and are amongst the most recognized in the world . 
 Canada has a well @-@ developed media sector , but its cultural output ; particularly in English films , television shows , and magazines , is often overshadowed by imports from the United States . As a result , the preservation of a distinctly Canadian culture is supported by federal government programs , laws , and institutions such as the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation ( CBC ) , the National Film Board of Canada ( NFB ) , and the Canadian Radio @-@ television and Telecommunications Commission ( CRTC ) . 
 = = = Symbols = = = 
 Canada 's national symbols are influenced by natural , historical , and Aboriginal sources . The use of the maple leaf as a Canadian symbol dates to the early 18th century . The maple leaf is depicted on Canada 's current and previous flags , and on the Arms of Canada . The Arms of Canada is closely modelled after the royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom with French and distinctive Canadian elements replacing or added to those derived from the British version . The Great Seal of Canada is a governmental seal used for purposes of state , being set on letters patent , proclamations and commissions , for representatives of the Queen and for the appointment of cabinet ministers , lieutenant governors , senators , and judges . Other prominent symbols include the beaver , Canada goose , common loon , the Crown , the Royal Canadian Mounted Police , and more recently , the totem pole and <unk> . Canadian coins feature many of these symbols : the loon on the $ 1 coin , the Arms of Canada on the 50 ¢ piece , the beaver on the nickel . The penny , removed from circulation in 2013 , featured the maple leaf . The Queen ' s image appears on $ 20 bank notes , and on the obverse of all current Canadian coins . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Canadian literature is often divided into French- and English @-@ language literatures , which are rooted in the literary traditions of France and Britain , respectively . There are four major themes that can be found within historical Canadian literature ; nature , frontier life , Canada 's position within the world , all three of which tie into the garrison mentality . By the 1990s , Canadian literature was viewed as some of the world 's best . Canada 's ethnic and cultural diversity are reflected in its literature , with many of its most prominent modern writers focusing on ethnic life . Arguably , the best @-@ known living Canadian writer internationally ( especially since the deaths of Robertson Davies and Mordecai Richler ) is Margaret Atwood , a prolific novelist , poet , and literary critic . Numerous other Canadian authors have accumulated international literary awards ; including Nobel Laureate Alice Munro , who has been called the best living writer of short stories in English ; and Booker Prize recipient Michael Ondaatje , who is perhaps best known for the novel The English Patient , which was adapted as a film of the same name that won the Academy Award for Best Picture . 
 = = = Visual arts = = = 
 Canadian visual art has been dominated by figures such as Tom Thomson – the country 's most famous painter – and by the Group of Seven . Thomson 's career painting Canadian landscapes spanned a decade up to his death in 1917 at age 39 . The Group were painters with a nationalistic and idealistic focus , who first exhibited their distinctive works in May 1920 . Though referred to as having seven members , five artists — <unk> Harris , A. Y. Jackson , Arthur Lismer , J. E. H. MacDonald , and Frederick Varley — were responsible for articulating the Group 's ideas . They were joined briefly by Frank Johnston , and by commercial artist Franklin Carmichael . A. J. Casson became part of the Group in 1926 . Associated with the Group was another prominent Canadian artist , Emily Carr , known for her landscapes and portrayals of the indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast . Since the 1950s , works of Inuit art have been given as gifts to foreign dignitaries by the Canadian government . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The Canadian music industry is the sixth largest in the world producing internationally renowned composers , musicians and ensembles . Music broadcasting in the country is regulated by the CRTC . The Canadian Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences presents Canada 's music industry awards , the Juno Awards , which were first awarded in 1970 . The Canadian Music Hall of Fame established in 1976 honours Canadian musicians for their lifetime achievements . Patriotic music in Canada dates back over 200 years as a distinct category from British patriotism , preceding the first legal steps to independence by over 50 years . The earliest , The Bold Canadian , was written in 1812 . The national anthem of Canada , " O Canada " , was originally commissioned by the Lieutenant Governor of Quebec , the Honourable Théodore Robitaille , for the 1880 St. Jean @-@ Baptiste Day ceremony , and was officially adopted in 1980 . Calixa Lavallée wrote the music , which was a setting of a patriotic poem composed by the poet and judge Sir Adolphe @-@ Basile Routhier . The text was originally only in French , before it was translated to English in 1906 . 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 The roots of organized sports in Canada date back to the 1770s . Canada 's official national sports are ice hockey and lacrosse . Seven of Canada 's eight largest metropolitan areas – Toronto , Montreal , Vancouver , Ottawa , Calgary , Edmonton and Winnipeg – have franchises in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) while Quebec City had the Quebec Nordiques until they relocated to Colorado in 1995 . Canada does have one Major League Baseball team , the Toronto Blue Jays , one professional basketball team , the Toronto Raptors , three Major League Soccer teams and four National Lacrosse League teams . Canada has participated in almost every Olympic Games since its Olympic debut in 1900 , and has hosted several high @-@ profile international sporting events , including the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal , the 1988 Winter Olympics in Calgary , the 1994 Basketball World Championship , the 2007 FIFA U @-@ 20 World Cup , the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver and Whistler , British Columbia and the 2015 FIFA Women 's World Cup . Other popular spectator sports in Canada include curling and Canadian football ; the latter is played professionally in the Canadian Football League ( CFL ) . Golf , tennis , baseball , skiing , cricket , volleyball , rugby union , Australian Rules Football , soccer and basketball are widely played at youth and amateur levels , but professional leagues and franchises are not widespread . 
 = Utah State Route 103 = 
 State Route 103 ( SR @-@ 103 ) is a 0 @.@ 225 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 362 m ) urban minor arterial state highway in the U.S. state of Utah . It branches off from SR @-@ 126 ( Main Street ) in downtown Clearfield and extends east to Interstate 15 ( I @-@ 15 ) , terminating at the entrance to the Falcon Hill National Aerospace Research Park , just outside Hill Air Force Base . The entire route is located in Davis County and was formed in 1965 coinciding with the construction of I @-@ 15 . The route has been mostly unchanged since its formation , except for the moniker of the highway and the route number of its western terminus . 
 The western terminus , in a stretch of fourteen years from its inception , has gone from SR @-@ 1 in 1965 , to SR @-@ 106 in 1967 , to SR @-@ 84 in 1969 , and SR @-@ 126 in 1979 . In 1979 , the moniker of the roadway for SR @-@ 103 was changed from 600 North to 650 North . SR @-@ 103 is one of four Utah state highways that connect to Hill Air Force Base , the others being SR @-@ 97 , SR @-@ 168 , and SR @-@ 232 . Only SR @-@ 168 has a lower average daily traffic count , with roughly 1 @,@ 000 vehicles @-@ per @-@ day traveling along the highway compared to SR @-@ 103 's approximately 16 @,@ 000 vehicles @-@ per @-@ day . The only major change to the highway since its formation was the addition of traffic lights at the on and off ramps for I @-@ 15 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 State Route 103 ( SR @-@ 103 ) begins at an intersection with SR @-@ 126 , locally known as Main Street in Clearfield . At this intersection , 650 North , which continues the right @-@ of @-@ way , lengthens from a two lane local street into a four lane arterial boulevard at SR @-@ 126 . SR @-@ 103 begins its progression eastward , passing between two commercial complexes . After a crossing of the Davis Weber Canal , the sidewalk on the southern side of the roadway turns to the south to follow the canal forming the Clearfield Canal Trail . SR @-@ 103 highway turns to the northeast , intersecting with the southbound on @-@ ramp and off @-@ ramp to Interstate 15 ( I @-@ 15 ) . After this intersection , SR @-@ 103 expands to five lanes , and crosses under the southbound and northbound lanes of I @-@ 15 . After the overpasses , SR @-@ 103 intersects with the northbound on @-@ ramp and off @-@ ramp from I @-@ 15 . The highway progresses straight for about 300 ft ( 91 m ) , passing a gated fence on the north side of the highway leading to a rail stub , and the dead @-@ end of Aspen Avenue , before reaching the entrance to the Falcon Hill National Aerospace Research Park , just outside Hill Air Force Base , the designated eastern terminus of SR @-@ 103 . From there , the right @-@ of @-@ way continues on the arterial in the base itself . 
 SR @-@ 103 serves the function of connecting the town of Clearfield , and residents along I @-@ 15 to Hill Air Force Base . The base , as of 2012 , was the sixth largest employer in the state of Utah and is the third largest employer which is neither the state government nor a state @-@ funded higher education institution . SR @-@ 103 is one of four Utah state highways that connect to Hill Air Force Base , the others being SR @-@ 97 , SR @-@ 168 and SR @-@ 232 , Only SR @-@ 168 has a lower average daily traffic count , with roughly 1 @,@ 000 vehicles @-@ per @-@ day traveling along the highway compared to SR @-@ 103 's approximately 16 @,@ 000 vehicles @-@ per @-@ day . This is a decline from previous years ( in 2007 the average on SR @-@ 103 was 22 @,@ 525 ; in 2006 , the average was 22 @,@ 215 ; in 2005 , 21 @,@ 275 ) . Four percent of this traffic was composed of trucks . The measurement point for the traffic counts is at the eastern terminus of SR @-@ 103 , the entrance to the Falcon Hill National Aerospace Research Park . The highway is codified as Utah Code § 72 @-@ 4 @-@ 116 , and is designated as a minor arterial , which the Federal Highway Administration defines as linking major arterials at a lower volume than a primary arterial . 
 = = History = = 
 SR @-@ 103 was originally on an alignment of Harrison Street in the city of Ogden . Between 1964 and 1965 , the state of Utah and the Utah Department of Transportation ( UDOT ) decommissioned the alignment of SR @-@ 103 on Harrison Street , renumbering the portion of Harrison Street as SR @-@ 203 . The SR @-@ 103 designation was soon rewritten in the Utah Code as an access road to Hill Air Force Base on April 19 , 1965 . 
 The new alignment , which the state felt was a major connector to a federal military institution , Hill Air Force Base , from U.S. Route 91 ( US @-@ 91 ) and I @-@ 15 was chosen as a state highway US @-@ 91 , before the formation of I @-@ 15 , was the major thoroughfare through Utah , connecting it to California and Montana . SR @-@ 103 was then designated onto its alignment , adding 0 @.@ 225 @-@ mile ( 362 m ) to the Utah state route system . Prior to designation , the alignment of 600 North went from U.S. Route 91 and uninterrupted until the Hill Air Force Base . In 1964 , a year prior to designation , a 27 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) concrete culvert bridge was constructed over the Davis Weber Canal . The two bridges for I @-@ 15 's southbound and northbound roadways were built in 1966 and are two 159 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 48 @.@ 5 m ) concrete continuous tee beam overpasses . 
 The route has been mostly unchanged since its formation , except for the moniker of the highway and the western terminus , of which SR @-@ 103 progresses . The western terminus , in a stretch of fourteen years from its inception , went from SR @-@ 1 in 1965 , to SR @-@ 106 in 1967 to SR @-@ 84 in 1969 and SR @-@ 126 in 1979 . In 1979 , the moniker of the roadway for SR @-@ 103 was changed from 600 North to 650 North . In 1998 , the legal definition of SR @-@ 103 was changed in the state codes . 
 The alignment of SR @-@ 103 , outside of the roadway renumbering , have received some technical changes as well . In November 1992 , UDOT confirmed that the interchange of I @-@ 15 and SR @-@ 103 ( exit 335 ) was to be given traffic lights to help monitor traffic . The mayor at the time , <unk> Hamblin , approved of the project , and put the project up for bids for construction . The interchange was holding up motorists needing to turn left up to 20 minutes . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Clearfield , Davis County . 
 = HMS Collingwood ( 1908 ) = 
 HMS Collingwood was a St Vincent @-@ class dreadnought battleship built for the Royal Navy in the first decade of the 20th century . She spent her whole career assigned to the Home and Grand Fleets and often served as a flagship . Prince Albert ( later King George VI ) spent several years aboard the ship before and during World War I. At the Battle of Jutland in May 1916 , Collingwood was in the middle of the battleline and lightly damaged a German battlecruiser . Other than that battle , and the inconclusive Action of 19 August , her service during the war generally consisted of routine patrols and training in the North Sea . The ship was deemed obsolete after the war ; she was reduced to reserve and used as a training ship before being sold for scrap in 1922 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The design of the St Vincent class was derived from that of the previous Bellerophon class , with a slight increase in size , armour and more powerful guns , among other more minor changes . Collingwood had an overall length of 536 feet ( 163 @.@ 4 m ) , a beam of 84 feet 2 inches ( 25 @.@ 7 m ) , and a normal draught of 28 feet ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) . She displaced 19 @,@ 700 long tons ( 20 @,@ 000 t ) at normal load and 22 @,@ 800 long tons ( 23 @,@ 200 t ) at deep load . In 1911 her crew numbered 758 officers and enlisted men . 
 Collingwood was powered by two sets of Parsons direct @-@ drive steam turbines , each driving two shafts , using steam from eighteen Yarrow boilers . The turbines were rated at 24 @,@ 500 shp ( 18 @,@ 300 kW ) and intended to reach a maximum speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . During her full @-@ power , eight @-@ hour sea trials on 17 January 1910 , the ship only reached a top speed of 20 @.@ 62 knots ( 38 @.@ 19 km / h ; 23 @.@ 73 mph ) from 26 @,@ 789 shp ( 19 @,@ 977 kW ) . She had a range of 6 @,@ 900 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 800 km ; 7 @,@ 900 mi ) at a cruising speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The St Vincent class was equipped with ten breech @-@ loading ( BL ) 12 @-@ inch Mk XI guns in five twin @-@ gun turrets , three along the centreline and the remaining two as wing turrets . The secondary , or anti @-@ torpedo boat , armament comprised twenty BL 4 @-@ inch Mk VII guns . Two of these guns were each installed on the roofs of the fore and aft centreline turrets and the wing turrets in unshielded mounts , and the other ten were positioned in the superstructure . All guns were in single mounts . The ships were also fitted with three 18 @-@ inch torpedo tubes , one on each broadside and the third in the stern . 
 The St Vincent @-@ class ships had a waterline belt of Krupp cemented armour ( KC ) that was 10 inches ( 254 mm ) thick between the fore and aftmost barbettes , reducing to a thickness of 2 inches ( 51 mm ) before it reached the ships ' ends . Above this was a strake of armour 8 inches ( 203 mm ) thick . Transverse bulkheads 5 to 8 inches ( 127 to 203 mm ) inches thick terminated the thickest parts of the waterline and upper armour belts once they reached the outer portions of the endmost barbettes . 
 The three centreline barbettes were protected by armour 9 inches ( 229 mm ) thick above the main deck that thinned to 5 inches ( 127 mm ) below it . The wing barbettes were similar except that they had 10 inches of armour on their outer faces . The gun turrets had 11 @-@ inch ( 279 mm ) faces and sides with 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) roofs . The three armoured decks ranged in thicknesses from .75 to 3 inches ( 19 to 76 mm ) . The front and sides of the forward conning tower were protected by 11 @-@ inch plates , although the rear and roof were 8 inches and 3 inches thick respectively . 
 = = = Alterations = = = 
 The guns on the forward turret roof were removed in 1911 – 12 and the upper forward pair of guns in the superstructure were removed in 1913 – 14 . In addition , gun shields were fitted to all guns in the superstructure and the bridge structure was enlarged around the base of the forward tripod mast . During the first year of the war , a fire @-@ control director was installed high on the forward tripod mast . Around the same time , the base of the forward superstructure was rebuilt to house four 4 @-@ inch guns and the turret @-@ top guns were removed , which reduced her secondary armament to a total of fourteen guns . In addition , a pair of 3 @-@ inch anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns were added . 
 By April 1917 , Collingwood mounted thirteen 4 @-@ inch anti @-@ torpedo boat guns as well as single 4 @-@ inch and 3 @-@ inch AA guns . Approximately 50 long tons ( 51 t ) of additional deck armour had been added after the Battle of Jutland . Before the end of the war the AA guns were moved from the deckhouse between the aft turrets to the stern and the stern torpedo tube was removed . In 1918 a high @-@ angle rangefinder was fitted and flying @-@ off platforms were installed on the roofs of the fore and aft turrets . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Collingwood , named after Vice @-@ Admiral Cuthbert Collingwood , was ordered on 26 October 1907 . She was laid down at Devonport Royal Dockyard on 3 February 1908 , launched on 7 November 1908 and completed in April 1910 . Including her armament , the ship 's cost is quoted at £ 1 @,@ 680 @,@ 888 or £ 1 @,@ 731 @,@ 640 . 
 On 19 April 1910 , Collingwood was commissioned and assigned to the 1st Division of the Home Fleet under the command of Captain William Pakenham . She joined other members of the fleet in regular peacetime exercises , and on 11 February 1911 damaged her bottom plating on an uncharted rock off Ferrol . On 24 June the ship was present at the Coronation Fleet Review for King George V at Spithead . Pakenham was relieved by Captain Charles Vaughan @-@ Lee on 1 December . On 1 May 1912 , the 1st Division was renamed the 1st Battle Squadron . On 22 June , Vaughan @-@ Lee was transferred to the battleship Bellerophon and Captain James Ley assumed command ; Vice @-@ Admiral Stanley Colville hoisted his flag in Collingwood as commander of the 1st Battle Squadron . The ship participated in the Parliamentary Naval Review on 9 July at Spithead before beginning a refit late in the year . In March 1913 , Collingwood and the 1st Battle Squadron undertook a port visit to Cherbourg , France . Midshipman Prince Albert ( later King George VI ) was assigned to the ship on 15 September 1913 . Collingwood hosted Albert 's older brother , Edward , Prince of Wales , during a short cruise on 18 April 1914 . She became a private ship when Colville hauled down his flag on 22 June . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Between 17 and 20 July , Collingwood took part in a test mobilisation and fleet review . Arriving in Portland on 27 July , she was ordered to proceed with the rest of the Home Fleet to Scapa Flow two days later to safeguard the fleet from a possible German surprise attack . In August 1914 , following the outbreak of World War I , the Home Fleet was reorganised as the Grand Fleet , and placed under the command of Admiral John Jellicoe . Most of it was briefly based ( 22 October to 3 November ) at Lough Swilly , Ireland , while the defences at Scapa were strengthened . On the evening of 22 November 1914 , the Grand Fleet conducted a fruitless sweep in the southern half of the North Sea ; Iron Duke stood with the main body in support of Vice @-@ Admiral David Beatty 's 1st Battlecruiser Squadron . The fleet was back in port in Scapa Flow by 27 November . The 1st Battle Squadron cruised north @-@ west of the Shetland Islands and conducted gunnery practice on 8 – 12 December . Four days later , the Grand Fleet sortied during the German raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby , but failed to make contact with the High Seas Fleet . Collingwood and the rest of the Grand Fleet conducted another sweep of the North Sea on 25 – 27 December . 
 The Grand Fleet , including Collingwood , conducted gunnery drills on 10 – 13 January 1915 west of the Orkneys and Shetlands . On the evening of 23 January , the bulk of the Grand Fleet sailed in support of Beatty 's battlecruisers , but Collingwood and the rest of the fleet did not participate in the ensuing Battle of Dogger Bank the following day . The ship sailed for Portsmouth Royal Dockyard on 2 February to begin a brief refit and returned on 18 February . On 7 – 10 March , the Grand Fleet conducted a sweep in the northern North Sea , during which it conducted training manoeuvres . Another such cruise took place on 16 – 19 March . From 25 March to 14 April 1915 , Rear @-@ Admiral Hugh Evan @-@ Thomas temporarily hoisted his flag aboard Collingwood . On 11 April , the Grand Fleet conducted a patrol in the central North Sea and returned to port on 14 April ; another patrol in the area took place on 17 – 19 April , followed by gunnery drills off the Shetlands on 20 – 21 April . 
 The Grand Fleet conducted sweeps into the central North Sea on 17 – 19 May and 29 – 31 May without encountering any German vessels . During 11 – 14 June the fleet conducted gunnery practice and battle exercises west of the Shetlands . Collingwood was briefly docked at Invergordon from 23 to 25 June . King George V inspected the ship on 8 July , and the Grand Fleet conducted training off the Shetlands beginning three days later . Rear @-@ Admiral Ernest Gaunt temporarily used Collingwood as his flagship from 24 August to 24 September and from 10 December to 16 January 1916 . On 2 – 5 September 1915 , the fleet went on another cruise in the northern end of the North Sea and conducted gunnery drills . Throughout the rest of the month , the Grand Fleet conducted numerous training exercises . The ship , together with the majority of the Grand Fleet , conducted another sweep into the North Sea from 13 to 15 October . Almost three weeks later , Collingwood participated in another fleet training operation west of Orkney during 2 – 5 November . On 21 November , she sailed for Devonport Royal Dockyard for a minor overhaul and arrived back at Scapa on 9 December . 
 The Grand Fleet departed for a cruise in the North Sea on 26 February 1916 ; Jellicoe had intended to use the Harwich Force to sweep the Heligoland Bight , but bad weather prevented operations in the southern North Sea . As a result , the operation was confined to the northern end of the sea . Another sweep began on 6 March , but had to be abandoned the following day as the weather grew too severe for the escorting destroyers . On the night of 25 March , Collingwood and the rest of the fleet sailed from Scapa Flow to support Beatty 's battlecruisers and other light forces raiding the German Zeppelin base at Tondern . By the time the Grand Fleet approached the area on 26 March , the British and German forces had already disengaged and a strong gale threatened the light craft , so the fleet was ordered to return to base . On 21 April , the Grand Fleet conducted a demonstration off Horns Reef to distract the Germans while the Russian Navy relaid its defensive minefields in the Baltic Sea . The fleet returned to Scapa Flow on 24 April and refuelled before proceeding south in response to intelligence reports that the Germans were about to launch a raid on Lowestoft . The Grand Fleet arrived in the area after the Germans had withdrawn . On 2 – 4 May , the fleet conducted another demonstration off Horns Reef to keep German attention focused on the North Sea . 
 = = = = Battle of Jutland = = = = 
 In an attempt to lure out and destroy a portion of the Grand Fleet , the German High Seas Fleet , composed of 16 dreadnoughts , 6 pre @-@ dreadnoughts , 6 light cruisers , and 31 torpedo boats , departed the Jade early on the morning of 31 May . The fleet sailed in concert with Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper 's five battlecruisers and supporting cruisers and torpedo boats . The Royal Navy 's Room 40 had intercepted and decrypted German radio traffic containing plans of the operation . The Admiralty ordered the Grand Fleet , totalling some 28 dreadnoughts and 9 battlecruisers , to sortie the night before to cut off and destroy the High Seas Fleet . Collingwood was the eighteenth ship from the head of the battle line after the Grand Fleet deployed for battle . 
 The initial action was fought primarily by the British and German battlecruiser formations in the afternoon , but by 18 : 00 , the Grand Fleet approached the scene . Fifteen minutes later , Jellicoe gave the order to turn and deploy the fleet for action . The transition from cruising formation caused congestion with the rear divisions , forcing many ships to reduce speed to 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) to avoid colliding with each other . During the first stage of the general engagement , Collingwood fired eight salvos from her main guns at the crippled light cruiser SMS Wiesbaden from 18 : 32 , although the number of hits made , if any , is unknown . Her secondary armament then engaged the destroyer SMS <unk> , which was attempting to come to Wiesbaden 's assistance , but failed to hit her . At 19 : 15 Collingwood fired two salvoes of high explosive ( HE ) shells at the battlecruiser SMS Derfflinger , hitting her target once before she disappeared into the mist . The shell detonated in the German ship 's sickbay and damaged the surrounding superstructure . Shortly afterwards , during the attack of the German destroyers around 19 : 20 , the ship fired her main armament at a damaged destroyer without success and dodged two torpedoes that missed by 10 yards ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) behind and 30 yards ( 27 m ) in front . This was the last time she fired her guns during the battle . 
 Following the German destroyer attack , the High Seas Fleet disengaged , and Collingwood and the rest of the Grand Fleet saw no further action in the battle . This was , in part , due to confusion aboard the fleet flagship over the exact location and course of the German fleet ; without this information , Jellicoe could not bring his fleet to action . At 21 : 30 , the Grand Fleet began to reorganise into its night @-@ time cruising formation . Early on the morning of 1 June , the Grand Fleet combed the area , looking for damaged German ships , but after spending several hours searching , they found none . Collingwood fired a total of 52 armour @-@ piercing , capped and 32 HE shells from her main armament and 35 four @-@ inch shells during the battle . Prince Albert was a sub @-@ lieutenant commanding the forward turret during the battle and sat in the open on the turret roof during a lull in the action . 
 = = = = Subsequent activity = = = = 
 After the battle the ship was transferred to the 4th Battle Squadron under the command of Vice @-@ Admiral Sir Doveton Sturdee , who inspected Collingwood on 8 August 1916 . On the evening of 18 August , the Grand Fleet put to sea in response to a message deciphered by Room 40 that indicated that the High Seas Fleet , minus II Squadron , would be leaving harbour that night . The German objective was to bombard Sunderland on 19 August , based on extensive reconnaissance conducted by Zeppelins and submarines . The Grand Fleet sailed with 29 dreadnoughts and 6 battlecruisers while the Germans mustered 18 dreadnoughts and 2 battlecruisers . Throughout the next day , Jellicoe and Vice @-@ Admiral Reinhard Scheer , commander of the High Seas Fleet , received conflicting intelligence ; after reaching the location in the North Sea where they expected to encounter the High Seas Fleet , the British turned north in the erroneous belief that they had entered a minefield . Scheer turned south again , then steered south @-@ eastward to pursue a lone British battle squadron sighted by an airship , which was in fact the Harwich Force of cruisers and destroyers under Commodore Reginald Tyrwhitt . Realising their mistake , the Germans changed course for home . The only contact came in the evening when Tyrwhitt sighted the High Seas Fleet but was unable to achieve an advantageous attack position before dark , and broke off contact . The British and the German fleets returned home ; the British lost two cruisers to submarine attacks , and one German dreadnought had been torpedoed . After returning to port , Jellicoe issued an order that prohibited risking the fleet in the southern half of the North Sea due to the overwhelming risk from mines and U @-@ boats unless the odds of defeating the High Seas Fleet in a decisive engagement were favourable . 
 Collingwood received a brief refit at Rosyth in early September before rejoining the Grand Fleet . On 29 October Sturdee came aboard to present the ship with her battle honour , " Jutland 1916 " . Captain Wilmot Nicholson briefly assumed command on 1 December before transferring to the new battlecruiser Glorious upon his relief by Captain Cole Fowler on 26 March 1917 . Together with the rest of the 4th Battle Squadron , Collingwood put to sea for tactical exercises for a few days in February 1917 . The ship was present at Scapa Flow when her sister ship Vanguard 's magazines exploded on 9 July and her crew recovered the bodies of three men killed in the explosion . In January 1918 , Collingwood and other of the older dreadnoughts cruised off the coast of Norway for several days , possibly to provide distant cover for a convoy to Norway . Along with the rest of the Grand Fleet , she sortied on the afternoon of 23 April after radio transmissions revealed that the High Seas Fleet was at sea after a failed attempt to intercept the regular British convoy to Norway . The Germans were too far ahead of the British , and no shots were fired . By early November , Collingwood was at Invergordon to receive a brief refit in the floating dock based there , and missed the surrender of the High Seas Fleet on the 21st . She was slightly damaged on 23 November while attempting to come alongside the oiler RFA <unk> . 
 In January 1919 , Collingwood was transferred to Devonport and assigned to the Reserve Fleet . Upon the dissolution of the Grand Fleet on 18 March , the Reserve Fleet was redesignated the Third Fleet and Collingwood became its flagship . She became a tender to HMS Vivid on 1 October and served as a gunnery and wireless telegraphy ( W / T ) training ship . The W / T school was transferred to Glorious on 1 June 1920 and the gunnery duties followed in early August ; Collingwood returned to the reserve . She became a boys ' training ship on 22 September 1921 until she was paid off on 31 March 1922 . Collingwood was sold to John Cashmore Ltd for scrap on 12 December and arrived at Newport , Wales , on 3 March 1923 to be broken up . 
 = = Relics = = 
 Battle ensigns flown by the ship during Jutland survive at the shore establishment of the same name and at the Roedean School in East Sussex . 
 = Ohio State Route 500 = 
 State Route 500 ( SR 500 ) is a 13 @.@ 32 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 21 @.@ 44 km ) Ohio State Route that runs between the Indiana state line and Paulding in the US state of Ohio . None of the highway is listed on the National Highway System . Most of the route is a rural two @-@ lane highway and passes through both farmland and residential properties . For much of its path , SR 500 runs generally parallel to the north of Flatrock Creek . 
 The highway was first signed in 1937 on much of the same alignment as today . SR 500 replaced the SR 194 designation of the highway which dated back to 1923 ; SR 194 ran between Payne and Paulding . Some of the highway was paved in 1937 , with the rest of the route being paved in 1951 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 500 begins at an intersection with county @-@ maintained State Line Road and Paulding Road on the Indiana state line in western Benton Township . The highway heads northeast as a two @-@ lane highway passing through farmland , with a few houses . The route turns east , then bends back to the northeast . At this point , Flatrock Creek appears close to the south side of the roadway , resulting in that side of the highway becoming primarily wooded , while the north side of the highway remains bounded by farmland . The route arrives at a T @-@ intersection with SR 49 on the southern boundary of Payne . At this point , it joins SR 49 heading north into the village along Main Street through a primarily residential area . 
 The road arrives at a traffic signal where it meets SR 613 ( Townline Street ) . This highway comes into the intersection from the west , and joins SR 49 and SR 500 going north for two blocks along Main Street into downtown Payne . At that point , the concurrency hits a signalized intersection with Merrin Street and SR 500 and SR 613 turn to the east , while SR 49 continues heading north . East of SR 49 , the SR 500 and SR 613 concurrency goes through the central business district and then into a residential neighborhood . The highway briefly jogs north via Maple Street before turning east @-@ southeasterly onto Orchard Street , which it follows through the eastern portion of Payne . While the north side of the street is bounded by homes , the south side becomes wooded as Flatrock Creek reappears nearby . 
 The route curves to the northeast at the County Road 47 ( CR 47 ) intersection and , upon crossing a set of railroad tracks , departs Payne . Now traveling through Harrison Township , the routes travel past rows of houses on each side of the highway before emerging into a landscape of farmland . Woods then appear along both sides of the roadway a short distance before SR 613 turns off to the east from SR 500 , which continues in an east @-@ northeasterly fashion . The route proceeds into Paulding Township passing a mix of farmland and houses , with forested land appearing along the south side at intervals where Flatrock Creek passes close to the highway . At CR 132 , the highway turns north for a short distance , passing along the west side of the campus of Paulding County Hospital just prior to its endpoint at SR 111 in the westernmost part of Paulding . Continuing north after SR 500 ends is CR 103 . 
 There is no section of SR 500 that is included as a part of the National Highway System . The highway is maintained by the Ohio Department of Transportation ( ODOT ) like all other state routes in the state . The department tracks the traffic volumes along all state highways as a part of its maintenance responsibilities using a metric called average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) . This measurement is a calculation of the traffic level along a segment of roadway for any average day of the year . In 2012 , ODOT figured that the lowest traffic levels were present on the section that is west of SR 49 , where only 410 vehicles used the highway daily . The peak traffic volume was 2 @,@ 830 vehicles AADT along a section of SR 500 at is concurrent with SR 49 and SR 613 . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1923 , SR 500 was signed as SR 194 northeast from Payne to Paulding and west of Payne was a county road . SR 194 was decommissioned in 1927 leaving the route that later became SR 500 as a county road . The commissioning of SR 500 took place in 1937 , and replaced a county road west of Payne , while east of Payne it replaced the former route of SR 194 . The highway had a gravel surface between the Indiana state line and SR 49 , while between SR 49 and its eastern terminus at SR 111 it was paved . In 1951 , the westernmost portion of SR 500 between the Indiana state line and SR 49 was paved . By 1955 , SR 113 , now SR 613 , was rerouted to be concurrent with SR 500 northeast of Payne to the current eastern split of the two routes . No significant changes have taken place to this state route since 1955 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Paulding County . 
 = Tobacco ( Last Week Tonight ) = 
 " Tobacco " is a segment about the tobacco industry , which aired on February 15 , 2015 as part of the second episode of the second season of the HBO series Last Week Tonight with John Oliver . During the eighteen @-@ minute segment , comedian John Oliver discusses tobacco industry trends and practices . He also introduces Jeff the Diseased Lung , a mascot he created for the American global cigarette and tobacco company Philip Morris International , the makers of Marlboro cigarettes . The anthropomorphic diseased lung , who smokes and coughs , has been compared to Joe Camel and the Marlboro Man . Oliver and his team promoted the cartoon character by sending shirts with Jeff 's image to Togo and displaying billboards in Uruguay , and by encouraging use of the hashtag ' # JeffWeCan ' , which trended on Twitter following the broadcast . 
 Philip Morris issued a response to the segment , which received some criticism . The " Tobacco " segment received widespread media coverage , with several outlets praising Oliver 's ability to launch successful marketing campaigns and change perceptions about smoking through the creation of the mascot . Jeff later appeared at a protest organized by the Campaign for Tobacco @-@ Free Kids in New York City in May 2015 . 
 = = Description = = 
 " Tobacco " is an eighteen @-@ minute segment about the tobacco industry , delivered by John Oliver during the February 15 , 2015 episode of Last Week Tonight with John Oliver . In the segment , Oliver describes industry trends and practices , such as the decline of smoking in the United States and marketing tactics by tobacco companies to introduce cigarettes to young people in emerging markets . He incorporates clips featuring the Marlboro Man , a figure used in advertising campaigns for Marlboro cigarettes , and notes that four of the actors who portrayed the character died from lung cancer or smoking @-@ related illnesses . 
 Furthermore , Oliver outlines the legal actions taken by tobacco companies against the governments of Australia , Namibia , the Solomon Islands , Togo , and Uruguay , some of which have displayed " grotesque " images of blackened teeth and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease on cigarette packaging to illustrate the harmful effects of smoking . He asserts that companies are able to avoid stricter regulations by threatening to sue entire countries , many of which do not have resources to combat these lawsuits in court . By the morning of February 16 , the segment had been viewed more than two million times . 
 = = = Jeff the Diseased Lung = = = 
 During the segment , Oliver offers the mascot Jeff the Diseased Lung ( fully named Jeff the Diseased Lung in a Cowboy Hat ) to Philip Morris International to use free of charge . Jeff , a fictional anthropomorphic cartoon character who smokes and coughs , has been called Oliver 's version of Joe Camel and compared to the Marlboro Man . 
 Jeff has been described as a " cartoon @-@ like , diseased lung cowboy created by crossing the diseased lung pictured on cigarette packs in Australia with the Marlboro Man " . Similarly , Rolling Stone 's Daniel Kreps said Jeff helps to " bridge the gap between the Marlboro Man ... and a ' lung that looks like you 're breathing through baked <unk> ' " . Alicia Lu of Bustle wrote : 
 Sure , he may be an anthropomorphic lung that 's decaying from being exposed to years of cigarette smoke , which might not be Big Tobacco 's first choice for branding , but he 's a cowboy . Look at his regal cowboy hat , his spiffy red cowboy boots , and the way that cigarette nonchalantly dangles from his lips – doesn 't Jeff remind you of a figure from days of yore ? If you squint , I swear you 'll see the Marlboro Man . 
 Oliver and his team promoted the character by sending shirts with his image to Togo and displaying billboards in Uruguay . During the segment , Oliver encouraged viewers to use the hashtag ' # JeffWeCan ' , which trended on Twitter . He also called on viewers to upload images of the mascot to Google + accounts so Jeff would be displayed following Google Images searches for " Marlboro " . A live version of Jeff appears at the end of the " Tobacco " segment . Sarene Leeds of The Wall Street Journal called Jeff 's appearance " a full @-@ on Disneyland @-@ ish nightmare " and wrote : " there is nothing more disturbing – or awesome – that you will see today than the sight of John Oliver dancing around a guy dressed up as a smoking , infected lung surrounded by more than a dozen children " . The HBO Shop sells T @-@ shirts depicting the mascot . 
 Jeff appeared at Kick Butts Day , a protest organized by the Campaign for Tobacco @-@ Free Kids and youth advocates , which was held outside Philip Morris ' annual shareholders ' meeting in New York City on May 6 , 2015 . The protests featured a flash mob with fifty dancers performing a choreographed dance to a song with the lyrics , " We don 't want your cigarettes . Jeff we can ! " The performance ended with the mascot : " rolling around on the floor in a coughing fit and loss of breath " . Shana Narula , the campaign 's coordinator , said : 
 The whole concept is to use Jeff and the hashtag # JeffWeCan and # <unk> to show that these marketing tactics are not allowed and tobacco is still the leading cause of preventable disease and death in the world . And the fact is it 's the only consumer product that when used as intended , it kills its user . This is very , very unique — no other consumer product does this . Most people think that tobacco is not really an issue in this country anymore and that 's completely not true . That 's what we want to shed light on today , in a fashion where people will take notice . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The " Tobacco " segment received widespread media coverage , with several outlets praising Oliver 's ability to launch successful marketing campaigns and " alter perceptions about smoking " through the creation of the mascot Jeff . Her Campus ' Kelly Tierney noted the enthusiasm displayed by Oliver 's fans during the segment and wrote : 
 While John Oliver simply considers himself a comedian , it is apparent that he is doing much more than comedy . He informs us of real issues we otherwise wouldn 't hear or think deeply about , which in and of itself is brilliant , but what really sets him apart is his way of calling his audience to action about these issues . He shows us that there really is something we can do and helps us to see how we can enact change . 
 <unk> Communications ' Marketing Daily published an article called " What Marketers Can Learn from John Oliver " , in which James G. Brooks , Jr. complimented Oliver 's ability to encourage audience participation . He wrote , " Jeff trended worldwide . This kind of reaction is ideal for any marketing campaign . " Alex Frail of The Massachusetts Daily Collegian said , " One of his funnier bits , Jeff the Diseased Lung , took aim at the tobacco industry ; landed on cigarette packs throughout Australia and on billboards throughout Uruguay ; and delivered t @-@ shirts to Togo . The power to spark a movement like Jeff the Diseased Lung isn 't shared by Oliver 's contemporaries . " Jeffrey Wasserman , vice president and director of RAND Health , opined : " John Oliver 's ' Jeff ' character is of course a mockery of an iconic figure , the Marlboro Man , whose legacy turned out to be cruelly ironic . As Oliver noted in his show , four former Marlboro men died of smoking @-@ related causes . Let 's hope that ' Jeff ' going viral causes current and prospective smokers — mainly teens and preteens — to recognize cigarette smoking for what it is : the most deadly habit . " 
 In July 2015 , Slant Magazine 's Julia Pressman describes the " Tobacco " segment in her article " The British Dude Who Is Winning America 's War on Bullshit " , in which she features five ways Oliver " has owned 2015 thus far " . The website Inverse included the February 15 segment , the second most effective from the show 's second season , saying it " may be the most lasting of the entire year " . Furthermore , the website 's Matthew Strauss wrote , " Jeff shows up when you Google Image @-@ search ' Marlboro ' ; he 's on bus stops in Uruguay ; and he 's on t @-@ shirts in Togo . Jeff is an icon . Oliver hasn 't taken down Big Tobacco , but he sure didn 't make them look too good . " In August , the Los Angeles Times named Oliver , and costume designer Mikaela Wohl , winners in the " Costume designer 's quietest cry for help " category for the paper 's 2015 Envy Awards , a parody of the annual Emmy Awards . Randee Dawn complimented both for their hard work and humor , but said Wohl 's work on " amazing " costumes like Jeff and Russian Space Sex Gecko distracted her from using her " creative energies " for dressing Oliver . 
 = = = Response by Philip Morris International = = = 
 Philip Morris issued a statement which read in part : 
 On February 15 , 2015 , the ' Last Week Tonight with John Oliver ' show dedicated a significant portion of its program to our company ... ' Last Week Tonight with John Oliver ' is a parody show , known for getting a laugh through exaggeration and presenting partial views in the name of humor . The segment includes many <unk> of our company , including our approach to marketing and regulation , which have been embellished in the spirit of comedic license ... While we recognize the tobacco industry is an easy target for comedians , we take seriously the responsibility that comes with selling a product that is an adult choice and is harmful to health ... We support and comply with thousands of regulations worldwide — including advertising restrictions , penalties for selling tobacco products to minors , and substantial health warnings on packaging . We 're investing billions into developing and scientifically assessing a portfolio of products that have the potential to be less harmful and that are satisfying so smokers will switch to them . And , like any other company with a responsibility to its business partners , shareholders and employees , we ask only that laws protecting investments , including trademarks , be equally applied to us . 
 The statement also provided readers with a " balanced view " , and facts about the issues raised by Oliver , including the company 's marketing practices and " approach to regulation " . Philip Morris included links to its " Be Marlboro " campaign , which is " aimed at competing for existing adult smoker market share " , reasons why the company is challenging Australia and Uruguay 's censorship of their trademarks , and " facts about smoking prevalence in Australia after the introduction of plain packaging " . 
 Chris <unk> of Consumerist said Philip Morris did a " really poor job of trying to defend its actions " . He wrote , " ... this should be where the very serious folks at Philip Morris go point by point and explain where Oliver exaggerated and embellished , but they don 't . It 's a classic non @-@ response in which the accused tried to undercut the accuser 's argument by claiming he can 't possibly be providing the truth . " He noted that Philip Morris does not deny making legal threats to suppress regulations on cigarette packaging and questions how the company : " [ expects ] to be taken seriously when it readily admits that the products it sells are ' harmful to health ' " . Furthermore , <unk> takes aim at the company 's claim that it " [ supports ] and [ complies ] with thousands of regulations worldwide " , writing : 
 ... the tobacco industry doesn 't support these regulations . It only supports the ones it can 't fight in a courtroom . Once it loses a battle — or realizes a battle can 't be won — then suddenly Big Tobacco , just like every other heavily regulated industry , claims to support and abide by the rules . 
 Finally , he said of the statement 's final sentence : " That 's honestly the best Philip Morris and Big Tobacco can come up with — We 've spent a lot of money and have a lot of investors so please don 't mess with our packaging because it might cause us to earn smaller profits ... It 's an argument that might be tenable if cigarettes did anything other than poison the people who buy them — or live in the same house with them . " 
 = Christmas Attack Zone = 
 " Christmas Attack Zone " is the tenth episode of the fifth season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 90th overall episode of the series . It was written by show story editor Tracey Wigfield and directed by co @-@ executive producer John Riggi . It originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on December 9 , 2010 . Guest stars in this episode include Alan Alda , Elizabeth Banks , Will Forte , and Elaine Stritch . 
 In the episode , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) and Avery Jessup ( Banks ) convince Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) to confide in and grow closer to his visiting mother Colleen Donaghy ( Stritch ) at Christmas time . At the same time , actor Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) tries to stop the release of his new film before it ruins his new serious persona , and Liz also tries to fix Jenna Maroney 's ( Jane Krakowski ) relationship with her former boyfriend Paul L <unk> ( Forte ) . 
 This episode of 30 Rock received generally positive reviews from television critics . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Christmas Attack Zone " was watched by 4 @.@ 759 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 5 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) is invited by her boss Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) to spend Christmas with him to help him deal with a visit from his mother , Colleen Donaghy ( Elaine Stritch ) . Liz finds it strange that Jack 's fiancée Avery Jessup ( Elizabeth Banks ) will not spend the holiday with him and immediately realizes that Jack has not told his mother about Avery 's pregnancy . Avery becomes angry , but she and Liz convince him to tell her which he promises to do . Jack tells Colleen about the news but she is not excited about the pregnancy as Jack and Avery are not married . To get back at her , Jack calls his biological father Milton Greene ( Alan Alda ) , the father she never told him he had , and invites him to spend Christmas with him , and does not inform him that Colleen will be present . The next day , Milton arrives and Jack explains the reason for his visit is so that he can ambush Colleen as she looks down on his relationship with Avery . Later , Avery arrives and is angered about what Colleen said about her relationship with Jack . Liz tries to warn Colleen about Jack 's plan but to no avail . She is shocked to see Milton , but immediately figures out what Jack is up to . Colleen gets even with Jack by faking a heart attack , which causes Milton and Avery to feel sorry for her thus abandoning their plan to reprimand Colleen . At the hospital , Avery reveals that she and Jack had planned to elope over New Year 's and extends an invitation to everyone . After the announcement , Liz leaves and travels to White Haven , Pennsylvania to spend Christmas with her family . 
 Meanwhile , actor Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) is nominated for a Golden Globe Award for his role in the drama feature Hard To Watch but realizes that in order to win the award he needs to act as a serious actor . As a result , Tracy buys the rights to his new comedy movie , The Chunks 2 : A Very Chunky Christmas , in order to block the distribution of the feature and improve his chances at winning the award . Later , Tracy decides to do a charity event by screening Hard To Watch — a story of an inner @-@ city boy living in the ghetto — for a women 's shelter . At the charity event , Tracy introduces the movie but decides against showing it , realizing that laughter is the best medicine and instead screens The Chunks 2 : A Very Chunky Christmas . The people in the shelter find the movie hilarious thus making Tracy happy . 
 At the same time , Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) is having a hard time dealing with her break @-@ up with Paul L <unk> ( Will Forte ) . Liz , seeing Jenna miserable , visits Paul and tells her that Jenna misses him . Paul visits Jenna , though not to resume their relationship , instead to tell her that he has come up with a brilliant costume for the New Queer 's Eve party in which guests dress up as a pop culture phenomenon from the previous year . Unbeknownst to Paul , Jenna also has the same costume idea as his and as a result the two get back together . At the party , Paul dresses like actress Natalie Portman 's character in the 2010 movie Black Swan , and Jenna dresses up as former Pittsburgh Steelers wide receiver Lynn Swann . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Christmas Attack Zone " was written by 30 Rock story editor Tracey Wigfield , her first episode for the fifth season , and her fourth writing credit overall after " Jackie Jormp @-@ Jomp " , " Future Husband " , and " Don Geiss , America and Hope " . This episode was directed by co @-@ executive producer and staff writer John Riggi , making it his fifth for the series after directing " Goodbye , My Friend " , " The Problem Solvers " , " The Moms " , and " Let 's Stay Together " . This episode of 30 Rock originally aired in the United States on December 9 , 2010 , on NBC as the tenth episode of the show 's fifth season and the 90th overall episode of the series . 
 Co @-@ showrunner and executive producer Robert Carlock revealed to Entertainment Weekly that " Christmas Attack Zone " was " the big [ episode ] for us . It 's the long @-@ awaited reunion of Jack 's biological parents . A couple of years ago , Jack discovered his real father , but just to avoid an argument , he hasn 't told his mother that he knows her shameful sex secret . " The character Professor Milton Greene , Jack Donaghy 's biological father , was played by guest actor Alan Alda , best known for his role as Hawkeye Pierce from the television series M * A * S * H. Alda and Alec Baldwin have worked together , having appeared in the 2004 biographical drama film The Aviator . This was Alda 's third appearance on the show . After the airing of the season three finale episode " Kidney Now ! ' , in which Jack organizes a benefit concert to get Milton a kidney , it was unknown whether or not the benefit concert for Milton was a success , however , in the season four episode " Into the Crevasse " , Milton is shown to have written his book From Peanut to President , a biography of United States President Jimmy Carter . In this episode it is revealed that Jack sent Milton a kidney from British singer @-@ songwriter Elvis Costello who participated in the benefit concert in " Kidney Now ! " . In October 2010 , it was confirmed that Alda would return as his 30 Rock character on the fifth season . In an interview with TV Guide , Alda said that he first met Elaine Stritch twenty years ago " but never worked with her before . I always knew the reunion would be interesting . We kid with each other a lot , and our characters have a common enemy in their son . " This was Elaine Stritch 's seventh appearance as Colleen Donaghy , Jack 's mother , on the series . She guest starred in the episodes " Hiatus " , " Ludachristmas " , " Christmas Special " , " Señor Macho Solo " , " The Natural Order " , and " The Moms " . 
 Avery Jessup , fiancée of Baldwin 's character , was played by actress Elizabeth Banks , who first guest starred as the character in the show 's fourth season . This was Banks ' tenth time as the Avery character . Banks told Michael Ausiello of Entertainment Weekly that she approached the 30 Rock staff about making an appearance as she is a fan of the show . " I definitely put feelers out , like , ' I would love to be on your show . ' And they did it . They made it happen ! I 'm a huge fan , so this is a dream come true . " Banks also revealed that she has no intention on becoming a series regular , explaining that she has been having " too much fun " making films to commit to a television show full @-@ time . Comedian actor Will Forte made his fourth appearance in the show , having guest starred as a different character in the February 1 , 2007 , episode " Black Tie " from the show 's first season . In the previous season , Forte played Jenna Maroney 's boyfriend and Jenna impersonator . Forte has appeared in the main cast of Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) , a weekly sketch comedy series which airs on NBC in the United States . Tina Fey , the series creator and lead actress on 30 Rock , was the head writer on SNL from 1999 until 2006 . In June 2010 , Jane Krakowski , who plays Jenna , confirmed that Forte would reprise his role as her boyfriend in the upcoming season . Carlock also noted in the Entertainment Weekly interview that the Jenna and Paul characters " have some ups and downs . He wants to try to be a normal couple , and she is afraid of that level of commitment . " In the previous episode , " Chain Reaction of Mental Anguish " , Jenna and Paul break @-@ up . In " Christmas Attack Zone " , the two get back together . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Liz says that she watches the CBS police procedural television series The Mentalist and that she has become a body language expert , in which she figures out that Jack has not told Colleen about Avery 's pregnancy , similar to the show 's series protagonist played by actor Simon Baker . Some reviewers have noted that Tracy 's movie The Chunks 2 : A Very Chunky Christmas is a parody to the movies Nutty Professor II : The Klumps ( 2000 ) , <unk> ( 2007 ) , and the comedic fictional character <unk> . Later , Tracy says " As an actor , it is my job to tell the truth , hold the mirror to humanity , and sell Proactiv " , this is a reference to Proactiv Solution , an over @-@ the @-@ counter topical treatment for mild to moderate forms of acne and the fact that the product has many celebrity spokespeople . At the New Queer 's Eve , in which guests dress up as a pop culture phenomenon from the previous year , Paul dresses as actress Natalie Portman 's character in the 2010 psychological thriller Black Swan , and Jenna dresses up as former Pittsburgh Steelers wide receiver Lynn Swann . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to Nielsen Media Research , this episode of 30 Rock was watched by 4 @.@ 759 million viewers during its original United States broadcast . The show claimed a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 5 share among viewers aged 18 to 49 , meaning that 2 @.@ 9 percent of all people in that group , and 5 percent of all people from that group watching television at the time , watched the episode . This was a decrease from the previous episode , " Chain Reaction of Mental Anguish " , which was watched by 5 @.@ 034 million American viewers . 
 Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club wrote that " Christmas Attack Zone " was a " nice holiday outing with a lot of great gag @-@ writing " , however " ... I wouldn 't put this up there with the show 's best Christmas episodes . But I 'd say it fits in nicely with the general run of competency to excellence we 've been seeing so far this season . It was modestly funny , a little sweet , and not at all horrible . " Alan Sepinwall from HitFix who is not a fan of Elaine Stritch 's role on the show enjoyed her in this episode , writing that along with the appearances of Elizabeth Banks and Alan Alda " I decided to hope their presence would counteract my feelings about hers – which is pretty much what happened . " Sepinwall enjoyed the subplots commenting that Tracy 's " played well " and Jenna and Paul 's " was both sweet and ridiculous " . Brad Sanders of the Indiana Daily Student said it was " a ton of fun to watch " all the subplots play out and considered " Christmas Attack Zone " as " probably one of the two or three best episodes of the season thus far . In fact ... it may have been the best Christmas episode of 30 Rock yet . " Johnny Firecloud of CraveOnline enjoyed Stritch and Alda 's " wonderfully funny roles " . 
 Entertainment Weekly 's Annie Barrett opined that Stritch and Alda " really made this episode great . " Meredith Blake , a contributor for the Los Angeles Times , opined that television Christmas episodes " are a sitcom staple , but ... they 're also a risky proposition for a show like 30 Rock . Just how do you maintain the right balance between holiday cheer and year @-@ round irreverence ? It 's a delicate formula , and on Thursday night 30 Rock got it just right . That is , they leaned toward the former , delivering a Christmas episode full of cynicism – but topped with just a sprinkle of sweetness . " In addition , Blake was complimentary toward Stritch 's role on the show . Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad wrote that this episode of 30 Rock " wasn 't the best Christmas episode that [ the show ] has had . Past episodes like ' Ludachristmas , ' ' Christmas Special ' and ' Secret Santa ' were put together better and had more heart " . Sassone noted that the problem with " Christmas Attack Zone " was Tracy 's subplot " as it wasn 't very funny " and the one that dragged the episode down . 
 = Crocodilia = 
 The Crocodilia ( or Crocodylia ) are an order of mostly large , predatory , semiaquatic reptiles . They appeared 83 @.@ 5 million years ago in the Late Cretaceous period ( Campanian stage ) and are the closest living relatives of birds , as the two groups are the only known survivors of the Archosauria . Members of the order 's total group , the clade Pseudosuchia , appeared about 250 million years ago in the Early Triassic period , and diversified during the Mesozoic era . The order Crocodilia includes the true crocodiles ( family Crocodylidae ) , the alligators and caimans ( family Alligatoridae ) , and the gharial and false gharial ( family Gavialidae ) . Although the term ' crocodiles ' is sometimes used to refer to all of these , a less ambiguous vernacular term for this group is crocodilians . 
 Large , solidly built , lizard @-@ like reptiles , crocodilians have long flattened snouts , laterally compressed tails , and eyes , ears , and nostrils at the top of the head . They swim well and can move on land in a " high walk " and a " low walk " , while smaller species are even capable of galloping . Their skin is thick and covered in non @-@ overlapping scales . They have conical , peg @-@ like teeth and a powerful bite . They have a four @-@ chambered heart and , somewhat like birds , a unidirectional looping system of airflow within the lungs , but like other non @-@ avian reptiles they are ectotherms . 
 Crocodilians are found mainly in lowlands in the tropics , but alligators also live in the southeastern United States and the Yangtze River in China . They are largely carnivorous , the various species feeding on animals such as fish , crustaceans , molluscs , birds , and mammals ; some species like the Indian gharial are specialised feeders , while others like the saltwater crocodile have generalised diets . Crocodilians are typically solitary and territorial , though cooperative feeding does occur . During breeding , dominant males try to monopolise available females . Females lay eggs in holes or in mounds and , unlike most other reptiles , care for their hatched young . 
 Eight species of crocodilians are known to have attacked humans . The largest number of attacks comes from the Nile crocodile . Humans are the greatest threat to crocodilian populations through activities that include hunting and habitat destruction , but farming of crocodilians has greatly reduced unlawful trading in wild skins . Artistic and literary representations of crocodilians have appeared in human cultures around the world since at least Ancient Egypt . The earliest known mention of the story that crocodiles weep for their victims was in the 9th century ; it was later spread by Sir John Mandeville in 1400 and then by William Shakespeare in the late 16th century and early 17th century . 
 = = Spelling and etymology = = 
 Crocodilia and Crocodylia have been used interchangeably for decades starting with Schmidt 's redescription of the group from the formerly defunct term <unk> . Schmidt used the older term Crocodilia , based on Owen 's original name for the group . Shortly after , Wermuth opted for Crocodylia as the proper name for this redescribed group , basing it on the type genus Crocodylus ( Laurenti , 1768 ) . Dundee — in a revision of many reptilian and amphibian names — argued strongly for Crocodylia to be the spelling for the group . However , it was not until the advent of cladistics and phylogenetic nomenclature that a more solid justification for assuming one spelling over the other was proposed . 
 Prior to 2003 , Crocodilia / Crocodylia was a group that encompassed the modern @-@ day animals ( the crown group ) as well as their more distant relatives now in the larger groups called Crocodylomorpha and Pseudosuchia . Under its current definition Crocodylia is restricted to only the most recent ancestor of today 's modern @-@ day crocodilians ( alligators , crocodiles , and gharials ) . This distinction is more important for paleontologists studying crocodilian evolution . As such , the alternate spellings Crocodilia and Crocodylia are still used interchangeably in the <unk> literature . 
 Crocodilia appears to be a <unk> of the Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) , which means both lizard and Nile crocodile . Crocodylia , as coined by Wermuth , in regards to the genus Crocodylus appears to be derived from the ancient Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) — meaning shingle or pebble — and <unk> or <unk> ( dr ( e ) <unk> ) for " worm " . The name may refer to the animal 's habit of basking on the pebbled shores of the Nile . 
 = = Morphology and physiology = = 
 Crocodilians range in size from the Paleosuchus and Osteolaemus species , which reach 1 – 1 @.@ 5 m ( 3 ft 3 in – 4 ft 11 in ) , to the saltwater crocodile , which reaches 7 m ( 23 ft ) and weighs up to 2 @,@ 000 kg ( 4 @,@ 400 lb ) , though some prehistoric species such as the late Cretaceous Deinosuchus were even larger at up to about 11 m ( 36 ft ) and 3 @,@ 450 kg ( 7 @,@ 610 lb ) . They tend to be sexually dimorphic , with males much larger than females . Though there is diversity in snout and tooth shape , crocodilian species have essentially the same body morphology . They have solidly built , lizard @-@ like bodies with elongated , flattened snouts and laterally compressed tails . Their limbs are reduced in size ; the front feet have five digits with little or no webbing , and the hind feet have four webbed digits and a rudimentary fifth . The skeleton is somewhat typical of tetrapods , although the skull , pelvis and ribs are specialised ; in particular , the cartilaginous processes of the ribs allow the thorax to collapse during diving and the structure of the pelvis can accommodate large masses of food , or more air in the lungs . Both sexes have a cloaca , a single chamber and outlet at the base of the tail into which the intestinal , urinary and genital tracts open . It houses the penis in males and the clitoris in females . The testes or ovaries are located near the kidneys . 
 The eyes , ears and nostrils of crocodilians are at the top of the head . This allows them to stalk their prey with most of their bodies underwater . When in bright light , the pupils of a crocodilian contract into narrow slits , whereas in darkness they become fully circular . This is typical for animals that hunt at night . Crocodilians also possess a tapetum lucidum which enhances vision in low light . While eyesight is fairly good in air , it is significantly weakened underwater . The eardrums are protected by flaps that can be opened or closed by muscles . 
 The ears are adapted for hearing both in air and underwater . Crocodilians have a wide hearing range , with sensitivity comparable to most birds and many mammals . They appear to have a well @-@ developed olfactory system , while the well @-@ developed trigeminal nerve allows them to detect vibrations in the water ( such as those made by potential prey ) . When the animal completely submerges , the nictitating membranes cover its eyes . In addition , glands on the nictitating membrane secrete a salty lubricant that keeps the eye clean . When a crocodilian leaves the water and dries off , this substance is visible as " tears " . The tongue cannot move freely but is held in place by a folded membrane . While the brain of a crocodilian is fairly small , it is capable of greater learning than most reptiles . Though they lack the vocal folds of mammals and the syrinx of birds , crocodilians can produce vocalisations by vibrating three flaps in the larynx . 
 = = = Locomotion = = = 
 Crocodilians are excellent swimmers . During aquatic locomotion , the muscular tail undulates from side to side to drive the animal through the water while the limbs are held close to the body to reduce drag . When the animal needs to stop , steer , or manoeuvre in a different direction , the limbs are splayed out . Crocodilians generally cruise slowly on the surface or underwater with gentle sinuous movements of the tail , but when pursued or when chasing prey they can move rapidly . Crocodilians are less well @-@ adapted for moving on land , and are unusual among vertebrates in having two different means of terrestrial locomotion : the " high walk " and the " low walk " . Their ankle joints flex in a different way from those of other reptiles , a feature they share with some early archosaurs . One of the upper row of ankle bones , the astragalus , moves with the tibia and fibula . The other , the calcaneum , is functionally part of the foot , and has a socket into which a peg from the astragalus fits . The result is that the legs can be held almost vertically beneath the body when on land , and the foot can swivel during locomotion with a twisting movement at the ankle . 
 The high walk of crocodilians , with the belly and most of the tail being held off the ground , is unique among living reptiles . It somewhat resembles the walk of a mammal , with the same sequence of limb movements : left fore , right hind , right fore , left hind . The low walk is similar to the high walk , but without the body being raised , and is quite different from the sprawling walk of salamanders and lizards . The animal can change from one walk to the other instantaneously , but the high walk is the usual means of locomotion on land . The animal may push its body up and use this form immediately , or may take one or two strides of low walk before raising the body higher . Unlike most other land vertebrates , when crocodilians increase their pace of travel they increase the speed at which the lower half of each limb ( rather than the whole leg ) swings forward ; by this means , stride length increases while stride duration decreases . 
 Though typically slow on land , crocodilians can produce brief bursts of speed , and some can run at 12 to 14 km / h ( 7 @.@ 5 to 8 @.@ 7 mph ) for short distances . A fast entry into water from a muddy bank can be effected by plunging to the ground , twisting the body from side to side and splaying out the limbs . In some small species such as the freshwater crocodile , a running gait can progress to a bounding gallop . This involves the hind limbs launching the body forward and the fore limbs subsequently taking the weight . Next , the hind limbs swing forward as the spine flexes dorso @-@ ventrally , and this sequence of movements is repeated . During terrestrial locomotion , a crocodilian can keep its back and tail straight , since the scales are attached to the vertebrae by muscles . Whether on land or in water , crocodilians can jump or leap by pressing their tails and hind limbs against the substrate and then launching themselves into the air . 
 = = = Jaws and teeth = = = 
 The snout shape of crocodilians varies between species . Crocodiles may have either broad or slender snouts , while alligators and caimans have mostly broad ones . Gharials have snouts that are extremely elongated . The muscles that close the jaws are much more massive and powerful than the ones that open them , and a crocodilian 's jaws can be held shut by a person fairly easily . Conversely , the jaws are extremely difficult to pry open . The powerful closing muscles attach at the bottom of the skull , allowing the top of the head to retain a flat profile . The jaw hinge attaches to the <unk> @-@ occipital joint , allowing the animal to open its mouth fairly wide . 
 Crocodilians have some of the strongest bite forces in the animal kingdom . In a study published in 2003 , an American alligator 's bite force was measured at up to 2 @,@ 125 lbf ( 9 @,@ 450 N ) . In a 2012 study , a saltwater crocodile 's bite force was measured even higher , at 3 @,@ 700 lbf ( 16 @,@ 000 N ) . This study also found no correlation between bite force and snout shape . Nevertheless , the gharial 's extremely slender jaws are relatively weak and built more for quick jaw closure . The bite force of Deinosuchus may have measured 23 @,@ 000 lbf ( 100 @,@ 000 N ) , even greater than that of theropod dinosaurs like Tyrannosaurus . 
 <unk> teeth vary from blunt and dull to sharp and needle @-@ like . Broad @-@ snouted species have teeth that vary in size , while those of slender @-@ snouted species are more uniform . The teeth of crocodiles and gharials tend to be more visible than those of alligators and caimans when the jaws are closed . The easiest way to distinguish crocodiles from alligators is by looking at their jaw line . The teeth on the lower jaw of an alligator fit into sockets in the upper jaw , so only the upper teeth are visible when the mouth is closed . The teeth on the lower jaw of a crocodile fit into grooves on the outside of the top jaw making both the upper and lower teeth visible when the mouth is closed . 
 Crocodilians are <unk> and able to replace each of their approximately 80 teeth up to 50 times in their 35 to 75 @-@ year lifespan . They are the only non @-@ mammalian vertebrates with tooth sockets . Next to each full @-@ grown tooth there is a small replacement tooth and an <unk> stem cell in the dental lamina in standby , which can be activated when required . Tooth replacement slows significantly and eventually stops as the animal grows old . 
 = = = Skin and scales = = = 
 The skin of crocodilians is thick and cornified , and is clad in non @-@ overlapping scales known as scutes , arranged in regular rows and patterns . These scales are continually being produced by cell division in the underlying layer of the epidermis , the stratum <unk> , and the surface of individual scutes sloughs off periodically . The outer surface of the scutes consists of the relatively rigid beta @-@ keratin while the hinge region between the scutes contains only the more pliable alpha @-@ keratin . 
 Many of the scutes are strengthened by bony plates known as osteoderms , which are the same size and shape as the superficial scales but grow beneath them . They are most numerous on the back and neck of the animal and may form a protective armour . They often have prominent , lumpy ridges and are covered in hard @-@ wearing beta @-@ keratin . Most of the skin on the head is fused to the skull . The skin on the neck and flanks is loose , while that on the abdomen and underside of the tail is sheathed in large , flat square scutes arranged in neat rows . The scutes contain blood vessels and may act to absorb or radiate heat during thermoregulation . Research also suggests that alkaline ions released into the blood from the calcium and magnesium in these dermal bones act as a buffer during prolonged submersion when increasing levels of carbon dioxide would otherwise cause acidosis . 
 Some scutes contain a single pore known as an integumentary sense organ . Crocodiles and gharials have these on large parts of their bodies , while alligators and caimans only have them on the head . Their exact function is not fully understood , but it has been suggested that they may be <unk> organs . Another possibility is that they may produce an oily secretion that prevents mud from adhering to the skin . There are prominent paired integumentary glands in skin folds on the throat , and others in the side walls of the cloaca . Various functions for these have been suggested . They may play a part in communication , as indirect evidence suggest that they secrete pheromones used in courtship or nesting . The skin of crocodilians is tough and can withstand damage from conspecifics , and the immune system is effective enough to heal wounds within a few days . 
 = = = Circulation = = = 
 The crocodilian has perhaps the most complex vertebrate circulatory system . It has a four @-@ chambered heart and two ventricles , an unusual trait among extant reptiles , and both a left and right aorta which are connected by a hole called the Foramen of <unk> . Like birds and mammals , crocodilians have heart valves that direct blood flow in a single direction through the heart chambers . They also have unique cog @-@ teeth @-@ like valves that , when interlocked , direct blood to the left aorta and away from the lungs , and then back around the body . This system may allow the animals to remain submerged for a longer period , but this explanation has been questioned . Other possible reasons for the peculiar circulatory system include assistance with thermoregulatory needs , prevention of pulmonary oedema , or faster recovery from metabolic acidosis . Retaining carbon dioxide within the body permits an increase in the rate of gastric acid secretion and thus the efficiency of digestion , and other gastrointestinal organs such as the pancreas , spleen , small intestine , and liver also function more efficiently . 
 When submerged , a crocodilian 's heart rate slows down to one or two beats a minute , and blood flow to the muscles is reduced . When it rises and takes a breath , its heart rate speeds up in seconds , and the muscles receive newly oxygenated blood . Unlike many marine mammals , crocodilians have little myoglobin to store oxygen in their muscles . During diving , muscles are supplied with oxygen when an increasing concentration of bicarbonate ions causes haemoglobin in the blood to release oxygen . 
 = = = Respiration = = = 
 Crocodilians were traditionally thought to breathe like mammals , with airflow moving in and out tidally , but studies published in 2010 and 2013 conclude that crocodilians breathe more like birds , with airflow moving in a unidirectional loop within the lungs . When a crocodilian inhales , air flows through the trachea and into two primary bronchi , or airways , which branch off into narrower secondary passageways . The air continues to move through these , then into even narrower tertiary airways , and then into other secondary airways which were bypassed the first time . The air then flows back into the primary airways and is exhaled back out . These aerodynamic valves within the bronchial tree have been hypothesised to explain how crocodilians can have unidirectional airflow without the aid of avian @-@ like air sacs . 
 The lungs of crocodilians are attached to the liver and the pelvis by the <unk> muscle ( analogous of the diaphragm in mammals ) . During inhalation , the external intercostal muscles expand the ribs , allowing the animal to take in more air , while the <unk> muscle causes the hips to swing downwards and push the belly outward , and the <unk> pulls the liver back . When exhaling , the internal intercostal muscles push the ribs inward , while the rectus <unk> pulls the hips and liver forwards and the belly inward . Because the lungs expand into the space formerly occupied by the liver and are compressed when it moves back into position , this motion is sometimes referred to as a " hepatic piston " . Crocodilians can also use these muscles to adjust the position of their lungs ; thereby controlling their buoyancy in the water . An animal sinks when the lungs are pulled towards the tail and floats when they move back towards the head . This allows them to move through the water without creating disturbances that could alert potential prey . In addition , they can also spin and twist by moving their lungs laterally . 
 Swimming and diving crocodilians appear to rely on lung volume more for buoyancy than oxygen storage . Just before diving , the animal exhales to reduce its lung volume and achieve negative buoyancy . When submerging , the nostrils of a crocodilian shut tight . All species have a palatal valve , a membranous flap of skin at the back of the oral cavity that prevents water from flowing into the throat , oesophagus , and trachea . This enables them to open their mouths underwater without drowning . Crocodilians typically remain underwater for fifteen minutes or less at a time , but some can hold their breath for up to two hours under ideal conditions . The maximum diving depth is unknown , but crocodiles can dive to at least 20 m ( 66 ft ) . 
 = = = Digestion = = = 
 <unk> teeth are adapted for seizing and holding prey , and food is swallowed <unk> . The digestive tract is relatively short , as meat is a fairly simple substance to digest . The stomach is divided into two parts : a muscular gizzard that grinds food , and a digestive chamber where enzymes work on it . The stomach is more acidic than that of any other vertebrate and contains ridges for gastroliths , which play a role in the mechanical breakdown of food . Digestion takes place more quickly at higher temperatures . Crocodilians have a very low metabolic rate and consequently , low energy requirements . This allows them to survive for many months on a single large meal , digesting the food slowly . They can withstand extended fasting , living on stored fat between meals . Even recently hatched crocodiles are able to survive 58 days without food , losing 23 % of their bodyweight during this time . An adult crocodile needs between a tenth and a fifth of the amount of food necessary for a lion of the same weight , and can live for half a year without eating . 
 = = = Thermoregulation = = = 
 Crocodilians are ectotherms , producing relatively little heat internally and relying on external sources to raise their body temperatures . The sun 's heat is the main means of warming for any crocodilian , while immersion in water may either raise its temperature by conduction , or cool the animal in hot weather . The main method for regulating its temperature is behavioural . For example , an alligator in temperate regions may start the day by basking in the sun on land . A bulky animal , it warms up slowly , but at some time later in the day it moves into the water , still exposing its dorsal surface to the sun . At night it remains submerged , and its temperature slowly falls . The basking period is extended in winter and reduced in summer . For crocodiles in the tropics , avoiding overheating is generally the main problem . They may bask briefly in the morning but then move into the shade , remaining there for the rest of the day , or submerge themselves in water to keep cool . Gaping with the mouth can provide cooling by evaporation from the mouth lining . By these means , the temperature range of crocodilians is usually maintained between 25 and 35 ° C ( 77 and 95 ° F ) , and mainly stays in the range 30 to 33 ° C ( 86 to 91 ° F ) . 
 The ranges of the American and Chinese alligator extend into regions that sometimes experience periods of frost in winter . Being ectothermic , the internal body temperature of crocodilians falls as the temperature drops , and they become sluggish . They may become more active on warm days , but do not usually feed at all during the winter . In cold weather , they remain submerged with their tails in deeper , less cold water and their nostrils just projecting through the surface . If ice forms on the water , they maintain ice @-@ free breathing holes , and there have been occasions when their snouts have become frozen into the ice . Temperature sensing probes implanted in wild American alligators have found that their core body temperatures can descend to around 5 ° C ( 41 ° F ) , but as long as they remain able to breathe they show no ill effects when the weather warms up . 
 = = = Osmoregulation = = = 
 No living species of crocodilian can be considered truly marine ; although the saltwater crocodile and the American crocodile are able to swim out to sea , their normal habitats are river mouths , estuaries , mangrove swamps , and hypersaline lakes , though several extinct species have had marine habits , including the recently gone " Gavialis " papuensis , which occurred in a fully marine habitat in the Solomon Islands coastlines . All crocodilians need to maintain the concentration of salt in body fluids at suitable levels . Osmoregulation is related to the quantity of salts and water exchanged with the environment . Intake of water and salts takes place across the lining of the mouth , when water is drunk , incidentally while feeding , and when present in foods . Water is lost from the body during breathing , and both salts and water are lost in the urine and faeces , through the skin , and via salt @-@ excreting glands on the tongue , though these are only present in crocodiles and gharials . The skin is a largely effective barrier to both water and ions . Gaping causes water loss by evaporation from the lining of the mouth , and on land , water is also lost through the skin . Large animals are better able to maintain homeostasis at times of osmotic stress than smaller ones . Newly hatched crocodilians are much less tolerant of exposure to salt water than are older juveniles , presumably because they have a higher surface @-@ area @-@ to @-@ volume ratio . 
 The kidneys and excretory system are much the same as in other reptiles , but crocodilians do not have a bladder . In fresh water , the osmolality ( the concentration of solutes that contribute to a solution 's osmotic pressure ) in the plasma is much higher than it is in the surrounding water . The animals are well @-@ hydrated , and the urine in the cloaca is abundant and dilute , nitrogen being excreted as ammonium bicarbonate . Sodium loss is low and mainly takes place through the skin in freshwater conditions . In seawater , the opposite is true . The osmolality in the plasma is lower than the surrounding water , which is dehydrating for the animal . The cloacal urine is much more concentrated , white , and opaque , with the nitrogenous waste being mostly excreted as insoluble uric acid . 
 = = Ecology and life history = = 
 = = = Distribution and habitat = = = 
 Crocodilians are amphibious reptiles , spending part of their time in water and part on land . The last surviving fully terrestrial genus , <unk> , became extinct about 3000 years ago after humans had arrived on its Pacific islands , making the extinction possibly anthropogenic . Typically they are creatures of the tropics ; the main exceptions are the American and Chinese alligators , whose ranges extend as far north as the south @-@ eastern United States and the Yangtze River , respectively . Florida , in the United States , is the only place that crocodiles and alligators live side by side . Most crocodilians live in the lowlands , and few are found above 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) , where the temperatures are typically about 5 ° C ( 9 ° F ) lower than at the coast . None of them permanently reside in the sea , though some can venture into it , and several species can tolerate the brackish water of estuaries , mangrove swamps , and the extreme salinity of hypersaline lakes . The saltwater crocodile has the widest distribution of any crocodilian , with a range extending from eastern India to New Guinea and northern Australia . Much of its success is due to its ability to swim out to sea and colonise new locations , but it is not restricted to the marine environment and spends much time in estuaries , rivers , and large lakes . 
 Various types of aquatic habitats are used by different crocodilians . Some species are relatively more terrestrial and prefer swamps , ponds , and the edges of lakes , where they can bask in the sun and there is plenty of plant life supporting a diverse fauna . Others spend more time in the water and inhabit the lower stretches of rivers , mangrove swamps , and estuaries . These habitats also have a rich flora and provide plenty of food . The Asian gharials find the fish on which they feed in the pools and backwaters of swift rivers . South American dwarf caimans inhabit cool , fast @-@ flowing streams , often near waterfalls , and other caimans live in warmer , turbid lakes and slow @-@ moving rivers . The crocodiles are mainly river dwellers , and the Chinese alligator is found in slow @-@ moving , turbid rivers flowing across China 's floodplains . The American alligator is an adaptable species and inhabits swamps , rivers , or lakes with clear or turbid water . Climatic factors also affect crocodilians ' distribution locally . During the dry season , caimans can be restricted to deep pools in rivers for several months ; in the rainy season , much of the savannah in the Venezuelan llanos is flooded , and they disperse widely across the plain . Desert crocodiles in Mauritania have adapted to their arid environment by staying in caves or burrows in a state of aestivation during the driest periods . When it rains , the reptiles gather at <unk> . 
 Dry land is also important as it provides opportunities for basking , nesting , and escaping from temperature extremes . Gaping allows evaporation of moisture from the mouth lining and has a cooling effect , and several species make use of shallow burrows on land to keep cool . <unk> in mud can also help prevent them from overheating . Four species of crocodilians climb trees to bask in areas lacking a shoreline . The type of vegetation bordering the rivers and lakes inhabited by crocodilians is mostly humid tropical forest , with mangrove swamps in estuarine areas . These forests are of great importance to the crocodilians , creating suitable microhabitats where they can flourish . The roots of the trees absorb water when it rains , releasing it back slowly into the environment . When the forests are cleared to make way for agriculture , rivers tend to silt up , the water runs off rapidly , the water courses can dry up in the dry season and flooding can occur in the wet season . Destruction of forest habitat is probably a greater threat to crocodilians than is hunting . 
 = = = Spacing = = = 
 Adult crocodilians are typically territorial and solitary . Individuals may defend basking spots , nesting sites , feeding areas , nurseries , and overwintering sites . Male saltwater crocodiles establish year @-@ round territories that encompass several female nesting sites . Some species are occasionally gregarious , particularly during droughts , when several individuals gather at remaining water sites . Individuals of some species may share basking sites at certain times of the day . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Crocodilians are largely carnivorous , and the diets of different species can vary with snout shape and tooth sharpness . Species with sharp teeth and long slender snouts , like the Indian gharial and Australian freshwater crocodile , are specialised for feeding on fish , insects , and crustaceans , while extremely broad @-@ snouted species with blunt teeth , like the Chinese alligator and broad @-@ snouted caiman , specialise in eating hard @-@ shelled molluscs . Species whose snouts and teeth are intermediate between these two forms , such as the saltwater crocodile and American alligator , have generalised diets and opportunistically feed on invertebrates , fish , amphibians , other reptiles , birds , and mammals . Though mostly carnivorous , several species of crocodilian have been observed to consume fruit , and this may play a role in seed dispersal . 
 In general , crocodilians are stalk @-@ and @-@ ambush predators , though hunting strategies vary depending on the individual species and the prey being hunted . Terrestrial prey is stalked from the water 's edge and then grabbed and drowned . Gharials and other fish @-@ eating species sweep their jaws sideways to snap up prey , and these animals can leap out of the water to catch birds , bats , and leaping fish . Small animals can be killed by whiplash as the predator shakes its head . <unk> use their tails and bodies to herd fish into shallow water . They may also dig for bottom @-@ dwelling invertebrates , and the smooth @-@ fronted caiman will even hunt on land . Some crocodilian species have been observed to use sticks and branches to lure nest @-@ building birds . Nile crocodiles are known to hunt cooperatively , and several individuals may feed on the same carcass . Most species will eat anything suitable that comes within reach and are also opportunistic scavengers . 
 Crocodilians are unable to chew and need to swallow food whole , so prey that is too large to swallow is torn into pieces . They may be unable to deal with a large animal with a thick hide , and may wait until it becomes putrid and comes apart more easily . To tear a chunk of tissue from a large carcass , a crocodilian spins its body continuously while holding on with its jaws , a manoeuvre known as the " death roll " . During cooperative feeding , some individuals may hold on to the prey , while others perform the roll . The animals do not fight , and each retires with a piece of flesh and awaits its next feeding turn . Food is typically consumed by crocodilians with their heads above water . The food is held with the tips of the jaws , tossed towards the back of the mouth by an upward jerk of the head and then <unk> down . Nile crocodiles may store carcasses underwater for later consumption . 
 = = = Reproduction and parenting = = = 
 Crocodilians are generally polygynous , and individual males try to mate with as many females as they can . Monogamous pairings have been recorded in American alligators . Dominant male crocodilians patrol and defend territories which contain several females . Males of some species , like the American alligator , try to attract females with elaborate courtship displays . During courtship , crocodilian males and females may rub against each other , circle around , and perform swimming displays . Copulation typically occurs in the water . When a female is ready to mate , she arches her back while her head and tail submerge . The male rubs across the female 's neck and then grasps her with his hindlimbs , placing his tail underneath hers so their cloacas align and his penis can be inserted . Mating can last up to 15 minutes , during which time the pair continuously submerge and surface . While dominant males usually monopolise reproductive females , multiple paternity is known to exist in American alligators , where as many as three different males may sire offspring in a single clutch . Within a month of mating , the female crocodilian begins to make a nest . 
 Depending on the species , female crocodilians may construct either holes or mounds as nests , the latter made from vegetation , litter , sand , or soil . Nests are typically found near dens or caves . Those made by different females are sometimes close to each other , particularly in hole @-@ nesting species . The number of eggs laid in a single clutch ranges from ten to fifty . As in all egg @-@ laying amniotes , crocodilian eggs are protected by hard shells made of calcium carbonate . The incubation period is two to three months . The temperature at which the eggs incubate determines the sex of the hatchlings . Constant nest temperatures above 32 ° C ( 90 ° F ) produce more males , while those below 31 ° C ( 88 ° F ) produce more females . However , sex in crocodilians may be determined in a short interval , and nests are subject to changes in temperature . Most natural nests produce hatchlings of both sexes , though single @-@ sex clutches do occur . 
 The young may all hatch in a single night . Crocodilians are unusual among reptiles in the amount of parental care provided after the young hatch . The mother helps excavate hatchlings from the nest and carries them to water in her mouth . Newly hatched crocodilians gather together and stay close to their mother . For spectacled caimans in the Venezuelan llanos , individual mothers are known to leave their young in the same nurseries , or crèches , and one of the mothers guards them . Hatchlings of many species tend to bask in a group during the day and disperse at nightfall to feed . The time it takes young crocodilians to reach independence can vary . For American alligators , groups of young associate with adults for one to two years , while juvenile saltwater and Nile crocodiles become independent in a few months . 
 = = = Communication = = = 
 The social life of a crocodilian begins while it is still in the egg , because the young start communicating with each other before they are hatched . It has been shown that a light tapping noise near the nest will be repeated by the young , one after another . Such early communication may help them to hatch simultaneously . Once it has broken out of the egg , a juvenile produces yelps and grunts , either spontaneously or as a result of external stimuli and even unrelated adults respond quickly to juvenile distress calls . 
 Vocalisations are frequent as the juveniles disperse , and again as they congregate in the morning . Nearby adults , presumably the parents , also give signals warning of predators or alerting the youngsters to the presence of food . The range and quantity of vocalisations vary between species . Alligators are the noisiest , while some crocodile species are almost completely silent . Adult female New Guinea crocodiles and Siamese crocodiles roar when approached by another adult , while Nile crocodiles grunt or bellow in a similar situation . The American alligator is exceptionally noisy ; it emits a series of about seven throaty bellows , each a couple of seconds long , at ten second intervals . It also makes various grunts and hisses . Males create vibrations in the water to send out infrasonic signals that serve to attract females and intimidate rivals . The enlarged boss of the male gharial may serve as a sound resonator . 
 Another form of acoustic communication is the <unk> . This typically starts with an animal in the water elevating its snout and remaining stationary . After some time , the jaws are opened sharply then clamped shut with a biting motion that makes a loud slapping sound , and this is immediately followed by a loud splash , after which the head may be submerged and copious bubbles produced . Some species then roar , while others slap the water with their tails . Episodes of <unk> spread through the group . The purpose varies , but it seems to be associated with maintaining social relationships , and is also used in courtship . Dominant individuals may also display their body size while swimming at the water surface , and a subordinate will submit by holding its head at an acute angle with the jaws open before retreating underwater . 
 = = = Growth and mortality = = = 
 Mortality is high for eggs and hatchlings , and nests face threats from floods , overheating , and predators . Flooding is a major cause of failure of crocodilians to breed successfully , as nests are submerged , developing embryos are deprived of oxygen , and juveniles get washed away . One of the chief predators of alligators ' eggs in Florida is the raccoon , which is attracted by olfactory cues after the nest has been disturbed by turtles . The Florida black bear also raids alligator eggs . In Africa , mongooses , honey badgers , baboons , otters , warthogs , <unk> , and spotted hyenas are all fond of crocodile eggs , but the monitor lizard is thought to be the most important nest raider . This lizard is also a major hazard in Asia , where other egg predators include civets , mongooses , rats , sloth bears , jackals , and dogs . 
 Despite the maternal care they receive , hatchlings commonly fall to predation . While the female is transporting some to the nursery area , others are picked off by predators that lurk near the nest . The hatchlings are a source of food for most of the creatures that feed on eggs , and are also subject to aquatic attacks by turtles , fish , and snakes . Birds of prey take their toll , and in any clutch there may be malformed individuals that are unlikely to survive . In northern Australia , the survival rate for saltwater crocodile hatchlings is only twenty @-@ five percent , but with each succeeding year of life this improves , reaching sixty percent by year five . Mortality rates are fairly low among subadult and adults of small species , though they are occasionally preyed on by large cats and snakes . The jaguar and the giant otter may prey on caimans in South America . In other parts of the world , elephants and hippopotamuses may kill crocodiles defensively . Authorities differ as to whether much cannibalism takes place among crocodilians . Adults do not normally eat their own offspring , but there is some evidence of subadults feeding on juveniles and of adults attacking subadults . In Nile crocodiles , rival males sometimes kill each other during the breeding season . 
 Growth in hatchlings and young crocodilians depends on the food supply , and sexual maturity is linked with length rather than age . Female saltwater crocodiles reach maturity at 2 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 5 m ( 7 ft 3 in – 8 ft 2 in ) , while males mature at 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) . Australian freshwater crocodiles take ten years to reach maturity at 1 @.@ 4 m ( 4 ft 7 in ) . The spectacled caiman matures earlier , reaching its mature length of 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 ft 11 in ) in four to seven years . Crocodilians continue to grow throughout their lives . Males in particular continue to gain in weight as they get older , but this is mostly in the form of extra girth rather than length . Crocodilians can live 35 – 75 years , and their age can be determined by growth rings in their bones . 
 = = = Ecological roles = = = 
 Being highly efficient predators , crocodilians tend to be top of the food chain in their watery environments . The nest mounds built by some species of crocodilian are used by other animals for their own purposes . American alligator mounds are used by turtles and snakes , both for basking and for laying their own eggs . The Florida red @-@ bellied turtle specialises in this , and alligator mounds may have several clutches of turtle eggs developing alongside the owner 's eggs . Alligators modify some wetland habitats in flat areas such as the Everglades by constructing small ponds known as " alligator holes " . These create wetter or drier habitats for other organisms , such as plants , fish , invertebrates , amphibians , reptiles , and mammals . In the limestone depressions of cypress swamps , alligator holes tend to be large and deep . Those in marl prairies and rocky glades are usually small and shallow , while those in peat depressions of ridge and slough wetlands are more variable . Man @-@ made holes do not appear to have as large an effect . 
 In the Amazon basin , when caimans became scarce as a result of overhunting in the mid @-@ 20th century , the number of local fish , such as the important <unk> ( <unk> gigas ) , also decreased . These are nutrient @-@ poor waters , and the urine and faeces of the caimans may have increased primary production by contributing plant nutrients . Thus the presence of the reptiles could have benefited the fish stock ; the number of crocodilians in a stretch of water appears to be correlated with the fish population . 
 = = Evolution and classification = = 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 The main distinguishing characteristic of diapsid tetrapods is the presence of two openings ( temporal fenestrae ) on either side of the skull behind the eye . Living diapsids include all crocodilians , lizards , snakes , tuataras , and birds . The feature that distinguishes archosaurs from other diapsids is an extra pair of openings in the skull ( antorbital fenestrae ) in front of the eye sockets . Archosauria is the crown group containing the most recent common ancestor of crocodilians and birds and all its descendants . It comprises the Pseudosuchia , the " false crocodiles " , and the <unk> , which in turn comprises the dinosaurs and their relatives , the pterosaurs , and the birds . Pseudosuchia is defined as living crocodilians and all archosaurs more closely related to crocodilians than to birds . The Pseudosuchia – bird split is assumed to have occurred close to the Permian – Triassic mass extinction event . Modern crocodilians have lost the antorbital fenestrae , but they were present in most of their fossil ancestors as small openings . 
 The crocodylomorphs are the only pseudosuchians to have survived the Triassic – Jurassic extinction event , 201 @.@ 3 million years ago . During the early Jurassic period , the dinosaurs became dominant on land , and the crocodylomorphs underwent major adaptive <unk> to fill ecological niches vacated by recently extinguished groups . Unfolding fossil evidence shows that Mesozoic crocodylomorphs had a much greater diversity of forms than modern crocodilians . Some became small fast @-@ moving insectivores , others specialist fish @-@ eaters , still others marine and terrestrial carnivores , and a few became herbivores . The earliest stage of crocodilian evolution was the <unk> , which evolved in the late Triassic and early Jurassic . They were followed by the <unk> , which diversified widely during the Jurassic and the Tertiary . Another group , the eusuchians , appeared in the late Cretaceous 80 million years ago and includes all the crocodilians living today . 
 <unk> were small , mostly terrestrial animals with short snouts and long limbs . They had bony armor in the form of two rows of plates extending from head to tail , and this armor is retained by most modern crocodilians . Their vertebrae were convex on the two main articulating surfaces , and their bony palates were little developed . The <unk> saw a fusion of the palatine bones to form a secondary bony palate and a great extension of the nasal passages to near the pterygoid bones . This allowed the animal to breathe through its nostrils while its mouth was open under the water . The eusuchians continued this process with the interior nostrils now opening through an aperture in the pterygoid bones . The vertebrae of eusuchians had one convex and one concave articulating surface , allowing for a ball and socket type joint between the vertebrae , bringing greater flexibility and strength . The oldest known eusuchian is <unk> <unk> from the lower Cretaceous of the Isle of Wight in the United Kingdom . It was followed by crocodilians such as the <unk> , the so @-@ called ' hoofed crocodiles ' , in the Palaeogene . Spanning the Cretaceous and Palaeogene periods is the genus <unk> of North America , with six species , though its phylogenetic position is not settled . 
 The three primary branches of Crocodilia had diverged by the end of the Mesozoic . The earliest @-@ known members of the group are alligatoroids and <unk> that lived in North America and Europe during the Campanian ( around 83 @.@ 6 – 72 @.@ 1 million years ago ) . Although the first known <unk> appeared in the Maastrichtian ( around 72 @.@ 1 – 66 @.@ 0 million years ago ) , that lineage must have been present during the Campanian , and the earliest alligatoroids and <unk> include highly derived forms , which indicates that the time of the actual divergence between the three lineages must have been a pre @-@ Campanian event . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 The phylogenetic relationships of crocodilians has been the subject of debate and conflicting results . Many studies and their resulting cladograms , or " family trees " of crocodilians , have found the " short @-@ snouted " families of Crocodylidae and Alligatoridae to be close relatives , with the long @-@ snouted Gavialidae as a divergent branch of the tree . The resulting group of short @-@ snouted species , name <unk> , was supported mainly by studies which analyzed skeletal features alone . 
 In 2012 , Erickson et al. produced a phylogeny formed from DNA sequencing to give a maximum likelihood cladogram of the relationships among living crocodilians ( excluding the yacare caiman for which no DNA evidence was available ) . In this , the existence of a distinct group <unk> was rejected , with the long @-@ snouted <unk> more closely related to crocodiles than to alligators . 
 = = = Taxonomy = = = 
 Extant 
 Family Gavialidae 
 Genus Gavialis 
 <unk> ( Gavialis gangeticus ) 
 Genus <unk> 
 False gharial ( <unk> schlegelii ) 
 There are two extant species of Gavialidae : the gharial and the false gharial . Gharials can be recognised by the long narrow snout , with an enlarged boss at the tip . They are rare and found only in South Asia . 
 Family Alligatoridae 
 Genus Alligator 
 American alligator ( Alligator mississippiensis ) 
 Chinese alligator ( Alligator sinensis ) 
 Genus Paleosuchus 
 Cuvier 's dwarf caiman ( Paleosuchus palpebrosus ) 
 Smooth @-@ fronted caiman ( Paleosuchus trigonatus ) 
 Genus Caiman 
 <unk> caiman ( Caiman yacare ) 
 Spectacled caiman ( Caiman <unk> ) 
 Broad @-@ snouted caiman ( Caiman latirostris ) 
 Genus <unk> 
 Black caiman ( <unk> niger ) 
 The extant Alligatoridae are two species in the genus Alligator , and six species of caimans grouped into three genera . They can be recognised by the broad snout , in which the fourth tooth of the lower jaw cannot be seen when the mouth is closed . 
 Family Crocodylidae 
 Genus Crocodylus 
 American crocodile ( Crocodylus acutus ) 
 Orinoco crocodile ( Crocodylus intermedius ) 
 Freshwater crocodile ( Crocodylus johnsoni ) 
 Philippine crocodile ( Crocodylus mindorensis ) 
 <unk> 's crocodile ( Crocodylus <unk> ) 
 Nile crocodile ( Crocodylus niloticus ) 
 Desert crocodile ( Crocodylus <unk> ) 
 New Guinea crocodile ( Crocodylus novaeguineae ) 
 <unk> crocodile ( Crocodylus palustris ) 
 Saltwater crocodile ( Crocodylus porosus ) 
 Cuban crocodile ( Crocodylus <unk> ) 
 Siamese crocodile ( Crocodylus siamensis ) 
 Genus <unk> 
 Slender @-@ snouted crocodile ( <unk> [ Crocodylus ] <unk> ) 
 Genus Osteolaemus 
 Dwarf crocodile ( Osteolaemus <unk> ) 
 The extant Crocodylidae are twelve species in the genus Crocodylus , and two species in other genera . They have a variety of snout shapes , but can be recognised because the fourth tooth of the lower jaw is visible when the mouth is closed . 
 Living and extinct groups 
 = = Interactions with humans = = 
 = = = Farming and ranching = = = 
 Alligators and crocodiles were first farmed in the early 20th century , but the facilities involved were zoo @-@ like and their main source of income was from tourism . By the early 1960s , the feasibility of farming these reptiles on a commercial scale was investigated in response to the decline of many crocodilian species around the world . Farming involves breeding and rearing captive stock on a self @-@ contained basis , whereas ranching means the use of eggs , juveniles , or adults taken each year from the wild . Commercial organisations must satisfy the criteria of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species ( CITES ) by demonstrating that , in the area concerned , they do not adversely impact the wild population . 
 Alligator and crocodile farming began because of demand for their hides , but now nearly all parts of the animal are put to use . The side and belly skin make the best leather , the meat is eaten , the gall bladders are valued in East Asia , and the heads are sometimes made into ornaments . In traditional Chinese medicine , alligator meat is said to cure the common cold and prevent cancer , while various internal organs are believed to have medicinal properties . 
 = = = Attacks = = = 
 Crocodilians are opportunistic predators that are at their most dangerous in water and at the edge of water . Eight species are known to attack humans and may do so to defend their territories , nests , or young ; by mistake , while attacking domestic animals such as dogs ; or for food , as larger crocodilians can take prey as big as or bigger than humans . The species on which there is most data are the saltwater crocodile , the Nile crocodile , and the American alligator . Other species which have sometimes attacked humans are the black caiman , the <unk> 's crocodile , the mugger crocodile , the American crocodile , the gharial , and the freshwater crocodile . 
 The Nile crocodile has a reputation as the biggest killer of large animals , including humans , on the African continent . It is widely distributed , found in many habitats and cryptically coloured . From a waiting position with only its eyes and nostrils above the water , it can lunge at drinking animals , fishermen , bathers , or people collecting water or washing clothes . Once seized and dragged into the water , there is little chance for the victim to escape . Analysis of attacks show that most take place during the breeding season or when crocodiles are guarding nests or newly hatched young . Although many attacks go unreported , there are estimated to be over 300 per year , 63 % of which are fatal . Wild saltwater crocodiles in Australia carried out 62 confirmed and unprovoked attacks causing injury or death between 1971 and 2004 . These animals have also caused fatalities in Malaysia , New Guinea , and elsewhere . They are highly territorial and resent intrusion into their territories by other crocodiles , humans , or boats such as canoes . Attacks may come from animals of various sizes , but the larger males are generally responsible for fatalities . As their size increases , so does their need for larger mammalian prey ; pigs , cattle , horses , and humans are all within the size range they seek . Most of the people attacked were either swimming or wading , but in two instances they were asleep in tents . 
 American alligators are recorded as making 242 unprovoked attacks between 1948 and mid @-@ 2004 , causing sixteen human fatalities . Ten of these were in the water and two were on land ; the circumstances of the other four are not known . Most attacks were in the warmer months of the year , though in Florida , with its warmer climate , attacks can happen at any time of year . Alligators are considered to be less aggressive than either the Nile or saltwater crocodile , but the increase in density of the human population in the Everglades has brought people and alligators into closer proximity and increased the risk of alligator attacks . Conversely in Mauritania , crocodiles appear to be habituated to the local people , who swim with them without being attacked . 
 = = = As pets = = = 
 Several species of crocodilian are traded as exotic pets . They are appealing when young , and pet @-@ store owners can easily sell them , but crocodilians do not make good pets ; they grow large and are both dangerous and expensive to keep . As they grow older , pet crocodilians are often abandoned by their owners , and feral populations of spectacled caimans exist in the United States and Cuba . Most countries have strict regulations for keeping these reptiles . 
 = = = In medicine = = = 
 The blood of alligators and crocodiles contains peptides with antibiotic properties . These may contribute to future antibacterial drugs . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 The main threat to crocodilians around the world is human activity , including hunting and habitat destruction . Early in the 1970s , more than 2 million wild crocodilian skins of a variety of species had been traded , driving down the majority of crocodilian populations , in some cases almost to extinction . Starting in 1973 , CITES attempted to prevent trade in body parts of endangered animals , such as the skins of crocodiles . This proved to be problematic in the 1980s , as crocodiles were abundant and dangerous to humans in some parts of Africa , and it was legal to hunt them . At the Conference of the Parties in Botswana in 1983 , it was argued on behalf of aggrieved local people that it was reasonable to sell the lawfully hunted skins . In the late 1970s , crocodiles began to be farmed in different countries , started from eggs taken from the wild . By the 1980s , farmed crocodile skins were produced in sufficient numbers to destroy the unlawful trade in wild crocodilians . By 2000 , skins from twelve crocodilian species , whether harvested lawfully in the wild or farmed , were traded by thirty countries , and the unlawful trade in the products had almost vanished . 
 The gharial has undergone a chronic long @-@ term decline , combined with a rapid short @-@ term decline , leading the IUCN to list the species as critically endangered . In 1946 , the gharial population had been widespread , numbering around 5 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 ; by 2006 , however , it had declined 96 – 98 % , reduced to a small number of widely spaced subpopulations of fewer than 235 individuals . This long @-@ term decline had a number of causes , including egg collection and hunting , such as for indigenous medicine . The rapid decline of about 58 % between 1997 and 2006 was caused by increasing use of gill nets and the loss of riverine habitat . The gharial population continues to be threatened by environmental hazards such as heavy metals and protozoan parasites , but as of 2013 numbers are rising , due to the protection of nests against egg predators . The Chinese alligator was historically widespread throughout the eastern Yangtze River system but is currently restricted to some areas in southeastern Anhui province thanks to habitat fragmentation and degradation . The wild population is believed to exist only in small fragmented ponds . In 1972 , the species was declared a Class I endangered species by the Chinese government and received the maximum amount of legal protection . Since 1979 , captive breeding programs were established in China and North America , creating a healthy captive population . In 2008 , alligators bred in the Bronx Zoo were successfully reintroduced to Chongming Island . The Philippine crocodile is perhaps the most threatened crocodilian and is considered by the IUCN to be critically endangered . Hunting and destructive fishing habits have reduced its population to around 100 individuals by 2009 . In the same year , 50 captive bred crocodiles were released into the wild to help boost the population . Support from local people is crucial for the species survival . 
 The American alligator has also suffered serious declines from hunting and habitat loss throughout its range , threatening it with extinction . In 1967 it was listed as an endangered species , but the United States Fish and Wildlife Service and state wildlife agencies in the Southern United States stepped in and worked towards its recovery . Protection allowed the species to recuperate , and in 1987 it was removed from the endangered species list . Much research into alligator ranching has been undertaken at the Rockefeller Wildlife Refuge , a large area of marshland in the state of Louisiana . The resulting data has increased understanding of penning , stocking rates , egg incubation , hatching , rearing , and diet , and this information has been used at other establishments around the world . Income from the alligators kept at Rockefeller Wildlife Refuge contributes to conservation of the marshland . A study examining alligator farms in the United States showed that they have generated significant conservation gains , and poaching of wild alligators has greatly diminished . 
 = = Cultural depictions = = 
 = = = In mythology and folklore = = = 
 Crocodilians have had prominent roles in the myths and legends of various cultures around the world and may even have inspired stories of dragons . In Ancient Egyptian religion , <unk> , the <unk> <unk> of unworthy souls , and Sobek , the god of power , protection , and fertility , are both represented as having crocodile heads . This reflects the Egyptians ' view of the crocodile both as a terrifying predator and an important part of the Nile ecosystem . The crocodile was one of several animals that the Egyptians mummified . Crocodiles were also associated with various water deities by tribes of West Africa . During the Benin Empire , crocodiles were considered the " policemen of the waters " and symbolised the power of the king or <unk> to punish wrongdoers . The Leviathan described in the Book of Job may have been based on a crocodile . In Mesoamerica , the Aztecs had a crocodilian god of fertility named <unk> who protected crops . In Aztec mythology , the sea monster <unk> is sometimes described as merging with a " great caiman " . The Mayans also associated crocodilians with fertility and death . 
 The gharial is featured in the folk tales of India . In one story , a gharial and a monkey become friends when the monkey gives the gharial fruit . The gharial 's wife demands that her husband bring home the monkey to eat , believing that the fruit made the monkey 's heart sweet . The gharial complies at first and attempts to lure the monkey to his home , but soon comes clean about the plan . Their friendship ends after that . Similar stories exist in Native American legends , and in the African American folktale of an alligator and Br 'er Rabbit . 
 In a Malay folk tale , the mouse deer Sang Kancil wants to cross a river to reach the fruit trees on the far side , but Sang Buaya , a crocodile , is waiting in the river to eat him . Sang Kancil asks all the crocodiles to line up across the river so he can count them for the king , and makes them promise not to eat him as he counts . He then steps on their heads one by one , calling out " One ! Two ! Three ! " as he goes . When he reaches the far side , he thanks them for helping him cross the river , and feasts on fruit . Sang Buaya does not fare as well , since the other crocodiles are angry with him for letting Sang Kancil trick them . A legend from East Timor tells how a boy rescues a gigantic crocodile that becomes stranded . In return , the crocodile protects him for the rest of its life , and when it dies , its scaly ridged back becomes the hills of Timor . One Australian Dreamtime story tells of a crocodile ancestor who had fire all to himself . One day , a " rainbow bird " stole fire @-@ sticks from the crocodile and gave it to man . Hence the crocodile lives in water . 
 = = = In literature = = = 
 Ancient historians have described crocodilians from the earliest historical records , though often their descriptions contain as much legend as fact . The Ancient Greek historian Herodotus ( c . 440 BC ) described the crocodile in detail , though much of his description is fanciful ; he claimed that it would lie with its mouth open to permit a " trochilus " bird ( possibly an Egyptian plover ) to enter and remove any leeches it found . The crocodile was one of the beasts described in the late @-@ 13th century Rochester Bestiary , based on classical sources , including Pliny 's Historia naturalis ( c . 79 AD ) and Isidore of Seville 's Etymologies . Isidore asserts that the crocodile is named for its saffron colour ( Latin croceus , ' saffron ' ) , and that it is often twenty cubits ( 10 m ( 33 ft ) ) long . He further claimed that the crocodile may be killed by fish with serrated crests sawing into its soft underbelly , and that the male and female take turns guarding the eggs . 
 Crocodiles have been reputed to weep for their victims since the 9th century Bibliotheca by Photios I of Constantinople . The story was repeated in later accounts such as that of Bartholomeus Anglicus in the 13th century . It became widely known in 1400 when the English traveller Sir John Mandeville wrote his description of " <unk> " : 
 " In that country [ of Prester John ] and by all Ind [ India ] be great plenty of <unk> , that is a manner of a long serpent , as I have said before . And in the night they dwell in the water , and on the day upon the land , in rocks and in caves . And they eat no meat in all the winter , but they lie as in a dream , as do the serpents . These serpents slay men , and they eat them weeping ; and when they eat they move the over jaw , and not the nether jaw , and they have no tongue . " 
 William Shakespeare refers to crocodile tears in Othello ( Act IV , Scene i ) , Henry VI , Part 2 ( Act III , Scene i ) , and Antony and Cleopatra ( Act II , Scene vii ) . 
 Crocodilians , especially the crocodile , have been recurring characters in stories for children throughout the modern era . Lewis Carroll 's Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland ( 1865 ) contains the poem How Doth the Little Crocodile , a parody of a moralising poem by Isaac Watts , Against Idleness and Mischief . In J. M. Barrie 's novel Peter and Wendy ( 1911 ) , the character Captain Hook has lost his arm to the crocodile . Hook fears the crocodile , but is warned of its approach by the ticking of a clock which it has swallowed . In Rudyard Kipling 's Just So Stories ( 1902 ) , the Elephant 's Child acquires his trunk by having his ( short ) nose pulled very hard by the Crocodile " on the banks of the great grey @-@ green , greasy Limpopo river " . The newly elongated nose allows him to pick fruit instead of waiting for it to fall , and to do many other useful things . Roald Dahl 's The Enormous Crocodile ( 1978 ) , illustrated by Quentin Blake , tells how a crocodile wanders the jungle looking for children to eat , trying one trick after another . 
 = = = In sports and media = = = 
 Crocodilians are sometimes used as mascots for sports teams . The Canton Crocodiles were a baseball team in the Frontier League , while the University of Florida sport teams are known as the Florida Gators , in reference to the American alligator , and their mascots are Albert and Alberta Gator . In film and television , crocodilians are represented as dangerous obstacles in lakes and rivers , as in the 1986 Australian comedy film " Crocodile " Dundee , or as monstrous man @-@ eaters in horror films like Eaten Alive ( 1977 ) , Alligator ( 1980 ) , Lake Placid ( 1999 ) , Primeval ( 2007 ) , and Black Water ( 2007 ) . Some media have attempted to portray these reptiles in more positive or educational light , such as Steve Irwin 's wildlife documentary series The Crocodile Hunter . Crocodilians in animation include the Hanna @-@ Barbera character Wally Gator , and Ben Ali Gator from the Dance of the Hours segment of Disney 's 1940 film Fantasia . 
 = One World Trade Center = 
 One World Trade Center ( also known as the Freedom Tower , 1 World Trade Center , One WTC and 1 WTC ) is the main building of the rebuilt World Trade Center complex in Lower Manhattan , New York City . It is the tallest building in the Western Hemisphere , and the sixth @-@ tallest in the world . The supertall structure has the same name as the North Tower of the original World Trade Center , which was completely destroyed in the terrorist attacks of September 11 , 2001 . The new skyscraper stands on the northwest corner of the 16 @-@ acre ( 6 @.@ 5 ha ) World Trade Center site , on the site of the original 6 World Trade Center . The building is bounded by West Street to the west , Vesey Street to the north , Fulton Street to the south , and Washington Street to the east . 
 The building 's architect was David Childs , whose firm Skidmore , Owings & Merrill ( SOM ) also designed the Burj Khalifa and the Willis Tower . The construction of below @-@ ground utility relocations , footings , and foundations for the new building began on April 27 , 2006 . One World Trade Center became the tallest structure in New York City on April 30 , 2012 , when it surpassed the height of the Empire State Building . The tower 's steel structure was topped out on August 30 , 2012 . On May 10 , 2013 , the final component of the skyscraper 's spire was installed , making the building , including its spire , reach a total height of 1 @,@ 776 feet ( 541 m ) . Its height in feet is a deliberate reference to the year when the United States Declaration of Independence was signed . The building opened on November 3 , 2014 . 
 On March 30 , 2009 , the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey ( PANYNJ ) confirmed that the building would be officially known by its legal name of " One World Trade Center " , rather than its colloquial name of " Freedom Tower " . The building is 104 standard floors high , but the tower has only 94 actual stories . 
 The new World Trade Center complex will eventually include five high @-@ rise office buildings built along Greenwich Street , as well as the National September 11 Memorial & Museum , located just south of One World Trade Center where the original Twin Towers stood . The construction of the new building is part of an effort to memorialize and rebuild following the destruction of the original World Trade Center complex . 
 = = Original building ( 1970 – 2001 ) = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The construction of the World Trade Center , of which the Twin Towers ( One and Two World Trade Center ) were the centerpieces , was conceived as an urban renewal project and spearheaded by David Rockefeller . The project was intended to help revitalize Lower Manhattan . The project was planned by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey , which hired architect Minoru Yamasaki . Yamasaki came up with the idea of building twin towers . After extensive negotiations , the New Jersey and New York State governments , which supervise the Port Authority , consented to the construction of the World Trade Center at the Radio Row site , located in the lower @-@ west area of Manhattan . To satisfy the New Jersey government , the Port Authority agreed to buy the bankrupt Hudson & Manhattan Railroad ( renamed to Port Authority Trans @-@ Hudson ) , which transported commuters from New Jersey to Lower Manhattan . 
 The towers were designed as framed tube structures , giving tenants open floor plans , unobstructed by columns or walls . This design was accomplished by using many closely spaced perimeter columns , providing much of structure 's strength , with the gravity load shared with the core columns . The elevator system , which made use of sky lobbies and a system of express and local elevators , allowed substantial floor space to be used for office purposes by making the structural core smaller . The design and construction of the towers involved many other innovative techniques , such as wind tunnel experiments and the slurry wall for digging the foundation . 
 Construction of the North Tower ( One World Trade Center ) began in August 1966 ; extensive use of prefabricated components sped up the construction process . The first tenants moved into the North Tower in December 1970 . In the 1970s , four other low @-@ level buildings were built as part of the World Trade Center complex . A seventh building was built in the mid @-@ 1980s . 
 = = = Specifications and operations = = = 
 After Seven World Trade Center was built in the 1980s , the World Trade Center complex had a total of seven buildings ; however , the most notable ones were the main Twin Towers built in the 1970s — One World Trade Center was the North Tower , and Two World Trade Center was the South Tower . Each tower was over 1 @,@ 350 feet ( 410 m ) high , and occupied about 1 acre ( 0 @.@ 40 ha ) of the total 16 acres ( 6 @.@ 5 ha ) of the site 's land . During a press conference in 1973 , Yamasaki was asked , " Why two 110 @-@ story buildings ? Why not one 220 @-@ story building ? " His response was , " I didn 't want to lose the human scale . " 
 When completed in 1972 , One World Trade Center became the tallest building in the world for two years , surpassing the Empire State Building , which had held the record for 40 years . The North Tower was 1 @,@ 368 feet ( 417 m ) tall , and in 1978 , a telecommunications antenna was added to the top of the roof ; by itself , the antenna was 360 feet ( 110 m ) tall . With the 360 @-@ foot ( 110 m ) -tall antenna , the highest point of the North Tower reached 1 @,@ 728 ft ( 527 m ) . The tower held its record for a brief period of time ; Chicago 's Sears Tower , finished in May 1973 , was 1 @,@ 450 feet ( 440 m ) at the rooftop . At 110 floors , the World Trade Center towers had more floors than any other building at that time . This number was not surpassed until the construction of the Burj Khalifa ( 163 floors ) , which opened in 2010 . 
 Of the 110 stories , eight were set aside as mechanical floors ( floors 7 / 8 , 41 / 42 , 75 / 76 , and 108 / 109 ) , which were four two @-@ floor areas that were spaced up the building in even intervals . All the remaining floors were open for tenants . Each floor of the tower had 40 @,@ 000 square feet ( 3 @,@ 700 m2 ) of available space . The North and South tower had 3 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 square feet ( 350 @,@ 000 m2 ) of total office space . The entire complex of seven buildings had a combined total of 13 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 square feet ( 1 @,@ 240 @,@ 000 m2 ) of office space . 
 The complex initially failed to attract the expected clientele . During the early years , various governmental organizations became key tenants of the World Trade Center , such as the State of New York . In the 1980s , the city 's perilous financial condition eased , after which an increasing number of private companies — mostly financial firms related to Wall Street — became tenants . During the 1990s , approximately 500 companies had offices in the complex , including financial companies such as Morgan Stanley , Aon Corporation , and Salomon Brothers . The basement concourse of the World Trade Center included The Mall at the World Trade Center , and a PATH station . The North Tower became the main corporate headquarters of Cantor Fitzgerald , and it also became the headquarters of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey . 
 The tower 's electrical service was supplied by Consolidated Edison ( <unk> ) at 13 @,@ 800 volts . The electricity passed through the World Trade Center Primary Distribution Center ( PDC ) , and was then sent up the building 's core to electrical substations located on the mechanical floors . The substations lowered the 13 @,@ 800 primary voltage to 480 / 277 volts , and the voltage was then further lowered to 208 / 120 volts for general power and lighting services . The complex was also served by emergency generators located in the sub @-@ levels of the towers and on the roof of Five World Trade Center . 
 The 110th floor of One World Trade Center ( the North Tower ) housed radio and television transmission equipment . The roof of the North Tower contained a vast array of transmission antennas , including the 360 feet ( 110 m ) center antenna mast , rebuilt by Dielectric Inc. to support <unk> in 1999 . The center mast contained the television signals for almost all NYC television broadcasters : WCBS @-@ TV 2 , WNBC @-@ TV 4 , WNYW 5 , WABC @-@ TV 7 , WWOR @-@ TV 9 Secaucus , WPIX 11 , WNET 13 Newark , <unk> @-@ TV 31 and <unk> 47 Linden . It also had four NYC FM broadcasters : <unk> @-@ FM 93 @.@ 1 , WNYC 93 @.@ 9 , WKCR 89 @.@ 9 , and WKTU 103 @.@ 5 . Access to the roof was controlled by the WTC Operations Control Center ( OCC ) , located in the B1 level of the South Tower . After the September 11 attacks of 2001 , the broadcasting equipment for the radio and television stations was moved to the Empire State Building . 
 On a typical weekday , a combined total of 50 @,@ 000 people worked in the North and South Towers , with another 200 @,@ 000 passing through as visitors . The complex was so large that it had its own zip code : <unk> . The Windows on the World restaurant , located on top of the North Tower , reported revenues of $ 37 million in 2000 , making it the highest @-@ grossing restaurant in the United States . The Twin Towers became known worldwide , appearing in movies , television shows , postcards , and other merchandise . The towers came to be seen as a New York City icon , much like the Empire State Building , the Chrysler Building , and the Statue of Liberty . 
 = = = Incidents = = = 
 On February 13 , 1975 , a three @-@ alarm fire broke out on the 11th floor of the North Tower . Fire spread through the core of the building to the 9th and 14th floors , as the insulation for telephone cables , located in a utility shaft that ran vertically between floors , had been ignited . Areas most affected by the fire were extinguished almost immediately , and the original fire was put out in a few hours . Most of the damage was on the 11th floor , where the fire was fueled by cabinets filled with paper , alcohol @-@ based fluid for office machines , and other office equipment . Fireproofing protected the steel , and there was no structural damage to the tower . In addition to the fire damage on the 9th and 14th floors , water used to extinguish the fire damaged a few floors below . At the time , the World Trade Center complex had no fire sprinkler systems . 
 The first terrorist attack on the World Trade Center occurred on February 26 , 1993 , at 12 : 17 p.m. , when a Ryder truck filled with 1 @,@ 500 pounds ( 680 kg ) of explosives , planted by Ramzi Yousef , detonated in the underground garage of the North Tower . The blast resulted in a 100 feet ( 30 m ) hole through five <unk> . The greatest damage was on levels B1 and B2 , with significant structural damage on level B3 . Six people were killed , and more than a thousand were injured , as 50 @,@ 000 workers and visitors were inside the tower at the time . Many people inside the North Tower were forced to walk down darkened stairwells that had no emergency lighting , and some took two hours or more to reach safety . 
 = = = September 11 attacks = = = 
 At 8 : 46 a.m. ( EDT ) on September 11 , 2001 , five hijackers affiliated with al @-@ Qaeda crashed American Airlines Flight 11 into the northern facade of the North Tower . Seventeen minutes later , at 9 : 03 a.m. ( EDT ) , a second group of terrorists crashed the hijacked United Airlines Flight 175 into the southern facade of the South Tower , striking between the 77th and 85th floors . 
 By 9 : 59 a.m. ( EDT ) , the South Tower collapsed after burning for approximately 56 minutes . After burning for 102 minutes , the North Tower collapsed due to structural failure at 10 : 28 a.m. ( EDT ) When the North Tower collapsed , debris fell on the nearby 7 World Trade Center , damaging it and starting fires . The fires burned for hours , compromising the building 's structural integrity . Seven World Trade Center collapsed at 5 : 21 p.m. ( EDT ) 
 Together with a simultaneous attack on the Pentagon in Arlington , Virginia , and a failed plane hijacking that resulted in a plane crash in Shanksville , Pennsylvania , the attacks resulted in the deaths of 2 @,@ 996 people ( 2 @,@ 507 civilians , 343 firefighters , 72 law enforcement officers , 55 military personnel , and the 19 hijackers ) . More than 90 % of the workers and visitors who died in the towers had been at or above the points of impact . In the North Tower , 1 @,@ 355 people at or above the point of impact were trapped , and died of smoke inhalation , fell , jumped from the tower to escape the smoke and flames , or were killed when the building eventually collapsed . One stairwell in the South Tower , Stairwell A , somehow avoided complete destruction , unlike the rest of the building . When Flight 11 hit , all three staircases in the North Tower above the impact zone were destroyed , thus making it impossible for anyone above the impact zone to escape . 107 people below the point of impact also died . 
 = = Current building = = 
 = = = Planning and early development = = = 
 Following the destruction of the original World Trade Center , there was debate regarding the future of the World Trade Center site . There were proposals for its reconstruction almost immediately , and by 2002 , the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation had organized a competition to determine how to use the site . The proposals were part of a larger plan to memorialize the September 11 attacks and rebuild the complex . When the public rejected the first round of designs , a second , more open competition took place in December 2002 , in which a design by Daniel Libeskind was selected as the winner . This design went through many revisions , mainly because of disagreements with developer Larry Silverstein , who held the lease to the World Trade Center site at that time . 
 There was criticism concerning the limited number of floors that were designated for office space and other amenities in an early plan . Only 82 floors would have been habitable , and the total office space of the rebuilt World Trade Center complex would have been reduced by more than 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 square feet ( 280 @,@ 000 m2 ) in comparison with the original complex . The floor limit was imposed by Silverstein , who expressed concern that higher floors would be a liability in the event of a future terrorist attack or other incident . Much of the building 's height would have consisted of a large , open @-@ air steel lattice structure on the roof of the tower , containing wind turbines and " sky gardens " . In a subsequent design , the highest occupiable floor became comparable to the original World Trade Center , and the open @-@ air lattice was removed from the plans . In 2002 , former New York Governor George Pataki faced accusations of cronyism for supposedly using his influence to get the winning architect 's design picked as a personal favor for his friend and campaign contributor , Ron Lauder . 
 A final design for the " Freedom Tower " was formally unveiled on June 28 , 2005 . To address security issues raised by the New York City Police Department , a 187 @-@ foot ( 57 m ) concrete base was added to the design in April of that year . The design originally included plans to clad the base in glass prisms in order to address criticism that the building might have looked uninviting and resembled a " concrete bunker " . However , the prisms were later found to be unworkable , as preliminary testing revealed that the prismatic glass easily shattered into large and dangerous shards . As a result , it was replaced by a simpler facade consisting of stainless steel panels and blast @-@ resistant glass . 
 Contrasting with Libeskind 's original plan , the tower 's final design tapers octagonally as it rises . Its designers stated that the tower would be a " monolithic glass structure reflecting the sky and topped by a sculpted antenna . " In 2006 , Larry Silverstein commented on a planned completion date : " By 2012 we should have a completely rebuilt World Trade Center , more magnificent , more spectacular than it ever was . " On April 26 , 2006 , the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey approved a conceptual framework that allowed foundation construction to begin . A formal agreement was drafted the following day , the 75th anniversary of the 1931 opening of the Empire State Building . Construction began in May ; a formal groundbreaking ceremony took place when the first construction team arrived . 
 = = = Construction and later development = = = 
 The symbolic cornerstone of One World Trade Center was laid in a ceremony on July 4 , 2004 . The stone had an inscription supposedly written by Arthur J. Finkelstein . However , construction was delayed until 2006 due to disputes over money , security , and design . The last major issues were resolved on April 26 , 2006 , when a deal was made between developer Larry Silverstein and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey , so the cornerstone was temporarily removed from the site on June 23 , 2006 . Soon after , explosives were detonated at the construction site for two months to clear bedrock for the building 's foundation , onto which 400 cubic yards ( 310 cubic meters ) of concrete was poured by November 2007 . 
 In a December 18 , 2006 , ceremony held in nearby Battery Park City , members of the public were invited to sign the first 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) steel beam installed onto the building 's base . It was welded onto the building 's base on December 19 , 2006 . Foundation and steel installation began shortly afterward , so the tower 's footings and foundation were nearly complete within a year . 
 In January 2008 , two cranes were moved onto the site . Construction of the tower 's concrete core , which began after the cranes arrived , reached street level by May 17 . However , construction of the base was not finished until two years later , after which construction of the office floors began , and the first glass windows were subsequently installed ; during 2010 , floors were constructed at a rate of about one per week . An advanced " cocoon " scaffolding system was installed to protect workers from falling , and was the first such safety system installed on a steel structure in the city . The tower reached 52 floors and was over 600 feet ( 180 m ) tall by December 2010 . The tower 's steel frame was halfway complete by then , but grew to 82 floors by the tenth anniversary of the September 11 attacks , at which time its concrete flooring had reached 72 floors and the glass cladding had reached 56 floors . 
 In 2009 , the Port Authority changed the official name of the building from " Freedom Tower " to " One World Trade Center " , stating that this name was the " easiest for people to identify with . " The change came after board members of the Port Authority voted to sign a 21 @-@ year lease deal with Vantone Industrial Co . , a Chinese real estate company , which will become the building 's first commercial tenant . Vantone plans to create the China Center , a trade and cultural facility , covering 191 @,@ 000 square feet on floors 64 through 69 . 
 Detailed floor plans of the tower were posted on the New York City 's Department of Finance website in May 2011 , resulting in an uproar from the media and citizens of the surrounding area , who warned that the plans could potentially be used for a future terrorist attack . 
