 = Reading , Berkshire = 
 Reading ( / <unk> / RED @-@ ing ) is a large town and unitary authority area in the ceremonial county of Berkshire , England . It was an important centre in the medieval period , as the site of Reading Abbey , a monastery with strong royal connections . The town was seriously affected by the English Civil War , with a major siege and loss of trade , and played a pivotal role in the Revolution of 1688 , with that revolution 's only significant military action fought on the streets of the town . The 19th century saw the coming of the Great Western Railway and the development of the town 's brewing , baking and seed growing businesses . Today Reading is a commercial centre , with involvement in information technology and insurance , and , despite its proximity to London , has a net inward commuter flow . 
 The first evidence for Reading as a settlement dates from the 8th century . By 1525 , Reading was the largest town in Berkshire , and tax returns show that Reading was the 10th largest town in England when measured by taxable wealth . By 1611 , it had a population of over 5000 and had grown rich on its trade in cloth . The 18th century saw the beginning of a major iron works in the town and the growth of the brewing trade for which Reading was to become famous . During the 19th century , the town grew rapidly as a manufacturing centre . It is ranked the UK 's top economic area for economic success and wellbeing , according to factors such as employment , health , income and skills . Reading is also a retail centre serving a large area of the Thames Valley , and is home to the University of Reading . Every year it hosts the Reading Festival , one of England 's biggest music festivals . Sporting teams based in Reading include Reading Football Club and the London Irish rugby union team , and over 15 @,@ 000 runners annually compete in the Reading Half Marathon . 
 The Borough of Reading has a population of 155 @,@ 698 ( 2011 census ) and the town formed the largest part of the Reading / Wokingham Urban Area which had a population of 318 @,@ 014 ( 2011 census ) . The town is currently represented in the UK parliament by two members , and has been continuously represented there since 1295 . For ceremonial purposes the town is in the county of Berkshire and has served as its county town since 1867 , previously sharing this status with Abingdon @-@ on @-@ Thames . It is located in the Thames Valley at the confluence of the River Thames and River Kennet , and on both the Great Western Main Line railway and the M4 motorway . By the national road network , Reading is located 40 miles ( 64 km ) east from Swindon , 27 miles ( 43 km ) south from Oxford , 41 miles ( 66 km ) west of central London , and 16 miles ( 26 km ) north from Basingstoke . 
 = = History = = 
 Reading may date back to the Roman occupation of Britain , possibly as a trading port for Calleva Atrebatum . However the first clear evidence for Reading as a settlement dates from the 8th century , when the town came to be known as <unk> . The name probably comes from the <unk> , an Anglo @-@ Saxon tribe whose name means <unk> 's People in Old English , or less probably the Celtic <unk> @-@ Inge , meaning Ford over the River . In late 870 , an army of Danes invaded the kingdom of Wessex and set up camp at Reading . On 4 January 871 , in the first Battle of Reading , King Ethelred and his brother Alfred the Great attempted unsuccessfully to breach the Danes ' defences . The battle is described in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , and that account provides the earliest known written record of the existence of Reading . The Danes remained in Reading until late in 871 , when they retreated to their winter quarters in London . 
 After the Battle of Hastings and the Norman conquest of England , William the Conqueror gave land in and around Reading to his foundation of Battle Abbey . In its 1086 Domesday Book listing , the town was explicitly described as a borough . The presence of six mills is recorded : four on land belonging to the king and two on the land given to Battle Abbey . Reading Abbey was founded in 1121 by Henry I , who is buried within the Abbey grounds . As part of his endowments , he gave the abbey his lands in Reading , along with land at Cholsey . It is not known how badly Reading was affected by the Black Death that swept through England in the 14th century , but it is known that the abbot of Reading Abbey , Henry of Appleford , was one of its victims in 1361 , and that nearby Henley lost 60 % of its population . The Abbey was largely destroyed in 1538 during Henry VIII 's dissolution of the monasteries . The last abbot , Hugh Cook Faringdon , was subsequently tried and convicted of high treason and hanged , drawn and quartered in front of the Abbey Church . 
 By 1525 , Reading was the largest town in Berkshire , and tax returns show that Reading was the 10th largest town in England when measured by taxable wealth . By 1611 , it had a population of over 5000 and had grown rich on its trade in cloth , as instanced by the fortune made by local merchant John Kendrick . Reading played an important role during the English Civil War . Despite its fortifications , it had a Royalist garrison imposed on it in 1642 . The subsequent Siege of Reading by Parliamentary forces succeeded in April 1643 . The town 's cloth trade was especially badly damaged , and the town 's economy did not fully recover until the 20th century . Reading played a significant role during the Revolution of 1688 : the second Battle of Reading was the only substantial military action of the campaign . 
 The 18th century saw the beginning of a major iron works in the town and the growth of the brewing trade for which Reading was to become famous . Reading 's trade benefited from better designed turnpike roads which helped it establish its location on the major coaching routes from London to Oxford and the West Country . In 1723 , despite considerable local opposition , the Kennet Navigation opened the River Kennet to boats as far as Newbury . Opposition stopped when it became apparent that the new route benefited the town . After the opening of the Kennet and Avon Canal in 1810 , one could go by barge from Reading to the Bristol Channel . From 1714 , and probably earlier , the role of county town of Berkshire was shared between Reading and Abingdon . 
 During the 19th century , the town grew rapidly as a manufacturing centre . The Great Western Railway arrived in 1841 , followed by the South Eastern Railway in 1849 and the London and South Western Railway in 1856 . The Summer Assizes were moved from Abingdon to Reading in 1867 , effectively making Reading the sole county town of Berkshire , a decision that was officially approved by the Privy Council in 1869 . The town became a county borough under the Local Government Act 1888 . The town has been famous for the Three Bs of beer ( 1785 – 2010 , Simonds ' Brewery ) , bulbs ( 1837 – 1974 , Suttons Seeds ) , and biscuits ( 1822 – 1976 , Huntley and Palmers ) . 
 The town continued to expand in the 20th century , annexing Caversham across the River Thames in Oxfordshire in 1911 . Compared to many other English towns and cities , Reading suffered little physical damage during either of the two World Wars that afflicted the 20th century , although many citizens were killed or injured in the conflicts . One significant air raid occurred on 10 February 1943 , when a single Luftwaffe plane machine @-@ gunned and bombed the town centre , resulting in 41 deaths and over 100 injuries . The Lower Earley development , built in 1977 , was one of the largest private housing developments in Europe . It extended the urban area of Reading as far as the M4 motorway , which acts as the southern boundary of the town . Further housing developments have increased the number of modern houses and hypermarkets in the outskirts of Reading . A major town @-@ centre shopping centre , The Oracle , opened in 1999 , is named after the 17th century Oracle workhouse , which once occupied a small part of the site . It provides three storeys of shopping space and boosted the local economy by providing 4 @,@ 000 jobs . 
 As one of the largest urban areas in the United Kingdom to be without city status , Reading has bid for city status on three recent occasions — in 2000 to celebrate the new millennium ; in 2002 to celebrate the Golden Jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II ; and 2012 to celebrate the Diamond Jubilee . All three bids were unsuccessful . 
 = = Government = = 
 Local government for the town of Reading is principally provided by Reading Borough Council , a single level unitary authority without civil parishes . However some of the town 's outer suburbs are in West Berkshire and Wokingham unitary authorities . These outer suburbs belong to civil parishes , in some cases with their own town status . Reading has elected at least one Member of Parliament to every Parliament since 1295 . Historically , Reading was represented by the members for the Parliamentary Borough of Reading , and the parliamentary constituencies of Reading , Reading North , and Reading South . Since the 2010 general election , Reading and its surrounding area has been divided between the parliamentary constituencies of Reading East and Reading West . The whole of the town is within the multi @-@ member South East England European constituency . 
 Reading is the site of both a Crown Court , administering criminal justice , and a County Court , responsible for civil cases . Lesser matters are dealt with in a local Magistrates ' Court . 
 Reading has had some degree of local government autonomy since 1253 , when the local merchant guild was granted a royal charter . Since then , the town has been run by a borough corporation , as a county borough , and as a district of Berkshire . The Borough of Reading became a unitary authority area in 1998 , when Berkshire County Council was abolished under the Banham Review , and is now responsible for all aspects of local government within the borough . 
 Prior to the 16th century , civic administration for the town of Reading was situated in the Yield Hall , a guild hall situated by the River Kennet near today 's Yield Hall Lane . After a brief stay in what later became Greyfriars Church , the town council created a new town hall by inserting an upper floor into the refectory of the Hospitium of St John , the former <unk> of Reading Abbey . For some 400 years up to the 1970s , this was to remain the site of Reading 's civic administration through the successive rebuilds that eventually created today 's Town Hall . In 1976 , Reading Borough Council moved to the new Civic Centre . 
 The government of the Borough of Reading follows the leader and cabinet model . Following the 2011 local elections , a Labour minority administration replaced the previous Conservative @-@ Liberal Democrat coalition on the casting vote of the mayor . The borough also has a ( largely ceremonial ) mayor . Cllr Sarah Hacker has been the mayor of Reading since May 2015 . 
 Since 1887 , the borough has included the former villages of Southcote and Whitley and small parts of Earley and Tilehurst . By 1911 , it also encompassed the Oxfordshire village of Caversham and still more of Tilehurst . A small area of <unk> parish was added in 1977 . An attempt to take over a small area of Eye and <unk> parish in Oxfordshire was rejected because of strong local opposition in 1997 . Today the borough itself is unparished , and the wards used to elect the borough councillors generally ignore the old parish boundaries and use invented ward names . 
 Reading 's municipal boundaries do not include all of the surrounding suburbs , some of which ( Tilehurst , Calcot , Earley and Woodley ) are , at least partly within West Berkshire or Wokingham Borough . This unusual configuration creates difficulties . The diminishing amount of land available and suitable for development within the borough 's boundary can bring the council into conflict with its neighbours ' development plans . This particularly affects education ( many schools have catchment areas that cross administrative boundaries ) , and transport . A perennial example is whether to construct a third road crossing of the Thames , which South Oxfordshire 's politicians and residents oppose . On this subject , Rob Wilson , MP for Reading East , said in a House of Commons debate in January 2006 : 
 " However , the process has been painfully slow and it appears that , for every two steps forwards , there are three steps backwards — mainly because of the view of South Oxfordshire district council , which is being incredibly parochial about this matter . Meanwhile , Reading Borough Council is adopting strategies that prioritise local traffic in Reading , obviously to the detriment of through traffic . We have now reached the point at which we desperately need direct Government intervention to break the logjam between those local authorities . " 
 = = Geography = = 
 <unk> the crow flies ' Reading is 36 miles ( 58 km ) due west of central London , 24 miles ( 39 km ) southeast of Oxford , 70 miles ( 110 km ) east of Bristol , and 50 miles ( 80 km ) north of the English south coast . The centre of Reading is on a low ridge between the River Thames and River Kennet , close to their confluence , reflecting the town 's history as a river port . Just above the confluence , the Kennet cuts through a narrow steep @-@ sided gap in the hills forming the southern flank of the Thames floodplain . The absence of a floodplain on the Kennet in this defile enabled the development of wharves . 
 As Reading has grown , its suburbs have spread : to the west between the two rivers into the foothills of the Berkshire Downs as far as Calcot , Tilehurst and Purley ; to the south and south @-@ east on the south side of the Kennet as far as Whitley Wood , Lower Earley and Woodley ; and to the north of the Thames into the Chiltern Hills as far as Caversham Heights , Emmer Green and Caversham Park Village . Outside the central area , the floors of the valleys containing the two rivers remain largely unimproved floodplain . Apart from the M4 curving to the south there is only one road across the Kennet floodplain . All other routes between the three built @-@ up areas are in the central area , which is a cause of road congestion there . 
 The floodplains adjoining Reading 's two rivers are subject to occasional flooding . However , in the 2007 floods that affected much of the UK , no properties were affected by flooding from the Thames and only four properties were affected by flooding from the Kennet . 
 Depending on the definition adopted , neither the town nor the urban area are necessarily coterminous with the borough . Historically , the town of Reading was smaller than the borough . Definitions include the old ecclesiastical parishes of the churches of St Mary , St Laurence and St Giles , or the even smaller pre @-@ 19th century borough . Today , as well as the town centre Reading comprises a number of suburbs and other districts , both within the borough itself and within the surrounding urban area . The names and location of these suburbs are in general usage but , except where some of the outer suburbs correspond to civil parishes , there are no formally defined boundaries . The Reading urban area , sometimes referred to as Greater Reading , incorporates the town 's eastern and western suburbs outside the borough , in the civil parishes of Earley , Woodley , Purley and Tilehurst . 
 Like the rest of the United Kingdom , Reading has a maritime climate , with limited seasonal temperature ranges and generally moderate rainfall throughout the year . The nearest official Met Office weather station is located at the Reading University Atmospheric Observatory on the Whiteknights Campus , which has recorded atmospheric measurements and meteorological observations since 1970 . The local absolute maximum temperature of 36 @.@ 4 ° C ( 97 @.@ 5 ° F ) was recorded in August 2003 and the local absolute minimum temperature of − 14 @.@ 5 ° C ( 5 @.@ 9 ° F ) was recorded in January 1982 . 
 = = Demography = = 
 The borough has a population of 160 @,@ 825 and a population density of 3 @,@ 981 per square kilometre ( 10 @,@ 311 / sq mi ) ( mid @-@ 2014 est . ) , while the Office for National Statistics ' definition of the urban sub @-@ division of Reading is significantly larger at 218 @,@ 705 people in an area of 51 @.@ 14 square kilometres ( 19 @.@ 75 sq mi ) . This urban subdivision is itself a component of the Reading / Wokingham Urban Area with a population of 318 @,@ 014 ( 2011 census ) , and is the most populous town in the United Kingdom not to have city status . 
 According to the 2011 census , 74 @.@ 8 % of the population were described as White ( 65 @.@ 3 % White British ) , 9 @.@ 1 % as South Asian , 6 @.@ 7 % as Black , 3 @.@ 9 % Mixed Race , 4 @.@ 5 % as Chinese and 0 @.@ 9 % as other ethnic group . In 2010 it was reported that Reading has 150 different spoken languages within its population . Reading has a large Polish community , which dates back over 30 years , and in October 2006 the Reading Chronicle printed 5 @,@ 000 copies of a Polish edition called the <unk> Reading . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Reading is an important commercial centre in the Thames Valley and Southern England . The town hosts the headquarters of several British companies and the UK offices of foreign multinationals , as well as being a major retail centre . Whilst located close enough to London to be sometimes regarded as part of the London commuter belt , Reading is a net inward destination for commuters . During the morning peak period , there are some 30 @,@ 000 inward arrivals in the town , compared to 24 @,@ 000 departures . 
 Major companies BG Group , ING Direct , Microsoft , Oracle <unk> ( formerly Yell Group ) , have their headquarters in Reading . The insurance company Prudential has an administration centre in the town . PepsiCo and Wrigley have offices . Reading has a significant historical involvement in the information technology industry , largely as a result of the early presence in the town of sites of International Computers Limited and Digital . Other technology companies with a significant presence in the town include <unk> Technologies , Cisco , Ericsson , Symantec , Verizon Business , and <unk> These companies are distributed around Reading or just outside the borough boundary , some in business parks including Thames Valley Park in nearby Earley , Green Park Business Park and Arlington Business Park . 
 Reading town centre is a major shopping centre . In 2007 , an independent poll placed Reading 16th in a league table of best performing retail centres in the UK . The main shopping street is Broad Street , which runs between The Oracle in the east and Broad Street Mall in the west and was pedestrianised in 1995 . The smaller Friars Walk in Friar Street is derelict and will be demolished if the proposed Station Hill redevelopment project goes ahead . There are three major department stores in Reading : John Lewis Reading ( formerly known as Heelas ) , Debenhams and House of Fraser . The Broad Street branch of bookseller Waterstone 's is a conversion of a nonconformist chapel dating from 1707 . Besides the two major shopping malls , Reading has three smaller shopping arcades , the Bristol and West Arcade , Harris Arcade and The Walk , which contain smaller specialist stores . An older form of retail facility is represented by Union Street , popularly known as Smelly Alley . Reading has no indoor market , but there is a street market in Hosier Street . A farmers ' market operates on two Saturdays a month . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Every year Reading hosts the Reading Festival , which has been running since 1971 . The festival takes place on the Friday , Saturday and Sunday of the August bank holiday weekend and is the largest of its kind in the UK aside from the Glastonbury Festival . For some twenty years until 2006 , Reading was also known for its WOMAD Festival until it moved to Charlton Park in Malmesbury , Wiltshire . The Reading Beer Festival was first held in 1994 and has now grown to one of the largest beer festivals in the UK . It is held at King 's Meadow for the five days immediately preceding the May Day bank holiday every year . Reading also holds Reading Pride , an annual <unk> festival in Kings Meadow . 
 The Frank Matcham @-@ designed Royal County Theatre , built in 1895 , was located on the south side of Friar Street . It burned down in 1937 . Within the town hall is a 700 @-@ seat concert hall that houses a Father Willis organ . Reading theatre venues include The Hexagon and South Street Arts Centre . Amateur theatre venues in Reading include Progress Theatre , a self @-@ governing , self @-@ funding theatre group and registered charity founded in 1947 that operates and maintains its own 97 @-@ seat theatre . 
 The demonym for a person from Reading is <unk> , giving the name of the local rugby team <unk> , based in Sonning , and of former members of Reading School . An alternative demonym is <unk> . 
 = = = Cultural references = = = 
 Jane Austen attended Reading Ladies Boarding School , based in the Abbey Gateway , in 1784 – 86 . 
 Mary Russell Mitford lived in Reading for a number of years and then spent the rest of her life just outside the town at Three Mile Cross and Swallowfield . The fictional Belford Regis of her eponymous novel , first published in 1835 , is largely based on Reading . Described with topographical accuracy , it is still possible to follow the steps of the novel 's characters in present @-@ day Reading . 
 Reading also appears in the works of Thomas Hardy where it is called ' <unk> ' . It features most heavily in his final novel , Jude the Obscure , as the temporary home of Jude Fawley and Sue <unk> . 
 Oscar Wilde was imprisoned in Reading Gaol from 1895 – 97 . While there , he wrote his letter De Profundis . After his release , he lived in exile in France and wrote The Ballad of Reading Gaol , based on his experience of the execution of Charles Wooldridge , carried out in Reading Gaol whilst he was imprisoned there . 
 Ricky Gervais , who is from Reading , made the film Cemetery Junction , which , although filmed elsewhere in the UK , is set in 1970s Reading and is named after a busy junction in East Reading . 
 Jasper Fforde 's Nursery Crimes Division novels , The Big Over Easy and The Fourth Bear are also placed in Reading , Berkshire . 
 BBC Two Sitcom Beautiful People based on the memoirs of Simon Doonan is set in Reading in the late 1990s . 
 = = = Landmarks = = = 
 The Maiwand Lion in Forbury Gardens , an unofficial symbol of Reading , commemorates the 328 officers of the Royal Berkshire Regiment who died in the Battle of Maiwand in 1880 . The Blade , a fourteen @-@ storey building completed in 2009 , is 128 m ( 420 ft ) tall and can be seen from the surrounding area . Jacksons Corner with its prominent sign , former home of Jacksons department store , occupies the corner of Kings Road and High Street , just south of the Market Place . 
 Reading has five Grade I listed buildings , 22 Grade II * and 853 Grade II buildings , in a wide variety of architectural styles that range from the medieval to the 21st century . The Grade I listed buildings are Reading Abbey , the Abbey Gateway , Greyfriars Church , St Laurence 's Church , and Reading Minster . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Reading has a local newspaper , the Reading Chronicle , published on Thursdays . The town 's other local newspaper , the Reading Post , ceased publication on paper in December 2014 , in order transition to an online only format under the title <unk> . An online magazine , Alt Reading , publishes articles focusing on arts , entertainment and culture in Reading . A local publishing company , the Two Rivers Press , has published over 70 book titles , many on the topic of local history and art . 
 Three local radio stations broadcast from Reading : BBC Radio Berkshire , Jack FM Berkshire and Heart Thames Valley . Other local radio stations , such as London 's 95 @.@ 8 Capital FM , Basingstoke 's The Breeze and East Berkshire 's Time 106 @.@ 6 , can also be received . Local television news programmes are the BBC 's South Today and ITV 's Meridian Tonight . 
 = = Public services = = 
 Reading has over 100 parks and playgrounds , including 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) of riverside paths . In the town centre is Forbury Gardens , a public park built on the site of the outer court of Reading Abbey . The largest public park in Reading is Prospect Park , previously an estate owned by Frances Kendrick and acquired by the Reading Corporation in 1901 . 
 The principal National Health Service ( NHS ) hospital in Reading is the Royal Berkshire Hospital , founded in 1839 and much enlarged and rebuilt since . A second major NHS general hospital , the Battle Hospital , closed in 2005 . Berkshire Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust runs a NHS hospital , Prospect Park Hospital , that specialises in the provision of care for people with mental health and learning disabilities . Reading has three private hospitals , the Berkshire Independent Hospital in Coley Park , the Dunedin Hospital situated on the main A4 Bath Road , and the Circle Hospital at Kennet Island . 
 The Reading Borough Public Library service dates back to 1877 . Initially housed in Reading Town Hall , the central branch of the library relocated in 1985 to a new building on King 's Road . 
 Mains water and sewerage services are supplied by Thames Water Utilities Limited , a private sector water supply company , whilst water abstraction and disposal is regulated by the Environment Agency . Reading 's water supply is largely derived from underground aquifers , and as a consequence the water is hard . 
 The commercial energy supplier for electricity and gas is at the consumer 's choice . Southern Electric runs the local electricity distribution network , while SGN runs the gas distribution network . A notable part of the local energy infrastructure is the presence of a 2 @-@ megawatt ( peak ) <unk> wind turbine at Green Park Business Park , wired to the local sub @-@ grid . It has the potential to produce 3 @.@ 5 million units of electricity a year , enough to power over a thousand homes . 
 The dialling code for fixed @-@ line telephones in Reading is <unk> . BT provides fixed @-@ line telephone coverage throughout the town and ADSL broadband internet connection to most areas . Parts of Reading are cabled by Virgin Media , supplying cable television , telephone and broadband internet connections . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Reading 's location in the Thames Valley to the west of London has made the town an important location in the nation 's transport system . 
 The town grew up as a river port at the confluence of the Thames and the Kennet . Both of these rivers are navigable , and Caversham Lock , Blake 's Lock , County Lock , Fobney Lock and Southcote Lock are all within the borough . Today , navigation is exclusively for purposes of leisure : private and hire boats dominate traffic , while scheduled boat services operate on the Thames from wharves on the Reading side of the river near Caversham Bridge . 
 Reading was a major staging point on the old Bath Road ( A4 ) from London to Avonmouth , near Bristol . This road still carries local traffic , but has now been replaced for long distance traffic by the M4 motorway , which closely skirts the borough and serves it with three junctions , <unk> @-@ <unk> . Other main roads serving Reading include the A33 , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Within Reading there is the Inner Distribution Road ( IDR ) , a ring road for local traffic . The IDR is linked with the M4 by the A33 relief road . National Express Coaches run out of Reading <unk> , at Junction 12 of the M4 . The Thames is crossed by both Reading and Caversham road bridges , while several road bridges cross the Kennet , the oldest surviving one of which is High Bridge . 
 Reading is a major junction point of the National Rail system , and hence Reading station is a major transfer point and terminus . In a project that finished in 2015 , Reading station was redeveloped at a cost of £ <unk> , with grade separation of some conflicting traffic flows , and extra platforms , to relieve severe congestion at this station . Railway lines link Reading to both Paddington and Waterloo stations in London . Other stations in the Reading area are Reading West , Tilehurst and Earley . Green Park railway station is planned on the Reading to Basingstoke Line to serve Green Park Business Park . 
 There have been two airfields in or near Reading , one at Coley Park and one at Woodley , but they have both closed . The nearest airport is London Heathrow , 25 miles ( 40 km ) away by road . An express bus service named <unk> links Reading with Heathrow , or the airport can be accessed by rail by taking the Paddington train and changing to the Heathrow Connect rail service at Hayes and Harlington railway station . 
 Today local public transport is largely by road , which is often affected by peak hour congestion in the borough . A frequent local bus network within the borough , and a less frequent network in the surrounding area , are provided by Reading Buses . Other bus operators include First , Arriva South East , Stagecoach and Thames Travel . <unk> provides an on @-@ demand transport service for people with restricted mobility in the area . 
 The <unk> bicycle sharing system operates in Reading , with approximately 15 bicycles and with docking stations at Reading station , Holiday Inn ( Basingstoke Road ) and Green Park . In March 2011 , Reading Borough Council approved a larger scheme similar to Barclays Cycle Hire in London , with 1 @,@ 000 bicycles available at up to 150 docking stations across Reading . 
 = = Education = = 
 Reading School , founded in 1125 , is the 16th oldest school in England . There are six other state secondary schools and 37 state primary schools within the borough , together with a number of private and independent schools and nurseries . 
 Reading College has provided further education in Reading since 1955 , with over 8 @,@ 500 local learners on over 900 courses . 
 The University of Reading was established in 1892 as an affiliate of Oxford University . It moved to its London Road Campus in 1904 and to its new Whiteknights Campus in 1947 . It took over the <unk> College of Higher Education , a teacher training college , in 1989 , becoming <unk> Court Campus . The Henley Management College , situated in Buckinghamshire and about 10 miles ( 16 km ) from Reading , was taken over in 2008 , becoming Greenlands Campus . The University of West London maintains a presence in the town for its higher education students , principally in nursing , but has now divested itself of its previous ownership of Reading College and its further education students . 
 English language schools located in Reading include Gateway Languages , The English Language Centre , <unk> London Street and <unk> Language School . 
 = = = Museums = = = 
 The Museum of Reading opened in 1883 in the town 's municipal buildings . It contains galleries relating to the history of Reading and to the excavations of Calleva Atrebatum , together with a full @-@ size replica of the Bayeux Tapestry , an art collection , and galleries relating to Huntley and Palmers . 
 The Museum of English Rural Life , in East Reading , is a museum dedicated to recording the changing face of farming and the countryside in England . It houses designated collections of national importance . It is owned and run by the University of Reading , as are the Ure Museum of Greek Archaeology , the Cole Museum of Zoology and the Harris Botanic Gardens , all of which can be found on the university 's Whiteknights Campus . 
 The small Riverside Museum at Blake 's Lock tells the story of Reading 's two rivers , the Kennet and the Thames . In the suburb of Woodley , the Museum of Berkshire Aviation has a collection of aircraft and other artefacts relating to the aircraft industry in the town . 
 = = Religion = = 
 Reading Minster , or the Minster Church of St Mary the Virgin as it is more properly known , is Reading 's oldest ecclesiastical foundation , known to have been founded by the 9th century and possibly earlier . Although eclipsed in importance by the later Abbey , Reading Minster has regained its importance since the destruction of the Abbey . 
 Reading Abbey was founded by Henry I in 1121 . He was buried there , as were parts of his daughter Empress Matilda , William of Poitiers , Constance of York , and Princess Isabella of Cornwall , among others . The abbey was one of the pilgrimage centres of medieval England ; it held over 230 relics including the hand of St. James . Today all that remains of the abbey are the inner rubble cores of the walls of many of the major buildings of the abbey , together with a much restored inner gateway and the intact <unk> . 
 The mediaeval borough of Reading was served by three parish churches : Reading Minster , St Giles ' Church , and St Laurence 's Church . All are still in use by the Church of England . The Franciscan friars built a friary in the town in 1311 . After the friars were expelled in 1538 , the building was used as a hospital , a poorhouse , and a jail , before being restored as the Church of England parish church of Greyfriars Church in 1863 . 
 The Bishop of Reading is a suffragan bishop within the Church of England 's Diocese of Oxford . The bishop is based in Reading , and is responsible for the archdeaconry of Berkshire . There are a total of 18 Church of England parish churches in Reading . 
 St James 's Church was built on a portion of the site of the abbey between 1837 – 40 , and marked the return of the Roman Catholic faith to Reading . Reading was also the site of the death of Blessed Dominic <unk> , the Catholic missionary to England in the 19th century who received John Henry Newman into the Catholic faith . There are now a total of 8 Roman Catholic parish churches in Reading . 
 Reading has had an organized Jewish community since 1886 . At least one Jewish family living in the area has been traced back as far as 1842 . The group grew to 13 families , who in 1886 declared themselves a community and commenced building a synagogue . On 31 October 1900 , Reading Synagogue officially opened in a solemn public ceremony , packed to capacity with dignitaries , led by the Chief Rabbi Hermann Adler . Reading Synagogue , which still stands on its original site at the junction of Goldsmid Road and Clifton Street near the town centre , is a Grade 2 @-@ listed historical structure , built to a traditional design in the Moorish style . The community forms the spiritual and communal centre for Jews in Berkshire and surrounding counties and is affiliated with the Orthodox United Hebrew Congregations of the Commonwealth . Reading also has a Liberal Jewish community which convenes in the Reading Quaker Meeting House and a Reform Jewish community which convenes in nearby Maidenhead Synagogue . 
 Reading also has places of worship of other religions , the <unk> Mahayana Buddhist centre , a Hindu temple , a Sikh <unk> , a Salvation Army citadel , a Quaker meeting house , and a <unk> Hall . 
 There is presently one mosque , the Central Reading Mosque . The £ 3 – 4m Abu Bakr Islamic Centre , on Oxford Road in West Reading , was granted planning permission in 2002 . The community @-@ funded project began construction in 2006 , but , as of July 2008 , had no estimated completion date . A second Islamic centre in eastern Reading has also been granted planning permission . This £ 4m project has garnered some controversy . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Reading is the home of Reading Football Club , an association football club nicknamed The Royals , formed in 1871 . Formerly based at Elm Park , the club plays at the 24 @,@ 161 capacity Madejski Stadium , named after chairman Sir John Madejski , and which opened in 1998 . After winning the 2005 – 06 Football League Championship with a record of 106 points , Reading F.C. spent two seasons in the Premier League before being relegated to The Championship . For the 2012 – 2013 season , the club again competed in the Premier League , after securing first place in The Championship for the 2011 – 2012 season , but were relegated back down to The Championship at season 's end . 
 Reading Town Football Club , formed in 1966 , played at <unk> Lane and were playing in the Hellenic League Premier Division but were dissolved in 2016 , while fellow Non @-@ League football club <unk> Ibis F.C. play at Palmer Park Stadium . 
 Reading is a centre for rugby union football in the area , with the Aviva Premiership team London Irish as tenants at the Madejski Stadium . Reading is also home to another three senior semi @-@ professional rugby clubs ; Reading Abbey R.F.C. , <unk> R.F.C. and Reading <unk> .. 
 The town hosts Australian rules football team Reading Kangaroos and American football team Berkshire Renegades . Palmer Park Stadium has a velodrome and athletics track . It is used by Reading Athletic Club and the Berkshire Renegades for training . The Reading Hockey Club play in the Men 's Premier Division and in Women 's Division One of the English Hockey League . The Reading Rockets basketball club plays in the English Basketball League . 
 Rowing is pursued by the Reading Rowing Club , the Reading University Boat Club , both next to Caversham Bridge whilst Reading Blue Coat School trains in Sonning adjacent to The Redgrave Pinsent Rowing Lake in Caversham , which provides training facilities for the GB National Squad . However almost all club rowing is done on the River Thames . The annual Reading Town Regatta takes place near Thames Valley Park , with the Reading Amateur Regatta taking place in June , usually two weeks prior to Henley Royal Regatta . 
 The town was home to a motorcycle speedway team , Reading Racers . Speedway came to Reading in 1968 at Tilehurst Stadium , until the team moved to <unk> Stadium in Whitley , which was demolished at the end of 2008 . The team is inactive pending the building of a new stadium , which was once hoped to be completed in 2012 . 
 The Reading Half Marathon is held on the streets of Reading in March of each year , with 16 @,@ 000 competitors from elite to fun runners . It was first run in 1983 and took place in every subsequent year except 2001 , when it was cancelled because of concerns over that year 's outbreak of foot @-@ and @-@ mouth disease . 
 The British Triathlon Association was formed at the town 's former Mall health club on 11 December 1982 . Britain 's first ever triathlon took place just outside Reading at <unk> 's Farm in <unk> in 1983 and was revived 10 years ' later by Banana Leisure with one of the original organisers as Event Director . Thames Valley <unk> , based in the town , is Britain 's oldest triathlon club , having its origins in the 1984 event at nearby <unk> , when a relay team raced under the name Reading Triathlon Club . 
 The Hexagon theatre was home to snooker 's Grand Prix tournament , one of the sport 's " Big Four " , from 1984 to 94 . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = Town twinning = = 
 Reading is twinned with : 
 Düsseldorf , Germany ( since 1947 , officially since 1988 ) 
 Clonmel , Ireland ( since 1994 ) 
 Meaux , France 
 San Francisco Libre , Nicaragua ( since 1994 ) 
 <unk> , Barbados ( since 2003 ) 
 Reading is also a sister city of : 
 <unk> , Sri Lanka ( since 2004 ) 
 Reading , Pennsylvania 
 = Battle of Lake Pontchartrain = 
 The Battle of Lake Pontchartrain was a single @-@ ship action on September 10 , 1779 , part of the Anglo @-@ Spanish War . It was fought between the British sloop @-@ of @-@ war HMS West Florida and the Continental Navy schooner USS Morris in the waters of Lake Pontchartrain , then in the British province of West Florida . 
 The West Florida was patrolling on Lake Pontchartrain when it encountered the Morris , which had set out from New Orleans with a Spanish and American crew headed by Continental Navy Captain William Pickles . The larger crew of the Morris successfully boarded the West Florida , inflicting a mortal wound on its captain , Lieutenant John Payne . The capture of the West Florida eliminated the major British naval presence on the lake , weakening already tenuous British control over the western reaches of West Florida . 
 = = Background = = 
 Significant military activities of the American Revolutionary War did not occur on the Gulf Coast until 1779 , when Spain entered the war . Before then , New Orleans , then the capital of Spanish Louisiana , served as a semi @-@ secret source of money and matériel for the Patriot cause . The cause was quietly supported by the Spanish governors before 1779 , and often mediated by Oliver Pollock , a prominent New Orleans businessman . Pollock effectively acted as an agent of the Continental Congress , negotiating with the Spanish governor , and taking other actions , including spending some of his own fortune , on Patriot activities along the lower Mississippi River . 
 In 1778 James Willing led a raiding expedition directed against targets in British West Florida . One prize that he captured on the Mississippi River was a British ship , the Rebecca , which he brought into New Orleans . She was brought into the Continental Navy and rechristened the USS Morris in honor of Philadelphia financier Robert Morris . 
 The British province of West Florida extended from the Mississippi River in the west to the Apalachicola River in the east . The HMS West Florida had been cruising Lake Pontchartrain since 1776 under the command of George Burdon , stopping and searching all manner of shipping , including Spanish merchants destined for New Orleans , to the annoyance of the Spanish . Burdon was unsuccessful in tracking down Willing during his 1778 raid , and returned to Pensacola , West Florida 's capital , for refit and repair late in 1778 . In January 1779 Burdon was replaced at her helm by Lieutenant John Payne , who had been engaged in survey duty along the West Florida coast and knew the area well . The West Florida was a sloop @-@ of @-@ war armed , according to its captors , with several four- and six @-@ pound cannons and carrying a crew complement of about 30 . ( British accounts place the crew size at 15 . ) 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Payne cruised West Florida 's waters uneventfully until August 1779 . On August 27 he sent a boat with a few men to make contact with a detachment of Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Dickson 's men at Manchac . The boat never returned . On that day Bernardo de Gálvez , the governor of Spanish Louisiana , launched an expedition to gain control of British military posts on the Mississippi , and the boat was captured by his men . Gálvez successfully took the Manchac garrison on September 7 , and negotiated the surrender of Dickson and the remaining British forces on the Mississippi after the Battle of Baton Rouge on September 21 . Payne however was unaware of these activities . 
 Pollock used commissioning authority granted him by Congress to give command of the Morris to Continental Navy Captain William Pickles . However , she was destroyed in a hurricane ( which also delayed the departure of Gálvez ' expedition ) , and Gálvez provided another ship for Pickles ' use , variously called Morris or " Morris 's tender " . According to the report of Lieutenant Peter George Rousseau , Pickles ' second @-@ in @-@ command , this ship was a schooner armed with five small ( 2 @.@ 5 pound or less ) cannons and ten swivel guns , and that it lacked barricades to protect the men on deck from gunfire . Furthermore , the crew was not otherwise well prepared for close action , lacking axes , lances , and other tools useful for a boarding action . Pollock instructed Pickles to harass British military shipping on the lake , which had recently increased in activity . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Pickles sailed from New Orleans with a crew of 57 Americans and Spaniards ( Rousseau , his second in command , was a Frenchman commissioned into the Continental Navy ) . To hide his intentions , Pickles flew a British ensign as a false flag . Spotted on September 10 , the two ships closed , and Payne hailed the Morris to discover her intentions . He was told she was a merchant bound for Pensacola shortly before Pickles had the false colors hauled down and replaced with an American flag . The Americans and Spaniards then threw grappling hooks to bring the ships together and opened fire with their swivel guns while Lieutenant Rousseau prepared a boarding party . It is unlikely that either ship fired its larger guns . 
 Payne 's small crew put up spirited resistance , twice repulsing the boarders . The third boarding attempt succeeded , and Payne himself went down with a mortal wound in fighting described as " very violent " . The boarders successfully overwhelmed the British , wounding two men in addition to Payne , while suffering 6 to 8 killed and several wounded . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Captain Pickles took the prize back to New Orleans , where Pollock had her fitted out . Pickles cruised with her in West Florida 's waters during Governor Gálvez 's march up the Mississippi . Pickles then assisted Gálvez in the Battle of Fort Charlotte , which resulted in the capture of Mobile , before sailing her to Philadelphia for sale . 
 The battle is commemorated by a historic marker in Mandeville , Louisiana . The marker credits William Pickles with ending the Revolutionary War in Louisiana , since some British individuals on the north shore of Lake Pontchartrain evidently surrendered to Captain Pickles in mid @-@ October of 1779 ( three weeks after the Battle of Baton Rouge ) . In this context , " Louisiana " means the future state of Louisiana and not the larger area of Spanish Louisiana . The Battle of St. Louis , also within Spanish Louisiana , took place in 1780 . 
 = SMS ( Bangerz ) = 
 " SMS ( Bangerz ) " is a song by American singer Miley Cyrus featuring Britney Spears for Cyrus ' fourth studio album Bangerz ( 2013 ) . It was written and produced by Mike Will Made It and Marz , with additional songwriting provided by Cyrus and Sean Garrett . The track incorporates elements of hip hop styles , and is lyrically a " celebration of pop culture , beautiful women , [ and ] strong women " . Upon its release " SMS ( Bangerz ) " received generally mixed reviews from music critics ; some complimented its originality , while others criticized its production and Cyrus ' rapping . The album 's digital downloads helped the song chart in the United States and the United Kingdom . Cyrus has performed on MTV Unplugged and her Bangerz Tour . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 " SMS ( Bangerz ) " was written by Miley Cyrus , Mike Will Made It , Sean Garrett , and Marz , while production was handled by Mike Will Made It and Marz . Stephen Hybicki and Tim Roberts recorded the track with help from Mike <unk> , and Jaycen Joshua mixed it with assistants of Ryan Kaul . Chris " Tek " O 'Ryan handled engineering the song , and it was further mastered by Dave Kutch at the Mastering Palace . The track is the third on Cyrus 's fourth album Bangerz , which was released in 2013 . 
 " SMS ( Bangerz ) " has been described as " 1980s hip hop @-@ inspired track " . The song lasts for two minutes and 49 seconds . Garrett stated that its concept was inspired by the female rap trio Salt @-@ n @-@ Pepa , and noted that the final track was " like five different things , it 's hip @-@ hop , it 's the girls , it 's a female anthem , Salt @-@ n @-@ Pepa , [ and ] Britney and Miley " . He further opined that the women 's collaboration made for a " historical moment [ ... ] as big as when Britney kissed Madonna " Miley said : " There 's only one bitch that I want on my album , and that is Britney bitch ! " . Speculation of a collaboration between Cyrus and Britney Spears first arose after they shared a brief exchange over Twitter in July 2013 . The following month , producer Sean Garrett confirmed that the pair had recorded a " nuts " collaboration for Bangerz . He later stated that Cyrus " [ was ] throwing around those ideas " of featuring Gwen Stefani and Nicki Minaj as the guest vocalist , but felt that the final cut with Spears was " absolutely the right one . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " SMS ( Bangerz ) " is the third track on Miley Cyrus 's fourth studio album Bangerz , which was released in October 2013 . Although the song never entered the Billboard Hot 100 , the album 's strong digital downloads helped it reach number 10 on Billboard 's Bubbling Under the Hot 100 chart , as well as number 157 on the UK Singles Chart . The song is marked as explicit by the RIAA due to its explicit language . Although in October 2013 Cyrus claimed she wanted the song to be the third single off Bangerz , " Adore You " was the album 's third single release instead . Talking about plans for a music video , Cyrus hoped " that the video will be as epic as the ' Work Bitch ' one , so I think that would be the smartest choice . " 
 Upon the album 's release , " SMS ( Bangerz ) " received generally mixed reviews from music critics . Nick Catucci of Entertainment Weekly provided a favorable review , calling the track one of the best included on Bangerz and describing it as " a merry rap @-@ off with Britney " . Caroline Sullivan from The Guardian opined that Spears ' inclusion was " a stroke of skewed inspiration " , which contributed in making its parent album Cyrus ' " game @-@ changer " . Writing for Slant Magazine , Kyle Fowle called the song an " Auto @-@ Tuned Euro @-@ house jam " that helped make the album both " a message of empowerment " and " a straightforward party album " . In contrast , Mariah Eakin of The A.V. Club provided a more mixed review , saying that " Cyrus absolutely cannot rap , as horrifyingly evidenced by her Kreayshawn @-@ like turns " highlighted in the track . Evan Sawdey from PopMatters cautioned that " braggadocio can only go so far ( especially with a song that features such a formless sense of melody ) " , and felt that Mike Will Made It has a " horrid sense of how hooks work , leaving a slew of missed @-@ attempts and mangled opportunities in his wake . " 
 = = Live performance = = 
 An episode of MTV Unplugged starring Cyrus premiered through MTV on January 29 , 2014 ; she performed an acoustic version of " SMS ( Bangerz ) " without Spears , among several additional tracks from Bangerz . The song was used as the opening number on the worldwide Bangerz Tour , lasting throughout 2014 . Blake Hannon provided a positive review for the performance , praising the " synthy rush of the title track . " Cyrus returned to perform the song during the musical festival on June 21 , 2014 , Summertime Ball at Wembley Stadium of London , in front of 80 @,@ 000 people . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the liner notes of Bangerz . 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Nightbird Studios ( West Hollywood , California ) ; Conway Recording Studios ( Los Angeles , California ) ; Glenwood Studios , ( Burbank , California ) 
 Mixed at The Penua Project / Innersound Management at Larrabee Sound Studios ( North Hollywood , California ) 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Vinkensport = 
 Vinkensport ( Dutch for " finch sport " ) is a competitive animal sport in which male common chaffinches are made to compete for the highest number of bird calls in an hour . Also called <unk> ( " finch sitting " ) , it is primarily active in the Dutch @-@ speaking region of Flanders in Belgium . 
 Vinkensport traces its origins to competitions held by Flemish merchants in 1596 , and is considered part of traditional Flemish culture . As of 2007 , it was estimated that there are over 13 @,@ 000 enthusiasts , called vinkeniers ( " <unk> " ) , breeding 10 @,@ 000 birds every year . Animal rights activists have opposed the sport for much of its history . 
 = = Description = = 
 In a contest , a row of small cages , each housing a single male finch , are lined up approximately six feet apart along a street . The close proximity of the cages increases the number of calls , as the birds sing for mates and to establish territory . A timekeeper begins and ends the contest with a red flag . Every time a bird sings a correct terminating flourish to their call — most often transcribed as <unk> @-@ e @-@ <unk> — a tally mark in chalk is made on a long wooden stick . The bird singing its song the most times during one hour wins the contest . Champion finches regularly sing hundreds of calls in contests . 
 = = History and practices = = 
 The earliest known records of vinkeniers are from 1596 ( with some sources advocating a slightly earlier 1593 origin ) with Flemish merchants competing . By the late nineteenth century , <unk> 's popularity had diminished significantly , but it saw a resurgence after the First World War . As of 2007 , it was estimated that there are over 13 @,@ 000 vinkeniers breeding 10 @,@ 000 birds every year . However , the popularity of this folk sport is waning in the 21st century . There is also a museum of the sport ( Nationaal <unk> Vinkensport ) in the village of <unk> in the Harelbeke municipality of Belgium . 
 <unk> use a variety of methods to increase the number of calls in their birds . Techniques to develop singing aptitude include selective breeding programs , high @-@ protein diets , and stimulating them with music and recordings of bird song . As wild finches generally begin singing during the spring mating season , keepers may also use artificial lights placed in aviaries to encourage increased song . 
 Some vinkeniers claim that finches from the different regions of Belgium sing in different dialects ; with birds from the Dutch @-@ speaking Flanders singing " in Dutch " and those from the French @-@ speaking Wallonia singing undesirably " in French " . The use of " Dutch " and " Walloon " to describe these two supposed types of finches has been suggested to refer to a simple difference in calling not literally linked to either the Flemish or Walloon communities of Belgium , and some linguists even suggest that " Walloon " simply means " foreign " . While minute regional differences ( a.k.a. dialects ) in song have been observed in the chaffinch ( also within Belgium ) , the differences have only been reliably distinguishable by the use of sonograms . <unk> , there are no officially @-@ recognized subspecies of chaffinch within Belgium . 
 = = = Cheating incidents = = = 
 As with other sports , <unk> has had its cheating scandals , as well as accusations of artificial enhancement . One finch sang a record 1 @,@ 278 <unk> @-@ e @-@ <unk> in one hour , and the owner was later accused of doping the bird with testosterone . After one contestant sang exactly the same number of calls in two rounds , the box was opened and a mini CD player was discovered within . 
 = = = Opposition to the sport = = = 
 Throughout much of its history , certain attributes of the sport have garnered criticism . Early proponents of the sport would blind birds with hot needles in order to reduce visual distractions . Thomas Hardy — the celebrated English author and poet who was also an <unk> and member of the RSPCA — is said to have written his poem " The Blinded Bird " as a protest against the practice . In 1920 , a campaign by blind World War I veterans banned the practice , and today the birds are kept in small wooden boxes that let air in but keep distractions out . 
 Modern animal rights activists , such as those from the Flemish Bird Protection Society , accuse trainers of " brainwashing " birds into singing more than is natural or healthy by playing looped recordings of finch calls , and that caging birds in the intentionally small and dark contest boxes is cruel . The finch is a popular aviary bird in many countries and it is forbidden in the European Union to catch birds in the wild , despite vinkeniers purporting that wild birds sing better than captive ones . Though chaffinch populations are currently not considered to be threatened , a 2002 court case at the Belgian Constitutional Court upheld a 1979 EU law banning the capture of wild finches . 
 = Catch a Fire = 
 Catch a Fire , released on 13 April 1973 , is the fifth album by Jamaican reggae band The Wailers , and the first the band released on Island Records . After touring and recording in the United Kingdom with Johnny Nash , Nash 's departure to the United States left the band without enough money to return home ; they approached producer Chris Blackwell , who agreed to advance the Wailers money for an album and paid their fares back to Jamaica , where they recorded Catch a Fire . The album features nine songs , two of which were written by Peter Tosh and the rest by Bob Marley . After Marley 's return to London to present the tapes to Blackwell , the producer reworked the tracks with contributions by Muscle Shoals session musician Wayne Perkins , who played guitar on two overdubbed tracks . 
 The album 's supporting concert tour throughout England and the United States helped establish the band as international stars . Catch a Fire peaked at number 171 and number 51 on Billboard 's 200 and Black Albums charts , respectively . The album has received critical acclaim , including being listed at number 126 on Rolling Stone 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time , the second highest placement of the five Bob Marley albums on the list , after the posthumous compilation album Legend . It is also regarded as one of the top reggae albums of all time . 
 = = Background = = 
 Businessman Danny Sims made a deal with Johnny Nash to star in and score the film Want So Much To Believe in Sweden and Nash invited Marley to work with him on composing songs for the soundtrack . Marley moved to Sweden to work on the film , and then from November to December 1971 toured Great Britain with Nash and the Wailers , with CBS also releasing a single by the Wailers ( the Nash @-@ produced " Reggae on Broadway " ) . After the tour , Sims and Nash had left the city for Miami , Florida , and CBS lost interest in the group , leaving the band without enough money to return to Jamaica and unable to work due to work permit issues . The band asked promoter Brent Clarke in the hope that he would help them . Clarke contacted Chris Blackwell from Island Records , who had released many Wailers singles in Great Britain . He then promised Clarke an advance of GB £ 8000 for their next album , and Clarke lent the Wailers some money for their way back to Jamaica . 
 = = Recording = = 
 In 1972 , sessions for the album started , with recording taking place at three Kingston , Jamaica studios , all members recording inside one room : Dynamic Sound , Harry J 's and Randy 's . Engineer Sylvan Morris put the songs on eight @-@ track tape , and allocated tracks with the drum mixes on one track and piano and guitar together on another . In the winter of 1972 , Marley flew back to London to present the master tapes . The deal with Island led to a dispute with CBS and Sims , to whom the band were already contracted . The case was won by the first , who received US $ 9 @,@ 000 and two percent of royalties from the band 's first six albums , and Sims received GB £ 5 @,@ 000 and the publishing rights to the Wailers songs . 
 Catch a Fire , which is Jamaican patois ( slang ) for smoking herb , features many backing musicians , but none of those were credited in the liner notes . Muscle Shoals session guitarist Wayne Perkins , who at that time was also recording a new Smith , Perkins & Smith album at the Island Studios on the Basing Street , was asked by Blackwell in the early 1972 to make overdubs for the song Catch a Fire in the studio below . Perkins , not knowing at the time what reggae was , agreed with the proposal and first played the guitar solo on " Concrete Jungle " , including the three @-@ octave feedback at the end . After also playing slide guitar on " Baby We 've Got a Date ( Rock It Baby ) " and the wah @-@ wah @-@ laced lead on " Stir it Up " , Perkins then went back to complete his own album . " Stir it Up " was later covered by Johnny Nash 's band , Rabbit and the Jungles , on their I Can See Clearly Now , peaking at number 11 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , Rabbit Bundrick played on all songs on numerous keyboards , including on a synthesizer and a clavinet . Robbie Shakespeare played the bass on " Concrete Jungle " , while organist Tyrone Downie performed on the same track as well as on " Stir it Up " . Chris Karen , Francisco Willie Pep and Winston Wright served as percussionists , and the female backing singing was performed by Rita Marley and her friend Marcia Griffiths , the latter of whom was already popular in Jamaica as a solo artist and together with her husband Bob Andy released successful singles . Tommy McCook played the flute . 
 According to Aston Barrett , " some of the songs had been recorded before , ... , in different studios and with different musicians , but we gave them that strict timing and brought the feeling out of them more " . " Baby We 've Got a Date ( Rock it Baby ) " is similar to " Black Bitter " , recorded in an earlier session . 
 The song 's lyrics deal with political injustice towards blacks and poverty , as is the case in many of their albums . Catch a Fire is about " the current state of urban poverty " , and " Slave Driver " " connects the present to past injustices " . But politics are not the main theme ; " Stir it Up " , for example , is a love song . 
 = = Cover art = = 
 The original 1973 vinyl release , designed by graphic artists Rod Dyer and Bob Weiner , was encased in a sleeve depicting a Zippo lighter . The sleeve functioned like a real Zippo lighter case , opening at a side hinge to reveal the record within . Only the original pressing of 20 @,@ 000 had the Zippo cover , subsequent pressings had an alternative cover designed by John Bonis featuring an Esther Anderson portrait of Marley smoking a " spliff " or joint , with the album now credited to " Bob Marley and the Wailers " . Copies of the record from the original pressings have since become collectors ' items . The original cover art was reproduced in 2001 for the deluxe compact disc edition . 
 = = Release = = 
 The first release from the album sessions was the " Baby We 've Got a Date " single , released in early 1973 on Island 's Blue Mountain subsidiary . Catch a Fire was released on 13 April 1973 on the Island label with a supporting tour . The album sold around 14 @,@ 000 copies in its first weeks , and peaked at number 171 on the Billboard 200 chart and at number 51 on Billboard R & B chart . 
 Catch a Fire has been re @-@ released under different recording labels with different track lengths . In 2001 , a special collection edition was released containing unreleased , non @-@ overdubbed ( " Jamaican " ) songs on the first side and the original , overdubbed album on the second side . 
 A documentary about the album , directed by Jeremy <unk> , was released in 2000 , featuring interviews with the musicians and engineers who worked on the album , archive performance footage , and home video footage filmed by members of the band . 
 = = Tour = = 
 The album 's supporting tour began in 1973 in the United Kingdom and then moved to the United States . In England they performed on 19 shows at universities and clubs . While in London , the band performed on the BBC shows The Old Grey Whistle Test and Top Gear . In the first performance singer Bunny Livingston performed for the first and last time for the Wailers , as he was unhappy touring outside Jamaica , difficulty finding suitable food due to his strict <unk> diet a contributing factor . After Bunny 's resignation from the band , Tosh consulted with Marley and finally picked Joe Higgs . Blackwell hired the concert promoter Lee Jaffe to book gigs in North America . The Wailers performed at Paul 's Mall in Boston , Massachusetts , and then three gigs in New York alongside Bruce Springsteen 's E Street Band , and in October opened for Sly and the Family Stone in Las Vegas . These concerts marked an important step towards international acknowledgement . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Catch a Fire had a positive critical reception . Robert Christgau rated the album as " A " , saying that " half these songs are worthy of St. John the Divine " , and " Barrett brothers ' bass and drums save those that aren 't from limbo " . Reviewers from Rolling Stone also praised the brother 's playing , concluding that " Catch a Fire is a blazing debut " . According to the review , " ' Concrete Jungle ' and ' Slave Driver ' crackle with streetwise immediacy , while ' Kinky Reggae ' and ' Stir It Up ' ... revel in the music 's vast capacity for good @-@ time <unk> . ' Stop That Train ' and ' 400 Years , ' both written by Peter Tosh , indicate the original Wailers weren 't strictly a one @-@ man show " . 
 Critics have called Catch a Fire one of the greatest reggae albums of all time . Vik Iyengar from AllMusic comments that " Marley would continue to achieve great critical and commercial success during the 1970s , but Catch a Fire is one of the finest reggae albums ever . This album is essential for any music collection " . Rolling Stone ranked the album at number 123 on its list of 500 Greatest Albums of All Time , the second highest placement for a reggae album ; only Legend , ranked higher at number 46 . Writing in The Spectator arts blog in 2012 , Dave <unk> described it as " quite simply , one of the greatest reggae albums ever made " . The album was also groundbreaking as its singles were released as long @-@ playing records as against to the early reggae songs coupled with two sides . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Original album release ( 1973 ) = = = 
 All songs were written by Bob Marley , except where noted . 
 = = = The Definitive Remastered edition ( 2001 ) = = = 
 = = = Deluxe edition ( 2001 ) = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Tropical Storm Amy ( 1975 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Amy was the first tropical cyclone to develop during the 1975 Atlantic hurricane season . Forming on June 28 from a trough of low pressure , Amy gradually attained tropical storm status off the coast of North Carolina . A rapidly approaching trough caused Amy to turn sharply eastward before the storm took a general northeastward track . On July 2 , the storm reached its peak intensity with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 981 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 97 inHg ) . During most of the storm 's existence , Amy featured many subtropical characteristics but was not classified as such due to the proximity to land . By July 4 , the system moved southeast of Newfoundland before becoming extratropical . 
 The main effects from Amy were rough seas , reaching up to 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) in height , that were felt from North Carolina to New Jersey , inflicting minor coastal flooding and beach erosion . On June 30 , a schooner carrying four people capsized off the North Carolina coastline , resulting in the death of the father of the other three crew members . They remained at sea for roughly 15 days before being rescued by a Greek merchant ship . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Tropical Storm Amy originated from a weak trough on June 24 accompanied by scattered showers and thunderstorms over Florida . The system tracked westward in response to an upper @-@ tropospheric low over Georgia . By June 26 , a surface circulation developed north of the Bahamas and satellite imagery showed a significant increase in convective activity and the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) classified the system as a tropical depression early on June 27 . On June 28 , the system attained tropical storm @-@ status while tracking north @-@ northeast off the coast of North Carolina . 
 By June 29 , a trough , moving through the westerlies , rapidly approached the storm , causing the newly designated Amy to turn sharply toward the east . Strong wind shear disorganized the system slightly , leading to Amy featuring subtropical characteristics . By the evening , the strongest winds were not located around the center , but were instead situated between 60 and 90 mi ( 95 and 140 km ) from the center . Convection became displaced from the center of circulation but the storm continued to intensify . Over the following several days , Amy tracked generally northeastward but underwent eastward jogs in response to rapidly moving troughs to the north . 
 Amy neared hurricane intensity several times , beginning on June 30 as maximum winds increased to 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) ; however , the storm was unable to acquire enough tropical features , and remained predominately subtropical . Gale @-@ force winds at this time extended roughly 125 mi ( 210 km ) out from the center to the north and east . Despite being subtropical at this point , the NHC decided against renaming it due to Amy 's proximity to land . On July 2 , a barometric pressure of 981 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 97 inHg ) was recorded , the lowest in relation to Amy . The following day , another trough caused the storm to accelerate northeastward . On July 4 , Amy passed roughly 170 mi ( 270 km ) southeast of Cape Race , Newfoundland before becoming an extratropical cyclone . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Rough seas from the storm resulted in minor coastal flooding and beach erosion in North Carolina . Small craft advisories were issued along the Virginia and North Carolina coastlines as waves up to 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) affected the region . Several beaches were closed due to the rough conditions . By July 2 , the small craft advisories were discontinued as Amy tracked away from land . Tides up to 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) in Virginia resulted in some beach erosion and coastal flooding due to the prolonged duration of the event . Although no warnings were issued , boaters in Newfoundland were advised to closely monitor the storm . In Hampton , Virginia , a funnel cloud spawned by a squall line associated with Amy formed just offshore . 
 As a tropical depression , Amy produced scattered rainfall in Florida , peaking around 3 in ( 76 mm ) near the Georgia border . Along the North Carolina coast , heavy rain fell as the center of Amy tracked nearby . Many coastal areas recorded more than 3 in ( 76 mm ) with a peak amount of 5 @.@ 87 in ( 149 mm ) falling in Belhaven , North Carolina . 
 Offshore , a schooner carrying four people capsized in rough seas roughly 250 mi ( 400 km ) east of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina on June 30 . The four crew were a father and his three kids . A diabetic , the 30 @-@ year @-@ old father searched for his insulin pen in the capsized ship ; however , for the fifteen days they were stranded , he was unable to find it . During the event , he slipped into a coma and later died on July 4 , leaving his kids on the boat . On July 14 , the three kids were rescued by the <unk> , a Greek merchant ship . 
 = Everybody ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Everybody " is the debut single by American singer Madonna from her eponymous debut studio album Madonna ( 1983 ) . It was released on October 6 , 1982 by Sire Records as her debut single . Madonna had recorded a demo of the song with Steve Bray . She urged DJ Mark Kamins , who played at her dance club , to play it . He was impressed by the song and took her to Sire Records , who signed her for a two @-@ song deal . However , after the recording of the two singles was over , Sire executive Michael Rosenblatt was not impressed with the production of the other song and decided to release only " Everybody " . 
 By incorporating R & B infused beats in the music and not including her image on the cover artwork , marketing for the song gave the impression of Madonna as a black artist . That impression did not last long as Madonna would later convince Sire executives to shoot a music video for the song . The low @-@ budget video directed by Ed Steinberg showed Madonna and her friends in a club singing and dancing to the song . The video helped to further promote the song and Madonna as an artist . 
 Critically , " Everybody " did not receive any acclaim and failed to enter the official Billboard Hot 100 chart . It did , however , appear on the dance charts . The song helped Madonna achieve her first appearance in a dance magazine . She has performed " Everybody " live a number of times . It was first performed during The Virgin Tour , then as the final song of The Girlie Show World Tour , later on The MDNA Tour and most recently on the Rebel Heart Tour . The song was included in a remixed form on Madonna 's 1987 remix album , You Can Dance , and on the deluxe edition of her 2009 compilation album , Celebration . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 In 1982 , the 24 @-@ year @-@ old Madonna was living in New York and trying to set up her music career . She was joined by her boyfriend from Detroit , Steve Bray , who became the drummer of her band , The Breakfast Club , which generally played hard @-@ rock music . After that , however , they abandoned playing songs in the hard @-@ rock genre and got signed by a music management company called Gotham Records with the plan of pursuing a new musical direction . They decided to pursue the funk genre but the record company was not happy with their musical abilities , hence they were dropped , and Madonna and Bray left the band . Meanwhile , Madonna had written and developed some songs on her own . She carried rough tapes of three of the songs , namely " Everybody " , " Ain 't No Big Deal " and " Burning Up " . At that time , she frequented the Danceteria nightclub in New York . It was there that Madonna convinced the DJ Mark Kamins to play " Everybody " for the crowd , and the song received a positive reaction . Kamins offered to get her a record deal with the understanding that he would produce the single . Kamins presented Madonna to his boss , Chris Blackwell who was the owner of Island Records , but Blackwell rejected her . Madonna finally went to Sire Records in 1982 . Michael Rosenblatt , who worked at the artists and repertoire department of Sire , commented that , 
 " Madonna is great . She will do anything to be a star , and that 's exactly what I look for in an artist : total co @-@ operation ... With Madonna , I knew I had someone hot and co @-@ operative , so I planned to build her career with singles , rather than just put an album right away and run the risk of disaster . " 
 Rosenblatt offered Madonna $ 5 @,@ 000 in advance plus $ 1 @,@ 000 in royalties for each song she wrote . Madonna was ultimately signed for two 12 inch singles by the President of Sire , Seymour Stein , who was impressed by her singing , after listening to " Everybody " at a hospital in Lenox Hill where he was admitted . The 12 inch version of " Everybody " was produced by Mark Kamins at Bob Blank 's Blank Tapes Studio in NYC . Kamins was romantically involved with Madonna at that time . He took over the production work from Steve Bray . The new recording ran 5 : 56 on one side and 9 : 23 for the dub version on the flipside . Madonna and Kamins had to record the single at their own cost . Arthur Baker , friend of Mark Kamins , guided him through the role of a music producer and provided him with studio musician Fred Zarr who performed his keyboard wizardry on the track . Zarr became one of the common musical threads on the album by eventually performing on every track . Due to the restrained budget , the recording was a hefty affair as Madonna could not understand Kamins ' directions and Kamins himself faced problems directing . Hence the A @-@ side " Ain 't No Big Deal " did not become as successful as everyone expected . Rosenblatt wanted to release " Everybody " with " Ain 't No Big Deal " on the other side , but later changed his mind and put " Everybody " on both sides of the vinyl record after hearing the recorded version of " Ain 't No Big Deal " . 
 = = Release and composition = = 
 " Everybody " was commercially released as Madonna 's first single in October 6 , 1982 , and came with a Lou Beach @-@ designed sleeve depicting a hip hop – style NYC street scene . Because of the ambiguous nature of the record sleeve and the R & B groove of the song , Madonna was widely believed to be a black artist when the single was released . According to Matthew Lindsay of The Quietus , it was ironic that the record sleeve did not depict Madonna on the cover , being that she would become , as he described , " the face of the 80s . " 
 " Everybody " starts with a heavily synthesized and spoken introduction with Madonna taking a loud intake of breath . Madonna displayed her bubblegum pop voice in the song , which was doubletracked . The song is written in the key of A minor with the melody of the song beginning in G and rising to the second scale degree on the syllable ' bo ' of ' everybody ' , thus highlighting the chorus which follows in the chord progression of G – A – B – A. " Everybody " incorporated R & B infused beats . Sire Records marketed the soulful nature of the dance song for the black audience and Madonna was promoted as an African @-@ American artist , thereby fitting the record into a radio playlist where the song might chart . In New York , the song was played on 92 KTU which had an African @-@ American audience . For the cover of the single , Sire Records portrayed a hip @-@ hop collage of downtown New York , rather than a portrait shot of Madonna , further perpetuating the notion that Madonna was African @-@ American . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Author Rikky Rooksby , in his book The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna , noted that the song closed the Madonna album on a flat note . He called the music artificial , repetitive and uninspired . Don Shewey from Rolling Stone commented that " At first , it [ " Everybody " ] doesn 't sound like much at all . Then you notice its one distinguishing feature , a girlish hiccup that the singer uses over and over until it 's irritating as hell . Finally , you get hooked , and you start looking forward to that silly little catch in her voice . " Author J. Randy Taraborrelli in his biography on Madonna commented that the song was a rhythmic call to party . Author Santiago Fouz @-@ Hernández in his book Madonna 's Drowned Worlds , complimented the chorus of the song , saying that " Everybody " and " Music " are the two Madonna singles which define her artistic credo - that music has the power to overcome divisions of race , gender , and sexuality . Matthew Lindsay of The Quietus praised the song , calling it " spectacular " and " hard to resist . " Lindsay added " with its breathy spoken word passages and invitation to dance , Madonna 's debut single was a template that would be revisited throughout her career . " In 2012 Louis Virtel of The Backlot listed " Everybody " at number two on his list of " 100 Greatest Madonna Songs , " commenting that the song is an example of Madonna 's undeniable talents . Virtel goes on to say through the song Madonna shows she is " a commander , the Baryshnikov of pop chutzpah , and a rightful disco empress . " 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 The 12 @-@ inch single of " Everybody " failed to break into the Billboard Hot 100 in the United States . It peaked at seven on Billboard 's Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart on December 25 , 1982 . However the song moved quickly up the dance charts , and was Madonna 's first single to chart on the Billboard Hot Dance / Club Play Chart , peaking at number three . One of the first radio stations to embrace the song was WKTU , which reported it as a new " Playlist Top Add On " in the December 11 , 1982 , issue of Billboard , reflecting their station 's playlist for the week ending November 30 , 1982 . Since its release , the single has sold around 250 @,@ 000 copies . The song helped Madonna achieve a first magazine cover photograph . In the December issue of Dance Music Report magazine , Madonna and another band Jekyll and Hyde were nominated for awards in the sales category of a reader 's poll . It was Madonna 's picture that appeared on the cover . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Sire Records had marketed the " Everybody " single as if Madonna was a black artist . This misconception was cleared by the release of the music video for the song . Regarding the importance of shooting a music video for the song , Madonna commented that , " If I didn 't have a video , I don 't think all the kids in the Midwest would know about me . It takes the place of touring . Everybody sees them everywhere . That really has a lot to do with the success of my album . " She invited Sire Records executives , including Stein and Rosenblatt , to the New York nightclub Danceteria . She performed " Everybody " on the dancefloor , wearing a top hat and tails . On the night of the performance , Madonna 's friend <unk> <unk> introduced her to the 300 strong audience . Cheered by them , Madonna and her dancers performed their choreographed dance moves , later described as a ' disco act backed by avant @-@ garde dancers . ' Seeing the performance , they also realised that Madonna appeared visually stunning . They ordered an in @-@ house video of " Everybody " to be sent to the clubs around the country which used dance videos . 
 Rosenblatt contacted Ed Steinberg , who ran the Rock America video company and asked him if he could spare a few hours to make a music video for " Everybody " with Madonna on stage at her next performance in Danceteria . The idea was to play the video as promotion across the United States so that people will come to recognize an image of Madonna and her performance . Rosenblatt offered Steinberg $ 1 @,@ 000 for the in @-@ house production video , when artists like Duran Duran and Michael Jackson were spending six figure sums on videos . They finally agreed on $ 1 @,@ 500 . With the low @-@ budget , the video was directed by Steinberg . Steinberg suggested shooting the video on location at the Paradise Garage , a downtown gay disco , instead of filming a live performance . Madonna 's friend Debi Mazar did the makeup and joined her other backup dancers , namely Erika Belle and Bags <unk> . Mazar brought a few of her friends to act as a disco crowd in the video , including African @-@ American graffiti artist Michael Stewart . Steinberg was impressed by Madonna 's professionalism on the set and he helped to send copies of the tape to nightclubs across America which used dance music videos for their entertainment . This promotion helped the song to grow from being a dance hit in New York to a nationwide hit . 
 The video starts with Madonna and her two backup dancers dancing in a club while lights blink in the background . The shots continue while interspersing close @-@ up shots of Madonna dancing while wearing a coat and junk jewelry . Author Douglas Kellner in his book Media Culture : Cultural Studies , Identity , and Politics Between the Modern and the Postmodern noted that already with her first video , Madonna was deploying fashion , sexuality and the construction of an individual image to present herself both as an alluring sex object and as a transgressor of established norms . The band Fab Five Freddy reminisce that with the video Madonna " is attracting those who were more street , more savvy , more flavorful . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 In order to promote " Everybody , " Madonna performed the track with backup dancers at <unk> <unk> 's " No <unk> " – a roving cabaret revue . In The Virgin Tour of 1985 , Madonna wore a blue see @-@ through crop @-@ top which revealed her black bra , a purple skirt , lacy leggings and a brightly patterned jacket . She also wore crucifixes in her hair , and on her ears and neck . As the performance of " Into the Groove " ended , Madonna took the microphone and danced around the stage while singing " Everybody " . The performance was included in the home video release titled Madonna Live : The Virgin Tour . Madonna sampled " Everybody " ' s line , " Dance and sing , get up and do your thing " during the opening bars of " Express Yourself " for the Blond Ambition World Tour . 
 For The Girlie Show World Tour ( 1993 ) , " Everybody " was performed as the closing song of the tour . Madonna wore pale shorts and a simple yellow and green V @-@ necked shirt , which she hitched up into a bra revealing top . The performance started off after " Justify My Love " . The beginning contained the chorus from " Everybody Is a Star " originally by Sly & The Family Stone . As the song progressed , musical excerpts of " Dance to the Music " , " After the Dance " and " It Takes Two " were included . Jon Pareles from The New York Times complimented the performance , saying " the show 's finale is downright wholesome , with the troupe in denim and white tops , inviting the audience to dance to ' Everybody ' . It 's just a good @-@ time song @-@ and @-@ dance revue , not a provocation . " 
 Madonna played the song during the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival while promoting her tenth studio album Confessions on a Dance Floor ( 2005 ) . She performed the song wearing a tank top and high boots , with a silver glitter band around her hair . It was also performed at London 's Koko Club . Madonna was dressed in an all @-@ purple ensemble of jacket , velvet pedal pushers and knee @-@ high boots . Before performing " Everybody " , she announced that , " I feel like I 'm really out of shape right now , I don 't like falling off horses , so I 'm going to do one more song . " 
 On October 6 , 2012 , Madonna performed " Everybody " during The MDNA Tour in San Jose to celebrate the single 's 30th anniversary . She said , " Today is a very special day for me . It is the 30th anniversary of the release of my first @-@ ever single . I remember the amazing feeling I had when I heard the song on the radio the first time . " Aidin Vaziri from San Francisco Chronicle commented that " Three decades later , the simple synth @-@ pop lift and naive R & B melody still felt amazing . It was an off @-@ script moment that inadvertently became the highlight of the show . " 
 In 2015 , " Everybody " was included in the set list of the first few dates of the Rebel Heart Tour , performed in a flamenco @-@ style medley with " Dress You Up " , " Into the Groove " and " Lucky Star " . During the sequence the singer dressed by in a Latin and gypsy inspired dress , created by Alessandro Michele for Gucci consisting off a shawl , flamenco hat , lace , skirts and jacquard bodysuit . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 Notes : UK 7 " and 12 " versions included a remix by Rusty Egan and Steve Short at Trident Studios Reduction Suite , which was only ever released in the UK . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – vocals , writer 
 Mark Kamins – producer 
 Butch Jones – synthesizer , engineering 
 Reggie Lucas – guitars , drum programming 
 Fred Zarr – synthesizer , electric and acoustic piano 
 Dean Gant – electric and acoustic piano 
 Bobby Malach – tenor saxophone 
 Ed Walsh – synthesizer 
 Gwen Guthrie – background vocals 
 Brenda White – background vocals 
 Chrissy Faith – background vocals 
 Christine Sauers - art direction , design 
 Lou Beach - artwork 
 Credits adapted from the album liner notes and the single liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Delaware Route 141 = 
 Delaware Route 141 ( DE 141 ) is a state highway that serves as a western bypass of Wilmington , Delaware . Its southern terminus is at DE 9 and DE 273 in New Castle and its northern terminus is an interchange with U.S. Route 202 ( US 202 ) and DE 261 in Fairfax . The route heads north from DE 9 / DE 273 on four @-@ lane divided Basin Road , becoming concurrent with US 202 at an interchange with US 13 / US 40 and passes to the east of Wilmington Airport . The highway becomes a freeway and reaches an interchange with Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) and I @-@ 295 , at which point US 202 splits from DE 141 . The DE 141 freeway continues north through Newport to Prices Corner . Here , the freeway segment ends and DE 141 continues northeast as a surface road , with another brief freeway segment in Greenville . The route heads east across the Brandywine Creek on the Tyler McConnell Bridge and continues to US 202 / DE 261 . 
 What is now DE 141 between New Castle and Newport was originally designated as part of DE 41 in the 1930s . DE 141 was designated as a surface bypass of Wilmington between New Castle and US 202 north of Wilmington in the 1950s , running concurrent with DE 41 south of Newport . DE 41 was removed from DE 141 by 1971 . In the 1960s , DE 141 was proposed to be upgraded to a freeway . Construction on the freeway segments between Newport and Prices Corner and in Greenville began in the 1970s and was completed around 1980 . In the 1990s , several improvements were planned for DE 141 north of Prices Corner , including grade separation at Rockland Road completed in 1997 and relocation of the northern terminus to its current location at an interchange finished in 2007 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Basin Road = = = 
 DE 141 begins at an intersection with DE 9 and DE 273 west of New Castle , where the road continues south as part of DE 9 . From the southern terminus , DE 141 heads northwest on Basin Road , a four @-@ lane divided highway . The road passes to the east of William Penn High School and continues past suburban homes and businesses . The route reaches a cloverleaf interchange with US 13 / US 40 east of the Wilmington Airport , at which point US 202 begins . 
 From here , US 202 runs concurrently with DE 141 , with the two routes heading between Wilmington Airport to the west and residential neighborhoods in Wilmington Manor to the east . The road passes between the Delaware Air National Guard 's New Castle Air National Guard Base to the west and commercial establishments to the east , coming to an intersection with the northern terminus of DE 37 . Past this intersection , the median of US 202 / DE 141 widens as the road intersects Airport Road . 
 = = = Newport Freeway = = = 
 After intersecting Airport Road , US 202 / DE 141 becomes a freeway . The road comes to an interchange with I @-@ 95 and the southern terminus of I @-@ 295 , at which point US 202 splits from DE 141 by continuing north along I @-@ 95 . Past this interchange , DE 141 widens to six lanes and has a southbound exit and entrance for South James Street and Old Airport Road before the median narrows . The freeway comes to a viaduct that crosses the Christina River into Newport , where it passes near industrial areas and crosses over Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor railroad line . 
 In Newport , the route has an interchange with DE 4 , at which point it narrows to four lanes and curves northwest with Newport Gap Pike serving as a frontage road on both sides . The freeway widens back to six lanes and heads into a below @-@ grade alignment that cuts through residential neighborhoods , leaving Newport . DE 141 reaches an interchange with DE 62 in the community of Belvedere , where the Newport Gap Pike frontage road ends and the freeway narrows to four lanes . Following this interchange , the six @-@ lane freeway rises to ground level and passes to the west of the former Wilmington Assembly plant used by General Motors before coming to a bridge over CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision railroad line . The road runs near business areas and comes to an interchange with DE 2 in Prices Corner . 
 = = = DE 2 to US 202 = = = 
 After the DE 2 interchange , the freeway section of DE 141 ends and the route continues northeast on at @-@ grade Centre Road , a four @-@ lane divided highway . The road passes through suburban residential neighborhoods and reaches an intersection with DE 34 . Following this intersection , the route heads north between the Ferris School to the west and DuPont 's Chestnut Run Plaza research facility to the east . DE 141 curves to the northeast and comes to an intersection with DE 48 / DE 100 . Here , DE 100 joins DE 141 and the road runs through industrial areas , curving north and becoming a freeway past the Barley Mill Road intersection . The freeway curves northeast and passes under an East Penn Railroad line before coming to a partial cloverleaf interchange with DE 52 in Greenville . Past this interchange , the road curves east and the freeway ends , with DE 100 splitting from DE 141 at an at @-@ grade intersection by heading north on Montchanin Road . 
 Past this intersection , DE 141 continues east as four @-@ lane divided Barley Mill Road , entering into wooded areas . The route becomes a two @-@ lane undivided road as it passes to the south of the Hagley Museum and Library before crossing over the Brandywine Creek valley on the Tyler McConnell Bridge . Past the bridge , DE 141 turns northeast onto four @-@ lane undivided Powder Mill Road , forming the northwestern boundary of the DuPont Experimental Station . The road widens into a divided highway and runs between the Nemours Mansion and Gardens to the east and the DuPont Country Club to the northwest . The route passes to the west of the A.I. duPont Children 's Hospital before coming to a bridge over Rockland Road . DE 141 makes a sharp curve to the southeast and comes to an intersection where Powder Mill Road splits to the east and Children 's Drive heads southwest to provide access to Rockland Road and the children 's hospital . The route continues southeast as it runs to the south of AstraZeneca 's North American headquarters . DE 141 curves east , heading to the north of Alapocas Run State Park , and comes to its northern terminus at an interchange with US 202 in Fairfax , where the road continues northeast as DE 261 . 
 In 2011 , DE 141 had an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 68 @,@ 304 vehicles at the DE 4 interchange to a low of 14 @,@ 639 vehicles at the University Avenue intersection between DE 9 / DE 273 and US 13 / US 40 . The entire length of DE 141 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1920 , what would become DE 141 existed as an unimproved county road . The road between Prices Corner and Greenville was paved by 1924 . A year later , the road between New Castle and Newport was upgraded to a state highway . Plans were underway in 1927 to replace the outdated swing bridge over the Christina River in Newport . Contracts for this project were awarded the following year . The replacement bridge over the Christina River , a bascule bridge , opened on December 1 , 1929 . In 1927 , plans were made to replace the grade crossing at the Pennsylvania Railroad line ( now Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor ) in Newport with an underpass under the tracks . Work on this underpass began in 1929 . The crossing under the Pennsylvania Railroad was finished and opened to traffic in June 1930 . What is now DE 141 between New Castle and Newport was designated as part of DE 41 by 1936 , which continued northwest from Newport toward Hockessin and the Pennsylvania border . Also by this time , Powder Mill Road was paved . 
 DE 141 was designated to run from DE 273 in New Castle to US 202 north of Wilmington by 1952 , following DE 41 on Basin Road and James Street between New Castle and Newport , Centerville Road between Newport and Prices Corner , and Centre Road , Barley Mill Road , and Powder Mill Road between Prices Corner and US 202 . In 1954 , plans were made to replace the intersection with US 13 / US 40 in Basin Corner with a modified cloverleaf interchange in an effort to reduce traffic congestion . Construction on the interchange began in September of that year . The interchange between US 13 / US 40 and DE 41 / DE 141 was completed in 1956 . Work was underway in 1954 to widen DE 141 to four lanes along Centerville and Centre roads from Boxwood Road near Prices Corner north to DE 48 ; this project was completed in 1955 . The new northbound lanes of DE 41 / DE 141 through the I @-@ 95 interchange opened in November 1962 , at which point construction on the southbound lanes began . The southbound lanes of DE 41 / DE 141 opened in June 1964 , enabling directional flow of DE 41 / DE 141 through the interchange . DE 41 was removed from its concurrency with DE 141 by 1971 . 
 In 1965 , a $ 20 million ( $ 150 million today ) freeway was proposed along the DE 141 corridor between Newport and US 202 north of Wilmington , providing a bypass to the west of Wilmington . By 1971 , the DE 141 freeway from Newport to Prices Corner was under design and the reconstruction of the route north of DE 48 began . The same year , a contract was awarded for construction of a grade separation of the Reading Railroad ( now the East Penn Railroad ) in Greenville . In 1973 , work started to upgrade DE 141 between the Christina River in Newport and the Brandywine Creek near Greenville . A contract was awarded to construct the DE 141 freeway through Newport in 1974 . The construction of interchanges in Prices Corner and at DE 52 were included in the Bond Bill in 1976 . The DE 141 freeway from Newport to Prices Corner and in Greenville was completed by 1981 . In 1984 , US 202 was rerouted to follow DE 141 between US 13 / US 40 and I @-@ 95 . DE 100 was rerouted to follow DE 141 between DE 48 and Montchanin Road by 1990 . 
 In 1992 , an environmental assessment was approved for improving DE 141 between DE 2 and US 202 . Among the improvements called for were a six @-@ lane bridge over the Brandywine Creek replacing the existing two @-@ lane bridge , a new bridge over Rockland Road , and a new interchange with US 202 and DE 261 . Later in the year , the proposed bridge over the Brandywine Creek was scaled back to four lanes . In 1994 , plans for the bridge over the Brandywine Creek and the US 202 interchange were placed on hold . Meanwhile , the bridge over Rockland Road was completed in 1997 , with DE 141 being realigned between Rockland Road and US 202 and the intersection with Children 's Drive improved . In the 2000s , the Blue Ball Construction Project relocated the northern terminus of DE 141 to an interchange with US 202 and DE 261 a short distance to the south of where Powder Mill Road intersects US 202 . The project took place between 2002 and 2007 and cost $ 123 million . In 2007 , construction began to upgrade the portion of DE 141 between DE 2 and DE 34 from a four @-@ lane undivided road into a four @-@ lane divided highway . Completion of the project was scheduled for 2010 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in New Castle County . 
 = Hey You ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Hey You " is a charity song written by American singer Madonna who co @-@ produced it with Pharrell Williams . The song was released as part of the Live Earth campaign and was free to download from websites like MSN . It was released digitally as well as on the CD and DVD of the Live Earth concerts on December 4 , 2007 . Musically it is a stripped @-@ down , folksy ballad with straightforward , anthem @-@ like lyrics talking about how to save the world from destruction . The song received generally mixed reviews , with one group of reviewers commenting that the modest message of the song was uninspiring while others called the song sweet and commended Madonna 's commitment to charity . 
 " Hey You " was initially released as a free download for a period of seven days before being made available as a regular digital single . Once it had been released as a regular digital single , it entered the lower reaches of the sales charts of a few countries including the United Kingdom , Canada , Sweden and Switzerland . Madonna only performed the song once at the Live Earth concert , London , where she was joined by a choir of school children who provided backing vocals to her singing while the backdrops displayed images relevant to the song 's message , like natural devastations , different cultures and political leaders . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Hey You " was written by Madonna , who also co @-@ produced it along with Pharrell Williams in honor of the 2007 Live Earth concert in London . It was inspired by the climate change campaign . It became Madonna 's first released material to be written entirely by herself since " Gambler " ( 1985 ) . Live Earth was a music event that brought together more than hundred headlining artists in a series of concerts , two billion people and launched a mass movement to combat climate crisis . The concerts took place in cities like New York , London , Sydney , Tokyo , Shanghai , Rio de Janeiro etc . It marked the beginning of a multi @-@ year campaign led by The Alliance for Climate Protection to move individuals , corporations and governments to take action . The song was made available to be downloaded in MP3 and WMA formats on MSN 's Live Earth website . Microsoft pledged to donate $ 0 @.@ 25 per download to the " Alliance for Global Climate Change " society for the first million downloads of the track . Live Earth founder Kevin Wall said in a statement , " We are thrilled that Madonna donated her art to Live Earth and is a part of this movement for us . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Hey You " is a stripped @-@ down , straightforward mid @-@ tempo ballad with influences of folk in it and features lyrics like " Hey you / Don 't you give up / It 's not so bad / There 's still a chance for us . " The lyric conveys the message that purifying your own soul can open the way , by which one can change the mind of others . According to The New York Times , the lyrics have straightforward , anthem @-@ like meaning with lines like " You can change someone else / Then you have saved someone else / But you must first love yourself . " Daryl Davis from Blogcritics felt that " Hey You " is about making the world a better place . The song begins with the sound of acoustic guitars , leading to an instrumental chorus , which according to Davis , is " simple and touching " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Sarah Hall from E ! Online called the song to be unlikely inspiring to the listeners to hit the dance floor . Jon Pareles from The New York Times , while reviewing the Live Earth concert in London , said that the song and its lyrics like " Don ’ t you give up / it ’ s not so bad " are not exactly eloquent . While reviewing Madonna 's album Hard Candy , he commented that " Hey You " failed to be the equivalent of Madonna 's cover version of John Lennon 's song " Imagine " . He also noted that " [ t ] he song came and went , raising some corporate donations " . Alessandra Stanley from The New York Times commented that the song had a modest message with lines like " Don 't you give up / it 's not so bad / there 's still a chance for us . " 
 Michael <unk> from The Atlantic Monthly said that the song was proof that Madonna 's heart was in the right place . Responses from the Madonna fansites were also mixed with some fans decrying the track 's message as overly sentimental and the lyrics as weak , while others defended the song as " sweet " and " not that bad , " while commending the singer 's commitment to charity . Daryl D from Blogcritics felt that " even if the lyrics are slightly clichéd , Madonna gives her best vocal performance since the Evita years and adds feeling when the lyrics falter .... The production on this record is outstanding . It also proves that Madonna brings more to the table on her own records than her critics give her credit for because this sounds absolutely nothing like a song Pharrell Williams would produce . The acoustic guitars at the beginning lead to an instrumental chorus that is simple and touching . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Hey You " was promoted through the official Live Earth website and the July 7 , 2007 concert in London . There was no physical single released . However , it managed to chart in countries like Canada , Sweden and Switzerland in its second week of release based purely on paid downloads . In Canada the song entered for one week on the Canadian Hot 100 chart at position fifty @-@ seven and was present for one week only . In Switzerland , it entered the chart at number 60 , but fell down to number 91 the next week . The song started climbing up again and ultimately reached a peak of number 55 on the chart issue dated September 2 , 2007 . " Hey You " was present on the chart for a total of seven weeks . It debuted on the Swedish Singles Chart at number 58 and reached a peak of 57 , being present on the chart for three weeks . The song was also able to chart at the lower positions of the UK Singles Chart , at number 187 based on downloads . In the Czech Republic , it reached the top ten and peaked at number nine on the airplay charts . " Hey You " also entered on the Digital charts of Italy , reaching a peak of number 36 in its fourth week . In the United States , the song sold 3 @,@ 000 digital downloads after it was made non @-@ free on iTunes Store . The song was not eligible to chart on the Hot Digital Songs since both Billboard and Nielsen SoundScan do not allow free downloads to chart . 
 = = Live performance = = 
 On May 17 , 2007 , Warner Bros. Records announced Madonna as one of the seventeen headliners performing at Wembley Stadium for the London stop of the Live Earth concerts . It is still the only venue where Madonna has performed the song . Madonna 's set list was the last performance of the London leg before the concert moved to New York City . " Hey You " was the first of the set list which consisted of a total of four songs . It was also used as the bridging music between the bands performing at Wembley . The performance started with the symbolic turning @-@ off of lights of the stadium which plunged it into darkness except for the lights on the stage and that from the cameras . Actor Terence Stamp who compered the show , declared " Let ’ s not be <unk> by this , let 's be <unk> by this . Let it be the beginning of an adventure ! " Madonna came out on the stage wearing a black satin leotard accompanied by a long line of children in school uniform . The children were compared to the Hogwarts school choir from the Harry Potter series by The New York Times . Madonna started singing the song while holding the amplifier in her hand . The backdrop imitated the song 's message by displaying a procession of images of environmental devastations like fires , nuclear power plants , suffering animals — which altered with images of visionary leaders like Nelson Mandela , Aung San Suu Kyi , Mahatma Gandhi , and current political leaders like George W. Bush , Gordon Brown and Nicolas Sarkozy . The video progressed to display the image of <unk> but nonetheless festive African children tossing a globe into the air , where it resolved into an image of the Earth as seen from space . The idea of the video was to transpose the images of the world leaders with natural disasters . The lyrics of the song were also projected as supertitles . Backing vocals were provided by the children . The performance ended with Madonna and the kids coming in front of the stage and saluting the crowd . This backdrop was created by Johan Söderberg and Marcus <unk> to support Live Earth . The performance saw an increase in Madonna 's digital and album sales . HMV reported that sales of Madonna 's 1990 greatest hits compilation The Immaculate Collection doubled up than that from the previous week of the performance . Also , there was an increase in the downloads of " Hey You " from the retailers . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – writer , producer 
 Mirwais Ahmadzaï – guitar 
 Pharrell Williams – producer , guitar , keyboards 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Guadalcanal Campaign = 
 The Guadalcanal Campaign , also known as the Battle of Guadalcanal and code @-@ named Operation Watchtower , originally applying only to an operation to take the island of Tulagi , by Allied forces , was a military campaign fought between 7 August 1942 and 9 February 1943 on and around the island of Guadalcanal in the Pacific theater of World War II . It was the first major offensive by Allied forces against the Empire of Japan . 
 On 7 August 1942 , Allied forces , predominantly United States ( US ) Marines , landed on the islands of Guadalcanal , Tulagi , and Florida in the southern Solomon Islands , with the objective of denying their use by the Japanese to threaten Allied supply and communication routes between the US , Australia , and New Zealand . The Allies also intended to use Guadalcanal and Tulagi as bases to support a campaign to eventually capture or neutralize the major Japanese base at Rabaul on New Britain . The Allies overwhelmed the outnumbered Japanese defenders , who had occupied the islands since May 1942 , and captured Tulagi and Florida , as well as an airfield ( later named Henderson Field ) that was under construction on Guadalcanal . Powerful American naval forces supported the landings . 
 Surprised by the Allied offensive , the Japanese made several attempts between August and November to retake Henderson Field . Three major land battles , seven large naval battles ( five nighttime surface actions and two carrier battles ) , and continual , almost daily , aerial battles culminated in the decisive Naval Battle of Guadalcanal in early November , in which the last Japanese attempt to bombard Henderson Field from the sea and land with enough troops to retake it , was defeated . In December , the Japanese abandoned their efforts to retake Guadalcanal and evacuated their remaining forces by 7 February 1943 , in the face of an offensive by the US Army 's XIV Corps . 
 The Guadalcanal campaign was a significant strategic combined arms Allied victory in the Pacific theater . The Japanese had reached the peak of their conquests in the Pacific . The victories at Milne Bay , Buna @-@ Gona , and Guadalcanal marked the Allied transition from defensive operations to the strategic initiative in the theater , leading to offensive operations such as the Solomon Islands , New Guinea , and Central Pacific campaigns , that eventually resulted in Japan 's eventual surrender and the end of World War II . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Strategic considerations = = = 
 On 7 December 1941 , Japanese forces attacked the United States Pacific Fleet at Pearl Harbor , Hawaii . The attack crippled much of the U.S. battleship fleet and precipitated an open and formal state of war between the two nations . The initial goals of Japanese leaders were to neutralize the US Navy , seize possessions rich in natural resources , and establish strategic military bases to defend Japan 's empire in the Pacific Ocean and Asia . To further those goals , Japanese forces captured the Philippines , Thailand , Malaya , Singapore , Burma , the Dutch East Indies , Wake Island , Gilbert Islands , New Britain and Guam . Joining the U.S. in the war against Japan were the rest of the Allied powers , several of whom , including the United Kingdom , Australia and the Netherlands had also been attacked by Japan . 
 Two attempts by the Japanese to continue their strategic initiative and offensively extend their outer defensive perimeter in the south and central Pacific to where they could threaten Australia and Hawaii or the US West Coast were thwarted at the naval battles of Coral Sea and Midway respectively . Coral Sea was a tactical stalemate , but a strategic Allied victory which became clear only much later . Midway was not only the Allies ' first clear major victory against the Japanese , it significantly reduced the offensive capability of Japan 's carrier forces , but did not change their offensive mindset for several crucial months in which they compounded mistakes by moving ahead with brash , even brazen decisions , such as the attempt to assault Port Moresby over the Kokoda trail . Up to this point , the Allies had been on the defensive in the Pacific but these strategic victories provided them an opportunity to seize the initiative from Japan . 
 The Allies chose the Solomon Islands ( a protectorate of the United Kingdom ) , specifically the southern Solomon Islands of Guadalcanal , Tulagi and Florida Island , as the first target , designated Task One , codenamed <unk> , with three specific objectives . Originally the objectives were the occupation of the Santa Cruz Islands , codenamed Huddle , Tulagi , codenamed Watchtower , and " adjacent positions " . Guadalcanal ( Code name Cactus ) , eventually the focus of the operation , was not even mentioned in the early directive and only later took on the operation name Watchtower . 
 The Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) had occupied Tulagi in May 1942 and had constructed a seaplane base nearby . Allied concern grew when , in early July 1942 , the IJN began constructing a large airfield at Lunga Point on nearby Guadalcanal — from such a base Japanese long @-@ range bombers would threaten the sea lines of communication from the West Coast of the Americas to the populous East Coast of Australia . By August 1942 , the Japanese had about 900 naval troops on Tulagi and nearby islands and 2 @,@ 800 personnel ( 2 @,@ 200 being Korean forced laborers & trustees as well as Japanese construction specialists ) on Guadalcanal . These bases would protect Japan 's major base at Rabaul , threaten Allied supply and communication lines and establish a staging area for a planned offensive against Fiji , New Caledonia and Samoa ( Operation FS ) . The Japanese planned to deploy 45 fighters and 60 bombers to Guadalcanal . In the overall strategy for 1942 these aircraft could provide air cover for Japanese naval forces advancing farther into the South Pacific . 
 The Allied plan to invade the southern Solomons was conceived by U.S. Admiral Ernest King , Commander in Chief , United States Fleet . He proposed the offensive to deny the use of the islands by the Japanese as bases to threaten the supply routes between the United States and Australia and to use them as starting points . With US President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's tacit consent , King also advocated the invasion of Guadalcanal . Because the United States supported Great Britain 's proposal that priority be given to defeating Germany before Japan , the Pacific theater had to compete for personnel and resources with the European theater . 
 An early obstacle was desire by both the Army and Roosevelt to initiate action in Europe . In addition there was an issue of command in which Tulagi lay in the area under command of General Douglas MacArthur while the Santa Cruz Islands lay in Admiral Chester W. Nimitz 's Pacific Ocean Area which would also supply almost all offensive forces that would prepare and be supplied and covered from that area . Both were overcome and Chief of Staff of the U. S. Army , General George C. Marshall gave the operation full support , even if MacArthur 's command could not lend support , and the Navy had to take full responsibility . As a result , and in order to preserve unity of command , the boundary between MacArthur 's Southwest Pacific Area and Nimitz 's Pacific Ocean Area was shifted 60 miles ( 97 km ) to 360 miles ( 580 km ) to the west effective 1 August 1942 . 
 The <unk> ordered for 1942 – 43 Pacific objectives : that Guadalcanal would be carried out in conjunction with an Allied offensive in New Guinea under Douglas MacArthur , to capture the Admiralty Islands and the Bismarck Archipelago , including the major Japanese base at Rabaul . The directive held that the eventual goal was the American reconquest of the Philippines . The U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff created the South Pacific theater , with Vice Admiral Robert L. Ghormley taking command on 19 June 1942 , to direct the offensive in the Solomons . Admiral Chester Nimitz , based at Pearl Harbor , was designated as overall Allied commander in chief for Pacific forces . 
 = = = Task force = = = 
 In preparation for the offensive in the Pacific in May 1942 , U.S. Marine Major General Alexander Vandegrift was ordered to move his 1st Marine Division from the United States to New Zealand . Other Allied land , naval and air force units were sent to establish or reinforce bases in Fiji , Samoa , New Hebrides and New Caledonia . Espiritu Santo , New Hebrides , was selected as the headquarters and main base for the offensive , codenamed Operation Watchtower , with the commencement date set for 7 August 1942 . 
 At first , the Allied offensive was planned just for Tulagi and the Santa Cruz Islands , omitting Guadalcanal . After Allied reconnaissance discovered the Japanese airfield construction efforts on Guadalcanal , its capture was added to the plan and the Santa Cruz operation was ( eventually ) dropped . The Japanese were aware , via signals intelligence , of the large @-@ scale movement of Allied forces in the South Pacific area but concluded that the Allies were reinforcing Australia and perhaps Port Moresby in New Guinea . 
 The Watchtower force , numbering 75 warships and transports ( of vessels from the U.S. and Australia ) , assembled near Fiji on 26 July 1942 and engaged in one rehearsal landing prior to leaving for Guadalcanal on 31 July . The commander of the Allied expeditionary force was U.S. Vice Admiral Frank Fletcher ( whose flag was on the aircraft carrier USS Saratoga ) . Commanding the amphibious forces was U.S. Rear Admiral Richmond K. Turner . Vandegrift led the 16 @,@ 000 Allied ( primarily U.S. Marine ) infantry earmarked for the landings . 
 The troops sent to Guadalcanal were fresh from military training and armed with bolt action <unk> Springfield rifles and a meager 10 @-@ day supply of ammunition . Because of the need to get them into battle quickly , the operation planners had reduced their supplies from a 90 @-@ days to only 60 days . The men of the 1st Marine Division began referring to the coming battle as " Operation Shoestring " . 
 = = Events = = 
 = = = Landings = = = 
 Bad weather allowed the Allied expeditionary force to arrive unseen by the Japanese on the night of 6 August and the morning of 7 August , taking the defenders by surprise . This is sometimes called the Midnight Raid on Guadalcanal . Japanese patrol aircraft from Tulagi had searched the area the Allied invasion fleet was moving through , but missed seeing the Allied ships due to severe storms and heavy clouds . The landing force split into two groups , with one group assaulting Guadalcanal , and the other Tulagi , Florida , and nearby islands . Allied warships bombarded the invasion beaches while U.S. carrier aircraft bombed Japanese positions on the target islands and destroyed 15 Japanese seaplanes at their base near Tulagi . 
 Tulagi and two nearby small islands , Gavutu and Tanambogo , were assaulted by 3 @,@ 000 U.S. Marines . The 886 IJN personnel manning the naval and seaplane bases on the three islands fiercely resisted the Marine attacks . With some difficulty , the Marines secured all three islands ; Tulagi on 8 August , and Gavutu and Tanambogo by 9 August . The Japanese defenders were killed almost to the last man , while the Marines suffered 122 killed . 
 In contrast to Tulagi , Gavutu , and Tanambogo , the landings on Guadalcanal encountered much less resistance . At 09 : 10 on 7 August , Vandegrift and 11 @,@ 000 U.S. Marines came ashore on Guadalcanal between Koli Point and Lunga Point . Advancing towards Lunga Point , they encountered little resistance and secured the airfield by 16 : 00 on 8 August . The Japanese naval construction units and combat troops , under the command of Captain Kanae <unk> , panicked by the warship bombardment and aerial bombing , had abandoned the airfield area and fled about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) west to the Matanikau River and Point Cruz area , leaving behind food , supplies , intact construction equipment and vehicles , and 13 dead . 
 During the landing operations on 7 and 8 August , Japanese naval aircraft based at Rabaul , under the command of Sadayoshi Yamada , attacked the Allied amphibious forces several times , setting afire the transport USS George F. Elliot ( which sank two days later ) and heavily damaging the destroyer USS Jarvis . In the air attacks over the two days , the Japanese lost 36 aircraft , while the U.S. lost 19 , both in combat and to accident , including 14 carrier fighters . 
 After these clashes , Fletcher was concerned about the losses to his carrier fighter aircraft strength , anxious about the threat to his carriers from further Japanese air attacks , and worried about his ships ' fuel levels . Fletcher withdrew from the Solomon Islands area with his carrier task forces the evening of 8 August . As a result of the loss of carrier @-@ based air cover , Turner decided to withdraw his ships from Guadalcanal , even though less than half of the supplies and heavy equipment needed by the troops ashore had been unloaded . Turner planned , however , to unload as many supplies as possible on Guadalcanal and Tulagi throughout the night of 8 August and then depart with his ships early on 9 August . 
 = = = Battle of Savo Island = = = 
 That night , as the transports unloaded , two groups of screening Allied cruisers and destroyers , under the command of British Rear Admiral Victor Crutchley VC , were surprised and defeated by a Japanese force of seven cruisers and one destroyer from the 8th Fleet based at Rabaul and Kavieng and commanded by Japanese Vice Admiral Gunichi Mikawa . In the Battle of Savo Island one Australian and three American cruisers were sunk and one American cruiser and two destroyers were damaged . The Japanese suffered moderate damage to one cruiser . Mikawa , who was unaware Fletcher was preparing to withdraw with the U.S. carriers , immediately retired to Rabaul without attempting to attack the transports . Mikawa was concerned about daylight U.S. carrier air attacks if he remained in the area . Bereft of his carrier air cover , Turner decided to withdraw his remaining naval forces by the evening of 9 August and in so doing left the Marines ashore without much of the heavy equipment , provisions and troops still aboard the transports . Mikawa 's decision not to attempt to destroy the Allied transport ships when he had the opportunity proved to be a crucial strategic mistake . 
 = = = Initial operations = = = 
 The 11 @,@ 000 Marines on Guadalcanal initially concentrated on forming a loose defensive perimeter around Lunga Point and the airfield , moving the landed supplies within the perimeter and finishing the airfield . In four days of intense effort , the supplies were moved from the landing beach into dispersed dumps within the perimeter . Work began on the airfield immediately , mainly using captured Japanese equipment . On 12 August the airfield was named Henderson Field after Lofton R. Henderson , a Marine aviator who was killed during the Battle of Midway . By 18 August the airfield was ready for operation . Five days worth of food had been landed from the transports , which , along with captured Japanese provisions , gave the Marines a total of 14 days worth of food . To conserve supplies , the troops were limited to two meals per day . 
 Allied troops encountered a severe strain of dysentery soon after the landings , with one in five Marines afflicted by mid @-@ August . Tropical diseases would affect the fighting strengths of both sides throughout the campaign . Although some of the Korean construction workers surrendered to the Marines , most of the remaining Japanese and Korean personnel gathered just west of the Lunga perimeter on the west bank of the Matanikau River and subsisted mainly on coconuts . A Japanese naval outpost was also located at Taivu Point , about 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) east of the Lunga perimeter . On 8 August , a Japanese destroyer from Rabaul delivered 113 naval reinforcement troops to the Matanikau position . 
 = = = The Goettge Patrol = = = 
 On the evening of 12 August , a 25 @-@ man U.S. Marine patrol , led by Division D @-@ 2 Lieutenant Colonel Frank Goettge and primarily consisting of intelligence personnel , landed by boat west of the Lunga perimeter , between Point Cruz and the Matanikau River , on a reconnaissance mission with a secondary objective of contacting a group of Japanese troops that U.S. forces believed might be willing to surrender . Soon after the patrol landed , a nearby platoon of Japanese naval troops attacked and almost completely wiped out the Marine patrol . 
 In response , on 19 August , Vandegrift sent three companies of the U.S. 5th Marine Regiment to attack the Japanese troop concentration west of the Matanikau . One company attacked across the sandbar at the mouth of the Matanikau river while another crossed the river 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 1 @,@ 100 yd ) inland and attacked the Japanese forces located in Matanikau village . The third landed by boat further west and attacked Kokumbuna village . After briefly occupying the two villages , the three Marine companies returned to the Lunga perimeter , having killed about 65 Japanese soldiers while losing four Marines . This action , sometimes referred to as the " First Battle of the Matanikau " , was the first of several major actions around the Matanikau River during the campaign . 
 On 20 August , the escort carrier USS Long Island delivered two squadrons of Marine aircraft to Henderson Field , one a squadron of 19 Grumman F4F Wildcats and the other a squadron of 12 Douglas SBD Dauntlesses . The aircraft at Henderson became known as the " Cactus Air Force " ( CAF ) after the Allied codename for Guadalcanal . The Marine fighters went into action the next day on the first of the almost @-@ daily Japanese bomber air raids . On 22 August five U.S. Army Bell P @-@ 400 Airacobras and their pilots arrived at Henderson Field . 
 = = = Battle of the Tenaru = = = 
 In response to the Allied landings on Guadalcanal , the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters assigned the Imperial Japanese Army 's ( IJA ) 17th Army , a corps @-@ sized command based at Rabaul and under the command of Lieutenant General Harukichi Hyakutake , the task of retaking Guadalcanal . The army was to be supported by Japanese naval units , including the Combined Fleet under the command of Isoroku Yamamoto , which was headquartered at Truk . The 17th Army , at that time heavily involved in the Japanese campaign in New Guinea , had only a few units available . Of these , the 35th Infantry Brigade under Major General Kiyotake Kawaguchi was at Palau , the 4th ( Aoba ) Infantry Regiment was in the Philippines and the 28th ( Ichiki ) Infantry Regiment , under the command of Colonel Kiyonao Ichiki , was on board transport ships near Guam . The different units began to move towards Guadalcanal via Truk and Rabaul immediately , but Ichiki 's regiment , being the closest , arrived in the area first . A " First Element " of Ichiki 's unit , consisting of about 917 soldiers , landed from destroyers at Taivu Point , east of the Lunga perimeter , after midnight on 19 August , then made a 9 @-@ mile ( 14 km ) night march west toward the Marine perimeter . 
 <unk> the strength of Allied forces on Guadalcanal , Ichiki 's unit conducted a nighttime frontal assault on Marine positions at Alligator Creek ( often called the " Ilu River " on U.S. Marine maps ) on the east side of the Lunga perimeter in the early morning hours of 21 August . Ichiki 's assault was defeated with heavy Japanese losses in what became known as the Battle of the Tenaru . After daybreak , the Marine units counterattacked Ichiki 's surviving troops , killing many more of them . The dead included Ichiki , though it has been claimed that he committed seppuku after realizing the magnitude of his defeat , rather than dying in combat . In total , all but 128 of the original 917 members of the Ichiki Regiment 's First Element were killed in the battle . The survivors returned to Taivu Point , notified 17th Army headquarters of their defeat and awaited further reinforcements and orders from Rabaul . 
 = = = Battle of the Eastern Solomons = = = 
 As the Tenaru battle was ending , more Japanese reinforcements were already on their way . Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto put together a very powerful expeditionary force . Their aim was to destroy any American fleet units in the area , and then eliminate Henderson Field . This force sortied from Truk on 23 August . Simultaneously , several other reinforcement , support , and bombardment groups sortied from both Truk and Rabaul . Three slow transports departed from Truk on 16 August carrying the remaining 1 @,@ 400 soldiers from Ichiki 's ( 28th ) Infantry Regiment plus 500 naval marines from the 5th Yokosuka Special Naval Landing Force . The transports were guarded by 13 warships commanded by Japanese Rear Admiral Raizo Tanaka , who planned to land the troops on Guadalcanal on 24 August . To cover the landings of these troops and provide support for the operation to retake Henderson Field from Allied forces , Yamamoto directed Chuichi Nagumo to sortie with a carrier force from Truk on 21 August and head towards the southern Solomon Islands . Nagumo 's force included three carriers and 30 other warships . 
 Simultaneously , three U.S. carrier task forces under Fletcher approached Guadalcanal to counter the Japanese offensive efforts . The American forces only had two carriers , which were the Saratoga and Enterprise , and their 176 aircraft to meet the two Japanese fleet carriers <unk> and Zuikaku and the light carrier Ryujo . The Japanese had 177 aircraft . On 24 and 25 August , the two carrier forces fought the Battle of the Eastern Solomons , which resulted in both fleets retreating from the area after taking some damage , with the Japanese losing one light aircraft carrier . Yamamoto next sent the light carrier named Ryujo on a bait role ahead of the rest of the fleet , and sending its planes to attack Guadalcanal . This drew attention from the American pilots . Meanwhile , the aircraft from the two fleet carriers would next charge in to attack the Americans . The bait carrier Ryujo was overwhelmed . It was hit by several 1 @,@ 000 pound bombs then subsequently was hit by an aerial torpedo . The ship was then abandoned and eventually sank that same night . Tanaka 's convoy , after suffering heavy damage during the battle from an air attack by CAF aircraft from Henderson Field , including the sinking of one of the transports , was forced to divert to the Shortland Islands in the northern Solomons in order to transfer the surviving troops to destroyers for later delivery to Guadalcanal . The Japanese had launched an air raid on Guadalcanal , causing chaos and havoc , while American Marine aircraft had engaged Tanaka 's convoy which was headed by the flagship Jintsu near Taivu Point . A Japanese transport was sunk . The older destroyer Mutsuki was so badly damaged that it had to be scuttled . Several other warships were damaged including Tanaka 's own Jintsu . At this point , Tanaka withdrew and rescheduled the supply run for the night of 28 August via the destroyers . Meanwhile , the American carrier Wasp positioned itself east of Guadalcanal expecting Japanese movement there . However , there was none to be found . Strategically , the Japanese had an opportunity here for a decisive victory . However , they failed to achieve it . They allowed the Americans to step away with a view of victory . In addition , the reinforcement of Henderson Field of Guadalcanal by Enterprise 's aircraft established a precedent . This made daylight supply runs to Guadalcanal impossible for Japanese shipments . Only weeks before this , the Japanese had total control of the sea in this particular region ; now they were forced to make supply runs only under the cover of darkness . 
 = = = Air battles over Henderson Field and strengthening of the Lunga defenses = = = 
 Throughout August , small numbers of U.S. aircraft and their crews continued to arrive at Guadalcanal . By the end of August , 64 aircraft of various types were stationed at Henderson Field . On 3 September , the commander of 1st Marine Aircraft Wing , U.S. Marine Brigadier General Roy S. Geiger , arrived with his staff and took command of all air operations at Henderson Field . Air battles between the Allied aircraft at Henderson and Japanese bombers and fighters from Rabaul continued almost daily . Between 26 August and 5 September , the U.S. lost about 15 aircraft while the Japanese lost approximately 19 aircraft . More than half of the downed U.S. aircrews were rescued while most of the Japanese aircrews were never recovered . The eight @-@ hour round trip flight from Rabaul to Guadalcanal , about 1 @,@ 120 miles ( 1 @,@ 800 km ) total , seriously hampered Japanese efforts to establish air superiority over Henderson Field . Australian coastwatchers on Bougainville and New Georgia islands were often able to provide Allied forces on Guadalcanal with advance notice of inbound Japanese air strikes , allowing the U.S. fighters time to take off and position themselves to attack the Japanese bombers and fighters as they approached the island . Thus , the Japanese air forces were slowly losing a war of attrition in the skies above Guadalcanal . 
 During this time , Vandegrift continued to direct efforts to strengthen and improve the defenses of the Lunga perimeter . Between 21 August and 3 September , he relocated three Marine battalions , including the 1st Raider Battalion , under Merritt A. Edson ( Edson 's Raiders ) , and the 1st Parachute Battalion from Tulagi and Gavutu to Guadalcanal . These units added about 1 @,@ 500 troops to Vandegrift 's original 11 @,@ 000 men defending Henderson Field . The 1st Parachute Battalion , which had suffered heavy casualties in the Battle of Tulagi and Gavutu @-@ Tanambogo in August , was placed under Edson 's command . 
 The other relocated battalion , the 1st Battalion , 5th Marine Regiment ( 1 / 5 ) , was landed by boat west of the Matanikau near Kokumbuna village on 27 August with the mission of attacking Japanese units in the area , much as in the first Matanikau action of 19 August . In this case , however , the Marines were impeded by difficult terrain , hot sun , and well @-@ emplaced Japanese defenses . The next morning , the Marines found that the Japanese defenders had departed during the night , so the Marines returned to the Lunga perimeter by boat . Losses in this action were 20 Japanese and 3 Marines killed . 
 Small Allied naval convoys arrived at Guadalcanal on 23 August , 29 August , 1 September , and 8 September to provide the Marines at Lunga with more food , ammunition , aircraft fuel , and aircraft technicians . The convoy on 1 September also brought 392 construction engineers to maintain and improve Henderson Field . 
 = = = Tokyo Express = = = 
 By 23 August , Kawaguchi 's 35th Infantry Brigade reached Truk and was loaded onto slow transport ships for the rest of the trip to Guadalcanal . The damage done to Tanaka 's convoy during the Battle of the Eastern Solomons caused the Japanese to reconsider trying to deliver more troops to Guadalcanal by slow transport . Instead , the ships carrying Kawaguchi 's soldiers were sent to Rabaul . From there , the Japanese planned to deliver Kawaguchi 's men to Guadalcanal by destroyers staging through a Japanese naval base in the Shortland Islands . The Japanese destroyers were usually able to make round trips down " The Slot " ( New Georgia Sound ) to Guadalcanal and back in a single night throughout the campaign , minimizing their exposure to Allied air attack . The runs became known as the " Tokyo Express " to Allied forces and were labeled " Rat Transportation " by the Japanese . Delivering the troops in this manner , however , prevented most of the heavy equipment and supplies , such as heavy artillery , vehicles , and much food and ammunition , from being transported to Guadalcanal with them . In addition , this activity tied up destroyers the IJN desperately needed for commerce defense . Either inability or unwillingness prevented Allied naval commanders from challenging Japanese naval forces at night , so the Japanese controlled the seas around the Solomon Islands during nighttime . However , any Japanese ship remaining during daylight hours within range of the aircraft at Henderson Field , about 200 miles ( 320 km ) , was in great danger from air attack . This tactical situation existed for the next several months of the campaign . 
 Between 29 August and 4 September , various Japanese light cruisers , destroyers , and patrol boats were able to land almost 5 @,@ 000 troops at Taivu Point , including most of the 35th Infantry Brigade , much of the Aoba ( 4th ) Regiment , and the rest of Ichiki 's regiment . General Kawaguchi , who landed at Taivu Point on 31 August Express run , was placed in command of all Japanese forces on Guadalcanal . A barge convoy took another 1 @,@ 000 soldiers of Kawaguchi 's brigade , under the command of Colonel Akinosuke Oka , to Kamimbo , west of the Lunga perimeter . 
 = = = Battle of Edson 's Ridge = = = 
 On 7 September , Kawaguchi issued his attack plan to " rout and annihilate the enemy in the vicinity of the Guadalcanal Island airfield . " Kawaguchi 's attack plan called for his forces , split into three divisions , to approach the Lunga perimeter inland , culminating with a surprise night attack . Oka 's forces would attack the perimeter from the west while Ichiki 's Second Echelon , now renamed the Kuma Battalion , would attack from the east . The main attack would be by Kawaguchi 's " Center Body " , numbering 3 @,@ 000 men in three battalions , from the jungle south of the Lunga perimeter . By 7 September , most of Kawaguchi 's troops had departed Taivu to begin marching towards Lunga Point along the coastline . About 250 Japanese troops remained behind to guard the brigade 's supply base at Taivu . 
 Meanwhile , native scouts under the direction of Martin Clemens , a coastwatcher officer in the Solomon Islands Protectorate Defense Force and the British district officer for Guadalcanal , brought reports to the U.S. Marines of Japanese troops at Taivu near the village of Tasimboko . Edson planned a raid on the Japanese troop concentration at Taivu . On 8 September , after being dropped @-@ off near Taivu by boat , Edson 's men captured Tasimboko as the Japanese defenders retreated into the jungle . In Tasimboko , Edson 's troops discovered Kawaguchi 's main supply depot , including large stockpiles of food , ammunition , medical supplies , and a powerful shortwave radio . After destroying everything in sight , except for some documents and equipment carried back with them , the Marines returned to the Lunga perimeter . The mounds of supplies along with intelligence gathered from the captured documents informed the Marines that at least 3 @,@ 000 Japanese troops were on the island and apparently planning an attack . 
 Edson , along with Colonel Gerald C. Thomas , Vandegrift 's operations officer , correctly believed that the Japanese attack would come at a narrow , grassy , 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) -long , coral ridge that ran parallel to the Lunga River located just south of Henderson Field . The ridge , called Lunga Ridge , offered a natural avenue of approach to the airfield , commanded the surrounding area and , at that time , was almost undefended . On 11 September , the 840 men of Edson 's battalion were deployed onto and around the ridge . 
 On the night of 12 September , Kawaguchi 's 1st Battalion attacked the Raiders between the Lunga River and ridge , forcing one Marine company to fall back to the ridge before the Japanese halted their attack for the night . The next night Kawaguchi faced Edson 's 830 Raiders with 3 @,@ 000 troops of his brigade plus an assortment of light artillery . The Japanese attack began just after nightfall with Kawaguchi 's 1st battalion assaulting Edson 's right flank just to the west of the ridge . After breaking through the Marine lines the battalion 's assault was eventually stopped by Marine units guarding the northern part of the ridge . 
 Two companies from Kawaguchi 's 2nd Battalion charged up the southern edge of the ridge and pushed Edson 's troops back to Hill 123 on the center part of the ridge . Throughout the night Marines at this position supported by artillery defeated wave after wave of frontal Japanese attacks , some of which resulted in hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting . Japanese units that infiltrated past the ridge to the edge of the airfield were also repulsed . Attacks by the Kuma battalion and Oka 's unit at other locations on the Lunga perimeter were also defeated . On 14 September Kawaguchi led the survivors of his shattered brigade on a five @-@ day march west to the Matanikau Valley to join with Oka 's unit . In total Kawaguchi 's forces lost about 850 killed and the Marines 104 . 
 On 15 September Hyakutake at Rabaul learned of Kawaguchi 's defeat and forwarded the news to Imperial General Headquarters in Japan . In an emergency session the top Japanese IJA and IJN command staffs concluded that , " Guadalcanal might develop into the decisive battle of the war . " The results of the battle now began to have a telling strategic impact on Japanese operations in other areas of the Pacific . Hyakutake realized that in order to send sufficient troops and matériel to defeat the Allied forces on Guadalcanal he could not at the same time support the major ongoing Japanese offensive on the Kokoda Track in New Guinea . Hyakutake , with the concurrence of General Headquarters , ordered his troops on New Guinea who were within 30 miles ( 48 km ) of their objective of Port Moresby to withdraw until the " Guadalcanal matter " was resolved . Hyakutake prepared to send more troops to Guadalcanal for another attempt to recapture Henderson Field . 
 = = = Reinforcement = = = 
 As the Japanese regrouped west of the Matanikau , the U.S. forces concentrated on shoring up and strengthening their Lunga defenses . On 14 September Vandegrift moved another battalion , the 3rd Battalion , 2nd Marine Regiment ( 3 / 2 ) , from Tulagi to Guadalcanal . On 18 September an Allied naval convoy delivered 4 @,@ 157 men from the 3rd Provisional Marine Brigade ( the 7th Marine Regiment plus a battalion from the 11th Marine Regiment and some additional support units ) , 137 vehicles , tents , aviation fuel , ammunition , rations and engineering equipment to Guadalcanal . These crucial reinforcements allowed Vandegrift , beginning on 19 September , to establish an unbroken line of defense around the Lunga perimeter . While covering this convoy the aircraft carrier USS Wasp was sunk by the Japanese submarine I @-@ 19 southeast of Guadalcanal , temporarily leaving only one Allied aircraft carrier ( USS Hornet ) in operation in the South Pacific area . Vandegrift also made some changes in the senior leadership of his combat units , transferring off the island several officers who did not meet his performance standards and promoting junior officers who had proven themselves to take their places . One of these was the recently promoted Colonel Merritt Edson who was placed in command of the 5th Marine Regiment . 
 A lull occurred in the air war over Guadalcanal , with no Japanese air raids occurring between 14 and 27 September due to bad weather , during which both sides reinforced their respective air units . The Japanese delivered 85 fighters and bombers to their air units at Rabaul while the U.S. brought 23 fighters and attack aircraft to Henderson Field . On 20 September the Japanese counted 117 total aircraft at Rabaul while the Allies tallied 71 aircraft at Henderson Field . The air war resumed with a Japanese air raid on Guadalcanal on 27 September which was contested by U.S. Navy and Marine fighters from Henderson Field . 
 The Japanese immediately began to prepare for their next attempt to recapture Henderson Field . The 3rd Battalion , 4th ( Aoba ) Infantry Regiment had landed at Kamimbo Bay on the western end of Guadalcanal on 11 September , too late to join Kawaguchi 's attack . By now , though , the battalion had joined Oka 's forces near the Matanikau . Tokyo Express runs by destroyers on 14 , 20 , 21 and 24 September brought food and ammunition as well as 280 men from the 1st Battalion , Aoba Regiment , to Kamimbo on Guadalcanal . Meanwhile , the Japanese 2nd and 38th Infantry Divisions were transported from the Dutch East Indies to Rabaul beginning on 13 September . The Japanese planned to transport a total of 17 @,@ 500 troops from these two divisions to Guadalcanal to take part in the next major attack on the Lunga Perimeter set for 20 October 1942 . 
 = = = Actions along the Matanikau = = = 
 Vandegrift and his staff were aware that Kawaguchi 's troops had retreated to the area west of the Matanikau and that numerous groups of Japanese stragglers were scattered throughout the area between the Lunga Perimeter and the Matanikau River . Vandegrift , therefore , decided to conduct another series of small unit operations around the Matanikau Valley . The purpose of these operations was to mop up the scattered groups of Japanese troops east of the Matanikau and to keep the main body of Japanese soldiers off @-@ balance to prevent them from consolidating their positions so close to the main Marine defenses at Lunga Point . 
 The first U.S. Marine operation conducted between 23 and 27 September by elements of three U.S. Marine battalions , an attack on Japanese forces west of the Matanikau , was repulsed by Kawaguchi 's troops under Akinosuke Oka 's local command . During the action three Marine companies were surrounded by Japanese forces near Point Cruz west of the Matanikau , took heavy losses , and barely escaped with assistance from the destroyer USS Monssen and landing craft manned by U.S. Coast Guard personnel . 
 In the second action between 6 and 9 October a larger force of Marines successfully crossed the Matanikau River , attacked newly landed Japanese forces from the 2nd Infantry Division under the command of generals Masao Maruyama and Yumio Nasu , and inflicted heavy losses on the Japanese 4th Infantry Regiment . The second action forced the Japanese to retreat from their positions east of the Matanikau and hindered Japanese preparations for their planned major offensive on the U.S. Lunga defenses . 
 Between 9 and 11 October the U.S. 1st Battalion 2nd Marines raided two small Japanese outposts about 30 miles ( 48 km ) east of the Lunga perimeter at <unk> and <unk> near Aola Bay . The raids killed 35 Japanese at a cost of 17 Marines and three U.S. Navy personnel killed . 
 = = = Battle of Cape Esperance = = = 
 Throughout the last week of September and the first week of October , Tokyo Express runs delivered troops from the Japanese 2nd Infantry Division to Guadalcanal . The Japanese Navy promised to support the Army 's planned offensive by not only delivering the necessary troops , equipment , and supplies to the island , but by stepping @-@ up air attacks on Henderson Field and sending warships to bombard the airfield . 
 In the meantime , Millard F. Harmon , commander of United States Army forces in the South Pacific , convinced Ghormley that U.S. Marine forces on Guadalcanal needed to be reinforced immediately if the Allies were to successfully defend the island from the next , expected Japanese offensive . Thus , on 8 October , the 2 @,@ 837 men of the 164th Infantry Regiment from the U.S. Army 's Americal Division boarded ships at New Caledonia for the trip to Guadalcanal with a projected arrival date of 13 October . To protect the transports carrying the 164th to Guadalcanal , Ghormley ordered Task Force 64 , consisting of four cruisers and five destroyers under U.S. Rear Admiral Norman Scott , to intercept and combat any Japanese ships that approached Guadalcanal and threatened the arrival of the transport convoy . 
 Mikawa 's 8th Fleet staff scheduled a large and important Express run for the night of 11 October . Two seaplane tenders and six destroyers were to deliver 728 soldiers plus artillery and ammunition to Guadalcanal . At the same time but in a separate operation three heavy cruisers and two destroyers under the command of Rear Admiral Aritomo Gotō were to bombard Henderson Field with special explosive shells with the object of destroying the CAF and the airfield 's facilities . Because U.S. Navy warships had yet to attempt to interdict any Tokyo Express missions to Guadalcanal , the Japanese were not expecting any opposition from Allied naval surface forces that night . 
 Just before midnight , Scott 's warships detected Gotō 's force on radar near the entrance to the strait between Savo Island and Guadalcanal . Scott 's force was in a position to cross the T of Gotō 's unsuspecting formation . Opening fire , Scott 's warships sank one of Gotō 's cruisers and one of his destroyers , heavily damaged another cruiser , mortally wounded Gotō , and forced the rest of Gotō 's warships to abandon the bombardment mission and retreat . During the exchange of gunfire , one of Scott 's destroyers was sunk and one cruiser and another destroyer were heavily damaged . In the meantime , the Japanese supply convoy successfully completed unloading at Guadalcanal and began its return journey without being discovered by Scott 's force . Later on the morning of 12 October , four Japanese destroyers from the supply convoy turned back to assist Gotō 's retreating , damaged warships . Air attacks by CAF aircraft from Henderson Field sank two of these destroyers later that day . The convoy of U.S. Army troops reached Guadalcanal as scheduled the next day and successfully delivered its cargo and passengers to the island . 
 = = = Henderson Field = = = 
 = = = = Battleship bombardment = = = = 
 Despite the U.S. victory off Cape Esperance , the Japanese continued with plans and preparations for their large offensive scheduled for later in October . The Japanese decided to risk a one @-@ time departure from their usual practice of only using fast warships to deliver their men and materiel to the island . On 13 October , a convoy comprising six cargo ships with eight screening destroyers departed the Shortland Islands for Guadalcanal . The convoy carried 4 @,@ 500 troops from the 16th and 230th Infantry Regiments , some naval marines , two batteries of heavy artillery , and one company of tanks . 
 To protect the approaching convoy from attack by CAF aircraft , Yamamoto sent two battleships from Truk to bombard Henderson Field . At 01 : 33 on 14 October , Kongō and Haruna , escorted by one light cruiser and nine destroyers , reached Guadalcanal and opened fire on Henderson Field from a distance of 16 @,@ 000 metres ( 17 @,@ 500 yd ) . Over the next one hour and 23 minutes , the two battleships fired 973 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) shells into the Lunga perimeter , most of them falling in and around the 2 @,@ 200 metres ( 2 @,@ 400 yd ) square area of the airfield . Many of the shells were fragmentation shells , specifically designed to destroy land targets . The bombardment heavily damaged both runways , burned almost all of the available aviation fuel , destroyed 48 of the CAF 's 90 aircraft , and killed 41 men , including six CAF pilots . The battleship force immediately returned to Truk . 
 In spite of the heavy damage , Henderson personnel were able to restore one of the runways to operational condition within a few hours . Seventeen SBDs and 20 Wildcats at Espiritu Santo were quickly flown to Henderson and U.S. Army and Marine transport aircraft began to shuttle aviation gasoline from Espiritu Santo to Guadalcanal . Now aware of the approach of the large Japanese reinforcement convoy , the U.S. desperately sought some way to interdict the convoy before it could reach Guadalcanal . Using fuel drained from destroyed aircraft and from a cache in the nearby jungle , the CAF attacked the convoy twice on the 14th , but caused no damage . 
 The Japanese convoy reached Tassafaronga on Guadalcanal at midnight on 14 October and began unloading . Throughout the day of 15 October , a string of CAF aircraft from Henderson bombed and strafed the unloading convoy , destroying three of the cargo ships . The remainder of the convoy departed that night , having unloaded all of the troops and about two @-@ thirds of the supplies and equipment . Several Japanese heavy cruisers also bombarded Henderson on the nights of 14 and 15 October , destroying a few additional CAF aircraft , but failing to cause significant further damage to the airfield . 
 = = = = Battle for Henderson Field = = = = 
 Between 1 and 17 October , the Japanese delivered 15 @,@ 000 troops to Guadalcanal , giving Hyakutake 20 @,@ 000 total troops to employ for his planned offensive . Because of the loss of their positions on the east side of the Matanikau , the Japanese decided that an attack on the U.S. defenses along the coast would be prohibitively difficult . Therefore , Hyakutake decided that the main thrust of his planned attack would be from south of Henderson Field . His 2nd Division ( augmented by troops from the 38th Division ) , under Lieutenant General Masao Maruyama and comprising 7 @,@ 000 soldiers in three infantry regiments of three battalions each was ordered to march through the jungle and attack the American defences from the south near the east bank of the Lunga River . The date of the attack was set for 22 October , then changed to 23 October . To distract the Americans from the planned attack from the south , Hyakutake 's heavy artillery plus five battalions of infantry ( about 2 @,@ 900 men ) under Major General Tadashi Sumiyoshi were to attack the American defenses from the west along the coastal corridor . The Japanese estimated that there were 10 @,@ 000 American troops on the island , when in fact there were about 23 @,@ 000 . 
 On 12 October , a company of Japanese engineers began to break a trail , called the " Maruyama Road " , from the Matanikau towards the southern portion of the U.S. Lunga perimeter . The 15 miles ( 24 km ) long trail traversed some of the most difficult terrain on Guadalcanal , including numerous rivers and streams , deep , muddy ravines , steep ridges , and dense jungle . Between 16 and 18 October , the 2nd Division began their march along the Maruyama Road . 
 By 23 October , Maruyama 's forces still struggled through the jungle to reach the American lines . That evening , after learning that his forces had yet to reach their attack positions , Hyakutake postponed the attack to 19 : 00 on 24 October . The Americans remained completely unaware of the approach of Maruyama 's forces . 
 Sumiyoshi was informed by Hyakutake 's staff of the postponement of the offensive to 24 October , but was unable to contact his troops to inform them of the delay . Thus , at dusk on 23 October , two battalions of the 4th Infantry Regiment and the nine tanks of the 1st Independent Tank Company launched attacks on the U.S. Marine defenses at the mouth of the Matanikau . U.S. Marine artillery , cannon , and small arms fire repulsed the attacks , destroying all the tanks and killing many of the Japanese soldiers while suffering only light casualties . 
 Finally , late on 24 October Maruyama 's forces reached the U.S. Lunga perimeter . Over two consecutive nights Maruyama 's forces conducted numerous , unsuccessful frontal assaults on positions defended by troops of the 1st Battalion , 7th Marines under Lieutenant Colonel Chesty Puller and the U.S. Army 's 3rd Battalion , 164th Infantry Regiment , commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Robert Hall . U.S. Marine and Army units armed with rifles , machine guns , mortars , artillery , including direct canister fire from 37 mm anti @-@ tank guns " wrought terrible carnage " on the Japanese . A few small groups of Japanese broke through the American defenses , but were all hunted down and killed over the next several days . More than 1 @,@ 500 of Maruyama 's troops were killed in the attacks while the Americans lost about 60 killed . Over the same two days American aircraft from Henderson Field defended against attacks by Japanese aircraft and ships , destroying 14 aircraft and sinking a light cruiser . 
 Further Japanese attacks near the Matanikau on 26 October were also repulsed with heavy losses for the Japanese . As a result , by 08 : 00 on 26 October , Hyakutake called off any further attacks and ordered his forces to retreat . About half of Maruyama 's survivors were ordered to retreat back to the upper Matanikau Valley while the 230th Infantry Regiment under Colonel Toshinari Shōji was told to head for Koli Point , east of the Lunga perimeter . Leading elements of the 2nd Division reached the 17th Army headquarters area at Kokumbona , west of the Matanikau on 4 November . The same day , Shoji 's unit reached Koli Point and made camp . Decimated by battle deaths , combat injuries , malnutrition , and tropical diseases , the 2nd Division was incapable of further offensive action and fought as a defensive force along the coast for the rest of the campaign . In total the Japanese lost 2 @,@ 200 – 3 @,@ 000 troops in the battle while the Americans lost around 80 killed . 
 = = = Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands = = = 
 At the same time that Hyakutake 's troops were attacking the Lunga perimeter , Japanese aircraft carriers and other large warships under the overall direction of Isoroku Yamamoto moved into a position near the southern Solomon Islands . From this location , the Japanese naval forces hoped to engage and decisively defeat any Allied ( primarily U.S. ) naval forces , especially carrier forces , that responded to Hyakutake 's ground offensive . Allied naval carrier forces in the area , now under the overall command of William Halsey , Jr . , also hoped to meet the Japanese naval forces in battle . Nimitz had replaced Ghormley with Halsey on 18 October after concluding that Ghormley had become too pessimistic and myopic to effectively continue leading Allied forces in the South Pacific area . 
 The two opposing carrier forces confronted each other on the morning of 26 October , in what became known as the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands . After an exchange of carrier air attacks , Allied surface ships were forced to retreat from the battle area with the loss of one carrier sunk ( Hornet ) and another ( Enterprise ) heavily damaged . The participating Japanese carrier forces , however , also retired because of high aircraft and aircrew losses and significant damage to two carriers . Although an apparent tactical victory for the Japanese in terms of ships sunk and damaged , the loss by the Japanese of many irreplaceable , veteran aircrews provided a long @-@ term strategic advantage for the Allies , whose aircrew losses in the battle were relatively low . The Japanese carriers played no further significant role in the campaign . 
 = = = November land actions = = = 
 In order to exploit the victory in the Battle for Henderson Field , Vandegrift sent six Marine battalions , later joined by one U.S. Army battalion , on an offensive west of the Matanikau . The operation was commanded by Merritt Edson and its goal was to capture Kokumbona , headquarters of the 17th Army , west of Point Cruz . Defending the Point Cruz area were Japanese army troops from the 4th Infantry Regiment commanded by Nomasu Nakaguma . The 4th Infantry was severely understrength because of battle damage , tropical disease , and malnutrition . 
 The American offensive began on 1 November and , after some difficulty , succeeded in destroying Japanese forces defending the Point Cruz area by 3 November , including rear echelon troops sent to reinforce Nakaguma 's battered regiment . The Americans appeared to be on the verge of breaking through the Japanese defenses and capturing Kokumbona . At this time , however , other American forces discovered and engaged newly landed Japanese troops near Koli Point on the eastern side of the Lunga perimeter . To counter this new threat , Vandegrift temporarily halted the Matanikau offensive on 4 November . The Americans suffered 71 and the Japanese around 400 killed in the offensive . 
 At Koli Point early in the morning 3 November , five Japanese destroyers delivered 300 army troops to support Shōji and his troops who were en route to Koli Point after the Battle for Henderson Field . Having learned of the planned landing , Vandegrift sent a battalion of Marines under Herman H. Hanneken to intercept the Japanese at Koli . Soon after landing , the Japanese soldiers encountered and drove Hanneken 's battalion back towards the Lunga perimeter . In response , Vandegrift ordered Puller 's Marine battalion plus two of the 164th infantry battalions , along with Hanneken 's battalion , to move towards Koli Point to attack the Japanese forces there . 
 As the American troops began to move , Shōji and his soldiers began to arrive at Koli Point . Beginning on 8 November , the American troops attempted to encircle Shōji 's forces at Gavaga Creek near Koli Point . Meanwhile , Hyakutake ordered Shōji to abandon his positions at Koli and rejoin Japanese forces at Kokumbona in the Matanikau area . A gap existed by way of a swampy creek in the southern side of the American lines . Between 9 and 11 November , Shōji and between 2 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 000 of his men escaped into the jungle to the south . On 12 November , the Americans completely overran and killed all the remaining Japanese soldiers left in the pocket . The Americans counted the bodies of 450 – 475 Japanese dead in the Koli Point area and captured most of Shōji 's heavy weapons and provisions . The American forces suffered 40 killed and 120 wounded in the operation . 
 Meanwhile , on 4 November , two companies from the 2nd Marine Raider Battalion , commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Evans Carlson landed by boat at Aola Bay , 40 miles ( 64 km ) east of Lunga Point . Carlson 's raiders , along with troops from the U.S. Army 's 147th Infantry Regiment , were to provide security for 500 Seabees as they attempted to construct an airfield at that location . Halsey , acting on a recommendation by Turner , had approved the Aola Bay airfield construction effort . The Aola airfield construction effort was later abandoned at the end of November because of unsuitable terrain . 
 On 5 November , Vandegrift ordered Carlson to take his raiders , march overland from Aola , and attack any of Shōji 's forces that had escaped from Koli Point . With the rest of the companies from his battalion , which arrived a few days later , Carlson and his troops set off on a 29 @-@ day patrol from Aola to the Lunga perimeter . During the patrol , the raiders fought several battles with Shōji 's retreating forces , killing almost 500 of them , while suffering 16 killed themselves . In addition to the losses sustained from attacks by Carlson 's raiders , tropical diseases and a lack of food felled many more of Shōji 's men . By the time Shōji 's forces reached the Lunga River in mid @-@ November , about halfway to the Matanikau , only 1 @,@ 300 men remained with the main body . When Shōji reached the 17th Army positions west of the Matanikau , only 700 to 800 survivors were still with him . Most of the survivors from Shōji 's force joined other Japanese units defending the Mount Austen and upper Matanikau River area . 
 Tokyo Express runs on 5 , 7 and 9 November , delivered additional troops from the Japanese 38th Infantry Division , including most of the 228th Infantry Regiment to Guadalcanal . These fresh troops were quickly emplaced in the Point Cruz and Matanikau area and helped successfully resist further attacks by American forces on 10 and 18 November . The Americans and Japanese remained facing each other along a line just west of Point Cruz for the next six weeks . 
 = = = Naval Battle of Guadalcanal = = = 
 After the defeat in the Battle for Henderson Field , the IJA planned to try again to retake the airfield in November 1942 , but further reinforcements were needed before the operation could proceed . The IJA requested assistance from Yamamoto to deliver the needed reinforcements to the island and to support the next offensive . Yamamoto provided 11 large transport ships to carry the remaining 7 @,@ 000 troops from the 38th Infantry Division , their ammunition , food , and heavy equipment from Rabaul to Guadalcanal . He also provided a warship support force that included two battleships . The two battleships , Hiei and Kirishima , equipped with special fragmentation shells , were to bombard Henderson Field on the night of 12 – 13 November and destroy it and the aircraft stationed there in order to allow the slow , heavy transports to reach Guadalcanal and unload safely the next day . The warship force was commanded from Hiei by recently promoted Vice Admiral Hiroaki Abe . 
 In early November , Allied intelligence learned that the Japanese were preparing again to try to retake Henderson Field . Therefore , the U.S. sent Task Force 67 , a large reinforcement and resupply convoy carrying Marine replacements , two U.S. Army infantry battalions , and ammunition and food , commanded by Turner , to Guadalcanal on 11 November . The supply ships were protected by two task groups , commanded by Rear Admirals Daniel J. Callaghan and Norman Scott , and aircraft from Henderson Field . The ships were attacked several times on 11 and 12 November by Japanese aircraft from Rabaul staging through an air base at Buin , Bougainville , but most were unloaded without serious damage . 
 U.S. reconnaissance aircraft spotted the approach of Abe 's bombardment force and passed a warning to the Allied command . Thus warned , Turner detached all usable combat ships under Callaghan to protect the troops ashore from the expected Japanese naval attack and troop landing and ordered the supply ships at Guadalcanal to depart by early evening 12 November . Callaghan 's force comprised two heavy cruisers , three light cruisers , and eight destroyers . 
 Around 01 : 30 on 13 November , Callaghan 's force intercepted Abe 's bombardment group between Guadalcanal and Savo Island . In addition to the two battleships , Abe 's force included one light cruiser and 11 destroyers . In the pitch darkness , the two warship forces intermingled before opening fire at unusually close quarters . In the resulting mêlée , Abe 's warships sank or severely damaged all but one cruiser and one destroyer in Callaghan 's force and both Callaghan and Scott were killed . Two Japanese destroyers were sunk and another destroyer and Hiei heavily damaged . In spite of his defeat of Callaghan 's force , Abe ordered his warships to retire without bombarding Henderson Field . Hiei sank later that day after repeated air attacks by CAF aircraft and aircraft from the U.S. carrier Enterprise . Because of Abe 's failure to neutralize Henderson Field , Yamamoto ordered the troop transport convoy , under the command of Raizo Tanaka and located near the Shortland Islands , to wait an additional day before heading towards Guadalcanal . Yamamoto ordered Nobutake Kondō to assemble another bombardment force using warships from Truk and Abe 's force to attack Henderson Field on 15 November . 
 In the meantime , around 02 : 00 on 14 November , a cruiser and destroyer force under Gunichi Mikawa from Rabaul conducted an unopposed bombardment of Henderson Field . The bombardment caused some damage but failed to put the airfield or most of its aircraft out of operation . As Mikawa 's force retired towards Rabaul , Tanaka 's transport convoy , trusting that Henderson Field was now destroyed or heavily damaged , began its run down the slot towards Guadalcanal . Throughout the day of 14 November , aircraft from Henderson Field and Enterprise attacked Mikawa 's and Tanaka 's ships , sinking one heavy cruiser and seven of the transports . Most of the troops were rescued from the transports by Tanaka 's escorting destroyers and returned to the Shortlands . After dark , Tanaka and the remaining four transports continued towards Guadalcanal as Kondo 's force approached to bombard Henderson Field . 
 In order to intercept Kondo 's force , Halsey , who was low on undamaged ships , detached two battleships , Washington and South Dakota , and four destroyers from the Enterprise task force . The U.S. force , under the command of Willis A. Lee aboard Washington , reached Guadalcanal and Savo Island just before midnight on 14 November , shortly before Kondo 's bombardment force arrived . Kondo 's force consisted of Kirishima plus two heavy cruisers , two light cruisers , and nine destroyers . After the two forces made contact , Kondo 's force quickly sank three of the U.S. destroyers and heavily damaged the fourth . The Japanese warships then sighted , opened fire , and damaged South Dakota . As Kondo 's warships concentrated on South Dakota , Washington approached the Japanese ships unobserved and opened fire on Kirishima , smashing into the Japanese battleship repeatedly with both main and secondary battery shells , and causing fatal damage . After fruitlessly chasing Washington towards the Russell Islands , Kondo ordered his warships to retire without bombarding Henderson Field . One of Kondo 's destroyers was also sunk during the engagement . 
 As Kondo 's ships retired , the four Japanese transports beached themselves near Tassafaronga on Guadalcanal at 04 : 00 and quickly began unloading . At 05 : 55 , U.S. aircraft and artillery began attacking the beached transports , destroying all four transports along with most of the supplies that they carried . Only 2 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 000 of the army troops made it ashore . Because of the failure to deliver most of the troops and supplies , the Japanese were forced to cancel their planned November offensive on Henderson Field making the results of the battle a significant strategic victory for the Allies and marking the beginning of the end of Japanese attempts to retake Henderson Field . 
 On 26 November , Japanese Lieutenant General Hitoshi Imamura took command of the newly formed Eighth Area Army at Rabaul . The new command encompassed both Hyakutake 's 17th Army and the 18th Army in New Guinea . One of Imamura 's first priorities upon assuming command was the continuation of the attempts to retake Henderson Field and Guadalcanal . The Allied offensive at Buna in New Guinea , however , changed Imamura 's priorities . Because the Allied attempt to take Buna was considered a more severe threat to Rabaul , Imamura postponed further major reinforcement efforts to Guadalcanal to concentrate on the situation in New Guinea . 
 = = = Battle of Tassafaronga = = = 
 The Japanese continued to experience problems in delivering sufficient supplies to sustain their troops on Guadalcanal . Attempts to use only submarines the last two weeks in November failed to provide sufficient food for Hyakutake 's forces . A separate attempt to establish bases in the central Solomons to facilitate barge convoys to Guadalcanal also failed because of destructive Allied air attacks . On 26 November , the 17th Army notified Imamura that it faced a food crisis . Some front @-@ line units had not been resupplied for six days and even the rear @-@ area troops were on one @-@ third rations . The situation forced the Japanese to return to using destroyers to deliver the necessary supplies . 
 Eighth Fleet personnel devised a plan to help reduce the exposure of destroyers delivering supplies to Guadalcanal . Large oil or gas drums were cleaned and filled with medical supplies and food , with enough air space to provide buoyancy , and strung together with rope . When the destroyers arrived at Guadalcanal they would make a sharp turn and the drums would be cut loose and a swimmer or boat from shore could pick up the buoyed end of a rope and return it to the beach , where the soldiers could haul in the supplies . 
 The Eighth Fleet 's Guadalcanal Reinforcement Unit ( the Tokyo Express ) , then commanded by Raizo Tanaka , was tasked by Mikawa with making the first of five scheduled runs to Tassafaronga on Guadalcanal using the drum method on the night of 30 November . Tanaka 's unit was centered on eight destroyers , with six destroyers assigned to carry between 200 and 240 drums of supplies apiece . Notified by intelligence sources of the Japanese supply attempt , Halsey ordered the newly formed Task Force 67 , comprising four cruisers and four destroyers under the command of U.S. Rear Admiral Carleton H. Wright , to intercept Tanaka 's force off Guadalcanal . Two additional destroyers joined Wright 's force en route to Guadalcanal from Espiritu Santo during the day of 30 November . 
 At 22 : 40 on 30 November , Tanaka 's force arrived off Guadalcanal and prepared to unload the supply barrels . Meanwhile , Wright 's warships were approaching through Ironbottom Sound from the opposite direction . Wright 's destroyers detected Tanaka 's force on radar and the destroyer commander requested permission to attack with torpedoes . Wright waited four minutes before giving permission , allowing Tanaka 's force to escape from an optimum firing setup . All of the American torpedoes missed their targets . At the same time , Wright 's cruisers opened fire , quickly hitting and destroying one of the Japanese guard destroyers . The rest of Tanaka 's warships abandoned the supply mission , increased speed , turned , and launched a total of 44 torpedoes in the direction of Wright 's cruisers . 
 The Japanese torpedoes hit and sank the U.S. cruiser Northampton and heavily damaged the cruisers Minneapolis , New Orleans , and Pensacola . The rest of Tanaka 's destroyers escaped without damage , but failed to deliver any of the provisions to Guadalcanal . 
 By 7 December 1942 , Hyakutake 's forces were losing about 50 men each day from malnutrition , disease , and Allied ground or air attacks . Further attempts by Tanaka 's destroyer forces to deliver provisions on 3 December 7 December , and 11 December , failed to alleviate the crisis , and one of Tanaka 's destroyers was sunk by a U.S. PT boat torpedo . 
 = = = Japanese decision to withdraw = = = 
 On 12 December , the Japanese Navy proposed that Guadalcanal be abandoned . At the same time , several army staff officers at the Imperial General Headquarters ( IGH ) also suggested that further efforts to retake Guadalcanal would be impossible . A delegation , led by IJA Colonel <unk> Sanada , chief of the IGH 's operations section , visited Rabaul on 19 December and consulted Imamura and his staff . Upon the delegation 's return to Tokyo , Sanada recommended that Guadalcanal be abandoned . The IGH 's top leaders agreed with Sanada 's recommendation on 26 December and ordered their staffs to begin drafting plans for a withdrawal from Guadalcanal , establishment of a new defense line in the central Solomons , and a shifting of priorities and resources to the campaign in New Guinea . 
 On 28 December , General Hajime Sugiyama and Admiral Osami Nagano personally informed Emperor Hirohito of the decision to withdraw from Guadalcanal . On 31 December , the Emperor formally endorsed the decision . The Japanese secretly began to prepare for the evacuation , called Operation Ke , scheduled to begin during the latter part of January 1943 . 
 = = = Battle of Mount Austen , the Galloping Horse , and the Sea Horse = = = 
 By December , the weary 1st Marine Division was withdrawn for recuperation , and over the course of the next month the U.S. XIV Corps took over operations on the island . This corps consisted of the 2nd Marine Division and the U.S. Army 's 25th Infantry and 23rd " Americal " Divisions . U.S. Army Major General Alexander Patch replaced Vandegrift as commander of Allied forces on Guadalcanal , which by January totaled just over 50 @,@ 000 men . 
 On 18 December , Allied ( mainly U.S. Army ) forces began attacking Japanese positions on Mount Austen . A strong Japanese fortified position , called the Gifu , stymied the attacks and the Americans were forced to temporarily halt their offensive on 4 January . 
 The Allies renewed the offensive on 10 January , <unk> the Japanese on Mount Austen as well as on two nearby ridges called the Seahorse and the Galloping Horse . After some difficulty , the Allies captured all three by 23 January . At the same time , U.S. Marines advanced along the north coast of the island , making significant gains . The Americans lost about 250 killed in the operation while the Japanese suffered around 3 @,@ 000 killed – about 12 to 1 in the Americans ' favor . 
 = = = Ke evacuation = = = 
 On 14 January , a Tokyo Express run delivered a battalion of troops to act as a rear guard for the Ke evacuation . A staff officer from Rabaul accompanied the troops to notify Hyakutake of the decision to withdraw . At the same time , Japanese warships and aircraft moved into position around the Rabaul and Bougainville areas in preparation to execute the withdrawal operation . Allied intelligence detected the Japanese movements , but misinterpreted them as preparations for another attempt to retake Henderson Field and Guadalcanal . 
 Patch , wary of what he thought to be an imminent Japanese offensive , committed only a relatively small portion of his troops to continue a slow @-@ moving offensive against Hyakutake 's forces . On 29 January , Halsey , acting on the same intelligence , sent a resupply convoy to Guadalcanal screened by a cruiser task force . Sighting the cruisers , Japanese naval torpedo bombers attacked that same evening and heavily damaged the cruiser Chicago . The next day , more torpedo aircraft attacked and sank Chicago . Halsey ordered the remainder of the task force to return to base and directed the rest of his naval forces to take station in the Coral Sea , south of Guadalcanal , to be ready to counter the perceived Japanese offensive . 
 In the meantime , the Japanese 17th Army withdrew to the west coast of Guadalcanal while rear guard units checked the American offensive . On the night of 1 February , a force of 20 destroyers from Mikawa 's 8th Fleet under Shintaro Hashimoto successfully extracted 4 @,@ 935 soldiers , mainly from the 38th Division , from the island . The Japanese and Americans each lost a destroyer from air and naval attacks related to the evacuation mission . 
 On the nights of 4 and 7 February , Hashimoto and his destroyers completed the evacuation of most of the remaining Japanese forces from Guadalcanal . Apart from some air attacks , Allied forces , still anticipating a large Japanese offensive , did not attempt to interdict Hashimoto 's evacuation runs . In total , the Japanese successfully evacuated 10 @,@ 652 men from Guadalcanal . On 9 February , Patch realized that the Japanese were gone and declared Guadalcanal secure for Allied forces , ending the campaign . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the Japanese withdrawal , Guadalcanal and Tulagi were developed into major bases supporting the Allied advance further up the Solomon Islands chain . In addition to Henderson Field , two additional fighter runways were constructed at Lunga Point and a bomber airfield was built at Koli Point . Extensive naval port and logistics facilities were established at Guadalcanal , Tulagi , and Florida . The anchorage around Tulagi became an important advanced base for Allied warships and transport ships supporting the Solomon Islands campaign . Major ground units were staged through large encampments and barracks on Guadalcanal before deployment further up the Solomons . 
 After Guadalcanal the Japanese were clearly on the defensive in the Pacific . The constant pressure to reinforce Guadalcanal had weakened Japanese efforts in other theaters , contributing to a successful Australian and American counteroffensive in New Guinea which culminated in the capture of the key bases of Buna and Gona in early 1943 . The Allies had gained a strategic initiative which they never relinquished . In June , the Allies launched Operation Cartwheel , which , after modification in August 1943 , formalized the strategy of isolating Rabaul and cutting its sea lines of communication . The subsequent successful neutralization of Rabaul and the forces centered there facilitated the South West Pacific campaign under General Douglas MacArthur and Central Pacific island hopping campaign under Admiral Chester Nimitz , with both efforts successfully advancing toward Japan . The remaining Japanese defenses in the South Pacific area were then either destroyed or bypassed by Allied forces as the war progressed to its ultimate conclusion . 
 = = Significance = = 
 = = = Resources = = = 
 The Battle of Guadalcanal was one of the first prolonged campaigns in the Pacific , alongside the related and concurrent Solomon Islands campaign . Both campaigns were battles that strained the logistical capabilities of the combatant nations involved . For the U.S. , this need prompted the development of effective combat air transport for the first time . A failure to achieve air superiority forced Japan to rely on reinforcement by barges , destroyers , and submarines , with very uneven results . Early in the campaign , the Americans were hindered by a lack of resources , as they suffered heavy losses in cruisers and carriers , with replacements from ramped @-@ up shipbuilding programs still months away from materializing . 
 The U.S. Navy suffered such high personnel losses during the campaign that it refused to publicly release total casualty figures for years . However , as the campaign continued , and the American public became more and more aware of the plight and perceived heroism of the American forces on Guadalcanal , more forces were dispatched to the area . This spelled trouble for Japan as its military @-@ industrial complex was unable to match the output of American industry and manpower . Thus , as the campaign wore on the Japanese were losing irreplaceable units while the Americans were rapidly replacing and even augmenting their forces . 
 The Guadalcanal campaign was costly to Japan strategically and in material losses and manpower . Roughly 30 @,@ 000 personnel , including 25 @,@ 000 experienced ground troops , died during the campaign . As many as three @-@ quarters of the deaths were from non @-@ combat causes such as starvation and various tropical diseases . The drain on resources directly contributed to Japan 's failure to achieve its objectives in the New Guinea campaign . Japan also lost control of the southern Solomons and the ability to interdict Allied shipping to Australia . Japan 's major base at Rabaul was now further directly threatened by Allied air power . Most importantly , scarce Japanese land , air , and naval forces had disappeared forever into the Guadalcanal jungle and surrounding sea . The Japanese could not replace the aircraft and ships destroyed and sunk in this campaign , as well as their highly trained and veteran crews , especially the naval aircrews , nearly as quickly as the Allies . 
 = = = Strategic = = = 
 After the victory at the Battle of Midway , America was able to establish naval parity in the Pacific . However , this fact alone did not change the direction of the war . It was only after the Allied victories in Guadalcanal and New Guinea that the Japanese offensive thrust was ended and the strategic initiative passed to the Allies , as it proved , permanently . The Guadalcanal Campaign ended all Japanese expansion attempts and placed the Allies in a position of clear supremacy . It thus can be argued that this Allied victory was the first step in a long string of successes that eventually led to the surrender of Japan and the occupation of the Japanese home islands . 
 The " Europe first " policy of the United States had initially only allowed for defensive actions against Japanese expansion , in order to focus resources on defeating Germany . However , Admiral King 's argument for the Guadalcanal invasion , as well as its successful implementation , convinced President Franklin D. Roosevelt that the Pacific Theater could be pursued offensively as well . By the end of 1942 , it was clear that Japan had lost the Guadalcanal campaign , a serious blow to Japan 's strategic plans for defense of their empire and an unanticipated defeat at the hands of the Americans . 
 Perhaps as important as the military victory for the Allies was the psychological victory . On a level playing field , the Allies had beaten Japan 's best land , air , and naval forces . After Guadalcanal , Allied personnel regarded the Japanese military with much less fear and awe than previously . In addition , the Allies viewed the eventual outcome of the Pacific War with greatly increased optimism . 
 Beyond Kawaguchi , several Japanese political and military leaders , including Naoki Hoshino , Osami Nagano , and Torashirō Kawabe , stated shortly after the war that Guadalcanal was the decisive turning point in the conflict . Said Kawabe , " As for the turning point [ of the war ] , when the positive action ceased or even became negative , it was , I feel , at Guadalcanal . " 
 = = Media , accounts and film = = 
 The Guadalcanal Campaign was the subject of large amount of high quality news reporting , due to it being the first major US combat operation of the war news agencies sent some of their most talented writers . Richard <unk> who wrote for International News Service gained fame with the publication of his bestselling Guadalcanal Diary in 1943 . Hanson Baldwin , a Navy correspondent , filed stories for the New York Times and won a Pulitzer Prize for his coverage of the early days of WWII . Tom Yarbrough wrote for the Associated Press , Bob Miller for the United Press , John Hersey for Time and Life , Ira Wolfert for the North American Newspaper Alliance ( his series of articles about the November 1942 Naval Battle of Guadalcanal won him the Pulitzer Prize ) , Sergeant James Hurlbut for the Marine Corps , and Mack Morriss for Yank magazine . Commander Vandegrift placed few restrictions on the reporters who were generally allowed to go wherever they wanted and write what they wanted . 
 Other books and films about the campaign include : 
 Tales of the South Pacific ( book ) 
 Guadalcanal Diary ( film ) 
 Pride of the Marines ( film ) 
 The Thin Red Line ( novel ) 
 The Pacific , Episode 1 , Guadalcanal / Leckie and Episode 2 , Basilone ( TV miniseries ) 
 The Gallant Hours ( film ) 
 Helmet for My Pillow ( book ) 
 The Thin Red Line ( novel ) 
 The Thin Red Line ( 1964 film ) 
 The Thin Red Line ( 1998 film ) 
 <unk> Season 1 , Ep . No. 4 – Guadalcanal ( TV series ) 
 Shootout ! Season 1 , Guadalcanal ( TV series ) 
 The Lost Evidence Episode 20 ( TV series ) 
 Battle 360 ° , Episodes 3 through 5 ( TV series ) 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Web = = = 
 = = Further information = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Web = = = 
 = = = Audio / visual = = = 
 = Four Times of the Day = 
 Four Times of the Day is a series of four paintings by English artist William Hogarth . Completed in 1736 , they were reproduced as a series of four engravings published in 1738 . They are humorous depictions of life in the streets of London , the vagaries of fashion , and the interactions between the rich and poor . Unlike many of Hogarth 's other series , such as A Harlot 's Progress , A Rake 's Progress , Industry and Idleness , and The Four Stages of Cruelty , it does not depict the story of an individual , but instead focuses on the society of the city . Hogarth intended the series to be humorous rather than instructional ; the pictures do not offer a judgment on whether the rich or poor are more deserving of the viewer 's sympathies : while the upper and middle classes tend to provide the focus for each scene , there are fewer of the moral comparisons seen in some of his other works . 
 The four pictures depict scenes of daily life in various locations in London as the day progresses . Morning shows a prudish spinster making her way to church in Covent Garden past the revellers of the previous night ; Noon shows two cultures on opposite sides of the street in St Giles ; Evening depicts a dyer 's family returning hot and bothered from a trip to Sadler 's Wells ; and Night shows disreputable goings @-@ on around a drunken freemason staggering home near Charing Cross . 
 = = Background = = 
 Four Times of the Day was the first set of prints that Hogarth published after his two great successes , A Harlot 's Progress ( 1732 ) and A Rake 's Progress ( 1735 ) . It was among the first of his prints to be published after the Engraving Copyright Act 1734 ( which Hogarth had helped push through Parliament ) ; A Rake 's Progress had taken early advantage of the protection afforded by the new law . Unlike Harlot and Rake , the four prints in Times of the Day do not form a consecutive narrative , and none of the characters appears in more than one scene . Hogarth conceived of the series as " representing in a humorous manner , morning , noon , evening and night " . 
 Hogarth took his inspiration for the series from the classical satires of Horace and Juvenal , via their Augustan counterparts , particularly John Gay 's " Trivia " and Jonathan Swift 's " A Description of a City Shower " and " A Description of the Morning " . He took his artistic models from other series of the " Times of Day " , " The Seasons " and " Ages of Man " , such as those by Nicolas Poussin and Nicholas Lancret , and from pastoral scenes , but executed them with a twist by transferring them to the city . He also drew on the Flemish " Times of Day " style known as points du jour , in which the gods floated above pastoral scenes of idealised shepherds and shepherdesses , but in Hogarth 's works the gods were recast as his central characters : the churchgoing lady , a frosty Aurora in Morning ; the pie @-@ girl , a pretty London Venus in Noon ; the pregnant woman , a sweaty Diana in Evening ; and the freemason , a drunken Pluto in Night . 
 Hogarth designed the series for an original commission by Jonathan Tyers in 1736 in which he requested a number of paintings to decorate supper boxes at Vauxhall Gardens . Hogarth is believed to have suggested to Tyers that the supper boxes at Gardens be decorated with paintings as part of their refurbishment ; among the works featured when the renovation was completed was Hogarth 's picture of Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn . The originals of Four Times of the Day were sold to other collectors , but the scenes were reproduced at Vauxhall by Francis Hayman , and two of them , Evening and Night , hung at the pleasure gardens until at least 1782 . 
 The engravings are mirror images of the paintings ( since the engraved plates are copied from the paintings the image is reversed when printed ) , which leads to problems ascertaining the times shown on the clocks in some of the scenes . The images are sometimes seen as parodies of middle class life in London at the time , but the moral judgements are not as harsh as in some of Hogarth 's other works and the lower classes do not escape ridicule either . Often the theme is one of over @-@ orderliness versus chaos . The four plates depict four times of day , but they also move through the seasons : Morning is set in winter , Noon in spring , and Evening in summer . However , Night — sometimes misidentified as being in September — takes place on Oak Apple Day in May rather than in the autumn . 
 Evening was engraved by Bernard Baron , a French engraver who was living in London , and , although the designs are Hogarth 's it is not known whether he engraved any of the four plates himself . The prints , along with a fifth picture , Strolling Actresses Dressing in a Barn from 1738 , were sold by subscription for one guinea ( £ 156 @.@ 00 in 2016 ) , half payable on ordering and half on delivery . After subscription the price rose to five shillings per print ( £ 37 @.@ 00 in 2016 ) , making the five print set four shillings dearer overall . Although Strolling Actresses Dressing in a Barn was not directly connected to the other prints , it seems that Hogarth always envisaged selling the five prints together , adding the Strolling Actresses as a complementary theme just as he had added Southwark Fair to the subscription for The Rake 's Progress . Whereas the characters in Four Times play their roles without being conscious of acting , the company of Strolling Actresses are fully aware of the differences between the reality of their lives and the roles they are set to play . Representations of Aurora and Diana also appear in both . 
 Hogarth advertised the prints for sale in May 1737 , again in January 1738 , and finally announced the plates were ready on 26 April 1738 . The paintings were sold individually at an auction on 25 January 1745 , along with the original paintings for A Harlot 's Progress , A Rake 's Progress and Strolling Actresses Dressing in a Barn . Sir William Heathcote purchased Morning and Night for 20 guineas and £ 20 6s respectively ( £ 3 @,@ 100 and £ 3 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) , and the Duke of Ancaster bought Noon for £ 38 17s ( £ 5 @,@ 800 in 2016 ) and Evening for £ 39 18s ( £ 5 @,@ 900 in 2016 ) . A further preliminary sketch for Morning with some differences to the final painting was sold in a later auction for £ 21 ( £ 3 @,@ 100 in 2016 ) . 
 = = Series = = 
 = = = Morning = = = 
 In Morning , a lady makes her way to church , shielding herself with her fan from the shocking view of two men pawing at the market girls . The scene is the west side of the piazza at Covent Garden , indicated by a part of the Palladian portico of Inigo Jones 's Church of St Paul visible behind Tom King 's Coffee House , a notorious venue celebrated in pamphlets of the time . Henry Fielding mentions the coffee house in both The Covent Garden Tragedy and Pasquin . At the time Hogarth produced this picture , the coffee house was being run by Tom 's widow , Moll King , but its reputation had not diminished . Moll opened the doors once those of the taverns had shut , allowing the revellers to continue enjoying themselves from midnight until dawn . The Mansion House with columned portico visible in the centre of the picture , No. 43 King Street , is attributed to architect Thomas Archer ( later 1st Baron Archer ) and occupied by him at the date of Hogarth 's works . It was situated on the north side of the piazza , while the coffee house was on the south side , as depicted in Hogarth 's original painting . In the picture , it is early morning and some revellers are ending their evening : a fight has broken out in the coffee house and , in the melée , a wig flies out of the door . Meanwhile , stallholders set out their fruit and vegetables for the day 's market . Two children who should be making their way to school have stopped , entranced by the activity of the market , in a direct reference to Swift 's A Description of the Morning in which children " lag with satchels in their hands " . Above the clock is Father Time and below it the inscription Sic transit <unk> mundi . The smoke rising from the chimney of the coffee house connects these portents to the scene below . 
 Hogarth replicates all the features of the pastoral scene in an urban landscape . The shepherds and shepherdesses become the beggars and whores , the sun overhead is replaced by the clock on the church , the snow @-@ capped mountains become the snowy rooftops . Even the setting of Covent Garden with piles of fruit and vegetables echoes the country scene . In the centre of the picture the icy goddess of the dawn in the form of the prim churchgoer is followed by her shivering red @-@ nosed pageboy , mirroring Hesperus , the dawn bearer . The woman is the only one who seems unaffected by the cold , suggesting it may be her element . Although outwardly shocked , the dress of the woman , which is too fashionable for a woman of her age and in the painting is shown to be a striking acid yellow , may suggest she has other thoughts on her mind . She is commonly described as a spinster , and considered to be a hypocrite , ostentatiously attending church and carrying a fashionable ermine muff while displaying no charity to her freezing <unk> or the half @-@ seen beggar before her . The figure of the spinster is said to be based on a relative of Hogarth , who , recognising herself in the picture , cut him out of her will . Fielding later used the woman as the model for his character of Bridget <unk> in Tom Jones . 
 A trail of peculiar footprints shows the path trodden by the woman on her pattens to avoid putting her good shoes in the snow and filth of the street . A small object hangs at her side , interpreted variously as a nutcracker or a pair of scissors in the form of a skeleton or a miniature portrait , hinting , perhaps , at a romantic disappointment . Although clearly a portrait in the painting , the object is indistinct in the prints from the engraving . Other parts of the scene are clearer in the print , however : in the background , a quack is selling his <unk> medicine , and while in the painting the advertising board is little more than a transparent outline , in the print , Dr. Rock 's name can be discerned inscribed on the board below the royal crest which suggests his medicine is produced by royal appointment . The salesman may be Rock himself . Hogarth 's opinion of Rock is made clear in the penultimate plate of A Harlot 's Progress where he is seen arguing over treatments with Dr <unk> while Moll Hackabout dies unattended in the corner . 
 Hogarth revisited Morning in his bidding ticket , Battle of the Pictures , for the auction of his works , held in 1745 . In this , his own paintings are pictured being attacked by ranks of Old Masters ; Morning is stabbed by a work featuring St. Francis as Hogarth contrasts the false piety of the prudish spinster with the genuine piety of the Catholic saint . 
 = = = Noon = = = 
 The scene takes place in Hog Lane , part of the slum district of St Giles with the church of St Giles in the Fields in the background . Hogarth would feature St Giles again as the background of Gin Lane and First Stage of Cruelty . The picture shows Huguenots leaving the French Church in what is now Soho . The Huguenot refugees had arrived in the 1680s and established themselves as tradesmen and artisans , particularly in the silk trade ; and the French Church was their first place of worship . Hogarth contrasts their fussiness and high fashion with the <unk> of the group on the other side of the road ; the rotting corpse of a cat that has been stoned to death lying in the gutter that divides the street is the only thing the two sides have in common . The older members of the congregation wear traditional dress , while the younger members wear the fashions of the day . The children are dressed up as adults : the boy in the foreground struts around in his finery while the boy with his back to the viewer has his hair in a net , bagged up in the " French " style . 
 At the far right , a black man fondles the breasts of a woman , distracting her from her work , her pie @-@ dish " tottering like her virtue " . Confusion over whether the law permitted slavery in England , and pressure from abolitionists , meant that by the mid @-@ eighteenth century there was a sizeable population of free black Londoners ; but the status of this man is not clear . The black man , the girl and bawling boy fill the roles of Mars , Venus and Cupid which would have appeared in the pastoral scenes that Hogarth is aping . In front of the couple , a boy has set down his pie to rest , but the plate has broken , spilling the pie onto the ground where it is being rapidly consumed by an urchin . The boy 's features are modelled on those of a child in the foreground of Poussin 's first version of the Rape of the Sabine Women ( now held in the Metropolitan Museum of Art ) , but the boy crying over his lost pie was apparently sketched by Hogarth after he witnessed the scene one day while he was being shaved . 
 The composition of the scene juxtaposes the prim and proper Huguenot man and his immaculately dressed wife and son with these three , as they form their own " family group " across the other side of the gutter . The head of John the Baptist on a platter is the advertisement for the pie shop , proclaiming " Good eating " . Below this sign are the embracing couple , extending the metaphor of good eating beyond a mere plate of food , and still further down the street girl greedily scoops up the pie , carrying the theme to the foot of the picture . I. R. F. Gordon sees the vertical line of toppling plates from the top window downwards as a symbol of the disorder on this side of the street . The man reduced to a head on the sign , in what is assumed to be the woman 's fantasy , is mirrored by the " Good Woman " pictured on the board behind who has only a body , her nagging head removed to create the man 's ideal of a " good woman " . In the top window of the " Good Woman " , a woman throws a plate with a leg of meat into the street as she argues , providing a stark contrast to the " good " woman pictured on the sign below . Ronald Paulson sees the kite hanging from the church as part of a trinity of signs ; the kite indicating the purpose of the church , an ascent into heaven , just as the other signs for " Good Eating " and the " Good Woman " indicate the predilections of those on that side of the street ; but he also notes it as another nod to the pastoral tradition : here instead of soaring above the fields it hangs impotently on the church wall . 
 The time is unclear . Allan Cunningham states it is half past eleven , and suggests that Hogarth uses the early hour to highlight the debauchery occurring opposite the church , yet the print shows the hands at a time that could equally be half past twelve , and the painting shows a thin golden hand pointing to ten past twelve . 
 In this scene more than any of the others Hogarth 's sympathies seem to be with the lower classes and more specifically with the English . Although there is disorder on the English side of the street , there is an abundance of " good eating " and the characters are rosy @-@ cheeked and well @-@ nourished . Even the street girl can eat her fill . The pinch @-@ faced Huguenots , on the other hand , have their customs and dress treated as mercilessly as any characters in the series . A national enmity towards the French , even French refugees , may explain why the English are depicted somewhat more flatteringly here than they are by figures in the accompanying scenes . Hogarth mocked continental fashions again in Marriage à @-@ la @-@ mode ( 1743 – 1745 ) and made a more direct attack on the French in The Gate of Calais which he painted immediately upon returning to England in 1748 after he was arrested as a spy while sketching in Calais . 
 = = = Evening = = = 
 Unlike the other three images , Evening takes place slightly outside the built @-@ up area of the city , with views of rolling hills and wide evening skies . The cow being milked in the background indicates it is around 5 o 'clock . While in Morning winter cold pervades the scene , Evening is oppressed by the heat of the summer . A pregnant woman and her husband attempt to escape from the claustrophobic city by journeying out to the fashionable Sadler 's Wells ( the stone entrance to Sadler 's Wells Theatre is shown to the left ) . By the time Hogarth produced this series the theatre had lost any vestiges of fashionability and was satirised as having an audience consisting of tradesmen and their pretentious wives . Ned Ward described the clientele in 1699 as : 
 : Butchers and bailiffs , and such sort of fellows , 
 mixed with a vermin train 'd up for the gallows , 
 As Bullocks and files , <unk> and <unk> , 
 With prize @-@ fighters , <unk> , and such sort of traders , 
 Informers , thief @-@ takers , deer stealers , and bullies . 
 The husband , whose stained hands reveal he is a dyer by trade , looks harried as he carries his exhausted youngest daughter . In earlier impressions ( and the painting ) , his hands are blue , to show his occupation , while his wife 's face is coloured with red ink . The placement of the cow 's horns behind his head represents him as a cuckold and suggests the children are not his . Behind the couple , their children replay the scene : the father 's cane protrudes between the son 's legs , doubling as a hobby horse , while the daughter is clearly in charge , demanding that he hand over his gingerbread . A limited number of proofs missing the girl and artist 's signature were printed ; Hogarth added the mocking girl to explain the boy 's tears . 
 The heat is made tangible by the flustered appearance of the woman as she fans herself ( the fan itself displays a classical scene — perhaps Venus , Adonis and Cupid ) ; the sluggish pregnant dog that looks longingly towards the water ; and the vigorous vine growing on the side of the tavern . As is often the case in Hogarth 's work , the dog 's expression reflects that of its master . The family rush home , past the New River and a tavern with a sign showing Sir Hugh <unk> , who bankrupted himself financing the construction of the river to bring running water into London in 1613 ( a wooden pipe lies by the side of the watercourse ) . Through the open window other refugees from the city can be seen sheltering from the oppressive heat in the bar . While they appear more jolly than the dyer and his family , Hogarth pokes fun at these people escaping to the country for fresh air only to reproduce the smoky air and crowded conditions of the city by huddling in the busy tavern with their pipes . 
 = = = Night = = = 
 The final picture in the series , Night , shows disorderly activities under cover of night in the Charing Cross Road , identified by Hubert Le Sueur 's equestrian statue of Charles I of England and the two pubs ; this part of the road is now known as Whitehall . In the background the passing <unk> of furniture suggests tenants escaping from their landlord in a " moonlight flit " . In the painting the moon is full , but in the print it appears as a crescent . 
 The night is 29 May , Oak Apple Day , a public holiday which celebrated the Restoration of the monarchy , demonstrated by the oak boughs above the barber 's sign and on some of the subjects ' hats , which recall the royal oak tree in which Charles II hid after losing the Battle of Worcester in 1651 . 
 Charing Cross was a central staging post for coaches , but the congested narrow road was a frequent scene of accidents ; here , a bonfire has caused the Salisbury Flying Coach to overturn . Festive bonfires were usual but risky : a house fire lights the sky in the distance . A link @-@ boy blows on the flame of his torch , street @-@ urchins are playing with the fire , and one of their fireworks is falling in at the coach window . 
 On one side of the road is a barber surgeon whose sign advertises Shaving , bleeding , and teeth drawn with a touch . Ecce <unk> ! Inside the shop , the barber , who may be drunk , haphazardly shaves a customer , holding his nose like that of a pig , while spots of blood darken the cloth under his chin . The surgeons and barbers had been a single profession since 1540 and would not finally separate until 1745 , when the surgeons broke away to form the Company of Surgeons . Bowls on the windowsill contain blood from the day 's patients . 
 Underneath the <unk> , a homeless family have made a bed for themselves . 
 In the foreground , a drunken freemason , identified by his apron and set square medallion as the Worshipful Master of a lodge , is being helped home by his Tyler , as the contents of a chamber pot are emptied onto his head from a window . In some of the prints , a woman standing back from the window looks down on him , suggesting that his soaking is not accidental . The freemason is traditionally identified as Sir Thomas de Veil , who was a member of Hogarth 's first Lodge , Henry Fielding 's predecessor as the Bow Street magistrate , and the model for Fielding 's character Justice <unk> in The Coffee @-@ House Politician ( 1730 ) . He was unpopular for his stiff sentencing of gin @-@ sellers , which was deemed to be hypocritical as he was known to be an enthusiastic drinker . He is supported by his Tyler , a servant equipped with sword and candle @-@ <unk> , who may be Brother Montgomerie , the Grand Tyler . 
 All around are pubs and brothels . The Earl of Cardigan tavern is on one side of the street , and opposite is the Rummer , whose sign shows a <unk> ( a short wide @-@ brimmed glass ) with a bunch of grapes on the pole . Masonic lodges met in both taverns during the 1730s , and the Lodge at the Rummer and Grapes in nearby Channel Row was the smartest of the four founders of the Grand Lodge . The publican is adulterating a hogshead of wine , a practice recalled in the poetry of Matthew Prior who lived with his uncle Samuel Prior , the Landlord successively of both the Rummer and Grapes and the Rummer " . 
 My uncle , rest his soul , when living , 
 Might have <unk> 'd me ways of thriving ; 
 Taught me with cider to replenish 
 My vats , or ebbing tide of Rhenish . 
 On either side of the street are signs for The Bagnio and The New Bagnio . Ostensibly a Turkish bath , bagnio had come to mean a disorderly house . 
 The 6th Earl of Salisbury scandalised society by driving and upsetting a stagecoach . John Ireland suggests that the overturned " Salisbury Flying Coach " below the " Earl of Cardigan " sign was a gentle mockery of the Grand Master 4th Earl of Cardigan , George Brudenell , later Duke of Montagu , who was also renowned for his reckless carriage driving , ; and it also mirrors the ending of Gay 's " Trivia " in which the coach is overturned and wrecked at night . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Four Times of the Day was the first series of prints that Hogarth had issued since the success of the Harlot and Rake ( and would be the only set he would issue until Marriage à @-@ la @-@ mode in 1745 ) , so it was eagerly anticipated . On hearing of its imminent issue , George Faulkner wrote from Dublin that he would take 50 sets . The series lacks the moral lessons that are found in the earlier series and revisited in Marriage à @-@ la @-@ mode , and its lack of teeth meant it failed to achieve the same success , though it has found an enduring niche as a snapshot of the society of Hogarth 's time . At the auction of 1745 , the paintings of Four Times of the Day raised more than those of the Rake ; and Night , which is generally regarded as the worst of the series , fetched the highest single total . Cunningham commented sarcastically : " Such was the reward then , to which the patrons of genius thought these works entitled " . While Horace Walpole praised the accompanying print , Strolling Actresses Dressing in a Barn , as being the finest of Hogarth 's works , he had little to say of Four Times of the Day other than that it did not find itself wanting in comparison with Hogarth 's other works . 
 Morning and Night are now in the National Trust Bearsted Collection at Upton House , Warwickshire . The collection was assembled by Walter Samuel , 2nd Viscount Bearsted and gifted to the Trust , along with the house , in 1948 . Noon and Evening remain in the Ancaster Collection at <unk> Castle , Lincolnshire . 
 = Crass = 
 Crass were an English collective and punk rock band formed in 1977 which promoted anarchism as a political ideology , a way of life and a resistance movement . Crass popularised the anarcho @-@ punk movement of the punk subculture , advocating direct action , animal rights and environmentalism . The band used and advocated a DIY punk ethic approach to its sound collages , leaflets , albums and films . 
 Crass spray @-@ painted stencilled graffiti messages in the London Underground system and on advertising billboards , coordinated squats and organised political action . The band expressed its ideals by dressing in black , military @-@ surplus @-@ style clothing and using a stage backdrop amalgamating icons of perceived authority such as the Christian cross , the swastika , the Union Jack and the ouroboros . 
 The band was critical of punk subculture and youth culture in general . Crass promoted an anarchism which became more common in the punk @-@ music scene . They are considered art punk in their use of tape collages , graphics , spoken word releases , poetry and improvisation . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1977 : Origins = = = 
 The band was based around Dial House , an open @-@ house community near Epping , Essex , and formed when Dial House founder Penny Rimbaud began jamming with Steve Ignorant ( who was staying in the house at the time ) . Ignorant was inspired to form a band after seeing The Clash perform at Colston Hall in Bristol , whilst Rimbaud , a veteran of avant garde performance art groups such as EXIT and Ceres Confusion , was working on his book Reality Asylum . They produced " So What ? " and " Do They Owe Us A Living ? " as a drum @-@ and @-@ vocal duo . They briefly called themselves Stormtrooper before choosing Crass in reference to a line in the David Bowie song " Ziggy Stardust " ( " The kids was just crass " ) . 
 Other friends and household members joined ( including Gee Vaucher , Pete Wright , N. A. Palmer and Steve Herman ) , and Crass played their first live gig at a squatted street festival in Huntley Street , North London . They planned to play five songs , but a neighbour " pulled the plug " after three . Guitarist Steve Herman left the band soon afterwards , and was replaced by Phil Clancey , aka Phil Free . Joy De Vivre and Eve Libertine also joined around this time . Other early Crass performances included a four @-@ date tour of New York City , a festival gig in Covent Garden and regular appearances with the U.K. Subs at The White Lion , Putney and Action Space in central London . The latter performances were often poorly attended : " The audience consisted mostly of us when the Subs played and the Subs when we played " . 
 Crass played two gigs at the Roxy Club in Covent Garden , London . According to Rimbaud , the band arrived drunk at the second show and were ejected from the stage ; this inspired their song , " Banned from the Roxy " , and Rimbaud 's essay for Crass ' self @-@ published magazine International Anthem , " Crass at the Roxy " . After the incident the band took themselves more seriously , avoiding alcohol and cannabis before shows and wearing black , military surplus @-@ style clothing on and offstage . 
 They introduced their stage backdrop , a logo designed by Rimbaud 's friend Dave King . This gave the band a militaristic image , which led to accusations of fascism . Crass countered that their uniform appearance was intended to be a statement against the " cult of personality " , so ( in contrast to many rock bands ) no member would be identified as the " leader " . 
 Conceived and intended as cover artwork for a self @-@ published pamphlet version of Rimbaud 's Christ 's Reality Asylum , the Crass logo was an amalgam of several " icons of authority " including the Christian cross , the swastika , the Union Jack and a two @-@ headed Ouroboros ( symbolising the idea that power will eventually destroy itself ) . Using such deliberately mixed messages was part of Crass ' strategy of presenting themselves as a " barrage of contradictions " , challenging audiences to ( in Rimbaud 's words ) " make your own fucking minds up " . This included using loud , aggressive music to promote a pacifist message , a reference to their Dadaist , performance @-@ art backgrounds and <unk> ideas . 
 The band eschewed elaborate stage lighting during live sets , preferring to play under 40 @-@ watt household light bulbs ; the technical difficulties of filming under such lighting conditions partly explains why there is little live footage of Crass . They pioneered multimedia presentation , using video technology ( back @-@ projected films and video collages by Mick Duffield and Gee Vaucher ) to enhance their performances , and also distributed leaflets and handouts explaining anarchist ideas to their audiences . 
 = = = 1978 – 1979 : The Feeding of the 5000 and Crass Records = = = 
 Crass ' first release was The Feeding of the 5000 ( an 18 @-@ track , 12 " 45 rpm EP on the Small Wonder label ) in 1978 . Workers at the record @-@ pressing plant refused to handle it due to the allegedly blasphemous content of the song " Asylum " , and the record was released without it . In its place were two minutes of silence , entitled " The Sound of Free Speech " . This incident prompted Crass to set up their own independent record label , Crass Records , to prevent Small Wonder from being placed in a compromising position and to retain editorial control over their material . 
 A re @-@ recorded , extended version of " Asylum " , renamed " Reality Asylum " , was shortly afterwards released on Crass Records as a 7 " single and Crass were investigated by the police due to the song 's lyrics . The band were interviewed at their Dial House home by Scotland Yard 's vice squad , and threatened with prosecution ; however , the case was dropped . " Reality Asylum " retailed at <unk> ( when most other singles cost about <unk> ) , and was the first example of Crass ' " pay no more than ... " policy : issuing records as inexpensively as possible . The band failed to factor value added tax into their expenses , causing them to lose money on every copy sold . A year later Crass Records released new pressings of " The Feeding of the 5000 " ( subtitled " The Second Sitting " ) , restoring the original version of " Asylum " . 
 = = = 1980 : Stations of the Crass and Bloody Revolutions = = = 
 In 1979 the band released their second album ( Stations of the Crass ) , financed with a loan from Poison Girls , a band with whom they regularly appeared . This was a double album , with three sides of new material and a fourth side recorded live at the Pied Bull in Islington . 
 The next Crass single , 1980 's " Bloody Revolutions " , was a benefit release with Poison Girls which raised £ 20 @,@ 000 to fund the Wapping Autonomy Centre . The words were a critique ( from an anarchist @-@ pacifist perspective ) of the traditional Marxist view of revolutionary struggle , and were ( in part ) a response to violence marring a gig at Conway Hall in London 's Red Lion Square at which both bands performed in September 1979 . The show was intended as a benefit for the so @-@ called " Persons Unknown " , a group of anarchists facing conspiracy charges . During the performance Socialist Workers Party supporters and other anti @-@ fascists attacked British Movement neo @-@ Nazis , triggering violence . Crass afterwards argued that the leftists were largely to blame for the fighting , and organizations such as Rock Against Racism were causing audiences to become polarised into left- and right @-@ wing factions . Others ( including the anarchist organisation Class War ) were critical of Crass 's position , stating that " like Kropotkin , their politics are up shit creek " . Many of the band 's punk followers felt that they failed to understand the violence to which they were subjected from the right . 
 " Rival Tribal Rebel Revel " , a flexi disc single given away with the Toxic <unk> [ sic ] fanzine , was also a commentary about the events at Conway Hall attacking the mindless violence and <unk> aspects of contemporary youth culture . This was followed by the single , " Nagasaki Nightmare / Big A Little A " . The strongly anti @-@ nuclear lyrics of the first song were reinforced by the fold @-@ out @-@ sleeve artwork . It featured an article by Mike Holderness of Peace News magazine connecting the atomic power industry and the manufacture of nuclear weapons , and a large poster @-@ style map of nuclear installations in the UK . The other side of the record , " Big A Little A " , was a statement of the band 's anti @-@ statist and individualist anarchist philosophy : 
 " Be exactly who you want to be , do what you want to do / I am he and she is she but you 're the only you " 
 = = = 1981 : Penis Envy = = = 
 Crass released their third album , Penis Envy , in 1981 . This marked a departure from the hardcore @-@ punk image The Feeding of the 5000 and Stations of the Crass had given the group . It featured more @-@ complex musical arrangements and female vocals by Eve Libertine and Joy De Vivre ( singer Steve Ignorant was credited as " not on this recording " ) . The album addressed feminist issues , attacking marriage and sexual repression . 
 The last track on Penis Envy , a parody of an MOR love song entitled " Our Wedding " , was made available as a white flexi disc to readers of Loving , a teenage romance magazine . Crass tricked the magazine into offering the disc , posing as " Creative Recording And Sound Services " . Loving accepted the offer , telling their readers that the free Crass flexi would make " your wedding day just that bit extra special " . A tabloid controversy resulted when the hoax was exposed , with the News of the World stating that the title of the flexi 's originating album was " too obscene to print " . Despite Loving 's annoyance , Crass had broken no laws . 
 The album was banned by the retailer HMV , and in 1984 copies of the album were seized from the Eastern Bloc record shop by Greater Manchester Police under the direction of Chief Constable James Anderton . The shop owners were charged with displaying " obscene articles for publication for gain " . The judge ruled against Crass in the ensuing court case , although the decision was overturned by the Court of Appeal ( except the lyrics to one song , " Bata Motel " , which were upheld as " sexually provocative and obscene " ) . 
 = = = 1982 – 1983 : Christ – The Album and strategy change = = = 
 The band 's fourth LP , 1982 's double set Christ - The Album , took almost a year to record , produce and mix ( during which the Falklands War broke out and ended ) . This caused Crass to question their approach to making records . As a group whose primary purpose was political commentary , they felt overtaken and redundant by world events : 
 The speed with which the Falklands War was played out and the devastation that Thatcher was creating both at home and abroad , forced us to respond far faster than we had ever needed to before . Christ – The Album had taken so long to produce that some of the songs in it , songs that warned of the imminence of riots and war , had become almost redundant . Toxteth , Bristol , Brixton and the Falklands were ablaze by the time that we released . We felt embarrassed by our slowness , humbled by our inadequacy . 
 Subsequent releases ( including the singles " How Does It Feel ? ( to Be the Mother of a Thousand Dead ) " and " Sheep Farming in the Falklands " and the album Yes Sir , I Will ) saw the band 's sound go back to basics and were issued as " tactical responses " to political situations . They anonymously produced 20 @,@ 000 copies of a flexi @-@ disc with a live recording of " Sheep Farming ... " , copies of which were randomly inserted into the sleeves of other records by sympathetic workers at the Rough Trade Records distribution warehouse to spread their views to those who might not otherwise hear them . 
 = = = Direct Action and internal debates = = = 
 From their early days of spraying stencilled anti @-@ war , anarchist , feminist and anti @-@ consumerist graffiti messages in the London Underground and on billboards , Crass was involved in politically motivated direct action and musical activities . On 18 December 1982 , the band helped co @-@ ordinate a 24 @-@ hour squat in the empty west London Zig Zag club to prove " that the underground punk scene could handle itself responsibly when it had to and that music really could be enjoyed free of the restraints imposed upon it by corporate industry " . About 500 people attended ; the bands playing ( in running order ) were Faction , D and V , Omega Tribe , Lack of Knowledge , Sleeping Dogs , the Apostles , Amebix , Null & Void , Soldiers of Fortune , the Mob , Polemic Attack , Poison Girls , Conflict , Flux of Pink Indians , Crass and DIRT . 
 In 1983 and 1984 , Crass were part of the Stop the City actions co @-@ ordinated by London Greenpeace which foreshadowed the anti @-@ globalisation rallies of the early 21st century . Support for these activities was provided in the lyrics and sleeve notes of the band 's last single , " You 're Already Dead " , expressing doubts about their commitment to non @-@ violence . It was also a reflection of disagreements within the group , as explained by Rimbaud ; " Half the band supported the pacifist line and half supported direct and if necessary violent action . It was a confusing time for us , and I think a lot of our records show that , inadvertently " . This led to introspection within the band , with some members becoming embittered and losing sight of their essentially positive stance . Reflecting this debate , the next release under the Crass name was Acts of Love : classical @-@ music settings of 50 poems by Penny Rimbaud , described as " songs to my other self " and intended to celebrate " the profound sense of unity , peace and love that exists within that other self " . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Another Crass hoax was known as the " <unk> tapes " , a recording of an apparently accidentally overheard telephone conversation ( due to crossed lines ) . The tape was constructed by Crass from edited recordings of Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan . On the ' rather clumsily ' forged tape , they appear to discuss the sinking of the HMS Sheffield during the Falklands War and agree that Europe would be a target for nuclear weapons in a conflict between the United States and the Soviet Union . 
 Copies were leaked to the press via a Dutch news agency during the 1983 general election campaign . The U.S. State Department and British Government believed the tape to be propaganda produced by the KGB ( as reported by the San Francisco Chronicle and The Sunday Times ) . Although the tape was produced anonymously , The Observer linked the tape with the band . Previously classified government documents made public in January 2014 under the UK 's ' Thirty Year Rule ' reveal that the prime minister was personally aware of the tape and had discussed it with her cabinet . 
 = = = 1984 : Breakup = = = 
 Crass had become a thorn in the side of Margaret Thatcher 's government after the Falklands War . Questions about the band in Parliament and an attempted prosecution by Conservative Party MP Timothy Eggar under the UK 's Obscene Publications Act for their single , " How Does It Feel ... " , made them question their purpose : 
 We found ourselves in a strange and frightening arena . We had wanted to make our views public , had wanted to share them with like minded people , but now those views were being analysed by those dark shadows who inhabited the corridors of power ( … ) We had gained a form of political power , found a voice , were being treated with a slightly awed respect , but was that really what we wanted ? Was that what we had set out to achieve all those years ago ? 
 The band had also incurred heavy legal expenses for the Penis Envy prosecution ; this , combined with exhaustion and the pressures of living and operating together , finally took its toll . On 7 July 1984 the band played a benefit gig at Aberdare , Wales for striking miners , and on the return trip guitarist N. A. Palmer announced that he intended to leave the group . This confirmed Crass 's previous intention to quit in 1984 , and the band split up . 
 = = = Crass Collective , Crass Agenda and Last Amendment = = = 
 In November 2002 several former members arranged Your Country Needs You , a concert of " voices in opposition to war " , as the Crass Collective . At Queen Elizabeth Hall on London 's South Bank , Your Country Needs You included Benjamin Britten 's War Requiem and performances by <unk> , Fun @-@ Da @-@ Mental , Ian MacKaye and Pete Wright 's post @-@ Crass project , Judas 2 . In October 2003 the Crass Collective changed their name to Crass Agenda , with Rimbaud , Libertine and Vaucher working with Matt Black of Coldcut and jazz musicians such as Julian Siegel and Kate Shortt . In 2004 Crass Agenda spearheaded a campaign to save the Vortex Jazz Club in Stoke Newington , north London ( where they regularly played ) . In June 2005 Crass Agenda was declared to be " no more " , changing its name to the " more pertinent " Last Amendment . After a five @-@ year hiatus , Last Amendment performed at the Vortex in June 2012 . Rimbaud has also performed and recorded with <unk> and the Charlatans . A " new " Crass track ( a remix of 1982 's " Major General Despair " with new lyrics ) , " The <unk> President " , is available . 
 = = = 2007 : Ignorant 's The Feeding of the 5000 = = = 
 On 24 and 25 November 2007 , Steve Ignorant performed Crass ' The Feeding of the 5000 album live at the Shepherds Bush Empire with a band of " selected guests " . Other members of Crass were not involved in these concerts . Initially Rimbaud refused Ignorant permission to perform Crass songs he had written , but later changed his mind : " I acknowledge and respect Steve 's right to do this , but I do regard it as a betrayal of the Crass ethos " . Ignorant had a different view : " I don 't have to justify what I do ... Plus , most of the lyrics are still relevant today . And remember that three @-@ letter word , " fun " ? " 
 = = = 2010 : Crassical Collection reissues = = = 
 In 2010 it was announced that Crass would release The Crassical Collection , remastered reissues of their back catalogue . Three former members objected , threatening legal action . Despite their concerns the project went ahead , and the remasters were eventually released . First in the series was The Feeding of the 5000 , released in August 2010 . Stations of the Crass followed in October , with new editions of Penis Envy , Christ – The Album , Yes Sir , I Will and Ten Notes on a Summer 's Day released in 2011 and 2012 . Critics praised the improved sound quality and new packaging of the remastered albums . 
 = = = 2011 : The Last Supper = = = 
 In 2011 Steve Ignorant embarked on an international tour , entitled " The Last Supper " . He performed Crass material , culminating with a final performance at the Shepherds Bush Empire on 19 November . Ignorant said that this was the last time he would sing the songs of Crass , with Rimbaud 's support ; the latter joined him onstage for a drum @-@ and @-@ vocal rendition of " Do They Owe Us A Living " , bringing the band 's career full circle after 34 years : " And then Penny came on ... and we did it , ' Do They Owe Us A Living ' as we 'd first done it all those years ago . As it started , so it finished " . Ignorant 's lineup for the tour were <unk> Butt , Carol Hodge , Pete Wilson and Spike T. Smith , and he was joined by Eve Libertine for a number of songs . The set list included a cover of " West One ( Shine on Me ) " by The Ruts , when Ignorant was joined onstage by the Norfolk @-@ based lifeboat crew with whom he volunteers . 
 = = Influences and Influence = = 
 For Rimbaud the initial inspiration for founding Crass was the death of his friend Phil ' Wally Hope ' Russell , as detailed in his book The Last of the Hippies : An Hysterical Romance . Russell had been placed in a psychiatric hospital after helping to set up the first Stonehenge free festival in 1974 , and died shortly afterwards . Rimbaud believed that Russell was murdered by the State for political reasons . 
 Band members have also cited influences ranging from existentialism and Zen to <unk> , the poetry of Baudelaire , British working class ' kitchen sink ' literature and films such as Kes and the films of Anthony McCall ( McCall 's Four Projected Movements was shown as part of an early Crass performance ) . 
 Crass have said that their musical influences were seldom drawn from rock , but more from classical music ( particularly Benjamin Britten , on whose work , Rimbaud states , some of Crass ' riffs are based ) , free jazz , European atonality and avant @-@ garde composers such as John Cage and Karlheinz Stockhausen . 
 Crass influenced the anarchist movement in the UK , the US and beyond . The growth of anarcho @-@ punk spurred interest in anarchist ideas . The band have also claimed credit for revitalising the peace movement and the UK Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament during the late 1970s early 1980s . Others contend that they overestimated their influence , their <unk> effect on militants notwithstanding . Crass ' philosophical and aesthetic influences on 1980s punk bands were far @-@ reaching , although few mimicked their later free @-@ form style ( heard on Yes Sir , I Will and their final recording , Ten Notes on a Summer 's Day ) . Their painted and collage black @-@ and @-@ white record sleeves ( by Gee Vaucher ) may have influenced later artists such as Banksy ( with whom Vaucher collaborated ) and the <unk> movement . Anti @-@ folk artist Jeffrey Lewis 's 2007 album , 12 Crass Songs , features acoustic covers of Crass material . 
 In February 2011 , artist Toby Mott exhibited a portion of his Crass ephemera collection at the Roth Gallery in New York . The exhibit featured artwork , albums ( including 12 " LPs and EPs ) , 7 " singles from Crass Records and a complete set of Crass ' self @-@ published zine , Inter @-@ National Anthem . 
 = = Members = = 
 Steve Ignorant ( vocals ) 
 Eve Libertine ( vocals ) 
 Joy De Vivre ( vocals ) 
 N. A. Palmer ( guitar ) 
 Phil Free ( guitar ) 
 Pete Wright ( bass , vocals ) 
 Penny Rimbaud ( drums , vocals ) 
 Gee Vaucher ( artwork , piano , radio ) 
 Mick Duffield ( films ) 
 John Loder , sound engineer and founder of Southern Studios , is sometimes considered the " ninth member " of Crass . 
 Steve Herman ( guitar ; left shortly after their first performance ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 ( All released on Crass Records unless otherwise stated . ) 
 = = = LPs = = = 
 The Feeding of the 5000 ( LP , 1978 , 45 rpm , Small Wonder Records – UK Indie – No. 1 . Reissued in 1980 as LP 33 rpm as The Feeding of the 5000 – Second Sitting , UK Indie – No. 11 ) 
 Stations of the Crass ( <unk> , double LP , 1979 ) ( UK Indie – No. 1 ) 
 Penis Envy ( <unk> / 1 , LP , 1981 ) ( UK Indie – No. 1 ) 
 Christ – The Album ( <unk> <unk> , double LP , 1982 ) ( UK Indie – No. 1 ) 
 Yes Sir , I Will ( 121984 / 2 , LP , 1983 ) ( UK Indie – No. 1 ) 
 Ten Notes on a Summer 's Day ( catalog No. 6 , LP , 1986 , Crass Records ) ( UK Indie – No. 6 ) 
 = = = Compilations and remastered editions = = = 
 Best Before 1984 ( 1986 – <unk> ; compilation album of singles ) ( UK Indie – No. 7 ) 
 The Feeding of the 5000 ( The Crassical Collection ) ( 2010 – <unk> remastered edition ) 
 Stations of the Crass ( The Crassical Collection ) ( 2010 – <unk> remastered ) 
 Penis Envy ( The Crassical Collection ) ( 2010 – <unk> remastered edition ) 
 Christ – The Album ( The Crassical Collection ) ( 2011 – <unk> remastered edition ) 
 Yes Sir , I Will ( The Crassical Collection ) ( 2011 – <unk> remastered edition ) 
 Ten Notes on a Summer 's Day ( The Crassical Collection ) ( 2012 – <unk> remastered edition ) 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Reality Asylum " / " Shaved Women " ( <unk> , 7 " , 1979 ) ( UK Indie – No. 9 ) 
 " Bloody Revolutions " / " Persons Unknown " ( 421984 / 1 , 7 " single , joint released with the Poison Girls , 1980 ) ( UK Indie – No. 1 ) 
 " Rival Tribal Rebel Revel " ( 421984 / 6F , one @-@ sided 7 " flexi disc single given away with Toxic <unk> [ sic ] fanzine , 1980 ) 
 " Nagasaki Nightmare " / " Big A Little A " ( 421984 / 5 , 7 " single , 1981 ) ( UK Indie – No. 1 ) 
 " Our Wedding " ( <unk> / 1F , one @-@ sided 7 " flexi @-@ disc single by Creative Recording And Sound Services made available to readers of teenage magazine Loving ) 
 " Merry <unk> " ( <unk> , 7 " single , 1981 , Crass ' stab at the Christmas novelty market ) ( UK Indie – No. 2 ) 
 " Sheep Farming in the Falklands " / " Gotcha " ( 121984 / 3 , 7 " single , 1982 , originally released anonymously as a flexi @-@ disc ) ( UK Indie – No. 1 ) 
 " How Does It Feel To Be The Mother of 1000 Dead ? " / " The Immortal Death " ( <unk> / 6 , 7 " single , 1983 ) ( UK Indie – No. 1 ) 
 " <unk> ? " ( 121984 / 4 , 7 " single , 1983 , pressed in " shit @-@ coloured vinyl " ) ( UK Indie – No. 2 ) 
 " You 're Already Dead " / " Nagasaki is Yesterday 's Dog @-@ End " / " Don 't Get Caught " ( 1984 , 7 " single , 1984 ) 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Penny Rimbaud Reads From ' Christ 's Reality Asylum ' ( Cat No. 10C , C90 cassette , 1992 ) 
 Acts of Love – Fifty Songs to my Other Self by Penny Rimbaud with Paul Ellis , Eve Libertine and Steve Ignorant ( Cat No. 1984 / 4 , LP and book , 1984 . Reissued as CD and book as <unk> Cat No . <unk> 2012 ) 
 EXIT The Mystic Trumpeter – Live at the Roundhouse 1972 , The <unk> Tapes ( pre Crass material featuring Penny Rimbaud , Gee Vaucher , John Loder and others ) ( Exit Stencil Music Cat No . <unk> , CD and book , 2013 ) 
 = = = Live recordings = = = 
 Christ : The Bootleg ( recorded live in Nottingham , 1984 , released 1989 on Allied Records ) 
 You 'll Ruin It For Everyone ( recorded live in Perth , Scotland , 1981 , released 1993 on Pomona Records ) 
 = = = Videos = = = 
 Crass 
 Christ : The Movie ( a series of short films by Mick Duffield that were shown at Crass performances , VHS , released 1990 ) 
 Semi @-@ Detached ( video collages by Gee Vaucher , 1978 – 84 , VHS , 2001 ) 
 Crass : There Is No Authority But Yourself ( documentary by Alexander Oey , 2006 ) documenting the history of Crass and Dial House . 
 Crass Agenda 
 In the Beginning Was the WORD – Live DVD recorded at the Progress Bar , Tufnell Park , London , 18 November 2004 
 = German cruiser Emden = 
 Emden was a light cruiser built by the Reichsmarine in the early 1920s . She was the only ship of her class and was the first large warship built in Germany after the end of World War I. She was built at the Reichsmarinewerft in Wilhelmshaven ; her keel was laid in December 1921 and her completed hull was launched in January 1925 . Emden was commissioned into the German fleet in October 1925 . Her design was heavily informed by the restrictions of the Treaty of Versailles and the dictates of the Allied disarmament commission . She was armed with a main battery of surplus 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns left over from World War I , mounted in single gun turrets , as mandated by the Allied powers . She had a top speed of 29 knots ( 54 km / h ; 33 mph ) . 
 Emden spent the majority of her career as a training ship ; in the inter @-@ war period , she conducted several world cruises to train naval cadets . At the outbreak of war , she laid minefields off the German coast and was damaged by a British bomber that crashed into her . She participated in the invasion of Norway in April 1940 , and then resumed training duties in the Baltic Sea . These lasted with minor interruptions until September 1944 , when she was deployed to Norway to serve as the flagship of the minelaying forces there . In January 1945 , she carried the disinterred remains of Paul von Hindenburg from East Prussia to Pillau , to prevent his remains from falling into the hands of the advancing Soviet Army . While undergoing repairs in Kiel , Emden was badly damaged by British bombers and later run aground outside the harbor and was blown up . The wreck was ultimately broken up in 1949 . 
 = = Design = = 
 According to Article 181 of the Treaty of Versailles , the treaty that ended World War I , the German Navy was permitted only six light cruisers . Article 190 limited new cruiser designs to 6 @,@ 000 long tons ( 6 @,@ 100 t ) and prohibited new construction until the vessel to be replaced was at least twenty years old . Design work on the first new light cruiser , ordered as " Ersatz Niobe " , began in 1921 . The ship was intended for long @-@ range overseas service , so the designers placed emphasis on a large cruising radius and capacious crew accommodation spaces . The designers wanted to use a main battery of eight 15 @-@ centimeter ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns in four dual mounts , but the Allied powers insisted on single gun turrets . This arrangement placed four guns amidships , which reduced the power of her broadside , as only six guns could fire on either side , as opposed to eight . 
 The ship was based on cruiser designs from late in World War I , primarily due to personnel shortages in the design staff and the closure of the Navy 's experimental institute . Nevertheless , the ship incorporated major advances over the earlier designs , including large @-@ scale use of welding in her construction and a significantly more efficient propulsion system that gave her a cruising radius fifty percent larger than that of the older ships . Emden was laid down at the Reichsmarinewerft in Wilhelmshaven on 8 December 1921 and launched on 7 January 1925 . She was commissioned into the fleet nine months later , on 15 October 1925 . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Emden was 150 @.@ 5 meters ( 494 ft ) long at the waterline and 155 @.@ 1 m ( 509 ft ) long overall . She had a beam of 14 @.@ 2 m ( 47 ft ) and a designed draft of 5 @.@ 3 m ( 17 ft ) ; at standard load , the draft was 5 @.@ 15 m ( 16 @.@ 9 ft ) , and at combat load the draft increased to 5 @.@ 93 m ( 19 @.@ 5 ft ) . Her designed displacement was 5 @,@ 960 long tons ( 6 @,@ 060 t ) , with 5 @,@ 300 long tons ( 5 @,@ 400 t ) standard and 6 @,@ 990 long tons ( 7 @,@ 100 t ) combat displacements . Her hull was constructed with longitudinal steel frames and incorporated seventeen watertight compartments and a double bottom that extended for 56 percent of the length of the keel . She had a waterline armored belt that was 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick ; her armored deck was 20 to 40 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 to 1 @.@ 57 in ) thick , and her conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides . 
 The ship had a standard crew of nineteen officers and 464 enlisted men . While serving on cadet training cruises , her crew numbered twenty @-@ nine officers and 445 enlisted , with 162 cadets . After 1940 , her standard crew was increased to twenty @-@ six officers and 556 enlisted , and after being reduced to a training ship , her crew numbered thirty officers and 653 enlisted men . Emden carried six boats . The German Navy regarded the ship as a good sea boat , with slight lee helm and gentle motion in a swell . The cruiser was maneuverable , but was slow going into a turn . Steering was controlled by a single large rudder . She lost speed only slightly in a head sea , but lost up to sixty percent in hard turns . She had a metacentric height of .79 m ( 2 ft 7 in ) . 
 = = = Machinery = = = 
 Emden was powered by two sets of Brown , <unk> & Co. geared steam turbines ; they drove a pair of three @-@ bladed screws that were 3 @.@ 75 m ( 12 @.@ 3 ft ) in diameter . Steam was provided by four coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type boilers and six oil @-@ fired Marine boilers divided into four boiler rooms . The engines were rated at 46 @,@ 500 shaft horsepower ( 34 @,@ 700 kW ) and a top speed of 29 knots ( 54 km / h ; 33 mph ) . On speed trials , her engines reached 45 @,@ 900 shp ( 34 @,@ 200 kW ) and a maximum of 29 @.@ 4 knots ( 54 @.@ 4 km / h ; 33 @.@ 8 mph ) . The ship was designed to carry 300 metric tons ( 295 long tons ) of coal , though additional space could accommodate up to 875 metric tons ( 861 long tons ) . Oil capacity was 200 metric tons ( 197 long tons ) as designed , and up to 1 @,@ 170 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 150 long tons ) in additional fuel bunkers . This gave the ship a cruising radius of 6 @,@ 700 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 400 km ; 7 @,@ 700 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . At 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) , her range fell to 5 @,@ 200 nmi ( 9 @,@ 600 km ; 6 @,@ 000 mi ) . Electrical power was supplied by two systems of three generators each , with a total combined output of 420 kilowatts ( 560 hp ) at 220 Volts . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The ship 's main battery was to have been eight 15 cm SK L / 55 guns in twin turrets , but the Allied disarmament authority refused to permit this armament . Instead , she was equipped with existing stocks of 15 cm SK L / 45 guns in single turrets . The guns were C / 16 models ; they fired a 45 kg ( 99 lb ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 835 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 740 ft / s ) . They could elevate to 40 degrees and had a maximum range of 17 @,@ 600 m ( 57 @,@ 700 ft ) . The eight guns were supplied with a total of 960 rounds of ammunition . Emden was also equipped with two 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns , and a third was later added . These guns had between 900 and 1 @,@ 200 rounds of ammunition in total . As designed , she was to have carried eight deck @-@ mounted 50 cm ( 20 in ) torpedo tubes in dual launchers , but only four tubes were fitted as built . In 1934 , these were replaced with more powerful 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) tubes . The ship carried twelve torpedoes . 
 In 1938 , the ship 's anti @-@ aircraft battery was strengthened . She received two and later four 3 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 30 guns and up to eighteen 2 cm Flak guns . The capacity to carry 120 mines was also added . In 1942 , two of the four torpedo launchers were removed , and she was rearmed with a new model of 15 cm gun . This gun was the <unk> KC / 36 model , and was designed for use on destroyers . It fired a slightly smaller 40 kg ( 88 lb ) shell at a higher muzzle velocity — 875 m / s ( 2 @,@ 870 ft / s ) . The gun could elevate to 47 degrees for a maximum range of 23 @,@ 500 m ( 77 @,@ 100 ft ) . By 1945 , the ship 's anti @-@ aircraft battery consisted of nine 3 @.@ 7 cm guns and six 2 cm guns . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning in 1925 , Emden was used as a training ship for naval cadets . She made a series of world cruises to show the flag in the pre @-@ war period and trained large numbers of cadets . In 1925 – 1926 , a series of modifications were made to the ship , including increasing the height of the second funnel and the installation of a flying bridge at the base of the battle mast , which was shortened by 7 m ( 23 ft ) . Lothar von Arnauld de la <unk> commanded the ship from September 1928 until October 1930 . In April 1933 , her coal @-@ fired boilers were replaced with more efficient oil @-@ fired boilers . The next year , another series of modifications was made , including reducing the main mast and funnels in height and the installation of a small crane on the starboard side of the main mast . In September 1934 , Karl Dönitz , the future commander of the Kriegsmarine , took command of the ship and remained in the position until September 1935 . Emden went into dock for further modifications in 1936 ; the ship 's masts were again reworked , and the third 8 @.@ 8 cm anti @-@ aircraft gun was added . Leopold <unk> commanded the Emden from 30 July 1937 to 15 June 1938 . 
 After the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 , a degaussing coil was installed just above the waterline to protect the ship from magnetic mines . Her first wartime operation saw her participating in laying a minefield off the German coast in the North Sea on 3 September . She conducted the operation with the other light cruisers Nürnberg , Leipzig , Köln , and Königsberg and sixteen destroyers . After laying her first set of mines , she returned to Wilhelmshaven to restock her mines . While moored in the harbor , she was attacked by British bombers on 4 September ; German anti @-@ aircraft gunners shot down four of the five Blenheim bombers , one of which inadvertently crashed into the ship . Twenty @-@ nine men were killed or wounded in the crash . 
 Emden next participated in the invasion of Norway ( Operation Weserübung ) . She was part of the ill @-@ fated <unk> 5 , tasked with seizing Oslo . The group 's flagship , the heavy cruiser Blücher , was sunk by the Oscarsborg coastal fortress inside Oslofjord and the heavy cruiser Lützow was damaged when the squadron attempted to steam up the fjord into Oslo harbor to land troops . After the loss of Blücher , Emden and the heavy cruiser Lützow disembarked their troops further down the fjord . After the ground troops had occupied Oslo , Emden entered the port serving as a joint communications center to coordinate Kriegsmarine , Wehrmacht , and Luftwaffe operations . After the conquest of Norway was complete , Emden returned to Germany and served as a training ship . This lasted until September 1941 . 
 In September 1941 , Emden was assigned to an operation in the Gulf of Riga to provide gunfire support to German troops . On the 16th , she was operating off Dagö with Leipzig and three torpedo boats ; the ships came under fire from Soviet coastal batteries , but were undamaged . A group of four Soviet torpedo boats also made an unsuccessful attack on the German squadron . Emden was then assigned to the Baltic Fleet , centered on the newly commissioned battleship Tirpitz ; the Baltic Fleet was tasked with preventing the Soviet Navy from breaking out of the Baltic . Emden and Leipzig were the core of the southern group , which was based in Libau . The fleet remained on station only briefly , and by 29 September , the ships were recalled to Gotenhafen . 
 After returning to Germany , Emden was assigned to training duties once again . She continued in this role until June 1942 , by which time a major overhaul was in order . The refit was completed in Wilhelmshaven , after which Emden returned to training cadets . In September 1944 , she was deployed to Norway , where she served as the flagship of the minelaying forces there . While in Norway , she participated in several minelaying operations through October , when she was transferred to convoy escort duty ; her primary task was to protect convoys in and out of Oslo . This lasted until December , when she ran aground in the Oslofjord off the island of <unk> . Her guns were removed while repairs were partially effected in the Schichau @-@ Werke . Before departing East Prussia , she took on the remains of Paul von Hindenburg and his wife to carry them to mainland Germany . They had been disinterred to prevent them from falling into the hands of the advancing Soviet Army . The repair work on the ship was not yet completed , and so she was towed to Pillau , where the <unk> ' remains were taken off . Emden 's engines were put back in working order , though she was incapable of reaching top speed , and her guns were reinstalled . 
 Emden departed Pillau on 1 February , bound for Kiel . She arrived on 7 February 1945 and was taken into the Deutsche Werke dockyard to complete the necessary repairs . British bombers attacked the ship twice and damaged her badly . The ship was listing heavily , and so on 14 April , she was towed out into Heikendorfer Bay and run aground . The Germans then blew her up on 3 May to prevent the Allies from capturing the ship . The wreck was ultimately broken up for scrap in 1949 . Her bow ornament is currently on display in the Deutsches Museum in Munich . 
 = July 18 , 1998 Albanian – Yugoslav border clashes = 
 On July 18 , 1998 a Yugoslav Army ( VJ ) border patrol ambushed over 200 Kosovo Liberation Army ( KLA ) insurgents and foreign mujahideen just west of Dečani , on the frontier between Albania and Yugoslavia . The ambush resulted in the deaths of four KLA fighters and 18 mujahideen ( mostly citizens of Saudi Arabia ) . Another six KLA fighters were arrested by the Yugoslav authorities and charged with illegal entry and gunrunning . The VJ reported seizing a significant amount of arms and ammunition that the militants had been smuggling . One Yugoslav border guard was seriously wounded in the clash . According to Israeli historian Shaul Shay , the ambush represented the first clash of the Kosovo War between the VJ and foreign mujahideen . Human Rights Watch advisor Fred C. Abrahams suggests it is possible that the mujahideen were deliberately led into a trap by the KLA as part of a plan to reduce the influence of Islamic extremists within the KLA 's ranks . 
 Later in the day , 19 KLA fighters were wounded when the VJ shelled an arms smuggling route near the site of the ambush . They were evacuated by Albanian border guards and airlifted to receive treatment in the country 's capital , Tirana . Albanian officials later alleged that two of the mortar rounds fired by Yugoslav troops had landed inside Albania , sparking further tension between the two countries . That afternoon , KLA militants attacked a Yugoslav border patrol , wounding another soldier . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following World War II , Kosovo was given the status of an autonomous province within the Socialist Republic of Serbia , one of six constitutional republics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia . After the death of Yugoslavia 's long @-@ time leader Josip Broz Tito in 1980 , Yugoslavia 's political system began to unravel . In 1989 , Belgrade used a series of political maneuvers known as the " anti @-@ bureaucratic revolution " to revoke Kosovo 's autonomy . Kosovo , a province predominantly inhabited by ethnic Albanians , is of great historical and cultural significance to Serbs , who formed a majority there before the mid @-@ 19th century but by 1990 represented only about ten percent of the population . Alarmed by their dwindling numbers , the province 's Serbs began to fear that they were being " squeezed out " by the Albanians , and ethnic tensions worsened . Once Kosovo 's autonomy was abolished , a minority government run by Serbs and Montenegrins was appointed by Serbian President Slobodan Milošević to oversee the province , enforced by thousands of heavily armed paramilitaries from Serbia @-@ proper . Albanian culture was systematically repressed and hundreds of thousands of Albanians working in state @-@ owned companies lost their jobs . In 1991 – 92 , the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia disintegrated following the secession of former constituent republics Slovenia , Croatia , Macedonia and Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina . In 1992 , amidst the breakup of Yugoslavia and the Yugoslav Wars , the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , a Serb @-@ controlled federation consisting of Serbia ( including Kosovo ) and Montenegro , was proclaimed . 
 In 1996 , a group of Albanian nationalists calling themselves the Kosovo Liberation Army ( KLA ) began attacking the Serb @-@ dominated Yugoslav Army ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Vojska Jugoslavije ; VJ ) and the Serbian Ministry of Internal Affairs ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Ministarstvo unutrašnjih poslova ; MUP ) in Kosovo . Their goal was to separate the province from the rest of Yugoslavia . At first , the KLA carried out hit @-@ and @-@ run attacks ( 31 in 1996 , 55 in 1997 , and 66 in January and February 1998 alone ) . It gained popularity among young Kosovo Albanians , many of whom rejected the non @-@ violent resistance to Yugoslav authorities advocated by the politician Ibrahim Rugova and favoured a more aggressive approach . The organization received a significant boost in 1997 , when an armed uprising in neighbouring Albania led to thousands of weapons from the Albanian Army 's depots being looted . Many of these weapons ended up in the hands of the KLA , which already had substantial resources due its involvement in the trafficking of drugs , weapons and people , as well as through donations from the Albanian diaspora . Cross @-@ border arms smuggling flourished ; the unit charged with securing the Yugoslav border was the 549th Motorized Brigade , under the command of General Božidar Delić . 
 The KLA 's popularity skyrocketed after the VJ and MUP attacked the compound of KLA leader Adem Jashari in March 1998 , killing him , his closest associates and most of his family . The attack prompted thousands of young Kosovo Albanians to join the ranks of the KLA , fueling the Kosovar uprising that eventually erupted in the spring of 1998 . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = = Prelude = = = 
 In the summer of 1998 , a number of senior U.S. intelligence officials met with the leaders of the KLA , and Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) agents arrived in northern Albania to monitor the fighting in Kosovo and assist in training rebel fighters . In exchange for American military , financial and intelligence support , KLA leaders promised not to carry out any actions outside Kosovo , not to continue participating in the drug trade , and not to accept help from Islamic radicals . Thus , the KLA ordered the 36 foreign Islamist fighters ( or mujahideen ) fighting in their ranks to leave Kosovo . Though few Kosovo Albanians sympathized with the Islamists , some argued that the KLA should have accepted assistance from any source , fundamentalist or otherwise . When KLA commanders ordered the mujahideen to leave , they refused , and disagreements arose within the KLA ranks as what was to be done with them . 
 Serb sources assert that the first mujahideen began arriving in Kosovo in the spring of 1998 , mainly from Bosnia and Herzegovina . By that summer , about 240 mujahideen were present in Kosovo and northern Albania . Most of these were ethnic Albanians , but the group also included several dozen Arabs from the Middle East and North Africa . According to the diary of the ambushed KLA group 's leader , Ali Rabiçi , the mujahideen involved in the July 18 ambush had initially gathered in Munich before taking a ferry from Bari to the Albanian port city of Durrës . Once in Albania , the mujahideen were escorted to the frontier towns of <unk> and <unk> <unk> by their KLA handlers , where they rendezvoused with Rabiçi 's men . 
 = = = Clashes = = = 
 In the early morning hours of Saturday , July 18 , 1998 , 24 mujahideen fighters and 200 KLA militants left their base in northern Albania and departed for Kosovo . They were carrying a large quantity of arms and ammunition , which significantly impeded their movement and obliged them to move slowly across the Albanian – Yugoslav frontier . One hypothesis is that they were heading to reinforce KLA fighters battling for the town of <unk> . At 02 : 00 , the column was ambushed by Yugoslav border guards near Mount <unk> , about 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) from the Albanian border , just west of Dečani . The clashes reportedly lasted until about 07 : 00 . According to Human Rights Watch observer Fred C. Abrahams , a total of 22 militants were killed in the clash ( 18 mujahideen and four KLA ) . Rabiçi was among those killed , and documents recording the KLA and mujahideen 's journey were recovered off his corpse by Yugoslav authorities . Sixteen of the mujahideen were citizens of Saudi Arabia and one was a citizen of Yemen . Six were carrying forged Macedonian passports under ethnic Albanian pseudonyms . According to Israeli historian Shaul Shay , the incident represented the first skirmish between the VJ and foreign mujahideen during the Kosovo War . It is unclear if the ambush came as a result of Yugoslav vigilance or if the KLA deliberately led the mujahideen into a trap with the goal of eliminating them and thus limiting the influence of Islamic extremists within the KLA 's ranks . Survivors told monitors from the Organization for Security and Co @-@ operation in Europe that KLA fighters had led the mujahideen into a trap and fled . A Yugoslav lance corporal was seriously wounded in the exchange . 
 Most of the surviving militants either retreated to Albania or went into hiding along the border . As they fled , they dropped large quantities of Chinese @-@ made weapons and munitions , which were subsequently seized by Yugoslav authorities . Six militants , all citizens of Albania , were captured . They were charged with illegally crossing the border and gunrunning . Yugoslav officials stated that more than 10 tonnes ( 9 @.@ 8 long tons ; 11 short tons ) of weapons and ammunition , including about 300 rifles , 60 machine guns , ten recoilless guns and a number of mortars had been confiscated . Later that day , the VJ shelled a known arms trafficking route near the site of the ambush , wounding 19 KLA fighters . The militants were rescued by Albanian border guards and airlifted by helicopter to receive treatment in a Tirana hospital . At 13 : 30 , two militants opened fire on a Yugoslav border patrol within 300 metres ( 980 ft ) of the Albanian frontier . The border patrol returned fire , and the militants fled to Albania . One Yugoslav soldier was slightly wounded . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Tim Judah , a journalist specializing in the Balkans , described the ambush as a " catastrophic disaster " for the KLA . Albania 's deputy Minister of Interior Affairs , <unk> <unk> , claimed two Yugoslav mortars had landed inside Albania . " These ... incidents could have very dangerous consequences , " he warned . Albanian officials indicated that the mortars did not cause any injuries . Albania lodged a formal protest and demanded an explanation from the Yugoslav authorities . Yugoslav officials denied shelling the border and accused the Albanian authorities of turning a blind eye to KLA arms smuggling in northern Albania . Albanian Foreign Minister <unk> Milo stated that Albania " expresses its fraternal solidarity and supports the just struggle of Albanians in Kosovo . " The Albanian Government released a statement describing the ambush as a " Serb provocation " and calling on the international community to " stop , by any means , the fascist aggression Belgrade is inflicting on the Albanian population of Kosovo . " In turn , Yugoslav officials accused Albania of sending 300 soldiers to fight alongside the KLA in Kosovo , citing the testimony of captured KLA personnel . Albanian officials denied having troops in the province . 
 The United States warned Yugoslavia not to shell Albanian territory . State Department spokesman James Rubin told reporters that the alleged shelling was likely an attempt to prevent the insurgents from re @-@ entering Kosovo . " If true , the shelling represents an unacceptable violation of Albanian territory . " He continued . " Belgrade must understand that such shelling runs the risk of further escalating the current conflict . " Rubin said that the U.S. was opposed to the creation of a pan @-@ Albanian state , and emphasized that calls for its establishment were a " very dangerous development that could affect the stability of the region . " Russian officials accused KLA fighters of stoking the clashes , and called for peace talks between the militants and Yugoslav authorities . On July 19 , Albanian officials requested that Greece — an important trading partner for Albania and traditional ally of Serbia — mediate to end the fighting . Greek Foreign Minister Theodoros <unk> issued a condemnation , saying " these senseless acts of violence must stop . " The European Union condemned the militant incursion , as well as the alleged cross @-@ border shelling . 
 = = = Endnotes = = = 
 = Rebecca Clarke ( composer ) = 
 Rebecca Clarke ( 27 August 1886 – 13 October 1979 ) was an English classical composer and violist best known for her chamber music featuring the viola . She was born in Harrow and studied at the Royal Academy of Music and Royal College of Music in London , later becoming one of the first female professional orchestral players . Stranded in the United States at the outbreak of World War II , she settled permanently in New York City and married composer and pianist James Friskin in 1944 . Clarke died at her home in New York at the age of 93 . 
 Although Clarke wrote little , due in part to her ideas about the role of a female composer , her work was recognised for its compositional skill . Most of her works have yet to be published ( or have only recently been published ) , and were largely forgotten after she stopped composing . Scholarship and interest in her compositions revived in 1976 . The Rebecca Clarke Society was established in 2000 to promote the study and performance of her music . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Clarke was born in Harrow , England , to Joseph Thacher Clarke , an American , and his German wife , Agnes Paulina Marie Amalie <unk> . Her father was interested in music , and had her take up the violin at age nine . She began her studies at the Royal Academy of Music in 1903 , but was withdrawn by her father in 1905 after teacher Percy <unk> Miles proposed to her ( he later left her his Stradivarius violin in his will ) . She made the first of many visits to the United States shortly after leaving the Royal Academy . She then attended the Royal College of Music from 1907 to 1910 , becoming one of Sir Charles Villiers Stanford 's first female composition students . At Stanford 's urging she shifted her focus from the violin to the viola , just as the latter was coming to be seen as a legitimate solo instrument . She studied with Lionel Tertis , who was considered by some the greatest violist of the day . In 1910 she composed a setting of Chinese poetry , called " Tears " , in collaboration with a group of fellow students at RCM . She also sang under the direction of Ralph Vaughan Williams in a student ensemble organized by Clarke to study and perform Palestrina 's music . 
 Following her criticism of his extra @-@ marital affairs , Clarke 's father turned her out of the house and cut off her funds . She had to leave the Royal College in 1910 and supported herself through her viola playing . Clarke became one of the first female professional orchestral musicians when she was selected by Sir Henry Wood to play in the Queen 's Hall Orchestra in 1912 . In 1916 she moved to the United States to continue her performing career . A short , lyrical piece for viola and piano entitled Morpheus , composed under the pseudonym of " Anthony Trent " , was premiered at her 1918 joint recital with cellist May Muklé in New York City . Reviewers praised the " Trent " , largely ignoring the works credited to Clarke premiered in the same recital . Her compositional career peaked in a brief period , beginning with the viola sonata she entered in a 1919 competition sponsored by Elizabeth Sprague Coolidge , Clarke 's neighbour and a patron of the arts . In a field of 72 entrants , Clarke 's sonata tied for first place with a composition by Ernest Bloch . Coolidge later declared Bloch the winner . Reporters speculated that " Rebecca Clarke " was only a pseudonym for Bloch himself , or at least that it could not have been Clarke who wrote these pieces , as the idea that a woman could write such a work was socially inconceivable . The sonata was well received and had its first performance at the Berkshire music festival in 1919 . In 1921 Clarke again made an impressive showing in Coolidge 's composition competition with her piano trio , though again failed to take the prize . A 1923 rhapsody for cello and piano followed , sponsored by Coolidge , making Clarke the only female recipient of Coolidge 's patronage . These three works represent the height of Clarke 's compositional career . 
 = = Later life and marriage = = 
 Clarke , in 1924 , embarked upon a career as a solo and ensemble performer in London , after first completing a world tour in 1922 – 23 . In 1927 she helped form the English Ensemble , a piano quartet that included herself , Marjorie Hayward , Kathleen Long and May <unk> . She also performed on several recordings in the 1920s and 1930s , and participated in BBC music broadcasts . Her compositional output greatly decreased during this period . However , she continued to perform , participating in the Paris Colonial Exhibition in 1931 as part of the English Ensemble . Between 1927 and 1933 she was romantically involved with the British baritone , John Goss , who was eight years her junior and married at the time . He had premiered several of her mature songs , two of which were dedicated to him , " June Twilight " and " The Seal Man " . Her " Tiger , Tiger " , finished at the time the relationship was ending , proved to be her last composition for solo voice until the early 1940s . 
 At the outbreak of World War II , Clarke was in the US visiting her two brothers , and was unable to obtain a visa to return to Britain . She lived for a while with her brothers ' families and then in 1942 took a position as a governess for a family in Connecticut . She composed 10 works between 1939 and 1942 , including her Passacaglia on an Old English Tune . She had first met her husband , James Friskin ( a composer , concert pianist and founding member of the Juilliard School faculty ) , when they were both students at the Royal College of Music . They renewed their friendship after a chance meeting on a Manhattan street in 1944 and married in September of that year when both were in their late 50s . According to musicologist Liane Curtis , Friskin was " a man who gave [ Clarke ] a sense of deep satisfaction and equilibrium . " 
 Clarke has been described by Stephen Banfield as the most distinguished British female composer of the inter @-@ war generation . However , her later output was sporadic . She suffered from dysthymia , a chronic form of depression ; the lack of encouragement — sometimes outright discouragement — she received for her work also made her reluctant to compose . Clarke did not consider herself able to balance her personal life and the demands of composition : " I can 't do it unless it 's the first thing I think of every morning when I wake and the last thing I think of every night before I go to sleep . " After her marriage , she stopped composing , despite the encouragement of her husband , although she continued working on arrangements until shortly before her death . She also stopped performing . 
 Clarke sold the Stradivarius she had been bequeathed , and established the May Muklé prize at the Royal Academy . The prize is still awarded annually to an outstanding cellist . After her husband 's death in 1967 , Clarke began writing a memoir , entitled I Had a Father Too ( or the Mustard Spoon ) ; it was completed in 1973 but never published . In it she describes her early life , marked by frequent beatings from her father and strained family relations which affected her perceptions of her proper place in life . Clarke died in 1979 at her home in New York City at the age of 93 , and was cremated . 
 = = Music = = 
 A large portion of Clarke 's music features the viola , as she was a professional performer for many years . Much of her output was written for herself and the all @-@ female chamber ensembles she played in , including the Norah Clench Quartet , the English Ensemble , and the d <unk> Sisters . She also toured worldwide , particularly with cellist May Muklé . Her works were strongly influenced by several trends in 20th century classical music . Clarke also knew many leading composers of the day , including Bloch and Ravel , with whom her work has been compared . 
 The impressionism of Debussy is often mentioned in connection with Clarke 's work , particularly its lush textures and modernistic harmonies . The Viola Sonata ( published in the same year as the Bloch and the Hindemith Viola Sonata ) is an example of this , with its pentatonic opening theme , thick harmonies , emotionally intense nature , and dense , rhythmically complex texture . The Sonata remains a part of standard repertoire for the viola . Morpheus , composed a year earlier , was her first expansive work , after over a decade of songs and miniatures . The Rhapsody that Coolidge sponsored is Clarke 's most ambitious work : it is roughly 23 minutes long , with complex musical ideas and ambiguous tonalities contributing to the varying moods of the piece . In contrast , " Midsummer Moon " , written the following year , is a light miniature , with a flutter @-@ like solo violin line . 
 In addition to her chamber music for strings , Clarke wrote many songs . Nearly all of Clarke 's early pieces are for solo voice and piano . Her 1933 " Tiger , Tiger " , a setting of Blake 's poem " The Tyger " , is dark and brooding , almost expressionist . She worked on it for five years to the exclusion of other works during her tumultuous relationship with John Goss and revised it in 1972 . Most of her songs , however , are lighter in nature . Her earliest works were parlour songs , and she went on to build up a body of work drawn primarily from classic texts by Yeats , Masefield , and A.E. Housman . 
 During 1939 to 1942 , the last prolific period near the end of her compositional career , her style became more clear and contrapuntal , with emphasis on motivic elements and tonal structures , the hallmarks of neoclassicism . Dumka ( 1941 ) , a recently published work for violin , viola , and piano , reflects the Eastern European folk styles of Bartók and Martinů . The " Passacaglia on an Old English Tune " , also from 1941 and premiered by Clarke herself , is based on a theme attributed to Thomas Tallis which appears throughout the work . The piece is modal in flavor , mainly in the Dorian mode but venturing into the seldom @-@ heard Phrygian mode . The piece is dedicated to " BB " , ostensibly Clarke 's niece Magdalen ; scholars speculate that the dedication is more likely referring to Benjamin Britten , who organised a concert commemorating the death of Clarke 's friend and major influence Frank Bridge . The Prelude , Allegro , and Pastorale , also composed in 1941 , is another <unk> @-@ influenced piece , written for clarinet and viola ( originally for her brother and sister @-@ in @-@ law ) . 
 Clarke composed no large scale works such as symphonies . Her total output of compositions comprises 52 songs , 11 choral works , 21 chamber pieces , the Piano Trio , and the Viola Sonata . Her work was all but forgotten for a long period of time , but interest in it was revived in 1976 following a radio broadcast in celebration of her ninetieth birthday . Over half of Clarke 's compositions remain unpublished and in the personal possession of her heirs , along with most of her writings . However , in the early 2000s more of her works were printed and recorded . Examples of recent publications include two string quartets and Morpheus , published in 2002 . 
 Modern reception of Clarke 's work has been generally positive . A 1981 review of her Viola Sonata called it a " thoughtful , well constructed piece " from a relatively obscure composer ; a 1985 review noted its " emotional intensity and use of dark tone colours " . Andrew <unk> , in his review of a Helen Callus recording of several Clarke works , referred to Morpheus as " striking " and " languorous " . Laurence <unk> noted that Clarke 's " Lullaby " was " exceedingly sweet and tender " . A 1987 review concluded that " it seems astonishing that such splendidly written and deeply moving music should have lain in obscurity all these years " . 
 The Viola Sonata was the subject of BBC Radio 3 's Building a Library survey on 17 October 2015 . The top recommendation , chosen by Helen Wallace , was by <unk> Zimmermann ( viola ) and Kirill Gerstein ( piano ) . 
 = = Rebecca Clarke Society = = 
 The Rebecca Clarke Society was established in September 2000 to promote performance , scholarship , and awareness of the works of Rebecca Clarke . Founded by musicologists Liane Curtis and Jessie Ann Owens and based in the Women 's Studies Research Center at Brandeis University , the Society has promoted recording and scholarship of Clarke 's work , including several world premiere performances , recordings of unpublished material , and numerous journal publications . 
 The Society made available previously unpublished compositions from Clarke 's estate . " <unk> " , a twelve @-@ minute song based on Celtic folklore , was discovered in 1997 , and not premiered until 2001 . Over 25 previously unknown works have been published since the establishment of the Society . Several of Clarke 's chamber works , including the expansive Rhapsody for cello and piano , and Cortège , her only piano work , were first recorded in 2000 on the Dutton label , using material from the Clarke estate . In 2002 , the Society organised and sponsored the world premieres of the 1907 and 1909 violin sonatas . 
 The head of the Rebecca Clarke Society , Liane Curtis , is the editor of A Rebecca Clarke Reader , originally published by Indiana University Press in 2004 . The book was withdrawn from circulation by the publisher following complaints from the current manager of Clarke 's estate about the quotation of unpublished examples from Clarke 's writings . However , the Reader has since been reissued by the Rebecca Clarke Society itself . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 For a complete listing , see List of compositions by Rebecca Clarke . 
 Chamber music 
 2 Pieces : Lullaby and Grotesque for viola ( or violin ) and cello ( ca . 1916 ) 
 Morpheus for viola and piano ( 1917 – 1918 ) 
 Sonata for viola ( or cello ) and piano ( 1919 ) 
 Piano Trio ( 1921 ) 
 Rhapsody for cello and piano ( 1923 ) 
 Passacaglia on an Old English Tune for viola ( or cello ) and piano ( ? 1940 – 1941 ) 
 Prelude , Allegro and Pastorale for viola and clarinet ( 1941 ) 
 Vocal 
