 Lord Hailsham left his position in 1938 due to his failing health , and was replaced by Lord Maugham , who was appointed on 15 March . His appointment was done on Schuster 's advice and was considered quite a surprise as he had no real political experience ; even Maugham himself admitted he had not expected to be offered the job . Schuster and Maugham had a difficult relationship , especially after the start of the Second World War in 1939 , due to their differing political opinions . Schuster did not play an active part in policy decisions in this period , partially because of his disagreements with Maugham and partially because Maugham preferred to work on legislation and policy changes himself . Schuster later said that he got on with all of his Lord Chancellors except one — Maugham . 
 = = = Lords Caldecote and Simon ( 1939 – 1940 , 1940 – 1945 ) = = = 
 Lord Maugham resigned on 3 September 1939 , giving his failing health as a reason ( he was 73 when he left the post ) , and he was replaced by Lord Caldecote a day later . Caldecote only held the office for eight months , but during this period spent a large amount of time preparing legislation for the Second World War . Putting the country on a war footing would impact on the ability of people to fulfil their civil obligations if , for example , they were conscripted , and Schuster was made chairman of a Cabinet subcommittee " to consider the problems arising from the inability of persons , owing to war conditions , to fulfil their contractual and other obligations , and in particular to consider the complaints already made to MPs and government departments " . The subcommittee made six reports and their recommendations were eventually made into the Liabilities ( Wartime Adjustment ) Acts of 1941 and 1944 . Schuster also led the committee that drafted the USA ( Visiting Forces ) Bill that provided that any criminal proceedings in relation to the behaviour of US soldiers stationed in Britain would be led by the US military authorities rather than the British government . 
 Lord Caldecote was forced to leave his position after only 8 months due to the fall of Neville Chamberlain 's government , of which he was a part . He was replaced by Lord Simon , who took up his position on 12 May 1940 . Simon frequently delegated to Schuster and accepted his advice on judicial appointments , such as that of Arthur Thompson Denning to the High Court in 1944 . Schuster also had influence in committee appointments ; when Simon was asked to select a chairman for the Committee on Reconstruction Priorities he delegated to Schuster , who chose Sir Walter Monckton . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Schuster retired in 1944 , and on 22 June of that year he was raised to the peerage as Baron Schuster , of Cerne in the County of Dorset . By the time he retired Schuster had served as Permanent Secretary for 29 years under 10 Lord Chancellors , records that have not yet been broken . He also served as High Sheriff of Dorset in 1941 . In retirement he undertook work for the Allied Commission for Austria and " tackled the unexpected with the zest of a young man " despite being 75 . He returned to Britain in 1946 . He served as Treasurer of the Inner Temple in 1947 , and in 1948 and 1949 took his seat in the House of Lords to voice his opinions on legislation , something he had previously been unable to do publicly due to the tradition of Civil Service neutrality . He participated in debates over the Criminal Justice Act 1948 and Criminal Justice Act 1949 , and was noted for being polite to the point of <unk> . He gave the Romanes Lecture in 1949 on the subject of " Mountaineering " and continued to play an active part in public life , helping reconstruct the Inner Temple after it was bombed in the Second World War . On 27 June 1956 he fell ill at an old Wykehamist dinner and was taken to Charing Cross Hospital , where he died the next morning . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Schuster met William Walter Merry when he was Rector of Lincoln College , Oxford and the two became friends due to their shared love of <unk> . Through him he met Merry 's daughter , Elizabeth , whom he married in 1896 . They had two children : a son , Christopher John Claud Schuster , in 1899 and a daughter , Elizabeth Alice Schuster , in 1902 , before Elizabeth Merry 's death in 1936 . Christopher also attended Winchester College and was killed in 1918 on the Western Front , and Elizabeth later married Theodore Turner , a King 's Counsel , before dying in 1983 . 
 = Scotland national football team = 
 The Scotland national football team represents Scotland in international football and is controlled by the Scottish Football Association . Scotland maintains its own national side that competes in the two major professional tournaments , the FIFA World Cup and the UEFA European Championship . Scotland is not a member of the International Olympic Committee and therefore the national team does not compete in the Olympic Games . The majority of Scotland 's home matches are played at the national stadium , Hampden Park . 
 Scotland are the joint oldest national football team in the world , alongside England , whom they played in the world 's first international football match in 1872 . Scotland has a longstanding rivalry with England , whom they played annually from 1872 until 1989 . The teams have met only five times since then , most recently in November 2014 . 
 Scotland have qualified for the FIFA World Cup on eight occasions and the UEFA European Championship twice , but have never progressed beyond the first group stage of a finals tournament . The team have achieved some noteworthy results , such as beating the 1966 FIFA World Cup winners England 3 – 2 at Wembley Stadium in 1967 . Archie Gemmill scored what has been described as one of the greatest World Cup goals ever in a 3 – 2 win during the 1978 World Cup against the Netherlands , who reached the final of the tournament . In their qualifying group for UEFA Euro 2008 , Scotland defeated 2006 World Cup runners @-@ up France 1 – 0 in both fixtures . 
 Scotland supporters are collectively known as the Tartan Army . The Scottish Football Association operates a roll of honour for every player who has made more than 50 appearances for Scotland . Kenny Dalglish holds the record for Scotland appearances , having played 102 times between 1971 and 1986 . Dalglish scored 30 goals for Scotland and shares the record for most goals scored with Denis Law . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Scotland and England are the oldest national football teams in the world . Teams representing the two sides first competed at the Oval in five matches between 1870 and 1872 . The two countries contested the first official international football match , at Hamilton Crescent in Partick , Scotland on 30 November 1872 . The match ended in a goalless draw . All eleven players who represented Scotland that day played for Glasgow amateur club Queen 's Park . Over the next forty years , Scotland played matches exclusively against the other three Home Nations — England , Wales and Ireland . The British Home Championship began in 1883 , making these games competitive . The encounters against England were particularly fierce and a rivalry quickly developed . 
 Scotland lost just two of their first 43 international matches . It was not until a 2 – 0 home defeat by Ireland in 1903 that Scotland lost a match to a team other than England . This run of success meant that Scotland would have regularly topped the Elo ratings , which were calculated in 1997 , between 1876 and 1904 . Scotland won the British Home Championship outright on 24 occasions , and shared the title 17 times with at least one other team . A noteworthy victory for Scotland before the Second World War was the 5 – 1 victory over England in 1928 , which led to that Scotland side being known as the " Wembley Wizards " . Scotland played their first match outside the British Isles in 1929 , beating Norway 7 – 3 in Bergen . Scotland continued to contest regular friendly matches against European opposition and enjoyed wins against Germany and France before losing to the Austrian " <unk> " and Italy in 1931 . 
 Scotland , like the other Home Nations , did not enter the three FIFA World Cups held during the 1930s . This was because the four associations had been excluded from FIFA due to a disagreement regarding the status of amateur players . The four associations , including Scotland , returned to the FIFA fold after the Second World War . A match between a United Kingdom team and a " Rest of the World " team was played at Hampden Park in 1947 to celebrate this reconciliation . 
 = = = 1950s = = = 
 The readmission of the Scottish Football Association to FIFA meant that Scotland were now eligible to enter the 1950 FIFA World Cup . FIFA advised that places would be awarded to the top two teams in the 1950 British Home Championship , but the SFA announced that Scotland would only attend the finals if Scotland won the competition . Scotland won their first two matches , but a 1 – 0 home defeat by England meant that the Scots finished as runners @-@ up . This meant that the Scots had qualified by right for the World Cup , but had not met the demand of the SFA to win the Championship . The SFA stood by this proclamation , despite pleas to the contrary by the Scotland players , supported by England captain Billy Wright and the other England players . The SFA instead sent the Scots on a tour of North America . 
 The same qualification rules were in place for the 1954 FIFA World Cup , with the 1954 British Home Championship acting as a qualifying group . Scotland again finished second , but this time the SFA allowed a team to participate in the Finals , held in Switzerland . To quote the SFA website , " The preparation was atrocious " . The SFA only sent 13 players to the finals , even though FIFA allowed 22 @-@ man squads . Despite this self @-@ imposed hardship in terms of players , the SFA dignitaries travelled in numbers , accompanied with their wives . Scotland lost 1 – 0 against Austria in their first game in the finals , which prompted the team manager Andy Beattie to resign hours before the game against Uruguay . Uruguay were reigning champions and had never before lost a game at the World Cup finals , and they defeated Scotland 7 – 0 . 
 The 1958 FIFA World Cup finals saw Scotland draw their first game against Yugoslavia 1 – 1 , but they then lost to Paraguay and France and went out at the first stage . Matt Busby had been due to manage the team at the World Cup , but the severe injuries he suffered in the Munich air disaster meant that trainer Dawson Walker took charge of the team instead . 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 Under the management of Ian McColl , Scotland enjoyed consecutive British Home Championship successes in 1962 and 1963 . Jock Stein , John Prentice and Malky MacDonald all had brief spells as manager before Bobby Brown was appointed in 1967 . Brown 's first match as manager was against the newly crowned world champions England at Wembley Stadium . Despite being underdogs , Scotland won 3 – 2 thanks to goals from Denis Law , Bobby Lennox and Jim <unk> . Having defeated the world champions on their own turf , the Scotland fans hailed their team as the " unofficial world champions " . Despite this famous win , the Scots failed to qualify for any major competitions during the 1960s . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 After Tommy Docherty 's brief spell as manager , Willie Ormond was hired in 1973 . Ormond lost his first match in charge 5 – 0 to England , but recovered to steer Scotland to their first World Cup finals in 16 years in 1974 . At the 1974 World Cup finals in West Germany , Scotland achieved their most impressive performance at a World Cup tournament . The team was unbeaten but failed to progress beyond the group stages on goal difference . After beating Zaïre , they drew with both Brazil and Yugoslavia , and went out because they had beaten Zaïre by the smallest margin . 
 Scotland appointed Ally MacLeod as manager in 1977 , with qualification for the 1978 World Cup in Argentina far from assured . The team made a strong start under MacLeod by winning the 1977 British Home Championship , largely thanks to a 2 – 1 victory over England at Wembley . The Scotland fans invaded the pitch after the match , ripping up the turf and breaking a crossbar . Scotland 's good form continued as they secured qualification for the World Cup with victories over Czechoslovakia and Wales . 
 During the build @-@ up to the 1978 FIFA World Cup , MacLeod fuelled the hopes of the nation by stating that Scotland would come home with a medal . As the squad left for the finals in Argentina , they were given an enthusiastic send off as they were paraded around a packed Hampden Park . Thousands more fans lined the route to Prestwick Airport as the team set off for South America . Scotland 's first game was against Peru in Córdoba . Two spectacular goals by Teófilo Cubillas meant that the result was a 3 – 1 loss . The second game was a very disappointing 1 – 1 draw against Iran . The disconsolate mood of the nation was reflected by footage of Ally MacLeod in the dugout with his head in his hands . 
 After taking a single point from their opening two games , Scotland had to defeat the Netherlands by three clear goals to progress . Despite the Dutch taking the lead , Scotland fought back to win 3 – 2 with a goal from Kenny Dalglish and two from Archie Gemmill , the second of which is considered one of the greatest World Cup goals ever ; Gemmill beat three Dutch defenders before lifting the ball over goalkeeper Jan <unk> into the net . The victory was not sufficient to secure a place in the second round , and Scotland were eliminated on goal difference for the second successive World Cup . 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 MacLeod resigned as manager shortly after the 1978 World Cup , and Jock Stein , who had won nine consecutive Scottish league titles and the European Cup as manager of Celtic , was appointed as his successor . After failing to qualify for the 1980 European Championship , Scotland qualified for the 1982 FIFA World Cup from a tough group including Sweden , Portugal , Israel and Northern Ireland , losing just one match in the process . They beat New Zealand 5 – 2 in their first game at the World Cup , but lost 4 – 1 to a Brazil team containing Socrates , Zico , Eder and Falcão . Scotland were again eliminated on goal difference , after a 2 – 2 draw with the Soviet Union . 
 Scotland qualified for the 1986 FIFA World Cup , their fourth in succession , in traumatic circumstances . The squad went into their last qualification match against Wales needing a point to progress to a qualifying playoff against Australia . With only nine minutes remaining and Wales leading 1 – 0 , Scotland were awarded a penalty kick , which was calmly scored by Davie Cooper . The 1 – 1 draw meant that Scotland progressed , but as the players and fans celebrated , national coach Jock Stein suffered a heart attack and died shortly afterwards . His assistant Alex Ferguson took over . Scotland qualified by winning 2 – 0 against Australia in a two @-@ leg playoff , but were eliminated from the tournament with just one point from their three matches , a goalless draw with Uruguay following defeats by Denmark and West Germany . 
 In July 1986 , Andy Roxburgh was the surprise appointment as the new manager of Scotland . Scotland did not succeed in qualifying for Euro 1988 , but their 1 – 0 away win over Bulgaria in the final fixture in November 1987 helped Ireland to a surprise first @-@ place finish and qualification for the finals in West Germany . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 Scotland qualified for their fifth consecutive World Cup in 1990 by finishing second in their qualifying group , ahead of France . Scotland were drawn in a group with Costa Rica , Sweden , and Brazil , but the Scots lost 1 – 0 to Costa Rica . While they recovered to beat Sweden 2 – 1 in their second game , they lost to Brazil in their third match 1 – 0 and were again eliminated after the first round . 
 By a narrow margin , Scotland qualified for the UEFA European Championship for the first time in 1992 . A 1 – 0 defeat by Romania away from home left qualification dependent upon other results , but a 1 – 1 draw between Bulgaria and Romania in the final group match saw Scotland squeeze through . Despite playing well in matches against the Netherlands and Germany and a fine win against the CIS , the team was knocked out at the group stage . Scotland failed to qualify for the 1994 FIFA World Cup . The team finished fourth in their qualifying group behind Italy , Switzerland and Portugal . When it became clear that Scotland could not qualify , Andy Roxburgh resigned from his position as team manager . 
 New manager Craig Brown successfully guided Scotland to the 1996 European Championship tournament . The first game against the Netherlands ended 0 – 0 , raising morale ahead of a much anticipated game against England at Wembley Stadium . Gary McAllister missed a penalty kick and a goal by Paul Gascoigne led to a 2 – 0 defeat . Scotland recovered to beat Switzerland 1 – 0 with a goal by Ally McCoist . England taking a 4 – 0 lead in the other match briefly put both teams in a position to qualify , but a late goal for the Netherlands meant that Scotland were again knocked out on goal difference . 
 Brown again guided Scotland to qualification for a major tournament in 1998 , and Scotland were drawn against Brazil in the opening game of the 1998 World Cup . John Collins equalised from the penalty spot to level the score at 1 – 1 , but a Tom Boyd own goal led to a 2 – 1 defeat . Scotland drew their next game 1 – 1 with Norway in Bordeaux , but the final match against Morocco ended in an embarrassing 3 – 0 defeat . 
 During the qualification for the 2000 European Championship , Scotland faced England in a two @-@ legged playoff nicknamed the " Battle of Britain " by the media . Scotland won the second match 1 – 0 with a goal by Don Hutchison , but lost the tie 2 – 1 on aggregate . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 Scotland failed to qualify for the 2002 FIFA World Cup , finishing third in their qualifying group behind Croatia and Belgium . This second successive failure to qualify prompted Craig Brown to resign from his position after the final qualifying match . The SFA appointed former Germany manager Berti Vogts as Brown 's successor . Scotland reached the qualification play @-@ offs for Euro 2004 . Scotland beat Netherlands 1 – 0 at Hampden Park , but suffered a 6 – 0 defeat in the return leg . Poor results in friendly matches and a bad start to the 2006 World Cup qualification caused the team to drop to a record low of 77th in the FIFA World Rankings . Vogts announced his resignation in 2004 , blaming the hostile media for his departure . 
 Walter Smith , a former Rangers and Everton manager , was brought in to replace Vogts . Improved results meant that Scotland rose up the FIFA rankings and won the Kirin Cup , a friendly competition in Japan . Scotland failed to qualify for the 2006 FIFA World Cup , finishing third in their group behind Italy and Norway . Smith left the national side in January 2007 to return to Rangers , with Scotland leading their Euro 2008 qualification group . Alex McLeish was named as Smith 's successor and Scotland 's twentieth manager . McLeish guided Scotland to wins against Georgia , the Faroe Islands , Lithuania , France and Ukraine , but defeats by Georgia and Italy ended their chances of qualification for Euro 2008 . These improved results , particularly the wins against France , lifted Scotland into the top 20 of the FIFA world rankings . 
 After the narrow failure to qualify for Euro 2008 , McLeish left to join Premier League club Birmingham City . Southampton manager George Burley was hired as the new manager , but he came in for criticism from the media after the team lost their first qualifier against Macedonia . After Scotland lost their fourth match 3 – 0 to the Netherlands , captain Barry Ferguson and goalkeeper Allan McGregor were excluded from the starting lineup for the following match against Iceland due to a " breach of discipline " . Despite winning 2 – 1 against Iceland , Scotland suffered a terrible 4 – 0 defeat by Norway in the following qualifier , which left Scotland effectively needing to win their last two games to have a realistic chance of making the qualifying play @-@ offs . Scotland defeated Macedonia 2 – 0 in the first of those two games , but were eliminated by a 1 – 0 loss to the Netherlands in the second game . Burley was allowed to continue in his post after a review by the SFA board , but a subsequent 3 – 0 friendly defeat by Wales led to the SFA sacking Burley . 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 The SFA appointed Craig Levein as head coach of the national team in December 2009 . In UEFA Euro 2012 qualification , Scotland were grouped with Lithuania , Liechtenstein , Czech Republic and world champions Spain . They took just four points from the first four games , leaving the team needing three wins from their remaining four games to have a realistic chance of progression . They only managed two wins and a draw and were eliminated after a 3 – 1 defeat by Spain in their last match . Levein left his position as head coach following a poor start to 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification , having taken just two points from four games . 
 Gordon Strachan was appointed Scotland manager in January 2013 , but defeats in his first two competitive matches meant that Scotland were the first UEFA team to be eliminated from the 2014 World Cup . Scotland finished their qualification section by winning three of their last four matches , including two victories against Croatia . In UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying , Scotland appeared to have a better chance of qualification as the finals tournament was expanded from 16 teams to 24 . After losing their opening match in Germany , Scotland recorded home wins against Georgia , the Republic of Ireland and Gibraltar . Steven Fletcher scored the first hat @-@ trick for Scotland since 1969 in the game with Gibraltar . Later in the group , Scotland produced an " insipid " performance as they lost 1 – 0 in Georgia . A home defeat by Germany and a late equalising goal by Poland eliminated Scotland from contention . After a win against Gibraltar in the last qualifier , Strachan agreed a new contract with the SFA . 
 In qualification for the 2018 FIFA World Cup , Scotland were drawn in the same group as England , facing their rivals in a competitive fixture for the first time since 1999 . 
 = = Competitive record = = 
 = = = FIFA World Cup = = = 
 Scotland did not compete in the first three World Cup competitions , held in 1930 , 1934 and 1938 . FIFA ruled that all its member associations must provide " broken @-@ time " payments to cover the expenses of players who participated in football at the 1928 Summer Olympics . In response to what they considered to be unacceptable interference , the football associations of Scotland , England , Ireland and Wales held a meeting at which they agreed to resign from FIFA . The Scottish Football Association did not rejoin FIFA as a permanent member until 1946 . The Scottish Football Association declined to participate in 1950 although they had qualified , as Scotland were not the British champions . 
 Scotland have since qualified for eight finals tournaments , including five consecutive tournaments from 1974 to 1990 . Scotland have never advanced beyond the first round of the finals competition – no country has qualified for as many World Cup finals without progressing past the first round . They have missed out on progressing to the second round three times on goal difference : in 1974 , when Brazil edged them out ; in 1978 , when the Netherlands progressed ; and in 1982 , when the Soviet Union went through . 
 = = = UEFA European Championship = = = 
 Scotland have qualified for two European Championships , but have failed to advance beyond the first round on both occasions . Their most recent participation was at the 1996 European Championship , where the Netherlands progressed instead of Scotland on goals scored . 
 = = = Other honours = = = 
 British Home Championship 
 Winners ( 24 ) : 1884 , 1885 , 1887 , 1889 , 1894 , 1896 , 1897 , 1900 , 1902 , 1910 , 1921 , 1922 , 1923 , 1929 , 1935 , 1936 , 1946 , 1949 , 1951 , 1962 , 1963 , 1967 , 1976 , 1977 
 Shared ( 17 ) : 1886 , 1890 , 1903 , 1906 , 1908 , 1912 , 1927 , 1931 , 1935 , 1939 , 1953 , 1956 , 1960 , 1964 , 1970 , 1972 , 1974 
 Rous Cup 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1985 
 Kirin Cup 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 2006 
 = = Stadium = = 
 Hampden Park in Glasgow is the traditional home of the Scotland team and is described by the Scottish Football Association as the National Stadium . The present stadium is one of three stadiums to have used the name . Stadiums named Hampden Park have hosted international matches since 1878 . The present site was opened in 1903 and became the primary home ground of the Scotland team from 1906 , as it has hosted every match against England since then . The attendance record of 149 @,@ 415 was set by the Scotland v England match in 1937 . Safety regulations reduced the capacity to 81 @,@ 000 by 1977 and the stadium was completely redeveloped during the 1990s , giving the present capacity of 52 @,@ 000 . Hampden is rated as a category four ( elite ) stadium within the UEFA stadium categories , having previously held the 5 – star status under the old rating system . 
 Some friendly matches are played at smaller venues . Pittodrie Stadium in Aberdeen and Easter Road in Edinburgh were both used as venues during the 2012 – 13 season . Other stadiums were also used while Hampden was being redeveloped during the 1990s . Celtic Park , Pittodrie Stadium , Ibrox Stadium and Rugby Park all hosted matches during the 1998 World Cup qualifying campaign , while Tynecastle Stadium , Pittodrie , Celtic Park and Ibrox were used for Euro 2000 qualifying matches . Since the last redevelopment to Hampden was completed in 1999 , Scotland have played most of their competitive matches there . The most recent exception to this rule was in 2014 , when Hampden was temporarily converted into an athletics stadium for the 2014 Commonwealth Games . 
 = = Media coverage = = 
 Scotland 's home matches are presently covered by the pay @-@ TV broadcaster Sky Sports . Television rights to away games vary ; Sky Sports currently hold the rights to both home and away qualifiers for Euro 2016 and the 2018 World Cup . The arrangements to show Scotland matches on pay @-@ TV have been criticised by the Scottish Government , who have argued that qualifying matches should be included in the list of sporting events which can only be broadcast on free @-@ to @-@ air television . The Scottish Football Association have argued that limiting the rights to free @-@ to @-@ air broadcasters would severely reduce the amount of revenue that they could generate . An independent advisory panel recommended that qualifying matches played by all four Home Nations be added to the list , but UK Sports Minister Hugh Robertson deferred a decision until the completion of the digital switchover . 
 BBC Scotland , STV , Setanta Sports , Channel 5 and BT Sport are among other networks that have previously shown live fixtures . All matches are broadcast with full commentary on BBC Radio Scotland and , when schedules allow , BBC Radio 5 Live also . In Australia , Scotland 's national football team home games and selected away games are broadcast by Setanta Sports Australia . 
 = = Colours = = 
 Scotland traditionally wear dark blue shirts with white shorts and dark blue socks , the colours of the Queen 's Park team who represented Scotland in the first international . The blue Scotland shirt was earlier used in a February 1872 rugby international , with reports stating that " the scotch were easily distinguishable by their uniform of blue jerseys .... the jerseys having the thistle embroidered " . The thistle had previously been worn to represent Scotland in the 1871 rugby international , but on brown shirts . The shirt is embroidered with a crest based upon the lion rampant of the Royal Standard of Scotland . Another style often used by Scotland comprises blue shirts , white shorts and red socks . Change colours vary , but are most commonly white or yellow shirts with blue shorts . From 1994 – 96 a tartan kit was used . The current version of the crest is a roundel similar to the crest used from 1961 to 1988 enclosing a shield , with " Scotland " written on the top and " Est 1873 " on the bottom . In the shield background there are 11 thistles , representing the national flower of Scotland , in addition to the lion rampant . Since 2005 , the SFA have supported the use of Scottish Gaelic on the national team 's strip in recognition of the language 's revival in Scotland . 
 Scotland have not always played in dark blue ; on a number of occasions between 1881 and 1951 they played in the primrose and pink racing colours of Archibald Primrose , 5th Earl of Rosebery . A former Prime Minister , Lord Rosebery was an influential figure in Scottish football , serving as honorary President of the Scottish Football Association and Edinburgh team Hearts . His colours were used most frequently in the first decade of the twentieth century , but were discontinued in 1909 . The colours were briefly reprised in 1949 , and were last used against France in 1951 . In 1900 , when Scotland defeated England 4 – 1 . Lord Rosebery remarked , " I have never seen my colours so well sported since Ladas won the Derby " . Rosebery colours were revived as a change kit for the UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying matches . 
 = = Supporters = = 
 Scotland fans are collectively known as the Tartan Army . During the 1970s , Scotland fans became known for their hooliganism in England , particularly after they invaded the Wembley pitch and destroyed the goalposts after the England v Scotland match in 1977 . Since then , the Tartan Army have won awards from UEFA for their combination of vocal support , friendly nature and charity work . The Tartan Army have been awarded a Fair Play prize by the Belgian Olympic Committee and were named as the best supporters during the 1992 European Championship . The fans were also presented with a trophy for non @-@ violence in sport and were voted by journalists to be the best supporters for their sense of fair play and sporting spirit at the 1998 World Cup in France . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = Current squad = = = 
 The following players were called up for the matches against Italy on 29 May 2016 and France on 4 June 2016 . 
 As of 21 : 32 , 4 June 2016 ( UTC ) 
 = = = Recent players = = = 
 The following players have been selected by Scotland in the past 12 months , but were not selected in the May / June 2016 squad , or withdrew from that squad due to injury or suspension . 
 = = = Honoured players = = = 
 The Scottish Football Association operates a roll of honour for every player who has made more than 50 appearances for Scotland . As of March 2016 there are 30 members of this roll , with Alan Hutton and Scott Brown the most recent additions to the list . The qualifying mark of 50 appearances means that many notable Scotland players including Jim Baxter , Hughie Gallacher , John Greig , Jimmy Johnstone , Billy McNeill , Bobby Murdoch and Lawrie Reilly are not on the roll of honour . 
 The Scottish Football Museum operates a hall of fame which is open to players and managers involved in Scottish football . This means that membership is not restricted to people who have played for Scotland ; inductees include Brian Laudrup and Henrik Larsson . At the most recent induction ceremony , Alan Rough , Martin Buchan , Eddie Gray , Tommy Docherty , Scot Symon and Bobby Walker were added to its membership . <unk> operates the Scottish Sports Hall of Fame , which has inducted some footballers . 
 = = Managers = = 
 From 1872 to 1953 , and 1954 to 1957 , the Scotland national team was appointed by a selection committee . Andy Beattie was manager for six matches in 1954 when Scotland competed at their first World Cup . After the tournament the selection committee resumed their duties , continuing until the appointment of Matt Busby in 1958 . Busby was initially unable to assume his duties due to the serious injuries he sustained in the Munich air disaster . 
 Statistically the most successful manager was Alex McLeish , who won seven of the ten games during his tenure . Discounting managers who took charge of less than ten games , the least successful manager was George Burley , with just three wins in 14 games . 
 Last updated : France v Scotland , 4 June 2016 . Statistics include official FIFA @-@ recognised matches only . The Scottish Football Association includes a match against a Hong Kong League XI played on 23 May 2002 in its statistical totals . 
 = = Records = = 
 Kenny Dalglish holds the record for Scotland appearances , having played 102 times between 1971 and 1986 . He is the only Scotland player to have reached 100 caps . Jim Leighton is second , having played 91 times , a Scottish record for appearances by a goalkeeper . Former Scotland manager Alex McLeish played for the team 77 times and is the third most capped player . 
 The title of Scotland 's highest goalscorer is shared by two players . Denis Law scored 30 goals between 1958 and 1974 , during which time he played for Scotland on 55 occasions . Kenny Dalglish scored an equal number from 102 appearances . Hughie Gallacher as well as being the third highest scorer is also the most prolific with his 23 goals coming from only 20 games ( averaging 1 @.@ 15 goals per game ) . Other notable strikers include , Lawrie Reilly , Ally McCoist , Mo Johnston and Joe Jordan . 
 The largest margin of victory achieved by a Scotland side is 11 – 0 against Ireland in the 1901 British Home Championship . The record defeat occurred during the 1954 FIFA World Cup , a 7 – 0 deficit against reigning world champions Uruguay . 
 Scotland 's 1937 British Home Championship match against England set a new world record for a football attendance . The Hampden Park crowd was officially recorded as 149 @,@ 415 , though the true figure is unknown as a large number of additional fans gained unauthorised entry . This attendance was surpassed 13 years later by the decisive match of the 1950 FIFA World Cup , but remains a European record . 
 = = United Kingdom team = = 
 Scotland has always participated by itself in most of the major tournaments , such as the FIFA World Cup and the UEFA European Championship . At the Olympic Games the International Olympic Committee charter only permit a Great Britain Olympic football team , representing the whole of the United Kingdom , to compete . Teams of amateur players represented Great Britain at the Olympics from 1900 until 1972 , but the FA stopped entering a team after then because the distinction between amateur and professional was abolished . The successful bid by London for the 2012 Summer Olympics prompted the FA to explore how a team could be entered . The SFA responded by stating that it would not participate , as it feared this would threaten the independent status of the Scotland national team . FIFA President Sepp Blatter denied this , but the SFA expressed concern that a future President could take a different view . An agreement was reached in May 2009 whereby the FA would be permitted to organise a team using only England @-@ qualified players , but this was successfully challenged by the British Olympic Association . Only English and Welsh players were selected for the men 's squad , but two Scottish players were selected for the women 's team . 
 = 1996 Andhra Pradesh cyclone = 
 The 1996 Andhra Pradesh cyclone ( also known as Cyclone 07B ) , was a small but powerful storm that left heavy damage in the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh . It formed on November 4 in the eastern Bay of Bengal . Moving westward , it quickly organized and developed a well @-@ defined eye . On November 6 , the cyclone struck about 50 km ( 30 mi ) south of Kakinada , Andhra Pradesh at peak intensity . The India Meteorological Department estimated peak winds of 145 km / h ( 90 mph ) , while the American @-@ based Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) assessed peak winds of 215 km / h ( 130 mph ) . Soon after landfall , the cyclone weakened and dissipated by November 7 . 
 Ahead of the storm , about 225 @,@ 000 families evacuated , although many towns lacked proper storm shelters . When the cyclone made landfall , it produced strong winds up to 100 km ( 60 mi ) inland , dropped 210 millimetres ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) of rainfall across a 40 km ( 25 mi ) region , and flooded over 250 villages along a 60 km ( 37 mi ) portion of the coast . About 70 % of the overall damage was in East Godavari district , where two villages were entirely destroyed . The storm destroyed 241 @,@ 802 ha ( 597 @,@ 510 acres ) of crops and killed millions of cattle and chicken . Across Andhra Pradesh , the storm damaged 647 @,@ 554 houses , including over 10 @,@ 000 that were destroyed . Overall damage totaled ₹ 21 @.@ 5 billion ( equivalent to ₹ 82 billion or US $ 1 @.@ 2 billion in 2016 ) , comparable to a cyclone in 1977 that also hit Andhra Pradesh . There were 1 @,@ 077 confirmed deaths with many others missing , although many of the dead were washed into the sea and were unlikely to be found . After the storm , the government and local Red Cross chapters helped residents recover from the damage , while the World Bank provided money to better prepare Andhra Pradesh for future storms . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On October 30 , a Pacific tropical depression crossed the Kra Isthmus into the Bay of Bengal , dissipating the next day over Myanmar . A new area of convection , or thunderstorms , developed over the Andaman Sea on November 1 The system was located within the monsoon trough , and a weak flow steered it slowly westward across the Bay of Bengal , bringing it briefly over southwestern Myanmar . After the convection organized more , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a tropical cyclone formation alert at 07 : 30 UTC on November 3 . At 12 : 00 UTC that day , the agency initiated advisories on the system , designating it Tropical Cyclone 07B about 645 km ( 400 mi ) west of Yangon , Myanmar . The India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) – the official Regional Specialized Meteorological Center for the basin – did not classify the system until November 4 ; at 15 : 00 UTC , the agency designated it as a depression . 
 Located beneath the axis of an upper @-@ level ridge , the depression was able to intensify and organize more , with prominent outflow developing . On November 5 , the IMD upgraded the system to a deep depression and later to a cyclonic storm . At 06 : 00 UTC on the same day , the JTWC upgraded the storm to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane , estimating 1 minute winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . It continued westward toward eastern India at a slow pace , later turning more to the west @-@ northwest . Early on November 6 , the storm began rapidly intensifying , and the IMD upgraded the storm to a severe cyclonic storm and later a very severe cyclonic storm . At 04 : 00 UTC that day , an irregular eye formed in the middle of the central dense overcast , which quickly became more circular and distinct . At 06 : 00 UTC on November 6 , the JTWC estimated peak 1 minute winds of 215 km / h ( 130 mph ) , the equivalent of a Category 4 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale , and a minimum barometric pressure of 922 mbar ( 27 @.@ 2 inHg ) . The IMD assessed a much lower intensity , estimating 3 minute winds of 145 km / h ( 90 mph ) based on a Dvorak rating of 4 @.@ 5 . 
 While approaching land , the eye contracted from a peak width of 64 km ( 40 mi ) to 17 km ( 11 mi ) . At 16 : 00 UTC on November 6 , the cyclone made landfall about 50 km ( 30 mi ) south of Kakinada , Andhra Pradesh along the east coast of India . The estimated landfall pressure was 978 mbar ( 28 @.@ 9 inHg ) . It was a smaller @-@ than @-@ normal cyclone , only 450 km ( 280 mi ) in diameter . The storm rapidly weakened after moving ashore , deteriorating into a deep depression early on November 7 . The JTWC issued their last advisory at 06 : 00 UTC that day , and the IMD downgraded the system to a remnant low pressure area over Telangana at 12 : 00 UTC . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 The IMD issued warnings related to the cyclone that were distributed to the public by television , telegraph , news outlets , and other government departments . The All India Radio broadcast warnings beginning on November 5 , the day before landfall . Train service was disrupted throughout Andhra Pradesh , stranding thousands of travelers . India 's Oil and Natural Gas Corporation suspended operations during the storm . The storm caused local Diwali festivities to be canceled . It ultimately struck about 50 km ( 30 mi ) north of where it was expected , in a region farther away from state shelters . About 225 @,@ 000 families evacuated due to the storm . However , about 30 % of the towns in the region lacked a storm shelter , and the existing shelters were generally in poor shape . Some residents avoided the shelters due to their state of disrepair , or stayed in their homes for fear they would be robbed . In addition , storm emergency plans enacted after a cyclone in 1977 that struck Andhra Pradesh had not been used since 1986 . Roads and shelters built following a cyclone in 1990 fared the storm better than older structures . 
 The powerful cyclone brought intense winds , heavy rainfall , and high waves to Andhra Pradesh in eastern India . Hurricane @-@ force winds – at least 120 km / h ( 75 mi ) – penetrated 100 km ( 60 mi ) inland . Peak gusts were estimated at 200 km / h ( 124 mph ) , based on anemometers that were blown away in Yanam . The highest recorded sustained wind was 111 km / h ( 69 mph ) by a ship at the Kakinada Port , only 50 km ( 30 mi ) from the landfall location . The storm dropped heavy rainfall near the coast , peaking at 390 mm ( 15 in ) in <unk> . Rainfall rates of over 210 millimetres ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) occurred over 3 hours in a 40 km ( 25 mi ) stretch of land . Along a 60 km ( 37 mi ) portion of the coast , 3 @.@ 7 m ( 12 ft ) waves accompanied a 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) storm surge , spreading 5 km ( 3 mi ) inland . The storm struck just three weeks after another storm killed 350 people . Storm damage extended 130 km ( 80 mi ) inland . Widespread areas of crop fields were inundated with floodwaters , washing away tons of rice , coconuts , and bananas . The winds knocked down about 5 million coconut trees . It was estimated that the storm destroyed 174 @,@ 000 ha ( 430 @,@ 000 acres ) of rice paddy , along with 67 @,@ 802 ha ( 167 @,@ 540 acres ) of other crops . About 13 @,@ 500 livestock and 1 million chickens were killed by the storm ; many of them rotted on arable fields after the waters receded . 
 Heavy rainfall and high tides flooded more than 250 villages , and the cyclone affected 1 @,@ 380 villages throughout Andhra Pradesh . Many canals and drains were breached by the floods . The storm washed four cargo ships ashore and sank or destroyed 6 @,@ 464 boats . About 70 % of the overall damage was in East Godavari district , where Kakinada was among the hardest hit villages . Two nearby villages – <unk> and <unk> – were entirely destroyed . The villages did not receive advanced warning , and <unk> did not have a functioning cyclone shelter . There , 90 % of the boats were damaged or destroyed . In <unk> , also in East Godavari , roughly two of every three houses were destroyed . The cyclone also destroyed 55 electrical towers , including a 100 m ( 330 ft ) tall telecommunications tower , as well as nearly 17 @,@ 000 power lines in West Godavari . About 1 @,@ 300 km ( 810 mi ) of roads were damaged or washed out , including 210 km ( 130 mi ) of National Highway 5 . Flooding also washed out several railroads , while damaged water drainage systems spewed sewage onto the streets . Many hospitals in the region were washed away or flooded . Across Andhra Pradesh , the storm damaged 647 @,@ 554 houses , with about 200 @,@ 000 sustaining roof damage , and over 10 @,@ 000 that were destroyed . Over 100 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . In the hardest hit areas , only houses made of brick and cement withstood the high winds , and huts made of mud and thatch were decimated . Overall damage was officially estimated at RS $ 21 @.@ 5 billion ( US $ 602 million ) . However , the World Bank indicated damage reached as high as US $ 1 @.@ 5 billion . Officials likened damage to the 1977 cyclone that also struck Andhra Pradesh . 
 After the storm , there were 1 @,@ 000 fishermen missing at sea , despite warnings not to leave port . After being presumed lost , 162 boats returned to port four days after the storm , and additional fishermen returned over the succeeding days . However , there were 569 fishermen killed or left missing due to lost boats at sea . Many of these fishermen had departed days before the storm , and those that survived had transistors in their boats . Lacking advanced warning , many shrimp farmers in remote villages were swept away by waves . Hundreds of dead bodies were discovered along the shore ; after they were identified , the corpses were cremated instead of bringing the bodies into local villages . Most of the fatalities on land were the result of buildings collapsing on people who stayed inside . A ferry crossing the Godavari River sank amid rough waves , killing all 42 people on board . Overall , the cyclone killed at least 978 people in Andhra Pradesh , with 1 @,@ 375 people listed as missing in January 1997 . However , the Red Cross did not expect to find all of the missing bodies , as some were likely washed into the Bay of Bengal . A later report to the Food and Agriculture Organization indicated there were 1 @,@ 077 confirmed deaths , with an unconfirmed death toll as high as 2 @,@ 760 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the storm 's heavy damage , homeless residents resided in temporary camps . Later , the Indian government set up 742 relief centers housing 177 @,@ 000 people , utilizing schools and office buildings . However , residents did not stay for extended periods of time in the shelters , as rebuilding began within three days of the storm 's landfall . Many of the displaced people returned to their homes after the storm receded . Workers restored water service and distributed potable water to those in need . Workers used cranes to remove trees from highways . Roads and communication links were quickly restored , as was the power supply . Later , damaged houses were reconstructed with tiled roofs while destroyed houses were rebuilt on concrete slabs , both to withstand stronger winds . 
 The Andhra Pradesh government coordinated with the Indian Red Cross Society to provide relief goods to the affected citizens , such as 75 kg ( 165 lb ) of rice per family . The Red Cross sent 10 trucks carrying blankets , food , and cooking supplies from Delhi to Andhra Pradesh , to be distributed by the Andhra Pradesh Red Cross . India 's military enacted search and rescue missions in the days following the storm . Six helicopters worked continuously to airlift food , water , and medicine to storm victims , although residents fought over the aid in poor areas . Helicopters also surveyed the storm damage , as many affected small villages were not linked by roads . About 935 medical teams were established following the storm , and chlorinated drinking tablets were distributed to purify water , in an attempt to prevent a cholera outbreak . Cholera spreads through stagnant contaminated water , and there were eight reports of storm victims contracting the disease . In the months after the storm , foreign governments and international organizations donated about US $ 500 @,@ 000 . 
 The World Bank considered the cyclone as having a significant effect on Andhra Pradesh 's economy . Andhra Pradesh 's chief minister N. Chandrababu Naidu estimated that the state would take as long as 30 years to recover from the storm . The government provided RS $ 1 @,@ 500 ( US $ 420 ) to every family whose hut collapsed during the storm , and RS $ 100 @,@ 000 ( US $ 2 @,@ 857 ) to the family of every person killed by the storm . However , there were also reports of people stealing bodies to receive the payment . The federal government provided about US $ 12 million to the state , as well as tax deductions for monetary donations . Former Union Minister <unk> Naidu opined that the state government overinflated the damage estimates to qualify for additional aid , in part due to the government spending annual disaster subsidies for salaries . The World Bank credited the government 's experience with disasters as saving lives , although the response to the disaster was largely in repairing damage , rather than mitigating against future storms . The storm also demonstrated the region 's outdated infrastructure . 
 Following the heavy damage from the cyclone and other recent disasters , the World Bank enacted a plan for Andhra Pradesh in April 1997 , consisting of repairing damaged infrastructure , an updated disaster plan , and technical assistance to the state government . Shelters and roads would be improved to higher standards . This plan ultimately cost about US $ 175 million and was completed in July 2003 , three years longer than expected but at a lower cost due to the Indian rupee losing some of its value . Power lines were improved to withstand winds of 200 km / h ( 120 mph ) , while drains were enlarged and a coastal plant system was created to lessen flooding . An additional 82 public shelters were constructed . However , the plan failed to yield a long term disaster policy for the state . 
 = USS Saugus ( 1863 ) = 
 USS Saugus was a single @-@ turreted Canonicus @-@ class monitor built for the Union Navy during the American Civil War . The vessel was assigned to the James River Flotilla of the North Atlantic Blockading Squadron upon completion in April 1864 . The ship spent most of her time stationed up the James River where she could support operations against Richmond and defend against a sortie by the Confederate ironclads of the James River Squadron . She engaged Confederate artillery batteries during the year and later participated in both attacks on Fort Fisher , defending the approaches to Wilmington , North Carolina , in December 1864 – January 1865 . Saugus returned to the James River after the capture of Fort Fisher and remained there until Richmond , Virginia was occupied in early April . 
 A few days later , the monitor was transferred to Washington , D. C. and used to temporarily incarcerate some of the suspected conspirators after the assassination of President Lincoln . She was decommissioned in June and recommissioned in early 1869 for service in the Caribbean and off the coast of Florida . Saugus was again recommissioned in late 1872 and generally remained active until late 1877 . She was condemned in 1886 and sold for scrap in 1891 . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 The ship was 223 feet ( 68 @.@ 0 m ) long overall , had a beam of 43 feet 4 inches ( 13 @.@ 2 m ) and had a maximum draft of 13 feet 6 inches ( 4 @.@ 1 m ) . Saugus had a tonnage of 1 @,@ 034 tons burthen and displaced 2 @,@ 100 long tons ( 2 @,@ 100 t ) . Her crew consisted of 100 officers and enlisted men . 
 Saugus was powered by a two @-@ cylinder horizontal vibrating @-@ lever steam engine that drove one propeller using steam generated by two Stimers horizontal fire @-@ tube boilers . The 320 @-@ indicated @-@ horsepower ( 240 kW ) engine gave the ship a top speed of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) . She carried 140 – 150 long tons ( 140 – 150 t ) of coal . Saugus 's main armament consisted of two smoothbore , muzzle @-@ loading , 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) Dahlgren guns mounted in a single gun turret . Each gun weighed approximately 43 @,@ 000 pounds ( 20 @,@ 000 kg ) . They could fire a 350 @-@ pound ( 158 @.@ 8 kg ) shell up to a range of 2 @,@ 100 yards ( 1 @,@ 900 m ) at an elevation of + 7 ° . 
 The exposed sides of the hull were protected by five layers of 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) wrought iron plates , backed by wood . The armor of the gun turret and the pilot house consisted of ten layers of one @-@ inch plates . The ship 's deck was protected by armor 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) thick . A 5 @-@ by @-@ 15 @-@ inch ( 130 by 380 mm ) soft iron band was fitted around the base of the turret to prevent shells and fragments from jamming the turret as had happened to earlier monitors during the First Battle of Charleston Harbor in April 1863 . The base of the funnel ( ship ) was protected to a height of 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) by 8 inches ( 200 mm ) of armor . A " rifle screen " of 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ inch ( 13 mm ) armor 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) high was installed on the top of the turret to protect the crew against Confederate snipers based on a suggestion by Commander Tunis A. M. Craven , captain of her sister ship Tecumseh . 
 The contract for Saugus , the first Navy ship to be named Saugus after the town of Saugus , Massachusetts , was awarded to Harlan & Hollingsworth ; the ship was laid down in 1862 at their Wilmington , Delaware shipyard . She was launched on 14 December 1863 and commissioned on 7 April 1864 with Commander Edmund R. Colhoun in command . The ship 's construction was delayed by multiple changes ordered while she was being built that reflected battle experience with earlier monitors . This included the rebuilding of the turrets and pilot houses to increase their armor thickness from 8 inches ( 203 mm ) to 10 inches and to replace the bolts that secured their armor plates together with rivets to prevent them from being knocked loose by the shock of impact from shells striking the turret . Other changes included deepening the hull by 18 inches ( 457 mm ) to increase the ship 's buoyancy , moving the position of the turret to balance the ship 's trim and replacing all of the ship 's deck armor . As far as is known the ship was not modified after her completion . 
 = = Service = = 
 Saugus was assigned to the James River Flotilla and arrived at Fort Monroe on 1 May . By 22 May , the ship was deployed with her sisters Canonicus and Tecumseh on the James River where they protected the transports of Major General Benjamin Butler 's Army of the James , supplying the army as it operated on the south bank of the river during the Bermuda Hundred Campaign . On 21 June , Commander Craven of the Tecumseh spotted a line of breastworks that the Confederates were building at Howlett 's Farm and his ship opened fire at the workers . The Confederates replied with a battery of four guns near the breastworks and Saugus and Canonicus joined in the bombardment . A half @-@ hour later , Confederate ships near Dutch Gap joined in , but their fire was ineffective because they were firing blindly at the Union monitors . During the engagement , Saugus fired thirty @-@ six 15 @-@ inch shells and was hit once by a Confederate shell that struck the deck and ricocheted into the turret ; no one was wounded or killed during the engagement . Eight days later , Saugus and the side @-@ wheel gunboat Hunchback engaged a battery at Deep Bottom Creek . The same pair of ships engaged another battery on Four Mile Creek on 31 June and 1 July . 
 Saugus was still under repair at the Norfolk Navy Yard in early September when she received orders to proceed with Canonicus and the gunboats Glaucus and Juniata to Port Royal , South Carolina , and there await Admiral David Farragut , the prospective commander of the North Atlantic Blockading Squadron , in anticipation of an attack on Fort Fisher . This deployment was cancelled on 19 September when poor health caused Farragut to decline the appointment . The ship returned to the James and resumed supporting the Union Army . In an engagement with Howlett 's Battery on 5 December , Saugus was hit twice . One of the shots from a 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) Brooke rifle disabled her turret temporarily when it cracked an armor plate and broke a number of 2 @-@ inch ( 51 mm ) bolts . The monitor ran aground on 14 December and she was refloated the following day . Saugus was repaired at Norfolk and she was then towed by the gunboat Nereus . They departed on 22 December and arrived off Fort Fisher on Christmas Eve . The next day , Saugus joined the bombardment of the Confederate fortifications from a range of 800 yards ( 730 m ) . Colhoun reported that he saw one Confederate gun dismounted by his ship 's shells ; Saugus fired 64 shells during the day . After Butler ordered his men re @-@ embarked onto their transports on 26 December , the monitor was towed to Beaufort , South Carolina by the gunboat Quaker City . 
 Towed by the side @-@ wheel gunboat Alabama , Saugus arrived back at Fort Fisher on 13 January 1865 . Together with her sisters Canonicus and Mahopac , the double @-@ turreted monitor Onondaga and the armored frigate New Ironsides , she bombarded the fort for three days until it was captured by Union troops . Despite the bursting of one of her guns on 13 January , which wounded one crewman , the ship fired 212 shells during the battle . Saugus was hit 11 times , cracking armor plates on her pilothouse and turret in addition to breaking bolts , but she was not badly damaged . Nonetheless , the monitor was ordered to return to Norfolk for repairs on 16 January , towed by the sidewheel gunboat Rhode Island . On 23 January , as the ship was en route for the Washington Navy Yard for repairs , the Confederate James River Squadron attempted to slip through the obstructions at Trent 's Reach for an attack on the Union gunboats and transports , but they were repulsed before Saugus reached City Point four days later . 
 Saugus remained on the James for the next month and contributed boats for clearing the river of " torpedoes " after the Confederate ships were scuttled on the night of 2 / 3 April and Richmond occupied . On 5 April , the ship , now under the command of Lieutenant B. F. Day , and Mahopac were ordered report to the Washington Navy Yard . After the assassination of President Abraham Lincoln on 15 April , eight of the suspected conspirators were incarcerated aboard Saugus and the monitor Montauk . On 30 April , they were transferred off the ships to the Arsenal Penitentiary . 
 = = Post @-@ war operations = = 
 Saugus was decommissioned and laid up at Washington , D. C. , on 13 June 1865 . Recommissioned on 30 April 1869 , the monitor steamed to Cuba to investigate reports of mistreatment of US citizens during a revolt there . She then patrolled along the Florida coast until she was laid up at Key West , Florida on the last day of 1870 . During this time , the ship was renamed Centaur on 15 June 1869 , but resumed her original name on 10 August 1869 . After being towed to Philadelphia , Pennsylvania for repairs , Saugus was recommissioned there on 9 November 1872 and was based at Key West until transferred to Port Royal , South Carolina in 1876 . During this period the ship was out of commission from 9 March to 10 October 1874 . Saugus returned to Washington in 1877 and was decommissioned there on 8 October . She was condemned in 1886 and sold for scrap on 25 May 1891 . 
 = Paresh Mokashi = 
 Paresh Mokashi ( born 6 February 1969 ) is an Indian filmmaker , producer , actor and Theatre director @-@ producer ; working predominantly in Marathi cinema and Marathi theatre . He started working as a backstage worker for theatre and did few minor roles for plays as well as films . Mokashi made his directorial debut for theatre with the Marathi play , Sangeet Debuchya Mulee in 1999 . He continued to work for theatre and made his directorial debut for cinema with the 2009 Marathi feature film , Harishchandrachi Factory . The film depicts the making of India 's first full @-@ length feature film , Raja Harishchandra ( 1913 ) , made by Dadasaheb Phalke . The film was acclaimed critically and won several awards . It was also selected as India 's official entry to 82nd Academy Awards in the Best Foreign Language Film category . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Paresh Mokashi was born to a Maharashtrian family in Pune and was brought up in Lonavla . He is a grandson of a noted Marathi writer D. B. Mokashi . Mokashi finished his schooling in Lonavla and acquired Bachelor of Arts degree from a Pune @-@ based college . He has also formed his production company , " <unk> Productions " , which has produced some of his own work including his 2005 Marathi play , Samudra and 2009 Marathi film , Harishchandrachi Factory . He currently lives in Mumbai and is married to theatre actor @-@ writer <unk> Kulkarni , who had also done a minor role in Mokashi 's debut film , Harishchandrachi Factory . Mokashi 's struggle to make the film is included as one of the twenty inspiring stories in the book " Connect the Dots " by Rashmi Bansal , under the title " Truth Shall <unk> " in " <unk> " section of the book . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 Mokashi started as an backstage worker for a theatre group in Pune . He has been associated with Marathi theatre since 1988 and worked as an actor in Pune based organisations like Theatre Academy and Maharashtra Cultural Center . He also participated in the plays made for children by a Berlin based theatre group , Grips @-@ Theater . After acting in couple of plays , Mokashi got associated with Prithvi Theatre , Mumbai . While working as an organiser for their theatre festivals , Mokashi directed his first play Sangeet Debuchya Mulee ( <unk> 's Daughters : The Musical ) in Marathi for 1999 Prithvi Theatre festival . The play was also written by Mokashi himself . He directed few more plays including <unk> Post Bombilwadi ( Bombilwadi : The Village ) , Sangeet Lagnakallol ( The Roaring Marriage : The Musical ) and Samudra ( The Ocean ) . 
 All his plays got critical acclaim and won several awards on release . Sangeet Debuchya Mulee made satirical comments on the current communal harmony in India , through the daughters of a saintly social reformer in Maharashtra , <unk> <unk> <unk> , popularly known as Gadge Maharaj . The play 's narrative format used <unk> , call @-@ and @-@ response chanting or <unk> , which were popularised by the 13th century Hindu saint , Dnyaneshwar and another 16th century Varkari saint , Tukaram . His 2001 comedy play , <unk> Post Bombilwadi , showcased tumultuous events upon Adolf Hitler 's accidental landing in a small village in coastal Maharashtra . The 2004 musical play , Sangeet Lagnakallol , was set in early 1900s referencing the characters and situations from <unk> <unk> <unk> 's book , <unk> <unk> ( 1910 ) and Ram Ganesh <unk> 's book , <unk> <unk> ( 1925 ) . His other plays like <unk> <unk> ( 2001 ) discussed environmental concerns and Samudra ( 2005 ) , starring Atul Kulkarni , explored a mystery based upon ancient Vedic mythological history . 
 = = = Feature films = = = 
 Mokashi did a few small @-@ time roles for Hindi TV serials and feature films , including Sanjay Leela Bhansali 's Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam ( 1999 ) but soon he turned to writing and directing . Mokashi came across a biography of Dadasaheb Phalke , also known as the father of Indian cinema , written by Bapu <unk> . With an idea of making film on Phalke , Mokashi started his research with the help of National Film Archive of India , Pune and finished the script by March 2005 . As Mokashi did not undergo any formal training for film @-@ making and did not assist any other film directors earlier , he found it difficult to find producers for the film and it took three years to raise finances for the film . Declining the suggestions of making the film in Hindi , casting big stars , adding at least one title track , Mokashi decided to produce the film by himself through his production company , " <unk> Productions " . Made with the budget of ₹ 40 million ( US $ 590 @,@ 000 ) , Mokashi had to mortgage his house to complete the film . 
 Mokashi made directorial debut with his much acclaimed feature film , Harishchandrachi Factory . The film shoot was completed in December 2005 and post production work was finished in eight months in 2008 . In an interview with Rediff.com , Mokashi told that the film " had a technical release in the remote places of Maharashtra so [ it ] could participate in various festivals across the country . " The film made in Marathi language depicts the struggle of Dadasaheb Phalke in making of India 's first full @-@ length feature film , Raja Harishchandra ( 1913 ) . Unlike typical biopic films , Mokashi used light humoured adventure style for the film . The film gathered wide critical acclaim and Mokashi was praised for the narrative storyline of the film . The film also participated in several national and international film festivals . 
 The film was selected as India 's official entry to 82nd Academy Awards in the Best Foreign Language Film category along with 62nd British Academy Film Awards and 66th Golden Globe Awards but was not listed among the final five nominations . Mokashi 's next feature film Elizabeth Ekadashi was released on 14 November 2014 . The film received critical acclaim and commercial success and was selected as the opening film of ' Indian Panorama ' at The International Film Festival of India ( <unk> ) . The film won National Film Award for Best Children 's Film at the 62nd National Film Awards in 2015 . 
 = = Other work = = 
 After Mokashi 's film competed for Academy Awards , in July 2010 , he launched Shailaja <unk> 's Marathi book " ... And The Oscar Goes To ... " about Academy award winning films and its history . In January 2011 , he inaugurated 5th National Book Exhibition at Nagpur and mentioned that if he hadn 't read Dadasaheb Phalke 's biography in 2005 , he would not have made the film . In March 2011 , UTV World Movies launched a short film contest , " Premier : The Short Film Festival " , for amateur and professional film makers . Mokashi was on the jury panel along with writer @-@ director Sooni <unk> and director Raj Kumar Gupta . The top three winners were given a chance to work with Mokashi . In November 2011 , Mokashi was made part of Disney and PVR Cinemas ' joint initiative " My City My Parks " , which focused on encouraging children about urban greenery . Mokashi inaugurated the event along with Bollywood actor Abhay Deol and director Amole Gupte . The child participants of the event were asked to create a project on the topic of environmental conservation , in the form of a film , photo @-@ journal , murals or a theatre performance . Gupte and Mokashi also worked as mentors for the shortlisted participants . 
 = = = Seminars and discussions = = = 
 Mokashi has attended several seminars and discussions about Indian cinema . In August 2010 , Film and Television Institute of India in collaboration with Film Writers Association , India organised a two @-@ day seminar on film scripts , " The Uniqueness of the Indian Script " , at Pune . Mokashi was part of seminar session , " The Road Ahead : <unk> , the Digital Revolution and Other Attractions " , with actor Kamal Haasan as its chairperson . The session also included other filmmakers like Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra , Rohan Sippy and Vikramaditya Motwane . In May 2011 , Mokashi was seen explaining and exploring the myths about Indian history in an event organised by actor Nandu Madhav , who had portrayed Dadasaheb Phalke in Mokashi 's film . At 84th Akhil Bharatiya Marathi Sahitya <unk> in December 2011 , he opened a discussion about Marathi cinema with fellow participants like actor Mohan Agashe , actress Mrinal Kulkarni , Smita <unk> and director Umesh Vinayak Kulkarni . He mentioned that Marathi film industry should experiment with new subjects , however he also said that these experimentations may not guarantee favourable audience responses . Lately in May 2012 , Mokashi participated in the centenary of Indian cinema celebration organised by P. L. Deshpande Arts Academy in Mumbai . He was accompanied by another Marathi film director , Chandrakant Kulkarni , and was involved in two discussions , " Dadasaheb Phalke 's cinematic journey " and " Hundred Years of Indian Cinema " . 
 = = Creative work = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 Plays 
 2004 – Alpha Gaurav Awards : Best Direction – Sangeet Lagnakallol 
 Feature films 
 Harishchandrachi Factory 
 2008 – 56th National Film Awards : National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Marathi 
 2008 – John Abraham National Awards in the fourth edition of <unk> 
 2009 – Ahmedabad International Film Festival : Best Feature Film 
 2009 – 18th Aravindan <unk> : Best Debutant Director 
 2009 – Balasaheb <unk> Award : Best Feature Film 
 2009 – Gollapudi Srinivas Award : Best Debutant Director 
 2009 – 14th International Film Festival of Kerala : Hassan Kutty Award for Best Debut Indian Film 
 2009 – 46th Maharashtra State Film Awards : Best Feature Film 
 2009 – 46th Maharashtra State Film Awards : Best Director 
 2009 – 1st International Film Festival Kolhapur : Public Choice Award 
 2009 – Marathi International Film and Theatre Awards : Best Screenplay 
 2009 – Pune International Film Festival : Best Director ( Marathi Section ) 
 2010 – Indian Film Festival of Los Angeles : Audience Choice Awards 
 Elizabeth Ekadashi 
 2015 – 13th Pune International Film Festival : Government of Maharashtra " Sant Tukaram " Best International Marathi Film 
 2015 – Salaam Pune Awards : Best Film 
 2015 – 62nd National Film Awards : National Film Award for Best Children 's Film 
 Other awards 
 2009 – Maharashtra Ratna : Jewel of Maharashtra 
 2010 – Majha <unk> Puraskar : Excellence in art 
 2010 – Acharya <unk> Foundation , Pune : Excellence in cinema 
 2011 – P. B. Bhave Memorial Trust : Excellence in cinema 
 2012 – The Maharashtra Chapter of the Federation of Film Society of India : Contribution to the Marathi cinema . 
 = Patrick Corbin = 
 Patrick Alan Corbin ( born July 19 , 1989 ) is an American professional baseball pitcher for the Arizona Diamondbacks of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . 
 At Cicero – North Syracuse High School , Corbin did not pitch for his high school 's baseball team until his junior season . He played college baseball at Mohawk Valley Community College in his freshman season , and was noticed by scouts in a traveling showcase . He transferred to Chipola College for his sophomore season . 
 After a standout season at Chipola , the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim drafted Corbin in the second round of the 2009 MLB Draft . The Angels traded Corbin to the Diamondbacks in 2010 as part of a package for Dan Haren . Corbin made his MLB debut with the Diamondbacks in 2012 , and was named an All @-@ Star in 2013 . Corbin missed the 2014 season due to an injury to the ulnar collateral ligament in his pitching elbow . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Corbin is from Clay , New York . His father , Dan Sr. , worked as a driver for a sausage company , while his mother , Patty , works as a nurse at a rehabilitation center for the elderly . 
 Corbin 's father built a basketball court in his backyard for his children . As a child , Corbin identified basketball as his favorite sport . He played Pop Warner football , basketball in the Catholic Youth Organization , and Little League baseball . For baseball , Corbin was a fan of the New York Yankees . 
 = = Amateur career = = 
 = = = High school = = = 
 Corbin attended from Cicero – North Syracuse High School ( C @-@ NS ) in Cicero , New York . His father suggested that he sign up for the school 's baseball team during his freshman year , but Corbin declined , preferring to play with his friends . However , he did play for the basketball and football teams . His friends on the basketball team convinced him to try out for the baseball team in his junior year , and with little training , he was able to throw as fast as 80 miles per hour ( 130 km / h ) . 
 In 2007 , his senior season at C @-@ NS , Corbin had an 8 – 0 win – loss record , allowing only 33 hits and 16 runs while striking out 76 batters in 47 innings pitched . C @-@ NS became the top ranked team in the state of New York , and Corbin was named to the All @-@ League team and first team All @-@ Central New York . He graduated from C @-@ NS with a record of 14 – 0 and 139 strikeouts . 
 For the C @-@ NS basketball team , Corbin broke the school 's record for most three @-@ point field goals in a single game . He was named to the All Section Basketball team after completing his senior season . 
 = = = College = = = 
 Corbin 's grades at C @-@ NS were not good enough for him to enroll at a four @-@ year college that would allow him to play college baseball . As a result , Corbin enrolled at Mohawk Valley Community College , a junior college in Utica , New York , for his freshman year . At Mohawk , Corbin played baseball and basketball . Scouts from two teams attempted to sign Corbin as an undrafted free agent for a $ 75 @,@ 000 signing bonus . Though Corbin 's father wanted his son to sign , Corbin 's coach suggested they wait another season . After the season , he joined a travel baseball team , where scouts took notice of Corbin after recording his fastball above 90 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) . In a tournament in Georgia , Corbin opposed a team led by Zack Wheeler . Corbin allowed only one hit in a shutout . 
 Corbin transferred to Chipola College in Marianna , Florida , also a junior college , for his sophomore year , so that he could play baseball throughout the year in the warmer weather . At Chipola , Corbin stopped playing basketball , focusing exclusively on baseball . While training , Corbin added 15 to 20 pounds ( 6 @.@ 8 to 9 @.@ 1 kg ) . Competing for the Chipola Indians , who play in the Panhandle Conference of the Florida State College Activities Association ( <unk> ) , a member of the National Junior College Athletic Association ( NJCAA ) Region 8 , Corbin pitched to a 5 – 2 record with a 4 @.@ 32 earned run average ( ERA ) and 86 strikeouts in 74 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . He was named to the Panhandle Conference 's All @-@ Conference first team , and was voted the league 's fourth best player . Chipola reached the <unk> / NJCAA Gulf District Tournament , but lost to Santa Fe College in the championship game . Corbin had a 1 – 0 record and a 2 @.@ 77 ERA in 13 innings pitched during the tournament , resulting in his being named to the All @-@ Tournament team . 
 Following the 2009 season , Corbin signed a letter of intent with the University of Southern Mississippi . He planned to transfer to Southern Miss in order to continue his college baseball career with the Southern Miss Golden Eagles , competing in the National Collegiate Athletic Association 's Division I. 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Draft and minor leagues = = = 
 Scouts from every Major League Baseball ( MLB ) team evaluated Corbin prior to the 2009 MLB Draft , including Tom Kotchman of the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim , a personal friend of Chipola 's head coach . With Kotchman 's recommendation , the Angels drafted Corbin in the second round of the draft , with the 80th overall selection . He was the first junior college player selected in the draft . On the day of the draft , Corbin played basketball with his roommate . 
 Corbin signed with the Angels , receiving a $ 450 @,@ 000 signing bonus , foregoing his commitment to Southern Miss . Corbin pitched for the Orem Owlz of the Rookie @-@ level Pioneer League in 2009 , where Kotchman served as his manager . Corbin struggled in his first professional experience . In his first six appearances , five of them starts , he allowed 23 hits and 12 earned runs in 17 1 ⁄ 3 innings , giving him a 6 @.@ 23 ERA . Corbin later related that he attempted to strike out too many batters while pitching for Orem . 
 Baseball America ranked Corbin the Angels ' 12th best prospect prior to the 2010 season , projecting him as a mid @-@ rotation starting pitcher . Corbin altered his approach , as he sought to pitch to contact . He began the 2010 season with the Cedar Rapids Kernels of the Class A Midwest League . Corbin had an 8 – 0 record and 3 @.@ 86 ERA , allowing 25 earned runs in 58 1 ⁄ 3 innings in nine starts for Cedar Rapids . He struck out 70 batters while allowing 78 hits and 20 walks . During the season , the Angels promoted Corbin to the Rancho Cucamonga Quakes of the Class A @-@ Advanced California League . With Rancho Cucamonga , Corbin had a 5 – 3 record and 3 @.@ 88 ERA , allowing 26 earned runs in 60 1 ⁄ 3 innings in 11 starts . Combined , Corbin had a 3 @.@ 87 ERA , 106 strikeouts , and 28 walks in 118 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched with Cedar Rapids and Rancho Cucamonga . 
 At the trade deadline , Corbin was traded to the Diamondbacks with Joe Saunders , Rafael Rodríguez and Tyler Skaggs for Dan Haren . The Diamondbacks assigned Corbin to the Visalia Rawhide of the California League . Corbin pitched to a 1 @.@ 38 ERA in 26 innings with Visalia . In 2011 , while pitching for the Mobile Bay Bears of the Class AA Southern League , he set a franchise record with 27 1 ⁄ 3 consecutive scoreless innings . He finished the season with a 9 – 8 win @-@ loss record and 142 strikeouts in 160 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . His strikeout total led the Southern League , and Mobile won the league championship . 
 The Diamondbacks invited Corbin to spring training in 2012 , where he pitched to a 0 @.@ 57 earned run average . Corbin began the 2012 season with Mobile , pitching to a 2 – 0 record and 1 @.@ 67 ERA in four starts . 
 = = = Major leagues = = = 
 On April 30 , 2012 , the Diamondbacks promoted Corbin to the major leagues to start in place of Josh Collmenter , who was moved to the bullpen . Joe Martinez was optioned to the Reno Aces of the Class AAA Pacific Coast League to make room for Corbin on the roster . Corbin allowed three runs in 5 2 ⁄ 3 innings in his MLB debut against the Miami Marlins , picking up the win . Corbin also had two sacrifice bunts and scored a run in the victory . After pitching to a 2 – 3 record and a 5 @.@ 27 ERA in five starts , the Diamondbacks optioned Corbin to Reno on May 22 , as Daniel Hudson was set to return to the Diamondbacks from the disabled list . Hudson suffered an elbow injury in June , and the Diamondbacks recalled Corbin as a long reliever , while moving Collmenter into the rotation . The Diamondbacks again optioned Corbin to Reno in July so that he could continue to work as a starting pitcher when they activated Saunders off of the disabled list . The Diamondbacks recalled Corbin on August 1 , displacing Collmenter in the rotation . In 107 innings with the Diamondbacks , Corbin pitched to a 6 – 8 record and 4 @.@ 54 ERA . 
 During the 2012 – 13 offseason , Corbin gained 10 pounds ( 4 @.@ 5 kg ) and added 2 miles per hour ( 3 @.@ 2 km / h ) to his fastball . Corbin made the Diamondbacks ' Opening Day roster out of spring training in 2013 , pitching in the starting rotation . He won the National League ( NL ) Pitcher of the Month Award for May 2013 , after he pitched to a 5 – 0 record and 1 @.@ 53 ERA in five games started . Corbin was named an All @-@ Star , as he had an 11 – 1 record with a 2 @.@ 35 ERA , which was the third best in the NL at the All @-@ Star break . Corbin was the eighth youngest player named an All @-@ Star . In the 2013 MLB All @-@ Star Game , Corbin received the loss after allowing the game 's first run in the fourth inning . He finished the season with a 3 @.@ 41 ERA . 
 During spring training in 2014 , Diamondbacks manager Kirk Gibson decided that Corbin would start on Opening Day . However , Corbin felt arm tightness during a spring training start . An MRI revealed damage to his ulnar collateral ligament of the elbow . He underwent Tommy John surgery , and missed the entire 2014 season . The Diamondbacks placed Corbin on the 15 @-@ day disabled list on March 30 , and transferred him to the 60 @-@ day disabled list on April 4 , in order to open a roster spot for Roger <unk> , who they claimed off waivers . 
 Corbin returned to the Diamondbacks on July 4 , 2015 . 
 = = Scouting report = = 
 Corbin is listed at 6 feet 3 inches ( 1 @.@ 91 m ) and 170 pounds ( 77 kg ) . His pitching repertoire contains a fastball that averages 92 miles per hour ( 148 km / h ) , occasionally topping out at 95 miles and hour . His secondary pitches include a changeup , which he throws between 81 miles per hour ( 130 km / h ) and 82 miles per hour ( 132 km / h ) and a slider , which he throws between 78 miles per hour ( 126 km / h ) and 79 miles per hour ( 127 km / h ) , and considered his best pitch coming out of college . 
 Corbin improved his changeup after pitching in Instructional League during the 2009 – 10 offseason , which led Corbin to consider it a better pitch than his slider . However , Todd Helton , after striking out twice against Corbin early in the 2013 season , dubbed Corbin 's slider " the best I 've ever seen . " In 2011 , he developed a knuckle curve , which he believes contributed to his consecutive scoreless innings streak . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Teammate Paul Goldschmidt describes Corbin as " humble " about his success . With his signing bonus , Corbin bought a used car instead of a new one . He lived in his parents ' basement during the 2012 – 13 winter and officiates youth basketball games during the offseason . 
 Corbin has three siblings . His sister plays for the basketball team at C @-@ NS . Corbin met his girlfriend when they were classmates at C @-@ NS . 
 = Eric Harrison ( RAAF officer ) = 
 Eric Harrison ( 10 August 1886 – 5 September 1945 ) was an Australian aviator who made the country 's first military flight , and helped lay the groundwork for the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . Born in Victoria , he was a flying instructor in Britain when , in 1912 , he answered the Australian Defence Department 's call for pilots to form an aviation school . Along with Henry Petre , he established Australia 's first air base at Point Cook , Victoria , and its inaugural training unit , the Central Flying School ( CFS ) , before making his historic flight in March 1914 . Following the outbreak of World War I , when Petre went on active service with the Mesopotamian Half Flight , Harrison took charge of instructing student pilots of the Australian Flying Corps at CFS . 
 Harrison transferred to the RAAF as one of its founding members in 1921 , and spent much of the inter @-@ war period in technical services and air accident investigation . Promoted to group captain in 1935 , he retired from the Air Force three years later when his post of Director of Aeronautical Inspection was transferred to the public service . He continued to serve in the same capacity as a civilian until his sudden death from heart disease at the age of fifty @-@ nine , just after the end of World War II . Harrison 's technical abilities and association with military flying from its earliest days in Australia earned him the title of " Father of the RAAF " for many years , until the mantle was assumed by Air Marshal Sir Richard Williams . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Born on 10 August 1886 at <unk> Hill near Castlemaine , Victoria , Harrison was the son of printer and stationer Joseph Harrison , and his English @-@ born wife Ann . He attended Castlemaine Grammar School before starting work as a motor mechanic . Keen to fly from the first time he saw an aeroplane , he travelled to Britain in March 1911 and trained as a pilot at the Bristol School on Salisbury Plain . Six months later , having accumulated some thirty minutes ' flight time , he qualified for his Royal Aero Club Aviator 's Certificate , becoming only the third Australian to do so . Gaining employment as an instructor for Bristol , he taught flying on behalf of the company in Spain and Italy , as well as in Halberstadt , Germany , where he became aware first @-@ hand of that country 's militarism ; some of the students he trained and examined later served as pilots in the Luftstreitkräfte during World War I. 
 In December 1911 , the Australian Defence Department advertised in the United Kingdom for " two competent mechanists and aviators " to establish a flying corps and training school . Henry Petre , a former solicitor employed by Handley Page , and H.R. <unk> , then Bristol 's chief test pilot , successfully applied . Petre was commissioned as a lieutenant in the Australian Military Forces on 6 August 1912 , but <unk> withdrew his application in October and Harrison took his place , gaining his commission on 16 December . While his new salary of £ 400 was little improvement on what he was earning in Britain , Harrison was happy to have an excuse to return home . 
 Petre selected Point Cook , Victoria , to become the site for the Army 's proposed Central Flying School ( CFS ) in March 1913 ; meanwhile Harrison remained in Britain temporarily , ordering the facility 's complement of aircraft including two Deperdussin monoplanes , two Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2 biplanes , and a Bristol Boxkite for initial training . By January 1914 , the pair had established the school with themselves as instructors , augmented by four mechanics and three other staff . Harrison made Australia 's first military flight in the Boxkite on Sunday , 1 March 1914 , followed by a second in the same aircraft with Petre as passenger , then a third by himself in a Deperdussin . On 29 June , Harrison married Kathleen Prendergast , daughter of future Premier of Victoria George Prendergast , at St Mary 's Catholic Church in West Melbourne . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Its coterie of personnel by now being referred to as the Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) , CFS commenced its first course on 17 August 1914 , two weeks after the outbreak of World War I. Its students included Captain Thomas White and Lieutenant Richard Williams , with Harrison providing initial training to solo standard and Petre advanced instruction . In September , Harrison was given command of a flying unit that accompanied the Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force to Rabaul in German New Guinea . With little in the way of enemy resistance , however , the aircraft were never assembled in country and he had to return without leading the first Australian airmen into combat , a distinction that instead went to Petre as commander of the Mesopotamian Half Flight the following year . 
 With Petre on active duty , Harrison took on the main responsibility for providing basic flying training to the pilots of the first three squadrons to be formed in Australia for overseas service . Many of his students would go on to play a prominent role in the future Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) , including Bill Anderson , Harry Cobby , Adrian Cole , Frank McNamara , Lawrence Wackett , and Henry Wrigley . Having graduated twenty @-@ four new pilots by the end of 1915 , Harrison was able to establish the first AFC squadron , designated No. 67 ( Australian ) Squadron , Royal Flying Corps ; it was however commonly known as No. 1 Squadron AFC from its inception , and officially so from 1 January 1918 . The unit departed for Egypt in March 1916 under the command of Lieutenant Colonel E.H. Reynolds . Nos. 3 and 4 Squadrons AFC were formed at Point Cook in late 1916 to operate in France following advanced training in England . In addition to his instructional and administrative duties , Harrison put his mechanical abilities to use initiating the building of aero engines in Australia and maintaining the CFS 's complement of airframes ; according to Wackett , only Harrison had the skill to keep the obsolescent machines in the air . He was appointed officer @-@ in @-@ charge of CFS in June 1917 with the temporary rank of major ; this was made permanent in September 1918 . The CFS was disbanded at Point Cook on 31 December 1919 . 
 = = Interbellum and World War II = = 
 Harrison began a long association with engineering and air safety when he was posted to Britain for secondment to the Aeronautical Inspection Directorate following the end of World War I. He transferred as a flight lieutenant ( honorary squadron leader ) to the newly formed Australian Air Force in March 1921 , becoming one of its twenty @-@ one founding officers ; the prefix " Royal " was added to the service 's name in August that year . Dissatisfied with his RAAF rank considering his leading position in the pre @-@ war Central Flying School , Harrison appealed for greater seniority . As a result , he was appointed Air Liaison Officer to the Air Ministry in London , with promotion to the substantive rank of squadron leader . Returning to Australia in 1925 , he was appointed Assistant Director of Technical Services in 1927 , and soon after helped form the RAAF 's Air Accident Investigation Committee . The following year he became Director of Aeronautical Inspection , receiving promotion to wing commander on 1 July 1928 . Harrison 's position took him throughout the country , inspecting equipment and investigating the causes of air crashes . Promoted group captain on 1 January 1935 , he took charge of the Federal government 's resources committee for aircraft , aero engines , and motor transport , one of a number of subcommittees on the Defence Resources Board set up to investigate and report on the readiness of Australian industry to provide munitions for defence in the event of international conflict . 
 In 1937 , Harrison returned to Britain for further study of accident investigation methods , as well as aircraft production . His position as Director of Aeronautical Inspection was <unk> on 12 March 1938 , which saw him retired from the RAAF but continuing in his role . He was a member of the court of inquiry into the crash on 25 October of the Douglas DC @-@ 2 airliner <unk> , which overshot Essendon airport in low cloud , killing all fourteen passengers and four crew members . The inquiry 's report singled out Major Melville <unk> , Finance Member on both the Civil Aviation Board and the RAAF Air Board , for criticism over cost @-@ cutting measures that had held up trials of safety beacons designed for such eventualities . According to Air Force historian Chris Coulthard @-@ Clark , when <unk> was appointed Secretary at the Department of Air in November the following year , he went out of his way to " make life difficult " for Harrison , causing " bitterness and friction within the department " , and necessitating the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Vice Marshal Stanley Goble , to take steps to shield the safety inspector from the new Secretary 's ire . 
 Harrison held the position of Director of Aeronautical Inspection throughout World War II , his staff numbering more than 1 @,@ 200 by 1945 . A reorganisation of the directorate in 1940 had permitted qualified civilian engineers to be recruited for work that required increasing technical expertise , without them having to join the Air Force . In July the same year , Harrison proposed the construction of a series of test houses to help decentralise chemical , mechanical and metrological testing of materials used in the manufacture of munitions that previously had to go through either the Munitions Supply Laboratories or the National Standards Laboratory . The result was a major improvement in the speed of testing and , according to the official history of Australia in the war , " a fuller use of the country 's scientific and technical manpower " . Harrison 's daughter Greta joined the Women 's Auxiliary Australian Air Force , and by the end of the war was ranked flight officer . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 On 5 September 1945 , just as the war had ended , Harrison died suddenly of hypertensive cerebrovascular disease at his home in the Melbourne suburb of Brighton ; he was survived by his wife and daughter , and cremated . The Minister for Air , Arthur Drakeford , commented that " all members of the service , and , indeed , all Australians interested in aviation , must feel his loss as the snapping of one of the last links with the pioneer days of flying " . One of the original <unk> that Harrison ordered and helped assemble for the Central Flying School in 1914 later went on display at the Australian War Memorial in Canberra . 
 Despite his accomplishments in overseeing the training of every student pilot who served in the Australian Flying Corps during World War I , Eric Harrison received no decorations or other official recognition , prompting Group Captain Mark Lax , at the 1999 RAAF History Conference , to describe him as " perhaps the unluckiest of the entire AFC ... an unsung hero " . He was , however , generally considered to be the " Father of the RAAF " until the title eventually settled on Air Marshal Sir Richard Williams . Harrison 's early technical expertise , long association with Australian military aviation as a founder member of the AFC and the RAAF , and " more assertive " personality tended to overshadow the contributions of Henry Petre , whom historian Douglas Gillison considered " equally entitled " to such an accolade . Reviewing the contributions of Petre and Harrison in his volume of The Australian Centenary History of Defence in 2001 , Alan Stephens concluded that " perhaps any judgement would not only be moot but also gratuitous , as by circumstance and achievement both men properly belong in the pantheon of the RAAF " . 
 = Anna May Wong = 
 Anna May Wong ( January 3 , 1905 – February 3 , 1961 ) was the first Chinese American movie star , and also the first Asian American actress to gain international recognition . Her long and varied career spanned silent film , sound film , television , stage and radio . 
 Born in Los Angeles to second @-@ generation Chinese @-@ American parents , Wong became infatuated with the movies and began acting in films at an early age . During the silent film era , she acted in The Toll of the Sea ( 1922 ) , one of the first movies made in color and Douglas Fairbanks ' The Thief of Bagdad ( 1924 ) . Wong became a fashion icon and had achieved international stardom in 1924 . Frustrated by the stereotypical supporting roles she reluctantly played in Hollywood , Wong left for Europe in the late 1920s , where she starred in several notable plays and films , among them Piccadilly ( 1929 ) . She spent the first half of the 1930s traveling between the United States and Europe for film and stage work . Wong was featured in films of the early sound era , such as Daughter of the Dragon ( 1931 ) and Daughter of Shanghai ( 1937 ) and with Marlene Dietrich in Josef von Sternberg 's Shanghai Express ( 1932 ) . 
 In 1935 Wong was dealt the most severe disappointment of her career , when Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer refused to consider her for the leading role of the Chinese character O @-@ Lan in the film version of Pearl S. Buck 's The Good Earth , choosing instead the German actress Luise Rainer to play the leading role . Wong spent the next year touring China , visiting her family 's ancestral village and studying Chinese culture . In the late 1930s , she starred in several B movies for Paramount Pictures , portraying Chinese Americans in a positive light . She paid less attention to her film career during World War II , when she devoted her time and money to helping the Chinese cause against Japan . Wong returned to the public eye in the 1950s in several television appearances . 
 In 1951 , Ms. Wong made history with her TV show The Gallery of Madame Liu @-@ Tsong , the first ever U.S. television show starring an Asian American series lead . 
 She had been planning to return to film in Flower Drum Song when she died in 1961 , at the age of 56 . 
 For decades after her death , Wong was remembered principally for the stereotypical " Dragon Lady " and demure " Butterfly " roles that she was often given . Her life and career were re @-@ evaluated in the years around the centennial of her birth , in three major literary works and film retrospectives . Interest in her life story continues and another biography , Shining Star : The Anna May Wong Story , was published in 2009 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Anna May Wong was born Wong Liu Tsong ( meaning " yellow willow frost " respectively , though " yellow " being her family name can be considered functionless here semantically ) on January 3 , 1905 , on Flower Street in Los Angeles , one block north of Chinatown , in an integrated community of Chinese , Irish , German and Japanese residents . She was the second of seven children born to Wong Sam Sing , owner of the Sam Kee Laundry in Los Angeles , and his second wife Lee Gon Toy . 
 Anna May Wong 's parents were second @-@ generation Chinese Americans ; her maternal and paternal grandparents had resided in the U.S. since at least 1855 . Her paternal grandfather , A Wong Wong , was a merchant who owned two stores in Michigan Hills , a gold @-@ mining area in Placer County . He had come from Chang On , a village near Taishan , Guangdong Province , China in 1853 . Anna May 's father spent his youth traveling between the U.S. and China , where he married his first wife and fathered a son in 1890 . He returned to the U.S. in the late 1890s and in 1901 , while continuing to support his family in China , he married a second wife , Anna May 's mother . Anna May 's older sister Lew Ying ( Lulu ) was born in late 1902 , and Anna May was born in 1905 , followed by five more children . 
 In 1910 , the family moved to a neighborhood on Figueroa Street where they were the only Chinese on their block , living alongside mostly Mexican and Eastern European families . The two hills separating their new home from Chinatown helped Wong to assimilate into American culture . She attended public school with her older sister at first , but then moved to a Presbyterian Chinese school when the girls became the target of racial taunts from other students . Classes were taught in English , but Wong attended a Chinese language school afternoons and on Saturdays . 
 About that same time , U.S. motion picture production began to relocate from the east coast to the Los Angeles area . Movies were shot constantly in and around Wong 's neighborhood . She began going to Nickelodeon movie theaters and quickly became obsessed with the " flickers " , missing school and using lunch money to attend the cinema . Her father was not happy with her interest in films , feeling that it interfered with her studies , but Wong decided to pursue a film career regardless . At the age of nine , she constantly begged filmmakers to give her roles , earning herself the nickname " C.C.C. " or " Curious Chinese Child " . By the age of 11 , Wong had come up with her stage name of Anna May Wong , formed by joining both her English and family names . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Wong was working at Hollywood 's Ville de Paris department store when Metro Pictures needed 300 female extras to appear in Alla Nazimova 's film The Red Lantern ( 1919 ) . Without her father 's knowledge , a friend of his with movie connections helped Anna May land an uncredited role as an extra carrying a lantern . 
 She worked steadily for the next two years as an extra in various movies , including Priscilla Dean and Colleen Moore pictures . While still a student , Wong came down with an illness identified as St. Vitus 's Dance which caused her to miss months of school . She was on the verge of emotional collapse when her father took her to a practitioner of traditional Chinese medicine . The treatments proved successful , though Wong later claimed this had more to do with her dislike of the methods . Other Chinese thought such as Confucianism and particularly Taoism and the teachings of Laozi had a strong influence on Wong 's personal philosophy throughout her life . The family 's religious life also included Christian thought , in the form of Presbyterianism and as an adult she was a Christian Scientist for some time . 
 Finding it difficult to keep up with both her schoolwork and her passion , she dropped out of Los Angeles High School in 1921 to pursue a full @-@ time acting career . Reflecting on her decision , Wong told Motion Picture Magazine in 1931 : " I was so young when I began that I knew I still had youth if I failed , so I determined to give myself 10 years to succeed as an actress . " 
 In 1921 , Wong received her first screen credit for Bits of Life , the first anthology film , in which she played the wife of Lon Chaney 's character , Toy Ling , in a segment entitled " Hop " . She later recalled it fondly as the only time she played the role of a mother ; her appearance earned her a cover photo in the British magazine Picture Show . 
 At the age of 17 she played her first leading role , in the early Metro two @-@ color Technicolor movie The Toll of the Sea . Written by Frances Marion , the story was based loosely on Madama Butterfly . Variety magazine singled Wong out for praise , noting her " extraordinarily fine " acting . The New York Times commented , " Miss Wong stirs in the spectator all the sympathy her part calls for and she never repels one by an excess of theatrical ' feeling ' . She has a difficult role , a role that is botched nine times out of ten , but hers is the tenth performance . Completely unconscious of the camera , with a fine sense of proportion and remarkable pantomimic accuracy ... She should be seen again and often on the screen . " 
 Despite such reviews , Hollywood proved reluctant to create starring roles for Wong ; her ethnicity prevented U.S. filmmakers from seeing her as a leading lady . David Schwartz , the chief curator of the Museum of the Moving Image , notes , " She built up a level of stardom in Hollywood , but Hollywood didn 't know what to do with her . " She spent the next few years in supporting roles providing " exotic atmosphere " , for instance playing a concubine in Tod Browning 's Drifting ( 1923 ) . Film producers capitalized on Wong 's growing fame but they relegated her to supporting roles . Still optimistic about a film career , in 1923 Wong said : " Pictures are fine and I 'm getting along all right , but it 's not so bad to have the laundry back of you , so you can wait and take good parts and be independent when you 're climbing . " 
 = = = Stardom = = = 
 At the age of 19 , Anna May Wong was cast in a supporting role as a scheming Mongol slave in the Douglas Fairbanks picture The Thief of Bagdad ( 1924 ) . Playing a stereotypical " Dragon Lady " role , her brief appearances on @-@ screen caught the attention of audiences and critics alike . The film grossed more than $ 2 million and helped introduce Wong to the public . Around this time , Wong had an affair with director Tod Browning . It was a romance largely known of at the time : it was an interracial relationship and Wong was underage . 
 After this second prominent role , Wong moved out of the family home into her own apartment . Conscious that Americans viewed her as " foreign born " even though she was born and raised in California , Wong began cultivating a flapper image . In March 1924 , planning to make films about Chinese myths , she signed a deal creating Anna May Wong Productions ; when her business partner was found to be engaging in dishonest practices , Wong brought a lawsuit against him and the company was dissolved . 
 It soon became evident that Wong 's career would continue to be limited by American anti @-@ miscegenation laws , which prevented her from sharing an on @-@ screen kiss with any person of another race , even if the character was Asian , but being portrayed by a white actor . The only leading Asian man in U.S. films in the silent era was Sessue Hayakawa . Unless Asian leading men could be found , Wong could not be a leading lady . 
 Wong continued to be offered exotic supporting roles , playing indigenous native girls in two 1924 films . Filmed on location in the Territory of Alaska she portrayed an Eskimo in The Alaskan . She returned to Los Angeles to perform the part of Princess Tiger Lily in Peter Pan . Both films were shot by cinematographer James Wong Howe but Peter Pan was more successful ; the hit of the Christmas season . The next year , Wong was singled out for critical praise in a manipulative Oriental vamp role in the film Forty Winks . Despite such favorable reviews , she became increasingly disappointed with her casting and began to seek other roads to success . In early 1925 she joined a group of serial stars on a tour of the vaudeville circuits ; when the tour proved to be a failure , Wong and the rest of the group returned to Hollywood . 
 In 1926 , Wong put the first rivet into the structure of Grauman 's Chinese Theatre when she joined Norma Talmadge for its groundbreaking ceremony , although she was not invited to leave her <unk> and foot @-@ prints in cement . 
 In the same year Wong starred in The Silk Bouquet . Re @-@ titled The Dragon Horse in 1927 , the film was one of the first U.S. films to be produced with Chinese backing , provided by San Francisco 's Chinese Six Companies . The story was set in China during the Ming Dynasty and featured Asian actors playing the Asian roles . 
 Wong continued to be assigned supporting roles . Hollywood 's Asian female characters tended toward two stereotypical poles : the naïve and self @-@ sacrificing " Butterfly " and the sly and deceitful " Dragon Lady " . In Old San Francisco ( 1927 ) , directed by Alan Crosland for Warner Brothers , Wong played a " Dragon Lady " , a gangster 's daughter . In Mr. Wu ( 1927 ) she played a supporting role as increasing censorship against mixed race onscreen couples cost her the lead . In The Crimson City , released the following year , this happened again . 
 = = = Move to Europe = = = 
 Tired of being both typecast and being passed over for lead Asian character roles in favor of non @-@ Asian actresses , Wong left Hollywood in 1928 for Europe . Interviewed by Doris Mackie for Film Weekly in 1933 , Wong complained about her Hollywood roles : " I was so tired of the parts I had to play . " She commented : " There seems little for me in Hollywood , because , rather than real Chinese , producers prefer Hungarians , Mexicans , American Indians for Chinese roles . " 
 In Europe , Wong became a sensation , starring in notable films such as <unk> Geld ( aka Song and Show Life , 1928 ) and <unk> ( Pavement Butterfly ) . Of the German critics ' response to Song , The New York Times reported that Wong was " acclaimed not only as an actress of transcendent talent but as a great beauty " . The article noted that Germans passed over Wong 's American background : " Berlin critics , who were unanimous in praise of both the star and the production , neglect to mention that Anna May is of American birth . They mention only her Chinese origins . " In Vienna , she played the title role in the operetta <unk> <unk> in fluent German . An Austrian critic wrote , " Fräulein Wong had the audience perfectly in her power and the unobtrusive tragedy of her acting was deeply moving , carrying off the difficult German @-@ speaking part very successfully . " 
 While in Germany , Wong became an inseparable friend of the director Leni Riefenstahl . Her close friendships with several women throughout her life , including Marlene Dietrich and Cecil Cunningham , led to rumors of lesbianism which damaged her public reputation . These rumors , in particular of her supposed relationship with Dietrich , embarrassed Wong 's family who in any case had long been opposed to her acting career , at that time not considered to be an entirely respectable profession . 
 London producer Basil Dean bought the play A Circle of Chalk for Wong to appear in with the young Laurence Olivier , her first stage performance in the UK . Criticism of her California accent , described by one critic as a " Yankee squeak " , led to Wong seeking vocal tutoring at Cambridge University , where she acquired a British accent . Composer Constant Lambert , infatuated with the actress after having seen her in films , attended the play on its opening night and subsequently composed Eight Poems of Li Po , dedicated to her . 
 Wong made her last silent film , Piccadilly , in 1929 , the first of five English films in which she had a starring role . The film caused a sensation in the UK . Gilda Gray was the top @-@ billed actress , but Variety commented that Wong " outshines the star " and that " from the moment Miss Wong dances in the kitchen 's rear , she steals ' Piccadilly ' from Miss Gray . " Though the film presented Wong in her most sensual role in a British film , once again she was not permitted to kiss her Caucasian love interest and a controversial planned scene involving a kiss was cut before the film was released . Forgotten for decades after its release , Piccadilly was later restored by the British Film Institute . Time magazine 's Richard Corliss calls Piccadilly Wong 's best film , and The Guardian reports that the rediscovery of this film and Wong 's performance in it has been responsible for a restoration of the actress ' reputation . 
 While in London , Wong was romantically linked with writer and broadcasting executive Eric <unk> , who wrote the lyrics to These Foolish Things ( Remind Me Of You ) as an evocation of his longing for her after they parted . Wong 's first talkie was The Flame of Love ( 1930 ) , which she recorded in French , English and German . Though Wong 's performance – particularly her handling of the three languages – was lauded , all three versions of the film received negative reviews . 
 = = = Return to Hollywood = = = 
 During the 1930s , American studios were looking for fresh European talent . Ironically , Wong caught their eye and she was offered a contract with Paramount Studios in 1930 . Enticed by the promise of lead roles and top billing , she returned to the United States . The prestige and training she had gained during her years in Europe led to a starring role on Broadway in On the Spot , a drama that ran for 167 performances and which she would later film as Dangerous to Know . When the play 's director wanted Wong to use stereotypical Japanese mannerisms , derived from Madame Butterfly , in her performance of a Chinese character , Wong refused . She instead used her knowledge of Chinese style and gestures to imbue the character with a greater degree of authenticity . Following her return to Hollywood in 1930 , Wong repeatedly turned to the stage and cabaret for a creative outlet . 
 In November 1930 , Anna May 's mother was run over and killed by an automobile in front of the Figueroa Street house . The family remained at the house until 1934 , when Wong 's father returned to his hometown in China with Anna May 's younger brothers and sister . Anna May had been paying for the education of her younger siblings , who put their education to work after they relocated to China . Before the family left , Wong 's father wrote a brief article for <unk> , a magazine for overseas Taishanese , in which he expressed his pride in his famous daughter . 
 With the promise of appearing in a Josef von Sternberg film , Wong accepted another stereotypical role – the title character of Fu Manchu 's vengeful daughter in Daughter of the Dragon ( 1931 ) . This was the last stereotypically " evil Chinese " role Wong played , and also her one starring appearance alongside the only other well @-@ known Asian actor of the era , Sessue Hayakawa . Though she was given the starring role , this status was not reflected in her paycheck : she was paid $ 6 @,@ 000 , while Hayakawa received $ 10 @,@ 000 and Warner Oland , who is only in the film for 23 minutes , was paid $ 12 @,@ 000 . 
 Wong began using her newfound celebrity to make political statements : late in 1931 , for example , she wrote a harsh criticism of the Mukden Incident and Japan 's subsequent invasion of Manchuria . She also became more outspoken in her advocacy for Chinese American causes and for better film roles . In a 1933 interview for Film Weekly entitled " I Protest " , Wong criticized the negative stereotyping in Daughter of the Dragon , saying , " Why is it that the screen Chinese is always the villain ? And so crude a villain – murderous , treacherous , a snake in the grass ! We are not like that . How could we be , with a civilization that is so many times older than the West ? " 
 Wong appeared alongside Marlene Dietrich as a self @-@ sacrificing courtesan in Sternberg 's Shanghai Express . Her sexually charged scenes with Dietrich have been noted by many commentators and fed rumors about the relationship between the two stars . Though contemporary reviews focused on Dietrich 's acting and Sternberg 's direction , film historians today judge that Wong 's performance upstaged that of Dietrich . 
 The Chinese press had long given Wong 's career very mixed reviews , and were less than favorable to her performance in Shanghai Express . A Chinese newspaper ran the headline : " Paramount <unk> Anna May Wong to Produce Picture to Disgrace China " and continued , " Although she is deficient in artistic portrayal , she has done more than enough to disgrace the Chinese race . " Critics in China believed that Wong 's on @-@ screen sexuality spread negative stereotypes of Chinese women . The most virulent criticism came from the Nationalist government , but China 's intellectuals and liberals were not always so opposed to Wong , as demonstrated when Peking University awarded the actress an honorary doctorate in 1932 . Contemporary sources reported that this was probably the only time that an actor had been so honored . 
 In both America and Europe , Wong had been seen as a fashion icon for over a decade . In 1934 , the Mayfair Mannequin Society of New York voted her " The World 's best @-@ dressed woman " and in 1938 Look magazine named her " The World 's most beautiful Chinese girl " . 
 = = = Atlantic crossings = = = 
 After her success in Europe and prominent role in Shanghai Express , Wong 's Hollywood career returned to its old pattern . Because of the Hays Code 's anti @-@ miscegenation rules , she was passed over for the leading female role in The Son @-@ Daughter in favor of Helen Hayes . Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer deemed her " too Chinese to play a Chinese " in the film , and the Hays Office would not have allowed her to perform romantic scenes since the film 's male lead , Ramón Novarro , was not Asian . Wong was scheduled to play the role of a mistress to a corrupt Chinese general in Frank Capra 's The Bitter Tea of General Yen ( 1933 ) , but the role went instead to <unk> Mori . 
 Again disappointed with Hollywood , Wong returned to Britain , where she stayed for nearly three years . In addition to appearing in four films she toured Scotland and Ireland as part of a vaudeville show . She also appeared in the King George Silver Jubilee program in 1935 . Her film Java Head ( 1934 ) , though generally considered a minor effort , was the only film in which Wong kissed the lead male character , her white husband in the film . Wong 's biographer , Graham Russell Hodges , commented that this may be why the film remained one of Wong 's personal favorites . While in London , Wong met Mei Lanfang , one of the most famous stars of the Beijing Opera . She had long been interested in Chinese opera and Mei offered to instruct Wong if she ever visited China . 
 In the 1930s , the popularity of Pearl Buck 's novels , especially The Good Earth , as well as growing American sympathy for China in its struggles with Japanese Imperialism , opened up opportunities for more positive Chinese roles in U.S. films . Wong returned to the U.S. in June 1935 with the goal of obtaining the role of O @-@ lan , the lead female character in MGM 's film version of The Good Earth . Since its publication in 1931 , Wong had made known her desire to play O @-@ lan in a film version of the book ; and as early as 1933 , Los Angeles newspapers were touting Wong as the best choice for the part . Nevertheless , the studio apparently never seriously considered Wong for the role because Paul Muni , an actor of European descent , was to play O @-@ lan 's husband , Wang Lung . The Chinese government also advised the studio against casting Wong in the role . The Chinese advisor to MGM commented : " whenever she appears in a movie , the newspapers print her picture with the caption ' Anna May again loses face for China ' " . 
 According to Wong , she was instead offered the part of Lotus , a deceitful song girl who helps to destroy the family and seduces the family 's oldest son . Wong refused the role , telling MGM head of production Irving Thalberg , " If you let me play O @-@ lan , I will be very glad . But you 're asking me – with Chinese blood – to do the only unsympathetic role in the picture featuring an all @-@ American cast portraying Chinese characters . " The role Wong hoped for went to Luise Rainer , who won the Best Actress Oscar for her performance . Wong 's sister , Mary Liu Heung Wong , appeared in the film in the role of the Little Bride . MGM 's refusal to consider Wong for this most high @-@ profile of Chinese characters in U.S. film is remembered today as " one of the most notorious cases of casting discrimination in the 1930s " . 
 = = = Tour of China = = = 
 After the major disappointment of losing the role in The Good Earth , Wong announced plans for a year @-@ long tour of China , to visit her father and his family in Taishan . Wong 's father had returned to his hometown in China with her younger brothers and sister in 1934 . Aside from Mei Lanfang 's offer to teach her , she wanted to learn more about the Chinese theater and through English translations to better perform some Chinese plays before international audiences . She told the San Francisco Chronicle on her departure , " ... for a year , I shall study the land of my fathers . Perhaps upon my arrival , I shall feel like an outsider . Perhaps instead , I shall find my past life assuming a dreamlike quality of unreality . " 
 Embarking in January 1936 , she chronicled her experiences in a series of articles printed in U.S. newspapers such as the New York Herald Tribune , the Los Angeles Examiner , the Los Angeles Times , and Photoplay . In a stopover in Tokyo on the way to Shanghai , local reporters , ever curious about her romantic life , asked if she had marriage plans , to which Wong replied , " No , I am wedded to my art . " The following day , however , Japanese newspapers reported that Wong was married to a wealthy Cantonese man named Art . 
 During her travels in China , Wong continued to be strongly criticized by the Nationalist government and the film community . She had difficulty communicating in many areas of China because she was raised with the Taishan dialect rather than Mandarin . She later commented that some of the varieties of Chinese sounded " as strange to me as Gaelic . I thus had the strange experience of talking to my own people through an interpreter . " 
 The toll of international celebrity on Wong 's personal life manifested itself in bouts of depression and sudden anger , as well as excessive smoking and drinking . Feeling irritable when she disembarked in Hong Kong , Wong was uncharacteristically rude to the awaiting crowd , which then quickly turned hostile . One person shouted : " Down with Huang Liu Tsong – the stooge that disgraces China . Don 't let her go ashore . " Wong began crying and a stampede ensued . After she left for a short trip to the Philippines , the situation cooled and Wong joined her family in Hong Kong . With her father and her siblings , Wong visited his family and his first wife at the family 's ancestral home near Taishan . Conflicting reports claim that she was either warmly welcomed or met with hostility by the villagers . She spent over 10 days in the family 's village and some time in neighboring villages before continuing her tour of China . After returning to Hollywood , Wong reflected on her year in China and her career in Hollywood : " I am convinced that I could never play in the Chinese Theatre . I have no feeling for it . It 's a pretty sad situation to be rejected by Chinese because I 'm ' too American ' and by American producers because they prefer other races to act Chinese parts . " Wong 's father returned to Los Angeles in 1938 . 
 = = = Late 1930s = = = 
 To complete her contract with Paramount Pictures , Wong made a string of B movies in the late 1930s . Often dismissed by critics , the films gave Wong non @-@ stereotypical roles which were publicized in the Chinese @-@ American press for their positive images . These smaller @-@ budgeted films could be bolder than the higher @-@ profile releases and Wong used this to her advantage to portray successful , professional , Chinese @-@ American characters . Competent and proud of their Chinese heritage , these roles worked against the prevailing U.S. film portrayals of Chinese Americans . In contrast to the usual official Chinese condemnation of Wong 's film roles , the Chinese consul to Los Angeles gave his approval to the final scripts of two of these films , Daughter of Shanghai ( 1937 ) and King of Chinatown ( 1939 ) . 
 In Daughter of Shanghai , Wong played the Asian @-@ American female lead in a role that was rewritten for her as the heroine of the story , actively setting the plot into motion rather than the more passive character originally planned . The script was so carefully tailored for Wong that at one point it was titled , Anna May Wong Story . Of this film , Wong told Hollywood Magazine , " I like my part in this picture better than any I 've had before ... because this picture gives Chinese a break – we have sympathetic parts for a change ! To me that means a great deal . " The New York Times gave the film a generally positive review , commenting of its B @-@ movie origins , " An unusually competent cast saves the film from the worst consequences of certain inevitable <unk> . [ The cast ] ... combine with effective sets to reduce the natural odds against any pictures in the Daughter of Shanghai tradition . " In October 1937 , the press carried rumors that Wong had plans to marry her male co @-@ star in this film , childhood friend and Korean @-@ American actor Philip Ahn . Wong replied , " It would be like marrying my brother . " 
 Bosley Crowther was not so kind to Dangerous to Know ( 1938 ) , which he called a " second @-@ rate melodrama , hardly worthy of the talents of its generally capable cast " . In King of Chinatown Wong played a surgeon who sacrifices a high @-@ paying promotion in order to devote her energies to helping the Chinese fight the Japanese invasion . The New York Times ' Frank Nugent gave the film a negative review . Though he commented positively on its advocacy of the Chinese in their fight against Japan , he wrote , " ... Paramount should have spared us and its cast ... the necessity of being bothered with such <unk> " . 
 Paramount also employed Wong as a tutor to other actors , such as Dorothy Lamour in her role as a Eurasian in Disputed Passage . Wong performed on radio several times , including a 1939 role as " Peony " in Pearl Buck 's The Patriot on Orson Welles ' The Campbell Playhouse . Wong 's cabaret act , which included songs in Cantonese , French , English , German , Danish , Swedish , and other languages , took her from the U.S. to Europe and Australia through the 1930s and 1940s . 
 In 1938 , having auctioned off her movie costumes and donated the money to Chinese aid , the Chinese Benevolent Association of California honored Wong for her work in support of Chinese refugees . The proceeds from the preface that she wrote in 1942 to a cookbook titled New Chinese Recipes , one of the first Chinese cookbooks , were also dedicated to United China Relief . Between 1939 and 1942 , she made few films , instead engaging in events and appearances in support of the Chinese struggle against Japan . 
 Being sick of the negative typecasting that had enveloped her throughout her American career , Anna May Wong visited Australia for over 3 months in 1939 . There she was the star attraction in a vaudeville show titled ' Highlights from Hollywood ' at the Tivoli Theatre in Melbourne . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 Wong starred in Lady from Chungking ( 1942 ) and Bombs over Burma ( 1943 ) , both anti @-@ Japanese propaganda made by the poverty row studio Producers Releasing Corporation . She donated her salary for both films to United China Relief . The Lady from Chungking differed from the usual Hollywood war film in that the Chinese were portrayed as heroes rather than as victims rescued by Americans . Even after American characters are captured by the Japanese , the primary goal of the heroes is not to free the Americans , but to prevent the Japanese from entering the city of Chongqing ( Chungking ) . Also , in an interesting twist , the Chinese characters are portrayed by Chinese @-@ American actors , while the Japanese villains – normally played by Chinese @-@ American actors – are acted by European Americans . The film ends with Wong making a speech for the birth of a " new China " . The Hollywood Reporter and Variety both gave Wong 's performance in The Lady from Chungking positive reviews , but commented negatively on the film 's plot . 
 Later in life , Wong invested in real estate and owned a number of properties in Hollywood . She converted her home on San Vincente Boulevard in Santa Monica into four apartments which she called " <unk> Apartments " . She served as the apartment house manager from the late 1940s until 1956 , when she moved in with her brother Richard on 21st Place in Santa Monica . 
 In 1949 , Wong 's father died in Los Angeles at the age of 91 . After a six @-@ year absence , Wong returned to film the same year with a small role in a B movie called Impact . From August 27 to November 21 , 1951 , Wong starred in a detective series that was written specifically for her , the DuMont Television Network series The Gallery of Madame Liu @-@ Tsong , in which she played the title role which used her birth name . Wong 's character was a dealer in Chinese art whose career involved her in detective work and international intrigue . The ten half @-@ hour episodes aired during prime time , from 9 : 00 to 9 : 30 p.m. Although there were plans for a second season , DuMont canceled the show in 1952 . No copies of the show or its scripts are known to exist . After the completion of the series , Wong 's health began to deteriorate . In late 1953 she suffered an internal hemorrhage , which her brother attributed to the onset of menopause , her continued heavy drinking , and financial worries . 
 In 1956 , Wong hosted one of the first U.S. documentaries on China narrated entirely by a Chinese American . Broadcast on the ABC travel series Bold Journey , the program consisted of film footage from her 1936 trip to China . Wong also did guest spots on television series such as Adventures in Paradise , The Barbara Stanwyck Show , and The Life and Legend of Wyatt Earp . 
 For her contribution to the film industry , Anna May Wong received a star at 1708 Vine Street on the inauguration of the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1960 . She is also depicted larger @-@ than @-@ life as one of the four supporting pillars of the " Gateway to Hollywood " sculpture located on the southeast corner of Hollywood Boulevard and La Brea Avenue , with the actresses Dolores del Río ( Hispanic American ) , Dorothy Dandridge ( African American ) and Mae West . 
 In 1960 , Wong returned to film in Portrait in Black , starring Lana Turner . She still found herself stereotyped , with one press release explaining her long absence from films with a supposed proverb , which was claimed to have been passed down to Wong by her father : " Don 't be photographed too much or you 'll lose your soul " , a quote that would be inserted into many of her obituaries . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 She was scheduled to play the role of Madame Liang in the film production of Rodgers and Hammerstein 's Flower Drum Song , but was unable to take the role due to failing health . On February 3 , 1961 , at the age of 56 , Wong died of a heart attack as she slept at home in Santa Monica , two days after her final screen performance on the television show The Barbara Stanwyck Show . Her cremated remains were interred in her mother 's grave at Rosedale Cemetery in Los Angeles . The headstone is marked with her mother 's Anglicized name on top , and the Chinese names of Anna May ( on the right ) and her sister Mary ( on the left ) along the sides . She was survived by her 3 daughters : <unk> ( May 31 , 1927 – August 9 , 1963 ) ; Wanda ( February 17 , 1929 – March 26 , 1996 ) ; and Leah ( December 2 , 1931 – April 13 , 2001 ) . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Wong 's image and career have left a legacy . Through her films , public appearances and prominent magazine features , she helped to humanize Asian Americans to white audiences during a period of overt racism and discrimination . Asian Americans , especially the Chinese , had been viewed as perpetually foreign in U.S. society but Wong 's films and public image established her as an Asian @-@ American citizen at a time when laws discriminated against Asian immigration and citizenship . Wong 's hybrid image dispelled contemporary notions that the East and West were inherently different . 
 Among Wong 's films , only Shanghai Express retained critical attention in the U.S. in the decades after her death . In Europe and especially England , her films appeared occasionally at festivals . Wong remained popular with the gay community who often claimed her as one of their own and for whom her marginalization by the mainstream became a symbol . Although the Chinese Nationalist criticism of her portrayals of the " Dragon Lady " and " Butterfly " stereotypes lingered , Wong herself was forgotten in China . Nevertheless , the importance of Wong 's legacy within the Asian @-@ American film community can be seen in the Anna May Wong Award of Excellence , which is given yearly at the Asian @-@ American Arts Awards ; the annual award given out by the Asian Fashion Designers was also named after Wong in 1973 . 
 For decades following her death , Wong 's image remained as a symbol in literature as well as in film . In the 1971 poem " The Death of Anna May Wong " , Jessica Hagedorn saw Wong 's career as one of " tragic glamour " and portrayed the actress as a " fragile maternal presence , an Asian @-@ American woman who managed to ' birth ' however ambivalently , Asian @-@ American screen women in the jazz age " . Wong 's character in Shanghai Express was the subject of John Yau 's 1989 poem " No One Ever Tried to Kiss Anna May Wong " , which interprets the actress ' career as a series of tragic romances . In David Cronenberg 's 1993 film version of David Henry Hwang 's 1986 play , M. Butterfly , Wong 's image was used briefly as a symbol of a " tragic diva " . Her life was the subject of China Doll , The Imagined Life of an American Actress , an award @-@ winning fictional play written by Elizabeth Wong in 1995 . 
 As the centennial of Wong 's birth approached , a re @-@ examination of her life and career took shape ; three major works on the actress appeared and comprehensive retrospectives of her films were held at both the Museum of Modern Art and the American Museum of the Moving Image in New York City . Anthony Chan 's 2003 biography , <unk> Cool : The Many Lives of Anna May Wong ( 1905 – 1961 ) , was the first major work on Wong and was written , Chan says , " from a uniquely Asian @-@ American perspective and sensibility " . In 2004 , Philip <unk> and <unk> Mi Lane 's exhaustive examination of Wong 's career , Anna May Wong : A Complete Guide to Her Film , Stage , Radio and Television Work was published , as well as a second full @-@ length biography , Anna May Wong : From <unk> 's Daughter to Hollywood Legend by Graham Russell Hodges . Though Anna May Wong 's life , career and legacy reflect many complex issues which remain decades after her death , Anthony Chan points out that her place in Asian @-@ American cinematic history , as its first female star , is permanent . 
 = = Partial filmography = = 
 The Red Lantern ( 1919 ) debut – uncredited 
 Bits of Life ( 1921 ) 
 The Toll of the Sea ( 1922 ) as Lotus Flower 
 The Thief of Bagdad ( 1924 ) as a Mongol Slave 
 A Trip to Chinatown ( 1926 ) as <unk> 
 Old San Francisco ( 1927 ) 
 Piccadilly ( 1929 ) as <unk> 
 Elstree Calling ( 1930 ) as Herself 
 Daughter of the Dragon ( 1931 ) as Princess Ling Moy 
 Shanghai Express ( 1932 ) as Hui Fei 
 A Study in Scarlet ( 1933 ) 
 Limehouse Blues ( 1934 ) as Tu Tuan 
 Dangerous to Know ( 1938 ) as Lan Ying 
 Island of Lost Men ( 1939 ) as Kim Ling 
 King of Chinatown ( 1939 ) as Dr. Mary Ling 
 Lady from Chungking ( 1942 ) as Kwan Mei 
 Bombs Over Burma ( 1943 ) as Lin Ying 
 Impact ( 1949 ) as Su Lin 
 Portrait in Black ( 1960 ) as Tawny 
 = Roman Catholicism in Nepal = 
 The Roman Catholic Church in Nepal is part of the worldwide Roman Catholic Church , under the spiritual leadership of the Pope in Rome . As of 2011 there are over 10 @,@ 000 Catholics in Nepal , organized into one Catholic jurisdiction known as an apostolic vicariate . 
 Catholicism was first propagated in Nepal during the 18th century , though from 1810 to 1950 no missionaries were allowed in Nepal . Since 1951 , missionaries have again been allowed , though conversion to Christianity is still illegal . In 1983 a mission sui iuris covering Nepal was created , and in 1996 it was raised to an Apostolic Prefecture . The 1990 Nepali constitution did not guarantee religious freedom for Christians , but as of May 2006 Nepal has been declared a secular state . The interim constitution , finalized in 2007 , guarantees some religious freedom but prohibits people from trying to convert others . On February 10 , 2007 , Benedict XVI elevated the prefecture of Nepal to the rank of a vicariate and appointed Anthony Francis Sharma as the first vicar and first Nepalese bishop of the Catholic Church . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The history of Catholicism in Nepal begins with its inclusion in the diocese of Funchal , Portugal , and in 1533 as part of the diocese of Goa . From then on until 1983 , it was a part of many different Indian dioceses . Apart from a short visit of Jesuit fathers Albert d 'Orville and Johann Gruber who spent the month of January 1662 in Kathmandu , missionaries settled in Nepal proper in 1715 , when Capuchin fathers entered the Kathmandu Valley at the invitation of the Malla Kings . Father Sharma Anthony Francis , who has headed the Catholic mission and then prefecture since 1983 , has stated , " The priests were given full authority to preach Christianity and even build a church , called Our Lady 's Assumption , somewhere in Lalitpur District " . Assumption was built in 1760 , and another church called Annunciation of Our Lady was built in Bhaktapur . After the unification of Nepal by Prithvi Narayan Shah into a Hindu kingdom , the priests were asked to leave for fear they were British spies . In 1769 the priests and many Nepalese Christians left for India and settled in <unk> , Northern Bihar , where they have remained . One Catholic priest did remain until his death in 1810 . After that , there was no Christian presence until 1950 . On May 19 , 1893 , the whole of Nepal was added to the Prefecture of Bettiah , India . It was then a part of the Patna , India apostolic vicariate from 1919 until the establishment of the mission covering only Nepal in 1983 . With the introduction of democracy in 1951 , Jesuit missionaries started educational institutions but were not allowed to evangelize . Saint Xavier 's School was established in 1951 . 
 = = = Mission Sui Iuris 1983 @-@ 1996 = = = 
 The Catholic Mission was established in 1983 with territory taken from Patna diocese in India and entrusted to the care of the Jesuits . The Apostolic Vicar , Anthony Sharma , spent Easter day in 1986 in a police station for preaching to non @-@ Christian relatives of some of the faithful attending church with them . Conversion to Christianity was forbidden by law , and was reiterated by the 1990 constitution that created a multi @-@ party democracy . Since 1990 , the law had not been enforced . In 1992 the Church of the Assumption , a new church built with its name hearkening back to the original Assumption church , was officially recognized . In 1996 the Mission was elevated to the rank of Apostolic Prefecture . 
 = = = Apostolic Prefecture 1996 @-@ 2007 = = = 
 Before King <unk> was stripped of his powers by the <unk> ( Nepalese parliament ) , there had been hope of official recognition by the state since the king was educated at a Catholic school ( St Joseph ' College , Darjeeling ) and was a pupil of the current Apostoli Vicar , Nepalese Jesuit Father Anthony Sharma . 
 In May 2006 , church leaders welcomed the parliamentary declaration that Nepal is now a " secular state , " a change from what had been the only officially Hindu country in the world . The first open air Christian musical program was hosted to celebrate the beginning of religious freedom for the first time in Nepal 's history . A convent was inaugurated along with a training center in western Nepal in June 2006 , a first for western Nepal . Six Nepalese youths went to World Youth Day 2005 in Cologne , Germany despite having a difficult time obtaining visas from German officials . In a display of inter @-@ religious cooperation , the Olympic torch was brought to the top of the sacred mountain of <unk> , having been blessed by both Pope Benedict XVI and the Dalai Lama . 
 On February 10 , 2007 , Pope Benedict XVI raised the status of the missionary jurisdiction to an apostolic vicariate . While remaining exempt ( directly subject to the Holy See , not part of any ecclesiastical province ) , the pre @-@ diocesan jurisdiction for Nepal is since entitled to a titular bishop . 
 = = = Apostolic Vicariate 2007 - Present = = = 
 At Nepal 's first Catholic church , the Church of the Assumption in Kathmandu , there are English masses said on Sundays . Catholic Relief Services conducts many programs in the country , including counteracting the trade in women and children and aiding those affected by floods and landslides . Caritas Nepal , in partnership with Caritas Australia , helped train 12 @,@ 000 Nepalese farmers to optimize their small land holdings . In 2007 , Nepal adopted an interim constitution . It guarantees each citizen the " right to profess , practise and preserve his / her own religion as handed down to him / her from ancient times " . However , it expressly forbids people to convert others to their religion . In 2009 three missions on the border with China were opened , and land was being acquired for more churches and for Catholic schools . A delegation was not sent to World Youth Day in 2008 or 2011 , but a group of 15 youths did attend with help from the Neo @-@ <unk> Way . Population estimates from 2011 show the number of Catholics exceeding 10 @,@ 000 . In 2011 the Nepal legislature proposed a series of laws making the changing of religions a crime Catholic groups and individuals raised the issue of Nepal 's anti @-@ conversion laws to the United Nations Human Rights Council during the January 2011 review cycle . The Church in Nepal provides assistance to the 35 @,@ 000 Bhutanese refugees in eastern Nepal . 
 = = Diplomatic relations = = 
 At the ambassadorial level , Nepal has exchanged diplomatic representations with the Vatican . The Holy See traditionally vests the office of Apostolic nuncio to Nepal in the Apostolic nunciature to India . 
 = = Persecution = = 
 Maoist rebels have targeted Catholic institutions in recent years , such as their torching of two Catholic schools in 2002 in the Gurkha region . A mission in Eastern Nepal was subject to attack by Maoist insurgents in 2003 , destroying a residence , clinic , chapel , kindergarten and kitchens . In July 2007 , Father John Prakash , rector of the Salesian School , was murdered by people thought to be connected to the Nepal Defence Army During Maoist attempts to call a national school strike , they attacked a small Catholic school in mid @-@ western Nepal with a bomb . In May 2009 a group called the Nepal Defence Army bombed Assumption Church in Kathmandu during a prayer service , killing three people . The church was also blackmailed for money in August 2012 by someone claiming to be a member of the group . 
 = Battle of Blandford = 
 The Battle of Blandford ( or Blanford ) , also called the Battle of Petersburg , took place near Petersburg , Virginia on 25 April 1781 , late in the American War of Independence . Roughly 2 @,@ 300 British regulars under the command of Brigadier General William Phillips defeated about 1 @,@ 000 militia under Major General Baron von Steuben . 
 The introduction of a British troop presence led by turncoat general Benedict Arnold into Virginia in early 1781 prompted an increase in militia activity to counter the British force . The militia were , however , poorly trained and equipped , and were unable to prevent Arnold from moving freely . Arnold was reinforced in March 1781 by additional troops led by General Phillips , who targeted Petersburg in a raiding expedition . Militia forces led by von Steuben and Peter Muhlenberg decided to make a stand at Blandford , then a separate community . 
 When the battle was joined , the outnumbered militia provided remarkably stiff resistance to the British advance , and executed a disciplined retreat across the Appomattox River , avoiding a flanking attempt led by John Graves Simcoe . They eventually retreated to Richmond , where they joined forces with Continental Army troops led by the Marquis de Lafayette . The British continued raiding , and eventually joined forces with Charles Cornwallis 's army from North Carolina . 
 = = Background = = 
 By December 1780 , the American Revolutionary War 's North American main theaters had reached a critical point . The Continental Army had suffered major defeats earlier in the year , with its southern armies either captured or dispersed in the loss of Charleston and the Battle of Camden in the south , while the armies of George Washington and the British commander @-@ in @-@ chief for North America , Sir Henry Clinton watched each other around New York City in the north . The national currency was virtually worthless , public support for the war , about to enter its sixth year , was waning , and army troops were becoming mutinous over pay and conditions . In the Americans ' favor , Loyalist recruiting had been checked with a severe blow at Kings Mountain in October . 
 To counter the British threat in the south , Washington sent Major General Nathanael Greene , one of his best strategists , to rebuild the American army in North Carolina after the defeat at Camden . Charles Cornwallis , leading the British troops in the south , wanted to deal with him and gain control over the state . 
 = = = Arnold sent to Virginia = = = 
 At Cornwallis 's request for a diversion in Virginia to draw attention and resources from Greene , General Clinton in December 1780 despatched Brigadier General Benedict Arnold ( who had changed sides the previous September ) with 1 @,@ 600 men to Virginia . Arnold 's instructions were to destroy Continental Army supplies and storage depots in that state , which had largely avoided military conflict before 1780 , and then to establish a base for future operations at Portsmouth . On the afternoon of 4 January , Arnold sailed up the James River and landed his force at Westover , Virginia . Moving rapidly with an overnight forced march , he raided Richmond , the state capital , the next day . After another day of raiding , he returned to his boats and sailed to Portsmouth , which he then proceeded to fortify . The land approaches to this base were guarded by Virginia militia under the command of Brigadier General Peter Muhlenberg , but these were inexperienced as well as relatively small in number , and could not prevent the movement of British troops by ship on the readily navigable rivers in the area . 
 Arnold 's arrival prompted General Washington to mobilize land and naval forces to challenge him . Washington sent the Marquis de Lafayette with a Continental Army detachment to Virginia in February , and asked the French admiral at Newport , Rhode Island , Charles René Dominique <unk> , Chevalier Destouches , to send a naval force with addition troops to support Lafayette . When a storm in late January caused damage to the Royal Navy fleet watching Newport , Destouches slipped a ship of the line and two frigates out of Newport while Lafayette marched south . When these arrived near Portsmouth , Arnold withdrew his ships , which were lighter vessels with shallow drafts , up the Elizabeth River , and the French fleet , with its deeper drafts , was unable to follow . The French returned to Newport , but the effort , and further urging by Washington , prompted Destouches to sally out of Newport on 8 March with his entire fleet , seven ships of the line and a recently captured frigate , with 1 @,@ 200 French troops aboard . When Clinton and Admiral Marriot Arbuthnot learned of this two days later , they immediately mobilized supporting resources . Arbuthnot sailed with eight ships of the line that very day , and , in naval action on 16 March , successfully prevented Destouches from entering Chesapeake Bay . Arbuthnot 's fleet was followed by transports carrying 2 @,@ 000 British Army troops under the command of General William Phillips . When Phillips and his troops were landed at Portsmouth on 26 March , Phillips , with seniority over Arnold , took command of the forces there . 
 = = = Raiding by Phillips = = = 
 Phillips then advanced again against the largely undefended countryside . A militia force under Major General Baron von Steuben tried to check their progress and protect Richmond and Petersburg . Von Steuben could discern that , though the British might attack Richmond as before , they definitely considered Petersburg a prime objective , since it served as a military depot for both state and Continental forces . By 23 April , the British force had sailed up the James River to Westover ; it landed there to drive off about 500 militia , and reports to von Steuben claimed the force to number between 2 @,@ 500 and 3 @,@ 000 . 
 On 24 April , as the afternoon progressed , about 1 @,@ 000 of General Muhlenberg 's Virginia militia marched into Petersburg . Other militia units were also gathering . Lafayette 's force was still several days away , and another Continental Army force under General Anthony Wayne was even further off . Von Steuben and Muhlenberg , who had been avoiding conflict with the British due to their weak numbers and inexperienced troops , decided that it was time to make some sort of stand . The militia had not had any sort of victory since the British arrived in Virginia , and morale was quite low . After a council of war , they decided to establish a line in Blandford , then a separate town east of Petersburg and now a neighborhood within the city . When the time came , the colonists could retreat across the Appomattox River over the Pocahontas Bridge . That evening General von Steuben ordered Muhlenberg 's corps to the north side of the Appomattox onto the peninsula known as Pocahontas Island and onto the elevated ground overlooking the river . Then , during the moonless night , von Steuben and Muhlenberg moved their forces south of the river into Blandford . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Shortly before sunset on 24 April , Phillips landed a force of 2 @,@ 500 British and Hessian soldiers at City Point ( now Hopewell ) , 12 miles ( 19 km ) east of Petersburg . As morning dawned the next day , four regiments of Muhlenberg 's Virginia militia infantry formed two lines of defense and awaited the British force . The first line was composed of the regiments of Thomas Merriweather and John Dick , with Merriweather 's anchoring the left of the line at the river , and Dick 's the right , extending into the hills south of Blandford . The second line , which was to form the main line of defense after the first one fell back , consisted of Ralph Faulkner 's regiment on the left , and John Slaughter 's on the right . The line extended along what is today Madison Street in Petersburg , from a causeway and bridge across the Lieutenant Run , a creek separating Petersburg and Blandford . The line was positioned to maximize the exposure of British troops to gunfire as they approached . Von Steuben also placed one regiment on the north shore of the Appomattox River to guarding against the possibility that the British landed on that side of the river . He also positioned a small reserve force at the southern end of the Pocahontas Bridge , and Muhlenberg sent a company of Slaughter 's men down the north bank to provide advance warning as the British approached . 
 The British set out around 10 that morning , marching along the River Road toward Petersburg . Phillips ' command consisted of the 78th and 80th Regiments of Foot , John Graves Simcoe 's corps of Loyalist Queen 's Rangers , Arnold 's American Legion , a force of Hessian jägers , and two battalions of light infantry . Phillips had originally planned a circuitous route in order to go after military stores at the Prince George County courthouse , but reconnaissance reported these had already been removed by the Americans , so Phillips marched directly for Petersburg . Eleven lightly armed gunboats accompanied the force up the Appomattox , carrying men and supplies . 
 The battle was preceded by an exchange of fire between the British gunboats and the American advance reconnaissance . Around 2 : 00 pm Phillips halted his column , then about one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the American lines , and organized his forces for battle . On his right , Colonel Robert Abercrombie was to lead a battalion of light infantry and the company of 50 jägers along the river to drive the American left back to the Pocahontas Bridge . Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Dundas was to lead the 78th and 80th Foot to attempt a flanking maneuver against the American right , and Phillips held the second light infantry battalion and the Loyalist units of Simcoe and Arnold in reserve . He also held in reserve the four small guns the expedition had brought . 
 As the British forces advanced on the American line , Phillips and Abercrombie noticed that one enterprising company of Virginia militia had established a position on a hill that provided them with an excellent opportunity to enfilade the British line . Abercrombie sent the jägers to flush them out . The lines then closed , and the action became general . The first line of militia put up stiffer resistance than the British anticipated . The British artillery , and the strength of numbers that threatened to flank their position convinced the first militia line to retreat to the second after half an hour of resistance . Phillips also detached Simcoe and his rangers on a lengthy and roundabout flanking maneuver intended to prevent the Americans from retreating across the Pocahontas Bridge . While Simcoe moved , Phillips made two assaults on the second militia line , both of which were repulsed . It was not until the British artillery was in position to rake the American line more than an hour later that von Steuben finally ordered the retreat . The Americans were eventually able to make an orderly retreat across the bridge , covered by the men placed on the high ground above the far side of the bridge . The last companies across took up the bridge planking as they went , in order to delay pursuit ( an act which later earned them the praise of contemporaries such as Thomas Jefferson , General Nathanael Greene , and others ) . 
 Pausing on the heights near Violet Bank ( in present @-@ day Colonial Heights ) , the Americans engaged in an artillery duel with the British forces on the opposite bank , with further losses on both sides . After being replenished with a supply of rum , the weary militia then continued its northward retreat , reaching Chesterfield Courthouse the following day — just as the British force was crossing the Appomattox , destroying three more bridges behind them . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Phillips ' and Arnold 's pursuit of the retreating American militia continued to Manchester , just across the river from Richmond , which they reached on 29 April . However , they were unable to enter Richmond , as Lafayette had marched rapidly and occupied the city first . After destroying tobacco warehouses throughout Chesterfield County , the British sailed back down the James to Westover , while Lafayette advanced as far as Pocahontas . At Westover on 7 May , Phillips received orders to return to Petersburg and await Lord Cornwallis , who was moving north from Wilmington , North Carolina . Upon reaching Petersburg on 9 May , Phillips was greeted by a bombardment from Lafayette 's artillery positioned north of the river in what is now Colonial Heights . General Phillips contracted typhoid fever and died on 13 May , leaving Arnold temporarily in command of the British force . 
 Cornwallis reached Petersburg on 20 May , bringing the British force up to 5 @,@ 300 men . Shortly after , additional British reinforcements arrived from New York , raising his force to over 7 @,@ 000 men . Cornwallis ordered Arnold back to New York , and then fruitlessly chased Lafayette for a time through central Virginia before making his way back to Williamsburg . Cornwallis was eventually ordered to fortify Yorktown , where Lafayette , joined early in September by a French force from the West Indies , blockaded the land routes while the French fleet prevented the arrival of British relief fleets . With the arrival of George Washington and the Franco @-@ American army from the north , Cornwallis was besieged , and surrendered his army on 17 October 1781 . 
 Petersburg was once again a center of military activity during the American Civil War , when it was besieged for nine months in 1864 and 1865 . The role of Petersburg in this later conflict dominates commemorations of its military history . However , since 1992 , the city of Petersburg has sponsored an annual reenactment of this battle . 
 = Sonestown Covered Bridge = 
 The Sonestown Covered Bridge is a Burr arch truss covered bridge over Muncy Creek in Davidson Township , Sullivan County , in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania . Built c . 1850 , the bridge is 110 feet ( 34 m ) long , and was placed on the National Register of Historic Places ( NRHP ) in 1980 . The bridge is named for the nearby unincorporated village of Sonestown in Davidson Township , and is also known as the Davidson Covered Bridge . It was built to provide access to a gristmill , which operated until the early 20th century . 
 Pennsylvania had the first covered bridge in the United States and the most such bridges in the 19th , 20th , and 21st centuries . In most places in the state they were a transition between stone and metal bridges , with the roof and sides protecting the wooden structure from weather . The Sonestown bridge is a Burr arch truss type , with a load @-@ bearing arch sandwiching multiple vertical king posts , for strength and rigidity . The bridge construction is cruder than the other two surviving covered bridges in Sullivan County , with each Burr arch formed from six straight beams set at angles instead of a smooth curve . 
 The bridge was repaired c . 1969 , and after flood damage in 1996 , 2005 , and 2013 . It was also restored in 2001 . Despite the repairs and restoration , as of 2012 the bridge structure 's sufficiency rating on the National Bridge Inventory was only 19 @.@ 0 percent and its condition was deemed " Structurally deficient " ( the bridge was also closed in 2012 , awaiting repair ) . It is the shortest covered bridge in the county and as of 2015 is still in use , with average daily traffic of 50 vehicles in 2010 . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The covered bridge crosses Muncy Creek in Davidson Township on Champion Hill Road ( Township Road 310 ) , just east of U.S. Route 220 . The village of Sonestown is 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of the bridge on Route 220 and has given the Sonestown Covered Bridge its name . The bridge is also 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) east of the village of Muncy Valley along Route 220 . Its official name on the NRHP is Sonestown Covered Bridge . It is also known as the Davidson Covered Bridge , for its township . Sullivan County is located in north central Pennsylvania , about 123 miles ( 198 km ) northwest of Philadelphia and 195 miles ( 314 km ) east @-@ northeast of Pittsburgh . 
 The area that became Davidson Township was first settled in 1806 and was incorporated as a township in 1833 . Within the township , George Sones built a sawmill and founded the unincorporated village of Sonestown in 1843 . All of these events occurred before Sullivan County was formed from part of Lycoming County on March 14 , 1847 . The bridge was built in 1850 , and in the late 19th century Sonestown " boomed like crazy " as the lumber industry grew in Sullivan County . The village was then home to a plant that manufactured the staves for making barrels . It had a <unk> factory from 1903 to 1929 but lost almost all industry by the 1930s . As of 1996 , Sonestown had a population of about 200 , most of whom commuted to work in Muncy , Montoursville , and Williamsport . In 1996 the village had a few stores , an inn with a restaurant , and attracted tourists and hunters . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The first covered bridge in the United States was built in 1800 over the Schuylkill River in Philadelphia . According to Susan M. Zacher , author of The Covered Bridges of Pennsylvania : A Guide , the first covered bridges of the Burr arch truss design were also built in the state . Pennsylvania is estimated to have once had at least 1 @,@ 500 covered bridges and is believed to have had the most in the country between 1830 and 1875 . In 2001 , Pennsylvania had more surviving historic covered bridges than any other state , with 221 remaining in 40 of its 67 counties . 
 Covered bridges were a transition between stone and metal bridges , the latter made of cast @-@ iron or steel . In 19th @-@ century Pennsylvania , lumber was an abundant resource for bridge construction , but wood did not last long when exposed to the elements . The roof and enclosed sides of covered bridges protected the structural elements , allowing some of these bridges to survive for well over a century . A Burr arch truss consists of a load @-@ bearing arch sandwiching multiple king posts , resulting in a stronger and more rigid structure than one made of either element alone . Although there were 30 covered bridges in Sullivan County in 1890 , only five were left by 1954 , and as of 2015 only three remain : Forksville , Hillsgrove , and Sonestown . 
 = = = Construction and description = = = 
 All three Sullivan County covered bridges were built in or c . 1850 with Burr arch trusses . At the time of its construction , the Sonestown bridge was the fifth covered bridge in Sullivan County . The bridge crossed Muncy Creek to provide access to Johnny Hazen 's gristmill , which was also built in 1850 . Although most sources do not list the builder of the Sonestown bridge , two newspaper articles on the remaining Sullivan County covered bridges reported that Sadler Rodgers had designed or possibly built it as well . Rogers , a native of Forksville , built both the Forksville and Hillsgrove bridges in 1850 , when he was 18 years old . 
 On July 24 , 1980 , the Sonestown bridge was listed on the NRHP in a Multiple Property Submission of seven Covered Bridges of Bradford , Sullivan and Lycoming Counties . The Sonestown bridge is also on the 2012 National Bridge Inventory ( NBI ) , which lists the covered bridge as 110 feet ( 33 @.@ 5 m ) long , with a roadway 13 feet 6 inches ( 4 @.@ 11 m ) wide , and a maximum load of 5 @.@ 0 short tons ( 4 @.@ 5 t ) . However , the maximum load posted beside the bridge itself is only 3 @.@ 0 short tons ( 2 @.@ 7 t ) . According to the NRHP , the bridge 's " road surface width " is 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) , which is only sufficient for a single lane of traffic . 
 According to the NRHP form , the Sonestown bridge " is of lighter construction than similar bridges in south @-@ eastern Pennsylvania " . The covered bridge rests on abutments of stone and mortar , which have been reinforced with concrete . The portals are flanked by wing walls below the level of the road ; these extend out from the abutments at an angle and " retain the soil of the approach embankment " . 
 The bridge deck is made of wide boards laid perpendicular to the axis of the bridge , with two runners on top of the deck which run the length of the bridge . The Burr arches which support the bridge are cruder than those in the other two Sullivan County covered bridges ; they are not smooth " continuous arcs , but several straight segments joined at an angle " . The top of the Burr arch on the south ( downstream ) side of the bridge is noticeably lower than the top of the arch on the north ( upstream ) side . 
 Vertical boards cover the sides and portals of the bridge and are painted red . The bridge has a small window in the center of each side ( it had no windows before the 2013 restoration ) , and openings between the eaves and the siding which run the length of the bridge on both sides . The gable roof is covered with wooden shake shingles . A sign listing the vertical clearance as 10 feet 0 inches ( 3 @.@ 05 m ) is posted above each portal . The bridge has no steel reinforcements . 
 Attitudes towards covered bridges in Sullivan County changed considerably in the last half of the 20th century . Two of the five bridges that remained in 1954 were razed by 1970 , when the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation considered tearing down the Forksville bridge ( but renovated it because of its historic nature and appeal to tourists ) . The Hillsgrove Covered Bridge was added to the NRHP in 1973 , and the two other bridges were added in 1980 . The Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission requires its approval for renovation work on NRHP bridges in the state , and forbids the destruction of these bridges . 
 = = = Use and restoration = = = 
 In the 19th century the Sonestown Covered Bridge survived major floods on March 1 , 1865 and June 1 , 1889 , that destroyed other bridges in the West Branch Susquehanna River valley . The latter flood was caused by the same storm system that caused the Johnstown Flood , which killed over 2 @,@ 200 people . In 1885 , the Williamsport and North Branch Railroad line along Muncy Creek reached Sonestown , passing just east of the bridge . The railroad carried lumber , coal , and passengers until it closed in 1938 . 
 The covered bridge was built to provide access to a gristmill , and the 1915 state highway map of Sullivan County shows a mill just downstream of the bridge on the east bank of Muncy Creek . The 1941 map ( using data from 1939 ) no longer shows a water @-@ powered mill there , although it does show two buildings on the east bank of the creek , with one just upstream and one just downstream of the bridge . Both of these buildings had disappeared by 1999 . The NRHP form states that the bridge had been recently repaired in 1969 , and that additional maintenance work was needed . The repairs done at that time included replacing some of the siding panels , reinforcing the abutments with concrete , and " very minor addition of steel to the truss structure " . 
 In January 1996 , there was major flooding throughout Pennsylvania . A blizzard from January 6 – 8 produced up to 40 inches ( 100 cm ) of snow , which was followed on January 19 – 21 by more than 3 inches ( 76 mm ) of rain with temperatures as high as 62 ° F ( 17 ° C ) and winds up to 38 miles per hour ( 61 km / h ) . The rain and snowmelt caused flooding throughout Pennsylvania , and ice jams made the flooding worse on many streams . In neighboring Lycoming County , flooding on Lycoming Creek in and near Williamsport killed six and caused millions of dollars in damage , and an ice jam on Plunketts Creek destroyed a mid @-@ 19th century stone arch bridge which was also on the NRHP . 
 The pressure of the flood on the Sonestown Covered Bridge moved the center of the structure almost 1 foot ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) downstream . This and other major damage closed the bridge from January until late December , 1996 . It was one of 69 publicly owned bridges in Pennsylvania destroyed or closed by the flooding . Sullivan County owns the bridge and paid for its repair , which was mandated by the state since it is listed on the NRHP . The original bid was for $ 93 @,@ 000 , and the repair was done by Lycoming Supply Inc. of Williamsport for $ 89 @,@ 000 over 60 days between mid @-@ November and Christmas . The bridge 's closure caused a 5 @-@ mile ( 8 km ) detour for those who normally used the bridge to reach their homes and businesses . 
 Even after the repair was completed , vehicles that were heavier or larger than the bridge ’ s original limits could not use it . Since beer trucks could not cross it , deliveries to the American Legion Post southeast of the bridge were made with a hand cart instead . On November 12 , 2000 , a new " Veterans Memorial Bridge " just downstream of the covered bridge was dedicated . The new bridge is also part of Champion Hill Road ( Township Road 310 ) , and allows all vehicles to cross Muncy Creek . 
 According to NBI data , the covered bridge was restored in 2001 . In September 2004 , flooding from Hurricane Ivan followed by heavy rains in April 2005 made a hole in one of the covered bridge 's abutments and weakened a structural support . Repair work took six weeks and was done by mid @-@ August 2005 . August of that same year saw placement of riprap and fill in the creek to further protect the abutments , with the work done by <unk> 's Drilling and Concrete of <unk> for $ 9 @,@ 250 . Erosion in September 2004 had destroyed a house 200 feet ( 61 m ) upstream of the bridge , so the Sullivan County Commissioners planned additional work to stabilize the creek bed and prevent further erosion damage . The work , on private property and requiring permission from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection , was done in the summer of 2006 . 
 The NRHP form describes the bridge 's condition as " fair " in 1969 and " good " in 1980 . Zacher 's 1994 book and the Evans 2001 book also listed it as in " good " condition . Despite this and the repairs and restoration , the 2006 Federal Highway Administration National Bridge Inventory found the sufficiency rating of the bridge structure to be only 18 @.@ 6 percent . It found that the bridge 's foundations were stable for scour conditions ( the potential for the stream washing them out ) , but that the railing " does not meet currently acceptable standards " . Its overall condition was deemed " basically intolerable requiring high priority of corrective action " , with an estimated cost to improve the bridge of $ 108 @,@ 000 . 
 In 1996 there was a tradition of decorating and lighting the Sonestown bridge for Christmas . The average daily traffic on the bridge was 50 vehicles in 2006 . As of 2016 , it was still used and was the only remaining covered bridge over Muncy Creek , although the Muncy Creek watershed also had the Lairdsville Covered Bridge , which spanned Little Muncy Creek in Lycoming County . According to Zacher , the " Sullivan County bridges , because of their settings , are some of the most attractive in the state " . 
 The bridge was damaged when Muncy Creek flooded from over 12 inches ( 300 mm ) of rainfall caused by Tropical Storm Lee on September 7 , 2011 . 
 = = Dimensions = = 
 The following table is a comparison of published measurements of length , width and load recorded in different sources using different methods , as well as the name or names cited . The NBI measures bridge length between the " backwalls of abutments " or the pavement grooves at the opposite ends of the bridge . It defines the roadway width as " the most restrictive minimum distance between curbs or rails " . The NRHP form was prepared by the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission ( PHMC ) , which surveyed county engineers , historical and covered bridge societies , and others for all the covered bridges in the commonwealth . The Evans visited every covered bridge in Pennsylvania in 2001 and measured each bridge 's length ( portal to portal ) and width ( at the portal ) for their book . The data in Zacher 's book was based on a 1991 survey of all covered bridges in Pennsylvania by the PHMC and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation , aided by local government and private agencies . The article uses primarily the NBI and NRHP data , as they are national programs . 
 = Lauryn Hill = 
 Lauryn Hill ( born May 26 , 1975 ) is an American singer , songwriter , rapper , record producer , and actress . She is best known for being a member of the Fugees and for her critically acclaimed solo album The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill , which won numerous awards , broke several sales records and was listed by Rolling Stone as one of the greatest albums of all time . 
 Raised mostly in South Orange , New Jersey , Hill began singing with her music @-@ oriented family during her childhood . She enjoyed success as an actress at an early age , with her older brother Graham Hill , appearing in a recurring role on the television soap opera As the World Turns and starring in the 1993 film Sister Act 2 : Back in the Habit . In high school , Hill was approached by Pras Michel to start a band , which his cousin , Wyclef Jean , soon joined . They renamed themselves the Fugees and released the albums Blunted on Reality ( 1994 ) and the Grammy Award @-@ winning The Score ( 1996 ) . In the latter record , which sold six million copies in the United States , Hill rose to prominence with her African @-@ American and Caribbean music influences , her rapping and singing , and her rendition of the hit " Killing Me Softly " . Hill 's tumultuous romantic relationship with Jean led to the split of the band in 1997 , after which she began to focus on solo projects . 
 The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill ( 1998 ) remains Hill 's only solo studio album . It received massive critical acclaim , showcasing a representation of life and relationships and locating a contemporary womanist voice within the neo soul genre . The album debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200 and has sold approximately eight million copies there . It included the singles " Doo Wop ( That Thing ) " ( also a number one ) , " Ex @-@ Factor " , and " Everything Is Everything " . At the 41st Grammy Awards , the record earned her five awards , including Album of the Year and Best New Artist . During this time she won numerous other awards and became a common sight on the cover of magazines . 
 Soon afterward , Hill dropped out of the public eye , dissatisfied with the music industry and suffering with the pressures of fame . Her last full @-@ length recording , the new @-@ material live album MTV Unplugged No. 2 @.@ 0 ( 2002 ) , sharply divided critics and sold poorly compared to her first album and work with the Fugees . Hill 's subsequent activity , which includes the release of a few songs and occasional festival appearances , has been sporadic and erratic . Her behavior has sometimes caused audience dissatisfaction ; a reunion with her former group did not last long . Her music , as well as a series of public statements she has issued , have become critical of pop culture and societal institutions . Hill has six children , five of whom are with Rohan Marley , son of reggae legend Bob Marley . In 2012 , she pleaded guilty to tax evasion for failure to pay federal income taxes , and in 2013 , served a three @-@ month prison sentence . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = 1975 – 93 : Early life and career beginnings = = = 
 Lauryn Hill was born on May 26 , 1975 , in East Orange , New Jersey to English teacher Valerie Hill and computer and management consultant Mal Hill . She has one older brother named <unk> ( born 1972 ) . Her Baptist family moved to New York and Newark for short periods until settling in South Orange , New Jersey . She had a middle @-@ class upbringing , knowing both many white Jewish families and many black ones . Future actor Zach Braff lived in the neighborhood , and she attended his Bar Mitzvah . 
 Hill has said of her musically oriented family : " there were so many records , so much music constantly being played . My mother played piano , my father sang , and we were always surrounded in music . " Her father sang in local nightclubs and at weddings . While growing up , Hill frequently listened to Curtis Mayfield , Stevie Wonder , Aretha Franklin , and Gladys Knight ; years later she recalled playing Marvin Gaye 's What 's Going On repeatedly until she fell asleep to it . 
 In middle school , Hill performed " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " before a basketball game . Due to its popularity , subsequent games featured a recording of her rendition . In 1988 , Hill appeared as an Amateur Night contestant on It 's Showtime at the Apollo . She sang her own version of the Smokey Robinson track " Who 's Lovin ' You ? " , garnering an initially harsh reaction from the crowd . She persevered , though she later cried off @-@ stage . 
 Hill attended Columbia High School , where she was a member of the track team , a cheerleader and was a classmate of Zach Braff . She also took violin lessons , went to dance class , and founded the school 's gospel choir . Academically , she took advanced placement classes and received primarily ' A ' grades . School officials recognized her as a leader among the student body . Later recalling her education , Hill commented , " I had a love for – I don 't know if it was necessarily for academics , more than it just was for achieving , period . If it was academics , if it was sports , if it was music , if it was dance , whatever it was , I was always driven to do a lot in whatever field or whatever area I was focusing on at the moment . " 
 While a freshman in high school , through mutual friends , <unk> " Pras " Michel approached Hill about a music group he was creating . Hill and Pras began under the name <unk> Crew , chosen because they wanted to rhyme in different languages . Another female vocalist was soon replaced by Michel 's cousin , multi @-@ instrumentalist Wyclef Jean . The group began performing in local showcases and high school talent shows . Hill was initially only a singer , but then learned to rap too ; instead of modeling herself on female rappers like Salt @-@ n @-@ Pepa and MC Lyte , she preferred male rappers like Ice Cube and developed her flow from listening to them . Hill later said , " I remember doing my homework in the bathroom stalls of hip @-@ hop clubs . " 
 Hill took acting lessons in Manhattan while growing up . She began her acting career in 1991 , appearing with Jean in Club XII , MC Lyte 's Off @-@ Broadway hip @-@ hop rendering of Shakespeare 's Twelfth Night . While the play was not a success , an agent noticed her . Later that year , Hill began appearing on the soap opera As the World Turns in a recurring role as troubled teenager Kira Johnson . She subsequently co @-@ starred alongside Whoopi Goldberg in the 1993 release Sister Act 2 : Back in the Habit , playing Rita Louise Watson , an inner @-@ city Catholic school teenager with a surly , rebellious attitude . In it , she performed the songs " His Eye Is on the Sparrow " ( a duet with Tanya Blount ) and " Joyful , Joyful " . Director Bill Duke credited Hill with improvising a rap in a scene : " None of that was scripted . That was all Lauryn . She was amazing . " Critic Roger Ebert called her " the girl with the big joyful voice " , although he thought her talent was wasted , while Rolling Stone said she " performed marvelously against type ... in the otherwise perfunctory [ film ] . " Hill also appeared in Steven Soderbergh 's 1993 motion picture King of the Hill , in a minor but pivotal role as a 1930s gum @-@ popping elevator operator . Soderbergh biographer Jason Wood described her as supplying one of the warmest scenes in the film . Hill graduated from Columbia High School in 1993 . 
 = = = 1994 – 96 : The Fugees = = = 
 Pras , Hill and Jean renamed their group the Fugees , a derivative of the word " refugee " , which was a derogatory term for Haitian Americans . Hill began a romantic relationship with Jean . The Fugees , who signed a contract with Columbia / Ruffhouse Records in 1993 , became known for their genre blending , particularly of reggae , rock and soul , which was first experimented on their debut album , Blunted on Reality , released in 1994 . It reached number 62 on the Billboard Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart but overall sold poorly and was met by poor critical notices due to being a ( management @-@ forced ) attempt at gangsta rap attitudes . Although the album made little impact , Hill 's rapping on " Some Seek Stardom " was seen as a highlight . Within the group , she was frequently referred to by the nickname " L. Boogie " . Hill 's image and artistry , as well as her full , rich , raspy alto voice , placed her at the forefront of the band , with some fans urging her to begin a solo career . 
 The Fugees ' second album , The Score ( 1996 ) , peaked at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200 and stayed in the top ten of that chart for over half a year . It sold about six million copies in the United States and more than 17 million copies worldwide . In the 1996 Pazz & Jop Critics Poll , The Score came second in the list of best albums and three of its tracks placed within the top twenty best singles . It won the Grammy Award for Best Rap Album , and was later included on Rolling Stone 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . Almost all of the writing and producing for it was done by Jean . The Score garnered praise for being a strong alternative to the gangsta idiom , and Hill stated , " We 're trying to do something positive with the music because it seems like only the negative is rising to the top these days . It only takes a drop of purity to clean a cesspool . " 
 Singles from The Score included " Fu @-@ Gee @-@ La " and " Ready or Not " , which highlighted Hill 's singing and rapping abilities , and " No Woman , No Cry " . Her rendition of " Killing Me Softly " became her breakout hit . <unk> by what Rolling Stone publications later called Hill 's " evocative " vocal line and her " amazing pipes " , the track became pervasive on pop , R & B , hip hop , and adult contemporary radio formats . It won the Grammy Award for Best R & B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals . On the album , Hill combined African @-@ American music and Caribbean music influences with socially conscious lyrics . Newsweek mentioned Hill 's " irresistibly cute looks " and proclaimed her " the most powerful new voice in rap . " 
 At 21 years old , the now @-@ famous Hill was still living at home with her parents . She had been enrolled at Columbia University during this period , and considered majoring in history as she became a sophomore , but left after about a year of total studies once sales of The Score went into the millions . In 1996 , Hill responded to a false rumor on The Howard Stern Show that she had made a racist comment on MTV , saying " How can I possibly be a racist ? My music is universal music . And I believe in God . If I believe in God , then I have to love all of God 's creations . There can be no segregation . " 
 In 1996 , Hill founded the Refugee Project , a non @-@ profit outreach organization that sought to transform the attitudes and behavior of at @-@ risk urban youth . Part of this was Camp Hill , which offered stays in the Catskill Mountains for such youngsters ; another was production of an annual Halloween haunted house in East Orange . Hill also raised money for Haitian refugees , supported clean water well @-@ building projects in Kenya and Uganda , and staged a rap concert in Harlem to promote voter registration . A 1997 benefit event for the Refugee Project introduced a Board of Trustees for the organization that included Sean Combs , Mariah Carey , Busta Rhymes , Spike Lee , and others as members . 
 In 1997 , the Fugees split to work on solo projects , which Jean later blamed on his tumultuous relationship with Hill and the fact he married his wife <unk> while still involved with Hill . Meanwhile , in the summer of 1996 Hill had met Rohan Marley , a son of the late reggae legend Bob Marley and a former University of Miami football player . Hill subsequently began a relationship with him , while still also involved with Jean . Hill became pregnant , and in August 1997 , Marley and Hill 's first child , Zion David , was born . The couple lived in Hill 's childhood house in South Orange after she bought her parents a new house down the street . 
 Hill had a cameo appearance in the 1997 film <unk> Plenty . In 1998 , Hill took up another small but important role in the film Restaurant ; Entertainment Weekly praised her portrayal of the protagonist 's pregnant former girlfriend as bringing vigor to the film . 
 = = = 1997 – 99 : The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill = = = 
 Hill recorded her solo record The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill from late 1997 through June 1998 at Tuff Gong Studios in Jamaica . The title was inspired by The Mis @-@ Education of the Negro book by Carter G. Woodson and The Education of Sonny Carson , a film and autobiographical novel . The album featured contributions from D 'Angelo , Carlos Santana , Mary J. Blige and the then @-@ unknown John Legend . Wyclef Jean initially did not support Hill recording a solo album , but eventually offered his production help ; Hill turned him down . Several songs on the album concerned her frustration with The Fugees ; " I Used to Love Him " dealt with the breakdown of the relationship between Hill and Wyclef Jean . Other songs such as " To Zion " spoke about her decision to have her first baby , even though many at the time encouraged her to have an abortion so to not interfere with her blossoming career . Indeed , Hill 's pregnancy revived her from a period of writer 's block . 
 In terms of production , Hill collaborated with a group of musicians known as New Ark , consisting of Vada Nobles , <unk> Pugh , <unk> Newton , and Johari Newton . Hill later said that she wanted to " write songs that lyrically move me and have the integrity of reggae and the knock of hip @-@ hop and the instrumentation of classic soul " and that the production on the album was intended to make the music sound raw and not computer @-@ aided . Hill spoke of pressure from her label to emulate Prince , wherein all tracks would be credited as written and produced by the artist with little outside help . She also wanted to be appreciated as an auteur as much as Jean had within the Fugees . ( She also saw a feminist cause : " But step out and try and control things and there are doubts . This is a very sexist industry . They 'll never throw the ' genius ' title to a sister . " ) While recording the album , when Hill was asked about providing contracts or documentation to the musicians , she replied , " We all love each other . This ain 't about documents . This is blessed . " 
 Released on August 25 , 1998 , the album received rave reviews from contemporary music critics , and was the most acclaimed album of 1998 . Critics lauded the album 's blending of the R & B , doo @-@ wop , pop , hip @-@ hop , and reggae genres and its honest representation of a woman 's life and relationships . David Browne , writing in Entertainment Weekly , called it " an album of often @-@ astonishing power , strength , and feeling " , and praised Hill for " easily flowing from singing to rapping , evoking the past while forging a future of her own " . Robert Christgau quipped , " PC record of the year — songs soft , singing ordinary , rapping skilled , rhymes up and down , skits de trop , production subtle and terrific " . It sold over 423 @,@ 000 copies in its first week ( boosted by advance radio play of two non @-@ label @-@ sanctioned singles , " Lost Ones " and " Can 't Take My Eyes Off You " ) and topped the Billboard 200 for four weeks and the Billboard R & B Albums chart for six weeks . It went on to sell about 8 million copies in the U.S. and 12 million copies worldwide . During 1998 and 1999 , Hill earned $ 25 million from record sales and touring . Hill , along with Blige , Missy Elliott , Meshell Ndegeocello , Erykah Badu , and others , found a feminist voice with the neo soul genre . 
 The first single released from the album was " Lost Ones " , which reached number 27 in Spring 1998 . The second was " Doo Wop ( That Thing ) " , which debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . It exemplified Hill 's appeal , combining feelings of self @-@ empowerment with self @-@ defense . Other charted singles from the album were " Ex @-@ Factor " , " Everything Is Everything " and " To Zion " . In the 1998 Pazz & Jop Critics Poll , Miseducation came second in the list of best albums and " Doo Wop ( That Thing ) " second in best singles . 
 In November 1998 , Marley and Hill 's second child , Selah Louise , was born . Of being a young mother of two , Hill said , " It 's not an easy situation at all . You have to really pray and be honest with yourself . " 
 In the run @-@ up to the 1999 Grammy Awards , Hill became the first woman to be nominated in ten categories in a single year . In addition to Miseducation works , the nominations included her rendition of " Can 't Take My Eyes Off You " for the 1997 film Conspiracy Theory , which had appeared on Billboard charts , and Hill 's writing and producing of " A Rose Is Still a Rose " , which became a late @-@ in @-@ career hit for Aretha Franklin . She appeared on several magazine covers , including Time , Esquire , Rolling Stone , Teen People and The New York Times Fashion Magazine . During the ceremony , Hill broke another record by becoming the first woman to win five times in one night , taking home the awards for Album of the Year , Best R & B Album , Best R & B Song , Best Female R & B Vocal Performance , and Best New Artist . During an acceptance speech , she said , " This is crazy . This is hip @-@ hop ! " Hill had brought forth a new , mainstream acceptance of the genre and led to Hill becoming known as one of the Queens of Hip Hop . 
 In February 1999 , Hill received four awards at the 30th Annual NAACP Image Awards . In May 1999 , she became the youngest woman ever named to Ebony magazine 's 100 + Most Influential Black Americans list ; in November of that year , the same publication named her as one of " 10 For Tomorrow " in the " Ebony 2000 : Special Millennium Issue " . In May 1999 , she made People magazine 's 50 Most Beautiful People list . The publication , which has called her " model @-@ gorgeous " , praised the 5 @-@ foot @-@ 4 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 63 m ) Hill for her idiosyncratic sense of personal style . In June 1999 , she received an Essence Award , but her acceptance speech , where she said there was no contradiction in religious love and servitude and " [ being ] who you are , as fly and as hot and as whatever , " drew reaction from those in the public who thought she was not a good role model as a young , unwed mother of two . This was a repetition of criticism she had received after the birth of her first child , and she had said that she and Marley would soon be married . In early 2000 , Hill was one of many artists and producers to share the Grammy Award for Album of the Year for Santana 's 1999 multi @-@ million selling Supernatural , which she had written , produced , and rapped on the track " Do You Like the Way " for ( a rumination on the direction the world was headed , it also featured the singing of CeeLo Green and the signature guitar runs of Carlos Santana ) . She was also nominated for Best R & B Song for " All That I Can Say " , which she had written and produced for Mary J. Blige . Also , her concocted duet with Bob Marley on " Turn Your Lights Down Low " for the 1999 remix tribute album Chant Down Babylon additionally appeared in the 1999 film The Best Man and later received a Grammy nomination for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals . 
 In November 1998 , New Ark filed a fifty @-@ page lawsuit against Hill , her management , also her record label , claiming that Hill " used their songs and production skills , but failed to properly credit them for the work " on Miseducation . The musicians claimed to be the primary songwriters on two tracks , and major contributors on several others , though Gordon Williams , a prominent recorder , engineer , and mixer on Miseducation , described the album as a " powerfully personal effort by Hill " and said " It was definitely her vision . " Hill responded that New Ark had been appropriately credited and now were seeking to take advantage of her success . New Ark requested partial writing credits on most of the tracks on the album as well as monetary reimbursement . After many delays , depositions took place during the latter part of 2000 . In part , the case illustrated the difficult boundaries between songwriting and all other aspects that went into contemporary arranging , sampling , and recording . The suit would eventually be settled out of court in February 2001 , with Hill paying New Ark a reported $ 5 million . A friend of Hill 's later said of the suit , " That was the beginning of a chain effect that would turn everything a little crazy . " 
 = = = 2000 – 03 : Self @-@ imposed exile and MTV Unplugged No. 2 @.@ 0 = = = 
 Hill began writing a screenplay about the life of Bob Marley , in which she planned to act as his wife Rita . She also began producing a romantic comedy about soul food with a working title of Sauce , and accepted a starring role in the film adaptation of Toni Morrison 's novel Beloved ; she later dropped out of both projects due to pregnancy . She also reportedly turned down roles in Charlie 's Angels ( the part that went to Lucy Liu ) , The Bourne Identity , The Mexican , The Matrix Reloaded and The Matrix Revolutions . 
 During 2000 , Hill dropped out of the public eye . The pressures of fame began to overwhelm her . She disliked not being able to go out of her house to do simple errands without having to worry about her physical appearance . She fired her management team and began attending Bible study classes five days a week ; she also stopped doing interviews , watching television and listening to music . She started associating with a " spiritual advisor " named Brother Anthony . Some familiar with Hill believe Anthony more resembled a cult leader than a spiritual advisor , and thought his guidance probably inspired much of Hill 's more controversial public behavior . 
 She later described this period of her life to Essence saying " People need to understand that the Lauryn Hill they were exposed to in the beginning was all that was allowed in that arena at that time … I had to step away when I realized that for the sake of the machine , I was being way too compromised . I felt uncomfortable about having to smile in someone 's face when I really didn 't like them or even know them well enough to like them . " She also spoke about her emotional crisis , saying , " For two or three years I was away from all social interaction . It was a very introspective time because I had to confront my fears and master every demonic thought about inferiority , about insecurity or the fear of being black , young and gifted in this western culture . " She went on to say that she had to fight to retain her identity , and was forced " to deal with folks who weren 't happy about that . " 
 In July 2001 , while pregnant with her third child , Hill unveiled her new material to a small crowd , for a taping of an MTV Unplugged special . An album of the concert , titled MTV Unplugged No. 2 @.@ 0 , was released in May 2002 and featured only her singing and playing an acoustic guitar . Unlike the near @-@ unanimous praise of Miseducation , 2 @.@ 0 sharply divided critics . AllMusic gave the album 4 out of 5 stars , saying that the recording " is the unfinished , unflinching presentation of ideas and of a person . It may not be a proper follow @-@ up to her first album , but it is fascinating . " Rolling Stone called the album " a public breakdown " and Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times said the album 's title opened Hill up for jokes that she had become unhinged . NME wrote that " Unplugged 2 @.@ 0 is a sparse and often gruelling listen , but there is enough genius shading these rough sketches to suggest that all might not yet be lost . " With the mixed reviews and no significant radio airplay , 2 @.@ 0 debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 , but then quickly fell down the charts and ended up selling less than 500 @,@ 000 copies in the U.S. Neither the album nor its songs placed in the 2002 Pazz & Jop Critics Poll . Her song " Mystery of Iniquity " was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Female Rap Solo Performance and used as an interpolation by hip @-@ hop producer / songwriter Kanye West for his single " All Falls Down " , as sung by Syleena Johnson . 
 Around 2001 , Marley and Hill 's third child , Joshua <unk> , was born . He was followed a year later by their fourth , John Nesta . While Hill sometimes had spoken of Marley as her husband , they never married , and along the way she was informed that Marley had been previously married at a young age . Furthermore , according to a 2003 Rolling Stone report , he had never secured a divorce ; but Marley later disputed this and made public to a blog a 1996 divorce document from Haiti . The two had been living in a high @-@ end Miami hotel , but around 2003 she moved out into her own place in that city . Hill later said that she and Marley " have had long periods of separation over the years " . Hill slowly worked on a new album and it was reported that by 2003 , Columbia Records had spent more than $ 2 @.@ 5 million funding it , including installing a recording studio in the singer 's Miami apartment and flying different musicians around the country . 
 By 2002 , Hill had shut down her non @-@ profit Refugee Project . She said , " I had a nonprofit organization and I had to shut all that down . You know , smiling with big checks , obligatory things , not having things come from a place of passion . That 's slavery . Everything we do should be a result of our gratitude for what God has done for us . It should be passionate . " 
 In December 2003 , Hill , during a performance in Vatican City , spoke of the " corruption , exploitation , and abuses " in reference to the molestation of boys by Catholic priests in the United States and the cover @-@ up of offenses by Catholic Church officials . High @-@ ranking church officials were in attendance , but Pope John Paul II was not present . The Catholic League called Hill " pathologically miserable " and claimed her career was " in decline " . The following day , several reporters suggested that Hill 's comments at the Vatican may have been influenced by her spiritual advisor , Brother Anthony . 
 = = = 2004 – 09 : Sporadic touring and recording = = = 
 In 2004 , Hill contributed a new song , " The Passion " , to The Passion of the Christ : Songs . A remix version with John Legend of his " So High " ended up receiving a Grammy Award nomination for Best R & B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals . Around this time , Hill began selling a pay @-@ per @-@ view music video of the song " Social Drugs " through her website . Those who purchase the $ 15 video would only be able to view it three times before it expired . In addition to the video , Hill began selling autographed posters and Polaroids through her website , with some items listed at upwards of $ 500 . 
 For the first time since 1997 , the Fugees performed in September 2004 at Dave Chappelle 's Block Party in the Bedford @-@ Stuyvesant neighborhood of Brooklyn . The concert featured Hill 's nearly a cappella rendition of " Killing Me Softly " . The event was recorded by director Michel Gondry and was released on March 3 , 2006 , to universal acclaim . The Fugees also appeared at BET Awards 2005 during June 2005 , where they opened the show with a 12 @-@ minute set . One track , " Take It Easy " , was leaked online and thereafter was released as an Internet single in late September . It peaked at number forty on the Billboard R & B Chart . In 2005 , she told USA Today , " If I make music now , it will only be to provide information to my own children . If other people benefit from it , then so be it . " When asked how she now felt about the songs on 2 @.@ 0 , she stated " a lot of the songs were transitional . The music was about how I was feeling at the time , even though I was documenting my distress as well as my bursts of joy . " 
 The Fugees embarked on a European tour in late 2005 . Old tensions between Hill and the other members of the group soon resurfaced , and the reunion ended before an album could be recorded ; Jean and Michel both blamed Hill for the split . Hill reportedly demanded to be addressed by everyone , including her bandmates , as " Ms. Hill " ; she also considered changing her moniker to " Empress " . Hill 's tardiness was also cited as a contributing factor . 
 Hill began touring on her own , although to mixed reviews ; often arriving late to concerts ( sometimes by over two hours ) , performing unpopular reconfigurations of her songs and sporting an exaggerated appearance . On some occasions , fans have booed her and left early . In June 2007 , Sony Records said Hill had been recording through the past decade , had accumulated considerable unreleased material and had re @-@ entered the studio with the goal of making a new album . Later that same year , an album titled Ms. Hill , which featured cuts from Miseducation , various soundtracks contributions and other " unreleased " songs , was released . It features guest appearances from D 'Angelo , Rah <unk> and John Forté . Also in June 2007 , Hill released a new song , " Lose Myself " , on the soundtrack to the film Surf 's Up . 
 In early 2008 , Marley and Hill 's fifth child , Sarah , was born . The couple was not living together , although Marley considered them " spiritually together " even while listing himself as single on social media . Hill later said that she and Marley " have [ had ] a long and complex history about which many inaccuracies have been reported since the beginning " and that they both valued their privacy . By August 2008 , Hill was living with her mother and children in her hometown of South Orange , New Jersey . 
 Reports in mid @-@ 2008 claimed that Columbia Records then believed Hill to be on hiatus . Marley disputed these claims , telling an interviewer that Hill has enough material for several albums : " She writes music in the bathroom , on toilet paper , on the wall . She writes it in the mirror if the mirror smokes up . She writes constantly . This woman does not sleep " . One of the few public appearances Hill made in 2008 was at a Martha Stewart book @-@ signing in New Jersey , perplexing some in the press . In April 2009 , it was reported that Hill would engage in a 10 @-@ day tour of European summer festivals during mid @-@ July of that year . She performed two shows for the tour and passed out on stage during the start of her second performance and left the stage . She refused to give refunds to angry consumers for the show . On June 10 , Hill 's management informed the promoters of the Stockholm Jazz Festival , which she was scheduled to headline , that she would not be performing due to unspecified " health reasons . " Shortly afterward , the rest of the tour was canceled as well . 
 = = = 2010 – present : Further activities and imprisonment = = = 
 In January 2010 , Hill returned to the live stage and performed in stops across New Zealand and Australia on the <unk> Music Festival . Many of the songs that Hill had performed and recorded over the past six years were included on an April 2010 unofficial compilation album titled <unk> Phase . The album also features a range of other material found on the Ms. Hill compilation . Hill appeared at the Harmony Festival in Santa Rosa , California , in June 2010 , her first live American performance in several years . An unreleased song called " Repercussions " was leaked via the Internet in late July 2010 , debuting at number 94 on Billboard 's Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs ( and peaked at number 83 the following week ) , making it her first Billboard chart appearance as a lead artist since 1999 . 
 Hill joined the Rock the Bells hip @-@ hop festival series in the U.S. during August 2010 , and as part of that year 's theme of rendering classic albums , she performed The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill in its entirety for the first time . She increased the tempo and urgency from the original recording , but at times had difficulty in communicating with her band . Hill continued touring , including a set at the 6th Annual Jazz in the Gardens , in Miami Gardens , Florida in December . In Spring 2011 , Hill performed at the Coachella Valley Music Festival , New Orleans Jazz Fest , and at The Cosmopolitan of Las Vegas . In July 2011 , Hill gave birth to her sixth child , Micah , her first not with Rohan Marley ; the father remains publicly unknown . 
 In February 2012 , Hill performed a new song titled " Fearless Vampire Killer " , during a sold @-@ out performance at the Warner Theater in Washington , D.C. In late 2012 , Hill toured with rapper Nas ; her portion of the tour , titled Black Rage , is named after her song , released October 30 . Hill has described the song as being " about the derivative effects of racial inequity and abuse " and " a juxtaposition to the statement ' life is good , ' which she believes can only be so when these long standing issues are addressed and resolved . " 
 In June 2012 , Hill was charged with three counts of tax evasion for not paying federal taxes on $ 1 @.@ 8 million of income earned between 2005 and 2007 . During this time she had toured as a musical artist , earned royalties from both her records and from films she had appeared in , and had owned and been in charge of multiple corporations . In a long post to her Tumblr , Hill said that she had gone " underground " and had rejected pop culture 's " climate of hostility , false entitlement , manipulation , racial prejudice , sexism and ageism . " She added that , " When I was working consistently without being affected by the interferences mentioned above , I filed and paid my taxes . This only stopped when it was necessary to withdraw from society , in order to guarantee the safety and well @-@ being of myself and my family . " On June 29 , 2012 , Hill appeared in the United States District Court for the District of New Jersey in Newark and pleaded guilty to the charges ; her attorney said she would make restitution for the back taxes she owed . By April 22 , 2013 , Hill had paid back only $ 50 @,@ 000 of the $ 554 @,@ 000 she owed immediately ; U.S. Magistrate Judge Madeline Cox Arleo criticized Hill , saying " This is not someone who stands before the court penniless . This is a criminal matter . Actions speak louder than words , and there has been no effort here to pay these taxes . " Hill also faced possible eviction from her rented home in South Orange as well as a civil lawsuit from the town for running a business , that being holding recording sessions , out of a home without a zoning permit . 
 On May 4 , 2013 , Hill released her first official single in over a decade , " Neurotic Society ( Compulsory Mix ) " . She later published a message on her Tumblr describing how she was " required to release [ it ] immediately , by virtue of the impending legal deadline . " The release received some criticism for lyrics that appeared to tie societal decay to certain LGBT social movements . Hill responded that the song was not targeted at any particular group but was instead focused on anyone hiding behind neurotic behavior . Following a deal with Sony Music , which involves Hill creating a new record label within the company , Hill was said to be scheduled to release her first album in fifteen years during 2013 ( that did not happen ) . 
 On May 6 , 2013 , Hill was sentenced by Judge Arleo to serve three months in prison for tax evasion and three months house arrest afterwards as part of a year of supervised probation . She had faced a possible sentence of as long as 36 months , and the sentence given took into account her lack of a prior criminal record and her six minor @-@ aged children . By this point Hill had fully paid back $ 970 @,@ 000 in back taxes and penalties she owed , which also took into account an additional $ 500 @,@ 000 that Hill had in unreported income for 2008 and 2009 . In the courtroom , Hill said that she had lived " very modestly " considering how much money she had made for others , and that " I am a child of former slaves who had a system imposed on them . I had an economic system imposed on me . " Hill reported to the minimum @-@ security Federal Correctional Institution , Danbury on July 8 , 2013 , to begin serving her sentence . 
 Hill was released from prison on October 4 , 2013 , a few days early for good behavior , and began her home confinement and probationary periods . She put out a single called " <unk> " that she had finished , via verbal and e @-@ mailed instructions , while incarcerated . Judge Arleo allowed her to postpone part of her confinement in order to tour in late 2013 under strict conditions . 
 During 2014 , Hill was heard as the narrator of Concerning Violence , an award @-@ winning Swedish documentary on the African liberation struggles of the 1960s and 1970s . She also continued to draw media attention for her erratic behavior , appearing late twice in the same day for sets at Voodoo Fest in November 2014 . 
 In May 2015 , Hill canceled her scheduled concert outside Tel Aviv in Israel following a social media campaign from activists promoting the Boycott , Divestment and Sanctions campaign . She said she had wanted to also perform a show in Ramallah in the West Bank but logistical problems had proved too great . Hill stated : " It is very important to me that my presence or message not be misconstrued , or a source of alienation to either my Israeli or my Palestinian fans . " 
 Hill contributed her voice to the soundtrack for What Happened , Miss Simone ? , a 2015 documentary about the life of Nina Simone , an American singer , pianist , and civil rights activist . Hill was originally supposed to record only two songs for the record , but ended up recording six . She also served as a producer on the comp alongside Robert Glasper . Hill said of her connection to Simone : " Because I fed on this music ... I believed I always had a right to have a voice . Her example is clearly a form of sustenance to a generation needing to find theirs . What a gift . " NPR critically praised Hill 's performance on the soundtrack , stating : " This album mainly showcases Lauryn Hill 's breadth and dexterity . Not formally marketed as Hill 's comeback album , her six tracks here make this her most comprehensive set of studio recordings since The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill in 1998 . " 
 In April 2016 , Hill hosted and headlined what was billed as the inaugural Diaspora Calling ! festival at the Kings Theatre in Brooklyn . The festival 's purpose was to showcase the efforts of musicians and artists from around the African diaspora . But the following month , Hill was 2 hours and 20 minutes late for her show at Chastain Amphitheater | Chastain Park Amphitheatre in Atlanta . Moments after the less than 40 minute show ended , she said her driver had gotten lost and she could not help that . Less than 48 hours later , after a large backlash from her fans on Twitter , she took to her Facebook page and claimed she was two hours late for concert because of need to ' align her <unk> 
 = = Discography = = 
 The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill ( 1998 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = United States Senate Democratic primary election in Pennsylvania , 2010 = 
 The Democratic primary for the 2010 United States Senate election in Pennsylvania took place on May 18 , 2010 , when Congressman Joe Sestak defeated incumbent Arlen Specter , which led to the end of Specter 's five @-@ term Senatorial career . Just prior to the start of the primary campaign , after serving in the Senate as a Republican for 29 years , Specter had switched to the Democratic Party in anticipation of a difficult primary challenge by Pat Toomey ; Sestak was ultimately defeated by Toomey in the general election . Political observers and journalists described the race between Specter and Sestak as one of the bitterest and most watched of all the 2010 primary elections . 
 Although Sestak was initially urged to run by the Democratic establishment , Specter gained wide support from Democrats after he switched parties . Major political figures like President Barack Obama and Pennsylvania Governor Ed Rendell later tried to sway Sestak from continuing the race , fearing he would damage Specter 's chances in the general election . Former President Bill Clinton offered Sestak a position in the Obama administration if he withdrew his candidacy , an offer Republicans would later criticize . Sestak refused to drop out and criticized Specter 's party switch as an opportunistic move aimed solely at self @-@ preservation . Nevertheless , Sestak struggled to overcome problems stemming from low name recognition and Specter 's support from such individuals as Joe Biden and Harry Reid , and organizations like the AFL @-@ CIO and Pennsylvania Democratic Committee . 
 Specter led Sestak by more than 20 percentage points for most of the race , but this lead narrowed significantly in the final month of the campaign , when Sestak concentrated his funds and efforts on television commercials questioning Specter 's Democratic credentials . Specter grew more critical of Sestak as the race progressed , attacking his House attendance record , accusing him of failing to pay his staffers minimum wage and alleging he was demoted while serving in the U.S. Navy for creating a poor command climate . Political observers said Sestak 's commercials played a major part in his victory , and that a national swing in momentum toward Republicans and against incumbents ultimately harmed Specter 's chances . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Chris Matthews speculation = = = 
 Beginning in April 2008 , the media reported growing speculation that Chris Matthews , news commentator and host of MSNBC 's Hardball with Chris Matthews , might run in the 2010 Democratic primary for the United States Senate Pennsylvania seat then occupied by the Republican Arlen Specter . In an interview with The New York Times Magazine , Matthews said that he believed Specter had been in the Senate for too long , but that running for Senate would mean giving up a career he loved . Mark <unk> , author of the article , wrote , " Matthews has been particularly obsessed with Pennsylvania of late , devoting hours on and off the air to the state 's upcoming Democratic primary , staying in close contact with the state 's party apparatus " . Speculation was further fueled by Matthews ' appearance on an April 14 episode of The Colbert Report . Host Stephen Colbert asked Matthews about the rumors and prodded him to make a public announcement , to which Matthews replied , " Did you ever want to be something your whole life ? ... When you grow up , some kids want to be a fireman . I want to be a Senator . But I have to deal with these things as they come . " Matthews declined to directly answer questions about his possible candidacy when pressed by the media , but did not deny the possibility . 
 The subject of Matthews ' possible candidacy was raised at an October dinner fundraiser for presidential candidate Barack Obama held by Robert Wolf , president of UBS 's investment bank . Discussing the dinner later , Matthews told The New York Times , " People have asked me about it . I 've never told anyone that I 'm running . " On November 28 , The Patriot @-@ News of Harrisburg reported that Matthews met that week with Pennsylvania Democratic Party Chairman T.J. Rooney and Executive Director Mary Isenhour to discuss possibly running against Specter . Isenhour told the paper Matthews had not formed a campaign committee or begun raising money , and she did not believe he had yet come to a firm decision , adding , " He 's got a really good job with MSNBC . I think he 's going to put some thought into it before he jumps in . " The same day as that Patriot @-@ News report , the political blog <unk> reported that Matthews had already met with potential campaign staff , something Matthews claimed was " absolutely not true " . 
 The increased speculation led some , like former spokesman for Hillary Rodham Clinton 's 2008 presidential campaign Phil Singer , to criticize Matthews for openly weighing a political campaign bid while working as a news broadcaster . Singer believed Matthews should resign or be suspended from the network until a decision was made . Speculation grew as Matthews spent much of 2008 attending meetings with Pennsylvania representatives and major Democratic fundraisers . Matthews discussed a possible campaign with Pennsylvania Governor Ed Rendell , and poll numbers for a theoretical race showed him only three percentage points behind Specter . However , the speculation came to an end on January 7 , 2009 , when Matthews told his Hardball staff he was not going to run for Senate . Such media outlets as The New York Times and The Washington Post suggested Matthews ' alleged consideration was a tactic to ensure a higher salary during negotiations with MSNBC to renew his contract , which was set to expire in June 2009 . 
 = = = Arlen Specter party switch = = = 
 As early as 2008 , the five @-@ term Republican Pennsylvania Senator Arlen Specter made clear his plans to seek re @-@ election . Specter had narrowly avoided a primary defeat against conservative challenger Pat Toomey during his 2004 Senate race , and he was expected to face an even greater challenge from Toomey in 2010 , particularly since the conservative faction of the Pennsylvania Republican Party had vowed to defeat Specter in the upcoming primary . Some high @-@ profile Democrats , including Vice President Joe Biden and Governor Rendell , began encouraging Specter to join the Democratic Party by publicly offering to help Specter raise money if he switched . A March 2009 Quinnipiac University Polling Institute poll found Specter trailing Toomey 41 percent to 27 percent among Republican primary voters , in large part due to voter angst over Specter 's support for the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 , which was supported by President Obama . Since the Pennsylvania primaries are closed , the poll noted that Specter could not be assisted by support from moderates or Democrats . Clay F. Richards , assistant director of the Quinnipiac University Polling Institute , said of the poll results , " Pennsylvania Republicans are so unhappy with Sen. Specter ’ s vote for President Barack Obama 's Stimulus Package and so @-@ called pork barrel spending that they are voting for a former Congressman they hardly know . " 
 The same month as the March poll , an article in The Hill quoted Specter as stating he was considering leaving the Republican party to run for re @-@ election as an Independent candidate . Specter later denied the validity of those claims , announcing on March 18 , " To eliminate any doubt , I am a Republican , and I am running for reelection in 2010 as a Republican on the Republican ticket . " However , on April 28 , 2009 , Specter announced he was leaving the Republican Party and becoming a Democrat because he disagreed with the increasingly conservative direction the Republican Party was heading in and found his personal philosophy was now better aligned with the Democrats . Although Specter said that he primarily based his decision on principle , he also admitted it was partially due to his poor chances at winning the Republican primary : " I have traveled the state and surveyed the sentiments of the Republican Party in Pennsylvania and public opinion polls , observed other public opinion polls and have found that the prospects for winning a Republican primary are bleak . " 
 Prior to switching parties , Specter was promised by Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid that he would keep his seniority on the Senate if he joined the Democratic Party . The arrangement displeased some Senate Democrats , and , on May 3 , the Senate voted to strip him of his seniority despite Reid 's promise . This temporarily made Specter the most junior Democrat in the Senate and severely limited his influence as a legislator . Nevertheless , Specter 's decision was praised by many major Democrats , including Reid and President Barack Obama , who promised to campaign for him . Republicans , however , criticized the decision , accusing Specter of betraying his principles and party to preserve his political career . Michael Steele , chairman of the Republican National Committee , said Specter " flipped the bird " to the party and that Specter made the decision based solely because he knew he would lose the election . Senator John Cornyn , chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee and a past supporter of Specter , said the decision " represents the height of political self @-@ preservation " . Specter defended his position by arguing the Republican Party had strayed too far from the vision of President Ronald Reagan , adding , " I am not prepared to have my 29 @-@ year record in the United States Senate decided by the Pennsylvania Republican primary electorate . " 
 = = = Joe Sestak declares candidacy = = = 
 Second @-@ term U.S Representative Joe Sestak , a former U.S. Navy admiral , began privately discussing the possibility of seeking the Democratic nomination with his family in December 2008 . Senator Bob Menendez , chairman of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee , approached Sestak in April 2009 and asked him to run , but Sestak claimed he was not initially interested . Nevertheless , media speculation about Sestak 's possible campaign began as early as mid @-@ April 2009 , and intensified the day Specter changed political parties . While most Democrats embraced the long @-@ time Senator , Sestak issued a statement criticizing Specter 's decision , declaring it an opportunist move that should have been made in consultation with Pennsylvanians rather than the Senate Democratic leadership and the Washington political establishment . Menendez approached Sestak again , this time asking him not to run against Specter , but Sestak did not agree to back down . Later , when asked by Fox News , Sestak insisted he had not decided whether he would run for the office , but declined to immediately endorse Specter and said he had to " wait and see " . During a May 3 appearance on CNN 's State of the Union with John King , Sestak questioned whether Specter was really a genuine Democrat , adding , " I think Arlen has to tell us not that it was too hard to run against someone . ... What I need to know is , what is he running for ? " 
 Sestak insisted he would not make a final decision for several months . On May 4 , he met with Andy Stern , president of the Service Employees International Union , which fueled speculation that he was seeking labor support for a campaign . Meanwhile , Joe Torsella , the former president of the National Constitution Center , had planned on running for the Democratic nomination and initially announced Specter 's party change would not affect his decision to run . However , Torsella announced on May 14 he was dropping out of the race because Specter 's decision changed the political landscape , and he wanted to avoid a campaign that " would probably be negative , personal , and more about Senator Specter 's past than our common future " . It had been reported that Governor Rendell , for whom Torsella previously worked as an aide , pushed for Torsella to step aside so Specter could run unopposed , but Torsella 's staff denied those claims . Despite Torsella 's departure , Sestak continued to consider entering the race and began gaining support from the Democratic party 's more liberal factions like the Progressive Change Campaign Committee , which began a " Draft Sestak " campaign fund . Sestak became further encouraged to run after taking a tour of all 67 Pennsylvania counties to meet with party leaders and discuss such issues as jobs , the economy and health care . Sestak said that the leaders voiced serious concerns to him about the direction of the country and , although his lack of name recognition was a problem , Sestak said many of the people he encountered voiced support for him . 
 On May 27 , the website Talking Points Memo posted a handwritten letter by Sestak to candidates declaring his intent to run for Senate . Sestak did not dispute the authenticity of the letter , but told the press he wanted to discuss the matter with his family before making a formal decision . Sestak told media outlets he realized President Obama wished him not to run against Specter , but that he felt the choice should be with the voters of Pennsylvania rather than the president . Governor Rendell overtly tried to convince him not to run , believing it would damage Sestak 's own political future , plus cost the Democratic Party both Sestak 's House seat and possibly damage Specter 's general election chances . Nevertheless , Sestak formally declared his candidacy for the Democratic nomination on August 4 , 2009 , in a speech before a Veterans of Foreign Wars hall in his native Delaware County . Shortly after the announcement , Toomey issued a statement welcoming Sestak to the race , describing him as " a consistent liberal who really believes in his values " , as compared to Specter , who he called " a career political opportunist who believes in nothing but his own re @-@ election " . 
 = = Candidates = = 
 Joe Sestak , U.S. Congressman 
 Arlen Specter , Incumbent U.S. Senator 
 Pennsylvania Rep. William C. <unk> and retired manufacturer Joseph <unk> also ran in the Democratic primary , but neither remained for the duration of the race . <unk> , who was little known outside the western Pennsylvania area , dropped out of the race on January 14 , 2010 after raising only $ 20 @,@ 000 of the $ 2 million he sought to raise for his campaign . <unk> , an Allegheny County man who had been mostly overlooked throughout the race , was formally removed from the ballot in mid @-@ April 2010 after it was revealed he failed to garner the minimum amount of signatures for a nominating petition . 
 = = Campaign = = 
 = = = Early months = = = 
 Both candidates started the campaign well @-@ funded . Sestak had more than $ 3 million available from his House fund to use toward starting a Senate campaign , and raised an additional $ 1 million by June 30 , 2009 , which brought his total to about $ 4 @.@ 2 million . Sestak called it the largest campaign war @-@ chest of any Senate challenger . Specter , however , was ahead with $ 6 @.@ 7 million in campaign funding as of March 31 . Sestak also faced challenges arising from his low name recognition and Specter 's support among high @-@ profile members of the Democratic establishment , like Obama and Biden . Specter spent the early months of his campaign trying to reestablish and strengthen his Democratic credentials , seeking union support and making speeches highlighting his support of positions supported by the party , such as the economic stimulus package , reforming health care , increasing the minimum wage , protecting abortion rights and supporting stem cell research . In a June 2009 speech to Pennsylvania Democratic Committee members in Pittsburgh , Specter said , " I 'm again a Democrat and I 'm pleased and proud to be a Democrat . " Commentators observed that Sestak 's involvement in the race would test Specter 's loyalty to the Democratic party and likely force him to make more liberal votes in the Senate . 
 Even before Sestak formally declared his candidacy on August 4 , 2009 , Specter and Sestak began exchanging criticisms about each other that were so heated , The New York Times writer Janie Lorber suggested " the contest will become one of the more vicious for next year 's midterm elections " . Sestak repeatedly said Specter was not a " real Democrat " and continued to assert Specter 's switch was based on self @-@ preservation rather than principles . Specter called Sestak a " flagrant hypocrite " for questioning Specter 's loyalty to the Democratic Party , citing the fact that Sestak himself was registered as an Independent until he became a Democrat in 2006 , just before he ran for Congress . Sestak claimed that was because he was serving in the military and wished to be nonpartisan , but Specter called that a " lame excuse for avoiding party affiliation ... undercut by his documented disinterest in the political process " , pointing out that records indicated Sestak voted in only 12 out of 35 elections from 1971 to 2005 . A day after Sestak formally entered the race , Specter described Sestak 's recent 67 @-@ county tour as a " taxpayer @-@ financed self @-@ promotion tour around the state " . Specter 's campaign also accused Sestak of neglecting his duties in the House and missing more than 100 votes in the last year , which Specter called the worst attendance record for any Pennsylvania Congressman . Sestak responded to the latter point that most of the missed votes were procedural in nature , and were missed because of the statewide tour and because he visited his father , who was dying at the time . Sestak accused Specter of launching a " GOP negative style campaign " , which Specter denied . 
 = = = Toomey and Obama get involved = = = 
 Specter and Sestak participated in an August 14 panel discussion hosted by <unk> Nation , which included questions from online viewers consisting mainly of liberal and progressive bloggers and advocates . Media reports suggested Specter faced tougher questions from the crowd , with many questioning whether they could trust him based on his switching parties . Specter dismissed suggestions that his recent Democratic votes were politically motivated by the primary , and cited his support of the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act and Children 's Health Insurance Reauthorization Act as proof of his Democratic credentials . Sestak argued a change in leadership was necessary and that his military background as a United States Navy admiral gave him the necessary experience . Sestak also pointed out that Specter worked with former Senator Bob Dole to defeat President Bill Clinton 's health care plan in 1993 . When some in the crowd brought up how Senator Chuck Grassley , a past ally of Specter 's , was arguing that Obama 's health care plan would lead to " death panels " , Specter said that Grassley was wrong and that he would call him about the matter . When some in the crowd chanted , " Call him now ! " , Specter took several audience members backstage and left a phone message for Grassley as they watched . Salon.com said based on the stunt , " Specter may have won the day , if not the battle " . However , a straw poll of 250 online activists attending the event showed Sestak was preferred to Specter by a vote of 46 percent to 10 percent . 
 Later , following an e @-@ mail exchange with the expected Republican challenger Toomey about health care , Sestak proposed an unorthodox joint town hall with Toomey about the issue , which was held September 2 at Muhlenberg College in Allentown . Specter was not invited to participate , and political pollster G. Terry Madonna of Franklin & Marshall College described it as an " informal pact " between Sestak and Toomey to weaken their joint rival , something the two men denied . Commentators suggested Toomey was willing to help Sestak at this stage of the race because he preferred Sestak as a general election opponent over Specter , who could possibly draw Republican and Independent voters from Toomey . Also in September , Obama appeared in a 30 @-@ second television ad for Specter , praising him for his support of the President 's economic recovery initiatives . A September poll by Franklin & Marshall College found Specter maintained a 37 percent to 11 percent lead over Sestak , but also that 54 percent of people felt a change was needed as opposed to 34 percent who felt Specter deserved a sixth term . That poll also found 73 percent felt they did not know enough about Sestak to form an opinion , which pollster Madonna said indicated the race would be focused more on Specter 's incumbency and record than about Sestak or Toomey . 
 On September 15 , Obama attended a Philadelphia fundraising dinner for Specter , an unusually public declaration of support so early in the primary season , when the President has the option of remaining neutral until the final outcome becomes clearer . Governor Rendell said that Obama and Biden felt obligated to strongly support Specter because they so strongly lobbied him to switch parties . Philadelphia Mayor Michael Nutter and radio personality Michael <unk> also spoke on Specter 's behalf . Senate Majority Leader Reid took the unusual steps of scheduling no Senate votes that day so both Specter and Pennsylvania Senator Bob Casey , Jr. could attend the fundraiser . That move drew criticism from Republicans , as well as from Sestak , who felt Specter was skirting his Senate responsibilities , yet hypocritically criticizing Sestak at the same time for missing more than 100 votes in the U.S. House . The event was expected to raise about $ 2 @.@ 5 million , which was to be split between Specter 's campaign and the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee . After the fundraiser , Obama and Specter traveled via Air Force One to Pittsburgh to address labor activists at the AFL @-@ CIO convention . There , Specter assured the audience he would support the Employee Free Choice Act , a proposed bill that would make union formation easier , which Specter had previously opposed as a Republican . 
 = = = Specter maintains lead = = = 
 As the primary entered into October , Specter continued to criticize Sestak on his record of missed votes in Congress . He claimed Sestak missed 122 in the past year , or nearly 17 percent of his total votes , whereas Specter missed four . In a letter , Specter told Sestak he should drop out of the campaign and start voting on a more consistent basis , or resign from the House " so he can cease to be a burden to the taxpayers " . Around the same time , Sestak launched a website called " The Real Specter " , which highlighted the right @-@ leaning votes Specter made and alliances he held during his 29 years as a Republican in the senate . Specter continued to maintain a significant lead against Sestak of 19 percentage points , according to a Quinnipiac University poll released that month . But Sestak pointed out that the gap was 32 points in July , and cited the poll as proof that he was gaining ground in the race . Also that month , new reports indicated Toomey was growing in popularity and , in one poll , was actually ahead of Specter , with 43 percent of respondents saying they would vote for him compared to 42 percent for Specter . This was attributed by some to the challenge presented by Sestak and the declining popularity of Obama , whose approval rating had dropped from 56 percent in July to 49 percent in October . 
 On October 14 , Specter reported he had raised $ 1 @.@ 8 million during the previous three @-@ month period , bringing his total to about $ 8 @.@ 7 million . The Senator said that he was aided in large part by his September 15 fundraiser hosted by Obama . In that same period , Sestak raised only $ 758 @,@ 000 , about a quarter million dollars lower than the previous quarter , making his total allocation about $ 4 @.@ 7 million . Sestak continued working hard to overcome his name recognition problem , seldom turning down interview requests and asking his staff to work six 12 @-@ hour days a week . As a result , Sestak saw a large amount of turnover in his staff , going through nearly half a dozen press secretaries and several chiefs of staff . Sestak called on Specter participate in six debates , one for each media market in Pennsylvania , but Specter only agreed to participate in one because that was the amount of debates he participated in as a Republican . On December 7 , Sestak was endorsed by Congressman Barney Frank , who said that he was impressed by Sestak 's leadership on economic and military issues , as well as his positions against the military 's " don 't ask , don 't tell " policy and the Defense of Marriage Act . The endorsement was important to Sestak because it was the first time a prominent member of Congress broke with the Democratic establishment to back him over Specter . Frank also said of Specter 's switching parties , " I have to say I don 't think it did our profession any good for someone to announce that he switched parties purely so he could survive . " 
 New polls in January indicated voter support was growing for Toomey , who now held a projected nine percentage point lead over Specter and an eight @-@ point lead over Sestak . Specter continued to lead against Sestak in the Democratic primary poll , this time by a 21 @-@ point margin . Some political scientists believed Toomey 's gain over Specter could be attributed to voter distrust of establishment candidates and growing dissatisfaction with the health care proposal pending in Congress . However , some Democratic leaders felt Sestak 's challenge to Specter was having a detrimental effect not only to Specter , but to the Democratic party in general and their prospects for ultimately winning the general election . This feeling was enhanced by the growing national support for the Republican party , and especially by the unexpected victory of the Tea Party @-@ backed Republican Scott Brown in a special election for a traditionally Democratic Massachusetts Senate seat . Specter acknowledged to The New York Times that the national political mood might work against him in the primary , but insisted he was not discouraged and expressed confidence in his ability to survive . 
 = = = Race grows more heated = = = 
 The primary continued to grow more heated in February 2010 . On February 5 , the two candidates held their first face @-@ to @-@ face debate , and used the 30 @-@ minute forum to strongly criticize each other , with Sestak continuing to associate Specter with failed Republican policies and Specter arguing his opponent was more focused on criticizing him than debating policy . Sestak continued to attack Specter for switching parties , asking , " Is the best the Democrats can do someone who has been on the other side , with respect , for 50 years , and cast 2 @,@ 000 votes with President Bush ? " Likewise , Specter once again criticized Sestak 's missed votes in Congress , which he said would have been enough to earn Sestak a court @-@ martial for going AWOL in his former Naval career . Sestak also criticized Specter for voting in favor of the Iraq War , and Specter in turn condemned Sestak for supporting Obama 's proposed troop increase for the War in Afghanistan , which Specter opposed . The next day , the Pennsylvania Democratic Committee voted to endorse Specter over Sestak , with 77 percent of voters supporting the incumbent Senator , or 229 votes compared to Sestak 's 72 . Sestak criticized the committee for its decision , but also argued it solidified his own position as a political outsider independent from the mainstream Washington establishment . Media outlets said the vote indicated Specter had convinced most important figures in the state party that he was not simply a crossover politician . 
 Later in February , Specter accused Sestak of mistreating his employees and disobeying state and federal minimum wage laws by severely underpaying his House staff . Citing Federal Election Commission reports , Specter claimed ten of Sestak 's sixteen campaign staffers were making less than minimum wage and that they were so underpaid they were eligible for food stamps . He also noted that Sestak 's three highest @-@ paid staffers were members of his family , including his brother Richard Sestak , who worked as campaign manager . T.J. Rooney , a Specter supporter , wrote a letter to Sestak expressing concern about the potential violation of minimum wage laws , which read : " It is inconceivable to me that our standard bearer wouldn ’ t be paying his workers the minimum wage " . Sestak responded by acknowledging his staff could make more money elsewhere , but said " they choose to work hard and make some sacrifices because they know how important it is to elect someone to the United States Senate who shares their principles " . 
 = = = Specter maintains momentum = = = 
 As the primary race entered into March , Specter appeared to be maintaining his momentum , with polls indicating he not only led Sestak by 24 percentage points , but had recaptured a projected lead against Toomey in the general election by a margin of 49 to 42 percent . <unk> indicated Specter was still benefiting greatly from his strong name recognition , whereas Sestak and Toomey remained relatively little @-@ known . Peter Brown , assistant director of the Quinnipiac University Polling Institute , said , " There remains no evidence that his primary challenger , Congressman Joe Sestak , has made much progress as we get within three months of the May primary . " However , Time writer Karen Tumulty noted that while " thus far , Sestak has failed to meet expectations " , the poll also indicated some weaknesses for Specter . Namely , more than half of the surveyed Pennsylvanians did not feel he deserved another term , and among Democrats who knew the candidates well enough to form an opinion of both , Sestak led Specter 54 percent to 37 percent . On March 16 , Governor Rendell restated his past support of Specter and said of Sestak , " He has , in my mind , no chance to win . " 
 On March 30 , Specter won the backing of the AFL @-@ CIO , which was considered one of the most important endorsements in the primary race . It was one of several major labor endorsements Specter had received , including the state Service Employees International Union and the Pennsylvania State Education Association , which represented 200 @,@ 000 state teachers . Representatives from the AFL @-@ CIO cited Specter 's backing of President Obama 's stimulus package as a major factor in their decision . Sestak criticized the union federation 's decision , pointing out he had a 100 percent rating from the national AFL @-@ CIO while Specter had a 61 percent rating . He also attacked Specter for previously backing President George W. Bush 's economic policies and said , " Pennsylvania workers need a Senator they can count on to be there when they need him , not only when he needs them during an election . " The Philadelphia Inquirer writer Thomas Fitzgerald called the endorsement " a powerful affirmation of how smoothly Specter has managed his political transition to the Democratic Party since leaving the Republican Party less than a year ago " . 
 On April 11 , Sestak held a debate with Toomey in Philadelphia without Specter present , which media observers described as an explicit criticism of Specter for refusing to hold more than one debate with Sestak . During that debate , Sestak strongly attacked Toomey 's voting record in what The Morning Call reporter Colby <unk> described as " an obvious effort to show Democrats that he could hold his own in a general election matchup " . At the end of the debate , Toomey voiced respect for Sestak and described him as a more principled man than Specter , who he criticized for not participating in more debates . Later that month , when the Senate candidates publicly released their quarterly campaign finance reports on April 15 , it was revealed Toomey raised more in the first three months of 2010 than either Democratic candidate , adding $ 2 @.@ 3 million to his total $ 4 @.@ 1 million war chest compared to Specter adding $ 1 @.@ 1 million to his total $ 9 @.@ 1 million fund . Political analysts attributed this to the national swing in momentum toward Republicans , and said that it could indicate the Republicans would be victorious in many Senate races , including in Pennsylvania . Sestak raised $ 442 @,@ 000 in the three @-@ month period , down from his previous quarter , which Specter 's campaign said proved Democratic donors had rejected his candidacy . Specter 's fundraising advantage was significant because it allowed him to start early in running political campaign commercials . 
 = = = Television advertisements = = = 
 Starting in April , both Specter and Sestak launched television advertisements that were particularly critical of each other . Sestak , who had been saving most of his roughly $ 5 million campaign funds until the final month of the primary race , unveiled a 60 @-@ second spot that highlighted his Navy career and described the role his daughter 's experience as a brain cancer survivor played in his decision to enter politics . The commercial did not discuss Specter by name but made several implicit references to him , such as Sestak 's statements that " too many politicians are concerned about keeping their jobs instead of helping people " and " if we want real change in Washington , we can 't keep sending the same career politicians to represent us " . Specter launched several commercials , most focusing on his plans to promote job growth . One advertisement , however , focused entirely on attacking Sestak , highlighting not only his voting attendance record – labeling him " No Show Joe " – but also his Navy service . The commercial stated Sestak was " relieved of duty in the Navy for creating a poor command climate " , a reference to Sestak 's 2005 transfer from a senior Pentagon planning post to a lesser position , which effectively ended his naval career . 
 The Navy Times had previously reported the transfer resulted from Sestak forcing subordinates to work unreasonable hours , although Sestak himself disputed that accusation and attributed the transfer to the fact that the new top officer , Admiral Michael Mullen , simply wanted to appoint his own team . Sestak called on Specter to stop broadcasting the commercial , accusing the Senator of " Republican @-@ style " negative campaign tactics , which he compared to those used against Senator John Kerry by the Swift Vets and POWs for Truth during the 2004 presidential election . Sestak said in a statement , " It 's time to tell Arlen Specter : Democrats don 't ' swift boat ' . We 're better than that . " A group of veterans gathered in Philadelphia to echo Sestak 's call that the commercial should be removed , with retired U.S. Air Force Lieutenant General Robert E. Kelley announcing , " We 're all here because we 're enraged at the fact that someone , anyone , in the United States today would question someone who has 30 years of service . " Specter 's campaign replied they would not remove the commercial because it was accurate , and instead called on Sestak to remove his own advertisement , claiming it violated United States Department of Defense guidelines because it used military images , references and jargon without a disclaimer that it was not endorsed by the department . 
 = = = Sestak gains in closing weeks = = = 
 Sestak and Specter held their first and only televised debate on May 1 at Philadelphia 's Fox affiliate , during which the two candidates bitterly attacked each other 's character and honesty . The two began arguing even before the hour @-@ long debate formally began , when Sestak objected to Specter 's use of notes and said that the rules did not allow them . The debate organizer ruled the notes were allowed . Specter criticized Sestak for campaign advertisements that accused the Senator of lying about Sestak 's record . Specter said , " Nobody has ever called me a liar , " and demanded an apology , to which Sestak did not respond . Specter also repeatedly asked Sestak to publicly release his military records , to which Sestak again refused to respond . Sestak accused Specter of using Republican @-@ style tactics in the vein of Karl Rove , former adviser to George W. Bush , and said Specter 's attacks were meant to mask his record of supporting Bush 's failed economic policies . Specter insisted the questions raised about Sestak 's naval record were legitimate because much of Sestak 's campaign was based on his military background , adding , " It goes to his ability to get things done , to get along with people . He 's all peaches and cream on television . " Specter criticized Sestak for supporting the troop build @-@ up in Afghanistan , while Sestak noted that Specter voted against a ban on assault weapons in the 1990s . The Philadelphia Inquirer noted the debate was " every bit as contentious as their Democratic Senate primary struggle has become in its closing days " . 
 With only two weeks remaining before the primary , a Quinnipiac University poll released May 4 showed Specter 's lead against Sestak had significantly narrowed , dropping from 53 @-@ 32 percent in the previous month to 47 @-@ 39 percent . A daily tracking poll by Muhlenberg College showed the race as even closer , with Specter supported by 46 percent of likely voters surveyed , and Sestak trailing only four points at 42 percent . The Quinnipiac poll indicated the strongest factor in these changes was that Sestak was gaining better name recognition due to his television commercials . According to the poll , 43 percent of respondents now had a favorable view of him , compared to only 33 percent in March . The day after the poll was released , Sestak unveiled a new television advertisement strongly critical of Specter , highlighting the incumbent Senator 's Republican history and showing images of him with George W. Bush and Republican vice presidential candidate Sarah Palin . The commercial featured a clip of Specter saying , " My change in party will enable me to be reelected " and ended with a narrator saying , " Arlen Specter switched parties to save one job : his , not yours . " The same week the advertisement ran , T.J. Rooney said in an interview with Politico that a Sestak primary victory would be " cataclysmic " for the party in the general election , and warned Democratic voters , " If we want to keep this seat in Democratic hands , the only person capable of delivering that victory is Arlen Specter . " 
 Specter received several high @-@ profile endorsements during the final weeks leading up to the primary . Senator John Kerry , who had been an early supporter of Sestak 's 2006 House campaign , endorsed Specter in the Senate race , calling him " fighter and a friend , and I am proud to vouch for his character " . The Philadelphia Inquirer called Sestak " a worthy opponent " and said that his determination made the race especially competitive , but ultimately embraced Specter , whose overall career record the newspaper said was " a good choice for Democrats " . The Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette also endorsed Specter , focusing more on the fact that Specter stood the best chance of defeating Toomey in a general election challenge . The Pittsburgh Tribune @-@ Review , however , endorsed Sestak , calling him " incredibly intelligent , thoughtful and articular " while condemning Specter as a " self @-@ serving political ferret " for switching parties . Actor Michael J. Fox , who suffers from Parkinson 's disease , appeared in a television advertisement for Specter , praising the Senator for his long @-@ standing support of stem cell research . Fox said , " In the fight against disease , you can look back or move forward . Arlen Specter is moving forward . " President Obama sent e @-@ mail messages to his Organizing for America supporters encouraging them to vote for Specter , However , despite his long position of support for Specter , Obama did not fly to Pennsylvania to actively campaign for the Senator during the campaign 's final days . 
 As the campaign entered its final week , polls showed Specter and Sestak at a dead heat , with different surveys reporting contradictory findings over which candidate maintained a slight edge . A Quinnipiac University poll found Specter leading 44 @-@ 42 percent , with fourteen percent undecided , whereas a Franklin & Marshall poll found Sestak ahead 38 @-@ 36 percent , with about a quarter of voters undecided . In both cases , the lead fell within the survey 's margin of error . G. Terry Madonna , director of the Franklin & Marshall poll , said that Sestak improved because his television commercials were resonating with voters on three fronts : the arguments that Specter switched parties for solely political reasons , that he consistently voted for Republican policies and that he had been in office too long . 
 = = Polling = = 
 = = Results = = 
 Sestak won the May 18 primary with 53 @.@ 8 percent of the vote , or 568 @,@ 563 of the votes cast , compared to 46 @.@ 2 percent and 487 @,@ 217 votes for Specter . The defeat led to the end of Specter 's nearly 30 @-@ year Senate career , the longest of any Pennsylvania Senator in history . Afterward , Sestak declared , " This is what democracy should look like : a win for the people over the establishment . It should come as no surprise to anyone that people want a change . " Specter conceded defeat and said , " It 's been a great privilege to serve the people of Pennsylvania . It 's been a great privilege to be in the United States Senate . " Commentators suggested Specter 's defeat signaled an electorate unsatisfied with the establishment in both major parties , and indicated that the backing of prominent politicians had little effect on voters during this political age . Sestak 's victory was seen as a minor embarrassment for Obama , who strongly and publicly advocated for Specter during the race . Several news outlets reflected that Sestak 's television advertisements condemning Specter as a hypocrite and opportunist were especially effective and may have been the primary factor in his victory . The Washington Post said the Pennsylvania race drew more attention than any other primary election in 2010 due to Specter 's longevity and his switch to the Democratic party . 
 Toomey went on to defeat Sestak in the general election , winning by a margin of 51 to 49 percent . 
 = = Clinton job offer to Sestak = = 
 During a February 2010 television interview , Sestak said that in July 2009 he was offered a job in President Obama 's administration if he dropped out of the race . During a February 18 taping of Larry Kane : Voice of Reason , a Philadelphia @-@ area local news show , host Larry Kane asked Sestak whether such an offer had been made , to which Sestak responded , " Yes " , without elaborating beyond that it was a high @-@ ranking assignment and that he did not plan to take it . In subsequent press inquiries , Sestak repeatedly stood by his original statement . When asked about the matter by The Washington Post , he said , " There has been some indirect means in which they were trying to offer things if I got out . " Likewise , during an appearance on the Fox News Channel , he said , " I was asked a direct question yesterday and I answered it honestly . There 's nothing more to go into . I 'm in this race now . " Over the next month , White House officials did not answer multiple press inquiries about whether Sestak 's claims were true . On March 16 , White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs said he had reviewed the matter and found conversations that had been held with Sestak were " not problematic . " 
 In March , Congressman Darrell Issa , the ranking Republican on the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform , sent a letter to White House Counsel Robert Bauer stating if Sestak 's claim was true , the Obama administration may have violated a federal statue that makes it illegal for a government employee to use his authority to interfere with a Senate election . Interest in the alleged job offer reignited after Sestak defeated Specter in the primary on May 18 . Seven Republicans from the Senate Judiciary Committee wrote to Attorney General Eric Holder seeking a review of the legal implications of the offer . Around this time , Sestak continued to maintain that a job offer was made , but he downplayed the importance of the incident and defended Obama 's integrity . On May 28 , the White House formally responded to the allegations and acknowledged White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel enlisted former President Bill Clinton to offer Sestak a seat on a presidential advisory board or another executive board if Sestak dropped his candidacy . If Sestak accepted , he would have been allowed to remain in the House while serving in the unpaid position . 
 Bauer said that nobody in the administration itself directly discussed the offer with Sestak , and he does not believe there was anything improper , illegal or unethical about the conduct . Republicans in Congress disagreed , arguing the action contradicted claims Obama made during his presidential campaign about ethical conduct and transparency in government . Darrell Issa , in particular , felt it was an impeachable offense and referred to it as " Obama 's Watergate " . Nevertheless , the matter gradually became less of a focus during the primary election , where other topics like spending and the economy took the spotlight . With Issa poised to become chairman of the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform following the Republican Party recapturing the house during the 2010 midterm elections , it was widely expected he would launch an official investigation into the job offer based on his prior critical comments about the matter . However , on November 5 , Issa announced he would not pursue an investigation . Some politicians and members of the media said that the job offer made to Sestak was neither illegal nor abhorrent , and that such deals are regularly made by politicians of all levels . Chris Cillizza of The Washington Post felt the matter only appeared to be a scandal because the White House badly mishandled the response , and Chicago Tribune writer John Kass wrote , " Offering a spot to an ambitious young politician to protect an old servile weakling isn 't new . Presidents do it , governors do it . Big @-@ city mayors really know how to do it . " 
 = Bruce Willis = 
 Walter Bruce Willis ( born March 19 , 1955 ) is an American actor , producer , and singer . His career began on the Off @-@ Broadway stage and then in television in the 1980s , most notably as David Addison in Moonlighting ( 1985 – 1989 ) . He is known for his role of John McClane in the Die Hard series . He has appeared in over 60 films , including Color of Night ( 1994 ) , Pulp Fiction ( 1994 ) , 12 Monkeys ( 1995 ) , The Fifth Element ( 1997 ) , Armageddon ( 1998 ) , The Sixth Sense ( 1999 ) , Unbreakable ( 2000 ) , Sin City ( 2005 ) , Red ( 2010 ) , The Expendables 2 ( 2012 ) , and Looper ( 2012 ) . 
 Willis married actress Demi Moore in 1987 , and they had three daughters , including Rumer , before their divorce in 2000 . Since 2009 , he has been married to model Emma Heming , with whom he has two daughters . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Willis was born Walter Bruce Willis on March 19 , 1955 in the town of Idar @-@ <unk> , West Germany . His father , David Willis ( 1929 @-@ 2009 ) , was an American soldier . His mother , Marlene , was German , born in Kassel . Willis is the oldest of four children : he has a sister , Florence , and a brother , David . His brother Robert died of pancreatic cancer in 2001 , aged 42 . 
 After being discharged from the military in 1957 , Willis 's father took his family back to Carneys Point Township , New Jersey . Willis has described himself as having come from a " long line of blue collar people " . His mother worked in a bank and his father was a welder , master mechanic , and factory worker . Willis attended Penns Grove High School in his hometown , where he encountered issues with a stutter . He was nicknamed " Buck @-@ Buck " by his schoolmates . Finding it easy to express himself on stage and losing his stutter in the process , Willis began performing on stage ; his high school activities were marked by such things as the drama club and being student council president . 
 After high school , Willis took a job as a security guard at the Salem Nuclear Power Plant and transported work crews at the DuPont Chambers Works factory in Deepwater , New Jersey . After working as a private investigator ( a role he would play in the television series Moonlighting and the 1991 film The Last Boy Scout ) , Willis turned to acting . He enrolled in the Drama Program at Montclair State University , where he was cast in the class production of Cat on a Hot Tin Roof . Willis left school in his junior year and moved to New York City , where in the early 1980s he supported himself as a bartender at the West 19th Street art bar Kamikaze . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 Willis left New York City and headed to California to audition for several television shows . In 1984 , he appeared in an episode of the TV series Miami Vice , titled " No Exit " . In 1985 , he was the guest actor in the first episode of the 1980s revival of The Twilight Zone , " <unk> " . He auditioned for the role of David Addison Jr. of the television series Moonlighting ( 1985 – 89 ) , competing against 3 @,@ 000 other actors for the position . The starring role , opposite Cybill Shepherd , helped to establish him as a comedic actor , with the show lasting five seasons winning him an Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series and a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor - Television Series Musical or Comedy . During the height of the show 's success , beverage maker Seagram hired Willis as the pitchman for their Golden Wine Cooler products . The advertising campaign paid the rising star between $ 5 – 7 million over two years . In spite of that , Willis chose not to renew his contract with the company when he decided to stop drinking alcohol in 1988 . 
 Willis had his first lead role in a feature film in the 1987 Blake Edwards film Blind Date , with Kim Basinger and John Larroquette . Edwards cast him again to play the real @-@ life cowboy actor Tom Mix in Sunset ( 1988 ) . However , it was his then @-@ unexpected turn in the film Die Hard ( 1988 ) as John McClane that catapulted him to movie star and action hero status . He performed most of his own stunts in the film , and the film grossed $ 138 @,@ 708 @,@ 852 worldwide . Following his success with Die Hard , he had a leading role in the drama In Country as Vietnam veteran Emmett Smith and also provided the voice for a talking baby in Look Who 's Talking , as well as its sequel Look Who 's Talking Too . 
 In the late 1980s , Willis enjoyed moderate success as a recording artist , recording an album of pop @-@ blues titled The Return of Bruno , which included the hit single " Respect Yourself " , promoted by a Spinal Tap – like rockumentary parody featuring scenes of him performing at famous events including Woodstock . He released a version of the Drifters song " Under the Boardwalk " as a follow @-@ up , which got to No. 2 in the UK Top 40 , though was less successful in the U.S. Willis returned to the recording studio several times afterward . ( See Discography below . ) 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 Having acquired major personal success and pop culture influence playing John McClane in Die Hard , Willis reprised his role in the sequels Die Hard 2 ( 1990 ) and Die Hard with a Vengeance ( 1995 ) . These first three installments in the Die Hard series grossed over US $ 700 million internationally and propelled Willis to the first rank of Hollywood action stars . 
 In the early 1990s , Willis 's career suffered a moderate slump , as he starred in flops such as The Bonfire of the Vanities ( 1990 ) , Striking Distance ( 1993 ) and a film he co @-@ wrote , Hudson Hawk ( 1991 ) , among others . He starred in a leading role in the highly sexualized erotic thriller , Color of Night ( 1994 ) : another box office failure , it was savaged by critics but did well in the home video market and became one of the Top 20 most @-@ rented films in the United States in 1995 . 
 In 1994 , he had a supporting role in Quentin Tarantino 's acclaimed Pulp Fiction , which gave a new boost to his career . In 1996 , he was the executive producer and star of the cartoon Bruno the Kid which featured a CGI representation of himself . He went on to play the lead roles in Twelve Monkeys ( 1995 ) and The Fifth Element ( 1997 ) . However , by the end of the 1990s , his career had fallen into another slump with critically panned films , like The Jackal , Mercury Rising , and Breakfast of Champions , saved only by the success of the Michael Bay @-@ directed Armageddon which was the highest grossing film of 1998 worldwide . The same year his voice and likeness were featured in the PlayStation video game Apocalypse . In 1999 , Willis then went on to the starring role in M. Night Shyamalan 's film , The Sixth Sense . The film was both a commercial and critical success and helped to increase interest in his acting career . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 In 2000 , Willis won an Emmy for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series for his work on Friends ( in which he played the father of Ross Geller 's much @-@ younger girlfriend ) . He was also nominated for a 2001 American Comedy Award ( in the Funniest Male Guest Appearance in a TV Series category ) for his work on Friends . Also in 2000 , Willis played Jimmy " The Tulip " <unk> in The Whole Nine Yards alongside Matthew Perry . Willis was originally cast as Terry Benedict in Ocean 's Eleven ( 2001 ) but dropped out to work on recording an album . In Ocean 's Twelve ( 2004 ) , he makes a cameo appearance as himself . In 2005 , he appeared in the film adaptation of Sin City . In 2007 , he appeared in the Planet Terror half of the double feature Grindhouse as the villain , a mutant soldier . This marked Willis 's second collaboration with director Robert Rodriguez , following Sin City . 
 Willis has appeared on the Late Show with David Letterman several times throughout his career . He filled in for an ill David Letterman on his show February 26 , 2003 , when he was supposed to be a guest . On many of his appearances on the show , Willis stages elaborate jokes , such as wearing a day @-@ glo orange suit in honor of the Central Park gates , having one side of his face made up with simulated buckshot wounds after the Harry Whittington shooting , or trying to break a record ( parody of David Blaine ) of staying underwater for only twenty seconds . 
 On April 12 , 2007 , he appeared again , this time wearing a Sanjaya <unk> wig . On his June 25 , 2007 , appearance , he wore a mini @-@ turban on his head to accompany a joke about his own fictional documentary titled An <unk> <unk> ( a wordplay on An Inconvenient Truth ) . Willis also appeared in Japanese Subaru Legacy television commercials . Tying in with this , Subaru did a limited run of <unk> , badged " Subaru Legacy Touring Bruce " , in honor of Willis . 
 Willis has appeared in four films with Samuel L. Jackson ( National Lampoon 's Loaded Weapon 1 , Pulp Fiction , Die Hard with a Vengeance , and Unbreakable ) and both actors were slated to work together in Black Water Transit , before dropping out . Willis also worked with his eldest daughter , Rumer , in the 2005 film Hostage . In 2007 , he appeared in the thriller Perfect Stranger , opposite Halle Berry , the crime / drama film Alpha Dog , opposite Sharon Stone , and reprised his role as John McClane in Live Free or Die Hard . Subsequently , he appeared in the films What Just Happened and <unk> , based on the comic book of the same name . 
 Willis was slated to play U.S. Army general William R. Peers in director Oliver Stone 's <unk> , a drama about the investigation of the 1968 My Lai Massacre . However , due to the 2007 Writers Guild of America strike , the film was cancelled . Willis appeared on the 2008 Blues Traveler album North Hollywood Shootout , giving a spoken word performance over an instrumental blues rock jam on the track " Free Willis ( Ruminations from Behind Uncle Bob 's Machine Shop ) " . In early 2009 , he appeared in an advertising campaign to publicize the insurance company Norwich Union 's change of name to Aviva . 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 Willis starred with Tracy Morgan in the comedy Cop Out , directed by Kevin Smith and about two police detectives investigating the theft of a baseball card . The film was released in February 2010 . Willis appeared in the music video for the song " <unk> " by Gorillaz . Also in 2010 , he appeared in a cameo with former Planet Hollywood co @-@ owners and ' 80s action stars Sylvester Stallone and Arnold Schwarzenegger in the film The Expendables . Willis played the role of generic bald man " Mr. Church " . This was the first time these three legendary action stars appeared on screen together . Although the scene featuring the three was short , it was one of the most highly anticipated scenes in the film . The trio filmed their scene in an empty church on October 24 , 2009 . Willis next starred in RED , an adaptation of the comic book mini @-@ series of the same name , in which he portrayed Frank Moses . The film was released on October 15 , 2010 . 
 Willis starred alongside Bill Murray , Edward Norton , and Frances McDormand in Moonrise Kingdom ( 2012 ) . Filming took place in Rhode Island under the direction of Wes Anderson , in 2011 . Willis returned , in an expanded role , in The Expendables 2 ( 2012 ) . He appeared alongside Joseph Gordon @-@ Levitt in the sci @-@ fi action film , Looper ( 2012 ) , as the older version of Gordon @-@ Levitt 's character , Joe . 
 Willis teamed up with 50 Cent in a film directed by David Barrett called Fire with Fire , starring opposite Josh Duhamel and Rosario Dawson , about a fireman who must save the love of his life . Willis also joined Vince Vaughn and Catherine Zeta @-@ Jones in Lay the Favorite , directed by Stephen Frears , about a Las Vegas cocktail waitress who becomes an elite professional gambler . The two films were distributed by Lionsgate Entertainment . 
 Willis reprised his most famous role , John McClane , for a fifth time , starring in A Good Day to Die Hard , which was released on February 14 , 2013 . In an interview , Willis said , " I have a warm spot in my heart for Die Hard ..... it 's just the sheer novelty of being able to play the same character over 25 years and still be asked back is fun . It 's much more challenging to have to do a film again and try to compete with myself , which is what I do in Die Hard . I try to improve my work every time . " 
 On October 12 , 2013 , Willis hosted Saturday Night Live with Katy Perry as a musical guest . 
 Willis will star in the movie adaptation of the video game Kane & Lynch : Dead Men , named Kane & Lynch . 
 In 2015 , Willis made his Broadway debut in William Goldman 's adaptation of Stephen King 's novel Misery opposite Laurie Metcalf at the Broadhurst Theatre . 
 = = Business activities = = 
 Films featuring Willis have grossed between US $ 2 @.@ 64 billion and $ 3 @.@ 05 billion at the North American box offices , making him in 2010 the eighth highest @-@ grossing actor in a leading role and 12th @-@ highest including supporting roles . He is a two @-@ time Emmy Award winner , two @-@ time Golden Globe Award winner , and has been nominated for a Saturn Award four times . 
 Willis owns property in Los Angeles and in Penns Grove , New Jersey ; rents apartments at Trump Tower and in Riverside South , Manhattan , both in New York City ; has a home in Malibu , California ; a ranch in Montana ; a beach home on Parrot Cay in Turks and Caicos ; and multiple properties in Sun Valley , Idaho . 
 In 2000 , Willis , with his business partner Arnold Rifkin , started a motion picture production company called Cheyenne Enterprises . He left the company to be run solely by Rifkin in 2007 after Live Free or Die Hard . He also owns several small businesses in Hailey , Idaho , including The Mint Bar and The Liberty Theater and is a co @-@ founder of Planet Hollywood , with actors Arnold Schwarzenegger and Sylvester Stallone . In 2009 Willis signed a contract to become the international face of Belvedere SA 's Sobieski Vodka in exchange for 3 @.@ 3 % ownership in the company . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Willis ' acting role models are Gary Cooper , Robert De Niro , Steve McQueen and John Wayne . Willis is left handed . 
 = = = Relationships and children = = = 
 At the premiere for the film Stakeout , Willis met actress Demi Moore . They married on November 21 , 1987 , and had three daughters : Rumer Willis ( born August 16 , 1988 ) , Scout ( born July 20 , 1991 ) , and Tallulah ( born 1994 ) . They announced their separation on June 24 , 1998 , and filed for divorce on October 18 , 2000 . Regarding the divorce , Willis stated , " I felt I had failed as a father and a husband by not being able to make it work . " He credited actor Will Smith for helping him cope with the situation . Willis has maintained a close relationship with both Moore and her third husband , actor Ashton Kutcher , and attended their wedding . 
 Willis was engaged to actress Brooke Burns until they broke up in 2004 after ten months together . He married model Emma Heming in Turks and Caicos on March 21 , 2009 ; guests included his three daughters , Demi Moore , and Ashton Kutcher . The ceremony was not legally binding , so the couple wed again in a civil ceremony in Beverly Hills , six days later . The couple has two daughters : Mabel Ray Willis ( b . 2012 ) and Evelyn Penn Willis ( b . 2014 ) . 
 = = = Religious views = = = 
 Willis was , at one point , Lutheran ( specifically Lutheran Church – Missouri Synod ) , but no longer practices . In a July 1998 interview with George magazine , he stated : 
 Organized religions in general , in my opinion , are dying forms . ... They were all very important when we didn 't know why the sun moved , why weather changed , why hurricanes occurred , or volcanoes happened . ... Modern religion is the end trail of modern mythology . But there are people who interpret the Bible literally . Literally ! I choose not to believe that 's the way . And that 's what makes America cool , you know ? 
 = = Political views = = 
 In 1988 , Willis and then @-@ wife Demi Moore campaigned for Massachusetts Governor Michael Dukakis 's Presidential bid . Four years later , he supported President George H. W. Bush for reelection and was an outspoken critic of Bill Clinton . However , in 1996 , he declined to endorse Clinton 's Republican opponent Bob Dole , because Dole had criticized Demi Moore for her role in the film Striptease . Willis was an invited speaker at the 2000 Republican National Convention , and supported George W. Bush that year . He did not make any contributions or public endorsements in the 2008 presidential campaign . In several June 2007 interviews , he declared that he maintains some Republican ideologies . 
 In 2006 , he said that the United States should intervene more into Colombia , in order to end the drug trafficking . In several interviews Willis has said that he supports large salaries for teachers and police officers , and said he is disappointed in the United States foster care system as well as treatment of Native Americans . Willis also stated that he is a supporter of gun rights , stating , " Everyone has a right to bear arms . If you take guns away from legal gun owners , then the only people who have guns are the bad guys . " 
 In February 2006 , Willis appeared in Manhattan to talk about his film 16 Blocks with reporters . One reporter attempted to ask Willis about his opinion on the current government , but was interrupted by Willis in mid @-@ sentence : " I 'm sick of answering this fucking question . I 'm a Republican only as far as I want a smaller government , I want less government intrusion . I want them to stop shitting on my money and your money and tax dollars that we give 50 percent of every year . I want them to be fiscally responsible and I want these goddamn lobbyists out of Washington . Do that and I 'll say I 'm a Republican . I hate the government , OK ? I 'm apolitical . Write that down . I 'm not a Republican . " 
 Willis ' name was in an advertisement in the Los Angeles Times on August 17 , 2006 , that condemned Hamas and Hezbollah and supported Israel in the 2006 Israel @-@ Lebanon war . 
 = = Military interests = = 
 Throughout his film career , Willis has depicted several military characters in films such as The Siege , Hart 's War , Tears of the Sun , Grindhouse and G.I. Joe : Retaliation . Growing up in a military family , Willis has publicly sold Girl Scout cookies for the United States armed forces . In 2002 , Willis 's then 8 @-@ year @-@ old daughter , Tallulah , suggested that he purchase Girl Scout cookies to send to troops . Willis purchased 12 @,@ 000 boxes of cookies , and they were distributed to sailors aboard USS John F. Kennedy and other troops stationed throughout the Middle East at the time . 
 In 2003 , Willis visited Iraq as part of the USO tour , singing to the troops with his band , The Accelerators . Willis considered joining the military to help fight the second Iraq war , but was deterred by his age . It was believed he offered $ 1 million to any noncombatant who turns in terrorist leaders Osama bin Laden , Ayman al @-@ Zawahiri , or Abu Musab al @-@ Zarqawi ; in the June 2007 issue of Vanity Fair , however , he clarified that the statement was made hypothetically and not meant to be taken literally . Willis has also criticized the media for its coverage of the war , complaining that the press were more likely to focus on the negative aspects of the war : 
 I went to Iraq because what I saw when I was over there was soldiers — young kids for the most part — helping people in Iraq ; helping getting the power turned back on , helping get hospitals open , helping get the water turned back on and you don 't hear any of that on the news . You hear , ' X number of people were killed today , ' which I think does a huge disservice . It 's like spitting on these young men and women who are over there fighting to help this country . 
 Willis stated in 2005 that he wanted to " make a pro @-@ war film in which American soldiers will be depicted as brave fighters for freedom and democracy . " The film would follow members of Deuce Four , the 1st Battalion , 24th Infantry , who spent considerable time in Mosul and were decorated heavily for it . The film is to be based on the writings of blogger Michael Yon , a former United States Army Special Forces soldier who was embedded with Deuce Four and sent regular dispatches about their activities . Willis described the plot of the film as " these guys who do what they are asked for very little money to defend and fight for what they consider to be freedom . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In 1996 , Roger Director , a writer and producer from Moonlighting , wrote a roman à clef on Willis titled A Place to Fall . Cybill Shepherd wrote in her 2000 autobiography , Cybill Disobedience , that Willis was angry at Director , because the character was written as a " neurotic , petulant actor . " In 1998 , Willis participated in Apocalypse , a PlayStation video game . The game was originally announced to feature Willis as a sidekick , not as the main character . The company reworked the game using Willis 's likeness and voice and changed the game to use him as the main character . In Quebec , Canada , Willis ' voice has been overdubbed in French , in 28 of his films , by Jean @-@ Luc <unk> . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Solo albums 
 1987 : The Return of Bruno ( Motown , OCLC <unk> ) 
 1989 : If It Don 't Kill You , It Just Makes You Stronger ( Motown / <unk> , OCLC <unk> ) 
 2001 : Classic Bruce Willis : The Universal Masters Collection ( Polygram Int 'l , OCLC <unk> ) 
 Compilations / Guest appearances 
 1986 : Moonlighting soundtrack ; track " Good Lovin ' " 
 1991 : Hudson Hawk soundtrack ; tracks " Swinging on a Star " and " Side by Side " , both duets with Danny Aiello 
 2003 : Rugrats Go Wild soundtrack ; " Big Bad Cat " with Chrissie Hynde and " Lust for Life " 
 2008 : North Hollywood Shootout , Blues Traveler ; track " Free Willis ( Ruminations from Behind Uncle Bob 's Machine Shop ) " 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Willis has won a variety of awards and has received various honors throughout his career in television and film . 
 1986 / 87 : Emmy ( Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series ) and Golden Globe ( Best Performance by an Actor in a TV @-@ Series – Comedy / Musical ) Awards for Moonlighting ( also received four nominations for the show ) 
 1986 : Nominated for a Golden Globe for Best Supporting Actor for In Country 
 1994 : Maxim magazine ranked his sex scene in Color of Night the # 1 sex scene in film history 
 1998 : Golden Raspberry Award ( Worst Actor ) for Armageddon , Mercury Rising and The Siege 
 2000 : Blockbuster Entertainment Award ( " Favorite Actor – Suspense " ) and the People 's Choice Award ( " Favorite Motion Picture Star in a Drama " ) for The Sixth Sense ( also nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Actor and received two nominations for the MTV Movie Awards for " Best Male Performance " and " Best On @-@ Screen Duo " ) 
 2000 : Emmy for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series for Friends 
 2002 : The Hasty Pudding Man of the Year award from Harvard 's Hasty Pudding Theatricals – given to performers who give a lasting and impressive contribution to the world of entertainment 
 2002 : Appointed as national spokesman for Children in Foster Care by President George W. Bush ; Willis wrote online : " I saw Foster Care as a way for me to serve my country in a system by which shining a little bit of light could benefit a great deal by helping kids who were literally wards of the government . " 
 2006 : Honored by French government for his contributions to the film industry ; appointed an Officer of the French Order of Arts and Letters in a ceremony in Paris ; the French Prime Minister stated , " This is France 's way of paying tribute to an actor who epitomizes the strength of American cinema , the power of the emotions that he invites us to share on the world 's screens and the sturdy personalities of his legendary characters . " 
 2006 : Honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on October 16 ; located at <unk> Hollywood Boulevard and it was the <unk> star awarded in its history ; at the reception , he stated , " I used to come down here and look at these stars and I could never quite figure out what you were supposed to do to get one ... time has passed and now here I am doing this , and I 'm still excited . I 'm still excited to be an actor . " 
 2011 : Inducted into the New Jersey Hall of Fame 
 2013 : Promoted to the dignity of Commander of the Order of Arts and Letters on February 11 by French Minister of Culture Aurélie <unk> 
 = Shirehampton railway station = 
 Shirehampton railway station is on the Severn Beach Line and serves the district of Shirehampton in Bristol , England . It is 7 @.@ 6 miles ( 12 @.@ 2 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads . Its three letter station code is SHH . The station has a single platform which serves trains in both directions . As of 2015 it is managed by Great Western Railway , which is the third franchise to be responsible for the station since privatisation in 1997 . They provide all train services at the station , mainly a train every forty minutes in each direction between Bristol Temple Meads and Avonmouth . 
 The station was opened in 1865 as the headquarters of the Bristol Port Railway and Pier , a railway which ran along the River Avon from Hotwells to a pier at Avonmouth , and was linked to the national network in 1877 . The station had a single platform to begin with , but was rebuilt with a second in 1903 , as well as a signal box and a goods yard . By the 1930s the station had ten staff . 
 The Severn Beach Line declined over the latter half of the twentieth century , with passenger numbers falling significantly . Goods services at Shirehampton ended in 1965 , and all staff were withdrawn in 1967 . The second platform and signal box were taken out of use in 1970 , with the station buildings sold off and later destroyed by fire . Services had decreased to ten per day each direction by 2005 , but have since increased to twenty @-@ four trains per day . 
 = = Description = = 
 The station is located in the Shirehampton district of Bristol , a primarily residential area on the north bank of the River Avon near the Severn Estuary . The A4 Bristol Portway is just to the north of the station , with a commercial vehicle hire depot in between . The railway crosses Station Road directly to the west of the station , and is bridged by Hung Road slightly to the east . The station is on the Severn Beach Line from Bristol Temple Meads to Severn Beach , 7 miles 50 chains ( 12 @.@ 3 km ) from Temple Meads and 5 miles 73 chains ( 9 @.@ 5 km ) from Severn Beach . It is the seventh station from Temple Meads . The next station towards Temple Meads is Sea Mills ; the next station towards Severn Beach is Avonmouth . 
 The station is on an east @-@ west alignment , curving towards the north . There is a single 140 @-@ yard ( 130 m ) -long platform which serves trains in both directions , situated on the north side of the track . The station 's southern platform was abandoned in 1970 and is overgrown . The station is only accessible via a footpath from the car park on Station Road , which is just off the A4 Portway . 
 Timetable information is provided at the station ; help points show next train information and allow users to contact railway staff . There is no ticket office or other means for buying or collecting tickets . There is a car park with 10 spaces on Station Road , as well as stands for four bicycles . The nearest bus stops are on the A4 Portway . 
 The line through Shirehampton has a speed limit of 30 miles per hour ( 48 km / h ) for locomotive @-@ hauled trains and 35 miles per hour ( 56 km / h ) for diesel multiple units . The line , which is not electrified , handles less than 5 million train tonnes per year , has a loading gauge of W6 and a route availability of 7 . In the 2012 / 13 financial year , approximately 50 @,@ 000 passengers used Shirehampton station , making it the <unk> busiest station in the country and the eleventh busiest within the Bristol unitary authority area , busier only than St Andrews Road . This was an increase of 34 % from the 2002 – 03 financial year , and reflected a general rise in usage of the Severn Beach Line . 
 = = Services = = 
 Services at Shirehampton are all operated by Great Western Railway , using mainly Class 150 Sprinter units . On Monday to Friday there are 25 trains per day in each direction : three trains run every two hours between Bristol Temple Meads and Avonmouth , with one extended to St Andrew 's Road and Severn Beach , giving a service at Sea Mills of one train in each direction every 40 minutes . Most services start at Bristol , but one evening service to Avonmouth begins at Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . On Saturdays there is a similar level of service , at 24 trains per day . Sunday sees a roughly hourly service to and from Bristol , ten trains per day , with only two services extending to Severn Beach , except during the May – September timetable period when all services are extended . The first and last Sunday trains towards Bristol are extended to Taunton via Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , and there are similar workings in the other direction . 
 Most trains from Shirehampton call at all stations , but some services omit Lawrence Hill . The typical journey time to Bristol Temple Meads is roughly 30 minutes , and 15 minutes to Severn Beach . In 2012 , the single fare to Clifton Down or Severn Beach was £ 1 @.@ 50 , and £ 3 return for the whole line . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction and initial operations = = = 
 The station was opened on 6 March 1865 when services began on the Bristol Port Railway and Pier ( BPRP ) , a self @-@ contained railway which ran along the north bank of the River Avon to a deep water pier on the Severn Estuary at Avonmouth . The route was 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) standard gauge single track , with Shirehampton initially the second station along the line , 3 miles 51 chains ( 5 @.@ 9 km ) from the southern terminus at Hotwells . Shirehampton was the BPRP 's headquarters , and was the site where construction of the railway began – the first sod being turned on 19 February 1863 by the Mayoress of Bristol , Mrs Sholto Vere Hare . 
 The original station was situated at a passing loop , with a single platform on the north side of the line . The building , which is noted as having been architecturally superior to other stations on the line , contained a booking office , porters ' rooms , and an office for the line superintendent . The platform was covered along its entire length . A single @-@ road engine shed was sited at the east end of the station from 1875 , but burnt down in 1900 . The initial service was six trains per day in each direction , however trains did not stop at Shirehampton on Sundays due to opposition from a local church , but this practice ended in May the same year following complaints from other residents and businesses . 
 = = = Connection to the national network = = = 
 The BPRP ran in to trouble by 1871 when the terminal pier at Avonmouth became difficult to use due to a build @-@ up of silt . With no prospect of a proper dock being funded without a connection to the national rail network , the Clifton Extension Railway ( CER ) was approved . This was a joint venture by the BPRP , Great Western Railway and Midland Railway which ran from Sneyd Park Junction , south of Sea Mills , via Clifton Down , to join up with the national network at Narroways Hill Junction . The link opened in 1877 , but initially only for goods trains . The route from Sneyd Park Junction to Clifton Down was subsequently cleared for passenger use on 3 August 1878 , but the Midland and Great Western Railways did not think the BPRP track was in a suitable condition and so refused to run any passenger trains beyond Clifton Down . Services along the BPRP however increased to eight trains per day in each direction from 1877 , and then to ten each way by 1887 . From 1 September 1885 , when passenger services along the link finally started , the Great Western offered six trains per day each direction between Avonmouth and Bristol Temple Meads . Fearing competition , the BPRP did not allow passengers to use GWR services between its stations . The Midland Railway did not run any passenger services beyond Clifton Down , apart from a one @-@ month trial service in September 1885 . Despite the increased traffic the BPRP suffered financially , and was taken over by the CER in 1890 . 
 In 1893 the platform was lengthened to 235 feet ( 72 m ) at a cost of £ 235 , and a station master 's house built . A second track was laid along the line in 1903 , and a new platform built on the south side of the line , coming in to use on 16 May . The station was remodelled at the same time , adding comfortable waiting rooms . The new platform had a waiting room and 20 @-@ lever signal box built on it , with an open footbridge to connect the two platforms . A small goods yard and coal sidings were added behind the northern platform , accessible from the east . The yard was subsequently extended in 1921 by Nott Brodie & Co Ltd to handle traffic from construction of the Bristol Portway . By 1910 there were 17 trains from Bristol to Avonmouth and 15 back , increasing to 21 and 19 respectively by 1920 . 
 During the First World War , an Army Remount Service depot was located nearby , with Shirehampton station handling the goods traffic , with up to 60 wagons per day inbound , mostly containing hay and sawdust for the horses . Twelve wagons of manure were dispatched each day , some to Cadbury Road on the Weston , Clevedon and Portishead Light Railway . 
 After the war , construction of the Bristol Portway along the Avon Gorge necessitated the closure of the line from Sneyd Park Junction to Hotwells , with trains along it ceasing on 3 July 1922 . By this point there were nine trains per day from Hotwells , and eight return . To compensate for the loss of service , the Great Western provided an additional four trains daily towards Bristol and six toward Avonmouth . In 1923 , grouping resulted in the Midland Railway being absorbed into the London , Midland and Scottish Railway ( LMS ) , and the line continued in a joint arrangement between the Great Western and the LMS . At this point Shirehampton station employed a station master , three clerks and four porters ; throughout the 1930s there were an average of ten staff . From 1928 many services to Avonmouth were extended to Severn Beach . By 1947 , just before the railways were nationalised , there were 33 services each direction between Avonmouth and Temple Meads , with 18 on Sundays . Some trains made circular trips to and from Temple Meads via Clifton Down and Henbury or Pilning . 
 = = = British Rail and privatisation = = = 
 When the railways were nationalised in 1948 , services at Shirehampton came under the aegis of the Western Region of British Railways . Staff levels decreased by 1958 to two clerks , two leading porters , one porter , and a stationmaster who was also responsible for Sea Mills railway station . Service levels had decreased slightly by 1955 to 28 towards Avonmouth and 29 towards Bristol , but the services were at regular intervals . Passenger numbers however dropped sharply in 1961 as the result of a fare increase , and so in 1962 a new reduced timetable was enacted , which lost more passengers . A year later in 1963 , the Beeching report suggested the complete withdrawal of services along the line , but ultimately only those beyond Severn Beach or via Henbury were withdrawn . Goods services from the station ended on 29 November 1965 , and from 17 July 1967 all staffing was withdrawn from stations along the line , including Shirehampton , with tickets issued by the train guard . An 800 @-@ ton oil storage tank was built in the station yard in 1967 , with deliveries continuing until the mid @-@ eighties . By 2005 the yard had been redeveloped and was occupied by a commercial vehicle hire company . The general reduction in passenger traffic , as well as the transfer of Avonmouth goods traffic to the Henbury Loop Line , allowed the removal of the second track from 19 October 1970 , with all services using the original , northern platform . The signal box was taken out of service at the same time , and the buildings on the remaining platform sold off before being destroyed by a fire in the 1990s . The station master 's house is now a private dwelling , with the garden containing a small brick building with a chimney surviving from the station buildings . By 1974 , service had reduced to 19 trains per day in each direction , with no Sunday services beyond Avonmouth . 
 British Rail was split into business @-@ led sectors in the 1980s , at which time operations at Shirehampton passed to Regional Railways . At this time , all trains ran to Severn Beach , but the service pattern was irregular . This changed in 1995 when an hourly timetable was introduced for peak times , but northbound services were terminated at Avonmouth . 
 When the railway was privatised in 1997 , local services were franchised to Wales & West , which was succeeded by Wessex Trains , an arm of National Express , in 2001 . Following action by Friends of Severn Beach Railway ( FOSBR ) and a string of protests , services had increased to 10 per day in each direction by 2005 , with Bristol City Council providing a subsidy to Wessex Trains . The Wessex franchise was amalgamated with the Great Western franchise into the Greater Western franchise from 2006 , and responsibility passed to First Great Western , a subsidiary company of FirstGroup , rebranded as Great Western Railway in 2015 . A minimum service requirement was written into the franchise agreement , ensuring an hourly service along the line , and this has since been increased to three trains every two hours ( 24 trains per day ) . Sunday services to Severn Beach were restored in 2010 . 
 = = Future = = 
 First Great Western declined a contractual option to continue the Greater Western passenger franchise ( of which services at Shirehampton are a part ) beyond 2013 , citing a desire for a longer @-@ term contract due to the impending upgrade to the Great Western Main Line . The franchise was put out to tender , but the process was halted and later scrapped due to the fallout from the collapse of the InterCity West Coast franchise competition . A two @-@ year franchise extension until September 2015 was agreed in October 2013 , and subsequently extended until March 2019 . 
 With the coming upgrade to the Great Western Main Line , the main line from London to Bristol is due to be electrified by 2016 . However , the electrification will not extend beyond the main lines , so Shirehampton will continue to be served by diesel trains , with the current " Sprinter " units expected to be replaced by Class 165 and 166 " Turbo " units . Stephen Williams , former MP for Bristol West ; and the group Friends of Suburban Bristol Railways supports the electrification being extended to the Severn Beach Line . 
 Improved services at Shirehampton are called for as part of the Greater Bristol Metro scheme , a rail transport plan which aims to enhance transport capacity in the Bristol area . There is an aspiration for half @-@ hourly services , with trains towards Bristol terminating alternately at Portishead and Bath Spa , however due to the large sections of the Severn Beach Line which are single @-@ track and to the congested main line from Temple Meads , such frequency is not currently feasible . The scheme was given the go @-@ ahead in July 2012 as part of the City Deal , whereby local councils would be given greater control over money by the government . There are also calls for the reopening of the Henbury Loop Line , which could allow a direct service from Shirehampton to Bristol Parkway via Avonmouth . Plans for a loop were rejected by the West of England Joint Transport Board , however Bristol City Councillors voted to send the decision back to the board for further discussion . 
 = Prairie Avenue = 
 Prairie Avenue is a north – south thoroughfare on the South Side of Chicago , which historically extended from 16th Street in the Near South Side community area of Chicago in Cook County , Illinois , United States , to the city 's southern limits and beyond . The street has a rich history from its origins as a major trail for horseback riders and carriages . During the last three decades of the 19th century , a six @-@ block section of the street served as the residence of many of Chicago 's elite families and an additional four @-@ block section was also known for grand homes . The upper six @-@ block section includes part of the historic Prairie Avenue District , which was declared a Chicago Landmark and added to the National Register of Historic Places . 
 Several of Chicago 's most important historical figures have lived on the street . This is especially true of the period of recovery from the Great Chicago Fire of 1871 when many of the most important families in the city moved to the street . Residents of the street have influenced the evolution of the city and have played prominent national and international roles . They have influenced the political history , the architecture , the culture , the economy , as well as the law and government of Chicago . The street has over time been influenced by the demographics of Chicago . 
 The importance of the street has declined , but it still has landmark buildings and is the backbone of a historic district . Preservation battles regarding various properties on the street have been notable with one having been chronicled on the front page of The New York Times . In the early 21st century , the street was redeveloped to host valuable and important condominiums . Recently , developments have extended the street north to accommodate new high @-@ rise condominiums , such as One Museum Park , along Roosevelt Road ( 12th Street ) . The redevelopment has extended the street so that it has prominent buildings bordering Grant Park with Prairie Avenue addresses . 
 = = History = = 
 Prairie Avenue once served as an Indian trail linking Fort Dearborn to Fort Wayne in Indiana and thus derived its name from the vast midwestern prairie land between the two endpoints . In 1812 , the Battle of Fort Dearborn occurred in the area that is now the northern section of the street , in what is known as the Near South Side community area . Casualties of the battle , such as William Wells and George Ronan , were struck down here . 
 Over time , the district has evolved from an upscale neighborhood to a factory district and back to an upscale neighborhood . Zoning in 1853 anticipated residential development , although only one grand villa existed at the time . By 1877 the eleven @-@ block area of Prairie Avenue as well as Calumet Avenue housed elite residences . By 1886 the finest mansions in the city , each equipped with its own carriage house , stood on Prairie Avenue . In the 1880s and 1890s , mansions for George Pullman , Marshall Field , John J. Glessner and Philip Armour anchored a neighborhood of over fifty mansions known as " Millionaire 's Row " . Many of the leading architects of the day , such as Richard Morris Hunt , Henry Hobson Richardson and Daniel Burnham designed mansions on the street . At the time of the 1893 World 's Columbian Exposition , guidebooks described the street as " the most expensive street west of Fifth Avenue " . However , after Bertha Palmer , society wife of Potter Palmer , built the Palmer Mansion that anchored the Gold Coast along Lake Shore Drive , the elite residents began to move north . 
 By 1911 , warehouses and factories cramped the Prairie Avenue District . Large industry overtook the district by 1950 . Early 21st century deindustrialisation , urban congestion , and historic preservation have brought the return of trendy buildings , and restored as well as renovated structures . Simultaneously new infill housing is resuscitating the district . Now , the historic northern section of the street is part of the Chicago Landmark Prairie Avenue District that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . It was declared a Chicago Landmark on December 27 , 1979 , and added to the National Register of Historic Places on November 15 , 1972 . The historic district includes the 1800 and 1900 @-@ blocks of South Prairie , the 1800 block of South Indiana and 211 through 217 East Cullerton . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the 1850s , railroad related industries prospered near the lumber district along the South Branch of the Chicago River . Thus , the business district began to supplant the elegant residences along Michigan and Wabash Avenues south of Jackson Boulevard . Shortly after the Civil War , the city 's wealthy residents settled on Prairie Avenue due to its proximity to the Loop less than a mile away and the fact that traveling there did not involve crossing the Chicago River . In 1870 , Daniel Thompson erected the first large upper @-@ Prairie Avenue home . Marshall Field followed in 1871 with a Richard Morris Hunt design . Prairie Avenue was the most posh Chicago address by the time of the Great Chicago Fire of 1871 . 
 Many of South Michigan Avenue 's elegant villas were destroyed in the Great Chicago Fire of 1871 . The post @-@ fire South Side of Chicago grew rapidly as all economic classes left the city 's center . Many of Chicago 's elite families settled along Prairie Avenue . By the 1870s and 1880s , Prairie Avenue was the location of elaborate houses between 16th Street and 22nd Street ( now Cermak Road ) . In 1886 , the urban elite , including George Pullman , Marshall Field , Philip Armour and John B. Sherman all owned family homes in this area that created an opulent Prairie Avenue streetscape reminiscent of European city streets ; as such , it was widely regarded as the city 's most fashionable neighborhood . Businesses , such as the Pullman Company , Armour & Company and D.H. Burnham & Company , with ties to Prairie Avenue had national and international reach and impact . Additional grand homes ( including many Queen Anne Style architecture and Richardsonian Romanesque ) were located on Prairie between 26th and 30th Streets starting in the mid @-@ 1880s . The last mansion , a three @-@ story Georgian Revival residence with 21 rooms , was built in the district at 2126 Prairie Avenue in 1905 . 
 However , as the start of the 20th century came , industry 's pervasive reach , increased railroad soot , and an encroaching vice district , caused the area to become less desirable , and the social elite vacated the region for quieter neighborhoods such as Kenwood , the Gold Coast and more commonly the suburban North Shore . The Chicago Tribune highlighted 1898 Prairie Avenue as a place that was undesirable to those for whom it was affordable , and unaffordable to those for whom it was desirable . Light industry and vacant lots overtook Prairie Avenue during the second half of the 20th century . The elegant mansions were mostly torn down or fell into extreme disrepair . By the 1970s , most of the residential buildings had been replaced by factories and parking lots . Starting in the late 1990s , the downtown housing market flourished in Chicago and the resulting boom that has transformed many neighborhoods revived Prairie Avenue , causing most of the factories to be demolished or converted to loft condominiums . The factories have been replaced by condominium projects and most of the remaining mansions have been renovated . 
 = = Influence = = 
 During the 1870s , 1880s and 1890s , upper Prairie Avenue residents were central to cultural and social fabric of the city . The economy was supported by the thousands of jobs created by the Pullman Car Company and Armour and Company . Chicago 's richest man , Marshall Field , changed the buying habits of the city . John <unk> saved the property from total chaos after the Great Chicago Fire by saving property records . At one point in the 1880s , sixteen of the 60 members of the Commercial Club of Chicago lived on Prairie Avenue . George Armour headed the Chicago Academy of Fine Arts , which became the Art Institute of Chicago . 1801 South Prairie resident , William Wallace Kimball , employed about 1500 people around the start of the 20th century in his organ and piano manufacturing company . John Glessner , a founder of International Harvester , built what has been described as the centerpiece of the historic district . 
 As a home to many of Chicago 's leading families , Prairie Avenue became the base of many important political movements . Woman 's suffrage had activists , such as Illinois Women Suffrage Association President Jane Jones , on Prairie Avenue . Illinois Central Railroad Co. v. State of Illinois , 146 U.S. 387 ( 1892 ) , pitted the public welfare of the city against the railroad industry and was the foundation for the public trust doctrine which facilitated the city 's reclamation of much of the lakefront . Prairie Avenue residents bolstered other efforts to fight against the railroads . The concentration of wealth also made Prairie Avenue the target of complaints about taxation inequities . 
 Many of these leading families also took part in philanthropy . John <unk> , founder of Chicago Title & Trust and Prairie Avenue resident , created the Illinois Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and convened local and state societies to unite under a national organization ( American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals ) that could combine its political strength and lobby Congress . The Illinois Institute of Technology was a successor entity of the Armour Institute of Technology , which was an outgrowth of the generosity of Philip and Joseph Armour . 
 = = Preservation = = 
 Historic preservation in Chicago has saved some of the city 's architectural heritage . The efforts of the Chicago Architecture Foundation and the Landmarks and Preservation Council of Illinois have been at the forefront of these efforts . The Commission on Chicago Landmarks ( now part of the city 's Department of Planning and Development ) has designated the Prairie Avenue Historic District as a city landmark . 
 A few of the mansions of the heyday still remain in the 1800 @-@ block including the National Historic landmark designated John J. Glessner House designed in 1886 by architect Henry H. Richardson for Glessner ; these provide a sense of the street 's former character . Glessner House , which was the subject of a notable preservation battle in the 1960s , is considered to be Richardson 's finest urban residence . This district includes the Henry B. Clarke House , which although twice relocated is purported to be the city 's oldest standing house . In addition to the Clarke House and the Glessner House , nine other houses from the late @-@ 19th century remain in the historic district portion of Prairie Avenue . Both the Glessner House and the Clarke House are on the National Historic Register and now serve as museums . Most of the Prairie Avenue families worshiped at the Chicago Landmark Second Presbyterian Church of Chicago , which is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 Marshall Field lived at 1905 South Prairie and purchased 1919 South Prairie for Marshall Field , Jr . It is believed that Solon Spencer Beman had contributed to the design of what is now known as the Marshall Field , Jr . Mansion . Then , Field hired Daniel Burnham to design extensions and additions to the property after purchasing it 1890 . In 2007 , the Commission on Chicago Landmarks announced the rehabilitation of the Marshall Field Jr . Mansion , which had been vacant for 40 years and which was renovated as six private residences , won a Preservation Award . 
 Today , Prairie Avenue has buildings indexed in the Chicago Historic Resources Survey in the Near South Side , Douglas , Grand Boulevard , Washington Park and Chatham community areas . Among the properties listed is a simple two @-@ flat used by Al Capone in the 1920s at <unk> South Prairie in Greater Grand Crossing . Other current prominent addresses are the Kimball House at 1801 South Prairie ( Near South Side ) , 2801 , <unk> , <unk> , and 3600 South Prairie ( Douglas ) , and <unk> South Prairie ( Grand Boulevard ) . 
 The William Wallace Kimball House , which is a three @-@ story turreted chateau , was designed by Solon Beman , who is best known for his work in the Pullman District of the Pullman community area . Adjacent to the Kimball House and across from the Glessner House is the Coleman @-@ Ames mansion at 1811 South Prairie . These two houses were formerly owned by R.R. Donnelley & Sons Company and now jointly serve as the national headquarters for the United States Soccer Federation ( USSF ) , which leased them from 1991 until 1998 when it purchased them from the Chicago Architectural Foundation . The Kimball house , which has been the product of a $ 1 million renovation in the 1990s by the USSF was featured in Richard Gere 's Primal Fear as well as several television shows . 
 Al Capone and his family lived in the two @-@ story red brick duplex at <unk> South Prairie Avenue from 1923 , which is shortly after he moved to Chicago , until 1931 , when he was sent off to prison for income tax fraud . The Capone family kept the home until his mother 's death in 1952 . In 1988 , the privately owned house was nominated for the National Register of Historic Places by historians as the home of one of Chicago 's most famous citizens . The nomination was withdrawn after local politicians and members of Italian @-@ American groups sharply argued that it would appear to validate the life of a murderer and hoodlum . The house retains the security bars on the basement windows and the brick garage out back , which the Capone built for his bullet @-@ proof Cadillac limousine . 
 In 2000 , the Howard Van Doren Shaw @-@ designed 1907 Georgian Revival Platt Luggage Building at <unk> South Prairie was the subject of preservation debates when McCormick Place attempted to tear it down to build a parking garage . The conflict , which was not settled before wreckers had knocked a hole in a corner of the building and which included protests and a petition to the Illinois Supreme Court , was described on the front page of The New York Times . Preservationists , including the Landmarks Preservation Council of Illinois and the National Trust for Historic Preservation , eventually dropped their appeals once the Metropolitan Pier and Exposition Authority committed to incorporating the original facade of the building into the exterior of the parking garage at an additional cost of $ 2 @.@ 5 million to the project . The Harriet F. Rees House at 2110 South Prairie was spared demolition in 2014 and moved one block north to 2017 South Prairie . 
 A book on the history of the street , entitled Chicago 's Historic Prairie Avenue , was published on June 2 , 2008 , as part of Arcadia Publishing Co . ' s Images of America series . William H. Tyre is the author . In 2006 , the Prairie District Neighborhood Alliance , a non @-@ profit organization , was formed to provide representation for thousands of South Loop residents , including the Prairie District , Central Station and Museum Park , Motor Row , the South Michigan Ave Corridor , as well as other areas of the Near South Side . 
 = = Today = = 
 In 2003 , the area redevelopment was well underway . <unk> and urbanization had pushed out manufacturing . As a result , factories were generally demolished , or converted to loft apartment buildings . Some neglected mansions survive as restored or renovated properties in the historic district . Today , Prairie Avenue is undergoing a redevelopment that includes One Museum Park ( 1215 South Prairie Avenue ) and One Museum Park West ( 1201 South Prairie Avenue ) . These Prairie Avenue addresses border the Roosevelt Road side of Grant Park . One Museum Park is the tallest building on Chicago 's South Side and among the tallest buildings in Chicago . It surpassed 340 on the Park as the tallest all @-@ residential building in Chicago , and it is second to the Trump World Tower in the United States . 
 = Daniel Santos ( boxer ) = 
 Daniel Santos ( born October 10 , 1975 in San Juan , Puerto Rico ) is a Puerto Rican professional boxer . As an amateur Santos represented Puerto Rico in international events , including the 1990 and 1992 Junior World Championships , Pan American Boxing Tournament , Goodwill Games , 1995 Pan American Games and the 1996 Summer Olympics , where he won a bronze medal in the Welterweight Division . Santos debuted as a professional in 1996 . Santos won the World Boxing Organization Welterweight championship on June 5 , 2000 . On March 16 , 2002 he vacated the welterweight division 's championship in order to compete against Yori Boy Campas for the vacant World Boxing Organization Light middleweight championship . Santos defended this championship on four occasions , against <unk> Takaloo ( in a fight where he won the World Boxing Union Light middleweight championship ) , Fulgencio Zúñiga , Michael Lerma and Antonio Margarito before losing it to Sergiy <unk> by unanimous decision in a fight that took place on December 3 , 2005 . On July 11 , 2008 , Santos won his third professional championship , knocking out Joachim Alcine in six rounds to win the World Boxing Association 's light middleweight title . 
 = = Amateur career and early life = = 
 Santos was raised in a family where boxing was a common profession , with his father Paquito Santos being a trainer and his brother Edgardo Santos being a former professional boxer . Early in his life Daniel Santos was enrolled in a school specialized in sports , located in a facility designed for the training of Olympic athletes in Puerto Rico . He eventually graduated from this institution and continued a career in boxing . Santos began to compete in the international amateur circuit in 1990 . On this year he won the bronze medal in the World Junior Championships that were organized in Lima , Peru . Two years later he competed in the World Junior Championships that were celebrated in Montreal , Canada , where he won the bronze medal , for the second straight time in a competition with worldwide scope . On 1993 he debuted in the adult division when he competed in the Panamerican Boxing championship . This event took place in Salinas , Puerto Rico . Santos won the gold medal on this tournament . In 1994 Santos represented Puerto Rico in the Goodwill Games that took place in Saint Petersburg , Russia . Here , Santos finished third in his division and won the bronze medal . His next international participation was in the 1995 Pan American games celebrated in Mar del Plata , Argentina , where he won the silver medal . The result of the championship fight was controversial , when David Reid won the fight by decision after Santos scored a knockdown during the course of the contest . Santos represented Puerto Rico once again at the 1996 Summer Olympics organized in Atlanta , Georgia . Here he competed in three fights , he defeated two adversaries by unanimous decision , these were : <unk> <unk> of Morocco with score of 16 @-@ 4 and Nariman <unk> of Uzbekistan with a score of 28 @-@ 15 . In his first fight he defeated Ernest Atangana <unk> of Cameroon by RSC ( referee stopping contest ) at the 2 : 54 mark of the first round . His last fight was against Oleg <unk> of Russia where he lost by points with score of 11 @-@ 13 . He finished the competition in the third global place and won the bronze medal , with this medal Santos became the sixth Puerto Rican boxer to win an Olympic medal . Daniel finished his amateur career compiling a record of 117 fights won and three defeats . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Welterweight = = = 
 Santos debuted as a professional on September 28 , 1996 against Andre Hawthorne in Fort Worth , Texas , in a fight where he won by technical knockout in the first round . Following this fight Santos compiled a record of twenty @-@ one victories , one defeat and one draw before competing for a world championship . During this period Santos boxed in the welterweight division , his adversaries in this stage of his career included : Bernard Gray , Miguel Gonzalez , Fidel <unk> , Juan <unk> Rodriguez , William Ruiz and Humberto Rodriguez . The first draw in Santos ' career occurred in a fight with Jose Luis Verdugo , that was part of a card that took place in El Cajon , California . On May 7 , 1999 Santos competed against Kofi <unk> in Las Vegas , Nevada . <unk> won this contest by technical knockout in the fifth round , marking Santos ' first defeat in the professional circuit . 
 = = = = WBO welterweight title = = = = 
 Santos fought Ahmed Kotiev for the World Boxing Organization 's welterweight championship on November 27 , 1999 . Kotiev retained the championship by split decision . The scores of the judges were 115 @-@ 113 and 115 @-@ 113 in favor of Kotiev and 117 @-@ 111 in favor of Santos . The fight was subsequently described as a " competitive and highly entertaining fight " and the result was reviewed as a " disputed " close split decision . On May 6 , 2000 these two boxers competed in a rematch of their previous fight . In the fifth round Santos won the fight by knockout , in the process winning his first professional championship , the World Boxing Organization 's championship . 
 On July 21 , 2000 , Santos defended the welterweight championship against Giovanni Parisi in Calabria , Italy . Santos won the fight by knockout in the fourth round . Following the fight Parisi stated that the welterweight championship was always his interest as he wanted to become the first Italian to win world championships in three different divisions . In this interview he claimed that his training prior to the fight was insufficient . Giovanni said : " We battled in Reggio Calabria , a coin toss from Sicily , and he <unk> me during the 4th round . I have no excuses . I didn ’ t train properly . " 
 His second defense was against Neil Sinclair in Yorkshire , Great Britain . In the first round Sinclair 's offensive was effective and he scored a knockdown on the defending champion . On the second round Santos responded to Sinclair 's strategy and won the fight by knockout . Prior to the fight Sinclair noted that a fight between Santos and him was supposed to happen eight years before , " We were both in the 1992 World junior championships in Montreal . We were both at the same weight and were at other side of the draw from each other and ended up with bronze medals . So I have watched him fight in person and shook hands on the podium . If we had both won our semi @-@ finals we would have faced each other . " Sinclair also stated that he expected to win based on his training , he said that all of his sparring partners were southpaws since Santos is one , this preparation also included contracting a new trainer . 
 On July 21 , 2001 , Santos defended against Antonio Margarito in a card that took place in Bayamón , Puerto Rico . This marked the first time that Santos fought a world title fight in Puerto Rico . At the moment of the fight Margarito was the mandatory challenger appointed by the World Boxing Organization , and it was televised on Showtime Too . The fight ended in at the 2 : 11 mark on the first round when the fight was stopped due to a large injury over Margarito 's right eye , the cut caused by an accidental head butt . The fight was declared a no @-@ contest and Santos retained the welterweight championship by default . Following the conclusion of the contest both competitors were visibly angered at the sudden conclusion . 
 = = = Light @-@ middleweight = = = 
 = = = = WBO light @-@ middleweight title = = = = 
 Santos boxed for the vacant WBO light @-@ middleweight title against Yori Boy Campas in a fight that took place at Bally 's Event Center in Las Vegas , Nevada . Santos won the fight when referee Joe Cortez intervened in the eleventh round . During the course of the fight numerous combinations hurt Campas and cut his face , in the eleventh round following one of Santos ' punches Campas informed Cortez that his vision was not functioning properly . At the moment of the fight 's conclusion the scores of the judges were 99 @-@ 91 , 97 @-@ 93 and 99 @-@ 90 in favor of Santos . On August 17 , 2002 , Santos defended this championship for a first time against <unk> Takaloo , in a fight that also involved the World Boxing Union Light middleweight championship . The event took place in the Cardiff Castle located in Cardiff , Wales . Takaloo began the fight by using his right hand often and on the fourth round he scored a knockdown . As the fight progressed Takaloo began to show signs of exhaustion and Santos managed to have a strong performance in the second half of the fight . Takaloo received cuts around both of his eyes which made the referee consider stopping the fight twice in the tenth round . When the fight ended Santos won the contest by unanimous decision and the judges ' scores were 116 @-@ 111 , 116 @-@ 112 , 117 @-@ 110 . 
 On January 14 , 2004 , Warrior 's Boxing Promotions announced that they had signed Santos to exclusively acquire the rights to promote the fights where he performed . At the moment of the announcement Santos said that he expected to have a productive business relationship with the promotion , and highlighted the company 's organization , he said : “ I am very impressed with the Warriors organization and believe that they will provide me with the platform to show the world that I am truly one of the best champions competing today . ” The executive director of the promotion , Jessie Robinson said that the company had been scouting Daniel for years , his words were : “ We have had our eye on Santos for the past two years and strongly feel that he is a serious player in the junior middleweight division . We will be announcing our long term plans for Mr. Santos shortly . ” 
 On September 11 , 2004 Santos fought in a rematch against Antonio Margarito as part of the undercard of the Cotto @-@ Pinto undercard . Early in the fight Santos ' strategy consisted of connecting with short punches with his left arm , including a strong impact to Margarito 's face in the first round . In the fifth round Margarito connected several strong punches to his head and body . Throughout the course of the fight both boxers fought at close quarters which led to their heads hitting against each other several times . Margarito 's face began bleeding in the sixth round which led to the referee stopping the fight twice in this round . Attempts by Francisco <unk> , Margarito 's <unk> , to stop the bleeding were unsuccessful . In the late rounds Santos began boxing and focused some of his punches in Margarito 's wound . In the tenth round Margarito responded to the bell but following the first seconds of the round the ringside doctor declared that he could not continue further . The result of the fight was decided by the scores of the judges , awarding Santos a victory by technical decision . On June 28 , 2003 he defended against Fulgencio Zúñiga in a card that took place in the Ruben Rodriguez Coliseum in Bayamón , Puerto Rico . Daniel won the contest by unanimous decision with identical scores of 118 @-@ 110 . 
 Santos was under contract with Warrior 's Boxing Promotions for one year , his contract ended when he abandoned the promotion . On April 26 , 2005 , Don King Productions announced that the company had acquired the exclusive rights to promote Santos ' fights . At the moment of the announcement Don King stated that : “ Daniel is another proud Puerto Rican world champion and I ’ m excited to have him with me , Junior middleweight is a solid division and there are many fights we can make for this great champion . Viva Puerto Rico ! . ” Santos said that this event held significance in his life because : “ I want to fight all the best fighters and by being with the best promoter , I know I will get those fights and make good money . I look forward to a long and happy relationship with Don King . ” When interviewed about Santos ' signing , Félix Trinidad Sr. said that he was impressed by Santos ' performance against Antonio Margarito and said that a fight between him and Félix Trinidad seemed plausible at the moment . On December 3 , 2005 Santos was scheduled to defend the light middleweight championship against Sergiy <unk> . In the eight round of the competition <unk> scored a knockdown . The three judges gave the fight a score of 115 @-@ 112 in favor of <unk> thus making him the new WBO champion . 
 On October 6 , 2007 Santos returned to action following a period of fifteen months of inactivity . This event took place in a fight card presented in the Madison Square Garden , against José Antonio Rivera . The contest ended in the eight round when Rivera 's corner surrendered by " throwing in the towel " . At the moment of the fight 's conclusion Rivera was receiving several combinations of punches to the face and displayed several injuries and cuts in his face as well as having his nose swollen . Prior to the decision Santos scored a knockdown which lasted until the count of eight . Following the fight Daniel noted that " it was a hard fight . " and that Rivera was a " hardy boxer with strong punches " , stating that his physical condition was responsible for his resistance throughout the contest . 
 = = = = WBA light @-@ middleweight title = = = = 
 On July 11 , 2008 , Santos competed in his first title fight since returning to action , facing Joachim Alcine for the WBA 's light middleweight championship . The first round was used by both fighters to study their adversary 's technique . Alcine began the second round aggressively , displaying accuracy in some of his punches . Santos focused on counter @-@ attacking Alcine 's offense during the following two rounds . He continued using this pattern , establishing notable control of the fight 's tempo in the fifth episode . In the sixth Santos connected a jab and followed it with a left hook , this combination injured Alcine who was unable to respond to the referee 's count , losing the contest by knockout . Subsequently , Santos was scheduled to defend the championship against <unk> Ishida on January 3 , 2009 . However , the fight was cancelled after it was suddenly suspended less than a month before the date . Don King proposed a <unk> contest against Sergio Gabriel Martínez , who held the World Boxing Council 's interim championship . Santos refused the offer , citing that he had less than a month to train for it after a long period of inactivity , but expressed interest in organizing it in another date . Consequently , the pugilist was inactive for several months . King made an offer to Ricardo Mayorga , pursuing a fight between both pugilists in May , but the negotiations failed to advance . On August 17 , 2009 , Top Rank won a bid to organize a fight between Santos and the WBA ’ s first contender , Yuri Foreman . The promotion scheduled the contest to take place as part of the undercard of " Firepower " , a card featuring a fight between Miguel Cotto and Manny Pacquiao in the main event . On that date , Santos lost the championship by unanimous decision to Foreman , with scores of 116 @-@ 110 and 117 @-@ 109 twice . 
 = Harrya chromapes = 
 Harrya chromapes , commonly known as the <unk> bolete or the chrome @-@ footed bolete , is species of bolete fungus in the family Boletaceae . The bolete is found in eastern North America , Costa Rica , and eastern Asia , where it grows on the ground , in a mycorrhizal association with deciduous and coniferous trees . Fruit bodies have smooth , rose @-@ pink caps that are initially convex before flattening out . The pores on the cap undersurface are white , aging to a pale pink as the spores mature . The thick stipe has fine pink or reddish dots ( scabers ) , and is white to pinkish but with a bright yellow base . The mushrooms are edible but are popular with insects , and so they are often infested with maggots . 
