 In its taxonomic history , Harrya chromapes has been shuffled to several different genera , including Boletus , Leccinum , and Tylopilus , and is known in field guides as a member of one of these genera . In 2012 , it was transferred to the newly created genus Harrya when it was established that morphological and molecular evidence demonstrated its distinctness from the genera in which it had formerly been placed . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described scientifically by American mycologist Charles Christopher Frost as Boletus chromapes . Cataloging the bolete fungi of New England , Frost published 22 new bolete species in that 1874 publication . Rolf Singer placed the species in Leccinum in 1947 due to the scabrous dots on the stipe , even though the spore print color was not typical of that genus . In 1968 , Alexander H. Smith and Harry Delbert Thiers thought that Tylopilus was a more appropriate fit as they believed the pinkish @-@ brown spore print — characteristic of that genus — to be of greater taxonomic significance . Other genera to which it has been shuffled in its taxonomic history include Ceriomyces by William Alphonso Murrill in 1909 , and Krombholzia by Rolf Singer in 1942 ; Ceriomyces and Krombholzia have since been subsumed into Boletus and Leccinum , respectively . Additional synonyms include Tylopilus <unk> , described by Wolfe & <unk> in 1993 , and a later combination based on this name , Leccinum <unk> . 
 Molecular analysis of large @-@ subunit ribosomal DNA and translation elongation factor 1α showed that the species belonged to a unique lineage in the family Boletaceae , and the genus Harrya was circumscribed to contain both it ( as the type species ) and the newly described H. atriceps . Javan species referred to Tylopilus <unk> are sister to the Harrya lineage . 
 The specific epithet chromapes is Latin for " yellow foot " . It is commonly known as the " <unk> bolete " or the " chrome @-@ footed bolete " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit bodies have caps that are initially convex before flattening out in maturity , reaching diameters between 3 and 15 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 and 5 @.@ 9 in ) . The cap surface is dry to slightly sticky . It is initially pink to rose @-@ colored , fading to tan or pinkish tan in maturity . The cap margin may curl upward in maturity . The flesh is white , and does not stain blue when it is bruised or injured ( an important diagnostic feature of many bolete species ) . It does not have any distinct odor or taste . The pore surface is initially white before becoming pinkish to flesh @-@ colored in age . The individual pores are circular to angular , numbering two or three per millimeter , while the tubes are 8 – 14 mm ( 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 6 in ) long . Tubes near the top of the stipe are depressed and almost free from attachment . The stipe measures 4 – 14 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 5 @.@ 5 in ) long by 1 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 0 in ) thick and is equal in width throughout its length , or with a slight taper in either direction . The stipe surface has a scurfy texture from scabers that are colored white , pink or reddish . The underlying surface color is white or pinkish except for the yellow base . The mushrooms are edible and good , but popular with insects , and so are often infested with maggots . 
 The spore print has been reported as ranging in color from pinkish , to pinkish @-@ brown , to rosy brown , to vinaceous @-@ fawn . The variation in spore print color results in part from differences in moisture content when recorded . Spores are roughly oblong to oval , smooth , hyaline ( translucent ) to pale brown , and measure 11 – 17 by 4 – 5 @.@ 5 µm . They are covered in a gelatinous sheath . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are club @-@ shaped , two- and four @-@ spored , thin @-@ walled , and measure 25 – 35 by 10 – 14 µm . Pleurocystidia ( found on the tube walls ) are roughly cylindrical to fuse @-@ shaped with rounded tips , and measure 37 – 50 by 5 – 8 µm . Cheilocystidia ( on the tube edges ) are fuse @-@ shaped with a central swelling , thin @-@ walled , and measure 23 – 40 by 6 – 8 µm . Caulocystidia at the top of the stipe have various shapes and dimensions of 25 – 45 by 10 – 15 µm ; at the stipe base , the caulocystidia are 30 – 40 by 7 – 23 µm and are mostly club @-@ shaped to roughly spherical to tear @-@ shaped . The cap cuticle comprises a single layer of tangled hyphae that are 4 – 6 µm thick . 
 Several chemical tests can be used to confirm the identify of the mushroom . A drop of ferrous sulfate ( FeSO4 ) on the flesh turns it greenish , while potassium hydroxide ( KOH ) turns it brown . The cap cuticle turns yellow with nitric acid ( HNO3 ) , and yellow with ammonium hydroxide ( NH4OH ) . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Fruit bodies of Harrya chromapes are readily identified in the field by their rosy color , bright yellow stipe base , and reddish scabers on the stipe . Tylopilus <unk> is a similar species found in Australia . Tylopilus <unk> has a more orangish cap and lacks the distinctive chrome @-@ yellow stipe base . Harrya atriceps is a closely related rare species from Costa Rica . In contrast to its more common relative , it lacks reddish color in its stipe scabers and has a black cap , although it has a similar yellow stipe base . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Harrya chromapes is an ectomycorrhizal species , and its fruit bodies grow singly to scattered on soil . They are usually found in forests containing conifers , Betulaceae and oak in North America . The North American distribution includes eastern Canada south to Georgia and Alabama , including Mexico . It extends west to Michigan and Mississippi . The fruit season extends from late spring to late summer . In Costa Rica , where the species associates with oak , it has been recorded from the Cordillera Talamanca , the <unk> and <unk> Volcano . It is also in Guatemala . In Asia , it is known from India ( West Bengal ) , Taiwan , Japan , and in China , where it associates with trees from the beech and pine families . 
 Fruit bodies can be parasitized by the molds Sepedonium ampullosporum , S. laevigatum , and S. <unk> . In Sepedonium infections , a white to powdery yellow mold covers the surface of the fruit body . The mushrooms are a food source and rearing habitat for several insect species , including the fungus gnats Mycetophila <unk> and M. <unk> , and flies such as Pegomya winthemi and species of the genera <unk> and Mydaea . The cottontail rabbit species Sylvilagus brasiliensis has been recorded feeding on the mushrooms in Costa Rica . 
 = Origin of the name " Empire State " = 
 The U.S. State of New York has been known by many nicknames , most notably as the Empire State , adopted as late as the 19th century . This nickname has been incorporated into the names of several state buildings and events , and is commonly believed to refer to the state 's wealth and resources . However , the origin of the term remains unclear . 
 There are several theories on the origin of the name . Two of them involve George Washington , one credits aggressive trade routes , and another associates the nickname with New York exceeding Virginia in population . None has been proven . One commonly accepted tale says that , when Washington was given a full map of New York prior to the Battle of New York , he remarked on New York 's natural geographic advantages , proclaiming New York the " Seat of an Empire " . 
 The origin of the term has puzzled many historians ; as American writer Paul Eldridge put it , " Who was the merry wag who crowned the State ... [ as the Empire State ] ? New York would certainly raise a monument to his memory , but he made his grandiose gesture and vanished forever . " 
 = = History = = 
 The source of the term " Empire State " is uncertain . It has been attributed to the state 's wealth and resources , but there is some doubt regarding that . Two possible stories involve America 's first president George Washington . 
 The first refers to an April 10 , 1785 letter to New York City Mayor James Duane in which Washington called New York " the Seat of the Empire " . Washington is also said to have used the phrase " Pathway to Empire " once when referring to the state in conversation with Governor George Clinton in the 1790s ; no documentation exists for this exchange , however . 
 Alexander Flick 's History of New York State claims that the title was used as early as 1819 , coinciding with New York surpassing Virginia in population . He does not provide any source for this claim . Further , Flick adds that the term was " universally acknowledged and accepted " by the time that the Erie Canal was completed in 1825 . In a later work , Flick and coauthor John Jacob Anderson claim that " New York is well called the Empire State ... not only because of the vastness of its resources , but because it so conspicuously illustrates the imperial power of law @-@ abiding liberty among the people . " 
 Milton Klein proposes in The Empire State : A History of New York that the name may have accompanied the success of the Black Ball Line in 1818 " because of the signal advantage the regularity of shipping gave to New York 's merchants over those in other coastal cities . " He claims that , by 1820 , it was clear that " Empire State " was in wide use , though he is doubtful that a clear origin of the term will ever be determined . The 1940 Guide to the Empire State included the following quotation : " ... it would gratify the people of New York if they could discover who first dared that spacious adjective . " 
 = = Namesakes = = 
 New York is widely known by the nickname " Empire State " , and its effects can be seen throughout the state . Manhattan 's Empire State Building opened in 1931 and was the world 's tallest building until the completion of the north tower of the World Trade Center in 1970 . Following the September 11 attacks , the Empire State Building once again became the tallest building in Manhattan until One World Trade Center claimed the title in April 2012 . The main offices of state government are located at the Empire State Plaza ( ESP ) in Albany , the state capital . Its most iconic structure is the Erastus Corning Tower , the tallest building in New York outside of New York City . 
 The nickname has also been used for train routes . The Empire State Express of the New York Central Railroad was established in 1891 , and Amtrak currently offers its Empire Service from New York City to Buffalo via Albany . SUNY Empire State College was established in 1971 in Saratoga Springs and makes use of the name . The Empire State Games were established in 1978 as an Olympic @-@ style competition for amateur athletes from New York . Additionally , the term " Empire State " has been included on New York State license plates since 2001 . In 2009 , Jay @-@ Z and Alicia Keys released the 5x @-@ platinum single " Empire State of Mind . " 
 = Shannon Moore = 
 Shannon Moore ( born July 27 , 1979 ) is an American professional wrestler . He is best known for his work with World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) between 1999 and 2001 and with World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) for several years in the 2000s . He has also worked for Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) . 
 Moore befriended Matt and Jeff Hardy as a child , and they later trained him to wrestle . He debuted in 1995 , and competed for several North Carolina @-@ based promotions , winning several Light Heavyweight Championships . He also wrestled for The Hardy Boyz ' promotion , Organization of Modern Extreme Grappling Arts ( OMEGA ) , where he won the OMEGA Light Heavyweight Championship twice and the OMEGA New Frontiers Championship once . In 1999 , he signed with WCW , and became part of 3 Count , a boy band parody . The three members of 3 Count jointly won the WCW Hardcore Championship in 2000 . In 2001 , he briefly held the NWA Wildside Tag Team Championship with Shane Helms . 
 He later joined the then @-@ WWF in 2001 , and was assigned to Heartland Wrestling Association , a developmental territory , where he won the HWA Tag Team Championship with Evan Karagias . After debuting on the SmackDown brand , he became a follower of ' Mattitude ' and appeared regularly as Matt Hardy 's sidekick . Between late 2003 and 2005 , Moore was used mainly in WWE 's cruiserweight division , until his release in July 2005 . After a stint on the independent circuit , Moore joined TNA in December 2005 . In March 2006 , he re @-@ signed with WWE , initially appearing on the ECW brand , before returning to SmackDown in 2007 . He formed a tag team with Jimmy Wang Yang , and the pair challenged unsuccessfully for the WWE Tag Team Championship on several occasions . Following his release in August 2008 , he once again returned to the independent circuit , before rejoining TNA in January 2010 . He soon formed a tag team , known as Ink Inc . , with Jesse Neal in April . 
 Aside from wrestling , Moore is also a tattoo artist , and used to own a tattoo parlor known as Gas Chamber Ink in Southern Pines , North Carolina . He is also a musician , having written his own entrance music , and was part of the band Peroxwhy ? gen with Jeff Hardy . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Early career ( 1995 – 1999 ) = = = 
 Moore befriended Matt and Jeff Hardy as a child and competed in their own backyard wrestling circuit . After the Hardy brothers began wrestling professionally , they trained Moore and he debuted on April 8 , 1995 against Jeff . Moore began working on the independent circuit , wrestling for the North Carolina @-@ based Southern Championship Wrestling and National Championship Wrestling promotions as " Kid Dynamo " , and won the Light Heavyweight Championship in both . In addition , he frequently wrestled for Organization of Modern Extreme Grappling Arts ( OMEGA ) , the promotion operated by the Hardys . In OMEGA , he won the OMEGA New Frontiers Championship once , and the OMEGA Light Heavyweight Championship on two occasions . During his time in OMEGA , he met Gregory Shane Helms , and the pair later formed the Bad Street Boys with Christian York and Joey Matthews in NWA Worldwide . In the late 1990s , Moore began wrestling for the Tennessee @-@ based Music City Wrestling promotion . 
 = = = World Championship Wrestling ( 1999 – 2001 ) = = = 
 In 1999 , Moore was hired by World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) by Chris Kanyon , who had been granted the authority to employ twenty @-@ one young cruiserweights for the Atlanta @-@ based promotion . He was placed in a faction known as " 3 Count " by Jimmy Hart . 3 Count , which consisted of Moore , Evan Karagias and Shane Helms , was a trio of young male wrestlers who utilized a boy band gimmick , parodying bands like the Backstreet Boys and ' N Sync . 3 Count debuted in WCW in November 1999 @.@ and they began lip synching the song " Can 't Get You Out Of My Heart " in the ring before their matches . On the February 28 , 2000 episode of WCW Monday Nitro in Minneapolis , Minnesota , all three members of 3 Count defeated Brian Knobs to win the WCW Hardcore Championship with all 3 members of the team simultaneously pinning him . 3 Count reigned as " co @-@ champions " until March 19 , at Uncensored where Knobs regained the title by pinning all three men consecutively . 
 3 Count were not involved in the Millionaire 's Club versus The New Blood angle that took place in mid @-@ 2000 because Helms was legitimately sidelined with a broken nose . When the team reconvened late in the summer of 2000 , they began performing a new song , " Dance With 3 Count " . In storyline , Ultimate Fighting Championship mixed martial artist Tank Abbott became an avid fan of 3 Count , and he began protecting them during their performances , attacking anyone who disrupted them , eventually acting as their talent manager and occasional inserting himself as a back @-@ up dancer . 3 Count were involved with a long @-@ running feud ( scripted rivalry ) with The Jung Dragons , with the Dragons attempting to steal 3 Count 's fictional recording contract . This led to a ladder match between the two teams at New Blood Rising , which 3 Count won due to Abbott 's interference . As a result , Abbott claimed that he should be the lead singer of 3 Count , and was kicked out by the other three members , leading to a feud . Following this , 3 Count briefly feuded with Misfits In Action . 
 In late 2000 , 3 Count began to fall apart , with Moore and Helms kicking Karagias out of the group for continually stealing the spotlight . Karagias joined forces with former Jung Dragons member Jamie <unk> and the three teams met in a Triangle match at Mayhem , which 3 Count won . At Starrcade , the six men faced off in a ladder match for the number contendership to the WCW Cruiserweight Championship . Both Moore and Helms grabbed the contract at the same time , and later wrestled for the opportunity to face the champion , which Helms won . 
 In 2001 , Moore and Helms briefly appeared in NWA Wildside , where they held the NWA Wildside Tag Team Championship for a single day , after defeating Suicidal Tendencies ( John Phoenix and Adam Jacobs ) on January 19 , 2001 . Moore and Helms both participated in a cruiserweight elimination match at SuperBrawl Revenge on February 18 , in which Helms eliminated Moore and went on to win the match . Following the match , Moore and former partner Karagias attacked Helms . Moore and Karagias joined forces once again to take part in a tournament for the WCW Cruiserweight Tag Team Championship , but were eliminated by Billy Kidman and Rey Mysterio , Jr .. 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment ( 2001 – 2005 ) = = = 
 In March 2001 , the World Wrestling Federation purchased WCW , which included Moore 's contract . Moore was assigned to the Heartland Wrestling Association ( HWA ) , a Louisville @-@ based WWF developmental territory . There , he teamed with Evan Karagias , and the two won the HWA Tag Team Championship on October 13 , 2001 , by defeating Dean and Chet Jablonski . They held the championship for a month , before losing it to The Island Boyz on November 14 . In early 2002 , Moore won the HWA Cruiserweight Championship on two occasions . 
 In July 2002 , Moore was assigned to the SmackDown ! brand , initially appearing on Velocity . In December , Moore became a heel ( villainous ) acolyte of Matt Hardy , who had begun proselytizing a philosophy known as " Mattitude " and calling himself " Matt Hardy Version 1 @.@ 0 " . Moore became a " Mattitude Follower " ( abbreviated " MF 'er " ) and started dressing like Hardy , accompanying him to ringside and interfering in his matches . Moore helped Hardy to lose several pounds in order to qualify for a WWE Cruiserweight Championship match at No Way Out . During the championship match , Moore distracted champion Billy Kidman to enable Hardy to get the win and the championship . On April 24 , Crash Holly was revealed as the newest MF 'er . He was subordinate to Moore and , as such , was referred to as a " Moore @-@ on " . When Hardy was displeased with either Moore or Holly , he would physically attack them . Holly was later released from WWE on June 30 . On September 23 , Moore and Hardy challenged Los Guerreros for the WWE Tag Team Championship , but were unsuccessful . 
 Moore and Hardy continued to work together until November 17 , when Hardy left SmackDown ! and joined the Raw brand . As a result , Paul Heyman , SmackDown ! ' s then @-@ general manager , decided to punish Hardy vicariously for leaving his show by forcing Moore to face a series of much larger opponents . In successive weeks , Moore was squashed by Matt Morgan , Nathan Jones , and The Big Show before unexpectedly defeating A @-@ Train in an upset on the December 11 episode of SmackDown ! . The following week , WWE Champion Brock Lesnar was scheduled to defend the championship against a wrestler chosen by a lottery machine , which produced Moore 's name . After defeating Moore , Lesnar revealed that the process had been rigged , and Moore 's name was on all the balls . Immediately afterward , Moore teamed with Hardcore Holly to defeat A @-@ Train and Morgan , earning Holly a championship match against Lesnar . In 2004 , at WrestleMania XX Moore took part in a " Cruiserweight Open " for the Cruiserweight Championship , but was eliminated by Último Dragón . His next high profile appearance was on the July 8 episode of SmackDown ! , which saw Moore wrestle under a mask as " El Gran Luchadore " to face John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) in the match for the WWE Championship . Initially Moore was dominated by his much larger opponent , but a second Luchadore ( the disguised Eddie Guerrero ) took Moore 's place , prompting Layfield to run away and giving Moore the victory by countout . Moore would start to drastically change his appearance by wearing red eye shadow , as well as new attire , and sporting a mohawk . Moore received a WWE Championship match on the December 30 , 2004 episode of SmackDown , but was quickly defeated by JBL . Moore appeared at the No Way Out pay @-@ per @-@ view in February 2005 , competing in a gauntlet match for the Cruiserweight Championship , but was eliminated by Paul London . 
 On March 21 he suffered a concussion and whiplash after his Hummer was involved in a head @-@ on collision with a vehicle driven by an inebriated United States Army Sergeant in Fort Bragg , North Carolina . He quickly recovered from his injuries , but was released by WWE on July 5 . 
 = = = Independent circuit ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = 
 Moore returned to the independent circuit soon thereafter , although the no @-@ compete clause in his contract ( which prohibits WWE employees who are fired or who negotiate a contract release from appearing on television within a given time period ) did not expire until November 1 of that year . Moore appeared at an AWA Superstars of Wrestling show , competing in a tournament for the WSL World Light Heavyweight Championship . Moore defeated Dexter Poindexter , Ricky Landell , and " Amazing " N8 Mattson before losing to " Krazy K " Kirby Mack in the finals . Over the next few months he wrestled Davey Richards at a Pro Wrestling WAR event , J.J. Perez at an All Pro Wrestling show , and Sonjay Dutt at Universal Uproar . He also wrestled A.J. Styles on a United Wrestling Association charity show on February 2 , 2006 . 
 During this time , Moore opened a professional wrestling school known as the " School of Punk " . 
 = = = Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = 
 Moore made his Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) television debut on the December 17 episode of Impact ! , appearing in the rafters of the Impact Zone and holding a sign reading " X Division needs to get Punk 'd " . Upon joining the roster , he gained the nickname the " Prince of Punk " . He appeared again in the rafters on the following episode of Impact ! . 
 On the December 31 episode , Moore was seen standing on the stage once again , before he attacked A.J. Styles during a tag team match on the special midnight episode of Impact ! , preventing him from winning the NWA World Tag Team Championship with Christopher Daniels . This attack prompted a feud between Moore and Styles , with Moore stalking Styles , attacking him and stealing his " Mr. TNA " award plaque . This led to a street fight between the two , which Moore won . On the February 18 episode of Impact ! , Moore faced Roderick Strong and Jay Lethal in a three @-@ way match for a place on Team USA , but the match was won by Lethal . Moore then teamed with Samoa Joe to defeat Styles and Daniels . Moore 's final match as part of TNA aired on the March 18 episode of Impact ! , when he , America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ) and Alex Shelley lost to Styles , Daniels , Ron Killings , and Rhino . 
 = = = Return to WWE ( 2006 – 2008 ) = = = 
 On March 17 , 2006 , WWE released an interview with Moore talking about his imminent return to the company . In July 2006 , Moore began appearing as part of WWE 's ECW brand , making his first appearances in vignettes calling himself " The Reject " . His in ring debut was a loss to CM Punk on September 12 , a week before Punk had confronted Moore and called him a " poser " before slapping him . After one more loss to Punk , Moore made only sporadic appearances throughout the rest of 2006 and early 2007 , losing each time . 
 On the February 16 , 2007 episode of SmackDown ! Moore suddenly switched brands , appearing in an in @-@ ring brawl with other SmackDown ! cruiserweights , which was a prelude to a Cruiserweight Open at No Way Out . Moore was eliminated from the Cruiserweight Open by the defending WWE Cruiserweight Champion Gregory Helms . Moore then established himself as a fan favorite by teaming with Scotty 2 Hotty and Jimmy Wang Yang to defeat Helms , Chavo Guerrero , and Daivari in a six @-@ man tag team match . 
 Following a hiatus from television , Moore returned on the June 15 episode of SmackDown ! , competing in a fatal four @-@ way number one contender match for the Cruiserweight Championship , which was won by Wang Yang and also involved Daivari and Jamie Noble . The following week , Moore teamed with Wang Yang in a losing effort against Guerrero and Noble . Moore competed in the 20 @-@ man battle royal for the World Heavyweight Championship in July , but was the third person to be eliminated . He also competed in the " Cruiserweight Open " at The Great American Bash along with Noble , Funaki , Wang Yang , and Guerrero . The match was inadvertently won by Hornswoggle . He also faced Noble and Guerrero , in losing efforts . Moore began feuding with Noble , appearing in several backstage vignettes together , where he mocked Noble for his obsession with Hornswoggle . Moore defeated Noble on the September 14 episode of SmackDown ! , by pretending that Hornswoggle was at ringside , distracting Noble and allowing Moore to pin him for the victory . In a rematch two weeks later , Noble pinned Moore . 
 In October 2007 , Moore formed a tag team with Yang , with the two defeating Deuce ' n Domino . They later competed in a tag team battle royal to determine the number one contenders to the WWE Tag Team Championship on the November 9 episode of SmackDown , but were the second team eliminated . In December , Moore and Yang challenged John Morrison and The Miz for the WWE Tag Team Championship , but were unsuccessful , igniting a feud between the two teams . The following week on ECW , Moore and Yang defeated Morrison and The Miz in a non @-@ title match , to earn a rematch for the championship . On January 1 , 2008 , Moore and Wang Yang once again beat Morrison and the Miz , this time in a six @-@ person tag team match also involving Layla and Kelly Kelly . The following week , in a Fifteen Minutes of Fame Match , Moore and Wang Yang tied the champions on pinfalls , meaning Miz and Morrison retained the championship . Throughout late January and February , Moore and Yang moved into a feud with Deuce ' n Domino , defeating them two weeks in a row . On the February 15 episode of SmackDown , Moore , Yang , and Jesse and Festus defeated Deuce ' n Domino and Curt Hawkins and Zack Ryder in an eight @-@ man tag team match on SmackDown . In April , Moore and Yang reignited their feud with Morrison and The Miz , losing to them twice in tag team encounters . Yang and Moore went on to win singles matches against Morrison and The Miz respectively , earning another match for the WWE Tag Team Championship on the May 2 episode of SmackDown , but were unsuccessful once again . 
 After this feud ended , Moore was rarely utilised . On August 8 , 2008 , WWE announced that Moore had been released from his WWE contract . 
 = = = Return to TNA ( 2010 – 2012 ) = = = 
 On the first live Monday edition of Impact ! on January 4 , 2010 , Moore made his return to TNA by celebrating backstage with Jeff Hardy , after Hardy had also made his return to the company . On February 19 , Dixie Carter confirmed that Moore had signed a new contract with TNA . On the March 8 episode of Impact ! , Moore attacked the TNA X Division Champion Doug Williams , and Eric Bischoff announced that Moore would face Williams for the X Division Championship at Destination X. At the pay @-@ per @-@ view Williams retained his title , after hitting Moore with a brick . Moore 's first victory since his return to TNA came on the March 29 episode of Impact ! in a tag team match when he pinned Brian Kendrick . At Lockdown Moore received another shot at the now vacant X Division Championship in a three @-@ way steel cage match , where he faced Homicide and the eventual winner of the match , Kazarian . 
 In April , Moore insulted the TNA World Tag Team Champion Matt Morgan , provoking a rivalry between the two . The following week Morgan cost Moore his shot at the TNA X Division Championship , and later attacked his tag team partner with Jesse Neal . Moore aided Neal , prompting the pair to form a tag team known as Ink Inc .. At Sacrifice Ink Inc. failed in their attempt to win the TNA World Tag Team Championship from The Band ( Kevin Nash and Scott Hall ) , when Neal 's trainer Brother Ray interfered in the match and attacked Neal . The following month , on the June 17 episode of Impact ! , Ink Inc. defeated The Band ( Kevin Nash and Eric Young ) to advance to the finals of a tournament for the vacant TNA World Tag Team Championship . In the final , Ink Inc. was defeated by Beer Money , Inc. when Brother Ray attacked Neal backstage prior to the match . On the October 28 episode of Impact ! , Ink Inc. received a match for the TNA World Tag Team Championship against The Motor City Machine Guns in a three @-@ way match , which also included Generation Me ( Max and Jeremy Buck ) , but failed to win the championship . On December 5 at the Final Resolution pay @-@ per @-@ view , Ink Inc. lost to Beer Money , Inc. in a number one contender 's match for the TNA World Tag Team Championship . Ink Inc. received a match for Beer Money 's TNA World Tag Team Championship at Victory Road in March 2011 , but were unsuccessful . After the match Moore turned heel by refusing to shake hands with the champions and instead spat beer in Storm 's face . On April 17 at Lockdown , Ink Inc. defeated The British Invasion ( Douglas Williams and Magnus ) , Crimson and Scott Steiner and Eric Young and Orlando Jordan in a four team steel cage match to become the number one contenders to the TNA World Tag Team Championship . The following month at Sacrifice , Ink Inc. was defeated by Mexican America ( Anarquia and Hernandez ) . During the match , Neal suffered a neck injury , which sidelined him for the next four months . 
 As a result , Moore returned to singles competition and on July 10 at Destination X , Moore participated in his first Ultimate X match , for a shot at the X Division Championship , but was defeated by Alex Shelley in the match , which also included Amazing Red and Robbie E. Ink Inc. returned on the September 22 episode of Impact Wrestling , attacking Mexican America , now the TNA World Tag Team Champions , at a tattoo parlour . On the October 13 episode of Impact Wrestling , Toxxin aligned herself with Ink Inc. by saving them from Mexican America . On October 16 , during the Bound for Glory pre @-@ show , Ink Inc. unsuccessfully challenged Mexican America for the TNA World Tag Team Championship and at Turning Point the following month , they again failed to win the championship in a six @-@ person tag team match , which also included Toxxin and Mexican America 's Sarita . In December , Neal parted ways with TNA , effectively dissolving Ink Inc . 
 On the December 22 episode of Impact Wrestling , Moore teamed up with Anarquia in the Wild Card Tournament but lost to Eric Young and ODB . Following a brief hiatus , Moore returned on February 12 , 2012 , at Against All Odds , answering Robbie E 's open invitational and unsuccessfully challenging him for the TNA Television Championship . On May 31 , Moore announced that he would not be returning to TNA and on July 2 , he announced he had been granted his release . 
 = = = Return to the independent circuit ( 2008 – 2009 , 2012 – present ) = = = 
 On September 28 , 2008 , Moore won the World Stars of Wrestling World Championship by defeating Joe E. Legend . Three months later , on November 22 , Moore won the Free @-@ Style Championship Wrestling World Heavyweight Championship by defeating Mot Van <unk> ; however , he lost it immediately afterwards to Rico Bushido . 
 In mid @-@ 2009 , Moore took a six @-@ month hiatus from wrestling . During November , Moore participated in the Hulkamania tour of Australia , where he took part in a best of three match series for a prize of US $ 25 @,@ 000 with Spartan 3000 . Spartan won the first match on November 21 , and Moore won the second on November 24 . The rubber match ended in a draw on November 26 , resulting in a ladder match for the final match of the tour , which Spartan won . 
 After leaving TNA in 2012 , Moore did not wrestle for approximately two years , and on July 6 , 2014 , he announced on Twitter that he is finished with in @-@ ring competition . Despite this , Moore returned to wrestling on December 14 , 2014 , at Xtreme Intense Championship Wrestling ( XICW ) ' s Hardcore With A Heart ; he defeated Hakim Zane to win the XICW Midwest Heavyweight Championship . On January 17 , 2015 , at Best in Detroit 8 Moore lost the XICW Midwest Heavyweight Title to Rhino . 
 = = Other media = = 
 Moore was in a band with Jeff Hardy called " Peroxwhy ? gen " , but later left to concentrate on wrestling . He wrote his own entrance music . Moore is part of Matt and Jeff Hardy 's side project , a reality show called " The Hardy Show " . He also appears on the DVD OMEGA : Uncommon Passion , which details the history of the OMEGA promotion . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Moore has been married twice . First , to Crystal , a country singer . Second , to Julie <unk> , who works for WWE as a seamstress , in April 2009 . Moore has known Jeff and Matt Hardy since around 1987 . Moore cites Shawn Michaels , The Rock ' n ' Roll Express , André the Giant and the Ultimate Warrior as his influences . 
 Moore has multiple tattoos including one on the inside of his lip that says " extinct " . He also has 2 tattoos across his fingers saying " Hard Knox " and " Made 1979 " . In 2005 , he had <unk> tattooed on his stomach . He operated a tattoo shop called Gas Chamber Ink in Southern Pines , North Carolina . He also has a total of three piercings ; one in each ear and one in his septum . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Halo ( Corkscrew senton bomb ) 
 <unk> ( Hip toss neckbreaker ) 
 Bottom 's Up ( WCW ) ( Leg drop bulldog ) 
 Signature moves 
 Diving hurricanrana 
 Exploder suplex 
 Moonsault to the outside 
 Multiple kick variations 
 Drop 
 Enzuigiri 
 Spinning heel 
 Northern Lights 
 Springboard crossbody 
 Sunset flip powerbomb 
 Managers 
 Tank Abbott 
 Brandi Richardson 
 Toxxin 
 Nicknames 
 " The Prince of Punk " 
 " The Reject " 
 Entrance themes 
 " Moore @-@ On " by Jim Johnston ( 2003 – 2005 ) 
 " I 'll Do Anything " by Ronn L. Chick , Dennis Winslow and Robert J. Walsh ( 2006 – 2008 ) 
 " Tattooed Attitude " by Shannon Moore and Dale Oliver ( TNA ; 2010 – 2012 ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Free @-@ Style Championship Wrestling 
 FCW World Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Heartland Wrestling Association 
 HWA Cruiserweight Championship ( 2 times ) 
 HWA Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Evan Karagias 
 NWA Wildside / National Championship Wrestling 
 NCW Light Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NWA Wildside Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Shane Helms 
 Organization of Modern Extreme Grappling Arts 
 OMEGA Light Heavyweight Championship ( 2 times ) 
 OMEGA New Frontiers Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked him 67 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the year in the PWI 500 in 2002 
 Southern Championship Wrestling 
 SCW Light Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 World Championship Wrestling 
 WCW Hardcore Championship ( 1 time ) 
 World Stars of Wrestling 
 WSW World Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Xtreme Intense Championship Wrestling 
 XICW Midwest Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 = Magna Carta = 
 Magna Carta <unk> ( Latin for " the Great Charter of the Liberties " ) , commonly called Magna Carta ( " the Great Charter " ) , is a charter agreed to by King John of England at Runnymede , near Windsor , on 15 June 1215 . First drafted by the Archbishop of Canterbury to make peace between the unpopular King and a group of rebel barons , it promised the protection of church rights , protection for the barons from illegal imprisonment , access to swift justice , and limitations on feudal payments to the Crown , to be implemented through a council of 25 barons . Neither side stood behind their commitments , and the charter was annulled by Pope Innocent III , leading to the First Barons ' War . After John 's death , the regency government of his young son , Henry III , reissued the document in 1216 , stripped of some of its more radical content , in an unsuccessful bid to build political support for their cause . At the end of the war in 1217 , it formed part of the peace treaty agreed at Lambeth , where the document acquired the name Magna Carta , to distinguish it from the smaller Charter of the Forest which was issued at the same time . Short of funds , Henry reissued the charter again in 1225 in exchange for a grant of new taxes ; his son , Edward I , repeated the exercise in 1297 , this time confirming it as part of England 's statute law . 
 The charter became part of English political life and was typically renewed by each monarch in turn , although as time went by and the fledgling English Parliament passed new laws , it lost some of its practical significance . At the end of the 16th century there was an upsurge in interest in Magna Carta . Lawyers and historians at the time believed that there was an ancient English constitution , going back to the days of the Anglo @-@ Saxons , that protected individual English freedoms . They argued that the Norman invasion of 1066 had overthrown these rights , and that Magna Carta had been a popular attempt to restore them , making the charter an essential foundation for the contemporary powers of Parliament and legal principles such as habeas corpus . Although this historical account was badly flawed , jurists such as Sir Edward Coke used Magna Carta extensively in the early 17th century , arguing against the divine right of kings propounded by the Stuart monarchs . Both James I and his son Charles I attempted to suppress the discussion of Magna Carta , until the issue was curtailed by the English Civil War of the 1640s and the execution of Charles . 
 The political myth of Magna Carta and its protection of ancient personal liberties persisted after the Glorious Revolution of 1688 until well into the 19th century . It influenced the early American colonists in the Thirteen Colonies and the formation of the American Constitution in 1787 , which became the supreme law of the land in the new republic of the United States . Research by Victorian historians showed that the original 1215 charter had concerned the medieval relationship between the monarch and the barons , rather than the rights of ordinary people , but the charter remained a powerful , iconic document , even after almost all of its content was repealed from the statute books in the 19th and 20th centuries . Magna Carta still forms an important symbol of liberty today , often cited by politicians and campaigners , and is held in great respect by the British and American legal communities , Lord Denning describing it as " the greatest constitutional document of all times – the foundation of the freedom of the individual against the arbitrary authority of the despot " . 
 In the 21st century , four exemplifications of the original 1215 charter remain in existence , held by the British Library and the cathedrals of Lincoln and Salisbury . There are also a handful of the subsequent charters in public and private ownership , including copies of the 1297 charter in both the United States and Australia . The original charters were written on parchment sheets using quill pens , in heavily abbreviated medieval Latin , which was the convention for legal documents at that time . Each was sealed with the royal great seal ( made of beeswax and resin sealing wax ) : very few of the seals have survived . Although scholars refer to the 63 numbered " clauses " of Magna Carta , this is a modern system of numbering , introduced by Sir William Blackstone in 1759 ; the original charter formed a single , long unbroken text . The four original 1215 charters were displayed together at the British Library for one day , 3 February 2015 , to mark the 800th anniversary of Magna Carta . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 13th century = = = 
 = = = = Background = = = = 
 Magna Carta originated as an unsuccessful attempt to achieve peace between royalist and rebel factions in 1215 , as part of the events leading to the outbreak of the First Barons ' War . England was ruled by King John , the third of the Angevin kings . Although the kingdom had a robust administrative system , the nature of government under the Angevin monarchs was ill @-@ defined and uncertain . John and his predecessors had ruled using the principle of vis et voluntas , or " force and will " , taking executive and sometimes arbitrary decisions , often justified on the basis that a king was above the law . Many contemporary writers believed that monarchs should rule in accordance with the custom and the law , with the counsel of the leading members of the realm , but there was no model for what should happen if a king refused to do so . 
 John had lost most of his ancestral lands in France to King Philip II in 1204 and had struggled to regain them for many years , raising extensive taxes on the barons to accumulate money to fight a war which ultimately ended in expensive failure in 1214 . Following the defeat of his allies at the Battle of Bouvines , John had to sue for peace and pay compensation . John was already personally unpopular with many of the barons , many of whom owed money to the Crown , and little trust existed between the two sides . A triumph would have strengthened his position , but in the face of his defeat , within a few months after his return from France John found that rebel barons in the north and east of England were organising resistance to his rule . 
 The rebels took an oath that they would " stand fast for the liberty of the church and the realm " , and demanded that the King confirm the Charter of Liberties that had been declared by King Henry I in the previous century , and which was perceived by the barons to protect their rights . The rebel leadership was unimpressive by the standards of the time , even disreputable , but were united by their hatred of John ; Robert FitzWalter , later elected leader of the rebel barons , claimed publicly that John had attempted to rape his daughter , and was implicated in a plot to assassinate John in 1212 . 
 John held a council in London in January 1215 to discuss potential reforms , and sponsored discussions in Oxford between his agents and the rebels during the spring . Both sides appealed to Pope Innocent III for assistance in the dispute . During the negotiations , the rebellious barons produced an initial document , which historians have termed " the Unknown Charter of Liberties " , which drew on Henry I 's Charter of Liberties for much of its language ; seven articles from that document later appeared in the " Articles of the Barons " and the subsequent charter . 
 It was John 's hope that the Pope would give him valuable legal and moral support , and accordingly John played for time ; the King had declared himself to be a papal vassal in 1213 and correctly believed he could count on the Pope for help . John also began recruiting mercenary forces from France , although some were later sent back to avoid giving the impression that the King was escalating the conflict . In a further move to shore up his support , John took an oath to become a crusader , a move which gave him additional political protection under church law , even though many felt the promise was insincere . 
 Letters backing John arrived from the Pope in April , but by then , the rebel barons had organised into a military faction . They congregated at Northampton in May and renounced their feudal ties to John , marching on London , Lincoln , and Exeter . John 's efforts to appear moderate and conciliatory had been largely successful , but once the rebels held London , they attracted a fresh wave of defectors from the royalists . The King offered to submit the problem to a committee of arbitration with the Pope as the supreme arbiter , but this was not attractive to the rebels . Stephen Langton , the Archbishop of Canterbury , had been working with the rebel barons on their demands , and after the suggestion of papal arbitration failed , John instructed Langton to organise peace talks . 
 = = = = Great Charter of 1215 = = = = 
 John met the rebel leaders at Runnymede , a water @-@ meadow on the south bank of the River Thames , on 10 June 1215 . Runnymede was a traditional place for assemblies , but it was also located on neutral ground between the royal fortress of Windsor Castle and the rebel base at Staines , and offered both sides the security of a rendezvous where they were unlikely to find themselves at a military disadvantage . Here the rebels presented John with their draft demands for reform , the ' Articles of the Barons ' . Stephen Langton 's pragmatic efforts at mediation over the next ten days turned these incomplete demands into a charter capturing the proposed peace agreement ; a few years later , this agreement was renamed Magna Carta , meaning " Great Charter " . By 15 June , general agreement had been made on a text , and on 19 June , the rebels renewed their oaths of loyalty to John and copies of the charter were formally issued . 
 Although , as the historian David Carpenter has noted , the charter " wasted no time on political theory " , it went beyond simply addressing individual baronial complaints , and formed a wider proposal for political reform . It promised the protection of church rights , protection from illegal imprisonment , access to swift justice , and , most importantly , limitations on taxation and other feudal payments to the Crown , with certain forms of feudal taxation requiring baronial consent . It focused on the rights of free men — in particular the barons . However , the rights of serfs were included in articles 16 , 20 , and 28 . Its style and content reflected Henry I 's Charter of Liberties , as well as a wider body of legal traditions , including the royal charters issued to towns , the operations of the Church and baronial courts and European charters such as the Statute of Pamiers . 
 Under what historians later labelled " clause 61 " , or the " security clause " , a council of 25 barons would be created to monitor and ensure John 's future adherence to the charter . If John did not conform to the charter within 40 days of being notified of a transgression by the council , the 25 barons were empowered by clause 61 to seize John 's castles and lands until , in their judgement , amends had been made . Men were to be compelled to swear an oath to assist the council in controlling the King , but once redress had been made for any breaches , the King would continue to rule as before . In one sense this was not unprecedented ; other kings had previously conceded the right of individual resistance to their subjects if the King did not uphold his obligations . Magna Carta was however novel in that it set up a formally recognised means of collectively coercing the King . The historian Wilfred Warren argues that it was almost inevitable that the clause would result in civil war , as it " was crude in its methods and disturbing in its implications " . The barons were trying to force John to keep to the charter , but clause 61 was so heavily weighted against the King that this version of the charter could not survive . 
 John and the rebel barons did not trust each other , and neither side seriously attempted to implement the peace accord . The 25 barons selected for the new council were all rebels , chosen by the more extremist barons , and many among the rebels found excuses to keep their forces mobilised . Disputes began to emerge between those rebels who had expected the charter to return lands that had been confiscated and the royalist faction . 
 Clause 61 of Magna Carta contained a commitment from John that he would " seek to obtain nothing from anyone , in our own person or through someone else , whereby any of these grants or liberties may be revoked or diminished " . Despite this , the King appealed to Pope Innocent for help in July , arguing that the charter compromised the Pope 's rights as John 's feudal lord . As part of the June peace deal , the barons were supposed to surrender London by 15 August , but this they refused to do . Meanwhile , instructions from the Pope arrived in August , written before the peace accord , with the result that papal commissioners excommunicated the rebel barons and suspended Langton from office in early September . Once aware of the charter , the Pope responded in detail : in a letter dated 24 August and arriving in late September , he declared the charter to be " not only shameful and demeaning but also illegal and unjust " since John had been " forced to accept " it , and accordingly the charter was " null , and void of all validity for ever " ; under threat of excommunication , the King was not to observe the charter , nor the barons try to enforce it . 
 By then , violence had broken out between the two sides ; less than three months after it had been agreed , John and the loyalist barons firmly repudiated the failed charter : the First Barons ' War erupted . The rebel barons concluded that peace with John was impossible , and turned to Philip II 's son , the future Louis VIII , for help , offering him the English throne . The war soon settled into a stalemate . The King became ill and died on the night of 18 October , leaving the nine @-@ year @-@ old Henry III as his heir . 
 = = = = = Lists of participants in 1215 = = = = = 
 = = = = Great Charter of 1216 = = = = 
 Although the Charter of 1215 was a failure as a peace treaty , it was resurrected under the new government of the young Henry III as a way of drawing support away from the rebel faction . On his deathbed , King John appointed a council of thirteen executors to help Henry reclaim the kingdom , and requested that his son be placed into the guardianship of William Marshal , one of the most famous knights in England . William knighted the boy , and Cardinal Guala Bicchieri , the papal legate to England , then oversaw his coronation at Gloucester Cathedral on 28 October . 
 The young King inherited a difficult situation , with over half of England occupied by the rebels . He had substantial support though from Guala , who intended to win the civil war for Henry and punish the rebels . Guala set about strengthening the ties between England and the Papacy , starting with the coronation itself , during which Henry gave homage to the Papacy , recognising the Pope as his feudal lord . Pope Honorius III declared that Henry was the Pope 's vassal and ward , and that the legate had complete authority to protect Henry and his kingdom . As an additional measure , Henry took the cross , declaring himself a crusader and thereby entitled to special protection from Rome . 
 The war was not going well for the loyalists , but Prince Louis and the rebel barons were also finding it difficult to make further progress . John 's death had defused some of the rebel concerns , and the royal castles were still holding out in the occupied parts of the country . Henry 's government encouraged the rebel barons to come back to his cause in exchange for the return of their lands , and reissued a version of the 1215 Charter , albeit having first removed some of the clauses , including those unfavourable to the Papacy and clause 61 , which had set up the council of barons . The move was not successful , and opposition to Henry 's new government hardened . 
 = = = = Great Charter of 1217 = = = = 
 In February 1217 , Louis set sail for France to gather reinforcements . In his absence , arguments broke out between Louis ' French and English followers , and Cardinal Guala declared that Henry 's war against the rebels was the equivalent of a religious crusade . This declaration resulted in a series of defections from the rebel movement , and the tide of the conflict swung in Henry 's favour . Louis returned at the end of April , but his northern forces were defeated by William Marshal at the Battle of Lincoln in May . 
 Meanwhile , support for Louis ' campaign was diminishing in France , and he concluded that the war in England was lost . He negotiated terms with Cardinal Guala , under which Louis would renounce his claim to the English throne ; in return , his followers would be given back their lands , any sentences of excommunication would be lifted , and Henry 's government would promise to enforce the charter of the previous year . The proposed agreement soon began to unravel amid claims from some loyalists that it was too generous towards the rebels , particularly the clergy who had joined the rebellion . 
 In the absence of a settlement , Louis remained in London with his remaining forces , hoping for the arrival of reinforcements from France . When the expected fleet did arrive in August , it was intercepted and defeated by loyalists at the Battle of Sandwich . Louis entered into fresh peace negotiations , and the factions came to agreement on the final Treaty of Lambeth , also known as the Treaty of Kingston , on 12 and 13 September 1217 . The treaty was similar to the first peace offer , but excluded the rebel clergy , whose lands and appointments remained forfeit ; it included a promise , however , that Louis ' followers would be allowed to enjoy their traditional liberties and customs , referring back to the Charter of 1216 . Louis left England as agreed and joined the Albigensian Crusade in the south of France , bringing the war to an end . 
 A great council was called in October and November to take stock of the post @-@ war situation ; this council is thought to have formulated and issued the Charter of 1217 . The charter resembled that of 1216 , although some additional clauses were added to protect the rights of the barons over their feudal subjects , and the restrictions on the Crown 's ability to levy taxation were watered down . There remained a range of disagreements around the management of the royal forests , which involved a special legal system that had resulted in a source of considerable royal revenue ; complaints existed over both the implementation of these courts , and the geographic boundaries of the royal forests . A complementary charter , the Charter of the Forest , was created , pardoning existing forest offences , imposing new controls over the forest courts , and establishing a review of the forest boundaries . To distinguish the two charters , the term magna carta <unk> , " the great charter of liberties " , was used by the scribes to refer to the larger document , which in time became known simply as Magna Carta . 
 = = = = Great Charter of 1225 = = = = 
 Magna Carta became increasingly embedded into English political life during Henry III 's minority . As the King grew older , his government slowly began to recover from the civil war , regaining control of the counties and beginning to raise revenue once again , taking care not to overstep the terms of the charters . Henry remained a minor and his government 's legal ability to make permanently binding decisions on his behalf was limited . In 1223 , the tensions over the status of the charters became clear in the royal court , when Henry 's government attempted to reassert its rights over its properties and revenues in the counties , facing resistance from many communities that argued — if sometimes incorrectly — that the charters protected the new arrangements . This resistance resulted in an argument between Archbishop Langton and William Brewer over whether the King had any duty to fulfil the terms of the charters , given that he had been forced to agree to them . On this occasion , Henry gave oral assurances that he considered himself bound by the charters , enabling a royal inquiry into the situation in the counties to progress . 
 Two years later , the question of Henry 's commitment to the charters re @-@ emerged , when Louis VIII of France invaded Henry 's remaining provinces in France , Poitou and Gascony . Henry 's army in Poitou was under @-@ resourced , and the province quickly fell . It became clear that Gascony would also fall unless reinforcements were sent from England . In early 1225 , a great council approved a tax of £ 40 @,@ 000 to dispatch an army , which quickly retook Gascony . In exchange for agreeing to support Henry , the barons demanded that the King reissue Magna Carta and the Charter of the Forest . The content was almost identical to the 1217 versions , but in the new versions , the King declared that the charters were issued of his own " spontaneous and free will " and confirmed them with the royal seal , giving the new Great Charter and the Charter of the Forest of 1225 much more authority than the previous versions . 
 The barons anticipated that the King would act in accordance with these charters , subject to the law and moderated by the advice of the nobility . Uncertainty continued , and in 1227 , when he was declared of age and able to rule independently , Henry announced that future charters had to be issued under his own seal . This brought into question the validity of the previous charters issued during his minority , and Henry actively threatened to overturn the Charter of the Forest unless the taxes promised in return for it were actually paid . In 1253 , Henry confirmed the charters once again in exchange for taxation . 
 Henry placed a symbolic emphasis on rebuilding royal authority , but his rule was relatively circumscribed by Magna Carta . He generally acted within the terms of the charters , which prevented the Crown from taking extrajudicial action against the barons , including the fines and expropriations that had been common under his father , John . The charters did not address the sensitive issues of the appointment of royal advisers and the distribution of patronage , and they lacked any means of enforcement if the King chose to ignore them . The inconsistency with which he applied the charters over the course of his rule alienated many barons , even those within his own faction . 
 Despite the various charters , the provision of royal justice was inconsistent and driven by the needs of immediate politics : sometimes action would be taken to address a legitimate baronial complaint , while on other occasions the problem would simply be ignored . The royal courts , which toured the country to provide justice at the local level , typically for lesser barons and the gentry claiming grievances against major lords , had little power , allowing the major barons to dominate the local justice system . Henry 's rule became lax and careless , resulting in a reduction in royal authority in the provinces and , ultimately , the collapse of his authority at court . 
 In 1258 , a group of barons seized power from Henry in a coup d 'état , citing the need to strictly enforce Magna Carta and the Charter of the Forest , creating a new baronial @-@ led government to advance reform through the Provisions of Oxford . The barons were not militarily powerful enough to win a decisive victory , and instead appealed to Louis IX of France in 1263 – 1264 to arbitrate on their proposed reforms . The reformist barons argued their case based on Magna Carta , suggesting that it was inviolable under English law and that the King had broken its terms . 
 Louis came down firmly in favour of Henry , but the French arbitration failed to achieve peace as the rebellious barons refused to accept the verdict . England slipped back into the Second Barons ' War , which was won by Henry 's son , Prince Edward . Edward also invoked Magna Carta in advancing his cause , arguing that the reformers had taken matters too far and were themselves acting against Magna Carta . In a conciliatory gesture after the barons had been defeated , in 1267 Henry issued the Statute of Marlborough , which included a fresh commitment to observe the terms of Magna Carta . 
 = = = = = Witnesses in 1225 = = = = = 
 = = = = Great Charter of 1297 : statute = = = = 
 King Edward I reissued the Charters of 1225 in 1297 in return for a new tax . It is this version which remains in statute today , although with most articles now repealed . 
 The Confirmatio Cartarum ( Confirmation of Charters ) was issued in Norman French by Edward I in 1297 . Edward , needing money , had taxed the nobility , and they had armed themselves against him , forcing Edward to issue his confirmation of Magna Carta and the Forest Charter to avoid civil war . The nobles had sought to add another document , the De <unk> , to Magna Carta . Edward I 's government was not prepared to concede this , they agreed to the issuing of the Confirmatio , confirming the previous charters and confirming the principle that taxation should be by consent , although the precise manner of that consent was not laid down . 
 A passage mandates that copies shall be distributed in " cathedral churches throughout our realm , there to remain , and shall be read before the people two times by the year " , hence the presence of a copy during the month of May 2014 at St <unk> Cathedral , and the permanent installation of a copy in Salisbury Cathedral . In the Confirmation 's second article , it is confirmed that 
 if any judgement be given from henceforth contrary to the points of the charters aforesaid by the justices , or by any other our ministers that hold plea before them against the points of the charters , it shall be undone , and holden for nought . 
 With the reconfirmation of the Charters in 1300 , an additional document was granted , the Articuli super Cartas ( The Articles upon the Charters ) . It was composed of 17 articles and sought in part to deal with the problem of enforcing the Charters . Magna Carta and the Forest Charter were to be issued to the sheriff of each county , and should be read four times a year at the meetings of the county courts . Each county should have a committee of three men who could hear complaints about violations of the Charters . 
 Pope Clement V continued the papal policy of supporting monarchs ( who ruled by divine grace ) against any claims in Magna Carta which challenged the King 's rights , and annulled the Confirmatio Cartarum in 1305 . Edward I interpreted Clement V 's papal bull annulling the Confirmatio Cartarum as effectively applying to the Articuli super Cartas , although the latter was not specifically mentioned . In 1306 Edward I took the opportunity given by the Pope 's backing to reassert forest law over large areas which had been " <unk> " . Both Edward and the Pope were accused by some contemporary chroniclers of " perjury " , and it was suggested by Robert McNair Scott that Robert the Bruce refused to make peace with Edward I 's son , Edward II , in 1312 with the justification : " How shall the king of England keep faith with me , since he does not observe the sworn promises made to his liege men ... " 
 = = = = Magna Carta 's influence on English medieval law = = = = 
 The Great Charter was referred to in legal cases throughout the medieval period . For example , in 1226 , the knights of Lincolnshire argued that their local sheriff was changing customary practice regarding the local courts , " contrary to their liberty which they ought to have by the charter of the lord king " . In practice , cases were not brought against the King for breach of Magna Carta and the Forest Charter , but it was possible to bring a case against the King 's officers , such as his sheriffs , using the argument that the King 's officers were acting contrary to liberties granted by the King in the charters . 
 In addition , medieval cases referred to the clauses in Magna Carta which dealt with specific issues such as wardship and dower , debt collection , and keeping rivers free for navigation . Even in the 13th century , some clauses of Magna Carta rarely appeared in legal cases , either because the issues concerned were no longer relevant , or because Magna Carta had been superseded by more relevant legislation . By 1350 half the clauses of Magna Carta were no longer actively used . 
 = = = 14th – 15th centuries = = = 
 During the reign of King Edward III six measures , later known as the Six Statutes , were passed between 1331 and 1369 . They sought to clarify certain parts of the Charters . In particular the third statute , in 1354 , redefined clause 29 , with " free man " becoming " no man , of whatever estate or condition he may be " , and introduced the phrase " due process of law " for " lawful judgement of his peers or the law of the land " . 
 Between the 13th and 15th centuries Magna Carta was reconfirmed 32 times according to Sir Edward Coke , and possibly as many as 45 times . Often the first item of parliamentary business was a public reading and reaffirmation of the Charter , and , as in the previous century , parliaments often exacted confirmation of it from the monarch . The Charter was confirmed in 1423 by King Henry VI . 
 By the mid @-@ 15th century , Magna Carta ceased to occupy a central role in English political life , as monarchs reasserted authority and powers which had been challenged in the 100 years after Edward I 's reign . The Great Charter remained a text for lawyers , particularly as a protector of property rights , and became more widely read than ever as printed versions circulated and levels of literacy increased . 
 = = = 16th century = = = 
 During the 16th century , the interpretation of Magna Carta and the First Barons ' War shifted . Henry VII took power at the end of the turbulent Wars of the Roses , followed by Henry VIII , and extensive propaganda under both rulers promoted the legitimacy of the regime , the illegitimacy of any sort of rebellion against royal power , and the priority of supporting the Crown in its arguments with the Papacy . 
 Tudor historians rediscovered the Barnwell chronicler , who was more favourable to King John than other 13th @-@ century texts , and , as historian Ralph Turner describes , they " viewed King John in a positive light as a hero struggling against the papacy " , showing " little sympathy for the Great Charter or the rebel barons " . Pro @-@ Catholic demonstrations during the 1536 uprising cited Magna Carta , accusing the King of not giving it sufficient respect . 
 The first mechanically printed edition of Magna Carta was probably the Magna Carta cum <unk> <unk> <unk> of 1508 by Richard Pynson , although the early printed versions of the 16th century incorrectly attributed the origins of Magna Carta to Henry III and 1225 , rather than to John and 1215 , and accordingly worked from the later text . An abridged English @-@ language edition was published by John <unk> in 1527 and , in 1534 , George Ferrers published the first unabridged English @-@ language edition of Magna Carta , dividing the Charter into 37 numbered clauses . 
 At the end of the 16th century , there was an upsurge in antiquarian interest in England . This work concluded that there was a set of ancient English customs and laws , temporarily overthrown by the Norman invasion of 1066 , which had then been recovered in 1215 and recorded in Magna Carta , which in turn gave authority to important 16th century legal principles . Modern historians note that although this narrative was fundamentally incorrect — many refer to it as a " myth " – it took on great importance among the legal historians of the time . 
 The antiquarian William Lambarde , for example , published what he believed were the Anglo @-@ Saxon and Norman law codes , tracing the origins of the 16th @-@ century English Parliament back to this period , albeit misinterpreting the dates of many documents concerned . Francis Bacon argued that clause 39 of Magna Carta was the basis of the 16th @-@ century jury system and judicial processes . Antiquarians Robert Beale , James Morice , and Richard Cosin argued that Magna Carta was a statement of liberty and a fundamental , supreme law empowering English government . Those who questioned these conclusions , including the Member of Parliament Arthur Hall , faced sanctions . 
 = = = 17th – 18th centuries = = = 
 = = = = Political tensions = = = = 
 In the early 17th century , Magna Carta became increasingly important as a political document in arguments over the authority of the English monarchy . James I and Charles I both propounded greater authority for the Crown , justified by the doctrine of the divine right of kings , and Magna Carta was cited extensively by their opponents to challenge the monarchy . 
 Magna Carta , it was argued , recognised and protected the liberty of individual Englishmen , made the King subject to the common law of the land , formed the origin of the trial by jury system , and acknowledged the ancient origins of Parliament : because of Magna Carta and this ancient constitution , an English monarch was unable to alter these long @-@ standing English customs . Although the arguments based on Magna Carta were historically inaccurate , they nonetheless carried symbolic power , as the charter had immense significance during this period ; antiquarians such as Sir Henry Spelman described it as " the most majestic and a sacrosanct anchor to English Liberties " . 
 Sir Edward Coke was a leader in using Magna Carta as a political tool during this period . Still working from the 1225 version of the text — the first printed copy of the 1215 charter only emerged in 1610 – Coke spoke and wrote about Magna Carta repeatedly . His work was challenged at the time by Lord Ellesmere , and modern historians such as Ralph Turner and Claire Breay have critiqued Coke as " <unk> " the original charter " anachronistically and uncritically " , and taking a " very selective " approach to his analysis . More sympathetically , J. C. Holt noted that the history of the charters had already become " distorted " by the time Coke was carrying out his work . 
 In 1621 , a bill was presented to Parliament to renew Magna Carta ; although this bill failed , lawyer John Selden argued during Darnell 's Case in 1627 that the right of habeas corpus was backed by Magna Carta . Coke supported the Petition of Right in 1628 , which cited Magna Carta in its preamble , attempting to extend the provisions , and to make them binding on the judiciary . The monarchy responded by arguing that the historical legal situation was much less clear @-@ cut than was being claimed , restricted the activities of antiquarians , arrested Coke for treason , and suppressed his proposed book on Magna Carta . Charles initially did not agree to the Petition of Right , and refused to confirm Magna Carta in any way that would reduce his independence as King . 
 England descended into civil war in the 1640s , resulting in Charles I 's execution in 1649 . Under the republic that followed , some questioned whether Magna Carta , an agreement with a monarch , was still relevant . An anti @-@ Cromwellian pamphlet published in 1660 , The English devil , said that the nation had been " compelled to submit to this Tyrant Nol or be cut off by him ; nothing but a word and a blow , his Will was his Law ; tell him of Magna Carta , he would lay his hand on his sword and cry Magna <unk> " . In a 2005 speech the Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales , Lord Woolf , repeated the claim that Cromwell had referred to Magna Carta as " Magna <unk> " . 
 The radical groups that flourished during this period held differing opinions of Magna Carta . The Levellers rejected history and law as presented by their contemporaries , holding instead to an " anti @-@ <unk> " viewpoint . John Lilburne , for example , argued that Magna Carta contained only some of the freedoms that had supposedly existed under the Anglo @-@ Saxons before being crushed by the Norman yoke . The <unk> Richard Overton described the charter as " a beggarly thing containing many marks of intolerable bondage " . Both saw Magna Carta as a useful declaration of liberties that could be used against governments they disagreed with . Gerrard Winstanley , the leader of the more extreme Diggers , stated " the best <unk> that England hath , [ viz . , the Magna Carta ] were got by our Forefathers importunate petitioning unto the kings that still were their Task @-@ masters ; and yet these best laws are <unk> and <unk> , tying one sort of people to be slaves to another ; Clergy and Gentry have got their freedom , but the common people still are , and have been left servants to work for them . " 
 = = = = Glorious Revolution = = = = 
 The first attempt at a proper historiography was undertaken by Robert Brady , who refuted the supposed antiquity of Parliament and belief in the immutable continuity of the law . Brady realised that the liberties of the Charter were limited and argued that the liberties were the grant of the King . By putting Magna Carta in historical context , he cast doubt on its contemporary political relevance ; his historical understanding did not survive the Glorious Revolution , which , according to the historian J. G. A. Pocock , " marked a setback for the course of English historiography . " 
 According to the Whig interpretation of history , the Glorious Revolution was an example of the reclaiming of ancient liberties . Reinforced with Lockean concepts , the Whigs believed England 's constitution to be a social contract , based on documents such as Magna Carta , the Petition of Right , and the Bill of Rights . The English Liberties ( 1680 , in later versions often British Liberties ) by the Whig propagandist Henry Care ( d . 1688 ) was a cheap polemical book that was influential and much @-@ reprinted , in the American colonies as well as Britain , and made Magna Carta central to the history and the contemporary legitimacy of its subject . 
 Ideas about the nature of law in general were beginning to change . In 1716 , the Septennial Act was passed , which had a number of consequences . First , it showed that Parliament no longer considered its previous statutes unassailable , as it provided for a maximum parliamentary term of seven years , whereas the Triennial Act ( 1694 ) ( enacted less than a quarter of a century previously ) had provided for a maximum term of three years . 
 It also greatly extended the powers of Parliament . Under this new constitution , monarchical absolutism was replaced by parliamentary supremacy . It was quickly realised that Magna Carta stood in the same relation to the King @-@ in @-@ Parliament as it had to the King without Parliament . This supremacy would be challenged by the likes of Granville Sharp . Sharp regarded Magna Carta as a fundamental part of the constitution , and maintained that it would be treason to repeal any part of it . He also held that the Charter prohibited slavery . 
 Sir William Blackstone published a critical edition of the 1215 Charter in 1759 , and gave it the numbering system still used today . In 1763 , Member of Parliament John Wilkes was arrested for writing an inflammatory pamphlet , No. 45 , 23 April 1763 ; he cited Magna Carta continually . Lord Camden denounced the treatment of Wilkes as a contravention of Magna Carta . Thomas Paine , in his Rights of Man , would disregard Magna Carta and the Bill of Rights on the grounds that they were not a written constitution devised by elected representatives . 
 = = = = Use in the Thirteen Colonies and the United States = = = = 
 When English colonists left for the New World , they brought royal charters that established the colonies . The Massachusetts Bay Company charter , for example , stated that the colonists would " have and enjoy all liberties and immunities of free and natural subjects . " The Virginia Charter of 1606 , which was largely drafted by Sir Edward Coke , stated that the colonists would have the same " liberties , franchises and immunities " as people born in England . The Massachusetts Body of Liberties contained similarities to clause 29 of Magna Carta ; when drafting it , the Massachusetts General Court viewed Magna Carta as the chief embodiment of English common law . The other colonies would follow their example . In 1638 , Maryland sought to recognise Magna Carta as part of the law of the province , but the request was denied by Charles I. 
 In 1687 , William Penn published The Excellent Privilege of Liberty and Property : being the birth @-@ right of the Free @-@ Born Subjects of England , which contained the first copy of Magna Carta printed on American soil . Penn 's comments reflected Coke 's , indicating a belief that Magna Carta was a fundamental law . The colonists drew on English law books , leading them to an anachronistic interpretation of Magna Carta , believing that it guaranteed trial by jury and habeas corpus . 
 The development of parliamentary supremacy in the British Isles did not constitutionally affect the Thirteen Colonies , which retained an adherence to English common law , but it directly affected the relationship between Britain and the colonies . When American colonists fought against Britain , they were fighting not so much for new freedom , but to preserve liberties and rights that they believed to be enshrined in Magna Carta . 
 In the late 18th century , the United States Constitution became the supreme law of the land , recalling the manner in which Magna Carta had come to be regarded as fundamental law . The Constitution 's Fifth Amendment guarantees that " no person shall be deprived of life , liberty , or property , without due process of law " , a phrase that was derived from Magna Carta . In addition , the Constitution included a similar writ in the Suspension Clause , Article 1 , Section 9 : " The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended , unless when in cases of rebellion or invasion , the public safety may require it . " 
 Each of these proclaim that no person may be imprisoned or detained without evidence that he or she committed a crime . The Ninth Amendment states that " The enumeration in the Constitution , of certain rights , shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people . " The writers of the U.S. Constitution wished to ensure that the rights they already held , such as those that they believed were provided by Magna Carta , would be preserved unless explicitly curtailed . 
 The Supreme Court of the United States has explicitly referenced Lord Coke 's analysis of Magna Carta as an antecedent of the Sixth Amendment 's right to a speedy trial . 
 = = = 19th – 21st centuries = = = 
 = = = = Interpretation = = = = 
 Initially , the Whig interpretation of Magna Carta and its role in constitutional history remained dominant during the 19th century . The historian William Stubbs 's Constitutional History of England , published in the 1870s , formed the high @-@ water mark of this view . Stubbs argued that Magna Carta had been a major step in the shaping of the English nation , and he believed that the barons at Runnymede in 1215 were not just representing the nobility , but the people of England as a whole , standing up to a tyrannical ruler in the form of King John . 
 This view of Magna Carta began to recede . The late @-@ Victorian jurist and historian Frederic William Maitland provided an alternative academic history in 1899 , which began to return Magna Carta to its historical roots . In 1904 , Edward Jenks published an article entitled " The Myth of Magna Carta " , which undermined the traditionally accepted view of Magna Carta . Historians such as Albert Pollard agreed with Jenks in concluding that Edward Coke had largely " invented " the myth of Magna Carta in the 17th century ; these historians argued that the 1215 charter had not referred to liberty for the people at large , but rather to the protection of baronial rights . 
 This view also became popular in wider circles , and in 1930 Sellar and <unk> published their parody on English history , 1066 and All That , in which they mocked the supposed importance of Magna Carta and its promises of universal liberty : " Magna Charter was therefore the chief cause of Democracy in England , and thus a Good Thing for everyone ( except the Common People ) " . 
 In many literary representations of the medieval past , however , Magna Carta remained a foundation of English national identity . Some authors used the medieval roots of the document as an argument to preserve the social status quo , while others pointed to Magna Carta to challenge perceived economic injustices . The Baronial Order of Magna Charta was formed in 1898 to promote the ancient principles and values felt to be displayed in Magna Carta . The legal profession in England and the United States continued to hold Magna Carta in high esteem ; they were instrumental in forming the Magna Carta Society in 1922 to protect the meadows at Runnymede from development in the 1920s , and in 1957 , the American Bar Association erected the Magna Carta Memorial at Runnymede . The prominent lawyer Lord Denning described Magna Carta in 1956 as " the greatest constitutional document of all times – the foundation of the freedom of the individual against the arbitrary authority of the despot " . 
 = = = = Repeal of articles and constitutional influence = = = = 
 Radicals such as Sir Francis Burdett believed that Magna Carta could not be repealed , but in the 19th century clauses which were obsolete or had been superseded began to be repealed . The repeal of clause 26 in 1829 , by the Offences against the Person Act 1828 ( 9 Geo . 4 c . 31 s . 1 ) , was the first time a clause of Magna Carta was repealed . Over the next 140 years , nearly the whole charter was repealed , leaving just clauses 1 , 9 , and 29 still in force after 1969 . Most of the clauses were repealed in England and Wales by the Statute Law Revision Act 1863 , and in Ireland by the Statute Law ( Ireland ) Revision Act 1872 . 
 Many later attempts to draft constitutional forms of government trace their lineage back to Magna Carta . The British dominions , Australia and New Zealand , Canada ( except Quebec ) , and formerly the Union of South Africa and Southern Rhodesia , reflected the influence of Magna Carta in their laws , and the Charter 's effects can be seen in the laws of other states that evolved from the British Empire . 
 = = = = Modern legacy = = = = 
 Magna Carta continues to have a powerful iconic status in British society , being cited by politicians and lawyers in support of constitutional positions . Its perceived guarantee of trial by jury and other civil liberties , for example , led to Tony Benn 's reference to the debate in 2008 over whether to increase the maximum time terrorism suspects could be held without charge from 28 to 42 days as " the day Magna Carta was repealed " . Although rarely invoked in court in the modern era , in 2012 the Occupy London protestors attempted to use Magna Carta in resisting their eviction from St. Paul 's Churchyard by the City of London . In his judgment the Master of the Rolls gave this short shrift , noting somewhat drily that although clause 29 was considered by many the foundation of the rule of law in England , he did not consider it directly relevant to the case , and the two other surviving clauses actually concerned the rights of the Church and the City of London . 
 Magna Carta carries little legal weight in modern Britain , as most of its clauses have been repealed and relevant rights ensured by other statutes , but the historian James Holt remarks that the survival of the 1215 charter in national life is a " reflexion of the continuous development of English law and administration " and symbolic of the many struggles between authority and the law over the centuries . The historian W. L. Warren has observed that " many who knew little and cared less about the content of the Charter have , in nearly all ages , invoked its name , and with good cause , for it meant more than it said " . 
 It also remains a topic of great interest to historians ; Natalie <unk> characterised the charter as " one of the holiest of cows in English medieval history " , with the debates over its interpretation and meaning unlikely to end . In many ways still a " sacred text " , Magna Carta is generally considered part of the uncodified constitution of the United Kingdom ; in a 2005 speech , the Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales , Lord Woolf , described it as the " first of a series of instruments that now are recognised as having a special constitutional status " . 
 The document also continues to be honoured in the United States as an antecedent of the United States Constitution and Bill of Rights . In 1976 , the UK lent one of four surviving originals of the 1215 Magna Carta to the United States for their bicentennial celebrations and also donated an ornate display case for it . The original was returned after one year , but a replica and the case are still on display in the United States Capitol Crypt in Washington , D.C. 
 = = = = Celebration of the 800th anniversary = = = = 
 The 800th anniversary of the original charter occurred on 15 June 2015 , and organisations and institutions planned celebratory events . The British Library brought together the four existing copies of the 1215 manuscript on 3 February 2015 for a special exhibition . British artist Cornelia Parker was commissioned to create a new artwork , Magna Carta ( An Embroidery ) , which was unveiled at the British Library on 15 May 2015 and remained on display until 24 July . The artwork is a copy of an earlier version of this Wikipedia page ( as it appeared on the document 's <unk> anniversary , 15 June 2014 ) , embroidered into the form of a tapestry . 
 On 15 June 2015 , a commemoration ceremony was conducted in Runnymede at the National Trust park , attended by British and American dignitaries . 
 The copy held by Lincoln Cathedral was exhibited in the Library of Congress in Washington , D.C. , from November 2014 until January 2015 . A new visitor centre at Lincoln Castle will also be opened for the anniversary . The Royal Mint released two commemorative two @-@ pound coins . 
 In 2014 , Bury St Edmunds in Suffolk celebrated the 800th anniversary of the barons ' Charter of Liberties , said to have been secretly agreed there in November 1214 . 
 = = Content = = 
 = = = Physical format = = = 
 Numerous copies , known as exemplifications , were made of the various charters , and many of them still survive . The documents were written in heavily abbreviated medieval Latin in clear handwriting , using quill pens on sheets of parchment made from sheep skin , approximately 15 by 20 inches ( 380 by 510 mm ) across . They were sealed with the royal great seal by an official called the <unk> , equipped with a special seal press , using beeswax and resin . There were no signatures on the charter of 1215 , and the barons present did not attach their own seals to it . The charters were not numbered or divided into paragraphs or separate clauses at the time ; the numbering system used today was introduced by the jurist Sir William Blackstone in 1759 . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 = = = = 1215 exemplifications = = = = 
 At least 13 original copies of the 1215 charter were issued by the royal chancery at the time , seven in the first tranche distributed on 24 June and another six later ; they were sent to county sheriffs and bishops , who would probably have been charged for the privilege . Variations would have existed between each of these copies and there was probably no single " master copy " . Of these documents , only four survive , all held in the UK — two in the British Library , one by Lincoln Cathedral , and one in Salisbury Cathedral . Each of these versions is slightly different in size and text , and each is considered by historians to be equally authoritative . 
 The two 1215 charters held by the British Library , known as Cotton MS. Augustus <unk> and Cotton Charter <unk> , were acquired by the antiquarian Sir Robert Cotton in the 17th century . One of these was originally found by Humphrey <unk> , a London lawyer , who may have discovered it in a tailor 's shop . The other was found in Dover Castle in 1630 by Sir Edward Dering . The Dering charter is usually identified as the copy originally sent to the Cinque Ports in 1215 . ( In 2015 it was announced that David Carpenter had found Dering 's copy to be identical to a 1290s transcription made from Canterbury Cathedral 's 1215 copy and so he suggests that the Dering copy 's destination was the Cathedral rather than the Cinque Ports . ) This copy was damaged in the Cotton library fire of 1731 , when its seal was badly melted . The parchment was somewhat shrivelled but otherwise relatively unscathed , and an engraved facsimile of the charter was made by John Pine in 1733 . In the 1830s , however , an ill @-@ judged and bungled attempt at cleaning and conservation rendered the manuscript largely illegible to the naked eye . This is , nonetheless , the only surviving 1215 copy still to have its great seal attached . 
 Lincoln Cathedral 's original copy of the 1215 charter has been held by the county since 1215 ; it was displayed in the Common Chamber in the cathedral before being moved to another building in 1846 . It was being displayed at the 1939 World Fair in New York when the Second World War broke out , and it spent the majority of the war in Fort Knox for safety . Winston Churchill wanted to gift the charter to the American people , hoping that this would encourage the United States , then neutral , to enter the war against the Axis powers , but the cathedral was unwilling and the plans were dropped . 
 The copy was returned to England and put on display in 1976 as part of the cathedral 's medieval library . It was subsequently displayed in San Francisco , and was taken out of display for a time to undergo conservation in preparation for another visit to the United States , where it was exhibited in 2007 at the Contemporary Art Center of Virginia and the National Constitution Center in Philadelphia . The document returned to New York to be displayed at the Fraunces Tavern Museum during 2009 . 
 The fourth copy , owned by Salisbury Cathedral , was first given in 1215 to its predecessor , Old Sarum Cathedral . Rediscovered by the cathedral in 1812 , it has remained in Salisbury throughout its history , except when being taken off @-@ site for restoration work . It is possibly the best preserved of the four , although small pin holes can be seen in the parchment from where it was once pinned up . The handwriting on this version is different from that of the other three , suggesting that it was not written by a royal scribe but rather by a member of the cathedral staff , who then had it exemplified by the royal court . 
 = = = = Later exemplifications = = = = 
 Other early versions of the charters survive today . Only one exemplification of the 1216 charter survives , held in Durham Cathedral . Four copies of the 1217 charter exist ; three of these are held by the Bodleian Library in Oxford and one by Hereford Cathedral . Hereford 's copy is occasionally displayed alongside the Mappa Mundi in the cathedral 's chained library and has survived along with a small document called the Articuli super Cartas that was sent along with the charter , telling the sheriff of the county how to observe the conditions outlined in the document . One of the Bodleian 's copies was displayed at San Francisco 's California Palace of the Legion of Honor in 2011 . 
 Four exemplifications of the 1225 charter survive : the British Library holds one , which was preserved at Lacock Abbey until 1945 ; Durham Cathedral also holds a copy , with the Bodleian Library holding a third . The fourth copy of the 1225 exemplification was held by the museum of the Public Record Office and is now held by The National Archives . The Society of Antiquaries also holds a draft of the 1215 charter ( discovered in 2013 in a late 13th century register from Peterborough Abbey ) , a copy of the 1225 third re @-@ issue ( within an early 14th century collection of statutes ) and a roll copy of the 1225 reissue . 
 Only two exemplifications of Magna Carta are held outside England , both from 1297 . One of these was purchased in 1952 by the Australian Government for £ 12 @,@ 500 from King 's School , Bruton , England . This copy is now on display in the Members ' Hall of Parliament House , Canberra . The second was originally held by the Brudenell family , earls of Cardigan , before they sold it in 1984 to the Perot Foundation in the U.S.A. , which in 2007 sold it to U.S. businessman David Rubenstein for US $ 21 @.@ 3 million . Rubenstein commented " I have always believed that this was an important document to our country , even though it wasn 't drafted in our country . I think it was the basis for the Declaration of Independence and the basis for the Constitution " . This exemplification is now on permanent loan to the National Archives in Washington , D.C. Only two other 1297 exemplifications survive , one of which is held in the UK 's National Archives . 
 Seven copies of the 1300 exemplification by Edward I survive , in Faversham , Oriel College , Oxford , the Bodleian Library , Durham Cathedral , Westminster Abbey , the City of London ( held in the archives at the London Guildhall ) and Sandwich ( held in the Kent County Council archives ) . The Sandwich copy was rediscovered in early 2015 in a Victorian scrapbook in the town archives of Sandwich , Kent , one of the Cinque Ports . In the case of the Sandwich and Oriel College exemplifications , the copies of the Charter of the Forest originally issued with them also survive . 
 = = = Clauses = = = 
 Most of the 1215 charter and later versions sought to govern the feudal rights of the Crown over the barons . Under the Angevin kings , and in particular during John 's reign , the rights of the King had frequently been used inconsistently , often in an attempt to maximise the royal income from the barons . Feudal relief was one way that a king could demand money , and clauses 2 and 3 fixed the fees payable when an heir inherited an estate or when a minor came of age and took possession of his lands . <unk> was a form of medieval taxation ; all knights and nobles owed military service to the Crown in return for their lands , which theoretically belonged to the King , but many preferred to avoid this service and offer money instead ; the Crown often used the cash to pay for mercenaries . The rate of scutage that should be payable , and the circumstances under which it was appropriate for the King to demand it , was uncertain and controversial ; clauses 12 and 14 addressed the management of the process . 
 The English judicial system had altered considerably over the previous century , with the royal judges playing a larger role in delivering justice across the country . John had used his royal discretion to extort large sums of money from the barons , effectively taking payment to offer justice in particular cases , and the role of the Crown in delivering justice had become politically sensitive among the barons . Clauses 39 and 40 demanded due process be applied in the royal justice system , while clause 45 required that the King appoint knowledgeable royal officials to the relevant roles . Although these clauses did not have any special significance in the original charter , this part of Magna Carta became singled out as particularly important in later centuries . In the United States , for example , the Supreme Court of California interpreted clause 45 in 1974 as establishing a requirement in common law that a defendant faced with the potential of incarceration be entitled to a trial overseen by a legally trained judge . 
 Royal forests were economically important in medieval England and were both protected and exploited by the Crown , supplying the King with hunting grounds , raw materials , and money . They were subject to special royal jurisdiction and the resulting forest law was , according to the historian Richard Huscroft , " harsh and arbitrary , a matter purely for the King 's will " . The size of the forests had expanded under the Angevin kings , an unpopular development . 
 The 1215 charter had several clauses relating to the royal forests ; clauses 47 and 48 promised to <unk> the lands added to the forests under John and investigate the use of royal rights in this area , but notably did not address the forestation of the previous kings , while clause 53 promised some form of redress for those affected by the recent changes , and clause 44 promised some relief from the operation of the forest courts . Neither Magna Carta nor the subsequent Charter of the Forest proved entirely satisfactory as a way of managing the political tensions around the operation of the royal forests . 
 Some of the clauses addressed wider economic issues . The concerns of the barons over the treatment of their debts to Jewish moneylenders , who occupied a special position in medieval England and were by tradition under the King 's protection , were addressed by clauses 10 and 11 . The charter concluded this section with the phrase " debts owing to other than Jews shall be dealt with likewise " , so it is debatable to what extent the Jews were being singled out by these clauses . Some issues were relatively specific , such as clause 33 which ordered the removal of all fishing weirs — an important and growing source of revenue at the time — from England 's rivers . 
 The role of the English Church had been a matter for great debate in the years prior to the 1215 charter . The Norman and Angevin kings had traditionally exercised a great deal of power over the church within their territories . From the 1040s onwards successive popes had emphasised the importance of the church being governed more effectively from Rome , and had established an independent judicial system and hierarchical chain of authority . After the 1140s , these principles had been largely accepted within the English church , even if accompanied by an element of concern about centralising authority in Rome . 
 These changes brought the customary rights of lay rulers such as John over ecclesiastical appointments into question . As described above , John had come to a compromise with Pope Innocent III in exchange for his political support for the King , and clause 1 of Magna Carta prominently displayed this arrangement , promising the freedoms and liberties of the church . The importance of this clause may also reflect the role of Archbishop Langton in the negotiations : Langton had taken a strong line on this issue during his career . 
 = = = = Clauses in detail = = = = 
 = = = = Clauses remaining in English law = = = = 
 Only three clauses of Magna Carta still remain on statute in England and Wales . These clauses concern 1 ) the freedom of the English Church , 2 ) the " ancient liberties " of the City of London ( clause 13 in the 1215 charter , clause 9 in the 1297 statute ) , and 3 ) a right to due legal process ( clauses 39 and 40 in the 1215 charter , clause 29 in the 1297 statute ) . In detail , these clauses ( using the numbering system from the 1297 statute ) state that : 
 I. FIRST , We have granted to God , and by this our present Charter have confirmed , for Us and our Heirs for ever , that the Church of England shall be free , and shall have all her whole Rights and Liberties inviolable . We have granted also , and given to all the Freemen of our Realm , for Us and our Heirs for ever , these Liberties under @-@ written , to have and to hold to them and their Heirs , of Us and our Heirs for ever . 
 IX . THE City of London shall have all the old Liberties and Customs which it hath been used to have . Moreover We will and grant , that all other Cities , Boroughs , Towns , and the Barons of the Five Ports , as with all other Ports , shall have all their Liberties and free Customs . 
 XXIX . NO Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned , or be disseised of his Freehold , or Liberties , or free Customs , or be outlawed , or exiled , or any other wise destroyed ; nor will We not pass upon him , nor condemn him , but by lawful judgment of his Peers , or by the Law of the land . We will sell to no man , we will not deny or defer to any man either Justice or Right . 
 = = Usage of the definite article and spelling = = 
 Magna Carta was given its name in Latin , a language which has no direct , consistent correlate of the English definite article " the " . As a result , the usual academic convention is to refer to the document in English without the article as " Magna Carta " rather than " the Magna Carta " . Nonetheless , " the Magna Carta " is frequently used in both academic and non @-@ academic speech . 
 Especially in the past , the name of the document has also been spelled as " Magna Charta " , but the pronunciation was the same . " Magna Charta " is still an acceptable variant spelling recorded in many dictionaries due to continued use in some reputable sources . From the 13th to the 17th centuries , only the spelling " Magna Carta " was used . The spelling " Magna Charta " began to be used in the 18th century but never became more common despite also being used by some reputable writers . 
 = Restoration of the Everglades = 
 The restoration of the Everglades is an ongoing effort to remedy damage inflicted on the environment of southern Florida during the 20th century . It is the most expensive and comprehensive environmental repair attempt in history . The degradation of the Everglades became an issue in the United States in the early 1970s after a proposal to construct a jetport in the Big Cypress Swamp . Studies indicated the airport would have destroyed the ecosystem in South Florida and Everglades National Park . After decades of destructive practices , both state and federal agencies are looking for ways to balance the needs of the natural environment in South Florida with urban and agricultural centers that have recently and rapidly grown in and near the Everglades . 
 In response to floods caused by hurricanes in 1947 , the Central and Southern Florida Flood Control Project ( C & SF ) was established to construct flood control devices in the Everglades . The C & SF built 1 @,@ 400 miles ( 2 @,@ 300 km ) of canals and levees between the 1950s and 1971 throughout South Florida . Their last venture was the C @-@ 38 canal , which straightened the Kissimmee River and caused catastrophic damage to animal habitats , adversely affecting water quality in the region . The canal became the first C & SF project to revert when the 22 @-@ mile ( 35 km ) canal began to be backfilled , or refilled with the material excavated from it , in the 1980s . 
 When high levels of phosphorus and mercury were discovered in the waterways in 1986 , water quality became a focus for water management agencies . Costly and lengthy court battles were waged between various government entities to determine who was responsible for monitoring and enforcing water quality standards . Governor Lawton Chiles proposed a bill that determined which agencies would have that responsibility , and set deadlines for pollutant levels to decrease in water . Initially the bill was criticized by conservation groups for not being strict enough on polluters , but the Everglades Forever Act was passed in 1994 . Since then , the South Florida Water Management District ( SFWMD ) and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers have surpassed expectations for achieving lower phosphorus levels . 
 A commission appointed by Governor Chiles published a report in 1995 stating that South Florida was unable to sustain its growth , and the deterioration of the environment was negatively affecting daily life for residents in South Florida . The environmental decline was predicted to harm tourism and commercial interests if no actions were taken to halt current trends . Results of an eight @-@ year study that evaluated the C & SF were submitted to the United States Congress in 1999 . The report warned that if no action was taken the region would rapidly deteriorate . A strategy called the Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan ( CERP ) was enacted to restore portions of the Everglades , Lake Okeechobee , the Caloosahatchee River , and Florida Bay to undo the damage of the past 50 years . It would take 30 years and cost $ 7 @.@ 8 billion to complete . Though the plan was passed into law in 2000 , it has been compromised by politics and funding problems . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Everglades are part of a very large watershed that begins in the vicinity of Orlando . The Okeechobee River drains into Lake Okeechobee , a 730 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 1 @,@ 900 km2 ) lake with an average depth of 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) . During the wet season when the lake exceeds its capacity , the water leaves the lake in a very wide and shallow river , approximately 100 miles ( 160 km ) long and 60 miles ( 97 km ) wide . This wide and shallow flow is known as sheetflow . The land gradually slopes toward Florida Bay , the historical destination of most of the water leaving the Everglades . Before drainage attempts , the Everglades comprised 4 @,@ 000 square miles ( 10 @,@ 000 km2 ) , taking up a third of the Florida peninsula . 
 Since the early 19th century the Everglades have been a subject of interest for agricultural development . The first attempt to drain the Everglades occurred in 1882 when a Pennsylvania land developer named Hamilton Disston constructed the first canals . Though these attempts were largely unsuccessful , Disston 's purchase of land spurred tourism and real estate development of the state . The political motivations of Governor Napoleon Bonaparte Broward resulted in more successful attempts at canal construction between 1906 and 1920 . Recently reclaimed wetlands were used for cultivating sugarcane and vegetables , while urban development began in the Everglades . 
 The 1926 Miami Hurricane and the 1928 Okeechobee Hurricane caused widespread devastation and flooding which prompted the Army Corps of Engineers to construct a dike around Lake Okeechobee . The four @-@ story wall cut off water from the Everglades . Floods from hurricanes in 1947 motivated the U.S. Congress to establish the Central and Southern Florida Flood Control Project ( C & SF ) , responsible for constructing 1 @,@ 400 miles ( 2 @,@ 300 km ) of canals and levees , hundreds of pumping stations and other water control devices . The C & SF established Water Conservation Areas ( WCAs ) in 37 % of the original Everglades , which acted as reservoirs providing excess water to the South Florida metropolitan area , or flushing it into the Atlantic Ocean or the Gulf of Mexico . The C & SF also established the Everglades Agricultural Area ( EAA ) , which grows the majority of sugarcane crops in the United States . When the EAA was first established , it encompassed approximately 27 % of the original Everglades . 
 By the 1960s , urban development and agricultural use had decreased the size of the Everglades considerably . The remaining 25 % of the Everglades in its original state is protected in Everglades National Park , but the park was established before the C & SF , and it depended upon the actions of the C & SF to release water . As Miami and other metropolitan areas began to intrude on the Everglades in the 1960s , political battles took place between park management and the C & SF when insufficient water in the park threw ecosystems into chaos . Fertilizers used in the EAA began to alter soil and hydrology in Everglades National Park , causing the proliferation of exotic plant species . However , a proposition to build a massive jetport in the Big Cypress Swamp in 1969 focused attention on the degraded natural systems in the Everglades . For the first time , the Everglades became a subject of environmental conservation . 
 = = Everglades as a priority = = 
 Environmental protection became a national priority in the 1970s . Time magazine declared it the Issue of the Year in January 1971 , reporting that it was rated as Americans ' " most serious problem confronting their community — well ahead of crime , drugs and poor schools " . When South Florida experienced a severe drought from 1970 to 1975 , with Miami receiving only 33 inches ( 840 mm ) of rain in 1971 — 22 inches ( 560 mm ) less than average — media attention focused on the Everglades . With the assistance of governor 's aide Nathaniel Reed and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service biologist Arthur R. Marshall , politicians began to take action . Governor Reubin Askew implemented the Land Conservation Act in 1972 , allowing the state to use voter @-@ approved bonds of $ 240 million to purchase land considered to be environmentally unique and irreplaceable . Since then , Florida has purchased more land for public use than any other state . In 1972 President Richard Nixon declared the Big Cypress Swamp — the intended location for the Miami jetport in 1969 — to be federally protected . Big Cypress National Preserve was established in 1974 , and Fakahatchee Strand State Preserve was created the same year . 
 In 1976 , Everglades National Park was declared an International Biosphere Reserve by UNESCO , which also listed the park as a World Heritage Site in 1979 . The Ramsar Convention designated the Everglades a Wetland of International Importance in 1987 . Only three locations on earth which have appeared on all three lists : Everglades National Park , Lake <unk> in Tunisia , and <unk> Lake in Bulgaria . 
 = = = Kissimmee River = = = 
 In the 1960s , the C & SF came under increased scrutiny from government overseers and conservation groups . Critics maintained its size was comparable to the Tennessee Valley Authority 's dam @-@ building projects during the Great Depression , and that the construction had run into the billions of dollars without any apparent resolution or plan . The projects of the C & SF have been characterized as part of " crisis and response " cycles that " ignored the consequence for the full system , assumed certainty of the future , and succeeded in solving the momentary crisis , but set in motion conditions that exaggerate future crises " . The last project , to build a canal to straighten the winding floodplain of the Kissimmee River that had historically fed Lake Okeechobee which in turn fed the Everglades , began in 1962 . Marjory Stoneman Douglas later wrote that the C & SF projects were " interrelated stupidity " , crowned by the C @-@ 38 canal . Designed to replace a meandering 90 @-@ mile ( 140 km ) river with a 52 @-@ mile ( 84 km ) channel , the canal was completed in 1971 and cost $ 29 million . It supplanted approximately 45 @,@ 000 acres ( 180 km2 ) of marshland with retention ponds , dams , and vegetation . Loss of habitat has caused the region to experience a drastic decrease of waterfowl , wading birds , and game fish . The reclaimed floodplains were taken over by agriculture , bringing fertilizers and insecticides that washed into Lake Okeechobee . Even before the canal was finished , conservation organizations and sport fishing and hunting groups were calling for the restoration of the Kissimmee River . 
 Arthur R. Marshall led the efforts to undo the damage . According to Douglas , Marshall was successful in portraying the Everglades from the Kissimmee Chain of Lakes to Florida Bay — including the atmosphere , climate , and limestone — as a single organism . Rather than remaining the preserve of conservation organizations , the cause of restoring the Everglades became a priority for politicians . Douglas observed , " Marshall accomplished the extraordinary magic of taking the Everglades out of the bleeding @-@ hearts category forever " . At the insistent urging of Marshall , newly elected Governor Bob Graham announced the formation of the " Save Our Everglades " campaign in 1983 , and in 1985 Graham lifted the first shovel of backfill for a portion of the C @-@ 38 canal . Within a year the area was covered with water returning to its original state . Graham declared that by the year 2000 , the Everglades would resemble its <unk> state as much as possible . The Kissimmee River Restoration Project was approved by Congress in the Water Resources Development Act of 1992 . The project was estimated to cost $ 578 million to convert only 22 miles ( 35 km ) of the canal ; the cost was designed to be divided between the state of Florida and the U.S. government , with the state being responsible for purchasing land to be restored . A project manager for the Army Corps of Engineers explained in 2002 , " What we 're doing on this scale is going to be taken to a larger scale when we do the restoration of the Everglades " . The entire project is estimated to be completed by 2011 . 
 = = Water quality = = 
 Attention to water quality was focused in South Florida in 1986 when a widespread algal bloom occurred in one @-@ fifth of Lake Okeechobee . The bloom was discovered to be the result of fertilizers from the Everglades Agricultural Area . Although laws stated in 1979 that the chemicals used in the EAA should not be deposited into the lake , they were flushed into the canals that fed the Everglades Water Conservation Areas , and eventually pumped into the lake . <unk> discovered that , although phosphorus assists plant growth , it destroys periphyton , one of the basic building blocks of marl in the Everglades . Marl is one of two types of Everglades soil , along with peat ; it is found where parts of the Everglades are flooded for shorter periods of time as layers of periphyton dry . Most of the phosphorus compounds also rid peat of dissolved oxygen and promote algae growth , causing native invertebrates to die , and sawgrass to be replaced with invasive cattails that grow too tall and thick for birds and alligators to nest in . Tested water showed 500 parts per billion ( ppb ) of phosphorus near sugarcane fields . State legislation in 1987 mandated a 40 % reduction of phosphorus by 1992 . 
 Attempts to correct phosphorus levels in the Everglades met with resistance . The sugarcane industry , dominated by two companies named U.S. Sugar and Flo @-@ Sun , was responsible for more than half of the crop in the EAA . They were well represented in state and federal governments by lobbyists who enthusiastically protected their interests . According to the Audubon Society , the sugar industry , nicknamed " Big Sugar " , donated more money to political parties and candidates than General Motors . The sugar industry attempted to block government @-@ funded studies of polluted water , and when the federal prosecutor in Miami faulted the sugar industry in legal action to protect Everglades National Park , Big Sugar tried to get the lawsuit withdrawn and the prosecutor fired . A costly legal battle ensued from 1988 to 1992 between the State of Florida , the U.S. government , and the sugar industry to resolve who was responsible for water quality standards , the maintenance of Everglades National Park and the Arthur R. Marshall Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge . 
 A different concern about water quality arose when mercury was discovered in fish during the 1980s . Because mercury is damaging to humans , warnings were posted for fishermen that cautioned against eating fish caught in South Florida , and scientists became alarmed when a Florida panther was found dead near Shark River Slough with mercury levels high enough to be fatal to humans . When mercury is ingested it adversely affects the central nervous system , and can cause brain damage and birth defects . Studies of mercury levels found that it is bioaccumulated through the food chain : animals that are lower on the chain have decreased amounts , but as larger animals eat them , the amount of mercury is multiplied . The dead panther 's diet consisted of small animals , including raccoons and young alligators . The source of the mercury was found to be waste incinerators and fossil fuel power plants that expelled the element in the atmosphere , which precipitated with rain , or in the dry season , dust . Naturally occurring bacteria in the Everglades that function to reduce sulfur also transform mercury deposits into methylmercury . This process was more dramatic in areas where flooding was not as prevalent . Because of requirements that reduced power plant and incinerator emissions , the levels of mercury found in larger animals decreased as well : approximately a 60 % decrease in fish and a 70 % decrease in birds , though some levels still remain a health concern for people . 
 = = = Everglades Forever Act = = = 
 In an attempt to resolve the political quagmire over water quality , Governor Lawton Chiles introduced a bill in 1994 to clean up water within the EAA that was being released to the lower Everglades . The bill stated that the " Everglades ecosystem must be restored both in terms of water quality and water quantity and must be preserved and protected in a manner that is long term and comprehensive " . It ensured the Florida Department of Environmental Protection ( DEP ) and the South Florida Water Management District ( SFWMD ) would be responsible for researching water quality , enforcing water supply improvement , controlling exotic species , and collecting taxes , with the aim of decreasing the levels of phosphorus in the region . It allowed for purchase of land where pollutants would be sent to " treat and improve the quality of waters coming from the EAA " . 
 Critics of the bill argued that the deadline for meeting the standards was unnecessarily delayed until 2006 — a period of 12 years — to enforce better water quality . They also maintained that it did not force sugarcane farmers , who were the primary polluters , to pay enough of the costs , and increased the threshold of what was an acceptable amount of phosphorus in water from 10 ppb to 50 ppb . Governor Chiles initially named it the Marjory Stoneman Douglas Act , but Douglas was so unimpressed with the action it took against polluters that she wrote to Chiles and demanded her name be stricken from it . Despite criticism , the Florida legislature passed the Act in 1994 . The SFWMD stated that its actions have exceeded expectations earlier than anticipated , by creating Stormwater Treatment Areas ( STA ) within the EAA that contain a calcium @-@ based substance such as lime rock layered between peat , and filled with calcareous periphyton . Early tests by the Army Corps of Engineers revealed this method reduced phosphorus levels from 80 ppb to 10 ppb . The <unk> are intended to treat water until the phosphorus levels are low enough to be released into the Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge or other WCAs . 
 = = Wildlife concerns = = 
 The intrusion of urban areas into wilderness has had a substantial impact on wildlife , and several species of animals are considered endangered in the Everglades region . One animal that has benefited from endangered species protection is the American Alligator ( Alligator mississippiensis ) , whose holes give refuge to other animals , often allowing many species to survive during times of drought . Once abundant in the Everglades , the alligator was listed as an endangered species in 1967 , but a combined effort by federal and state organizations and the banning of alligator hunting allowed it to rebound ; it was pronounced fully recovered in 1987 and is no longer an endangered species . However , alligators ' territories and average body masses have been found to be generally smaller than in the past , and because populations have been reduced , their role during droughts has become limited . 
 The American Crocodile ( Crocodylus acutus ) is also native to the region and has been designated as endangered since 1975 . Unlike their relatives the alligators , crocodiles tend to thrive in brackish or salt @-@ water habitats such as estuarine or marine coasts . Their most significant threat is disturbance by people . Too much contact with humans causes females to abandon their nests , and males in particular are often victims of vehicle collisions while roaming over large territories and attempting to cross U.S. 1 and Card Sound Road in the Florida Keys . There are an estimated 500 to 1 @,@ 000 crocodiles in southern Florida . 
 The most critically endangered of any animal in the Everglades region is the Florida panther ( Puma concolor coryi ) , a species that once lived throughout the southeastern United States : there were only 25 – 30 in the wild in 1995 . The panther is most threatened by urban encroachment , because males require approximately 200 square miles ( 520 km2 ) for breeding territory . A male and two to five females may live within that range . When habitat is lost , panthers will fight over territory . After vehicle collisions , the second most frequent cause of death for panthers is intra @-@ species aggression . In the 1990s urban expansion crowded panthers from southwestern Florida as Naples and Ft . Myers began to expand into the western Everglades and Big Cypress Swamp . Agencies such as the Army Corps of Engineers and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service were responsible for maintaining the Clean Water Act and the Endangered Species Act , yet still approved 99 % of all permits to build in wetlands and panther territory . A limited genetic pool is also a danger . Biologists introduced eight female Texas cougars ( Puma concolor ) in 1995 to diversify genes , and there are between 80 and 120 panthers in the wild as of 2008 . 
 Perhaps the most dramatic loss of any group of animals has been to wading birds . Their numbers were estimated by eyewitness accounts to be approximately 2 @.@ 5 million in the late 19th century . However , snowy egrets ( Egretta thula ) , roseate spoonbills ( Platalea ajaja ) , and reddish egrets ( Egretta rufescens ) were hunted to the brink of extinction for the colorful feathers used in women 's hats . After about 1920 when the fashion passed , their numbers returned in the 1930s , but over the next 50 years actions by the C & SF further disturbed populations . When the canals were constructed , natural water flow was restricted from the mangrove forests near the coast of Florida Bay . From one wet season to the next , fish were unable to reach traditional locations to repopulate when water was withheld by the C & SF . Birds were forced to fly farther from their nests to forage for food . By the 1970s , bird numbers had decreased 90 % . Many of the birds moved to smaller colonies in the WCAs to be closer to a food source , making them more difficult to count . Yet they remain significantly fewer in number than before the canals were constructed . 
 = = = Invasive species = = = 
 Around 6 million people moved to South Florida between 1940 and 1965 . With a thousand people moving to Miami each week , urban development quadrupled . As the human population grew rapidly , the problem of exotic plant and animal species also grew . Many species of plants were brought into South Florida from Asia , Central America , or Australia as decorative landscaping . Exotic animals imported by the pet trade have escaped or been released . Biological controls that keep invasive species smaller in size and fewer in number in their native lands often do not exist in the Everglades , and they compete with the embattled native species for food and space . Of imported plant species , melaleuca trees ( Melaleuca quinquenervia ) have caused the most problems . <unk> grow on average 100 feet ( 30 m ) in the Everglades , as opposed to 25 to 60 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 to 18 @.@ 3 m ) in their native Australia . They were brought to southern Florida as windbreaks and deliberately seeded in marsh areas because they absorb vast amounts of water . In a region that is regularly shaped by fire , melaleucas are fire @-@ resistant and their seeds are more efficiently spread by fire . They are too dense for wading birds with large wingspans to nest in , and they choke out native vegetation . Costs of controlling melaleucas topped $ 2 million in 1998 for Everglades National Park . In Big Cypress National Preserve , melaleucas covered 186 square miles ( 480 km2 ) at their most pervasive in the 1990s . 
 Brazilian pepper ( Schinus terebinthifolius ) was brought to Southern Florida as an ornamental shrub and was dispersed by the droppings of birds and other animals that ate its bright red berries . It thrives on abandoned agricultural land growing in forests too dense for wading birds to nest in , similar to melaleucas . It grows rapidly especially after hurricanes and has invaded pineland forests . Following Hurricane Andrew , scientists and volunteers cleared damaged pinelands of Brazilian pepper so the native trees would be able to return to their natural state . 
 The species that is causing the most impediment to restoration is the Old World climbing fern ( Lygodium microphyllum ) , introduced in 1965 . The fern grows rapidly and thickly on the ground , making passage for land animals such as black bears and panthers problematic . The ferns also grow as vines into taller portions of trees , and fires climb the ferns in " fire ladders " to scorch portions of the trees that are not naturally resistant to fire . 
 Several animal species have been introduced to Everglades waterways . Many tropical fish are released , the most detrimental being the blue tilapia ( Oreochromis aureus ) , which builds large nests in shallow waters . Tilapia also consume vegetation which would normally be used by young native fishes for cover and protection . 
 Reptiles have a particular affinity for the South Florida ecosystem . Virtually all lizards appearing in the Everglades have been introduced , such as the brown anole ( Anolis <unk> ) and the tropical house gecko ( Hemidactylus <unk> ) . The herbivorous green iguana ( Iguana iguana ) can reproduce rapidly in wilderness habitats . However , the reptile that has earned media attention for its size and potential to harm children and domestic pets is the Burmese python ( Python bivittatus ) , which has spread quickly throughout the area . The python can grow up to 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) long and competes with alligators for the top of the food chain . 
 Though exotic birds such as parrots and parakeets are also found in the Everglades , their impact is negligible . Conversely , perhaps the animal that causes the most damage to native wildlife is the domestic or feral cat . Across the U.S. , cats are responsible for approximately a billion bird deaths annually . They are estimated to number 640 per square mile ; cats living in suburban areas have devastating effects on migratory birds and marsh rabbits . 
 = = = Homestead Air Force Base = = = 
 Hurricane Andrew struck Miami in 1992 , with catastrophic damage to Homestead Air Force Base in Homestead . A plan to rejuvenate the property in 1993 and convert it into a commercial airport was met with enthusiasm from local municipal and commercial entities hoping to recoup $ 480 million and 11 @,@ 000 jobs lost in the local community by the destruction and subsequent closing of the base . On March 31 , 1994 , the base was designated as a reserve base , functioning only part @-@ time . A cursory environmental study performed by the Air Force was deemed insufficient by local conservation groups , who threatened to sue in order to halt the acquisition when estimates of 650 flights a day were projected . Groups had previously been alarmed in 1990 by the inclusion of Homestead Air Force Base on a list of the U.S. Government 's most polluted properties . Their concerns also included noise , and the inevitable collisions with birds using the mangrove forests as rookeries . The Air Force base is located between Everglades National Park and Biscayne National Park , giving it the potential to cause harm to both . In 2000 , Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt and the director of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency expressed their opposition to the project , despite other Clinton Administration agencies previously working to ensure the base would be turned over to local agencies quickly and smoothly as " a model of base disposal " . Although attempts were made to make the base more environmentally friendly , in 2001 local commercial interests promoting the airport lost federal support . 
 = = Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan = = 
 = = = Sustainable South Florida = = = 
 Despite the successes of the Everglades Forever Act and the decreases in mercury levels , the focus intensified on the Everglades in the 1990s as quality of life in the South Florida metropolitan areas diminished . It was becoming clear that urban populations were consuming increasingly unsustainable levels of natural resources . A report entitled " The Governor 's Commission for a Sustainable South Florida " , submitted to Lawton Chiles in 1995 , identified the problems the state and municipal governments were facing . The report remarked that the degradation of the natural quality of the Everglades , Florida Bay , and other bodies of water in South Florida would cause a significant decrease in tourism ( 12 @,@ 000 jobs and $ 200 million annually ) and income from compromised commercial fishing ( 3 @,@ 300 jobs and $ 52 million annually ) . The report noted that past abuses and neglect of the environment had brought the region to " a precipitous juncture " where the inhabitants of South Florida faced health hazards in polluted air and water ; furthermore , crowded and unsafe urban conditions hurt the reputation of the state . It noted that though the population had increased by 90 % over the previous two decades , registered vehicles had increased by 166 % . On the quality and availability of water , the report stated , " [ The ] frequent water shortages ... create the irony of a natural system dying of thirst in a subtropical environment with over 53 inches of rain per year " . 
 Restoration of the Everglades , however , briefly became a bipartisan cause in national politics . A controversial penny @-@ a @-@ pound ( 2 cent / kg ) tax on sugar was proposed to fund some of the necessary changes to be made to help decrease phosphorus and make other improvements to water . State voters were asked to support the tax , and environmentalists paid $ 15 million to encourage the issue . Sugar lobbyists responded with $ 24 million in advertising to discourage it and succeeded ; it became the most expensive ballot issue in state history . How restoration might be funded became a political battleground and seemed to stall without resolution . However , in the 1996 election year , Republican senator Bob Dole proposed that Congress give the State of Florida $ 200 million to acquire land for the Everglades . Democratic Vice President Al Gore promised the federal government would purchase 100 @,@ 000 acres ( 400 km2 ) of land in the EAA to turn it over for restoration . <unk> reduced the number to 50 @,@ 000 acres ( 200 km2 ) , but both Dole 's and Gore 's gestures were approved by Congress . 
 = = = Central and South Florida Project Restudy = = = 
 As part of the Water Resources Development Act of 1992 , Congress authorized an evaluation of the effectiveness of the Central and Southern Florida Flood Control Project . A report known as the " Restudy " , written by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the South Florida Water Management District , was submitted to Congress in 1999 . It cited indicators of harm to the system : a 50 % reduction in the original Everglades , diminished water storage , harmful timing of water release , an 85 to 90 % decrease in wading bird populations over the past 50 years , and the decline of output from commercial fisheries . Bodies of water including Lake Okeechobee , the Caloosahatchee River , St. Lucie estuary , Lake Worth Lagoon , Biscayne Bay , Florida Bay , and the Everglades reflected drastic water level changes , hypersalinity , and dramatic changes in marine and freshwater ecosystems . The Restudy noted the overall decline in water quality over the past 50 years was caused by loss of wetlands that act as filters for polluted water . It predicted that without intervention the entire South Florida ecosystem would deteriorate . Canals took roughly 170 billion US gallons ( 640 Gl ) of water to the Atlantic Ocean or Gulf of Mexico daily , so there was no opportunity for water storage , yet flooding was still a problem . Without changes to the current system , the Restudy predicted water restrictions would be necessary every other year , and annually in some locations . It also warned that revising some portions of the project without dedicating efforts to an overall comprehensive plan would be insufficient and probably detrimental . 
 After evaluating ten plans , the Restudy recommended a comprehensive strategy that would cost $ 7 @.@ 8 billion over 20 years . The plan advised taking the following actions : 
 Create surface water storage reservoirs to capture 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 1 @.@ 9 km3 ) of water in several locations taking up 181 @,@ 300 acres ( 734 km2 ) . 
 Create water preserve areas between Miami @-@ Dade and Palm Beach and the eastern Everglades to treat runoff water . 
 Manage Lake Okeechobee as an ecological resource to avoid the drastic rise and fall of water levels in the lake that are harmful to aquatic plant and animal life and disturb the lake sediments . 
 Improve water deliveries to estuaries to reduce the rapid discharge of excess water to the Caloosahatchee and St. Lucie estuaries that upset nutrient balances and cause lesions on fish . Stormwater discharge would be sent instead to reservoirs . 
 Increase underground water storage to hold 16 billion US gallons ( 61 Gl ) a day in wells , or reservoirs in the Floridan Aquifer , to be used later in dry periods , in a method called Aquifer Storage and Recovery ( ASR ) . 
 Construct treatment wetlands as Stormwater Treatment Areas throughout 35 @,@ 600 acres ( 144 km2 ) , that would decrease the amount of pollutants in the environment . 
 Improve water deliveries to the Everglades by increasing them at a rate of approximately 26 % into Shark River Slough . 
 Remove barriers to sheetflow by destroying or removing 240 miles ( 390 km ) of canals and levees , specifically removing the Miami Canal and reconstructing the Tamiami Trail from a highway to culverts and bridges to allow sheetflow to return to a more natural rate of water flow into Everglades National Park . 
 Store water in quarries and reuse wastewater by employing existing quarries to supply the South Florida metropolitan area as well as Florida Bay and the Everglades . Construct two wastewater treatment plants capable of discharging 22 billion US gallons ( 83 Gl ) a day to recharge the Biscayne Aquifer . 
 The implementation of all of the advised actions , the report stated , would " result in the recovery of healthy , sustainable ecosystems throughout south Florida " . The report admitted that it did not have all the answers , though no plan could . However , it predicted that it would restore the " essential defining features of the pre @-@ drainage wetlands over large portions of the remaining system " , that populations of all animals would increase , and animal distribution patterns would return to their natural states . Critics expressed concern over some unused technology ; scientists were unsure if the quarries would hold as much water as was being suggested , and whether the water would harbor harmful bacteria from the quarries . <unk> the aquifers was another concern — it was not a technique that had been previously attempted . 
 Though it was optimistic , the Restudy noted , 
 It is important to understand that the ' restored ' Everglades of the future will be different from any version of the Everglades that has existed in the past . While it certainly will be vastly superior to the current ecosystem , it will not completely match the pre @-@ drainage system . This is not possible , in light of the irreversible physical changes that have made ( sic ) to the ecosystem . It will be an Everglades that is smaller and somewhat differently arranged than the historic ecosystem . But it will be a successfully restored Everglades , because it will have recovered those hydrological and biological patterns which defined the original Everglades , and which made it unique among the world ’ s wetland systems . It will become a place that <unk> the wildness and richness of the former Everglades . 
 The report was the result of many cooperating agencies that often had conflicting goals . An initial draft was submitted to Everglades National Park management who asserted not enough water would be released to the park quickly enough — that the priority went to delivering water to urban areas . When they threatened to refuse to support it , the plan was rewritten to provide more water to the park . However , the Miccosukee Indians have a reservation in between the park and water control devices , and they threatened to sue to ensure their tribal lands and a $ 50 million casino would not be flooded . Other special interests were also concerned that businesses and residents would take second priority after nature . The Everglades , however , proved to be a bipartisan cause . The Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan ( CERP ) was authorized by the Water Resources Development Act of 2000 and signed into law by President Bill Clinton on December 11 , 2000 . It approved the immediate use of $ 1 @.@ 3 billion for implementation to be split by the federal government and other sources . 
 = = = Implementation = = = 
 The State of Florida reports that it has spent more than $ 2 billion on the various projects since CERP was signed . More than 36 @,@ 000 acres ( 150 km2 ) of Stormwater Treatment Areas ( STA ) have been constructed to filter 2 @,@ 500 short tons ( 2 @,@ 300 t ) of phosphorus from Everglades waters . An STA covering 17 @,@ 000 acres ( 69 km2 ) was constructed in 2004 , making it the largest manmade wetland in the world . Fifty @-@ five percent of the land necessary for restoration , totaling 210 @,@ 167 acres ( 850 @.@ 5 km2 ) , has been purchased by the State of Florida . A plan named " Acceler8 " , to hasten the construction and funding of the project , was put into place , spurring the start of six of eight construction projects , including that of three large reservoirs . 
 Despite the bipartisan goodwill and declarations of the importance of the Everglades , the region still remains in danger . Political maneuvering continues to impede CERP : sugar lobbyists promoted a bill in the Florida legislature in 2003 that increased the acceptable amount of phosphorus in Everglades waterways from 10 ppb to 15 ppb and extended the deadline for the mandated decrease by 20 years . A compromise of 2016 was eventually reached . Environmental organizations express concern that attempts to speed up some of the construction through Acceler8 are politically motivated ; the six projects Acceler8 focuses on do not provide more water to natural areas in desperate need of it , but rather to projects in populated areas bordering the Everglades , suggesting that water is being diverted to make room for more people in an already overtaxed environment . Though Congress promised half the funds for restoration , after the War in Iraq began and two of CERP 's major supporters in Congress retired , the federal role in CERP was left unfulfilled . According to a story in The New York Times , state officials say the restoration is lost in a maze of " federal bureaucracy , a victim of ' analysis paralysis ' " . In 2007 , the release of $ 2 billion for Everglades restoration was approved by Congress , overriding President George W. Bush 's veto of the entire Water Development Project the money was a part of . Bush 's rare veto went against the wishes of Florida Republicans , including his brother , Governor Jeb Bush . A lack of subsequent action by the Congress prompted Governor Charlie Crist to travel to Washington D.C. in February 2008 and inquire about the promised funds . By June 2008 , the federal government had spent only $ 400 million of the $ 7 @.@ 8 billion legislated . Carl Hiaasen characterized George W. Bush 's attitude toward the environment as " long @-@ standing indifference " in June 2008 , exemplified when Bush stated he would not intervene to change the Environmental Protection Agency 's ( EPA ) policy allowing the release of water polluted with fertilizers and phosphorus into the Everglades . 
 = = = Reassessment of CERP = = = 
 Florida still receives a thousand new residents daily and lands slated for restoration and wetland recovery are often bought and sold before the state has a chance to bid on them . The competitive pricing of real estate also drives it beyond the purchasing ability of the state . Because the State of Florida is assisting with purchasing lands and funding construction , some of the programs under CERP are vulnerable to state budget cuts . In June 2008 Governor Crist announced that the State of Florida will buy U.S. Sugar for $ 1 @.@ 7 billion . The idea came when sugar lobbyists were trying to persuade Crist to relax restriction of U.S. Sugar 's practice of pumping phosphorus @-@ laden water into the Everglades . According to one of the lobbyists who characterized it as a " duh moment " , Crist said , " If sugar is polluting the Everglades , and we 're paying to clean the Everglades , why don 't we just get rid of sugar ? " The largest producer of cane sugar in the U.S. will continue operations for six years , and when ownership transfers to Florida , 187 @,@ 000 acres ( 760 km2 ) of the Everglades will remain undeveloped to allow it to be restored to its pre @-@ drainage state . 
 In September 2008 the National Research Council ( NRC ) , a nonprofit agency providing science and policy advice to the federal government , submitted a report on the progress of CERP . The report noted " scant progress " in restoration because of problems in budgeting , planning , and bureaucracy . The NRC report called the Everglades one of the " world 's treasured ecosystems " that is being further endangered by lack of progress : " Ongoing delay in Everglades restoration has not only postponed improvements — it has allowed ecological decline to continue " . It cited the shrinking tree islands , and the negative population growth of the endangered Rostrhamus sociabilis or Everglades snail kite , and Ammodramus maritimus mirabilis , the Cape Sable seaside sparrow . The lack of water reaching Everglades National Park was characterized as " one of the most discouraging stories " in implementation of the plan . The NRC recommended improving planning on the state and federal levels , evaluating each CERP project annually , and further acquisition of land for restoration . Everglades restoration was earmarked $ 96 million in federal funds as part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 with the intention of providing civil service and construction jobs while simultaneously implementing the legislated repair projects . 
 In January 2010 , work began on the C @-@ 111 canal , built in the 1960s to drain irrigated farmland , to reconstruct it to keep from diverting water from Everglades National Park . Two other projects focusing on restoration were also scheduled to start in 2010 . Governor Crist announced the same month that $ 50 million would be earmarked for Everglades restoration . In April of the same year , a federal district court judge sharply criticized both state and federal failures to meet deadlines , describing the cleanup efforts as being slowed by " glacial delay " and government neglect of environmental law enforcement " incomprehensible " . 
 = Urnula craterium = 
 Urnula craterium is a species of cup fungus in the family Sarcosomataceae . It is parasitic on oak and various other hardwood species ; it is also saprobic , as the fruit bodies develop on dead wood after it has fallen to the ground . Appearing in early spring , its distinctive goblet @-@ shaped and dark @-@ colored fruit bodies have earned it the common names devil 's urn and the gray urn . The distribution of U. craterium includes eastern North America , Europe , and Asia . It produces bioactive compounds that can inhibit the growth of other fungi . The asexual ( imperfect ) , or conidial stage of U. craterium is a plant pathogen known as Conoplea globosa , which causes a canker disease of oak and several other hardwood tree species . 
 = = History and taxonomy = = 
 Urnula craterium was first described in 1822 by American botanist Lewis David de Schweinitz as Peziza craterium , based on a specimen found in North Carolina . The species first appeared in the scientific literature under its current name when Elias Magnus Fries described the new genus Urnula in 1849 , and set Peziza craterium as the type species . In 1896 , German mycologist Heinrich Rehm removed the species from Urnula – transferring it to the genus Geopyxis – and replaced the type species with Urnula terrestris , a peripherally related species . This restructuring resulted in a <unk> untenable situation in which the genus Urnula consisted of a single species with ambiguous resemblance to the original species ( described by Fries ) upon which the genus was based . According to Elsie Kupfer , who had written Rehm to clarify the rationale for his decision : 
 Urnula craterium was placed with its related species under Geopyxis , because Geopyxis was established by Persoon before Urnula by Fries ; and that in order to retain the genus Urnula , under which Saccardo had placed Podophacidium terrestre of <unk> , he ( Rehm ) restricted the genus to this latter fungus . 
 As Kupfer explains , Rehm did not justify why he believed Urnula craterium should be allied to Geopyxis , or why Podophacidium terrestre should be considered an Urnula . Kupfer 's macro- and microscopic analysis of tissues from these and related genera clearly showed the inconsistency in Rehm 's taxonomical choices , and that Urnula craterium represented an entirely different genus not related to Geopyxis ; Fries 's naming was restored . 
 The genus name means " little urn " ; the specific epithet is derived from the Latin <unk> , referring to a type of bowl used in antiquity to mix wine with water . It is commonly known as the devil 's urn and the gray urn . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit bodies begin from dense , black mycelium on the surface of oak branches in contact with the ground . Starting out as rolls of cylindrical tissue 1 or more centimeters long and 3 – 4 mm wide , they expand slowly over the winter , and grow rapidly in the spring when the weather becomes warmer . 
 The goblet @-@ shaped fruit body ( technically an ascocarp ) is 3 – 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) in diameter and 4 – 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) deep ; initially it is closed , but opens as it matures , leaving a ragged or smooth inrolled margin around a round opening . The flesh of the ascocarp walls is tough and initially gelatinous , later becoming leathery . The exterior of the ascocarp is brownish black to black , with a velvety surface , while the interior spore @-@ bearing surface , the hymenium , is brownish black in color , usually somewhat paler than the outside . The outer surface may be partially covered with small <unk> patches of tissue . When viewed with a magnifying glass , the " hairs " ( fungal hyphae ) making up the outer velvety surface are variable in length , and are thick @-@ walled , blunt , and appear to wind from side to side ( flexuous ) . The ascocarp is connected to a stalk that is typically 3 – 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) long by 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 8 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 3 in ) thick , with black mycelia at its base . 
 = = = Microscopic features = = = 
 The spores are ellipsoid or sausage @-@ shaped ( allantoid ) , smooth , and thin @-@ walled . They are non @-@ amyloid ( not taking up iodine stain ) , and hyaline ( translucent ) , with dimensions of 22 – 37 by 10 – 15 µm . The spore @-@ bearing cells , the asci are eight @-@ spored , cylindrical , and measure 600 by 15 – 17 µm . They are operculate , analogous to having a flip @-@ top lid mechanism to release the spores . Interspersed among the asci are thin , filamentous , branched paraphyses that extend beyond the tops of the asci . 
 Viewed with a microscope , the wall of the apothecium is made of three tissue layers of roughly equal thickness . The first layer of tissue is black , leathery and compact , and covered with a fine layer of brownish @-@ black hairs ( a tomentum ) ; the second layer consists of loosely interlaced brown hyphae suspended in a gelatinous matrix . The third layer is the fertile , spore @-@ bearing surface , the brownish @-@ black hymenium . 
 = = = Imperfect state = = = 
 The life cycle of Urnula craterium allows for both an imperfect ( making asexual spores , or conidia ) or perfect ( making sexual spores ) form ; as has often happened in fungal taxonomy , the imperfect form was given a different name , because the relationship between the perfect and imperfect forms of the same species was not then known . The imperfect stage of Urnula craterium is the plant pathogenic species Conoplea globosa , known to cause a canker disease ( <unk> canker ) of oak and several other hardwoods . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 This species is often listed in field guides as inedible , or not recommended for consumption due to its tough texture . Michael Kuo , in his 2007 book on edible mushrooms , lists the taste as " mediocre " , and comments " the devil 's urn is not as bad as I thought it was going to be . It 's not good , mind you , but it would be possible to eat it with a forced smile if your Aunt Wanda served it to you . " 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The cup fungus Plectania <unk> is also black , but it is smaller and the cup not as deep . 
 = = Spore development = = 
 The spores of U. craterium have a rapid and high percentage of germination . Germination requires only 1 @.@ 5 hours , a relatively short time compared to another <unk> species in the same family , Sarcoscypha coccinea , which requires 48 hours . Furthermore , germination is possible under a wide temperature range , from 5 ° C ( 41 ° F ) to 35 ° C ( 95 ° F ) , and wide soil pH range ; the quality and quantity of light does not affect germination , although prolonged exposure to light does reduce germination efficiency . 
 = = Ecology , habitat and distribution = = 
 Urnula craterium grows singly or clustered together , usually attached to sticks and branches ( especially oak ) that are partially buried in the ground . The teleomorph state is saprobic , and decomposes hardwood ; the anamorph state is parasitic , and causes a canker of various hardwoods , including oaks , hickories , basswood and beech . The is often found in deciduous forests , although it is sometimes inconspicuous due to its dark color , and because it may be partially covered with leaf litter . One of the first fleshy fungi to appear from March to May , U. craterium has been dubbed a " harbinger of spring " , and is sometimes encountered under melting snow . 
 The distribution of U. craterium includes eastern North America , Europe ( including the Czech Republic , Finland , Spain , ) Japan , and China . It is red @-@ listed as critically endangered in the Czech Republic . 
 = = Bioactive compounds = = 
 Urnula craterium , when grown in liquid culture , produces bioactive chemicals that inhibit the growth of other fungi that are pathogenic to aspen ; specifically , these chemical are antagonistic to aspen blue @-@ stain fungi Ophiostoma <unk> and O. piliferum , as well as the wood @-@ decay fungus Phellinus <unk> . Chemicals produced by U. craterium include <unk> , 5 @,@ 6 @-@ <unk> , 4 @-@ methoxy @-@ 3 @,@ 5 @-@ dimethyl @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 @-@ one , and ( 4S ) <unk> @-@ dihydro @-@ 4 @,@ 8 @-@ dihydroxy @-@ 1 ( 2H ) <unk> . However , none of these isolated compounds inhibits the aspen pathogens in vitro , suggesting the true nature of the antifungal mechanism in the devil 's urn has not yet been resolved . 
 = Phineas and Ferb 's Quantum Boogaloo = 
 " Phineas and Ferb 's Quantum Boogaloo " is the fourteenth episode of the second season of the animated television series Phineas and Ferb , and the 72nd overall episode of the series . It originally aired on Disney XD in the United States on September 21 , 2009 . In the episode , Phineas and his stepbrother Ferb travel into the future and have their time machine stolen by their older sister Candace , now an adult , who travels back in time to get her brothers in trouble during one of their outlandish schemes . In doing so , however , she sets off a chain reaction leading to a dystopian future ruled by the evil Dr. Doofenshmirtz . 
 " Phineas and Ferb 's Quantum Boogaloo , " written by Scott Peterson and directed by Zac Moncrief , was rated TV @-@ G in the United States . The episode was conceived as a means of expanding the time machine plot that was introduced previously in the episode " It 's About Time . " Dan Povenmire and Jeff " Swampy " Marsh , co @-@ founders of Phineas and Ferb , centralized plot elements to satirize time travel films , such as The Time Machine ( 1960 ) and the Back to the Future trilogy ( 1985 @-@ 1990 ) . Multiple scenes in the episode were meant to be rather confusing and difficult to understand in order to interest viewers so they would watch the episode multiple times , trying to learn something new each time . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews from television critics . In its original broadcast , it ranked fourth in the key demographics Boys 6 @-@ 14 , Kids 6 @-@ 11 and Boys 6 @-@ 11 , totaling 599 @,@ 000 viewers , an 88 percent increase from that of the previous year 's ratings in the timeslot . When it premiered on Disney Channel , it was the thirteenth highest @-@ ranked cable program for the entire week . It guest starred actors Jennifer Stone , Moises Arias , Noah Munck , and Jennifer Grey , along with the band Bowling for Soup , who appeared as themselves playing an extended version of the series ' theme song , " Today is Gonna Be a Great Day , " which was also included on the official Phineas and Ferb soundtrack which was released on September 22 , 2009 . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Phineas and his stepbrother Ferb learn from their friend Baljeet that a tool they need for their latest project has yet to be invented . They and their friend Isabella borrow the time machine on display at the local museum to travel twenty years into the future . Once they arrive , Isabella stays behind with the time machine while the boys enter their sister Candace 's backyard , where her sons Fred and Xavier are sitting under a tree doing nothing . The boys convince their future nephews to be active and in return are given the tool they need . As they leave , Candace spots them and it brings back upsetting memories of never being able to bust the boys . She takes her mother Linda to the museum where the boys leave , right before Linda can see them . 
 Professor Onassis , who invented the time machine in the 1800s , arrives in the original version of the machine soon after and future Candace steals it . She travels back to the day the boys built the rollercoaster in their backyard and succeeds in getting her mother to see them , finally fulfilling her dream of busting them . However , in doing so , she accidentally leads Perry , their pet platypus who is secretly a suave secret agent , to be injured while stopping an evil magnet mechanism . As a result , Perry 's nemesis , Dr. Doofenshmirtz , comes out unharmed from the effects of the now @-@ destroyed machine . Over time , everything is altered and the world becomes <unk> for fear of a repeat of Phineas and Ferb 's dangerous activities . Doofenshmirtz eventually gains the upper hand , effectively becoming emperor of the world . He claims to be a nice Emperor , though , since he can remember everyone 's name ( though this is considerably easier than it seems , since one of his rules is that everyone has to be named Joe ) . Also , because of Doofenshmirtz gaining the upper hand , the Agency is now forced into a oath to obey him , resulting a demoralized Perry to fail more on his missions against Doofenshmirtz . After arriving in the dystopia future Doofenshmirtz rules , Candace returns to the day of the rollercoaster to stop herself from interfering like before , stopping the dystopia from occurring . 
 The time machine gets destroyed so the two <unk> go to the backyard to convince the boys to fix the current time machine in the museum and take them back , creating a paradox and as a result , the Candace from the bleak future ( wearing a white lab coat as seen in the picture above ) ceases to exist . The boys then fix the machine . Isabella says to Ferb that a rollercoaster ride and time travel was a bonus . The present Candace tags along with her future self , Phineas , Ferb , and Isabella as they travel to the future ( while Candace " finally " busting them in the process , but the future Linda is not angry at the boys , saying she doesn 't have jurisdiction to bust the boys anymore ) . As Candace and the boys talk to the future Linda , Isabella sparks an idea and travels back in time . During the credits , it reveals Isabella obtained the tool and gave it to the boys before they even time traveled in the first place , thus , canceling out all the events that happened earlier in the episode and also causing all the characters involved in the future to cease existence ( also erasing the " busting " present Candace caused , thus possibly causing a time loop ) . In " Summer Belongs To You " , Phineas mentions time traveling twice and Isabella comments that Phineas has travelled through time " twice " , but because of the events in the credits of Quantum Boogaloo , no @-@ one - including Isabella should actually know about the time @-@ travelling . 
 During this episode , it is implied that Isabella marries either Phineas or Ferb , though none of the characters remember this . It is also implied that Phineas wins at least one Nobel Prize as the future Linda says the future Phineas is " in Switzerland for the Awards Ceremony . " Ferb is likely President of the United States as he is stated to be " at Camp David " , a resort specially made for Presidents since Eisenhower , although his British birth would ordinarily prevent this . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Phineas and Ferb 's Quantum Boogaloo " was written by Scott Peterson and directed by Zac Moncrief . Phineas and Ferb had previously produced an episode in season one 's " It 's About Time " which featured a time machine . Co @-@ founder Dan Povenmire stated that he enjoyed the outcome of said episode . The writers purposely left the time machine available for the boys ' use at the end of the episode so that they could reuse it in a later episode . Eventually , they conceived a plot where " Phineas and Ferb go into the future and actually see Candace as an adult ( which ) drags up all kinds of memories of not being able to bust them . " 
 The scenes in which Candace travels back to the Phineas and Ferb building a roller coaster are taken from the pilot episode , " Rollercoaster . " Including the scenes was " great fun " for Povenmire and fellow co @-@ founder Jeff " Swampy " Marsh , who decided early on that using it would have " future Candace go back to the rollercoaster [ sic ] . Then whatever she did would affect the future , in this case give Doofenshmirtz the upper hand and effectively change history . " The inclusion was inspired by the Star Trek : Deep Space Nine episode " Trials and Tribble @-@ ations , " in which the Deep Space 9 crew travel back in time to the Star Trek episode " The Trouble With Tribbles . " The novel approach was viewed by Marsh as " a great way to interweave a story . " 
 The crew spent a long amount of time plotting out the episode in a room , using sticky notes , in order to make sure it played out sensibly and was clearly understandable to viewers . The production staff based a lot of the usage of time travel in " Phineas and Ferb 's Quantum Boogaloo " on those from the Back to the Future trilogy ( 1985 @-@ 1990 ) and H. G. Wells ' The Time Machine ( 1960 ) . The goal of the crew was to make sure everything stayed strong to a certain logical standpoint , which led to several surreal conversations , including several paradoxes involving time travel . The crew members sought to venture into elements that seemed complicated , as their children viewers were deemed intelligent enough to understand such elements . The hopes of the production staff was to make the episode one that they could watch multiple times and notice something new with each viewing . 
 Since Doofenshmirtz and Perry 's actions tend to affect those of the boys , the choice to have future Candace 's interference in the past greatly affect those of Doofenshmirtz and Perry 's was considered the logical choice . Povenmire explained , " They affect each other in ways that we never fully understand , but if you throw off that little balance of power of their [ respective ] activities , all hell could break loose . " The song Doofenshmirtz sings , entitled " It 's Been a Charmed Life , " was well @-@ praised by the production crew , who felt that it was considerably well @-@ handled . The song centralized the irony surrounding Doofenshmirtz having everything go well for him , a theme completely different from that which is generally touched upon in the series . 
 The scene where Candace mentions that her best friend Stacy Hirano had become the president of Uruguay was originally written as a throwaway joke for the episode . During an e @-@ mail exchange between the crew , some crew members were curious about the line and Povenmire came up with an entire back story , in which Stacy meets the prince of the country , moves there and , after changing several laws , becomes eligible for the presidency . The staff enjoyed the idea and wrote it down as a possible plot for a future episode . 
 " Phineas and Ferb 's Quantum Boogaloo " featured multiple guest appearances . Actress Jennifer Stone guest starred as Amanda , Candace 's future daughter . Stone researched actress Ashley Tisdale 's performance as Candace on YouTube to better grasp the attention needed on the voice role . Stone recorded her lines a long time before the final animation came in and was feeling impatient about how the end results would come out . Moises Arias , who is , according to Stone , " like [ her ] little brother , " voiced Candace 's future son , Fred . Actress Jennifer Grey also appeared as a librarian . Grey 's character in Ferris Bueller 's Day Off was the inspiration for Candace and the actress had previously portrayed Doofenshmirtz 's professor in " Oil on Candace . " 
 " Phineas and Ferb 's Quantum Boogaloo " originally broadcast on September 21 , 2009 , on Disney XD . Like all episodes of Phineas and Ferb , it carried a TV @-@ G parental guidance rating . The song " Today is Gonna Be a Great Day " is available on the official Phineas and Ferb soundtrack , which was released on September 22 , 2009 , a day after the episode 's broadcast . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " Phineas and Ferb 's Quantum Boogaloo " serves as a satire on time travel films , particularly the Back to the Future film series and H. G. Wells ' The Time Machine . Candace stealing the time machine to change something in the past , thus creating a dystopian future , mirrors the scene in Back to the Future Part II ( 1989 ) , in which Biff Tannen steals a time machine and causes a dark and chaotic future in the process . In the future , the American pop @-@ punk band Bowling for Soup appears and performs an extended version of the series ' theme song . The band members were designed to look twenty years older and having gained weight . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Phineas and Ferb 's Quantum Boogaloo " ranked fourth in its timeslot , in the demographics Boys 6 – 14 , Kids 6 – 11 and Boys 6 – 11 . It averaged 599 @,@ 000 total viewers , an 88 percent increase over the previous year 's record for the timeslot . In Kids 6 – 14 , it outranked previous year 's records by 152 percent . In Boys 6 – 14 , it claimed over a 121 percent increase , in Boys 6 – 11 , it garnered an over 116 percent increase , and in Boys 9 @-@ 14 , an over 138 percent registered increase . When the episode aired on Disney Channel for the first time , it was watched by 2 @.@ 7 million American households and 3 @.@ 9 million individual viewers , placing it at number 13 in cable network ratings for the entire week . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews from television critics . Matt Blum of Wired called it " probably the <unk> episode of the show so far " . Blum praised the joke about Stacy becoming the president of Uruguay and called Doofenshmirtz 's song " It 's Been a Charmed Life " " heavy irony . " Paige Wiser of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times considered the episode one of September 21 's television highlights , writing that she " could not be more excited . " News OK listed the episode on its " Top 55 TV Programs for Sept . 20 @-@ 26 , 2009 " , and all three guest stars appeared on its list of " Top 30 Guest Stars on TV Shows airing Sept . 20 @-@ 26 , 2009 " . Povenmire considered the episode one of his favorites of the series . 
 = = = General = = = 
 Marsh , Jeff " Swampy " ( 2009 @-@ 09 @-@ 18 ) . Phineas and Ferb : A Sci @-@ Fi Episode , a Soundtrack Album , and an Interview ! ( Audio ) . Wired . 
 Blum , Matt ( 2009 @-@ 09 @-@ 18 ) . Phineas and Ferb : A Sci @-@ Fi Episode , a Soundtrack Album , and an Interview ! ( Audio ) . Wired . 
 = = = Specific = = = 
 = Everyone Nose ( All the Girls Standing in the Line for the Bathroom ) = 
 " Everyone Nose ( All the Girls Standing in the Line for the Bathroom ) " is a song by American band N.E.R.D. It is the lead single from their third studio album Seeing Sounds and was released on May 13 , 2008 . Lyrically , the song delves into the issue of woman socially snorting cocaine in bathrooms . The song was accompanied by music video , which was directed by Diane Martel . A video for the remix of the song featuring Kanye West , Lupe Fiasco , and Pusha T of Clipse was also filmed and directed by Hype Williams . 
 " Everyone Nose " received generally favorable reviews from music critics . N.E.R.D promoted the song through numerous tours and festivals . The song failed to chart in the United States , but peaked at number 17 on the Japan Hot 100 Singles and at number 41 on the UK Singles Chart . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Everyone Nose " was written by Pharrell Williams and Chad Hugo , who also produced the song as The Neptunes . The title of the song derives from the subject of women snorting cocaine socially in bathrooms . N.E.R.D <unk> that , " when the girls go in the bathroom , they 're powdering their faces with that other white stuff " . Andrew Coleman , the band 's engineer , explained the song 's bridge , saying it is the " breakdown " of the girl : " you can imagine a girl who is totally <unk> out of her mind dancing and sweating . " 
 In midst of working with Missy Elliott , Williams was shown a video of people dancing to Baltimore house music . He " lost his mind , the way these people were dancing and these crazy beats " , which inspired the beat for " Everyone Nose " . The song begins with a Roland 5080 acoustic bass guitar and continues with drums provided by a Triton Extreme . He went on to say that , " Timbaland is scratching in there , too . The big Latin section is again , all Pharrell — all the same instruments ; he just flipped the programming . That is the Latin club explosion part , mostly programmed beats with some buckets . " 
 = = Remix = = 
 N.E.R.D produced a remix featuring Kanye West , Lupe Fiasco , and Pusha T , which was available as an iTunes and Zune Marketplace bonus track with the purchase of Seeing Sounds . When asked why the song was remixed , Hugo replied with , " We wanted something with more of a straight @-@ ahead , club @-@ bumping beat , just a different take on it . We like to remix , dismantle , take apart shit and put it back together . It 's just like a Rubik 's Cube : When you can 't solve it , you just break it and you put it back together . " Williams added , " We think that ' Everyone Nose ' in its current form already hits a certain demographic a certain way , so I just wanted to go and do something different . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Christian Hoard of Rolling Stone claimed that the song would be " destined to go down as [ one ] of 2008 's most interesting hip @-@ hop cuts . " Addi Stewart of Now magazine said the song " is straight groovy , baby ! " Many praised the beat ; Nick Levine of Digital Spy said , " It 's a triumph of beats over melody , but few would deny that those beats sound pretty good as they 're dropping . " The Daily Mirror described the beat as " nicely buffeted electropop " , noting its " <unk> timed beats , synthesised horns and playful vocal jousting " . Scott Lowe of IGN said the song featured an " intriguing jazzy beat layered over pounding bass " . Others panned the song 's sound and lyrics , saying Williams " lampoons <unk> <unk> by sounding like Baha Men after five too many rails " and that the lyrics were " about as shallow and trite as an inflatable kiddy swimming pool , but less fun " . 
 The remix has also garnered positive reviews ; Lowe noted that " Kanye West , Lupe Fiasco , and Pusha T make an appearance on a somewhat more enjoyable remixed version of [ the song ] " , which added a " nice outside perspective to the otherwise tiresome track " . Tom Breihan of The Village Voice called the remix " pretty great " compared to the " horrible hammering " of the original song . He criticized West 's lyrics , saying he was " back to talking about girls on his verse again [ … ] without any of the humane warmth he used to sometimes bring . " The song was number 32 on Rolling Stone 's list of the 100 Best Songs of 2008 . 
 In response to the positive reception from listeners , Williams said , " We love the reaction that we get [ from that song ] . They know what we 're talking about . " Shay Haley , a member of the band , went on saying , " Me , personally , I 'm shocked it 's being embraced the way it is . I feel like it sticks out like a sore thumb in comparison to what you hear every day on the radio … It 's just our personal observation of what we 've seen over the past couple of years , so we felt like making a party record out of it . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 N.E.R.D promoted the song by performing it in several tours and festivals , including the Austin City Limits Music Festival and the Diesel Bash . Toby Green of The Guardian attended a concert at The Roundhouse in London and gave the performance four out of five stars , saying " Pharrell 's knack is connecting with the crowd . Many bands tell the audience they want to party with them , but N.E.R.D seem to mean it . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 Williams contacted the T.A.G. ad agency to record an interactive video to create an " integrated campaign " in order to " hype " the single . The music video for " Everyone Nose " was directed by Diane Martel and co @-@ directed by <unk> , in collaboration with photo website Last Night 's Party . It was filmed at a nightclub in Madison , New York , with 100 guests as an " orgiastic party " video , in addition to cameos by Kanye West , Lindsay Lohan , and Samantha Ronson . During the filming of the music video , a fight broke out on set , which threatened to halt recording of the video . The outbreak resulted in one person being sent to a nearby hospital for medical treatment . N.E.R.D , West , and Lohan were not on set at the time of the altercation . Due to the lack of security and believing their safety was compromised , members of the trade union " threatened to walk off the set " before being persuaded to stay . 
 A large dancing nose and nude strippers were set to appear in the video , but were censored with " removed by request " slates . Because the lyrics dealt with cocaine , MTV initially did not air " Everyone Nose " . MTV softened after their website was visited 5 @,@ 000 times , and they played a censored version of the music video without the URL . Rebecca Skinner of HSI Productions criticized MTV , saying , " All artists want their videos to be seen on as many platforms as possible . However MTV is not what [ it ] used to be — yet another reason why the online component to this is important . " 
 A music video for the remix of " Everyone Nose " featuring Kanye West , Lupe Fiasco , and Pusha T was filmed in July and was directed by Hype Williams . It features video game graphics from the 1980s . Williams explained that , " We just want to have fun with the project . In a day and age where the record industry is what it is , I 'm lucky enough to be on a label that understands and they 'll just let us have fun . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital single 
 " Everyone Nose ( All the Girls Standing in the Line for the Bathroom ) " – 3 : 49 
 United Kingdom CD single 
 " Everyone Nose ( All the Girls Standing in the Line for the Bathroom ) " – 3 : 27 
 " Spaz " – 3 : 50 
 Remix single 
 " Everyone Nose ( Remix ) " ( Clean ) feat . Kanye West , Lupe Fiasco and Pusha T – 3 : 53 
 " Everyone Nose ( Remix ) " ( Instrumental ) – 3 : 49 
 " Everyone Nose ( Remix ) " feat . Kanye West , Lupe Fiasco and Pusha T – 3 : 53 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Pink Floyd = 
 Pink Floyd were an English rock band formed in London . They achieved international acclaim with their progressive and psychedelic music . Distinguished by their use of philosophical lyrics , sonic experimentation , extended compositions and elaborate live shows , they are one of the most commercially successful and influential groups in the history of popular music . 
 Pink Floyd were founded in 1965 by students Syd Barrett on guitar , Nick Mason on drums , Roger Waters on bass , and Richard Wright on keyboards . They gained popularity performing in London 's underground music scene during the late 1960s , and under Barrett 's leadership released two charting singles and a successful debut album , The Piper at the Gates of Dawn ( 1967 ) . Guitarist David Gilmour joined in December 1967 ; Barrett left in April 1968 due to deteriorating mental health . Waters became the band 's primary lyricist and eventually their dominant songwriter , devising the concepts behind their albums The Dark Side of the Moon ( 1973 ) , Wish You Were Here ( 1975 ) , Animals ( 1977 ) , The Wall ( 1979 ) and The Final Cut ( 1983 ) . The Dark Side of the Moon and The Wall became two of the best @-@ selling albums of all time . 
 Following creative tensions , Wright left Pink Floyd in 1979 , followed by Waters in 1985 . Gilmour and Mason continued as Pink Floyd ; Wright rejoined them as a session musician and , later , a band member . The three produced two more albums , A Momentary Lapse of Reason ( 1987 ) and The Division Bell ( 1994 ) , and toured until 1994 . After nearly two decades of acrimony , Pink Floyd reunited with Waters in 2005 for a performance at the global awareness event Live 8 , but Gilmour and Waters have since stated they have no plans to reunite as a band again . Barrett died in 2006 and Wright in 2008 . The final Pink Floyd studio album , The Endless River ( 2014 ) , was recorded without Waters and largely based on unreleased material from 1993 – 94 . 
 Pink Floyd were inducted into the US Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1996 , and the UK Music Hall of Fame in 2005 . By 2013 , the band had sold more than 250 million records worldwide , including 75 million certified units in the United States . 
 = = 1963 – 67 : Early years = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 Roger Waters met Nick Mason while they were both studying architecture at the London Polytechnic at Regent Street . They first played music together in a group formed by Keith Noble and Clive Metcalfe with Noble 's sister <unk> . Richard Wright , a fellow architecture student , joined later that year , and the group became a sextet named Sigma 6 . Waters played lead guitar , Mason drums , and Wright rhythm guitar ( since there was rarely an available keyboard ) . The band performed at private functions and rehearsed in a tearoom in the basement of the Regent Street Polytechnic . They performed songs by the Searchers and material written by their manager and songwriter , fellow student Ken Chapman . 
 In September 1963 , Waters and Mason moved into a flat at 39 Stanhope Gardens near Crouch End in London , owned by Mike Leonard , a part @-@ time tutor at the nearby Hornsey College of Art and the Regent Street Polytechnic . Mason moved out after the 1964 academic year , and guitarist Bob Klose moved in during September 1964 , prompting Waters ' switch to bass . Sigma 6 went through several names , including the Meggadeaths , the Abdabs and the Screaming Abdabs , Leonard 's Lodgers , and the Spectrum Five , before settling on the Tea Set . In 1964 , as Metcalfe and Noble left to form their own band , guitarist Syd Barrett joined Klose and Waters at Stanhope Gardens . Barrett , two years younger , had moved to London in 1962 to study at the Camberwell College of Arts . Waters and Barrett were childhood friends ; Waters had often visited Barrett and watched him play guitar at Barrett 's mother 's house . Mason said about Barrett : " In a period when everyone was being cool in a very adolescent , self @-@ conscious way , Syd was unfashionably outgoing ; my enduring memory of our first encounter is the fact that he bothered to come up and introduce himself to me . " 
 Noble and Metcalfe left the Tea Set in late 1963 , and Klose introduced the band to singer Chris Dennis , a technician with the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) . In December 1964 , they secured their first recording time , at a studio in West Hampstead , through one of Wright 's friends , who let them use some down time free . Wright , who was taking a break from his studies , did not participate in the session . When the RAF assigned Dennis a post in Bahrain in early 1965 , Barrett became the band 's frontman . Later that year , they became the resident band at the Countdown Club near Kensington High Street in London , where from late night until early morning they played three sets of 90 minutes each . During this period , spurred by the group 's need to extend their sets to minimise song repetition , the band realised that " songs could be extended with lengthy solos " , wrote Mason . After pressure from his parents and advice from his college tutors , Klose quit the band in mid @-@ 1965 and Barrett took over lead guitar . The group first referred to themselves as the Pink Floyd Sound in late 1965 . Barrett created the name on the spur of the moment when he discovered that another band , also called the Tea Set , were to perform at one of their gigs . The name is derived from the given names of two blues musicians whose Piedmont blues records Barrett had in his collection , Pink Anderson and Floyd Council . 
 By 1966 , the group 's repertoire consisted mainly of rhythm and blues songs and they had begun to receive paid bookings , including a performance at the Marquee Club in March 1966 , where Peter Jenner , a lecturer at the London School of Economics , noticed them . Jenner was impressed by the sonic effects Barrett and Wright created , and with his business partner and friend Andrew King became their manager . The pair had little experience in the music industry and used King 's inheritance to set up Blackhill Enterprises , purchasing about £ 1 @,@ 000 worth of new instruments and equipment for the band . It was around this time that Jenner suggested they drop the " Sound " part of their band name , thus becoming the Pink Floyd . Under Jenner and King 's guidance , the group became part of London 's underground music scene , playing at venues including All Saints Hall and the Marquee . While performing at the Countdown Club , the band had experimented with long instrumental excursions , and they began to expand them with rudimentary but effective light shows , projected by coloured slides and domestic lights . Jenner and King 's social connections helped gain the band prominent coverage in the Financial Times and an article in the Sunday Times which stated : " At the launching of the new magazine IT the other night a pop group called the Pink Floyd played throbbing music while a series of bizarre coloured shapes flashed on a huge screen behind them ... apparently very psychedelic . " 
 In 1966 , the band strengthened their business relationship with Blackhill Enterprises , becoming equal partners with Jenner and King and the band members each holding a one @-@ sixth share . By late 1966 , their set included fewer R & B standards and more Barrett originals , many of which would be included on their first album . While they had significantly increased the frequency of their performances , the band were still not widely accepted . Following a performance at a Catholic youth club , the owner refused to pay them , claiming that their performance was not music . When their management filed suit in a small claims court against the owner of the youth organisation , a local magistrate upheld the owner 's decision . The band was much better received at the UFO Club in London , where they began to build a fan base . Barrett 's performances were enthusiastic , " leaping around ... madness ... improvisation ... [ inspired ] to get past his limitations and into areas that were ... very interesting . Which none of the others could do " , wrote biographer Nicholas Schaffner . 
 = = = Signing with EMI = = = 
 In 1967 , Pink Floyd began to attract the attention of the mainstream music industry . While in negotiations with record companies , IT co @-@ founder and UFO club manager Joe Boyd and Pink Floyd 's booking agent Bryan Morrison arranged and funded a recording session at Sound Techniques in West Hampstead . Three days later , Pink Floyd signed with EMI , receiving a £ 5 @,@ 000 advance . EMI released the band 's first single , " Arnold Layne " , with the B @-@ side " Candy and a Currant Bun " , on 10 March 1967 on its Columbia label . Both tracks were recorded on 29 January 1967 . " Arnold Layne " ' s references to cross @-@ dressing led to a ban by several radio stations ; however , creative manipulation by the retailers who supplied sales figures to the music business meant that the single peaked in the UK at number 20 . 
 EMI @-@ Columbia released Pink Floyd 's second single , " See Emily Play " , on 16 June 1967 . It fared slightly better than " Arnold Layne " , peaking at number 6 in the UK . The band performed on the BBC 's Look of the Week , where Waters and Barrett , erudite and engaging , faced tough questioning from Hans Keller . They appeared on the BBC 's Top of the Pops , a popular programme that controversially required artists to mime their singing and playing . Though Pink Floyd returned for two more performances , by the third , Barrett had begun to unravel , and it was around this time that the band first noticed significant changes in his behaviour . By early 1967 , he was regularly using LSD , and Mason described him as " completely distanced from everything going on " . 
 = = = The Piper at the Gates of Dawn = = = 
 Morrison and EMI producer Norman Smith negotiated Pink Floyd 's first recording contract , and as part of the deal , the band agreed to record their first album at EMI Studios in London . Mason recalled that the sessions were trouble @-@ free . Smith disagreed , stating that Barrett was unresponsive to his suggestions and constructive criticism . EMI @-@ Columbia released The Piper at the Gates of Dawn in August 1967 . The album peaked at number 6 , spending 14 weeks on the UK charts . One month later , it was released under the Tower Records label . Pink Floyd continued to draw large crowds at the UFO Club ; however , Barrett 's mental breakdown was by then causing serious concern . The group initially hoped that his erratic behaviour would be a passing phase , but some were less optimistic , including Jenner and his assistant , June Child , who commented : " I found [ Barrett ] in the dressing room and he was so ... gone . Roger Waters and I got him on his feet , [ and ] we got him out to the stage ... The band started to play and Syd just stood there . He had his guitar around his neck and his arms just hanging down " . 
 Forced to cancel Pink Floyd 's appearance at the prestigious National Jazz and Blues Festival , as well as several other shows , King informed the music press that Barrett was suffering from nervous exhaustion . Waters arranged a meeting with psychiatrist R. D. Laing , and though Waters personally drove Barrett to the appointment , Barrett refused to come out of the car . A stay in Formentera with Sam Hutt , a doctor well established in the underground music scene , led to no visible improvement . The band followed a few concert dates in Europe during September with their first tour of the US in October . As the US tour went on , Barrett 's condition grew steadily worse . During appearances on the Dick Clark and Pat Boone shows in November , Barrett confounded his hosts by not responding to questions and staring off into space . He refused to move his lips when it came time to mime " See Emily Play " on Boone 's show . After these embarrassing episodes , King ended their US visit and immediately sent them home to London . Soon after their return , they supported Jimi Hendrix during a tour of England ; however , Barrett 's depression worsened as the tour continued , reaching a crisis point in December , when the band responded by adding a new member to their line @-@ up . 
 = = 1967 – 78 : Transition and international success = = 
 = = = Gilmour replaces Barrett = = = 
 In December 1967 , the group added guitarist David Gilmour as the fifth member of Pink Floyd . Gilmour already knew Barrett , having studied with him at Cambridge Tech in the early 1960s . The two had performed at lunchtimes together with guitars and harmonicas , and later hitch @-@ hiked and busked their way around the south of France . In 1965 , while a member of Joker 's Wild , Gilmour had watched the Tea Set . Morrison 's assistant , Steve O 'Rourke , set Gilmour up in a room at O 'Rourke 's house with a salary of £ 30 per week , and in January 1968 , Blackhill Enterprises announced Gilmour as the band 's newest member ; the second guitarist and its fifth member , the band intending to continue with Barrett as a <unk> songwriter . Jenner commented : " The idea was that Dave would ... cover for [ Barrett 's ] eccentricities and when that got to be not workable , Syd was just going to write . Just to try to keep him involved " . In an expression of his frustration , Barrett , who was expected to write additional hit singles to follow up " Arnold Layne " and " See Emily Play " , instead introduced " Have You Got It Yet ? " to the band , intentionally changing the structure on each performance so as to make the song impossible to follow and learn . In a January 1968 photo @-@ shoot of the five @-@ man Pink Floyd , the photographs show Barrett looking detached from the others , staring into the distance . 
 Working with Barrett eventually proved too difficult , and matters came to a head in January while en route to a performance in Southampton when a band member asked if they should collect Barrett . According to Gilmour , the answer was " Nah , let 's not bother " , signalling the end of Barrett 's tenure with Pink Floyd . Waters later admitted , " He was our friend , but most of the time we now wanted to strangle him " . In early March 1968 , Pink Floyd met with business partners Jenner and King to discuss the band 's future ; Barrett agreed to leave . 
 Jenner and King believed Barrett to be the creative genius of the band , and decided to represent him and end their relationship with Pink Floyd . Morrison then sold his business to NEMS Enterprises , and O 'Rourke became the band 's personal manager . Blackhill announced Barrett 's departure on 6 April 1968 . After Barrett 's departure , the burden of lyrical composition and creative direction fell mostly on Waters . Initially , Gilmour mimed to Barrett 's voice on the group 's European TV appearances ; however , while playing on the university circuit , they avoided Barrett songs in favour of Waters and Wright material such as " It Would Be So Nice " and " Careful with That Axe , Eugene " . 
 = = = A Saucerful of Secrets = = = 
 In 1968 , Pink Floyd returned to Abbey Road Studios to record their second album , A Saucerful of Secrets . The album included Barrett 's final contribution to their discography , " Jugband Blues " . Waters began to develop his own songwriting , contributing " Set the Controls for the Heart of the Sun " , " Let There Be More Light " and " Corporal Clegg " . Wright composed " See @-@ Saw " and " Remember a Day " . Smith encouraged them to self @-@ produce their music , and they recorded demos of new material at their houses . With Smith 's instruction at Abbey Road , they learned how to use the recording studio to realise their artistic vision . However , Smith remained unconvinced by their music , and when Mason struggled to perform his drum part on " Remember a Day " , Smith stepped in as his replacement . Wright recalled Smith 's attitude about the sessions , " Norman gave up on the second album ... he was forever saying things like , ' You can 't do twenty minutes of this ridiculous noise ' " . As neither Waters nor Mason could read music , to illustrate the structure of the album 's title track , they invented their own system of notation . Gilmour later described their method as looking " like an architectural diagram " . 
 Released in June 1968 , the album featured a psychedelic cover designed by Storm Thorgerson and Aubrey Powell of Hipgnosis . The first of several Pink Floyd album covers designed by Hipgnosis , it was the second time that EMI permitted one of their groups to contract designers for an album jacket . The release peaked at number 9 , spending 11 weeks on the UK chart . Record Mirror gave the album an overall favourable review , but urged listeners to " forget it as background music to a party " . John Peel described a live performance of the title track as " like a religious experience " , while NME described the song as " long and boring ... [ with ] little to warrant its monotonous direction " . On the day after the album 's UK release , Pink Floyd performed at the first ever free concert in Hyde Park . In July 1968 , they returned to the US for a second visit . Accompanied by the Soft Machine and the Who , it marked Pink Floyd 's first significant tour . In December of that year , they released " Point Me at the Sky " ; no more successful than the two singles they had released since " See Emily Play " , it would be the band 's last until their 1973 release , " Money " . 
 = = = Ummagumma , Atom Heart Mother , and Meddle = = = 
 Ummagumma represented a departure from their previous work . Released as a double @-@ LP on EMI 's Harvest label , the first two sides contained live performances recorded at Manchester College of Commerce and Mothers , a club in Birmingham . The second LP contained a single experimental contribution from each band member . Ummagumma received positive reviews upon its release , in November 1969 . The album peaked at number 5 , spending 21 weeks on the UK chart . 
 In October 1970 , Pink Floyd released Atom Heart Mother . An early version premièred in France in January , but disagreements over the mix prompted the hiring of Ron Geesin to work out the sound issues . Geesin worked to improve the score , but with little creative input from the band , production was troublesome . Geesin eventually completed the project with the aid of John Alldis , who was the director of the choir hired to perform on the record . Smith earned an executive producer credit , and the album marked his final official contribution to the band 's discography . Gilmour said it was " A neat way of saying that he didn 't ... do anything " . Waters was critical of Atom Heart Mother , claiming that he would prefer if it were " thrown into the dustbin and never listened to by anyone ever again " . Gilmour was equally dismissive of the album and once described it as " a load of rubbish " , stating : " I think we were scraping the barrel a bit at that period " . Pink Floyd 's first number 1 album , Atom Heart Mother was hugely successful in Britain , spending 18 weeks on the UK chart . It premièred at the Bath Festival on 27 June 1970 . 
 Pink Floyd toured extensively across America and Europe in 1970 . In 1971 , Pink Floyd took second place in a reader 's poll , in Melody Maker , and for the first time were making a profit . Mason and Wright became fathers and bought homes in London while Gilmour , still single , moved to a 19th @-@ century farm in Essex . Waters installed a home recording studio at his house in Islington in a converted <unk> at the back of his garden . 
 In January 1971 , upon their return from touring Atom Heart Mother , Pink Floyd began working on new material . Lacking a central theme , they attempted several unproductive experiments ; engineer John Leckie described the sessions as often beginning in the afternoon and ending early the next morning , " during which time nothing would get [ accomplished ] . There was no record company contact whatsoever , except when their label manager would show up now and again with a couple of bottles of wine and a couple of joints " . The band spent long periods working on basic sounds , or a guitar riff . They also spent several days at Air Studios , attempting to create music using a variety of household objects , a project which would be revisited between The Dark Side of the Moon and Wish You Were Here . 
 Released in October 1971 , " Meddle not only confirms lead guitarist David Gilmour 's emergence as a real shaping force with the group , it states forcefully and accurately that the group is well into the growth track again " , wrote Jean @-@ Charles Costa of Rolling Stone . NME called Meddle " an exceptionally good album " , singling out " Echoes " as the " Zenith which the Floyd have been striving for " . However , Melody Maker 's Michael Watts found it underwhelming , calling the album " a soundtrack to a non @-@ existent movie " , and shrugging off Pink Floyd as " so much sound and fury , signifying nothing " . Meddle is a transitional album between the Barrett @-@ influenced group of the late 1960s and the emerging Pink Floyd . The LP peaked at number 3 , spending 82 weeks on the UK chart . 
 = = = The Dark Side of the Moon = = = 
 Pink Floyd recorded The Dark Side of the Moon between May 1972 and January 1973 , with EMI staff engineer Alan Parsons at Abbey Road . The title is an allusion to lunacy rather than astronomy . The band had composed and refined the material on Dark Side while touring the UK , Japan , North America and Europe . Producer Chris Thomas assisted Parsons . Hipgnosis designed the album 's packaging , which included George Hardie 's iconic refracting prism design on the cover . Thorgerson 's Dark Side album cover features a beam of white light , representing unity , passing through a prism , which represents society . The resulting refracted beam of coloured light symbolises unity diffracted , leaving an absence of unity . Waters is the sole author of the album 's lyrics . 
 Released in March 1973 , the LP became an instant chart success in the UK and throughout Western Europe , earning an enthusiastic response from critics . Each member of Pink Floyd except Wright boycotted the press release of The Dark Side of the Moon because a quadraphonic mix had not yet been completed , and they felt presenting the album through a poor @-@ quality stereo PA system was insufficient . Melody Maker 's Roy Hollingworth described side one as " utterly confused ... [ and ] difficult to follow " , but praised side two , writing : " The songs , the sounds ... [ and ] the rhythms were solid ... [ the ] saxophone hit the air , the band rocked and rolled " . Rolling Stone 's Loyd Grossman described it as " a fine album with a textural and conceptual richness that not only invites , but demands involvement . " 
 Throughout March 1973 , The Dark Side of the Moon featured as part of Pink Floyd 's US tour . The album is one of the most commercially successful rock albums of all time ; a US number 1 , it remained on the Billboard chart for more than fourteen years , selling more than 45 million copies worldwide . In Britain , the album peaked at number 2 , spending 364 weeks on the UK chart . Dark Side is the world 's second best @-@ selling album , and the twenty @-@ first best @-@ selling album of all time in the US . The success of the album brought enormous wealth to the members of Pink Floyd . Waters and Wright bought large country houses while Mason became a collector of expensive cars . Disenchanted with their US record company , Capitol Records , Pink Floyd and O 'Rourke negotiated a new contract with Columbia Records , who gave them a reported advance of $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , which is worth approximately $ 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 today . In Europe , they continued to be represented by Harvest Records . 
 = = = Wish You Were Here = = = 
 After a tour of the UK performing Dark Side , Pink Floyd returned to the studio in January 1975 and began work on their ninth studio album , Wish You Were Here . Parsons declined an offer to continue working with them , becoming successful in his own right with the Alan Parsons Project , and so the band turned to Brian Humphries . Initially , they found it difficult to compose new material ; the success of The Dark Side of the Moon had left Pink Floyd physically and emotionally drained . Wright later described these early sessions as " falling within a difficult period " and Waters found them " tortuous " . Gilmour was more interested in improving the band 's existing material . Mason 's failing marriage left him in a general malaise and with a sense of apathy , both of which interfered with his drumming . 
 Despite the lack of creative direction , Waters began to visualise a new concept after several weeks . During 1974 , Pink Floyd had sketched out three original compositions and had performed them at a series of concerts in Europe . These compositions became the starting point for a new album whose opening four @-@ note guitar phrase , composed purely by chance by Gilmour , reminded Waters of Barrett . The songs provided a fitting summary of the rise and fall of their former bandmate . Waters commented : " Because I wanted to get as close as possible to what I felt ... [ that ] indefinable , inevitable melancholy about the disappearance of Syd . " 
 While Pink Floyd were working on the album , Barrett made an impromptu visit to the studio , during which Thorgerson recalled that he " sat round and talked for a bit , but he wasn 't really there . " He had changed significantly in appearance , so much so that the band did not initially recognise him . Waters was reportedly deeply upset by the experience . Most of Wish You Were Here premiered on 5 July 1975 , at an open @-@ air music festival at Knebworth . Released in September , it reached number one in both the UK and the US . 
 = = = Animals = = = 
 In 1975 , Pink Floyd bought a three @-@ storey group of church halls at 35 Britannia Row in Islington and began converting the building into a recording studio and storage space . In 1976 , they recorded their tenth album , Animals , in their newly finished 24 @-@ track studio . The concept of Animals originated with Waters , loosely based on George Orwell 's political fable , Animal Farm . The album 's lyrics described different classes of society as dogs , pigs , and sheep . Hipgnosis received credit for the packaging of Animals ; however , Waters designed the final concept , choosing an image of the ageing Battersea Power Station , over which they superimposed an image of a pig . 
 The division of royalties was a source of conflict between band members , who earned royalties on a per @-@ song basis . Although Gilmour was largely responsible for " Dogs " , which took up almost the entire first side of the album , he received less than Waters , who contributed the much shorter two @-@ part " Pigs on the Wing " . Wright commented : " It was partly my fault because I didn 't push my material ... but Dave did have something to offer , and only managed to get a couple of things on there . " Mason recalled : " Roger was in full flow with the ideas , but he was really keeping Dave down , and frustrating him deliberately . " Gilmour , distracted by the birth of his first child , contributed little else toward the album . Similarly , neither Mason nor Wright contributed much toward Animals ; Wright had marital problems , and his relationship with Waters was also suffering . Animals is the first Pink Floyd album that does not include a writing credit for Wright , who commented : " Animals ... wasn 't a fun record to make ... this was when Roger really started to believe that he was the sole writer for the band ... that it was only because of him that [ we ] were still going ... when he started to develop his ego trips , the person he would have his conflicts with would be me . " 
 Released in January 1977 , the album peaked on the UK chart at number two , and the US chart at number three . NME described the album as " one of the most extreme , relentless , harrowing and downright iconoclastic hunks of music " , and Melody Maker 's Karl Dallas called it " [ an ] uncomfortable taste of reality in a medium that has become in recent years , increasingly soporific " . 
 Pink Floyd performed much of the album 's material during their " In the Flesh " tour . It was the band 's first experience playing large stadiums , whose size caused unease in the band . Waters began arriving at each venue alone , departing immediately after the performance . On one occasion , Wright flew back to England , threatening to leave the band . At the Montreal Olympic Stadium , a group of noisy and enthusiastic fans in the front row of the audience irritated Waters so much that he spat at one of them . The end of the tour marked a low point for Gilmour , who felt that the band achieved the success they had sought , with nothing left for them to accomplish . 
 = = 1978 – 85 : Waters @-@ led era = = 
 = = = The Wall = = = 
 In July 1978 , amid a financial crisis caused by negligent investments , Waters presented the group with two original ideas for their next album . The first was a 90 @-@ minute demo with the working title Bricks in the Wall , and the other would later become Waters ' first solo album , The Pros and Cons of Hitch Hiking . Although both Mason and Gilmour were initially cautious , they chose the former to be their next album . Bob Ezrin co @-@ produced , and he wrote a forty @-@ page script for the new album . Ezrin based the story on the central figure of Pink — a gestalt character inspired by Waters ' childhood experiences , the most notable of which was the death of his father in World War II . This first metaphorical brick led to more problems ; Pink would become drug @-@ addled and depressed by the music industry , eventually transforming into a megalomaniac , a development inspired partly by the decline of Syd Barrett . At the end of the album , the increasingly fascist audience would watch as Pink tore down the wall , once again becoming a regular and caring person . 
 During the recording of The Wall , Waters , Gilmour and Mason became increasingly dissatisfied with Wright 's lack of contribution to the album . Gilmour said that Wright " hadn 't contributed anything of any value whatsoever to the album — he did very , very little " and this was why he " got the boot " . According to Mason , " Rick 's contribution was to turn up and sit in on the sessions without doing anything , just ' being a producer ' . " Waters commented : " [ Wright ] was not prepared to cooperate in making the record ... [ and ] it was agreed by everybody ... either [ he ] can have a long battle or [ he ] can agree to ... finish making the album , keep [ his ] full share ... but at the end of it [ he would ] leave quietly . Rick agreed . " 
 The album was supported by " Another Brick in the Wall ( Part II ) " , Pink Floyd 's first single since " Money " , and topped the charts in the US and the UK . Released on 30 November 1979 , The Wall topped the Billboard chart in the US for fifteen weeks , reaching number three in the UK . The Wall ranks number three on the RIAA 's list of the all @-@ time Top 100 albums , with 23 million certified units sold in the US . The cover is one of their most minimalist designs , with a stark white brick wall , and no trademark or band name . It was also their first album cover since The Piper at the Gates of Dawn not designed by Hipgnosis . 
 Gerald Scarfe produced a series of animations for the subsequent live shows , The Wall Tour . He also commissioned the construction of large inflatable puppets representing characters from the storyline including the " Mother " , the " Ex @-@ wife " and the " Schoolmaster " . Pink Floyd used the puppets during their performances of the album . Relationships within the band were at an all @-@ time low ; their four Winnebagos parked in a circle , the doors facing away from the centre . Waters used his own vehicle to arrive at the venue and stayed in different hotels from the rest of the band . Wright returned as a paid musician and was the only one of the four to profit from the venture , which lost about $ 600 @,@ 000 . 
 The Wall concept also spawned a film , the original idea for which was to be a combination of live concert footage and animated scenes . However , the concert footage proved impractical to film . Alan Parker agreed to direct and took a different approach . The animated sequences would remain , but scenes would be acted by professional actors with no dialogue . Waters was screen @-@ tested , but quickly discarded and they asked Bob Geldof to accept the role of Pink . Geldof was initially dismissive , condemning The Wall 's storyline as " bollocks " . Eventually won over by the prospect of participation in a significant film and receiving a large payment for his work , Geldof agreed . Screened at the Cannes Film Festival in May 1982 , Pink Floyd – The Wall premièred in the UK in July 1982 . 
 = = = The Final Cut = = = 
 In 1982 , Waters suggested a new musical project with the working title Spare Bricks , originally conceived as the soundtrack album for Pink Floyd – The Wall . With the onset of the Falklands War , Waters changed direction and began writing new material . He saw Margaret Thatcher 's response to the invasion of the Falklands as jingoistic and unnecessary , and dedicated the album to his late father . Immediately arguments arose between Waters and Gilmour , who felt that the album should include all new material , rather than recycle songs passed over for The Wall . Waters felt that Gilmour had contributed little to the band 's lyrical repertoire . Michael Kamen , a contributor to the orchestral arrangements of The Wall , mediated between the two , also performing the role traditionally occupied by the then @-@ absent Wright . The tension within the band grew . Waters and Gilmour worked independently ; however , Gilmour began to feel the strain , sometimes barely maintaining his composure . After a final confrontation , Gilmour 's name disappeared from the credit list , reflecting what Waters felt was his lack of songwriting contributions . 
 Though Mason 's musical contributions were minimal , he stayed busy recording sound effects for an experimental Holophonic system to be used on the album . With marital problems of his own , he remained a distant figure . Pink Floyd did not use Thorgerson for the cover design , Waters choosing to design the cover himself . Released in March 1983 , The Final Cut went straight to number one in the UK and number six in the US . Waters wrote all the lyrics , as well as all the music on the album . Gilmour did not have any material ready for the album and asked Waters to delay the recording until he could write some songs , but Waters refused . Gilmour later commented : " I 'm certainly guilty at times of being lazy ... but he wasn 't right about wanting to put some duff tracks on The Final Cut . " Rolling Stone magazine gave the album five stars , with Kurt Loder calling it " a superlative achievement ... art rock 's crowning masterpiece " . Loder viewed The Final Cut as " essentially a Roger Waters solo album " . 
 = = = " A spent force " , Waters ' departure and legal battles = = = 
 Gilmour had recorded his second solo album , About Face , in 1984 , and he used it to express his feelings about a variety of topics , from the murder of John Lennon to his relationship with Waters . He later stated that he used the album to distance himself from Pink Floyd . Soon afterwards , Waters began touring his first solo album , The Pros and Cons of Hitch Hiking . Wright formed Zee with Dave Harris and recorded Identity , which went almost unnoticed upon its release . Mason released his second solo album , Profiles , in August 1985 . 
 Following the release of The Pros and Cons of Hitch Hiking , Waters publicly insisted that Pink Floyd would not reunite . He contacted O 'Rourke to discuss settling future royalty payments . O 'Rourke felt obliged to inform Mason and Gilmour , which angered Waters , who wanted to dismiss him as the band 's manager . He terminated his management contract with O 'Rourke and employed Peter Rudge to manage his affairs . Waters wrote to EMI and Columbia announcing he had left the band , and asked them to release him from his contractual obligations . Gilmour believed that Waters left to hasten the demise of Pink Floyd . Waters later stated that , by not making new albums , Pink Floyd would be in breach of contract — which would suggest that royalty payments would be suspended — and that the other band members had forced him from the group by threatening to sue him . He then went to the High Court in an effort to dissolve the band and prevent the use of the Pink Floyd name , declaring Pink Floyd " a spent force creatively . " When his lawyers discovered that the partnership had never been formally confirmed , Waters returned to the High Court in an attempt to obtain a veto over further use of the band 's name . Gilmour responded by issuing a carefully worded press release affirming that Pink Floyd would continue to exist . He later told The Sunday Times : " Roger is a dog in the manger and I 'm going to fight him " . In 2013 , Waters stated that he regretted the lawsuit , saying : " I was wrong . Of course I was . " 
 = = 1985 – 95 : Gilmour @-@ led era = = 
 = = = A Momentary Lapse of Reason = = = 
 In 1986 , Gilmour began recruiting musicians for what would become Pink Floyd 's first album without Waters , A Momentary Lapse of Reason . There were legal obstacles to Wright 's re @-@ admittance to the band ; however , after a meeting in Hampstead Pink Floyd invited Wright to participate in the coming sessions . Gilmour later stated that Wright 's presence " would make us stronger legally and musically " ; Pink Floyd employed him as a musician with weekly earnings of $ 11 @,@ 000 . Recording sessions for the album began on Gilmour 's houseboat , the Astoria , moored along the River Thames . Gilmour worked with several songwriters , including Eric Stewart and Roger McGough , eventually choosing Anthony Moore to write the album 's lyrics . Gilmour would later admit that the project was difficult without Waters ' creative direction . Mason , concerned that he was too out @-@ of @-@ practice to perform on the album , made use of session musicians to complete many of the drum parts . He instead busied himself with the album 's sound effects . 
 A Momentary Lapse of Reason was released in September 1987 . Storm Thorgerson , whose creative input was absent from The Wall and The Final Cut , designed the album cover . To drive home the point that Waters had left the band , they included a group photograph on the inside cover , the first since Meddle . The album went straight to number three in the UK and the US . Waters commented : " I think it 's facile , but a quite clever forgery ... The songs are poor in general ... [ and ] Gilmour 's lyrics are third @-@ rate . " Although Gilmour initially viewed the album as a return to the band 's top form , Wright disagreed , stating : " Roger 's criticisms are fair . It 's not a band album at all . " Q Magazine described the album as essentially a Gilmour solo effort . 
 Waters attempted to subvert the Momentary Lack of Reason tour by contacting promoters in the US and threatening to sue them if they used the Pink Floyd name . Gilmour and Mason funded the start @-@ up costs with Mason using his Ferrari 250 GTO as collateral . Early rehearsals for the upcoming tour were chaotic , with Mason and Wright entirely out of practice . Realising he had taken on too much work , Gilmour asked Bob Ezrin to assist them . As Pink Floyd toured throughout North America , Waters ' Radio K.A.O.S. tour was on occasion , close by , though in much smaller venues than those hosting his former band 's performances . Waters issued a writ for copyright fees for the band 's use of the flying pig . Pink Floyd responded by attaching a large set of male genitalia to its underside to distinguish it from Waters ' design . The parties reached a legal agreement on 23 December ; Mason and Gilmour retained the right to use the Pink Floyd name in perpetuity and Waters received exclusive rights to , among other things , The Wall . 
 = = = The Division Bell = = = 
 For several years Pink Floyd had busied themselves with personal pursuits , such as filming and competing in the La Carrera <unk> and recording a soundtrack for a film based on the event . In January 1993 , they began working on a new album , returning to Britannia Row Studios , where for several days , Gilmour , Mason and Wright worked collaboratively , improvising material . After about two weeks , the band had enough ideas to begin creating songs . Ezrin returned to co @-@ produce the album and production moved to the Astoria , where from February to May 1993 , they worked on about 25 ideas . 
 Contractually , Wright was not a member of the band , and said " It came close to a point where I wasn 't going to do the album . " However , he earned five co @-@ writing credits on the album , his first on a Pink Floyd album since 1975 's Wish You Were Here . Another songwriter credited on the album was Gilmour 's future wife , Polly Samson . She helped him write several tracks , including , " High Hopes " , a collaborative arrangement which , though initially tense , " pulled the whole album together , " according to Ezrin . They hired Michael Kamen to arrange the album 's orchestral parts ; Dick Parry and Chris Thomas also returned . Writer Douglas Adams provided the album title and Thorgerson the cover artwork . Thorgerson drew inspiration for the album cover from the Moai monoliths of Easter Island ; two opposing faces forming an implied third face about which he commented : " the absent face — the ghost of Pink Floyd 's past , Syd and Roger " . Eager to avoid competing against other album releases , as had happened with A Momentary Lapse , Pink Floyd set a deadline of April 1994 , at which point they would resume touring . The album reached number 1 in both the UK and the US . It spent 51 weeks on the UK chart . 
 Pink Floyd spent more than two weeks rehearsing in a hangar at Norton Air Force Base in San Bernardino , California , before opening on 29 March 1994 , in Miami , with an almost identical road crew to that used for their Momentary Lapse of Reason tour . They played a variety of Pink Floyd favourites , and later changed their setlist to include The Dark Side of the Moon in its entirety . The tour ended on 29 October 1994 , with the final performance of the last Pink Floyd tour so far . 
 = = 2005 – 14 : Reunion , deaths , and final album = = 
 = = = Live 8 reunion = = = 
 On 2 July 2005 , Waters , Gilmour , Mason and Wright performed together as Pink Floyd for the first time in more than 24 years , at the Live 8 concert in London 's Hyde Park . Organiser Bob Geldof arranged the reunion , having called Mason earlier in the year to explore the possibility of their reuniting for the event . Geldof asked Gilmour , who turned down the offer , and then asked Mason to intercede on his behalf . Mason declined , but contacted Waters who was immediately enthusiastic . Waters then called Geldof to discuss the event , scheduled to take place in one month . About two weeks later Waters called Gilmour , their first conversation in two years , and the next day the latter agreed . Gilmour then contacted Wright who immediately agreed . In their statement to the press , they stressed the unimportance of the band 's problems in the context of the Live 8 event . 
 They planned their setlist at the Connaught Hotel in London , followed by three days of rehearsals at Black Island Studios . The sessions were problematic , with minor disagreements over the style and pace of the songs they were practising ; the running order decided on the eve of the event . At the beginning of their performance , Waters told the audience : " [ It is ] quite emotional , standing up here with these three guys after all these years , standing to be counted with the rest of you ... we 're doing this for everyone who 's not here , and particularly of course for Syd . " At the end , Gilmour thanked the audience and started to walk off the stage . Waters then called him back , and the band shared a group hug . Images of that hug were a favourite among Sunday newspapers after Live 8 . Waters commented on their almost twenty years of animosity : " I don 't think any of us came out of the years from 1985 with any credit ... It was a bad , negative time , and I regret my part in that negativity . " 
 Though Pink Floyd turned down a contract worth £ 136 million for a final tour , Waters did not rule out more performances , suggesting it ought to be for a charity event only . However , Gilmour told the Associated Press that a reunion would not happen , stating : " The [ Live 8 ] rehearsals convinced me [ that ] it wasn 't something I wanted to be doing a lot of ... There have been all sorts of farewell moments in people 's lives and careers which they have then rescinded , but I think I can fairly categorically say that there won 't be a tour or an album again that I take part in . It isn 't to do with animosity or anything like that . It 's just ... I 've been there , I 've done it . " In February 2006 , Gilmour was interviewed by Gino Castaldo from the Italian newspaper La Repubblica ; the resulting article declared : " Patience for fans in mourning . The news is official . Pink Floyd the brand is dissolved , finished , definitely deceased . " Asked about the future of Pink Floyd , Gilmour responded : " It 's over ... I 've had enough . I 'm 60 years old ... it is much more comfortable to work on my own . " Gilmour and Waters repeatedly said that they had no plans to reunite with the surviving former members . 
 = = = Deaths of Barrett and Wright = = = 
 Barrett died on 7 July 2006 , at his home in Cambridge , aged 60 . His family interred him at Cambridge Crematorium on 18 July 2006 ; no Pink Floyd members attended . After Barrett 's death , Wright commented : " The band are very naturally upset and sad to hear of Syd Barrett 's death . Syd was the guiding light of the early band line @-@ up and leaves a legacy which continues to inspire . " Although Barrett had faded into obscurity over the previous 35 years , the national press praised him for his contributions to music . On 10 May 2007 , Waters , Gilmour , Wright and Mason performed during a Barrett tribute concert at the Barbican Centre in London . Gilmour , Wright and Mason performed the Barrett compositions , " Bike " and " Arnold Layne " , and Waters performed a solo version of his song " Flickering Flame " . 
 Wright died of an undisclosed form of cancer on 15 September 2008 , aged 65 . His surviving former bandmates praised him for his influence on the sound of Pink Floyd . 
 = = = Further performances and re @-@ releases = = = 
 On 10 July 2010 , Waters and Gilmour performed together at a charity event for the Hoping Foundation . The event , which raised money for Palestinian children , took place at <unk> Hall in Oxfordshire , England , where they played to an audience of approximately 200 . In return for Waters ' appearance at the event , Gilmour agreed to perform " Comfortably Numb " at one of Waters ' upcoming performances of The Wall . On 12 May 2011 , at The O2 Arena in London , Gilmour honoured his commitment to Waters . Gilmour sang the first and second chorus and played the two guitar solos . Near the end of the show , after the wall had fallen down , Waters said to the crowd : " So now we know tonight was the night when David did me the enormous honour of coming to play ' Comfortably Numb ' . So , please welcome David Gilmour ! ... By a strange and extraordinary , happy coincidence , there is another remnant of our old band here tonight . Please welcome Mr. Nick Mason to the stage ! " Gilmour and Mason , with respectively a mandolin and a tambourine , joined Waters and the rest of his band for " Outside the Wall " . 
 On 26 September 2011 , Pink Floyd and EMI launched an exhaustive re @-@ release campaign under the title Why Pink Floyd ... ? , reissuing the band 's back catalogue in newly remastered versions , including " Experience " and " Immersion " multi @-@ disc multi @-@ format editions . The albums were remastered by James Guthrie , co @-@ producer of The Wall . In November 2015 , Pink Floyd released a limited edition EP , 1965 : Their First Recordings , comprising six songs recorded prior to The Piper at the Gates of Dawn . 
 = = = The Endless River = = = 
 In 2012 , Gilmour and Mason decided to revisit recordings made with Wright , mainly during the Division Bell sessions , to create a new Pink Floyd album . They recruited session musicians to help record new parts and " generally harness studio technology " . Mason described the album as a tribute to Wright : " I think this record is a good way of recognising a lot of what he does and how his playing was at the heart of the Pink Floyd sound . Listening back to the sessions , it really brought home to me what a special player he was . " Waters was not involved . 
 Samson announced The Endless River in July 2014 on Twitter . Details were announced on Pink Floyd 's website on 7 July , describing it as " mainly ambient " and instrumental music . It was released 7 November 2014 ; it is the second Pink Floyd album distributed by Parlophone following the release of the 20th anniversary editions of The Division Bell earlier in 2014 . It became the most pre @-@ ordered album of all time on Amazon UK , and debuted at number one in several countries . The vinyl edition was the fastest @-@ selling UK vinyl release of 2014 and the fastest @-@ selling since 1997 . The album received mixed reviews . 
 Gilmour stated that The Endless River is Pink Floyd 's last album , saying : " I think we have successfully commandeered the best of what there is ... It 's a shame , but this is the end . " There was no tour to support the album , as Gilmour said it was " kind of impossible " without Wright . In August 2015 , Gilmour reiterated that Pink Floyd were " done " and that to reunite without Wright " would just be wrong " . 
 = = Musicianship = = 
 = = = Genres = = = 
 Considered one of the UK 's first psychedelic music groups , Pink Floyd began their career at the vanguard of London 's underground music scene . Some categorise their work from that era as a space rock . According to Rolling Stone : " By 1967 , they had developed an unmistakably psychedelic sound , performing long , loud <unk> compositions that touched on hard rock , blues , country , folk , and electronic music . " Released in 1968 , the song " Careful with That Axe , Eugene " helped <unk> their reputation as an art rock group . Critics also describe them as an acid rock band . By the late 1960s , the press had begun to label their music progressive rock . O 'Neill Surber comments on the music of Pink Floyd : 
 Rarely will you find Floyd dishing up catchy hooks , tunes short enough for air @-@ play , or predictable three @-@ chord blues progressions ; and never will you find them spending much time on the usual pop <unk> of romance , partying , or self @-@ hype . Their sonic universe is expansive , intense , and challenging ... Where most other bands neatly fit the songs to the music , the two forming a sort of autonomous and seamless whole complete with memorable hooks , Pink Floyd tends to set lyrics within a broader soundscape that often seems to have a life of its own ... Pink Floyd employs extended , stand @-@ alone instrumentals which are never mere vehicles for showing off virtuoso but are planned and integral parts of the performance . 
 In 1968 , Wright commented on Pink Floyd 's sonic reputation : " It 's hard to see why we were cast as the first British psychedelic group . We never saw ourselves that way ... we realised that we were , after all , only playing for fun ... tied to no particular form of music , we could do whatever we wanted ... the emphasis ... [ is ] firmly on spontaneity and improvisation . " Waters gave a less enthusiastic assessment of the band 's early sound : " There wasn 't anything ' grand ' about it . We were laughable . We were useless . We couldn 't play at all so we had to do something stupid and ' experimental ' ... Syd was a genius , but I wouldn 't want to go back to playing " Interstellar Overdrive " for hours and hours . " Unconstrained by conventional pop formats , Pink Floyd were innovators of progressive rock during the 1970s and ambient music during the 1980s . 
 = = = Gilmour 's guitar work = = = 
 Critic Alan di Perna praised Gilmour 's guitar work as an integral element of Pink Floyd 's sound . Rolling Stone ranked Gilmour number 14 in their " 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time " list and di Perna described him as the most important guitarist of the 1970s , calling him " the missing link between Hendrix and Van Halen . " In 2006 , Gilmour commented on his playing technique : " [ My ] fingers make a distinctive sound ... [ they ] aren 't very fast , but I think I am instantly recognisable ... The way I play melodies is connected to things like Hank Marvin and the Shadows " . Gilmour 's ability to use fewer notes than most to express himself without sacrificing strength or beauty drew a favourable comparison to jazz trumpeter Miles Davis . 
 In 2006 , Guitar World writer Jimmy Brown described Gilmour 's guitar style as " characterised by simple , huge @-@ sounding riffs ; gutsy , well @-@ paced solos ; and rich , ambient chordal textures . " According to Brown , Gilmour 's solos on " Money " , " Time " and " Comfortably Numb " " cut through the mix like a laser beam through fog . " Brown described the " Time " solo as " a masterpiece of phrasing and motivic development ... Gilmour paces himself throughout and builds upon his initial idea by leaping into the upper register with gut @-@ wrenching one @-@ and @-@ one @-@ half @-@ step ' over bends ' , soulful triplet arpeggios and a typically impeccable bar vibrato . " Brown described Gilmour 's sense of phrasing as intuitive , singling it out as perhaps his best asset as a lead guitarist . Gilmour explained how he achieved his signature tone : " I usually use a fuzz box , a delay and a bright EQ setting ... [ to get ] singing sustain ... you need to play loud — at or near the feedback threshold . It 's just so much more fun to play ... when bent notes slice right through you like a razor blade . " 
 = = = Sonic experimentation = = = 
 Throughout their career , Pink Floyd experimented with their sound . Their second single , " See Emily Play " premiered at the Queen Elizabeth Hall in London , on 12 May 1967 . During the performance , the group first used an early quadraphonic device called an Azimuth Co @-@ ordinator . The device enabled the controller , usually Wright , to manipulate the band 's amplified sound , combined with recorded tapes , projecting the sounds 270 degrees around a venue , achieving a sonic swirling effect . In 1972 , they purchased a custom @-@ built PA which featured an upgraded four @-@ channel , 360 @-@ degree system . 
 Waters experimented with the EMS Synthi A and VCS 3 synthesisers on Pink Floyd pieces such as " On the Run " , " Welcome to the Machine " , and " In the Flesh ? " . He used a Binson Echorec 2 echo effect on his bass @-@ guitar track for " One of These Days " . 
 Pink Floyd used innovative sound effects and state of the art audio recording technology during the recording of The Final Cut . Mason 's contributions to the album were almost entirely limited to work with the experimental Holophonic system , an audio processing technique used to simulate a three @-@ dimensional effect . The system used a conventional stereo tape to produce an effect that seemed to move the sound around the listener 's head when they were wearing headphones . The process enabled an engineer to simulate moving the sound to behind , above or beside the listener 's ears . 
 = = = Film scores = = = 
 Pink Floyd also composed several film scores , starting in 1968 , with The Committee . In 1969 , they recorded the score for Barbet Schroeder 's film More . The soundtrack proved beneficial ; not only did it pay well but , along with A Saucerful of Secrets , the material they created became part of their live shows for some time thereafter . While composing the soundtrack for director Michelangelo Antonioni 's film Zabriskie Point , the band stayed at a luxury hotel in Rome for almost a month . Waters claimed that , without Antonioni 's constant changes to the music , they would have completed the work in less than a week . Eventually he used only three of their recordings . One of the pieces turned down by Antonioni , called " The Violent Sequence " , later became " Us and Them " , included on 1973 's The Dark Side of the Moon . In 1971 , the band again worked with Schroeder on the film La Vallée , for which they released a soundtrack album called Obscured by Clouds . They composed the material in about a week at the Château d <unk> near Paris , and upon its release , it became Pink Floyd 's first album to break into the top 50 on the US Billboard chart . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 Regarded as pioneers of live music performance and renowned for their lavish stage shows , Pink Floyd also set high standards in sound quality , making use of innovative sound effects and quadraphonic speaker systems . From their earliest days , they employed visual effects to accompany their psychedelic rock music while performing at venues such as the UFO Club in London . Their slide @-@ and @-@ light show was one of the first in British rock , and it helped them became popular among London 's underground . 
 To celebrate the launch of the London Free School 's magazine International Times in 1966 , they performed in front of 2 @,@ 000 people at the opening of the Roundhouse , attended by celebrities including Paul McCartney and Marianne Faithfull . In mid @-@ 1966 , road manager Peter Wynne @-@ Willson joined their road crew , and updated the band 's lighting rig with some innovative ideas including the use of <unk> , mirrors and stretched condoms . After their record deal with EMI , Pink Floyd purchased a Ford Transit van , then considered extravagant band transportation . On 29 April 1967 , they headlined an all @-@ night event called The 14 Hour Technicolour Dream at the Alexandra Palace , London . Pink Floyd arrived at the festival at around three o 'clock in the morning after a long journey by van and ferry from the Netherlands , taking the stage just as the sun was beginning to rise . In July 1969 , precipitated by their space @-@ related music and lyrics , they took part in the live BBC television coverage of the Apollo 11 moon landing , performing an instrumental piece which they called " <unk> " . 
 In November 1974 , they employed for the first time the large circular screen that would become a staple of their live shows . In 1977 , they employed the use of a large inflatable floating pig named " Algie " . Filled with helium and propane , Algie , while floating above the audience , would explode with a loud noise during the In the Flesh Tour . The behaviour of the audience during the tour , as well as the large size of the venues , proved a strong influence on their concept album The Wall . The subsequent The Wall Tour featured a 40 feet ( 12 m ) high wall , built from cardboard bricks , constructed between the band and the audience . They projected animations onto the wall , while gaps allowed the audience to view various scenes from the story . They commissioned the creation of several giant inflatables to represent characters from the story . One striking feature of the tour was the performance of " Comfortably Numb " . While Waters sang his opening verse , in darkness , Gilmour waited for his cue on top of the wall . When it came , bright blue and white lights would suddenly reveal him . Gilmour stood on a <unk> on <unk> , an insecure setup supported from behind by a technician . A large hydraulic platform supported both Gilmour and the tech . 
 During the Division Bell Tour , an unknown person using the name Publius posted a message on an internet newsgroup inviting fans to solve a riddle supposedly concealed in the new album . White lights in front of the stage at the Pink Floyd concert in East Rutherford spelled out the words Enigma Publius . During a televised concert at Earls Court on 20 October 1994 , someone projected the word " enigma " in large letters on to the backdrop of the stage . Mason later acknowledged that their record company had instigated the Publius Enigma mystery , rather than the band . 
 = = Lyrical themes = = 
 Marked by Waters ' philosophical lyrics , Rolling Stone described Pink Floyd as " purveyors of a distinctively dark vision " . Author Jere O 'Neill Surber wrote : " their interests are truth and illusion , life and death , time and space , causality and chance , compassion and indifference . " Waters identified empathy as a central theme in the lyrics of Pink Floyd . Author George Reisch described Meddle 's psychedelic opus , " Echoes " , as " built around the core idea of genuine communication , sympathy , and collaboration with others . " Despite having been labelled " the gloomiest man in rock " , author Deena Weinstein described Waters as an existentialist , dismissing the unfavourable moniker as the result of misinterpretation by music critics . 
 = = = Disillusionment , absence , and non @-@ being = = = 
 Waters ' lyrics to Wish You Were Here 's " Have a Cigar " deal with a perceived lack of sincerity on the part of music industry representatives . The song illustrates a dysfunctional dynamic between the band and a record label executive who congratulates the group on their current sales success , implying that they are on the same team while revealing that he erroneously believes " Pink " is the name of one of the band members . According to author David Detmer , the album 's lyrics deal with the " dehumanizing aspects of the world of commerce " , a situation the artist must endure to reach their audience . 
 Absence as a lyrical theme is common in the music of Pink Floyd . Examples include the absence of Barrett after 1968 , and that of Waters ' father , who died during the Second World War . Waters ' lyrics also explored unrealised political goals and unsuccessful endeavours . Their film score , Obscured by Clouds , dealt with the loss of youthful exuberance that sometimes comes with <unk> . Longtime Pink Floyd album cover designer , Storm Thorgerson , described the lyrics of Wish You Were Here : " The idea of presence withheld , of the ways that people pretend to be present while their minds are really elsewhere , and the devices and motivations employed psychologically by people to suppress the full force of their presence , eventually boiled down to a single theme , absence : The absence of a person , the absence of a feeling . " Waters commented : " it 's about none of us really being there ... [ it ] should have been called Wish We Were Here " . 
 O 'Neill Surber explored the lyrics of Pink Floyd and declared the issue of non @-@ being a common theme in their music . Waters invoked non @-@ being or non @-@ existence in The Wall , with the lyrics to " Comfortably Numb " : " I caught a fleeting glimpse , out of the corner of my eye . I turned to look , but it was gone , I cannot put my finger on it now , the child is grown , the dream is gone . " Barrett referred to non @-@ being in his final contribution to the band 's catalogue , " Jugband Blues " : " I 'm most obliged to you for making it clear that I 'm not here . " 
 = = = Exploitation and oppression = = = 
 Author Patrick <unk> described Animals as a unique blend of the " powerful sounds and suggestive themes " of Dark Side with The Wall 's portrayal of artistic alienation . He drew a parallel between the album 's political themes and that of Orwell 's Animal Farm . Animals begins with a thought experiment , which asks : " If you didn 't care what happened to me . And I didn 't care for you " , then develops a beast fable based on anthropomorphised characters using music to reflect the individual states of mind of each . The lyrics ultimately paint a picture of dystopia , the inevitable result of a world devoid of empathy and compassion , answering the question posed in the opening lines . 
 The album 's characters include the " Dogs " , representing fervent capitalists , the " Pigs " , symbolising political corruption , and the " Sheep " , who represent the exploited . <unk> described the " Sheep " as being in a " state of delusion created by a misleading cultural identity " , a false consciousness . The " Dog " , in his tireless pursuit of self @-@ interest and success , ends up depressed and alone with no one to trust , utterly lacking emotional satisfaction after a life of exploitation . Waters used Mary Whitehouse as an example of a " Pig " ; being someone who in his estimation , used the power of the government to impose her values on society . At the album 's conclusion , Waters returns to empathy with the lyrical statement : " You know that I care what happens to you . And I know that you care for me too . " However , he also acknowledges that the " Pigs " are a continuing threat and reveals that he is a " Dog " who requires shelter , suggesting the need for a balance between state , commerce and community , versus an ongoing battle between them . 
 = = = Alienation , war , and insanity = = = 
 O 'Neill Surber compared the lyrics of Dark Side 's " Brain Damage " with Karl Marx 's theory of self @-@ alienation ; " there 's someone in my head , but it 's not me . " The lyrics to Wish You Were Here 's " Welcome to the Machine " suggest what Marx called the alienation of the thing ; the song 's protagonist preoccupied with material possessions to the point that he becomes estranged from himself and others . Allusions to the alienation of man 's species being can be found in Animals ; the " Dog " reduced to living instinctively as a non @-@ human . The " Dogs " become alienated from themselves to the extent that they justify their lack of integrity as a " necessary and defensible " position in " a cutthroat world with no room for empathy or moral principle " wrote Detmer . Alienation from others is a consistent theme in the lyrics of Pink Floyd , and it is a core element of The Wall . 
 War , viewed as the most severe consequence of the manifestation of alienation from others , is also a core element of The Wall , and a recurring theme in the band 's music . Waters ' father died in combat during the Second World War , and his lyrics often alluded to the cost of war , including those from " Corporal Clegg " ( 1968 ) , " Free Four " ( 1972 ) , " Us and Them " ( 1973 ) , " When the Tigers Broke Free " and " The Fletcher Memorial Home " from The Final Cut ( 1983 ) , an album dedicated to his late father and subtitled A Requiem for the Postwar Dream . The themes and composition of The Wall express Waters ' upbringing in an English society depleted of men after the Second World War , a condition that negatively affected his personal relationships with women . 
 Waters ' lyrics to The Dark Side of the Moon dealt with the pressures of modern life and how those pressures can sometimes cause insanity . He viewed the album 's explication of mental illness as illuminating a universal condition . However , Waters also wanted the album to communicate positivity , calling it " an exhortation ... to embrace the positive and reject the negative . " Reisch described The Wall as " less about the experience of madness than the habits , institutions , and social structures that create or cause madness . " The Wall 's protagonist , Pink , is unable to deal with the circumstances of his life , and overcome by feelings of guilt , slowly closes himself off from the outside world inside a barrier of his own making . After he completes his estrangement from the world , Pink realises that he is " crazy , over the rainbow " . He then considers the possibility that his condition may be his own fault : " have I been guilty all this time ? " Realizing his greatest fear , Pink believes that he has let everyone down , his overbearing mother wisely choosing to smother him , the teachers rightly criticising his poetic aspirations , and his wife justified in leaving him . He then stands trial for " showing feelings of an almost human nature " , further exacerbating his alienation of species being . As with the writings of philosopher Michel Foucault , Waters ' lyrics suggest Pink 's insanity is a product of modern life , the elements of which , " custom , <unk> , and <unk> " , contribute to his angst , according to Reisch . 
 = = Recognition and influence = = 
 Pink Floyd are one of the most commercially successful and influential rock bands of all time . They have sold more than 250 million records worldwide , including 75 million certified units in the United States , and 37 @.@ 9 million albums sold in the US since 1993 . The Sunday Times Rich List , Music Millionaires 2013 ( UK ) , ranked Waters at number 12 with an estimated fortune of £ 150 million , Gilmour at number 27 with £ 85 million and Mason at number 37 with £ 50 million . 
 In 2004 , MSNBC ranked Pink Floyd number 8 on their list of " The 10 Best Rock Bands Ever " . Rolling Stone ranked them number 51 on their list of " The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time " . Q named Pink Floyd as the biggest band of all time . VH1 ranked them number 18 in the list of the " 100 Greatest Artists of All Time " . Colin Larkin ranked Pink Floyd number 3 in his list of the ' Top 50 Artists of All Time ' , a ranking based on the cumulative votes for each artist 's albums included in his All Time Top 1000 Albums . 
 Pink Floyd have won several awards , including a " Best Engineered Non @-@ Classical Album " Grammy in 1980 for The Wall , and a BAFTA award for " Best Original Song " in 1982 for " Another Brick in the Wall ( Part 2 ) " from The Wall film . In 1995 , they won a Grammy for best " Rock Instrumental Performance " for " Marooned " . In 2008 , King Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden presented Pink Floyd with the Polar Music Prize for their contribution to modern music ; Waters and Mason attended the ceremony and accepted the award . They were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1996 , the UK Music Hall of Fame in 2005 , and the Hit Parade Hall of Fame in 2010 . 
 The music of Pink Floyd influenced numerous artists ; David Bowie called Barrett a significant inspiration , and The Edge of U2 bought his first delay pedal after hearing the opening guitar chords to " Dogs " from Animals . Other bands who cite Pink Floyd as an influence include Queen , Tool , Radiohead , Kraftwerk , Marillion , Queensrÿche , Nine Inch Nails , the Orb and the Smashing Pumpkins . Pink Floyd were an influence on the neo @-@ progressive rock subgenre which emerged in the 1980s . The English rock band Mostly Autumn " fuse the music of Genesis and Pink Floyd " in their sound . 
 Pink Floyd were also admirers of the Monty Python comedy group , and helped finance their 1975 film Monty Python and the Holy Grail . 
 = = Members = = 
 Roger Waters – co @-@ lead vocals , bass guitar , rhythm guitar , synthesizers ( 1965 – 1985 , 2005 ) 
 David Gilmour – co @-@ lead vocals , lead and rhythm guitars , bass guitar , synthesizers , keyboards ( 1967 – 1995 , 2005 , 2014 ) 
 Richard Wright – co @-@ lead vocals , keyboards , synthesizers , piano , rhythm guitar ( 1965 – 1979 , 1987 – 1995 , 2005 , died 2008 ) 
 Nick Mason – drums , percussion , keyboards , piano ( 1965 – 1994 , 2005 , 2014 ) 
 Syd Barrett – lead vocals , lead and rhythm guitar ( 1965 – 1968 , died 2006 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 The Piper at the Gates of Dawn ( 1967 ) 
 A Saucerful of Secrets ( 1968 ) 
 More ( 1969 ) 
 Ummagumma ( 1969 ) 
 Atom Heart Mother ( 1970 ) 
 Meddle ( 1971 ) 
 Obscured by Clouds ( 1972 ) 
 The Dark Side of the Moon ( 1973 ) 
 Wish You Were Here ( 1975 ) 
 Animals ( 1977 ) 
 The Wall ( 1979 ) 
 The Final Cut ( 1983 ) 
 A Momentary Lapse of Reason ( 1987 ) 
 The Division Bell ( 1994 ) 
 The Endless River ( 2014 ) 
 = = Tours = = 
 Pink Floyd World Tour ( 1968 ) 
 The Man and The Journey Tour ( 1969 ) 
 Atom Heart Mother World Tour ( 1970 ) 
 Meddle Tour ( 1971 ) 
 Dark Side of the Moon Tour ( 1972 – 73 ) 
 French Summer Tour ( 1974 ) 
 British Winter Tour ( 1974 ) 
 Wish You Were Here Tour ( 1975 ) 
 In the Flesh Tour ( 1977 ) 
 The Wall Tour ( 1980 – 81 ) 
 A Momentary Lapse of Reason Tour ( 1987 – 90 ) 
 The Division Bell Tour ( 1994 ) 
 = 1973 – 74 Buffalo Braves season = 
 The 1973 – 74 Buffalo Braves season was the fourth season for the expansion Buffalo Braves franchise in the National Basketball Association and its Atlantic Division . It was the team 's second season under head coach Jack Ramsay . The team 's official home arena was Buffalo Memorial Auditorium . 
 Bob McAdoo , who finished second in the NBA MVP Award voting , led the league in scoring ; Ernie DiGregorio , who won the NBA Rookie of the Year Award , led the league in assists and free throw percentage , and every starter on the team was among the league 's top ten in at least one statistical category . 
 The team finished third in the Atlantic Division and fourth in the Eastern Conference . After three consecutive 60 @-@ loss seasons , the team made the NBA playoffs for the first time and became the youngest team to have ever done so in terms of average player age . They lost in the first round of the playoffs to the eventual champions , the Boston Celtics . 
 = = Draft picks = = 
 1973 NBA Draft 
 = = Roster = = 
 = = Regular season = = 
 McAdoo had an outstanding second season and led the league in scoring with 30 @.@ 6 ppg . The Braves led the league in team scoring ( 111 @.@ 60 ) but were last in team defense ( 111 @.@ 8 ) . They totaled 427 @,@ 270 in attendance in their 41 home games , ranking them 4th of 17 teams . The Braves played several home games at the Maple Leaf Gardens in Toronto , in order to expand their fan base into Canada . This season was the first of three consecutive scoring titles for McAdoo . McAdoo also posted 15 @.@ 1 rebounds per game and 3 @.@ 3 blocked shots per game , which were each third in the league . It was the most recent time that one player averaged both 30 points and 15 rebounds in the same NBA season . In addition to McAdoo , the Braves were led by Ernie DiGregorio , who became the second straight Brave ( following McAdoo ) to capture NBA Rookie of the Year honors by leading the league in assists with 8 @.@ 2 per game . 1974 NBA Rookie of the Year DiGregorio earned the first of two NBA free throw percentage championships ( 90 @.@ 2 % ) and led the NBA in assists ( 8 @.@ 2 ) . That season DiGregorio set the NBA single @-@ game rookie assists record ( 25 ) , which still stands as unbroken ( tied by Nate McMillan ) . Jim McMillan would finish fifth in the NBA in minutes played ( <unk> ) and tenth in free throw percentage ( 85 @.@ 8 % ) . He also finished second on the Braves in scoring ( 18 @.@ 6 ) . Heard went on to rank in the top ten in rebounds ( 11 @.@ 7 , 10th ) and blocked shots ( 2 @.@ 8 , 6th ) that season . Randy Smith , who was third on the team in scoring with a 15 @.@ 5 average , finished third in the league in steals ( 2 @.@ 5 / game ) . 
 October – November 
 In his October 9 , 1973 NBA debut against the Houston Rockets , Ernie DiGregorio had 14 assists . <unk> had 17 points but it was a 25 @-@ foot basket with two seconds left in overtime by McAdoo , who had 31 points and 21 rebounds , that earned the Braves a 107 – 105 victory . An October 30 victory over the Seattle SuperSonics gave the Braves a half game lead over the Celtics in the Atlantic Division with a 6 – 4 record . The Braves only won one of their next nine games . It came on November 14 when McAdoo set the franchise single game rebound record with 28 against the Atlanta Hawks . That night , he also scored 31 points for the fourth game in a row . Two weeks later on November 28 , the Braves lost when Pete Maravich , who entered the game in the second quarter and posted 42 points off the bench , led the Atlanta Hawks over the Braves by 130 – 106 . 
 December – January 
 The Braves ' December 12 game against the Celtics was played in Providence , Rhode Island , making it a homecoming game for DiGregorio , the former Providence Friar . The Braves lost for the 20th consecutive time to the Celtics that night . Following a December 30 loss to the Los Angeles Lakers , the Braves fell to a 16 – 22 record at the end of 1973 but began the New Year with a season high seven @-@ game winning streak . Heard set a career high with 22 rebounds in game five of the streak on January 8 . The fifth game of the streak set a new franchise record for consecutive wins and gave the team 21 wins , which matched their total of the prior season . The resulting 23 – 22 record following the January 12 victory over the Capital Bullets gave them their first winning record since their 6 – 5 start . McAdoo , who would go on to finish second in the NBA Most Valuable Player Award balloting , represented the team in the January 15 , 1974 NBA All @-@ Star Game . By the end of the month the Braves had fallen back to a 26 – 29 record . 
 February – March 
 On February 1 , the Braves traded Kunnert and Wohl to the Rockets for <unk> and Marin . The team then went 10 – 5 in February . On February 27 , the Braves earned their first victory over the Boston Celtics after 22 defeats . By late February , the team had the top scoring offense in the league . They clinched their first playoff experience in a victory at a home game held at Toronto 's Maple Leaf Gardens against the Portland Trail Blazers as McAdoo again had 28 rebounds as well as 29 points . The clinching game on March 10 was the Braves 74th game . The team reached five games over .500 three times following their 40th , 41st and 42nd wins but lost the last three games of a five @-@ game western road trip to conclude the season at 42 – 40 . The team made the playoffs by finishing in 3rd place in the Atlantic Division . 
 = = = Season standings = = = 
 = = = Record vs. opponents = = = 
 = = = Season schedule = = = 
 Source : www.basketball @-@ reference.com 
 = = Playoffs = = 
 In the 1974 NBA Playoffs the Braves were matched up against the Boston Celtics . The Celtics had won 22 of 24 matches between the teams . However , the Braves had won the most recent two matches after 22 straight defeats , including 5 earlier that season . Through four games , the series was even at two games apiece . However the Celtics would pull away with two more wins to take the series in six games . With rookie DiGregorio and 2nd year McAdoo leading the way , the team became the youngest NBA playoff team ( 24 @.@ 42 , using data going back to 1952 ) based on average age weighted by minutes played . The 1977 – 78 Milwaukee Bucks ( 23 @.@ 82 ) would surpass this record . The Celtics went on to win the NBA championship in the 1974 NBA Finals . 
 In game 1 , the Braves lost a 17 @-@ point lead as Dave Cowens led a fourth quarter rally despite five personal fouls . In game 2 , the Braves evened the series 1 – 1 with a 115 – 105 victory despite balanced scoring by the Celtics who had three 20 @-@ point scorers : Jo Jo White had 27 , Don Nelson had 21 and John Havlicek had 20 . McAdoo had 23 and DiGregorio had 18 for Buffalo . The Braves led most of game 2 and held on for the victory . In game 3 , the Celtics scored 39 first quarter points on their way to a 120 – 107 victory . Havlicek had 43 points ( 26 in the first half ) , and Cowens added 23 ( 17 in the first half ) . The Braves recovered from an early fourth quarter 10 @-@ point deficit to win game 4 104 – 102 . The game had a frenetic final 15 seconds as McMillian lost the ball on a drive resulting in a game @-@ tying fast break by the Celtics . Then when a McAdoo shot rolled off the rim , McMillian tipped the ball in as time expired for the victory . The Braves had rallied from an 84 – 74 deficit to tie the score at 98 largely on the performance of McAdoo . In the game the lead changed hands 9 times , and the Braves outrebounded the Celtics 62 – 38 , including 20 – 3 offensive rebounds ( 11 by McMillian ) . The Celtics won game 5 by a 100 – 97 margin . Although McAdoo was held to 16 points on the night , the Braves led 89 – 85 with four minutes left . The Celtics won game 6 of the series when White sank two free throws after time expired in regulation play for a 106 – 104 victory . McAdoo had tied the score at 104 with 7 seconds left , but he fouled White at midcourt . 
 In the playoffs , Heard bettered his regular season 15 @.@ 3 points and 11 @.@ 7 rebounds averages with 16 @.@ 8 points and 14 @.@ 7 rebounds . Likewise , McAdoo contributed 31 @.@ 7 points and 13 @.@ 7 rebounds . McMillian contributed 14 @.@ 5 points and 8 @.@ 8 rebounds . Following the season the team lost Bob Kauffman to the New Orleans Jazz in the May 20 , 1974 NBA Expansion Draft . 
 = = = Playoff Schedule = = = 
 Source : www.basketball @-@ reference.com 
 = = Player stats = = 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Ernie DiGregorio , NBA Rookie of the Year 
 Ernie DiGregorio , led NBA in assists ( 663 ) 
 Ernie DiGregorio , led NBA in free throw percentage 
 Bob McAdoo led the NBA in scoring . 
 Bob McAdoo All @-@ NBA Team ( 2nd team ) 
 Bob McAdoo 1974 NBA All @-@ Star Game 
 = = Transactions = = 
 Prior to this season the Braves had lost 60 games or more each year and failed to make the NBA Playoffs . Over the course of the season , the team made a series of player transactions that were part of the résumé that earned Buffalo Braves General Manager Eddie Donovan the NBA Executive of the Year Award and put the team into the playoffs for the first time . Donovan 's season bolstered his reputation as a wheeler and dealer . 
 The Braves drafted four players in the 1973 NBA Draft who played for the team during the 1973 – 74 season : DiGregorio , Ken Charles , Mike <unk> , and Jim Garvin . In addition , the team made two free agent signings . On September 11 , 1973 , the team signed Paul Ruffner . On September 17 , 1973 , the team waived Dick Garrett and Bill Hewitt . The other members of the 1972 – 73 team who were not traded or waived and did not play on the 1973 – 74 team were Howard <unk> , Fred Hilton and Harold Fox . On November 24 , 1973 , the Braves waived Garvin . On November 27 , 1973 , the team signed Lee Winfield . 
 Prior to the 1973 – 74 NBA season , Gar Heard and Kevin Kunnert were traded from the Chicago Bulls to the Buffalo Braves for John Hummer , a 1974 NBA Draft 2nd round pick and a 1975 NBA Draft 2nd round pick . Also before the season , the Braves also traded Elmore Smith to the Los Angeles Lakers for Jim McMillian . The trade of Smith , who had been the team 's leading scorer and rebounder the prior year , was controversial at first . Other trades during the season included the February 1 , 1974 trade of Kunnert and Dave Wohl for Matt <unk> and 1973 NBA All @-@ Star Jack Marin . 
 = Para @-@ Nordic skiing classification = 
 Para @-@ Nordic skiing classification is the classification system for para @-@ Nordic skiing which includes the biathlon and cross country events . The classifications for Para @-@ Nordic skiing mirrors the classifications for Para @-@ Alpine skiing with some exceptions . A functional mobility and medical classification is in use , with skiers being divided into three groups : standing skiers , sit skiers and visually impaired skiers . International classification is governed by International Paralympic Committee , Nordic Skiing ( IPC @-@ NS ) . Other classification is handled by national bodies . Before the IPC @-@ NS took over classification , a number of organizations handled classification based on the type of disability . 
 The first classification system for the sport was developed in Scandinavia and was a medical system for skiers with amputations . At the time , other types of disability were not eligible for classification . In developing a system for use at the first Winter Paralympics , organisers wanted to get away from a medical classification system and use a functional system , but they ended up with a system based on equipment utilised by the skier instead . As the 1970s progressed , equipment improvements made it possible for skiers with spinal cord injuries to participate and a classification system developed for these skiers . By the 1990s , there were over ten Nordic skiing classes and a percentage system was developed to allow skiers with different disabilities inside one of three groups to compete against each other . The skiers time at the end of the race would be multiplied against a percentage to determine a time that allowed for fair cross classification comparisons . While the actual percentages change from time to time , this system to calculate a winner is still in use . Despite repeated efforts to move to a true functional mobility based classification dating back to the 1970s , medical assessment still took place during the classification process in the 2010s . 
 There are different events and equipment for different Para @-@ Nordic skiing classes . For sit @-@ skiers , they use sit @-@ skis with two skis , unlike Para @-@ Alpine Skiing where sit skiers use one ski . Blind skiers use a guide , with the position of the guide relative to the skier depending on the class of the skier . In the United States , Para @-@ Nordic skiing has events for people with intellectual disability that are run through Special Olympics . The classification process for blind Para @-@ Nordic skiing is handled internationally by the International Blind Sports Association and is a medical assessment . While National Paralympic Committees can classify their skiers for national competitions , this classification is subject to change at international competitions . These classifications have been used at the Winter Paralympics . Intellectual disability skiers were allowed to compete in full medal events at the 1998 Winter Paralympics but were subsequently removed because of cheating problems at the 2000 Summer Olympics . 
 = = Definition = = 
 Para @-@ Nordic skiing has two events , the biathlon and cross @-@ country skiing . The classifications for Para @-@ Nordic skiing at the same as classifications for Para @-@ Alpine skiing . Classifications are based on functional mobility . For amputees , this is based on their mobility with the use of an assistive device . Classification for competitors with cerebral palsy is difficult because the levels of spasticity can change as the race progresses . People with cerebral palsy in classifications from <unk> to CP8 are covered by skiing classifications . Skiers from CP5 to CP8 compete standing up with the use of equipment . Since 1995 , the classes area LW2 , LW3 , LW4 , LW5 / 7 , LW6 , LW8 , and LW9 . There are three sit @-@ ski classifications : LW10 , LW11 and LW12 , with LW10 being divided into LW10 and LW10.5 , and LW11 being divided into LW11 and <unk> The sport also has three classifications for blind skiers , B1 , B2 , and B3 . These are based solely on medical classification . Research done at the Central Institute on Employment Abilities of the Handicapped in Moscow has found differences in functional capabilities based on differences in visual acuity . This plays a significant role in skiing . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Para @-@ Nordic skiing is governed by the International Paralympic Committee , Nordic Skiing . The United States Deaf Ski and Snowboard Association is in charge of deaf classification for competitors in the United States . In the United States , the sport is governed by Disabled Sports USA for skiers with functional mobility , and governed by the United States Association of Blind Athletes ( USABA ) for skiers with vision impairment , while Special Olympics governs the sport and classification for people with intellectual disabilities . Disabled Sports USA developed its own classification system for sit skiing that is not used internationally . They use a three group classification system , with Group 1 skiers including T5 to T10 spinal cord injuries , Group 2 including all other skiers with disabilities below T10 and Group 3 including all spinal cord disabilities above T10 . 
 In the sport 's early history , the International Sports Organization for the Disabled ( ISOD ) , founded in 1964 , governed the sport . In 1980 , there were two governing bodies handling classification , ISOD and the International Stoke Mandeville Games Committee ( <unk> ) , which later became the International Stoke Mandeville Games Federation ( ISMGF ) , and still later the International Stoke Mandeville Wheelchair Sports Federation ( ISMWSF ) . <unk> was in charge of classification for athletes with spinal cord related disabilities . In 1981 , the International Blind Sports Federation ( IBSA ) was created , and took over governance for skiers with visual impairments . In 2003 , ISMWSF merged with ISOD , and changed its name to the International Wheelchair and Amputee Sports Federation ( IWAS ) in 2004 . While the Cerebral Palsy International Sports and Recreation Association ( CP @-@ ISRA ) has an interest in the sport because it is open to people with cerebral palsy , it is not governed by them . In 1983 , both the rules for this sport , and classification , was done by the CP @-@ ISRA . By 1984 , there were four organisations governing classification for the sport : ISOD , ISMGF , IBSA and CP @-@ ISRA . 
 = = Eligibility = = 
 Currently , people with physical disabilities and vision impairment are eligible for classification . In 1983 , Cerebral Palsy @-@ International Sports and Recreation Association ( CP @-@ ISRA ) set the eligibility rules for classification for this sport for people with cerebral palsy . They defined cerebral palsy as a non @-@ progressive brain legion that results in impairment . People with cerebral palsy or non @-@ progressive brain damage were eligible for classification by them . The organisation also dealt with classification for people with similar impairments . For their classification system , people with spina bifida were not eligible unless they also had evidence of upper motor neuron dysfunction , caused by associated hydrocephalus . People with cerebral palsy and epilepsy were eligible provided the condition did not interfere with their ability to compete . People who had strokes were eligible for classification following medical clearance . Competitors with multiple sclerosis , muscular dystrophy and <unk> were not eligible for classification by CP @-@ ISRA , but were eligible for classification by International Sports Organisation for the Disabled for the Games of Les Autres . 
 = = History = = 
 Classification for winter sport started out as a medical one before moving to a functional system . The earliest classification systems for the sport were developed in Scandinavia . The original classification system was for people with amputations , with classification based on the type of amputation as determined by a medical expert . Other classes of disability were not eligible to be classified and compete early in the sport 's history . 
 Going into the first winter Paralympic Games , the 1976 Winter Paralympics , the organisers had a difference of opinion with Paralympic Games founder Ludwig Guttmann , because they wanted a functional classification , not medical classification system , from the onset . They largely succeeded , although the system that was developed in Örnsköldsvik , Sweden , that ended up being used was based on equipment utilised by the skier instead of a true functional classification system . During the 1970s , equipment was first being developed for skiers with spinal injuries and a classification system had yet to become fully developed for the sport . 
 In 1983 , classification for cerebral palsy competitors in this sport was done by the Cerebral Palsy @-@ International Sports and Recreation Association . The classification used the classification system designed for track events . In 1983 , there were five cerebral palsy classifications . During the 1980s , there were three sit @-@ ski classes and seven other classes . During the 1980s , while not formally part of the para @-@ skiing classification system , intellectual disability Nordic skiing classes did exist as part of the Special Olympics movement . The sport was one sports people with disabilities were more likely to play during the 1990s . 
 Prior to 1988 , the classification assessment process generally involved a medical exam to determine the classification . The change in winter disability sport classification towards a more formal functional classification system happened more quickly as a result of changes being made in wheelchair basketball classification that started in 1983 . Prior to the 1988 Games , sit skiing was not included on the Paralympic programme . Norway worked to change this by added sit skiing classifications to the World Championships in 1986 . 
 Functional classification testing was developed in 1989 for Nordic sit skiing , with the same system still being used for the 1998 Winter Paralympics . The tests included hand , arm and shoulder coordination , a sitting balance in the sagittal plane test , a stability sagittal plane test , a sitting balance test in the frontal planes , and a functional sitting ability test of the frontal and sagittal planes with an examination of sideways displacement . 
 By the 1990s , an integrated classification approach was tried in Nordic skiing had been developed using a percentage system that would allow for multiple classes to compete against each other in the same event using a formula to create a time finish that would enable fair comparisons for skiers of different functional ability . In 1997 / <unk> , this was defined as 84 % for LW10 , 93 % for LW11 and 100 % for LW12 . Their finishing time would then be multiplied against this percentage to determine where they finished . A variant of this system was still in place for the 2010 Winter Paralympics . The Canadian Paralympic Committee explains how this works with the following example : " Athlete A is classified as LW6 with a factor of 91 % finishes the race in 1 minute , their final race time is 54 @.@ 6 seconds . Athlete B is classified as LW5 with a factor of 79 % finishes the race in 1 minute and 2 seconds , their final race time is 48 @.@ 98 seconds . Athlete B wins . Therefore , the athlete who completed the race fastest may not be the winner and gold medalist . " For the 2008 to 2010 ski seasons , the following percentages were used : 
 The move from a medical classification to a functional classification system continued during the 1990s . There were conversations about whether or not less @-@ disabled <unk> athletes should be competing in disability winter sport and if they should instead be competing against able bodied competitors . At the same time , there were people including IPC first vice president Jens <unk> who entertained discussions about whether or not blind classifications should be combined into a single class like is done in some other disabilities sports . The debate about inclusion of competitors into able @-@ bodied competitions was seen by some disability sport advocates like Horst <unk> as a hindrance to the development of an independent classification system not based on the rules for able @-@ bodied sport . These efforts ended by 1993 as the International Paralympic Committee tried to carve out its own identity and largely ceased efforts for inclusion of disability sport on the Olympic programme . Nonetheless , in 2006 , skiers with amputation still had a medical component to their classification assessment . 
 The International Sports Federation for Persons with Intellectual Disability was given the task of re @-@ evaluating the classification system for skiers with intellectual disabilities to prevent future abuses following the Spanish basketball team cheating scandal at the 2000 Summer Paralympics using a more reliable system that can be verified to classify competitors . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Skiers with physical disabilities may compete on the same team as people with vision impairment in team events . This is the case in cross country relay events , where there needs to be one sit skier , one standing skier and one vision impaired skier . At the 2010 Winter Paralympics , the men 's relay , named the 1 x 4 km + 2 x 5 km relay , a sit skier led off with a 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) leg , with the standing skier going second on a 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) leg and the vision impaired skier going last on a 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) leg . On the women 's side , the event is called the 3 x 2 @.@ 5 km event . Skiing in the same order , all three skiers ski 2 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) . Sit skiers sit in a chair with two skis attached to it . Classification percentages for national competitions are not necessarily the same ones used for international competitions . 
 In the biathlon , sit skiers and standing skiers shot at a target that had a bullseye 1 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) large while vision impairment classifications shot at a bullseye that was 2 @.@ 8 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 1 in ) large . Vision impaired skiers have a sound system that helps them sight for shooting portions in the biathlon . The guide for B1 skiers generally skis behind the skier in order to maximize the ability of the skier to hear the guide . The guide tells the skier things like when weight should be shifted , elements coming up on the course , and how to position themselves to maximize the diagonal run of the course . Guides for B2 and B3 skiers often position themselves differently as the skiers have some vision , which means the things a guide assists with will be different from what is required of a skier who has almost no sight . 
 = = Process = = 
 For skiers with a visual impairment , their classification is handled by the International Blind Sports Association . They are tested based on medical classification by an Ophthalmologist . In the 1990s , the classification assessment process for Nordic skiing had several components . One component was a test that looked at the ability of the skier to go up and down a hill . Another was a neurological test . In Canada , classification for blind skiers is handled by Canadian Blind Sports Association . Canadians seeking classification start the process by getting in touch with the organisation . Para @-@ Nordic skiing classification is handled by Canada Cross Country . For Australian competitors in this sport , the sport and classification is managed the national sport federation with support from the Australian Paralympic Committee . There are three types of classification available for Australian competitors : Provisional , national and international . The first is for club level competitions , the second for state and national competitions , and the third for international competitions . While a skier is first classified by their national Paralympic committee , their international classification may take place during their first World Cup event . A competitor may challenge their own classification or that of their fellow competitors . 
 = = At the Paralympic Games = = 
 The 1976 Winter Paralympics were the first time classifications other than spinal cord injury classifications competed at the Paralympic Games . At these Games , there were only two classifications for this sport . The 1976 Winter Paralympics were the first time classifications other than spinal cord injury classifications competed at the Paralympic Games . The only event open to a classification for people with spinal paralysis at the 1980 Winter Paralympics was the cross country event . It was one of only two events in the whole Games for people with spinal paralysis . 
 At the 1998 Winter Paralympics , skiers with intellectual disabilities were eligible to compete as full medal participants in the cross country event despite early initial opposition by the Nagano Organising Committee . The local organizers believed it would be too difficult to separate intellectual disability skiers into different classes . At the same time , there were few eligible skiers from Japan who would have been eligible to compete in these events . 
 At the 1992 Winter Paralympics , all disability types were eligible to participate , with classification being run through the International Paralympic Committee , with classification being done based on blind , amputee and sitting disability type . The biathlon was open to men with vision impairment classifications for the first time at the 1992 Games . At the 1992 Games , intellectual disability skiers competed in a demonstration event . At the 1992 Games , LW1 to LW9 competed in the short distances in a combined event , with LW 10 and 11 competing in their own short distance event . Blind skiers all skied the short distances in a combined event . The 10 km event was open to LW1 to LW9 , and H to D. The relay event was open to LW1 to LW9 in one event , and <unk> and <unk> in another event , and blind skiing in a third event . The biathlon was open to women in blind classes for the first time at the 1994 Winter Paralympics . 
 Historically , Nordic skiing was the only skiing discipline open to competitors with intellectual disabilities , but their inclusion was suspended following the 2000 Summer Paralympics cheating scandal and they were not eligible to compete at the 2002 Winter Paralympics . At the 2002 Games , the cross country event had three groups of skiers : vision impaired , standing and sitting . In 2002 , for the Winter Paralympics , the Games Classifiers were Birgitta Blomquist , Anne <unk> and Ted Fay . The Games Classifiers for vision impairment classifications were Roman <unk> , Johan <unk> and Axel <unk> . Classifications for skiers with intellectual disabilities were not included at these Games because of cheating that took place at the Sydney Summer Paralympics two years earlier . 
 = = Future = = 
 Going forward , disability sport 's major classification body , the International Paralympic Committee , is working on improving classification to be more of an evidence @-@ based system as opposed to a performance @-@ based system so as not to punish elite athletes whose performance makes them appear in a higher class alongside competitors who train less . 
 = Mitch Henderson = 
 Mitchell G. " Mitch " Henderson ( born August 14 , 1975 ) is an American college basketball coach , currently serving as head coach for the Princeton Tigers men 's basketball team . Before taking the Princeton job in 2011 , he served as an assistant for the Northwestern Wildcats men 's basketball team for eleven seasons under Bill Carmody . He had been a member of three consecutive Ivy League champion Princeton teams as a player ( two of which went undefeated in conference , the first tying the school record with 19 consecutive wins and the second achieving 20 ) . He was a co @-@ captain of the second of these undefeated league champions along with Steve Goodrich . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Henderson was a twelve @-@ time varsity letter winner at Culver Military Academy in football , basketball and baseball . He had been drafted by the New York Yankees with the 24th pick of the 29th round , <unk> overall in the 1994 Major League Baseball draft . In baseball , he was a pitcher . He was named the 1994 South Bend Tribune high school Male Athlete of the Year . He did not sign with the Yankees and retained his amateur status although he chose to pursue basketball rather than baseball in college . 
 As a basketball player , he was a four @-@ year starter at Princeton University , where he was captain of the Ivy League champion 1997 – 98 Princeton Tigers men 's basketball team as well as a member of the 1995 – 96 and 1996 – 97 conference champions . The latter two teams were undefeated in conference play . These two undefeated Ivy League seasons were coached by Carmody . The 1995 – 96 team was notable for its upset of the defending national champion UCLA Bruins in the 1996 NCAA Tournament . 
 The 1996 – 97 team finished the regular season on a school record 19 @-@ game winning streak . In the 1997 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , against the fifth @-@ seeded California Golden Bears , the team lost 55 – 52 . Henderson had tied the score at 50 with 1 : 37 to play . Henderson was a 1997 honorable mention All @-@ Ivy League selection . 
 The 1997 – 98 team posted a 27 – 2 overall record , reached the top 10 in the national polls , and achieved a 14 – 0 conference record . The Tigers entered the 1998 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament on a 19 @-@ game winning streak and finished the season ranked eighth in the final USAToday / NABC Coaches Poll . He was a 1998 2nd team All @-@ Ivy League selection . In the 1998 tournament opening game for the fifth @-@ seeded Tigers , he scored 19 points to help them defeat the UNLV Runnin ' Rebels 69 – 57 , which marked the team 's 20th consecutive win — a school record . 
 He was briefly a member of the Atlanta Hawks of the National Basketball Association during the 1998 – 99 NBA season , but he did not appear in any regular season games . He also played professional basketball in Sligo , Ireland , from August 1998 to January 1999 . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 Henderson served as an assistant to his former coach Carmody during Carmody 's first eleven seasons as the coach at Northwestern University . Carmody used Henderson , who commonly <unk> with the players , as part of a joke for a Sports Illustrated : " I don 't mind that Mitch is <unk> and smarter than all those guys on the court . The thing that bothers me is that he 's faster than all of them . " During Henderson 's final three seasons at Northwestern , the team qualified for the National Invitation Tournament . 
 Henderson was selected to replace outgoing Princeton head coach Sydney Johnson . He inherited a 2010 – 11 team that narrowly lost to Kentucky in its opening game of the 2011 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament . The team returned its 2nd leading scorer and rebounder , Ian Hummer , who as a sophomore was a 2nd team All @-@ Ivy selection . 
 With a new head coach who is a first @-@ time head coach , the 2011 – 12 Tigers got off to a slow start with a 1 – 5 record , but won 18 of its final 24 games and started its conference schedule with a 2 – 3 record , but won 8 of its final 9 games . Eventually , Princeton earned its first home win against a ranked opponent since the 1976 – 77 team 's January 3 , 1977 victory over Notre Dame by defeating Harvard ( No. 21 Coaches / 25 AP ) on February 11 , 2012 . The win was also its first against a ranked opponent on any court since November 11 , 1997 , which is when the 1997 – 98 team opened its season with a victory over a ranked Texas team at Meadowlands Arena ( now named Izod Center ) in East Rutherford , New Jersey . Princeton also defeated eventual 2012 ACC Men 's Basketball Tournament Champion Florida State five weeks after Harvard did . The team qualified for the 2012 CBI Tournament and earned a first round 95 – 86 victory over Evansville . In the subsequent game against Pittsburgh , Princeton lost 82 – 61 to end the season . 
 The 2012 – 13 Tigers finished with a 17 – 11 ( 10 – 4 ) record and did not qualify for the post season . Princeton had entered the final weekend of the season with three games remaining and a half game lead over Harvard . The team got swept in its two weekend games while Harvard won both its games to clinch the 2012 – 13 Ivy League title . 
 The 2013 – 14 team lost in the second round of the 2nd Round CBI to finish with a 21 – 9 ( 8 – 6 ) record . 
 = = = Head coaching record = = = 
 = = Personal = = 
 Henderson earned his A.B. from Princeton in 1998 in economics and worked as a research associate for <unk> Corporation in San Francisco before beginning his coaching career . He was senior @-@ year roommates with James <unk> , who was a 1998 honorable mention All @-@ Ivy League selection . 
 = Pirates of the Caribbean : At World 's End = 
 Pirates of the Caribbean : At World 's End is a 2007 American epic fantasy swashbuckler film and the third installment of the Pirates of the Caribbean film series . The plot follows Will Turner ( Orlando Bloom ) , Elizabeth Swann ( Keira Knightley ) , Hector Barbossa ( Geoffrey Rush ) , and the crew of the Black Pearl rescuing Captain Jack Sparrow ( Johnny Depp ) from Davy Jones 's Locker , and then preparing to fight the East India Trading Company , led by Cutler Beckett ( Tom Hollander ) , who controls Davy Jones ( Bill Nighy ) and plans to extinguish piracy forever . It is the last film in the series to be directed by Gore Verbinski . It was filmed in two shoots during 2005 and 2006 , the former simultaneously with the preceding film , Dead Man 's Chest . 
 The film was released in English @-@ speaking countries on May 25 , 2007 , by Walt Disney Pictures . Critical reviews were mixed . The film was praised for its performances , musical score , action scenes , and special effects , but was criticized for its plot and running time . At World 's End was a box office hit , becoming the most successful film of 2007 , with over $ 960 million worldwide . 
 It was nominated for the Academy Award for Makeup and the Academy Award for Visual Effects , which it lost to La Vie en Rose and The Golden Compass , respectively . A fourth installment , On Stranger Tides , the first in the series to neither be directed by Verbinski nor star Bloom and Knightley , was released in cinemas on May 20 , 2011 . 
 With a production budget of $ 300 million , Pirates of the Caribbean : At World 's End was the most expensive film ever made at the time of its release , even after adjusting for inflation . 
 = = Plot = = 
 To control the oceans , Lord Cutler Beckett executes anyone associated with piracy by ordering Davy Jones to destroy all pirate ships in the seas . Condemned prisoners sing " Hoist the Colours " to compel the nine Pirate Lords to convene at Shipwreck Cove to hold the Brethren Court . Because Captain Jack Sparrow , one of the Pirate Lords , never named a successor , before being killed , Captain Barbossa , along with Will Turner , Elizabeth Swann , Tia Dalma , and the crew of the Black Pearl , plot to rescue Jack from Davy Jones 's Locker . Travelling to Singapore , the crew meet Captain Sao Feng who owns navigational charts to the Locker and quickly gains an unpredictable interest in Elizabeth . Beckett 's soldiers invade , but the crew escape . Feng and Turner make a deal to give Jack to Feng , so he in turn can use the Pearl to rescue his father Bootstrap Bill from the Flying Dutchman . The crew travels to the locker and rescues the marooned Jack . They find themselves trapped , encountering dead souls , including Elizabeth 's father Governor Swann . They learn the Dutchman must have a captain . 
 Returning to the living world , the Pearl is attacked by Sao Feng and Beckett 's men . Through a complex series of deals , Elizabeth is handed over to Feng who he believes is the goddess Calypso , while the rest of the crew make for Shipwreck Cove aboard the Pearl , though Jack later throws Will off the ship as part of the plan to seize control of the Dutchman . Sao Feng tells Elizabeth that the first Brethren Court bound Calypso in human form after she betrayed her lover , Davy Jones . He plans to release her to defeat Beckett . Davy Jones attacks Feng 's ship , but Feng appoints Elizabeth his successor as Pirate Lord before dying . Admiral Norrington frees Elizabeth and her new crew from the Dutchman , but is killed by a crazed Bootstrap Bill . 
 The Black Pearl arrives at Shipwreck Cove where Barbossa attempts to persuade the Brethren Court to release Calypso . Jack 's father Captain Teague and Keeper of the Pirate Code , informs the Court that only an elected Pirate King can decide . A vote is taken . To avoid a stalemate , Jack casts his vote for Elizabeth , making her King . Davy Jones visits Tia Dalma in the Pearl 's brig , revealing she is Calypso , and they promise to be together again . 
 The Brethren Court and Beckett 's fleets emerge for war . On a sandbank , Elizabeth , Jack , Barbossa , Beckett , Jones , and Will parley , trading Will for Jack , and Barbossa steals Jack 's piece of eight , all of which are owned by the Pirate Lords and required to free Calypso . Barbossa frees Calypso , but when Will reveals it was Jones who made it possible for the first Court to imprison her , Calypso vanishes and summons an enormous maelstrom . 
 The Pearl and the Dutchman battle in the maelstrom . Elizabeth and Will are wed by Barbossa before swinging over to the Dutchman to aid Jack . On board the Dutchman , Jones and Jack engage in a duel , with Jones gaining the upper hand . Jones stabs Will with a sword , but Jack and Elizabeth have Will stab Jones ' heart . Jones dies , and falls in the maelstrom , free for all eternity . Will succumbs to his injuries . Jack and Elizabeth escape the Dutchman as it is sucked into the maelstrom . As Beckett 's ship , the Endeavour , approaches to destroy the Pearl , the Dutchman rises , now captained by Will , and the crew free of Jones ' curse . Together , the two pirate ships destroy the Endeavour , with a stunned Beckett going down with the ship while his army retreats . With Will now bound to escort souls lost at sea to the next world for ten years , Will and Elizabeth consummate their marriage before he departs on the Dutchman . 
 Jack and Joshamee Gibbs discover Barbossa has stolen the Black Pearl again , but Jack planned ahead and cut out Sao Feng 's navigational charts , departing from Tortuga alone to track down the mythical Fountain of Youth to become immortal . 
 In a post @-@ credits scene , set ten years later , Elizabeth and her son watch from a sea cliff as Will returns aboard the Dutchman . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Following The Curse of the Black Pearl 's success in 2003 , the cast and crew signed on for two sequels to be shot back @-@ to @-@ back . For the third film , director Gore Verbinski wanted to return the tone to that of a character piece after using the second film to keep the plot moving . Inspired by the real @-@ life confederation of pirates , Elliott and Rossio looked at historical figures and created fictional characters from them to expand the scope beyond the main cast . Finally embellishing their mythology , Calypso was introduced , going full circle to Barbossa 's mention of " heathen gods " that created the curse in the first film . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Parts of the third film were shot during location filming of Pirates of the Caribbean : Dead Man 's Chest , a long shoot which finished on March 1 , 2006 . During August 2005 , the Singapore sequence was shot . The set was built on Stage 12 of the Universal Studios backlot , and comprised 40 structures within an 80 by 130 @-@ foot ( 24 by 40 @-@ m ) tank that was 3 1 ⁄ 2 feet ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) deep . As 18th century Singapore is not a well @-@ documented era , the filmmakers chose to use an Expressionist style based on Chinese and Malaysian cities of the same period . The design of the city was also intended by Verbinski to parody spa culture , with fungi growing throughout the set . Continuing this natural feel , the floorboards of Sao Feng 's bathhouse had to be cut by hand , and real humidity was created by the combination of gallons of water and the lighting equipment on the set . 
 Filming resumed on August 3 , 2006 at the Bonneville Salt Flats in Utah and continued until early 2007 for 70 days off the California coast , as all the shooting required in the Caribbean had been conducted in 2005 . Davy Jones 's Locker was shot at Utah , and it was shot in a monochromatic way to represent its different feeling from the usual colorful environment of a pirate . The climactic battle was shot in a former air hangar at Palmdale , California , where the cast had to wear wetsuits underneath their costumes on angle @-@ tipped ships . The water @-@ drenched set was kept in freezing temperatures , to make sure bacteria did not come inside and infect the crew . A second unit shot at Niagara Falls . Industrial Light & Magic did 750 effects shots , while Digital Domain also took on 300 . They spent just five months finishing the special effects . The film posed numerous challenges in creating water @-@ based effects . 
 Filming finished on December 12 , 2006 in Molokai , and the first assembly cut was three hours . Twenty minutes were removed , not including end credits , though producer Jerry Bruckheimer maintained that the long running time was needed to make the final battle work in terms of build @-@ up . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Hans Zimmer composed the score , as he did for the previous film , composing eight new motifs , including a new love theme for the At World 's End soundtrack . He scored scenes as the editors began work , so as to influence their choice of cutting to the music . Gore Verbinski helped on the score . He played the Ennio Morricone @-@ influenced guitar music in the parley scene between Barbossa , Sparrow , Elizabeth and Will , Davy Jones , and Cutler Beckett . He also co @-@ wrote the song " Hoist the Colours " with Zimmer . 
