 = = Volume list = = 
 = = Reception = = 
 Joy Kim of Manga Life also praised the art style saying the characters were distinctive . She criticized the relationship of the lead couple , Si @-@ Joon Lee and Mu @-@ Yeon Park , saying that Mu @-@ Yeon should not be so sweet and protective of someone who does not return her feelings . Kim praised the character Ji @-@ Oh Yun as the most interesting character in the series and that his relationship with Mu @-@ Hwa Park is interesting . Melinda <unk> of Manga Bookshelf reviewed the first volume and concluded that despite being " somewhat muddled , the visual storytelling is not . The art is clean , lovely , and easy to follow , with a nicely restrained use of elaborate backgrounds and imaginative panel layouts . The character designs are pretty , distinct , and occasionally even creepy , as with Mu @-@ Yeon 's eternally smiling mask . The overall look is undeniably " manhwa " – a draw for some and a turn @-@ off for others . " Erin Jones of Mania.com noted the distinct and typical romance story in the first volume , but found the first volume enjoyable and noted that the interactions of the " Pig Girl " are what will drive the series despite the volume ending without strong development of the characters . A review of volume two by Pop Culture Shock gave it a " B + " despite confusion caused by the plot and " vagueness on the villain front , Pig Bride is still a very entertaining tale . " 
 The series was received negatively by Katherine Dacey of <unk> where it was listed as fifth on Manga Critic 's " The 2009 Manga Hall of Shame Inductees " . Dacey criticized the series ' lack of comedy , art style , and the personality of girls stating the author must hate girls . Kurt Hassler of Yen Press rebutted <unk> review and disagreed and praised the characters and the art style . Hassler 's response to the review led to Dacey modifying her review to specify it was not hatred of women , but of the characters . Hassler also highlighted a quote from a review by Julie of Manga Maniac Cafe , a personal website , which stated , " The art alone makes this title worthy of a read , with its fine lines , elegant details , and overall attractiveness … the vision revealed inside this book is gorgeous . Dramatic and comedic scenes are played out with equal effectiveness , making the visuals a joy to behold . " 
 = Elizabeth Cresswell = 
 Elizabeth Cresswell ( c . 1625 – c . 1698 ) , also known as Mother Creswell and Madam Cresswell of Clerkenwell , was one of the most successful prostitutes and brothel keepers of the English seventeenth century . Starting with houses in Bartholomew Close , in the City of London and St Leonard 's , Shoreditch , she built a widespread network of brothels across London , supplied with girls and women from across England . Her employees included the wives of soldiers pressed into service for Charles II and gentlewomen who had supported the Cavalier cause during the English Civil War and had since fallen on hard times . Her bawdy houses were favoured by King Charles and his court as well as powerful figures in government and city guilds . This position gave her a measure of immunity from prosecution and added to her profile as a caricature of iniquity and corruption . 
 During the Bawdy House Riots of 1668 , apprentices smashed up brothels across London , including those belonging to Cresswell . She is listed as one the addressers of the satirical Whores ' Petition , sent to Lady Castlemaine , the King 's courtesan . The letter requests help for the " sister " prostitutes who have had their livelihoods destroyed , asking that the brothels be rebuilt with money from the national tax coffers . Supporter of the prominent Whig , anti @-@ Catholic , and anti @-@ Carolean Thomas Player , Cresswell financed his political campaigns . In her final years she was attacked by both Protestants and Catholics : by Protestants for providing the royal court with whores , and by Catholics for financing Player 's political rebellion . 
 Cresswell occupied a rare position in seventeenth @-@ century England , as a person of common birth who rose to a position of high status as an independently wealthy , unmarried woman running a substantial business enterprise . She figures in a wide assortment of contemporary literature and songs , in ballads , poems , broadsides , novels and party pamphlets , often portrayed as a caricature of vice , a satirical figure of street commentary , sexual theatre and political <unk> . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 Elizabeth Cresswell was born in about 1625 , probably in the small village of Knockholt in Kent , England . Her middle @-@ class Protestant family were influential , with strong connections to the powerful Percival family , favoured by King Charles I. By July 1658 Cresswell is recorded as a bawd " without rival in her wickedness " , running a brothel in Bartholomew Close , a small street off Little Britain in the City of London . That month she was brought to trial in Hicks Hall , where constable John Marshall gave evidence that " Elizabeth Cresswell living in Bartholomew Close was found with divers Gentlemen and Women in her House at divers times " . Marshall notes that some of the women were " sent to Bridewell " , a notorious London prison . She subsequently attempted to bribe the police to avoid publicity for the court case . She was living two miles to the northeast of Bartholomew Close in St Leonard 's , Shoreditch , by October 1658 , when a mass of angry locals gathered at Westminster Court to give evidence against her and the prostitutes she ran from her " house " . They stated that she : 
 ... did entertain divers loose Persons , Men and Women suspected to have committed <unk> ... the said Elizabeth having lately taken a House ... for which she paid £ 100 for a Fine and a Rent of £ 40 per annum , whereunto many Persons well @-@ habited have resorted by Day as by <unk> ... continued Drinking , Ranting , Dancing , <unk> , Swearing ... demeaning themselves as well on the Lord 's Day and Fast Days . Witnesses told of seeing men and women going into rooms , ' the Woman having <unk> to her <unk> and Petticoat going into a room where they have shut the Casement and locked the Door ... some Company drunk about a dozen bottles of wine and further that divers Women suspected of Lightness have ... did surreptitiously slip in at a back gate whereby much infamy is brought upon the Place . 
 The amassed neighbours told of further infamies such as when whores " in the habit of a Gentlewoman began to propose a Health to the Privy Member of a Gentleman ... and afterwards drank a Toast to her own Private Parts " . They complained that , such was the proliferation of bawds in the area around the house that the daughters of local families were assumed to be prostitutes by the men visiting the brothel . For her iniquities , Cresswell was " sett to Hard Labour " in prison . 
 = = = Success = = = 
 By 1660 , like her fellow Londoner Damaris Page , Mother Cresswell was regarded as one of the great figures of the London scene , with a talent for self @-@ promotion . She declared she had " Beauties of all <unk> , from the cole @-@ black <unk> @-@ fast to the golden lock 'd <unk> , from the sleepy ey 'd Slug to the lewd <unk> " . She had a network of agents across the country who found her pretty young girls . Among her brothels , she owned one in Lincoln 's Inn Fields by Whetstone Park where she sold " strong waters and fresh @-@ faced wenches to all who had guineas to buy them with . " Her headquarters were in a brothel on Back Alley off Moor Lane , near <unk> , where Moorgate station stands today . She also ran an office in Millbank to organise whores for local noblemen and owned both a mansion in Clerkenwell and a " House of <unk> " where women old and young could discreetly meet their lovers . She took on a cohort of Cavalier gentlewomen from formerly high circles of society who had supported the parliamentarian uprising , their standing destroyed by the civil war . This network of women worked the alleys close to the Gresham Royal Exchange in the city , and so were known as the " Countesses of the Exchange " or " side @-@ pillows " . 
 = = = The Bawdy House Riots and the Whores ' Petition = = = 
 King Charles II patronised Cresswell 's establishments , as he did those of Madam Damaris Page ; he declared Cresswell 's to be " a Sound organisation " . She became as well known as the politicians of her time , largely shielded from legal proceedings by her extensive London network of clients across the court , the guilds and government . Her increasing immunity from prosecution furthered her stature as a hate figure , particularly with the many thousands of London apprentices who could not afford her bawds , and bound by the terms of their contracts , were forbidden to marry . The houses of Cresswell and Page were a target for the 1668 Bawdy House Riots that swept London . Starting on Shrove Tuesday , the rioting lasted for five days , as young apprentices burnt and smashed the royally supported brothels . To some , the brothels symbolised Charles 's continental style court : licentious and awash with unaffordable debauchery . The apprentices attacked her " <unk> " in Moorfields , assaulting the women , tearing up the bedding , looting the property and destroying the building . 
 Following the riot , Page and Cresswell are listed as the addressers of The Whores ' Petition , sent to Lady Castlemaine , the King 's lover , notorious for her own wild promiscuity . Some historians , such as Linnane , infer an active role of the addressers Page and Cresswell in the writing of the document . Others such as Mowry and Turner suggest it is an organ of political ventriloquism on behalf of anonymous , radical dissenters . In an act of brazen public satire , the two brothel owners request that the aristocrat act on the behalf of her " sisters " and repay the madams for the rebuilding of their brothels , funded by the national tax coffers . They address Castlemaine as a prostitute herself and list the sites of the brothels where her fellows struggle . It is addressed as : 
 The Poor Whores ' Petition to the most splendid , illustrious , serene and eminent Lady of Pleasure the Countess of <unk> & c : The humble petition of the undone company of poore distressed whores , bawds , pimps , and panders .... Signed by us , Madam Cresswell and Damaris Page , in the behalf of our sisters and fellow sufferers ( in this day of our calamity ) in Dog and Bitch Yard , <unk> ’ s Lane , Saffron Hill , Moorfields , Chiswell Street , Rosemary Lane , Nightingale Lane , Ratcliffe Highway , Well Close , East Smithfield etc . 
 Given her great experience in whoring , Lady Castlemaine would , they argued , be able to sympathise deeply with prostitutes across the city . " Should your <unk> but once fall into these Rough hands " , they wrote , " you may expect no more Favour than they have shewn unto us poor <unk> Whores " . Diarist Samuel Pepys noted that Castlemaine was " horribly vexed " by the petition . The letter itself was so finely tuned to the political dynamics of the day that though the printer was arrested , the court censor writes that " I can fasten nothing on The Poor Whore 's Petition that a jury will take notice of . " 
 The Petition caused a flurry of broadside satires , poems and ballads on the subject through the following year . The historian James Turner identifies this event as an example of a new <unk> of sexuality in Restoration England , where genuine political attack , satire , street commentary and bawdy theatre came together . Two years after the riots , a mob gathered once more and again swore they would raze Cresswell 's <unk> to the ground , though protection from the local <unk> prevented the attack . 
 = = = Political affiliation = = = 
 Cresswell never married . She was widely considered to be the lover of City Chamberlain Sir Thomas Player , nicknamed Sir Thomas Cresswell . He was a prominent Whig , an anti @-@ Catholic , and an anti @-@ Carolean , who gave large banquets for his political affiliates at Cresswell 's house in Camberwell . These were said often to turn into orgies . On one occasion Cresswell provisioned such a party with 300 prostitutes ; the story of the night was promptly turned into a local ballad . Cresswell bankrolled Player 's career during this period , which gave her leverage in the political and financial underworld but also made her fierce enemies . Player 's support for the anti @-@ Catholic rebel Titus Oates and the avowedly Protestant claimant to the throne the Duke of Monmouth proved to be his ruin . Cresswell attempted to distance herself from any political affiliation , but was ultimately attacked by Protestants for providing the royal court with whores and by Catholics for financing Player . In 1681 she was brought to trial and convicted for " over thirty years of <unk> " ; during the proceedings many of her own prostitutes testified against her . Her brothel at Moorfields was taken from her , but her businesses continued as usual . 
 = = = Last years = = = 
 Creswell 's health deteriorated towards the end of her life , probably because of tuberculosis . She appears ill and careworn in the portrait of her engraved by Marcellus <unk> , which now hangs in London 's National Portrait Gallery . Cresswell was incarcerated in Bridewell Prison and she died there . Differing sources place the year of her death at some point around 1698 . In her will she requested " a Decent <unk> in the Parish Church of <unk> in the County of Kent <unk> to the Manner of the Church of England " . 
 Cresswell was not buried at Knockholt and was possibly interred in the Bridewell graveyard . Several accounts claim that in her will she left £ 10 for a sermon to be read that said nothing ill of her . After a long search , a young clergyman prepared to perform the funeral rites was found . Following a lengthy sermon on social morality , he intoned : " By the will of the deceased it is expected that I should mention her and say nothing but what was well of her . All I shall say of her , therefore , is this – she was born well , lived well , and died well ; for she was born with the name of Cresswell , lived at Clerkenwell , and died in Bridewell . " 
 = = In contemporary media = = 
 Cresswell was in a rare position for many reasons . Although she was of common birth , a woman and unmarried , she rose to a position of high status , running a large business enterprise . By mid @-@ life she was an independently wealthy woman , connected across England to rich and powerful men in government and the court . Her network of services were in high demand , counter to the religious and social morals of the day . 
 Cresswell 's success was fed by a talent and zest for self @-@ promotion ; she openly advertised her bawdy businesses , which helped to build her own profile . She was regularly referenced in party pamphlets , street literature and ballads , and may have been one of the inspirations for the eponymous heroine of Daniel Defoe 's satire Moll Flanders . Richard Head and Francis Kirkman , authors who frequented bawdy houses , wrote up and circulated graphic accounts of their encounters with " the old matron " and " her girls " in The English Rogue ( 1665 ) . She is mentioned often in Nathanael Thompson 's Collection of 180 Loyal Songs ( 1685 and 1694 ) , the Rochester satires and Poems on State Affairs ( 1697 – 1707 ) . 
 Cresswell is satirised in Thomas Otway 's Venice Preserv 'd as the figure providing Sir Thomas Player with unending quantities of young flesh and in the anonymous pamphlet A Letter from the Lady Cresswell to Madam C. [ Cellier ] the midwife ( London , 1680 ) . The Whore 's <unk> ( 1683 ) was an anonymous translation of Ferrante Pallavicino 's La <unk> della <unk> ( 1642 ) . Set out like a traditional text book on the ancient art of rhetoric , the adaptation featured a caricature of Cresswell as a philosopher teaching her lifetime 's worth of sexual tricks and wiles to <unk> , the fallen daughter of a ruined royalist . In this satirical parody , the madam advises her young student : " You must <unk> your discourse with a meek , grave , and pious aspect , to make your sophistry pass for sincere and real " . She recommends researching the nature of the client : 
 [ THE Whore ] will find it much to her advantage , to enquire particularly into the state and quality of all her Suitors affairs , to hinder any disappointment or <unk> : for if she has well informed her self of their busy hours , and when the necessities of their vocation , or the impulse of pleasure , do oblige their attendance ; it will be easy to appoint times of meeting , as may give general satisfaction , and enable her to observe her particular engagements . 
 " In the sentiment of my <unk> " , she lectures " there is no music ought to sound more charmingly in a Whores Ears as the sweet melody created by the clashing of Gold in her own purse . " 
 = Panama Creature = 
 The " Panama Creature " ( also variously referred to as the " Panama Monster " , " Panama ET " " Cerro Azul Monster " , " Blue Stream Monster " or " Blue Hill Horror " ) refers to a creature photographed near the town of Cerro Azul , Panama , in September 2009 . After the creature was discovered and reputedly killed by a group of teenagers , photographs of the corpse were given to Telemetro , a Panamanian television station . The story and pictures circulated , and comparisons to the Montauk Monster were made . There was speculation about the identity of the creature , with suggestions including a hairless sloth , an alien species and a creature new to science . A biopsy performed by the National Environmental Authority of Panama on the remains a few days after the creature 's discovery concluded that the corpse was in fact that of a male brown @-@ throated sloth . The odd appearance had been caused by underwater decomposition , which had resulted in hair loss . Once identified , the corpse was buried . 
 = = Events = = 
 A group of four or five teenagers aged between 14 and 16 claim to have been playing near a cave in Cerro Azul , Panama when the creature emerged . They say that it approached them , and , fearing for their safety , they attacked the creature with sticks and rocks , killing it . They claim that they then threw its corpse into a pool of water before leaving the area . They later returned and took photographs of the creature 's corpse , before sending the pictures to Telemetro , a Panamanian television station . Virginia Wheeler , writing for The Sun , claimed that the discovery " sparked fear and confusion " in the town . According to some sources , subsequent photographs were taken of the creature after it had further decomposed ; however , doubts have been expressed about whether the later photos were of the same specimen . A few days after the photographs were taken , one of the teenagers gave a different account in an interview with Telemetro <unk> , saying " I was in the river and I felt something grabbing my legs ... We took it out of the water and started throwing rocks and sticks at it . We had never seen anything like that . " The photographs show a pale creature that is mostly hairless , with a rubbery body . It has " revolting features " ; a snub @-@ nose and long arms . Writers for the Huffington Post said that while the head is clearly animal , the torso is " strange " , while the limbs are reminiscent of thin human arms . Writers for <unk> compared it to both a " small , portly " version of the alien in E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial and The Lord of the Rings 's Gollum 's " long @-@ lost cousin " . 
 = = Speculation = = 
 The story and the photographs circulated the Internet , including various cryptozoology blogs , with a great amount of speculation about possible explanations . A video showing the original photographs , as well as some footage of the further decomposed corpse , became very popular on the web , being one of the most viewed videos over the course of a day . In addition to its prevalence on the Internet , the story was covered on television and radio . Comparisons were drawn to the Montauk Monster found in Montauk , New York in June 2008 . A popular theory was that the Panama Creature was a sloth ( perhaps an albino ) that had somehow became hairless ; proponents of the hypothesis cited the hooked claw visible in one of the photographs . Science author Darren Naish , writing for ScienceBlogs , supported the sloth hypothesis , but had a " difficult time " explaining the creature 's hairlessness . The sloth theory was generally considered most credible ; in 1996 , similar photographs were taken of a creature found on the coast between Panama and Costa Rica that was later confirmed to be a sloth that had started to decay . Further Internet speculation led to some proposing that it was in fact a dolphin or a pit bull terrier , an example of a species previously unknown to science , or some sort of genetic mutation . Some Panamanian zoologists said that it appeared to be a fetus of some kind . In addition to naturalistic explanations , Billy Booth of About.com reported that " there has been speculation that it is alien , and thereby the connection to UFOs , undersea bases , the whole ball of wax " . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The creature 's corpse was recovered four days after the encounter , and a biopsy was performed by the National Environmental Authority of Panama ( ANAM ) . The biopsy concluded that the corpse was in fact a male brown @-@ throated sloth , a species common in the area . André Sena Maia , a veterinarian who works at Niterói Zoo , Rio de Janeiro , Brazil , explained that " most people know how a dead animal looks like in a dry environment " , and claimed that " the body must have got stuck under the water , and the movement of the currents gave the false impression that it was alive . " A necropsy revealed that severe trauma had been inflicted on the body of the sloth , and <unk> Ramos , a specialist from the ANAM Department of Protected Areas , estimated that the body had been in the water for " about two days " prior to discovery . The hairlessness was probably caused by the fact it was submerged in water , which can lead to acceleration of fur loss , resulting in smooth skin . A post @-@ mortem bloating further contributed to the unusual appearance of the corpse . After the sloth was identified , its body was buried by ANAM staff . 
 = Cato June = 
 Cato Nnamdi June ( born November 18 , 1979 ) is a former American football linebacker and high @-@ school football coach . He was selected by the Indianapolis Colts of the National Football League ( NFL ) in the sixth round of the 2003 NFL Draft . A 2006 Pro Bowl choice , June was a member of the Super Bowl XLI champion Colts that defeated the Chicago Bears . During the Super Bowl championship season , June was the Colts ' leading tackler . In addition to his tenure with the Colts , he played in the NFL for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers . Before becoming a professional , he played college football at Michigan and was an outstanding athlete in high school football , basketball , track and field and baseball at Anacostia High School in Washington , D.C. As a senior , he was widely regarded to be the best high school football player in the District of Columbia . 
 He led Anacostia to the District of Columbia Interscholastic Athletic Association ( DCIAA ) football championship title as a sophomore and in two subsequent championship games . He was city champion in the triple jump as a junior . As a senior , he earned all @-@ league recognition in basketball and earned numerous honors in football , including District of Columbia Player of the year awards from Gatorade , USA Today and The Washington Post as well as a Parade All @-@ American . He was also co @-@ class president , salutatorian and a member of the National Honor Society . 
 He was widely recruited for his all @-@ around abilities as an athlete , scholar and leader . He attracted dozens of scholarship offers but chose the University of Michigan . He was a member of the defending national champions ' recruiting class , which was considered to be the best in the country . He became a starter towards the end of his redshirt freshman year , but missed the entire next season due to injury . He returned as a fourth @-@ year junior starter . He continued starting as a safety until an injury slowed him down late in his fifth @-@ year senior season . Despite senior season injuries , he was named as an honorable mention All @-@ Big Ten Conference player and was chosen to play in the Senior Bowl . 
 June spent a year on special teams before becoming a starter during the 2004 NFL season . During the 2005 NFL season , he began the year with a record @-@ setting rate of interceptions for a linebacker to help his team start out 13 – 0 and head to the 2005 – 06 NFL playoffs . He was a Pro Bowler that year and finished seventh in the NFL in tackles the next as the Colts won Super Bowl XLI . After four seasons with the Colts , he signed with the Buccaneers where he became the first person to displace 11 @-@ time Pro Bowler Derrick Brooks from the lineup . After two seasons with the Buccaneers , he signed with the Houston Texans but broke his forearm during 2009 training camp and was released before the regular season . He signed with the Bears in the middle of the season only to be released after 2 weeks . Since retiring from the NFL , he has become a football coach at his high school alma mater . 
 = = Early years = = 
 June was raised in the Great Plains of Oklahoma . As a high school freshman , June attended Muskogee High School in Muskogee , Oklahoma , where he was a veritable " Okie from Muskogee " . According to a Washington Post article , he envisioned himself eventually playing football for either Oklahoma or Oklahoma State . His high school football team had a large following with regular attendance of 8 @,@ 000 . When June was a sophomore , he and <unk> Dele , his mother , moved to the northwest section of Washington , D.C. in 1995 . Following the move , she enrolled him in a summer college prep program , where he met Troy Stewart , son of Anacostia head coach Willie Stewart . Troy , an assistant coach at Anacostia , and his father recruited June to Anacostia High School . That season he played cornerback , wide receiver , and kickoff returner . On Thanksgiving Day , Anacostia won the DCIAA championship game , known as the Turkey Bowl , by a 40 – 31 score over Dunbar High School . In the game , June intercepted a pass late in the first half and returned it 92 yards for a touchdown to enable his team to take an 8 – 7 lead . That season he earned a selection to The Washington Post 's 1995 All @-@ Met Football team as a defensive back . The following spring , he played shortstop and pitcher for the school baseball team . 
 Prior to winning the city championship , Anacostia had played football on a barren field that was described by The Washington Post as " rugged prairie known by players across the city as the ' dust bowl ' " . In 1996 , Mayor of Washington , D.C. , Marion Barry , helped the team acquire new topsoil and 500 rolls of Brute Bermuda sod worth about $ 60 @,@ 000 ( $ 90 @,@ 528 today ) . As a junior , June , who wore # 1 , rushed for 90 yards and scored two touchdowns in the DCIAA semi @-@ final game . In the championship game , June fumbled on the 1 @-@ yard line in the fourth quarter , leaving the door open for Cardozo Senior High School to score a touchdown in the waning seconds to secure a victory . During his junior year , he was part of the basketball team that successfully defended the Washington D.C. city high school basketball championship . 
 As a senior , he was a preseason USA Today honorable mention All @-@ American and preseason SuperPrep All @-@ American as a 6 @-@ foot @-@ 1 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 85 m ) , 190 @-@ pound ( 86 kg ) defensive back . During the season the football team would deal with the adversity of a D.C. school crisis , the slaying of a player and the death of an assistant coach . That season he switched from defensive back to linebacker at times . By mid @-@ season , he was being mentioned across the country as the nation 's best player . As a senior , he rushed for 121 yards and scored two touchdowns in the DCIAA semi @-@ final game . Prior to the championship game , no one had caught a touchdown against him and he had not fumbled the football . During the championship game , June scored the touchdown that gave Anacostia its only lead at 8 – 6 . However , Howard D. Woodson High School and senior quarterback Byron Leftwich avenged its only regular season loss ( which came 28 – 20 at the hands of Anacostia ) by a 26 – 22 margin . 
 At the end of the season , he was a 1997 All @-@ Met selection by The Washington Post and described as both the top DCIAA defensive back and as a running back who scored 18 two @-@ point conversions and returned three kickoffs for touchdowns . He was selected as The Washington Post All @-@ Met Defensive Player of the Year and USA Today District of Columbia Player of the Year and Second @-@ team All @-@ USA . During the season he did not yield a touchdown all season and collecting five interceptions ( two for touchdowns ) , 84 solo tackles , 39 assists in addition to his offensive statistics , which included 889 yards and 12 touchdowns . He was named the only Parade All @-@ American from Metropolitan Washington , and he was selected as a Gatorade player of the year for the District of Columbia . June was also honored by The Pigskin Club of Washington , D.C. June played under coach Willie Stewart who coached Anacostia to seven consecutive appearances in the DCIAA championship game , including three in which June participated and the 1995 victory in which June was MVP . 
 As a senior , he was a member of the National Honor Society , co @-@ class president and a candidate to be valedictorian with a 3 @.@ 8 grade point average . In addition to football , he played on the baseball , basketball and track and field teams . In track , he ran the 100 meters in 10 @.@ 5 seconds and 200 meters in 21 @.@ 6 seconds . He was city champion in the triple jump as a junior . He was a starting small forward on the three @-@ time DCIAA championship basketball team . He received second @-@ team All @-@ conference honors his senior year . By the eve of the DCIAA Championship game held on Thanksgiving Day ( November 27 , 1997 ) , he had 35 scholarship offers . Before his senior season his dream school for its combination of athletics and academics was the University of North Carolina . He was recruited by top football programs such as Syracuse , and Miami and his early list of top five programs was Michigan , Ohio State , Florida , North Carolina and Penn State . Later , he replaced Penn State with Miami on his five school visitation list . He visited Ohio State in mid @-@ December as they prepared for the 1998 Sugar Bowl . He visited Florida in mid @-@ January 1998 . June 's final decision was a choice between Florida and Michigan and he chose Michigan on January 13 , 1998 , although there were reports that he had signed with Notre Dame . 
 He was part of the nation 's number one recruiting class for the undefeated defending national champion Wolverines . The team recruited numerous top 50 @-@ rated players on both offense : Justin Fargas , Marquise Walker , David Terrell and Drew Henson , and defense : Victor Hobson , Dave Armstrong , June , Bennie <unk> , and Larry Foote . The All @-@ Met Offensive Player of the Year , Walter Cross , was also a member of this recruiting class . The class included a total of six Parade All @-@ Americans : Fargas , Henson , Walker , Terrell , June and Hayden Epstein . Before matriculating to Michigan he participated in the July 1998 D.C. Coaches Association All @-@ Star game as well as the Baltimore @-@ Washington Beltway Classic . As a high schooler with aspirations of making a mark in the NFL and who kept a Deion Sanders poster in his bedroom , he left his mark by writing " Big Time 1 " on things whenever the opportunity arose . June graduated as salutatorian . 
 = = College career = = 
 June played college football at the University of Michigan , where he switched from cornerback to play safety and wear the # 2 jersey that had previously been worn by 1997 Heisman Trophy winner , Charles Woodson . As a defensive back at Michigan , June 's head coach , Lloyd Carr , was the former coach for the position . He redshirted as a freshman during the 1998 season for the 1998 Wolverines . During his 1999 season as a redshirt freshmen for the 1999 Wolverines , he intercepted a pass in his second game , which he returned for 29 yards to the 16 @-@ yard line . That season he played all twelve games and started the final four games at free safety . As the season progressed , he became involved in several big plays . He recovered a fumble on October 23 against Illinois . In the following game against Indiana on October 30 , he blocked a punt and recovered the football , which led to a touchdown on the following play . He earned his first start on November 6 against Northwestern and sacked the quarterback to take the Wildcats out of field goal range . On November 13 against Penn State , he forced a fumble near midfield , which led to a Michigan scoring drive . Although he had earned a starting position , his pass defense coverage had not yet earned respect . In his best performance of the season , before a record @-@ setting crowd of 111 @,@ 575 at Michigan Stadium , he recorded a team @-@ high 10 ( 7 solo ) of his 27 tackles in a 24 – 17 victory in the rivalry game against Ohio State on November 20 , 1999 . June also recovered a fumble to set up a scoring drive for the final Michigan touchdown . The season ended in an overtime victory against Alabama in the 2000 Orange Bowl . 
 During the summer before his 2000 season as a redshirt sophomore for the 2000 Wolverines when he was expected to challenge for the starting strong safety position , he suffered a season @-@ ending anterior cruciate ligament injury in his right knee that required reconstructive surgery . He spent the season in rehabilitation with two other teammates who had knee injuries and was unable to run for six months . His absence at the safety position caused Fargas to switch from running back to safety that season . Before returning to football , he was involved in a public altercation in spring 2001 . During the altercation , a Michigan teammate was identified as having punched someone in the face , and June was charged with failing to obey an officer 's order for refusing to leave the scene . 
 The 2001 Michigan Wolverines football team lost several key offensive components from the previous season when Anthony Thomas and David Terrell joined the Chicago Bears of the NFL and Drew Henson was drafted by the New York Yankees of Major League Baseball . The 2001 team lost a total of nine starters for the 2001 season but returned eight defensive starters , and June was a welcome addition to a lineup . In the second game of the season , June was called for a questionable roughing the passer penalty against Washington that allowed the Huskies to score a field goal to reduce the Wolverines ' lead to 23 – 12 in the fourth quarter . A few weeks later , he had a career @-@ high two sacks in a 45 – 20 victory against Illinois on September 29 . The following week , on October 6 , he had an interception in a shutout of Penn State . June had been starting at free safety , but the Penn State game marked his first start at strong safety because of an injury to Julius Curry . On October 13 , he led the team in tackles with seven , including a sack , against Purdue in a game that left the team as the only Big Ten team with an undefeated conference record . In the next game , his fourth quarter interception led to a comeback victory against Iowa to stay unbeaten in conference . In the following game on November 3 against Michigan State , Michigan 's conference record fell to 4 – 1 as June left the game with another injury to his right knee . June started all but one game and finished the season fourth on the team in tackles . 
 In his senior season for the 2002 Wolverines , one of June 's notable performances was his individual effort to stop a bootleg play against Notre Dame on September 14 , which forced a change of possession to give Michigan the ball with just over two minutes remaining . On September 28 against Illinois , he had a sack and made a notable lead block on the interception return of a fellow defensive back . In the October 12 victory over Penn State , he made a key defensive play that almost resulted in an interception as part of an overtime goal line stand to hold Penn State to a field goal . In the 23 – 21 victory over Purdue on October 19 , he recovered the final onside kick by Purdue . A collision on October 26 in a game with Iowa halted play for ten minutes while June received medical attention after leaving the game on a stretcher . At the time , he had movement in his extremities . He was hospitalized after the incident , but was released from the hospital the following morning . June was sidelined for the Michigan – Michigan State Paul Bunyan Trophy game against Michigan State on November 2 , but participated in two plays during the subsequent Michigan – Minnesota Little Brown Jug game against Minnesota on November 9 . June was healthy in time for the 2003 Outback Bowl against Florida , where he recorded a season @-@ high nine tackles . Over the course of the season , June had 36 tackles , 17 assists , four tackles for loss , and two sacks . He had 102 career tackles and 36 career assists , 10 tackles for loss , and six sacks . 
 June was selected as an honorable mention All @-@ Big Ten performer by both the coaches and the media , despite his late season injury . He was also selected to play in the 2003 Senior Bowl along with Hobson , B.J. Askew and <unk> . At the 2003 NFL Scouting Combine , June ran the slowest 40 @-@ yard dash ( 4 @.@ 68 seconds ) of all the free safeties . June was one of six Wolverines drafted in the 2003 NFL Draft and the first Michigan safety drafted since Corwin Brown in the 1993 NFL Draft . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Indianapolis Colts = = = 
 On April 27 , June was selected by the Indianapolis Colts in the sixth round ( 25th pick ) of the 2003 NFL Draft with the expectation that he would play weak side linebacker . Colts coach Tony Dungy had had previous success converting college safeties into linebackers . Colts President Bill Polian made the decision to draft him and have him converted . June agreed to a three @-@ year contract on July 23 with the Colts just before the voluntary rookie camp in advance of the full training camp . During the 2003 NFL season , June was one of only two 2003 Colts draft choices not to make a significant contribution . He sat out the first five games and played mostly on special teams the rest of the season . Nonetheless , June , who wore # 59 for the Colts , was on the roster for the 2003 – 04 NFL playoffs . 
 After losing to the New England Patriots in the American Football Conference Championship Game and losing Marcus Washington who joined the Washington Redskins , the Colts shuffled their linebacker lineup and June was listed as a starter when the Colts arrived at mini @-@ camp . At the 2004 Colts training camp , June competed with <unk> Whiteside for the starting weakside linebacker position . By the end of training camp , June was the starter , and 2004 rookie Gilbert Gardner was the backup . June made his debut as a starter in the opening game against the 2004 Super Bowl champion New England Patriots . That season , the Colts used a 4 @-@ 3 defense with a fourth linebacker on passing downs . In week 5 , June had a team @-@ high ten tackles and his first interception in a 35 – 14 victory over the Oakland Raiders . In week 15 , June returned an interception 71 yards to the four @-@ yard @-@ line where he stepped out of bounds with 59 seconds remaining in the game at the RCA Dome , the Colts ' home stadium . This prompted the fans to chant for Peyton Manning to enter the game to attempt to tie Dan Marino 's single @-@ season touchdown pass record . Since the Colts led the game 20 – 10 and had clinched the AFC South division , Manning took a knee instead . Coach Dungy 's scheme is designed so that the weakside linebacker is supposed to make the most tackles , and June was the Colts ' leading tackler by a wide margin that season . June started every game that season . 
 June 's 2004 season had been described as average , and he was considered likely to lose his starting assignment in a battle with Gardner and <unk> Pope in 2005 . Pope was suspended for the season for violating the league 's substance abuse policy . June beat Gardner for the starting position , although some speculate that he won the job due to Gardner 's injury at the end of training camp . June recorded an interception that he ran back for a touchdown in the first game of the season against the Baltimore Ravens on Sunday Night Football . On October 9 , he recorded two interceptions and ran back one for a touchdown to help Indianapolis reach a 5 – 0 record with a 28 – 3 victory over the San Francisco 49ers . The following week on Monday Night Football , June recorded two more interceptions , one of which changed the momentum of the game because quarterback Marc Bulger was injured trying to chase June . Both interceptions led to touchdowns as the Colts beat the St. Louis Rams 17 – 0 . After six games , June was the NFL leader in interceptions , but he was diagnosed with a sports hernia . June 's fast start prompted talk of him breaking the all @-@ time NFL linebacker single @-@ season interception record of eight and being the first linebacker to lead the league since 1959 . In a game that was considered a bad performance by the Colts despite its victorious result , June had a season @-@ high fourteen tackles to help the Colts raise their record to 9 – 0 in a 31 – 17 victory over the Houston Texans . June sat out the December 11 game against the Jacksonville Jaguars , which resulted in the Colts raising their record to 13 – 0 , clinching their third straight AFC South title , a first @-@ round bye and home @-@ field advantage throughout the playoffs . There was great speculation about whether June and other injured players would rest up for the 2005 – 06 NFL playoffs or whether the team would attempt to post the first perfect 16 – 0 regular season . June was able to play , but the Colts lost their next game on December 18 to fall to 13 – 1 . After being named to the 2006 Pro Bowl during the following week , June was listed as inactive for the 15th game of the season and did not travel with the team to Seattle . He also sat out the final game of the season . After the conclusion of the regular season , June was selected as a first time Pro Bowl starter at linebacker . In the opening round of the playoffs , the Colts forced a fumble by Jerome Bettis that was nearly run back for a winning touchdown in the final minute of play , but Ben Roethlisberger made a game @-@ saving tackle on Nick Harper for the Pittsburgh Steelers 's 21 – 18 victory . Gary Brackett forced the fumble , although at least one source credited June with the tackle . June also had an interception and four solo tackles in the loss . June was named second @-@ team All @-@ Pro at outside linebacker . Despite missing three games due to injury , June finished third on the team with 109 tackles and led the team with 5 interceptions . 
 June had two surgeries to repair his hernia in February 2006 . He would have become an unrestricted free agent on March 3 , 2006 , but the Colts made him a $ 1 @.@ 55 million tender offer on March 2 . On April 24 , June signed a $ 1 @.@ 57 million one @-@ year contract despite his interest in a long @-@ term deal . June was arrested on June 13 for failing to appear in court on a driving while suspended charge in Boone County , Indiana . The arrest was described as the result of a miscommunication . When the 2006 Colts started training camp , June 's health caused the team to limit him to one practice session per day . June was sidelined during the final preseason game . In week 5 of the season , June recorded 9 tackles as the Colts improved to 5 – 0 prior to their bye week , and he followed it up with 15 tackles as they moved to 6 – 0 . June forced a fumble in the seventh game , and he intercepted two Tom Brady passes as the team improved to 8 – 0 in a 27 – 20 road victory over the New England Patriots . June led the team with nine tackles as they moved to 9 – 0 . Although June accepted responsibility for missed tackles after the team fell to 10 – 3 , he was ranked fifth in the NFL in tackles made . June recorded an interception as the 12 – 4 Colts finished the regular season with a 27 – 22 victory over the Miami Dolphins , and he finished the season ranked seventh in the NFL and first on the team in tackles made . During the 2006 – 07 NFL playoffs , he helped the Colts win Super Bowl XLI . June started every game for the Colts during the season and the playoffs . When the free agent signing period began on March 2 , June and several unrestricted free agents were left unsigned . 
 = = = Tampa Bay Buccaneers = = = 
 June was considered to be a fast linebacker and a specialized talent with a better likelihood of success in a defensive scheme that was built around speed rather than size . On March 17 , 2007 he signed with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers , who used the defensive scheme designed by Dungy . The New York Giants and Colts were also interested in signing June . The contract was believed to be a three @-@ year , $ 12 million agreement , but some later reports claim it was a four @-@ year , $ 17 million contract . 
 In Tampa , June joined a defense that had been among the top 10 in the league for a decade until the 2006 Buccaneers faltered with a 4 – 12 record . In 2006 , they fell from 1st to 17th in team defense . When June arrived it was fairly clear that Derrick Brooks would not be changing from his weakside linebacker position and that June would be moving to strongside linebacker . When he became a Buccaneer , he stood out for his dedication and enthusiasm . For example , when the Colts had their Super Bowl ring ceremony , June flew to Indianapolis and back without missing any Buccaneers practice time . As strongside linebacker he beat out Ryan <unk> as the 2007 Buccaneers starter , although he was considered the heir apparent to 13 @-@ year veteran and 10 @-@ time Pro Bowler Brooks at the weakside position . June again wore the # 59 as a Buccaneer . Because of his weakside linebacker and safety experience , June was expected to remain in the game during passing situations unlike most strongside linebackers . June also expected defenses to run at him because at 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) , 227 pounds ( 103 kg ) he was small for an NFL strongside linebacker and one of the smallest linebackers in the NFL . 
 June recorded an interception and touchdown return in the Buccaneers ' third preseason game against the Miami Dolphins . In his first game as a Buccaneer , he did not play on many passing downs , which caused something of a controversy in the press after the opening 20 – 6 loss to the Seattle Seahawks . In the second game , on some passing downs June played in place of Brooks , who had never sat on the sidelines previously . Brooks , whose speed may have been slowed by father time , avoided the media after the game , but June and other teammates defended him . The press was much more amenable to having June play more and claimed that the defense was back up to its prior level of excellence with the change . Over the course of the 2007 season June and Brooks divided time at linebacker during nickel defense coverage . 
 June made his first interception during his second game as a Buccaneer . It led to a touchdown scoring drive during a 31 – 14 victory against the New Orleans Saints . In his third game , June made a key tackle for a 3 @-@ yard loss , which resulted in a subsequent missed field goal by the St. Louis Rams . After the fourth week the Bucs were 3 – 1 with the NFL 's fifth @-@ rated defense and June was the team 's third @-@ leading tackler as they headed into a week five showdown against June 's previous team , the 4 – 0 Indianapolis Colts . The Colts gained 400 yards on June and the Buccaneers in a 33 – 14 defeat on October 7 . After the sixth week the Bucs were 4 – 2 and June was eighth in the NFL and second on his team in assists . After June had a team @-@ high nine tackles and a forced fumble to lead them to a 6 – 4 record with a 31 – 7 victory over the Atlanta Falcons , he was arrested for driving under the influence ( DUI ) in Hillsborough County , Florida , which had the most DUI cases of any county in Florida . June was one of several Bucs to be charged with DUI that season , and charges were eventually dropped . In the Atlanta game , which gave the Bucs an undefeated 3 – 0 division record , June was involved in a controversial fumble – lateral play , which NFL officials said the referees ruled incorrectly on . Subsequently , the Bucs raised their record to 9 – 5 and clinched the NFC South Division . June and other star players were rested for large parts of the final two games , which the Bucs lost . Nonetheless , June was still injured in the final game of the season , and he was listed as inactive for the Bucs ' 2007 – 08 NFL playoffs matchup with the New York Giants , which the team lost . June finished his first season with the Bucs with 69 tackles and one interception . June was part of a defense that finished the season ranked second in the league . 
 June had offseason foot surgery in February 2008 . During the opening game of the season , Brooks suffered a hamstring injury and removed himself from the game in the third quarter , which fueled speculation during the following week that he would miss the first start of his fourteen @-@ year career and that June would start on the weakside . Brooks , however , made his 194th @-@ consecutive start the following week . In a story not published until four weeks later , Minnesota Vikings running back Adrian Peterson claims that June attempted to injure him in a November 16 game . June made his first interception of the season and second as a Buccaneer on a Drew Brees pass that was tipped by Ronde Barber in the twelfth game of the season as Tampa earned its fourth consecutive victory to improve its record to 9 – 3 on November 30 against the New Orleans Saints . After the Buccaneers lost their final four games to miss the playoffs , the Buccaneers replaced Jon Gruden and Bruce Allen with Raheem Morris and Mark Dominik as head coach and general manager . The team subsequently released five veteran players in a move that was said to be unrelated to the salary cap . June was released by the Buccaneers on February 25 , 2009 along with Derrick Brooks , Ike Hilliard , Warrick Dunn and Joey Galloway . The transaction avoided a $ 2 million roster bonus for June . 
 = = = Houston Texans = = = 
 June was signed by the Houston Texans on April 4 , 2009 to a one @-@ year contract worth $ 1 @.@ 5 million . He was expected to compete with Xavier Adibi and Zac <unk> for the weakside linebacker position . However , on August 20 , June broke his forearm during morning practice , had surgery to insert a plate that afternoon and was expected to miss 6 – 8 weeks . June had previously missed some training camp time due to a knee injury . On August 28 , June was placed on season @-@ ending injured reserve due to his injured forearm . He was released with an injury settlement on September 3 , making him a free agent . 
 = = = Chicago Bears = = = 
 June signed with the Chicago Bears on December 1 , 2009 June was signed as a replacement for Lance Briggs who had a knee injury . He played on special teams on December 6 , against the St. Louis Rams , but was inactive the following week against the Green Bay Packers . He was waived on December 14 and replaced on the 53 @-@ man roster by practice squad member James Marten when Briggs returned to good health . 
 = = = Omaha Nighthawks = = = 
 June was signed by the Omaha Nighthawks of the United Football League on September 8 , 2010 . In June 2011 , the Nighthawks dropped several players with NFL experience , including June . 
 = = = NFL stats = = = 
 Key 
 GP : games played 
 <unk> : combined tackles 
 TOTAL : total tackles 
 AST : assisted tackles 
 <unk> : sacks 
 FF : forced fumbles 
 FR : fumble recoveries 
 FR YDS : fumble return yards 
 INT : interceptions 
 IR YDS : interception return yards 
 AVG IR : average interception return 
 LNG : longest interception return 
 TD : interceptions returned for touchdown 
 PD : passes <unk> 
 = = Coaching = = 
 Cato June served as the Anacostia defensive coordinator for the 2011 season and took over as head coach of a team that had gone 1 – 17 over the prior to season as head coach for the 2012 season . In three season at Anacostia , June compiled a 12 – 23 record before accepting a position as head coach at Charles Herbert Flowers High School in Prince George 's County for the 2015 season . In April 2016 , June became the running backs coach and running backs coach and assistant recruiting coordinator at Howard University for Howard Bison football . 
 In July 2014 , the Detroit Lions announced that June would join their staff as one of four Bill Walsh Minority Fellowship <unk> , but June coached Anacostia to a 4 – 8 record in 2014 . 
 = = Personal = = 
 The name Cato is of Nigerian origin and goes back for generations in his family . His great , great grandfather , Cato , was a runaway slave and the name had been passed along through eight previous generations . According to one source the name means " wise and cautious " . 
 June 's mother , <unk> , is a minister who spent nine months helping in New Orleans , Louisiana in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina . She disapproves of June 's tattoos . One of his tattoos reads " Big Time " for his high school and college nickname . He got his first tattoo of his college number 2 after he turned 18 while playing for Michigan . 
 75 @-@ year @-@ old Will June , his grandfather , became the oldest player to bowl consecutive perfect games on August 31 , 2010 . 
 In college , June and Hobson were roommates . They were known for having sessions of Madden NFL 2003 for PlayStation 2 in an apartment known as " The Stadium " , where competition among football team members often occurred . At Tampa , he had two @-@ time defending Madden Bowl champion Alex Smith as a teammate and June , who is known as a vocal player , voiced an interest in playing him . As a professional , June became an avid fantasy football owner , and he eventually started playing in a league only for NFL players . He was the champion of the 2008 NFL Players league . June enjoys workouts that consist of boxing . 
 During the 2005 season , June and Gary Brackett visited the three most successful Marion County , Indiana Vectren C5 food drive elementary schools . As part of a United Service Organizations event for Veterans Day 2008 , June , Smith , Phillip <unk> , and Aqib Talib played video games with United States military personnel . During Super Bowl XLIII week in Tampa , June hosted a celebrity benefit for the June Family Foundation , which offers career insights to disadvantaged youths . 
 = Frederick Birks = 
 Frederick Birks , VC , MM ( 16 August 1894 – 21 September 1917 ) was a Welsh @-@ born Australian First World War soldier and recipient of the Victoria Cross , the highest decoration for gallantry " in the face of the enemy " that can be awarded to members of the British and Commonwealth forces . Born in Buckley , Flintshire , Birks served in the Royal Artillery for three years before emigrating to Australia in 1913 . After serving as a non @-@ commissioned officer during the landing at Gallipoli and the Battle of the Somme , Birks was commissioned as a second lieutenant on 4 May 1917 . On 20 September , while advancing in Glencorse Wood , Ypres , Birks , alongside a corporal , forced a garrison to surrender and captured sixteen men in another attack . His actions were later recognised with the Victoria Cross . The following day , Birks was killed by a shell while attempting to save some of his men . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Birks was born in Buckley , Flintshire , Wales , on 16 August 1894 to Samuel Birks , a groom , and his wife Mary , née Williams . The family lived at Garden Cottage , Lane End . The youngest of six siblings , Birks was five years old when his father died in a coal @-@ mining accident . He attended the local Anglican school ( St. Matthews ) in Buckley and was awarded a medal there for 11 years " without ever being absent or late " . He was known to be adventurous , being active in boxing and association football as well as the local Church Lads ' Brigade . Birks left school at fourteen , before entering the workforce as a labourer and steel <unk> in nearby Shotton . During 1910 , Birks is thought to have enlisted in the Royal Artillery , staying in the service for three years . On 29 August 1913 , Birks migrated to Australia with two friends Emrys Edward Jones and William Gray ( both from Buckley ) . They sailed from London on the SS Otway disembarking in Melbourne . He went on to work in Tasmania where he stayed with a Herbert Jones ( a friend of his brother ) , South Australia and Victoria as a labourer and later , a waiter . In late March 1914 , at the age of nineteen he started a relationship with sixteen @-@ year @-@ old Susan <unk> who lived in Largs Bay . Susan kept in contact with Birks throughout his service , although she apparently lost contact with him for some time in mid @-@ 1917 . He is known to have lived in Norwood , a suburb of Adelaide where he lodged with a Mrs E. Cornelius , and in Hobart . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Birks enlisted into the Australian Imperial Force on 18 August 1914 , a few weeks after the war started . He trained at a camp in <unk> , and was assigned to the 2nd Field Ambulance of the Royal Australian Army Medical Corps . The 2nd Field Ambulance boarded the HMAT <unk> Wiltshire in Melbourne on 19 October 1914 , and set sail for Egypt . After stopping in Albany , the unit arrived in Egypt on 10 December . 
 = = = Gallipoli Campaign = = = 
 Birks ' unit was incorporated into the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force and was sent into action at the landing at Anzac Cove , providing medical support for the 2nd Infantry Brigade . The 2nd Brigade were also sent to Cape Helles , where they assisted in the attack on Krithia . During the battle , Birks was carrying wounded under heavy shell and rifle fire , in areas where stretchers were unable to reach . His " devotion to duty and good work " earned him his first Military Medal recommendation . On 26 June 1915 , Birks was wounded by shrapnel but returned to service the next day , remaining on Gallipoli until 9 September . 
 = = = France = = = 
 Birks unit was sent to Marseilles , France , as a part of the British Expeditionary Force . He was promoted to lance corporal on 21 April 1916 , and served as a stretcher bearer during the Battle of the Somme . On 26 July , Birks was engaged in duties at Pozières , as the Australian and British forces fought for supremacy of the village . Throughout the day , Birks " continually led his squad of stretcher bearers " through the village and Pozières Wood to the frontline , all the while being " exposed to heavy shell fire " . Commended for his " constant good services " , Birks was recommended for the Military Medal . The announcement of the decoration was promulgated in a supplement to the London Gazette on 14 November 1916 , and he was later presented with his Military Medal by Lieutenant General Sir William Birdwood . 
 Birks was promoted as a temporary wagon orderly corporal on 5 August 1916 , and the rank was made substantive five days later . After his unit moved away from the front line , Birks had an opportunity to return to Buckley . There , he visited his old school and gave them a Turkish flag that he has attained while in Gallipoli . Following his return to France , Birks was hospitalised for five days with <unk> . He rejoined his unit on 14 February 1917 . 
 = = = Commissioning = = = 
 Birks took classes at the Australian 1st Division school in France , and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the 6th Battalion on 4 May 1917 . He had served with the battalion earlier while a stretcher bearer , and began serving as an infantryman at Passchendaele . Passchendaele was characterised by the mud of the battlefield , and has been widely used as an example of attrition warfare — both the Commonwealth and German forces were suffering heavy casualties . When the Fifth Army was failing to make any appreciable headway , Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig put General Herbert Plumer in command of the offensive . 
 = = = Victoria Cross = = = 
 Birks ' battalion were ordered to attack and capture the German line parallel to them , and the men moved towards their positions from Zillebeke on the night of 18 September , coming under some fire from gas shells . 19 September was incident @-@ free , with the battalion preparing to attack the next day , in what would become known as the Battle of Menin Road . Early in the morning of the 20th , a " light drizzle " fell over the battlefield and at 4am the Germans sent barrages in front of and behind the battalion 's position . At 5 : 40am , the battalion advanced . 
 The first resistance was met by Birks and a corporal , taking two machine @-@ gun positions as another group of officers rushed a strong post . They were attacked with bombs , and the corporal was seriously wounded . Birks continued on alone . Reaching the rear of the pillbox , he forced the occupants to surrender . Birks then led an attack a series of dugouts and pillboxes on the edge of Glencorse Wood , and fought against machine gun and bombs . He also assisted in the reorganisation and consolidation of Australian men who had drifted away from their unit . 
 The next day , 21 September , enemy shelling in response to the movement of Allied artillery had buried some men in Birks ' platoon . Birks attempted to dig out these men , " standing exposed " , but another shell aimed at the C Coy post killed Birks , and four others , before he could save them . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 For his actions at Ypres , Birks was subsequently awarded the Victoria Cross , the announcement of which was gazetted on 8 November 1917 . His citation read : 
 War Office , 8th November , 1917 
 His Majesty The KING has been graciously pleased to approve of the award of the Victoria Cross to the undermentioned Offices , Non @-@ commissioned Officers and Man : — 
 2nd Lt. Frederick Birks , Late Aust . Imp . Force . 
 For most conspicuous bravery in attack when accompanied by only a corporal , he rushed a strong point which was holding up the advance . The corporal was wounded by a bomb , but 2nd Lt. Birks went on by himself killed the remainder of the enemy occupying the position , and captured a machine gun . 
 Shortly afterwards he organised a small party and attacked another strong point which was occupied by about twenty @-@ five of the enemy , of whom many were killed and an officer and fifteen men captured . 
 During the consolidation this officer did magnificent work in reorganising parties of other units which had been disorganised during the operations . 
 By his wonderful coolness and personal bravery 2nd Lt. Birks kept his men in splendid spirits throughout . He was killed at his post by a shell whilst endeavouring to extricate some of his men who had been buried by a shell . 
 Birks ' grave is in the Perth Cemetery ( China Wall ) near Ypres . A memorial was constructed at his old school in Wales in 1921 , funded largely by contributions from local people . When the school was demolished the Memorial was moved to outside St. Matthews Church where it stands now . On Remembrance Sunday the local branch of the British Legion continues to place a wreath of poppies on the Memorial . A portrait of Fred is on display at the Australian War Memorial in Canberra , alongside his Victoria Cross . He is also remembered in the Museum in Ypres , Belgium ( Cloth Hall ) . His service during the war earned him the 1914 – 15 Star , British War Medal and Victory Medal . 
 = SMS Erzherzog Karl = 
 SMS Erzherzog Karl ( German : " His Majesty 's ship Archduke Karl " ) was a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship built by the Austro @-@ Hungarian navy in 1902 . The lead ship of the Erzherzog Karl class , she was launched on 3 October 1903 . They were assigned to the III Battleship Division . 
 For most of World War I , Erzherzog Karl remained in her home port of Pula , in present @-@ day Croatia , except for four engagements . In 1914 , she formed part of the Austro @-@ Hungarian flotilla sent to protect the escape of the German ships SMS Goeben and SMS Breslau from the British @-@ held Mediterranean ; she advanced as far as Brindisi before being recalled to her home port . Her sole combat engagement occurred in late May 1915 , when she participated in the bombardment of the Italian port city of Ancona . She also took part in suppressing a major mutiny among the crew members of several armored cruisers stationed in Cattaro between 1 – 3 February 1918 . She also attempted to break through the Otranto Barrage in June of that year , but had to retreat when the dreadnought SMS Szent István was sunk . After the war , Erzherzog Karl was awarded to the French as a war prize , but ran aground at Bizerte . She was scrapped in Italy in 1921 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Erzherzog Karl displaced 10 @,@ 472 long tons ( 10 @,@ 640 t ) . She was 414 feet 2 inches ( 126 @.@ 2 m ) long , had a beam of 71 feet 5 inches ( 21 @.@ 8 m ) and a draft of 24 feet 7 inches ( 7 @.@ 5 m ) . She was manned by 700 men . She and her sisters were the last and largest pre @-@ dreadnought class built by the Austro Hungarian Navy , surpassing the Habsburg class by approximately 2 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 968 long tons ) . The ships were propelled by two two @-@ shaft , four cylinder vertical triple expansion steam engines . On trials , they developed 18 @,@ 000 ihp ( 13 @,@ 423 kW ) , which propelled the ship at a speed of 20 @.@ 5 knots ( 38 @.@ 0 km / h ; 23 @.@ 6 mph ) . On trials , Erzherzog Karl 's engines managed to produce a knot more speed than was originally planned . 
 Erzherzog Karl carried a primary armament of four 24 @-@ centimeter ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) / 40 caliber guns in two twin turrets on the centerline . These guns were an Austro @-@ Hungarian replica of the British 24 cm / 40 ( 9 @.@ 4 " ) Krupp C / 94 , which was used on the Habsburgs . Her secondary armament consisted of twelve 19 @-@ centimeter ( 7 @.@ 5 in ) / 42 caliber guns , also made by Škoda , mounted in eight single casemates on either wing of the ship and two single midships turrets on the either wing of the ship . They could fire a 97 kilograms ( 214 lb ) armor @-@ piercing shell 20 @,@ 000 metres ( 22 @,@ 000 yd ) at maximum elevation with a muzzle velocity of 800 metres per second ( 2 @,@ 600 ft / s ) . The gun weighed 12 @.@ 1 tons and could fire three rounds per minute . The ships had a tertiary armament for protection against torpedo boats in the form of the 6 @.@ 6 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) / 45 caliber gun , also manufactured by Škoda . Anti @-@ aircraft and airship protection was covered by the four 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Vickers anti @-@ aircraft guns on the ship bought from Britain in 1910 and mounted onto Erzherzog Karl . Erzherzog Karl was also fitted with two above water 45 @-@ centimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes , although they were rarely used . 
 = = Service history = = 
 At the outbreak of World War I , Erzherzog Karl was in the III division of the Austrian @-@ Hungarian battle @-@ fleet . She was mobilized on the eve of the war along with the remainder of the fleet to support the flight of SMS Goeben and SMS Breslau . The two German ships were attempting to break out of Messina , which was surrounded by British troops , and make their way to Turkey . The breakout succeeded . When the flotilla had advanced as far south as Brindisi in south eastern Italy , the Austro @-@ Hungarian ships were recalled . In company with other units of the Austro @-@ Hungarian navy , Erzherzog Karl took part in the bombardment of Ancona on 24 May 1915 . There she and her sisters expended 24 rounds of 240 mm armor @-@ piercing shells at signal and semaphore stations as well as 74 rounds of 190 mm shells aimed at Italian gun @-@ batteries and other port installations . 
 A major mutiny among crews of the armored cruisers stationed in Cattaro , including Sankt Georg and Kaiser Karl VI , began on 1 February 1918 . Two days later , the three Erzherzog Karl @-@ class ships arrived in the port and assisted with the suppression of the mutiny . Following the restoration of order in the naval base , the armored cruisers Sankt Georg and Kaiser Karl VI were decommissioned and Erzherzog Karl and her sisters were stationed in Cattaro in their place . For the morning of 11 June , Admiral Miklos Horthy planned a major assault on the Otranto Barrage ; the three Erzherzog Karls and the four Tegetthoff @-@ class battleships were to provide support for the Novara @-@ class cruisers . The plan was intended to replicate the success of the raid conducted one @-@ year earlier . Horthy 's plan was to destroy the blockading fleet by luring Allied ships to the cruisers and lighter ships , which were protected from the heavier guns of the battleships , including the guns of the Erzherzog Karl class . However , on the morning of 10 June , the dreadnought Szent István was torpedoed and sunk by an Italian torpedo boat . Horthy felt that the element of surprise had been compromised , and therefore called off the operation . This was to be the last military action the Erzherzog Karl @-@ class ships were to take part in and they spent the rest of their career at port in Pula . 
 Following the end of World War I in November 1918 , Erzherzog Karl was first taken over by Yugoslavia in 1919 , but was then ceded as a war reparation to France . Erzherzog Karl ran aground at Bizerte on her voyage to Toulon and was eventually broken up in situ . 
 = Jarome Iginla = 
 Jarome Arthur @-@ Leigh <unk> Tig Junior Elvis Iginla ( / <unk> <unk> / ; born July 1 , 1977 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey player and an alternate captain for the Colorado Avalanche in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . He was a longtime member and former captain of the Calgary Flames and also played for the Pittsburgh Penguins and Boston Bruins before joining the Avalanche in 2014 . 
 As a junior , Iginla was a member of two Memorial Cup winning teams with the Kamloops Blazers and was named the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) ' s Player of the Year in 1996 . He was selected 11th overall by the Dallas Stars in the 1995 NHL Entry Draft , but was traded to Calgary prior to making his NHL debut . He led the NHL in goals and points in 2001 – 02 , and won the Lester B. Pearson Award as its most valuable player as voted by the players . In 2003 – 04 , Iginla led the league in goals for the second time and captained the Flames to the Stanley Cup Finals , leading the playoffs in goals . 
 A six @-@ time NHL All @-@ Star , he is the Flames ' all @-@ time leader in goals , points , and games played , and is second in assists to Al MacInnis . Iginla scored 50 goals in a season on two occasions and is one of seven players in NHL history to score 30 goals in 11 consecutive seasons . He is one of 19 players in NHL history to score over 600 goals and has recorded over 1 @,@ 200 points in his career . He is a past winner of the Mark Messier Leadership Award and has been recognized by both the Flames and the league for his community work ; while a member of the Flames , Iginla donated $ 2 @,@ 000 to the children 's charity <unk> for every goal he scores . 
 Internationally , Iginla has represented Canada on numerous occasions . He was a member of championship teams at the 1996 World Junior and 1997 World Championships as well as the 2004 World Cup of Hockey . He is a three @-@ time Olympian and two @-@ time gold medal winner , including at the 2002 Winter Olympics where he helped lead Canada to its first Olympic hockey championship in 50 years . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Iginla was born in Edmonton , Alberta , and raised in nearby St. Albert . His father , a lawyer , was originally from Nigeria and changed his first name from <unk> to Elvis when he arrived in Canada . His surname means " Big tree " in Yoruba , his father 's native language . Iginla 's mother , Susan , is originally from Oregon , and has worked as a massage therapist and music teacher . Iginla grew up with his mother and grandparents after his parents divorced when he was a year old . While his mother is a Buddhist , he identifies himself as Christian , his father 's faith . 
 In addition to hockey , Iginla played baseball as a young man and was the catcher on the Canadian national junior team . He credits his grandfather for his hockey career , as with his mother working and father attending law school , he would not have had the opportunity to play sports at a high level if not for his grandfather 's support . Iginla grew up admiring other black hockey players , including Edmonton Oilers goaltender Grant Fuhr . Emulating Fuhr , Iginla played goaltender in his first two years of organized hockey before switching to the right wing . He played his entire minor hockey career in St. Albert , leading the Alberta Midget Hockey League in scoring as a 15 @-@ year @-@ old with 87 points for the St. Albert Midget Raiders in 1992 – 93 . 
 = = Junior career = = 
 Iginla played three years with the Kamloops Blazers of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) . As a 16 @-@ year @-@ old in 1993 – 94 , he recorded six goals and 29 points in 48 regular season games before playing an additional 19 in the playoffs . The Blazers captured both the league title and the 1994 Memorial Cup , Canada 's national junior championship . In reference to the Blazers ' dominance of the league at the time ( they had won their third WHL title in five seasons ) , Iginla described the expectations of success as being similar to those placed on the Montreal Canadiens , the NHL 's most successful franchise : " When you put on a Blazers jersey , it 's like putting on the Canadiens ' . You 've got to perform . " 
 Iginla scored 33 goals and 71 points in 1994 – 95 , his first full WHL season . The Blazers repeated as league champions , earning a trip to the 1995 Memorial Cup . Iginla scored five goals in the tournament to lead the Blazers to a second consecutive national championship . He received the George Parsons Trophy as the most sportsmanlike player of the tournament . 
 The Dallas Stars selected Iginla with their first pick , 11th overall , in the 1995 NHL Entry Draft ; however , on December 20 , 1995 , they traded him to the Calgary Flames , along with Corey Millen , for the rights to forward Joe Nieuwendyk , then in a contract dispute with the Flames . 
 In his final season in Kamloops in 1995 – 96 , Iginla finished fourth in league scoring with 136 points , including 63 goals in 63 games played , and was awarded the Four Broncos Memorial Trophy as the league 's most outstanding player . The Blazers were upset in the Western Conference Final by the Spokane Chiefs , but Iginla still finished fourth in playoff scoring , recording 29 points in 16 games . His performance during the season earned him an invitation to play for Team Canada at the 1996 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships in Boston , where he led the tournament in scoring with 12 points and helped Canada to its fourth consecutive gold medal . 
 = = NHL career = = 
 Iginla made his NHL debut in the 1996 Stanley Cup playoffs , as he was signed to a contract and flown to Calgary immediately after his junior season ended in Kamloops . He appeared in two games for the Flames in their series against the Chicago Blackhawks . In doing so , he became the first 18 @-@ year @-@ old to play for the Flames since Dan Quinn in 1983 . In his first NHL game , Iginla assisted on a Theoren Fleury goal to record his first point ; he scored his first goal in his second game . He remained with the Flames , and played his first NHL season in 1996 – 97 . He earned a spot on that year 's NHL All @-@ Rookie Team and finished as the runner @-@ up to Bryan Berard in voting for the Calder Memorial Trophy as rookie of the year after leading all first @-@ year players in scoring with 50 points . 
 By his third season , 1998 – 99 , Iginla led the Flames in goals with 28 . His success complicated negotiations for a new contract , as he and the Flames struggled to agree on a new deal following the season . Hoping to help resolve the contract impasse , Iginla agreed to attend training camp without a contract and purchased his own insurance as the team would not have been responsible financially if he suffered an injury . He remained without a contract at the start of the 1999 – 2000 season and missed the first three games as a holdout before signing a three @-@ year deal worth US $ 4 @.@ 9 million , plus bonuses . He finished the year with career highs in goals ( 29 ) and points ( 63 ) . He then topped both marks in 2000 – 01 by recording 31 goals and 71 points . 
 After participating in Canada 's Olympic summer camp before the season , Iginla again set new personal highs in 2001 – 02 when he registered 52 goals and 96 points . This season elevated Iginla to superstar status . He earned the Art Ross and Maurice Richard trophies as the NHL 's leading point and goal scorer , respectively . He was also awarded the Lester B. Pearson Award as the league 's most valuable player as voted by his peers , and was a nominee for both the Hart Memorial Trophy and the King Clancy Memorial Trophy . The Hart Trophy voting proved to be controversial : Iginla tied Canadiens goaltender José Théodore in voting points , but received fewer first place votes than Théodore . However , one voter , rumoured to be from Quebec — Théodore and the Canadiens ' home province — inexplicably left Iginla off his ballot . As a result of the controversy that followed , the Professional Hockey Writers Association changed the rules on how its members voted for the award to prevent a recurrence . 
 There were fears Iginla would again hold out after his contract expired following the season . They were unfounded , however , as he signed a two @-@ year , $ 13 million deal before the season and was looked on to again lead the Flames offensively . Iginla fell back to 67 points in 2002 – 03 as injuries , including a lingering finger dislocation following a fight , diminished his play . His 35 goals were still enough to lead the Flames for the fourth time in five seasons . Despite his offensive contributions , the Flames missed the playoffs . 
 = = = Flames captaincy = = = 
 At the start of the 2003 – 04 season , Iginla was named the 18th captain in Flames franchise history , and 14th since the team moved to Calgary from Atlanta in 1980 . His predecessor as captain , Craig Conroy , cited Iginla 's experience and leadership for his decision to relinquish the captaincy . " He was a leader on that team and old enough to where he 'd been there a long time . It was time for him . He took us to the Stanley Cup Final that year so it worked out pretty well . " Iginla was reported to be the first black captain in NHL history , though former Blackhawks captain Dirk Graham , who is of African descent , has also been said to hold that honour . 
 Iginla responded to being named captain by capturing his second Rocket Richard Trophy , sharing the goal @-@ scoring title with Ilya Kovalchuk and Rick Nash with 41 goals . The Flames qualified for the 2004 Stanley Cup playoffs as the sixth seed , the team 's first playoff appearance in eight years . Iginla led all playoff scorers with 13 goals as he captained the Flames to their first Stanley Cup finals appearance in 15 years . The Flames were unable to defeat the Tampa Bay Lightning , however , falling to the Eastern Conference champions in seven games . A dejected Iginla sat in the Flames locker room after the final game and was met by his father , who told his son that " I 'm proud of you . All of Canada is proud of you . " 
 While he was hailed as the best player in the world following his performance in the playoffs , Iginla spent the 2004 – 05 NHL lockout focused on improving his game further . Following the lockout , he was named as one of six player representatives on the newly created NHL competition committee , with a mandate to suggest recommendations for ways to improve the game . He held this position until early 2008 . 
 On December 7 , 2006 , Iginla reached career milestones when he scored his 300th career goal and 600th career point against the Minnesota Wild . He was expected to play in the 2007 NHL All @-@ Star Game in Dallas ; however , he missed the game with a knee injury . The injury kept him out of 12 games in 2006 – 07 . He nevertheless scored 94 points , including a career @-@ high 55 assists . 
 The 2007 – 08 season saw Iginla post his second career 50 goal season , adding 48 assists for a career high 98 points , good for third overall in the league . He was voted to the starting line @-@ up of the 2008 NHL All @-@ Star Game along with teammate Dion Phaneuf , and was named captain of the Western All @-@ Star Team . He broke the Flames ' franchise record for games played when he played his 804th career game on November 29 , 2007 , against the Anaheim Ducks . He also broke Theoren Fleury 's franchise record for goals when he scored his 365th on March 10 , 2008 , against the St. Louis Blues . Iginla was nominated as a Hart Trophy finalist for league most valuable player for the third time , though he again did not win the award . During the season , he signed a five @-@ year contract extension with the Flames at $ 7 million per season . 
 Iginla continued his pursuit of Fleury 's franchise record of 830 points in 2008 – 09 . He recorded his 800th point with a first period assist against the Chicago Blackhawks on December 19 , 2008 . He ended 2008 with a career high five points in a New Year 's Eve game against the Edmonton Oilers . He had 14 previous four point games . In January , he was named to the 2009 NHL All @-@ Star Game in Montreal , his fifth such selection . Representing the Western Conference , Iginla scored his first career NHL All @-@ Star Game goal in a 12 – 11 shootout loss . He passed Fleury as the Flames ' all @-@ time scoring leader on March 1 , 2009 , by recording five points , including his 400th career goal , in an 8 – 6 loss to the Lightning . He finished the season with 35 goals and 89 points , but a disappointing playoff performance led to questions of whether he had been playing with an injury . Iginla quickly denied the rumour , admitted that he had not played with the level of consistency he expected and stated that he would spend the summer focused on improving his play in 2009 – 10 . 
 = = = Milestones = = = 
 The Flames struggled in 2009 – 10 , failing to qualify for the playoffs for the first time since 2003 . Iginla accepted responsibility for the team 's failure , admitting that finishing around 70 points for the season was " not enough " . The Flames ' declining fortunes and Iginla 's season led to increasing questions on whether he could be traded from the team he has played his entire NHL career with . Iginla , who would have to approve any trade the team attempts to make due to a no @-@ movement clause in his contract , expressed that he did not wish to leave Calgary , but would accommodate a trade if the Flames wished to do so . Former Flames ' general manager Craig Button argued against trading Iginla , blaming a lack of complementary players for both Iginla and Calgary 's failures : " There 's nothing easier in hockey than to be able to shut down one player . And the Calgary Flames , I would argue , have made it really easy for teams to shut down Jarome . " The Flames publicly stated that they had no plans to trade him . 
 Individually , Iginla reached 900 career points in a two @-@ goal , two @-@ assist effort against the Oilers on January 30 , 2010 . Six nights later , he played his 1,000th career game against the Florida Panthers . Iginla struggled offensively to begin the 2010 – 11 season , and with the Flames falling to the bottom of the standings , there was renewed speculation over his future in Calgary . Team management repeatedly reiterated that they were not interested in moving him to another team . Improving his game as the season wore on , Iginla reached another personal milestone , recording his 500th career assist on January 11 , 2011 , the same day he was named to play in his sixth All @-@ Star Game . He announced several days later that he had declined to play in the All @-@ Star Game as he wished to spend the time with his ailing grandmother . 
 Iginla scored his 30th goal of the season on a penalty shot against the Nashville Predators on March 6 , 2011 , and in doing so became the 10th player in NHL history to score at least 30 goals in ten consecutive seasons . A month later , he scored his 1,000th career point , notching the game @-@ winning goal against the St. Louis Blues in a 3 – 2 win on April 1 , 2011 . 
 Iginla scored his 500th goal on January 7 , 2012 , against Niklas Bäckström of the Minnesota Wild in a 3 – 1 victory . He was the 42nd player in league history to achieve the feat , and the 15th to do so with one organization . Midway through the 2011 – 12 season , Iginla was named an All @-@ Star for the seventh time in his career ( the sixth played ) , representing the Flames at the 2012 All @-@ Star Game . 
 Iginla scored his 30th goal of the 2011 – 12 season in a 3 – 2 win against goaltender Antti Niemi of the San Jose Sharks on March 13 , 2012 . He is the seventh player in league history to score 30 goals in 11 consecutive seasons . 
 = = = Pittsburgh and Boston = = = 
 Playing the final year of his contract in 2012 – 13 and with the team languishing near the bottom of the NHL standings , speculation about Iginla 's future in Calgary was again raised as the April 3 , 2013 , trade deadline neared . National media outlets reported that Iginla , who had a clause in his contract preventing the Flames from moving him to another team without his permission , had given the organization a list of four teams he would be willing to accept a trade with : the Chicago Blackhawks , Los Angeles Kings , Boston Bruins or Pittsburgh Penguins . The Bruins were considered the leading contender to acquire Iginla 's services , and after he was held out of the lineup of Calgary 's March 27 , 2013 , game against the Colorado Avalanche , it was reported that a trade between the two teams had been completed . Instead , Iginla 's 16 @-@ year career in Calgary ended when he was sent to the Penguins in exchange for Pittsburgh 's first round selection at the 2013 NHL Entry Draft and college prospects Kenny Agostino and Ben <unk> . Iginla stated that playing with Sidney Crosby and Evgeni Malkin played a factor in his decision to move to the Penguins . The Bruins and Penguins met in the 2013 Eastern Conference Finals . Despite having the top scoring offense in the league , the Penguins lost the series without winning a game . Iginla , along with Crosby , Malkin , James Neal and Kris Letang , registered a combined 0 points in the series . Iginla was moved to the third line after a 6 – 1 Game 2 loss . Bruins forward Milan Lucic said after the series that Iginla 's spurning of Boston ignited the series sweep : " When a guy chooses another team over your team , it does light a little bit of a fire underneath you . " 
 As a free agent following the season , Iginla chose to go to Boston and signed a one @-@ year , $ 6 million contract with the Bruins . He required nine games before scoring his first goal as a Bruin , as part of a 2 – 1 win over the San Jose Sharks , but later settled in on Boston 's first line with Milan Lucic and David Krejčí . He made his first return to Calgary on December 10 , 2013 , where the fans greeted him with a long standing ovation prior to the game as the Flames played a video tribute . Following the contest , a 2 – 1 Bruins victory , Iginla was named the game 's third star and took two laps around the rink to more cheers from the crowd . He recorded his 600th career assist in a 3 – 1 victory over the Vancouver Canucks on February 4 , 2014 . 
 = = = Colorado Avalanche = = = 
 Salary cap constraints prevented the Bruins from re @-@ signing Iginla . Consequently , he left the team as a free agent and signed a three @-@ year , $ 16 million contract with the Colorado Avalanche . The Avalanche disappointed in 2014 – 15 ; by mid @-@ February , they stood in last place in the Central Division , though Iginla himself was among the team 's leading scorers . He led the team with 29 goals , however the Avalanche failed to qualify for the playoffs . On January 4 , 2016 , Iginla became the 19th player in NHL history to score 600 career goals . His milestone marker came in a 4 – 1 victory over the Los Angeles Kings . 
 = = International play = = 
 Iginla first represented Canada at the 1994 Nations Cup , an unsanctioned tournament for players under the age of 18 . He led Canada in scoring with five goals and nine points as it won the gold medal . Two years later , he joined the national junior team at the 1996 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships . He led the tournament in scoring with five goals and 12 points as Canada won its fourth consecutive gold medal . He was named an all @-@ star and the tournament 's top forward . One year later , Iginla played in his first tournament with the senior team , competing at the 1997 World Championships as a 19 @-@ year @-@ old , the youngest player on the team . He recorded two goals and three assists in 11 games as Canada won the gold medal . 
 A late invitation to join Team Canada 's summer camp in preparation for the 2002 Winter Olympics helped Iginla emerge as a star player . He was so surprised by the invite he initially thought one of his Calgary Flames teammates was playing a prank on him . He scored two goals in the gold medal game , a 5 – 2 victory over the United States , as Canada won its first Olympic gold medal in 50 years . With this win , Iginla became the first black man to win a gold medal at the Winter Olympics . Iginla also represented Canada at the 2004 World Cup of Hockey as an alternate captain , playing on a line with Joe Sakic and Mario Lemieux . Canada won the gold medal . 
 Iginla participated in his second Olympics and was an alternate captain at the 2006 Turin games , recording three points in six games . The Canadians were unable to defend their 2002 gold medal , losing to Russia in the quarter @-@ finals . Named an alternate captain once again for the 2010 team in Vancouver , he opened the tournament with a hat trick against Norway . He finished as the tournament leader with five goals , and assisted on Sidney Crosby 's overtime winning goal in the gold medal final against the United States . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 In his prime , Iginla was considered to be one of the NHL 's most prominent power forwards . Upon entering the league , he tried to emulate players like Brendan Shanahan and Keith Tkachuk , hoping to match their combination of finesse and physicality . He is one of the most consistent scorers in the league ; between 1998 and 2008 , only Jaromír Jágr scored more NHL goals than Iginla . Even so , scouting reports have argued that Iginla 's lack of speed makes it easier for opponents to isolate him and restrict his ability to move if his teammates rely on him too much to lead the offence . 
 The abuse he faced at the hands of opponents early in his NHL career prompted Iginla 's coaches to work at developing his physical play . While he was not enthusiastic about fighting , Iginla accepted then head coach Brian Sutter 's arguments that he needed to adopt a more aggressive style to improve as a player . Iginla is most effective when he has room to manoeuvre , and to create that space , he had to intimidate his opponents . The lessons Iginla learned have carried throughout his career . " You 've got a power forward who does it all , " said Craig Conroy . " I mean , he 'll fight , and hit , and score goals . Maybe it 's not the end @-@ to @-@ end rushes , but he does all those little things that win games and get things done . " His opponents also respect his play . Rob Blake said that while Iginla is not known for fancy play , " he 'll run you over . Or he 'll fight somebody . And then he 'll score a goal . He does pretty much everything you 'd want a guy to do . " 
 Iginla has recorded several Gordie Howe hat tricks – a fight , a goal and an assist in the same game – and as it is not an official statistic , The Hockey News estimated that as of 2012 , he was the active leader with nine . His fights , including one with Tampa Bay Lightning star Vincent Lecavalier in the 2004 Stanley Cup Finals , have had a motivating effect on his play and that of his teammates . Iginla has suffered injuries as a result of his fighting , including a broken hand from a 2003 fight with Bill Guerin of the Dallas Stars . His physical style of play also leads to a greater risk of persistent injuries and penalties . 
 He commands the respect of his peers , and has been known to stand up to the coaching staff to defend a fellow player . Former teammate and present Edmonton Oilers captain Andrew Ference — a former Bruins player himself , before Iginla 's arrival on the Boston team 's roster — once described following Iginla as like " following a friend . " Preferring to lead by example , Iginla is not regarded as a vocal captain . He likes to speak with players individually , and tries to ensure that all of his teammates are comfortable . He was named the recipient of the Mark Messier Leadership Award in 2009 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Iginla married his high school sweetheart , Kara , and the couple has three children : daughter Jade and sons <unk> and Joe . They had been dating since they were in the eighth grade . He has two half @-@ brothers , Jason and Stephen , and two half @-@ sisters , Theresa and Elizabeth . Theresa played for the University of Saskatchewan Huskies women 's hockey team for two seasons from 2003 to 2005 . Jarome is an avid golfer and a regular participant in the Calgary Flames Celebrity Charity Golf Classic . 
 Iginla is well known for his kind @-@ hearted nature . Former Flames General manager Craig Button described Iginla as being grounded : " He doesn 't carry himself with any attitude or arrogance . He 's confident in his abilities . He 's self @-@ assured . He 's genuine . He 's a better person than he is a player , and we all know what kind of player he is . " In 2002 , while in Salt Lake City for the Winter Olympic Games , Iginla struck up a conversation with four Calgarians sitting next to his table , and found out they were sleeping in their car outside of the hotel . He excused himself from the conversation , and booked them accommodations at his own expense at the hotel his family was staying in . 
 Since 2002 , he has operated the Jarome Iginla Hockey School in Calgary as a non @-@ profit organization , donating proceeds to the Diabetes Research Association . In 2004 , he was awarded the NHL Foundation Player Award for his community service and the King Clancy Memorial Trophy in recognition of his humanitarian contributions . Iginla supports many charities . In 2000 , he began donating $ 1 @,@ 000 per goal he scored to <unk> , a figure he doubled to $ 2 @,@ 000 in 2005 . Between 2000 and 2013 , he donated more than $ 700 @,@ 000 from this initiative . 
 Iginla is a part owner of the Kamloops Blazers of the Western Hockey League , for whom he played during his junior hockey days . He purchased a minority share in the franchise , along with fellow NHL players Shane Doan , Mark Recchi and Darryl Sydor , in October 2007 . He is also an ambassador with the NHL Diversity program , which supports youth hockey organizations that offer economically disadvantaged kids the opportunity to play . Since 2008 , he has been a hockey spokesperson for Scotiabank , appearing in commercials and at events supporting its grassroots hockey programs , as well as for Samsung Canada . 
 Iginla was the cover athlete and spokesperson for the EA Sports video game NHL 2003 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 Statistics as of end of 2015 @-@ 16 NHL season . 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = = All @-@ Star Games = = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = Gottes Zeit ist die allerbeste Zeit , BWV 106 = 
 Gottes Zeit ist die allerbeste Zeit ( God 's time is the very best time ) , BWV 106 , also known as Actus tragicus , is an early sacred cantata composed by Johann Sebastian Bach in Mühlhausen , intended for a funeral . 
 The earliest source for the composition is a copied manuscript dated 1768 , therefore the date of the composition is not certain . Research leads to a funeral of a former mayor of Mühlhausen on 16 September 1708 . The text is a carefully compiled juxtaposition of biblical texts , three quotations from the Old Testament and four from the New Testament , combined with funeral hymns , of which two are sung and one is quoted instrumentally , and some additions by an anonymous author . Bach scored the work for four vocal parts and a small ensemble of Baroque instruments , two recorders , two violas da gamba and continuo . The work is opened by an instrumental Sonatina , followed by through @-@ composed sections which have been assigned to three movements . The structure is symmetrical around a turning point , when the lower voices , who contemplate the Old Covenant , are overcome by a soprano calling for Jesus . 
 = = History = = 
 Although Bach 's manuscript is lost , the work is agreed to be one of the earliest Bach cantatas , probably composed during the year he spent in Mühlhausen 1707 / 1708 as organist of the Divi Blasii church , at the age of 22 . Various funerals known to have taken place at this time have been proposed as the occasion for the composition , for example that of his uncle Tobias <unk> from his mother 's family , who died in Erfurt on 10 August 1707 , and that of Adolph Strecker , a former mayor of Mühlhausen , whose funeral was 16 September 1708 . 
 The earliest surviving manuscript , in the hand of Christian Friedrich <unk> , was copied in 1768 after Bach 's death . It introduced the title Actus tragicus . The cantata was published in 1876 as part of the first complete edition of Bach 's works : the Bach @-@ Gesellschaft @-@ Ausgabe , edited by Wilhelm Rust . 
 = = Theme = = 
 The text consists of different Bible passages from the Old and New Testament , as well as individual verses of hymns by Martin Luther and Adam <unk> , which all together refer to finiteness , preparation for death and dying . There are two distinct parts to the cantata : the view of the Old Testament on death shown in the first part is confronted by that of the New Testament in the second part , leading to a symmetrical structure . The juxtaposition of texts from the Old and New Testament appeared before in the Christliche <unk> ( Christian school of prayer ) by Johann <unk> . Markus Rathey , professor at the Yale Institute of Sacred Music , argued in 2006 , that the sermon given at the funeral of Strecker is similar in ideas to the themes of the cantatas . It may be an indication that Bach composed the work for this occasion . 
 = = Structure and scoring = = 
 Bach scored the cantata for four vocal parts ( soprano ( S ) , alto ( A ) , tenor ( T ) , and bass ( B ) ) and a chamber ensemble of Baroque instruments : two alto recorders ( Fl ) , two violas da gamba ( Vg ) , basso continuo . The duration is given as 23 minutes . 
 The sections comprising the cantata are traditionally grouped into four movements . The musicologist Carol Traupman @-@ Carr notes : " Although movements are marked by tempo changes , occasionally key changes , meter changes , and double bar lines , Cantata 106 appears to be a continuous work . Bach helps create a more seamless effect by occasionally resolving the cadence of one section at the downbeat of another , thus blurring the beginnings and endings of traditional movements . " The keys and tempo markings are taken from the first publication . The keys in the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe and other more recent publications start in F major . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = 1 = = = 
 In the opening <unk> , marked Molto adagio , two obbligato alto recorders mournfully echo each other over a sonorous background of viola da <unk> and continuo . 
 = = = 2 = = = 
 The first vocal movement combines several aspects of getting ready to die , based mostly on texts from the Old Testament . Bach expresses their ideas in a variety of musical form and scoring . The movement opens ( 2a ) on a text in free poetry , " Gottes Zeit ist die allerbeste Zeit " ( God 's time is the best of all times ) . The chorus has no initial tempo marking , but has a fugal section marked Allegro , and the end is Adagio assai . 
 The thought from Psalm 90 ( 2b ) , " Ach , Herr , <unk> uns <unk> , daß wir sterben müssen " ( Ah , Lord , teach us to consider that we must die ) is rendered as an arioso of the tenor , market Lento . The melodic line is broken by rests of reflection . 
 The warning to be prepared for death ( 2c ) from Isaiah , " <unk> dein Haus ; denn du wirst sterben " ( Put your house in order ; for you will die ) , is performed as an aria by the bass , marked Vivace . <unk> of the recorder accompany the voice which has been described as " evocative of the command of God " . 
 Marked Andante , the movement concludes ( 2d ) with the central piece in the <unk> composition . It presents a contrast : while the lower choral voices remind of the Old Covenant , " Es ist der alte Bund : Mensch , du <unk> sterben ! " ( It is the ancient law : human , you must die ! ) , based on Jesus Sirach , the solo soprano turns to accepting death as a union with Jesus , singing three times " Ja , komm , Herr Jesu , komm ! " ( Yes , come , Lord Jesus ! ) . The personal decision is supported by the instrumental quotation in the recorders of Johann Leon 's hymn " Ich hab mein Sach Gott <unk> " ( I have brought my affairs home to God ) . The final call to Jesus closes the movement , leading to a long rest . The musicologist Wendy Heller writes : 
 Bach allows the confident soprano the final word , one that even silences the continuo ; the passage concludes with an ornamented cadential passage in semiquaver triplets that arrives with tentative optimism and a distinct lack of completion ... 
 = = = 3 = = = 
 The second vocal movement is a similar combination of ideas , now mostly from the New Testament . It quotes twice what Jesus said on the cross according to the Gospel of Luke . The first quotation ( 3a ) , " In deine Hände <unk> ich meinen Geist " ( Into Your hands I commit my spirit ) , with an added explanation " du hast mich <unk> , Herr , du getreuer Gott " ( You have redeemed me , Lord , faithful God ) , from Psalm 31 , is rendered as an alto aria . 
 The second quotation ( 3b ) , " <unk> wirst du mit mir im Paradies sein " ( Today you will be with Me in Paradise ) , is a bass arioso , supported by the Martin Luther 's hymn " Mit Fried und Freud ich fahr dahin " ( With peace and joy I depart ) , after the Nunc dimittis ( also following Luke ) , sung by the alto as a cantus firmus . 
 = = = 4 = = = 
 The work concludes with the closing seventh stanza of Adam <unk> 's hymn " In dich hab ich <unk> , Herr " , " <unk> , Lob , Ehr und Herrlichkeit " ( Glory , praise , honor , and majesty ) , as a choral movement , but not a simple four @-@ part setting . Introduced by an instrumental passage recalling motifs from the Sonatina , the first lines of the hymn are set for four parts . The movement ends in a double fugue on Amen marked Allegro . The musicologist Julian notes that the fugal section became the " major focus of the piece " . 
 = = = Evaluation = = = 
 The cantata ranks among Bach 's most important works . The Bach scholar Alfred Dürr called the cantata " a work of genius such as even great masters seldom achieve ... The Actus tragicus belongs to the great musical literature of the world " . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The cantata can be performed with only four singers , as in the recording by Joshua Rifkin , while other recordings feature a choir with multiple voices to a part . The following entries are taken from the listing by Aryeh Oron on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . Choirs are roughly marked as large ( by red background ) or one voice per part ( OVPP ) ( by green background ) ; instrumental groups playing period instruments in historically informed performances are highlighted green under the header Instr .. 
 = Enrico Fermi = 
 Enrico Fermi ( Italian : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; 29 September 1901 – 28 November 1954 ) was an Italian physicist , who created the world 's first nuclear reactor , the Chicago Pile @-@ 1 . He has been called the " architect of the nuclear age " and the " architect of the atomic bomb " . He was one of the few physicists to excel both theoretically and experimentally . Fermi held several patents related to the use of nuclear power , and was awarded the 1938 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on induced radioactivity by neutron bombardment and the discovery of transuranic elements . He made significant contributions to the development of quantum theory , nuclear and particle physics , and statistical mechanics . 
 Fermi 's first major contribution was to statistical mechanics . After Wolfgang Pauli announced his exclusion principle in 1925 , Fermi followed with a paper in which he applied the principle to an ideal gas , employing a statistical formulation now known as Fermi – Dirac statistics . Today , particles that obey the exclusion principle are called " fermions " . Later Pauli postulated the existence of an uncharged invisible particle emitted along with an electron during beta decay , to satisfy the law of conservation of energy . Fermi took up this idea , developing a model that incorporated the postulated particle , which he named the " neutrino " . His theory , later referred to as Fermi 's interaction and still later as weak interaction , described one of the four fundamental forces of nature . Through experiments inducing radioactivity with recently discovered neutrons , Fermi discovered that slow neutrons were more easily captured than fast ones , and developed the Fermi age equation to describe this . After bombarding thorium and uranium with slow neutrons , he concluded that he had created new elements ; although he was awarded the Nobel Prize for this discovery , the new elements were subsequently revealed to be fission products . 
 Fermi left Italy in 1938 to escape new Italian Racial Laws that affected his Jewish wife Laura Capon . He emigrated to the United States where he worked on the Manhattan Project during World War II . Fermi led the team that designed and built Chicago Pile @-@ 1 , which went critical on 2 December 1942 , demonstrating the first artificial self @-@ sustaining nuclear chain reaction . He was on hand when the X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor at Oak Ridge , Tennessee , went critical in 1943 , and when the B Reactor at the Hanford Site did so the next year . At Los Alamos he headed F Division , part of which worked on Edward Teller 's thermonuclear " Super " bomb . He was present at the Trinity test on 16 July 1945 , where he used his Fermi method to estimate the bomb 's yield . 
 After the war , Fermi served under J. Robert Oppenheimer on the General Advisory Committee , which advised the Atomic Energy Commission on nuclear matters and policy . Following the detonation of the first Soviet fission bomb in August 1949 , he strongly opposed the development of a hydrogen bomb on both moral and technical grounds . He was among the scientists who testified on Oppenheimer 's behalf at the 1954 hearing that resulted in the denial of the latter 's security clearance . Fermi did important work in particle physics , especially related to pions and muons , and he speculated that cosmic rays arose through material being accelerated by magnetic fields in interstellar space . Many awards , concepts , and institutions are named after Fermi , including the Enrico Fermi Award , the Enrico Fermi Institute , the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory , the Fermi Gamma @-@ ray Space Telescope , the Enrico Fermi Nuclear Generating Station , and the synthetic element fermium ( one of just over a dozen elements named after people ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Enrico Fermi was born in Rome , Italy , on 29 September 1901 . He was the third child of Alberto Fermi , a division head ( Capo Divisione ) in the Ministry of Railways , and Ida de Gattis , an elementary school teacher . His only sister , Maria , was two years older than he was , and his brother Giulio was a year older . After the two boys were sent to a rural community to be wet nursed , Enrico rejoined his family in Rome when he was two and a half . Although he was baptised a Roman Catholic in accordance with his grandparents ' wishes , his family was not particularly religious ; Enrico was an agnostic throughout his adult life . As a young boy he shared the same interests as his brother Giulio , building electric motors and playing with electrical and mechanical toys . Giulio died during the administration of an anesthetic for an operation on a throat abscess in 1915 . 
 One of Fermi 's first sources for his study of physics was a book he found at the local market at Campo de ' <unk> in Rome . Published in 1840 , the 900 @-@ page <unk> physicae <unk> , was written in Latin by Jesuit Father Andrea Caraffa , a professor at the Collegio Romano . It covered mathematics , classical mechanics , astronomy , optics , and acoustics , insofar as these disciplines were understood when the book was written . Fermi befriended another scientifically inclined student , Enrico Persico , and together the two worked on scientific projects such as building gyroscopes and trying to accurately measure the acceleration of Earth 's gravity . Fermi 's interest in physics was further encouraged by his father 's colleague Adolfo Amidei , who gave him several books on physics and mathematics , which he read and assimilated quickly . 
 = = Scuola Normale Superiore in Pisa = = 
 Fermi graduated from high school in July 1918 and , at Amidei 's urging , applied to the Scuola Normale Superiore in Pisa . Having lost one son , his parents were reluctant to let him move away from home for four years while attending the Sapienza University of Rome , but in the end they acquiesced . The school provided free lodging for students , but candidates had to take a difficult entrance exam that included an essay . The given theme was " Specific characteristics of Sounds " . The 17 @-@ year @-@ old Fermi chose to derive and solve the partial differential equation for a vibrating rod , applying Fourier analysis in the solution . The examiner , Professor Giuseppe <unk> from the Sapienza University of Rome , interviewed Fermi and praised that he would become an outstanding physicist in the future . Fermi achieved first place in the classification of the entrance exam . 
 During his years at the Scuola Normale Superiore , Fermi teamed up with a fellow student named Franco Rasetti with whom he would indulge in light @-@ hearted pranks and who would later become Fermi 's close friend and collaborator . In Pisa , Fermi was advised by the director of the physics laboratory , Luigi Puccianti , who acknowledged that there was little that he could teach Fermi , and frequently asked Fermi to teach him something instead . Fermi 's knowledge of quantum physics reached such a high level that Puccianti asked him to organize seminars on the topic . During this time Fermi learned tensor calculus , a mathematical technique invented by Gregorio Ricci and Tullio Levi @-@ Civita that was needed to demonstrate the principles of general relativity . Fermi initially chose mathematics as his major , but soon switched to physics . He remained largely self @-@ taught , studying general relativity , quantum mechanics , and atomic physics . 
 In September 1920 , Fermi was admitted to the Physics department . Since there were only three students in the department — Fermi , Rasetti , and <unk> Carrara — Puccianti let them freely use the laboratory for whatever purposes they chose . Fermi decided that they should research X @-@ ray crystallography , and the three worked to produce a Laue photograph — an X @-@ ray photograph of a crystal . During 1921 , his third year at the university , Fermi published his first scientific works in the Italian journal Nuovo Cimento . The first was entitled " On the dynamics of a rigid system of electrical charges in translational motion " ( Sulla <unk> di un <unk> <unk> di <unk> <unk> in moto <unk> ) . A sign of things to come was that the mass was expressed as a tensor — a mathematical construct commonly used to describe something moving and changing in three @-@ dimensional space . In classical mechanics , mass is a scalar quantity , but in relativity it changes with velocity . The second paper was " On the electrostatics of a uniform gravitational field of electromagnetic charges and on the weight of electromagnetic charges " ( <unk> <unk> di un <unk> <unk> <unk> e sul peso delle masse <unk> ) . Using general relativity , Fermi showed that a charge has a weight equal to U / c2 , where U was the electrostatic energy of the system , and c is the speed of light . 
 The first paper seemed to point out a contradiction between the electrodynamic theory and the relativistic one concerning the calculation of the electromagnetic masses , as the former predicted a value of 4 / 3 U / c2 . Fermi addressed this the next year in a paper " Concerning a contradiction between electrodynamic and the relativistic theory of electromagnetic mass " in which he showed that the apparent contradiction was a consequence of relativity . This paper was sufficiently well @-@ regarded that it was translated into German and published in the German scientific journal Physikalische Zeitschrift in 1922 . That year , Fermi submitted his article " On the phenomena occurring near a world line " ( Sopra i <unk> che <unk> in <unk> di una <unk> <unk> ) to the Italian journal I <unk> dell <unk> dei Lincei . In this article he examined the Principle of Equivalence , and introduced the so @-@ called " Fermi coordinates " . He proved that on a world line close to the time line , space behaves as if it were a Euclidean space . 
 Fermi submitted his thesis , " A theorem on probability and some of its applications " ( Un <unk> di <unk> delle <unk> ed <unk> sue <unk> ) , to the Scuola Normale Superiore in July 1922 , and received his <unk> at the unusually young age of 20 . The thesis was on X @-@ ray diffraction images . Theoretical physics was not yet considered a discipline in Italy , and the only thesis that would have been accepted was one on experimental physics . For this reason , Italian physicists were slow in embracing the new ideas like relativity coming from Germany . Since Fermi was quite at home in the lab doing experimental work , this did not pose insurmountable problems for him . 
 While writing the appendix for the Italian edition of the book Fundamentals of Einstein Relativity by August <unk> in 1923 , Fermi was the first to point out that hidden inside the famous Einstein equation ( E = mc2 ) was an enormous amount of nuclear potential energy to be exploited . " It does not seem possible , at least in the near future " , he wrote , " to find a way to release these dreadful amounts of energy — which is all to the good because the first effect of an explosion of such a dreadful amount of energy would be to smash into smithereens the physicist who had the misfortune to find a way to do it . " 
 In 1924 Fermi was initiated to the Freemasonry in the Masonic Lodge " Adriano <unk> " of the Grand Orient of Italy . 
 Fermi decided to travel abroad , and spent a semester studying under Max Born at the University of Göttingen , where he met Werner Heisenberg and Pascual Jordan . Fermi then studied in Leiden with Paul Ehrenfest from September to December 1924 on a fellowship from the Rockefeller Foundation obtained through the intercession of the mathematician Vito Volterra . Here Fermi met Hendrik Lorentz and Albert Einstein , and became good friends with Samuel Goudsmit and Jan Tinbergen . From January 1925 to late 1926 , Fermi taught mathematical physics and theoretical mechanics at the University of Florence , where he teamed up with Rasetti to conduct a series of experiments on the effects of magnetic fields on mercury vapour . He also participated in seminars at the Sapienza University of Rome , giving lectures on quantum mechanics and solid state physics . While giving lectures of new quantum mechanics based on remarkable accuracy of predictions of Schrödinger equation , the Italian physicist would often say , " It has no business to fit so well ! " 
 After Wolfgang Pauli announced his exclusion principle in 1925 , Fermi responded with a paper " On the <unk> of the perfect <unk> gas " ( Sulla <unk> del gas <unk> <unk> ) , in which he applied the exclusion principle to an ideal gas . The paper was especially notable for Fermi 's statistical formulation , which describes the distribution of particles in systems of many identical particles that obey the exclusion principle . This was independently developed soon after by the British physicist Paul Dirac , who also showed how it was related to the Bose – Einstein statistics . Accordingly , it is now known as Fermi – Dirac statistics . Following Dirac , particles that obey the exclusion principle are today called " fermions " , while those that do not are called " bosons " . 
 = = Professor in Rome = = 
 Professorships in Italy were granted by competition ( <unk> ) for a vacant chair , the applicants being rated on their publications by a committee of professors . Fermi applied for a chair of mathematical physics at the University of Cagliari on Sardinia , but was narrowly passed over in favour of Giovanni Giorgi . In 1926 , at the age of 24 , he applied for a professorship at the Sapienza University of Rome . This was a new chair , one of the first three in theoretical physics in Italy , that had been created by the Minister of Education at the urging of Professor Orso Mario Corbino , who was the University 's professor of experimental physics , the Director of the Institute of Physics , and a member of Benito Mussolini 's cabinet . Corbino , who also chaired the selection committee , hoped that the new chair would raise the standard and reputation of physics in Italy . The committee chose Fermi ahead of Enrico Persico and Aldo Pontremoli , and Corbino helped Fermi recruit his team , which was soon joined by notable students such as Edoardo Amaldi , Bruno Pontecorvo , Ettore Majorana and Emilio Segrè , and by Franco Rasetti , whom Fermi had appointed as his assistant . They were soon nicknamed the " Via Panisperna boys " after the street where the Institute of Physics was located . 
 Fermi married Laura Capon , a science student at the University , on 19 July 1928 . They had two children : Nella , born in January 1931 , and Giulio , born in February 1936 . On 18 March 1929 , Fermi was appointed a member of the Royal Academy of Italy by Mussolini , and on 27 April he joined the Fascist Party . He later opposed Fascism when the 1938 racial laws were promulgated by Mussolini in order to bring Italian Fascism ideologically closer to German National Socialism . These laws threatened Laura , who was Jewish , and put many of Fermi 's research assistants out of work . 
 During their time in Rome , Fermi and his group made important contributions to many practical and theoretical aspects of physics . In 1928 , he published his Introduction to Atomic Physics ( <unk> alla <unk> <unk> ) , which provided Italian university students with an up @-@ to @-@ date and accessible text . Fermi also conducted public lectures and wrote popular articles for scientists and teachers in order to spread knowledge of the new physics as widely as possible . Part of his teaching method was to gather his colleagues and graduate students together at the end of the day and go over a problem , often from his own research . A sign of success was that foreign students now began to come to Italy . The most notable of these was the German physicist Hans Bethe , who came to Rome as a Rockefeller Foundation fellow , and collaborated with Fermi on a 1932 paper " On the Interaction between Two Electrons " ( German : Über die <unk> von Zwei <unk> ) . 
 At this time , physicists were puzzled by beta decay , in which an electron was emitted from the atomic nucleus . To satisfy the law of conservation of energy , Pauli postulated the existence of an invisible particle with no charge and little or no mass that was also emitted at the same time . Fermi took up this idea , which he developed in a tentative paper in 1933 , and then a longer paper the next year that incorporated the postulated particle , which Fermi called a " neutrino " . His theory , later referred to as Fermi 's interaction , and still later as the theory of the weak interaction , described one of the four fundamental forces of nature . The neutrino was detected after his death , and his interaction theory showed why it was so difficult to detect . When he submitted his paper to the British journal Nature , that journal 's editor turned it down because it contained speculations which were " too remote from physical reality to be of interest to readers " . Thus Fermi saw the theory published in Italian and German before it was published in English . 
 In the introduction to the 1968 English translation , physicist Fred L. Wilson noted that : 
 Fermi 's theory , aside from bolstering Pauli 's proposal of the neutrino , has a special significance in the history of modern physics . One must remember that only the naturally occurring β emitters were known at the time the theory was proposed . Later when positron decay was discovered , the process was easily incorporated within Fermi 's original framework . On the basis of his theory , the capture of an orbital electron by a nucleus was predicted and eventually observed . With time much experimental data has accumulated . Although peculiarities have been observed many times in β decay , Fermi 's theory always has been equal to the challenge . 
 The consequences of the Fermi theory are vast . For example , β spectroscopy was established as a powerful tool for the study of nuclear structure . But perhaps the most influential aspect of this work of Fermi is that his particular form of the β interaction established a pattern which has been appropriate for the study of other types of interactions . It was the first successful theory of the creation and annihilation of material particles . Previously , only photons had been known to be created and destroyed . 
 In January 1934 , Irène Joliot @-@ Curie and Frédéric Joliot announced that they had bombarded elements with alpha particles and induced radioactivity in them . By March , Fermi 's assistant Gian @-@ Carlo Wick had provided a theoretical explanation using Fermi 's theory of beta decay . Fermi decided to switch to experimental physics , using the neutron , which James Chadwick had discovered in 1932 . In March 1934 , Fermi wanted to see if he could induce radioactivity with Rasetti 's polonium @-@ beryllium neutron source . Neutrons had no electric charge , and so would not be deflected by the positively charged nucleus . This meant that they needed much less energy to penetrate the nucleus than charged particles , and so would not require a particle accelerator , which the Via Panisperna boys did not have . 
 Fermi had the idea to resort to replacing the polonium @-@ beryllium neutron source with a radon @-@ beryllium one , which he created by filling a glass bulb with beryllium powder , evacuating the air , and then adding 50 mCi of radon gas , supplied by Giulio Cesare <unk> . This created a much stronger neutron source , the effectiveness of which declined with the 3 @.@ 8 @-@ day half @-@ life of radon . He knew that this source would also emit gamma rays , but , on the basis of his theory , he believed that this would not affect the results of the experiment . He started by bombarding platinum , an element with a high atomic number that was readily available , without success . He turned to aluminium , which emitted an alpha particle and produced sodium , which then decayed into magnesium by beta particle emission . He tried lead , without success , and then fluorine in the form of calcium fluoride , which emitted an alpha particle and produced nitrogen , decaying into oxygen by beta particle emission . In all , he induced radioactivity in 22 different elements . Fermi rapidly reported the discovery of neutron @-@ induced radioactivity in the Italian journal La <unk> <unk> on 25 March 1934 . 
 The natural radioactivity of thorium and uranium made it hard to determine what was happening when these elements were bombarded with neutrons but , after correctly eliminating the presence of elements lighter than uranium but heavier than lead , Fermi concluded that they had created new elements , which he called hesperium and ausonium . The chemist Ida Noddack criticised this work , suggesting that some of the experiments could have produced lighter elements than lead rather than new , heavier elements . Her suggestion was not taken seriously at the time because her team had not carried out any experiments with uranium , and its claim to have discovered masurium ( technetium ) was disputed . At that time , fission was thought to be improbable if not impossible on theoretical grounds . While physicists expected elements with higher atomic numbers to form from neutron bombardment of lighter elements , nobody expected neutrons to have enough energy to split a heavier atom into two light element fragments in the manner that Noddack suggested . 
 The Via Panisperna boys also noticed some unexplained effects . The experiment seemed to work better on a wooden table than a marble table top . Fermi remembered that Joliot @-@ Curie and Chadwick had noted that paraffin wax was effective at slowing neutrons , so he decided to try that . When neutrons were passed through paraffin wax , they induced a hundred times as much radioactivity in silver compared with when it was bombarded without the paraffin . Fermi guessed that this was due to the hydrogen atoms in the paraffin . Those in wood similarly explained the difference between the wooden and the marble table tops . This was confirmed by repeating the effect with water . He concluded that collisions with hydrogen atoms slowed the neutrons . The lower the atomic number of the nucleus it collides with , the more energy a neutron loses per collision , and therefore the less collisions that are required to slow a neutron down by a given amount . Fermi realised that this induced more radioactivity because slow neutrons were more easily captured than fast ones . He developed a diffusion equation to describe this , which became known as the Fermi age equation . 
 In 1938 Fermi received the Nobel Prize in Physics at the age of 37 for his " demonstrations of the existence of new radioactive elements produced by neutron irradiation , and for his related discovery of nuclear reactions brought about by slow neutrons " . After Fermi received the prize in Stockholm , he did not return home to Italy , but rather continued on to New York City with his family in December 1938 , where they applied for permanent residency . The decision to move to America and become US citizens was primarily a result of the racial laws in Italy . 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 Fermi arrived in New York City on 2 January 1939 . He was immediately offered posts at five different universities , and accepted a post at Columbia University , where he had already given summer lectures in 1936 . He received the news that in December 1938 , the German chemists Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann had detected the element barium after bombarding uranium with neutrons , which Lise Meitner and her nephew Otto Frisch correctly interpreted as the result of nuclear fission . Frisch confirmed this experimentally on 13 January 1939 . The news of Meitner and Frisch 's interpretation of Hahn and Strassmann 's discovery crossed the Atlantic with Niels Bohr , who was to lecture at Princeton University . Isidor Isaac Rabi and Willis Lamb , two Columbia University physicists working at Princeton , found out about it and carried it back to Columbia . Rabi said he told Enrico Fermi , but Fermi later gave the credit to Lamb : 
 I remember very vividly the first month , January , 1939 , that I started working at the Pupin Laboratories because things began happening very fast . In that period , Niels Bohr was on a lecture engagement at the Princeton University and I remember one afternoon Willis Lamb came back very excited and said that Bohr had leaked out great news . The great news that had leaked out was the discovery of fission and at least the outline of its interpretation . Then , somewhat later that same month , there was a meeting in Washington where the possible importance of the newly discovered phenomenon of fission was first discussed in semi @-@ jocular earnest as a possible source of nuclear power . 
 Noddack was proven right after all . Fermi had dismissed the possibility of fission on the basis of his calculations , but he had not taken into account the binding energy that would appear when a nuclide with an odd number of neutrons absorbed an extra neutron . For Fermi , the news came as a profound embarrassment , as the transuranic elements that he had partly been awarded the Nobel Prize for discovering had not been transuranic elements at all , but fission products . He added a footnote to this effect to his Nobel Prize acceptance speech . 
 The scientists at Columbia decided that they should try to detect the energy released in the nuclear fission of uranium when bombarded by neutrons . On 25 January 1939 , in the basement of Pupin Hall at Columbia , an experimental team including Fermi conducted the first nuclear fission experiment in the United States . The other members of the team were Herbert L. Anderson , Eugene T. Booth , John R. Dunning , G. Norris <unk> , and Francis G. Slack . The next day , the Fifth Washington Conference on Theoretical Physics began in Washington , D.C. under the joint auspices of George Washington University and the Carnegie Institution of Washington . There , the news on nuclear fission was spread even further , which fostered many more experimental demonstrations . 
 French scientists Hans von Halban , Lew Kowarski , and Frédéric Joliot @-@ Curie had demonstrated that uranium bombarded by neutrons emitted more neutrons than it absorbed , which implies chain reaction may be a possibility . Fermi and Anderson did so too a few weeks later . Leó Szilárd obtained 200 kilograms ( 440 lb ) of uranium oxide from Canadian radium producer Eldorado Gold Mines Limited , allowing Fermi and Anderson to conduct experiments with fission on a much larger scale . Fermi and Szilárd collaborated on a design of a device to achieve a self @-@ sustaining nuclear reaction — a nuclear reactor . Due to the rate of absorption of neutrons by the hydrogen in water , it was unlikely that a self @-@ sustaining reaction could be achieved with natural uranium and water as a neutron moderator . Fermi suggested , based on his work with neutrons , that the reaction could be achieved with uranium oxide blocks and graphite as a moderator instead of water . This would reduce the neutron capture rate , and in theory make a self @-@ sustaining chain reaction possible . Szilárd came up with a workable design : a pile of uranium oxide blocks interspersed with graphite bricks . Szilárd , Anderson , and Fermi published a paper on " Neutron Production in Uranium " . But their work habits and personalities were different , and Fermi had trouble working with Szilárd . 
 Fermi was among the first to warn military leaders about the potential impact of nuclear energy , giving a lecture on the subject at the Navy Department on 18 March 1939 . The response fell short of what he had hoped for , although the Navy agreed to provide $ 1 @,@ 500 towards further research at Columbia . Later that year , Szilárd , Eugene Wigner , and Edward Teller sent the famous letter signed by Einstein to U.S. President Roosevelt , warning that Nazi Germany was likely to build an atomic bomb . In response , Roosevelt formed the S @-@ 1 Uranium Committee to investigate the matter . 
 The S @-@ 1 Committee provided money for Fermi to buy graphite , and he built a pile of graphite bricks on the seventh floor of the Pupin Hall laboratory . By August 1941 , he had six tons of uranium oxide and thirty tons of graphite , which he used to build a still larger pile in Schermerhorn Hall at Columbia . 
 The S @-@ 1 Committee next met on 18 December 1941 , with the U.S. now engaged in World War II , making its work urgent . Most of the effort sponsored by the Committee had been directed at producing enriched uranium , but Committee member Arthur Compton determined that a feasible alternative was plutonium , which could be mass @-@ produced in nuclear reactors by the end of 1944 . He decided to concentrate the plutonium work at the University of Chicago . Fermi reluctantly moved , and his team became part of the new Metallurgical Laboratory there . 
 The possible results of a self @-@ sustaining nuclear reaction were unknown , so it seemed inadvisable to build the first nuclear reactor on the U. of C. campus in the middle of the city . Compton found a location in Argonne Woods Forest Preserve , about 20 miles ( 32 km ) from Chicago . Stone & Webster was contracted to develop the site , but the work was halted by an industrial dispute . Fermi then persuaded Compton that he could build the reactor in the squash court under the stands of the U of C 's Stagg Field . Construction of the pile began on 6 November 1942 , and Chicago Pile @-@ 1 went critical on 2 December . The shape of the pile was intended to be roughly spherical , but as work proceeded Fermi calculated that criticality could be achieved without finishing the entire pile as planned . 
 This experiment was a landmark in the quest for energy , and it was typical of Fermi 's approach . Every step was carefully planned , every calculation meticulously done . When the first self @-@ sustained nuclear chain reaction was achieved , Compton made a coded phone call to James B. Conant , the chairman of the National Defense Research Committee . 
 I picked up the phone and called Conant . He was reached at the President 's office at Harvard University . " Jim , " I said , " you 'll be interested to know that the Italian navigator has just landed in the new world . " Then , half apologetically , because I had led the S @-@ l Committee to believe that it would be another week or more before the pile could be completed , I added , " the earth was not as large as he had estimated , and he arrived at the new world sooner than he had expected . " 
 " Is that so , " was Conant 's excited response . " Were the natives friendly ? " " Everyone landed safe and happy . " 
 To continue the research where it would not pose a public health hazard , the reactor was disassembled and moved to the Argonne Woods site . There Fermi directed experiments on nuclear reactions , revelling in the opportunities provided by the reactor 's abundant production of free neutrons . The laboratory soon branched out from physics and engineering into using the reactor for biological and medical research . Initially , Argonne was run by Fermi as part of the University of Chicago , but it became a separate entity with Fermi as its director in May 1944 . 
 When the air @-@ cooled X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor at Oak Ridge went critical on 4 November 1943 , Fermi was on hand just in case something went wrong . The technicians woke him early so that he could see it happen . Getting X @-@ 10 operational was another milestone in the plutonium project . It provided data on reactor design , training for DuPont staff in reactor operation , and produced the first small quantities of reactor @-@ bred plutonium . Fermi became an American citizen in July 1944 , the earliest date the law allowed . 
 In September 1944 , Fermi inserted the first uranium fuel slug into the B Reactor at the Hanford Site , the production reactor designed to breed plutonium in large quantities . Like X @-@ 10 , it had been designed by Fermi 's team at the Metallurgical Laboratory , and built by DuPont , but it was much larger , and was water @-@ cooled . Over the next few days , 838 tubes were loaded , and the reactor went critical . Shortly after midnight on 27 September , the operators began to withdraw the control rods to initiate production . At first all appeared to be well , but around 03 : 00 , the power level started to drop and by 06 : 30 the reactor had shut down completely . The Army and DuPont turned to Fermi 's team for answers . The cooling water was investigated to see if there was a leak or contamination . The next day the reactor suddenly started up again , only to shut down once more a few hours later . The problem was traced to neutron poisoning from xenon @-@ 135 , a fission product with a half @-@ life of 9 @.@ 2 hours . Fortunately , DuPont had deviated from the Metallurgical Laboratory 's original design in which the reactor had 1 @,@ 500 tubes arranged in a circle , and had added 504 tubes to fill in the corners . The scientists had originally considered this over @-@ engineering a waste of time and money , but Fermi realized that by loading all 2 @,@ 004 tubes , the reactor could reach the required power level and efficiently produce plutonium . 
 In mid @-@ 1944 , Robert Oppenheimer persuaded Fermi to join his Project Y at Los Alamos , New Mexico . Arriving in September , Fermi was appointed an associate director of the laboratory , with broad responsibility for nuclear and theoretical physics , and was placed in charge of F Division , which was named after him . F Division had four branches : F @-@ 1 Super and General Theory under Teller , which investigated the " Super " ( thermonuclear ) bomb ; F @-@ 2 Water Boiler under L. D. P. King , which looked after the " water boiler " aqueous homogeneous research reactor ; F @-@ 3 Super Experimentation under Egon Bretscher ; and F @-@ 4 Fission Studies under Anderson . Fermi observed the Trinity test on 16 July 1945 , and conducted an experiment to estimate the bomb 's yield by dropping strips of paper into the blast wave . He paced off how far they were blown by the explosion , and calculated the yield as ten kilotons of TNT ; the actual yield was about 18 @.@ 6 kilotons . 
 Along with Oppenheimer , Compton , and Ernest Lawrence , Fermi was part of the scientific panel that advised the Interim Committee on target selection . The panel agreed with the committee that atomic bombs would be used without warning against an industrial target . Like others at the Los Alamos Laboratory , Fermi found out about the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki from the public address system in the technical area . Fermi did not believe that atomic bombs would deter nations from starting wars , nor did he think that the time was ripe for world government . He therefore did not join the Association of Los Alamos Scientists . 
 = = Post @-@ war work = = 
 Fermi became the Charles H. Swift Distinguished Professor of Physics at the University of Chicago on 1 July 1945 , although he did not depart the Los Alamos Laboratory with his family until 31 December 1945 . He was elected a member of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences in 1945 . The Metallurgical Laboratory became the Argonne National Laboratory on 1 July 1946 , the first of the national laboratories established by the Manhattan Project . The short distance between Chicago and Argonne allowed Fermi to work at both places . At Argonne he continued experimental physics , investigating neutron scattering with Leona Marshall . He also discussed theoretical physics with Maria Mayer , helping her develop insights into spin – orbit coupling that would lead to her receiving the Nobel Prize . 
 The Manhattan Project was replaced by the Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) on 1 January 1947 . Fermi served on the AEC General Advisory Committee , an influential scientific committee chaired by Robert Oppenheimer . He also liked to spend a few weeks of each year at the Los Alamos National Laboratory , where he collaborated with Nicholas Metropolis , and with John von Neumann on Rayleigh – Taylor instability , the science of what occurs at the border between two fluids of different densities . 
 Following the detonation of the first Soviet fission bomb in August 1949 , Fermi , along with Isidor Rabi , wrote a strongly worded report for the committee , opposing the development of a hydrogen bomb on moral and technical grounds . Nonetheless , Fermi continued to participate in work on the hydrogen bomb at Los Alamos as a consultant . Along with Stanislaw Ulam , he calculated that not only would the amount of tritium needed for Teller 's model of a thermonuclear weapon be prohibitive , but a fusion reaction could still not be assured to propagate even with this large quantity of tritium . Fermi was among the scientists who testified on Oppenheimer 's behalf at the Oppenheimer security hearing in 1954 that resulted in denial of Oppenheimer 's security clearance . 
 In his later years , Fermi continued teaching at the University of Chicago . His PhD students in the post @-@ war period included Owen Chamberlain , Geoffrey Chew , Jerome Friedman , Marvin Goldberger , Tsung @-@ Dao Lee , Arthur Rosenfeld and Sam <unk> . Jack Steinberger was a graduate student . Fermi conducted important research in particle physics , especially related to pions and muons . He made the first predictions of pion @-@ nucleon resonance , relying on statistical methods , since he reasoned that exact answers were not required when the theory was wrong anyway . In a paper co @-@ authored with Chen Ning Yang , he speculated that pions might actually be composite particles . The idea was elaborated by Shoichi Sakata . It has since been supplanted by the quark model , in which the pion is made up of quarks , which completed Fermi 's model , and vindicated his approach . 
 Fermi wrote a paper " On the Origin of Cosmic Radiation " in which he proposed that cosmic rays arose through material being accelerated by magnetic fields in interstellar space , which led to a difference of opinion with Teller . Fermi examined the issues surrounding magnetic fields in the arms of a spiral galaxy . He mused about what is now referred to as the " Fermi paradox " : the contradiction between the presumed probability of the existence of extraterrestrial life and the fact that contact has not been made . 
 Toward the end of his life , Fermi questioned his faith in society at large to make wise choices about nuclear technology . He said : 
 Some of you may ask , what is the good of working so hard merely to collect a few facts which will bring no pleasure except to a few long @-@ haired professors who love to collect such things and will be of no use to anybody because only few specialists at best will be able to understand them ? In answer to such question [ s ] I may venture a fairly safe prediction . 
 History of science and technology has consistently taught us that scientific advances in basic understanding have sooner or later led to technical and industrial applications that have revolutionized our way of life . It seems to me improbable that this effort to get at the structure of matter should be an exception to this rule . What is less certain , and what we all fervently hope , is that man will soon grow sufficiently adult to make good use of the powers that he acquires over nature . 
 Fermi died at age 53 of stomach cancer in his home in Chicago , and was interred at Oak Woods Cemetery . 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Fermi received numerous awards in recognition of his achievements , including the Matteucci Medal in 1926 , the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1938 , the Hughes Medal in 1942 , the Franklin Medal in 1947 , and the Rumford Prize in 1953 . He was awarded the Medal for Merit in 1946 for his contribution to the Manhattan Project . Fermi was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society ( FRS ) in 1950 . The Basilica of Santa Croce , Florence , known as the Temple of Italian Glories for its many graves of artists , scientists and prominent figures in Italian history , has a plaque commemorating Fermi . In 1999 , Time named Fermi on its list of the top 100 persons of the twentieth century . Fermi was widely regarded as an unusual case of a 20th @-@ century physicist who excelled both theoretically and experimentally . The historian of physics , C. P. Snow , wrote that " if Fermi had been born a few years earlier , one could well imagine him discovering Rutherford 's atomic nucleus , and then developing Bohr 's theory of the hydrogen atom . If this sounds like hyperbole , anything about Fermi is likely to sound like hyperbole " . 
 Fermi was known as an inspiring teacher , and was noted for his attention to detail , simplicity , and careful preparation of his lectures . Later , his lecture notes were transcribed into books . His papers and notebooks are today in the University of Chicago . Victor Weisskopf noted how Fermi " always managed to find the simplest and most direct approach , with the minimum of complication and sophistication . " Fermi 's ability and success stemmed as much from his appraisal of the art of the possible , as from his innate skill and intelligence . He disliked complicated theories , and while he had great mathematical ability , he would never use it when the job could be done much more simply . He was famous for getting quick and accurate answers to problems that would stump other people . Later on , his method of getting approximate and quick answers through back @-@ of @-@ the @-@ envelope calculations became informally known as the " Fermi method " , and is widely taught . 
 Fermi was fond of pointing out that Alessandro Volta , working in his laboratory , could have had no idea where the study of electricity would lead . Fermi is generally remembered for his work on nuclear power and nuclear weapons , especially the creation of the first nuclear reactor , and the development of the first atomic and hydrogen bombs . His scientific work has stood the test of time . This includes his theory of beta decay , his work with non @-@ linear systems , his discovery of the effects of slow neutrons , his study of pion @-@ nucleon collisions , and his Fermi – Dirac statistics . His speculation that a pion was not a fundamental particle pointed the way towards the study of quarks and leptons . 
 = = = Things named after Fermi = = = 
 Many things have been named in Fermi 's honour . These include the Fermilab particle accelerator and physics lab in Batavia , Illinois , which was renamed in his honour in 1974 , and the Fermi Gamma @-@ ray Space Telescope , which was named after him in 2008 , in recognition of his work on cosmic rays . Three nuclear reactor installations have been named after him : the Fermi 1 and Fermi 2 nuclear power plants in Newport , Michigan , the Enrico Fermi Nuclear Power Plant at <unk> <unk> in Italy , and the RA @-@ 1 Enrico Fermi research reactor in Argentina . A synthetic element isolated from the debris of the 1952 Ivy Mike nuclear test was named fermium , in honour of Fermi 's contributions to the scientific community . It follows the element einsteinium , which was discovered with it . Since 1956 , the United States Atomic Energy Commission has named its highest honour , the Fermi Award , after him . Recipients of the award include well @-@ known scientists like Otto Hahn , Robert Oppenheimer , Edward Teller and Hans Bethe . 
 = = Patents = = 
 US Patent <unk> , " Process for the Production of Radioactive Substances " , issued July 1940 
 US Patent <unk> , " Air Cooled Neutronic Reactor " , issued April 1950 
 US Patent <unk> , " Neutron Velocity Selector " , issued October 1950 
 US Patent <unk> , " Neutronic Reactor " , issued September 1953 
 US Patent <unk> , " Neutronic Reactor " , issued May 1955 
 US Patent <unk> , " Testing Material in a Neutronic Reactor " , issued October 1956 
 US Patent <unk> , " Test Exponential Pile " , issued February 1957 
 US Patent <unk> , " Method of Operating a Neutronic Reactor " , issued July 1957 
 US Patent <unk> , " Neutronic Reactor " , issued September 1957 
 US Patent <unk> , " Neutronic Reactor Shield " , issued September 1957 
 US Patent <unk> , " Method of Sustaining a Neutronic Chain Reacting System " , issued November 1957 
 US Patent <unk> , " Chain Reacting System " , issued June 1958 
 US Patent <unk> , " Neutronic Reactor " , issued April 1960 
 US Patent <unk> , " Method of Testing Thermal Neutron <unk> Material for Purity " , issued January 1961 
 = Star Wars Jedi Knight : Jedi Academy = 
 Star Wars Jedi Knight : Jedi Academy is a 2003 first- and third @-@ person shooter action video game set in the Star Wars universe . It was developed by Raven Software and published by LucasArts in North America , by Activision in Europe and by CyberFront in Japan . The game was released for Microsoft Windows and OS X ( published by Aspyr ) in September 2003 and for Xbox ( developed by Vicarious Visions ) in November 2003 , and received positive reviews . In September 2009 , the game was re @-@ released with the other Star Wars : Jedi Knight games ( Star Wars : Dark Forces , Star Wars Jedi Knight : Dark Forces II , Star Wars Jedi Knight : Mysteries of the Sith and Star Wars Jedi Knight II : Jedi Outcast ) through Steam and Direct2Drive . 
 Jedi Academy is powered by the id Tech 3 game engine , the same engine used by Jedi Academy 's predecessor , Jedi Outcast . In a new feature to the series , the player can modify the character 's gender and appearance , and can construct a lightsaber by choosing the hilt style and blade color . 
 In single @-@ player mode , the player takes control of the character Jaden Korr , a student at the Jedi Academy under the tutelage of Kyle Katarn . The player must complete various missions assigned to them by Katarn and Luke Skywalker . There is also a multiplayer mode that allows players to play against other people over the internet or via a LAN . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 As a first and third @-@ person shooter set in the Star Wars expanded universe , Jedi Academy puts the player into combat wielding a variety of firearms from that universe , as well as lightsabers and Force powers . The player can choose perspective for every weapon . The shooter aspects of the game are standard , including a variety of projectile and energy weapons and explosives . Players have a health meter and a shield meter , which are replenished separately . 
 In both single @-@ player and multiplayer , the player character is a Force @-@ user , who has access to a variety of Force powers in addition to their lightsaber ( s ) . Powers include Push , Pull , Jump , Heal , Lightning , and other abilities from the Star Wars universe . Force powers are categorized into core , Light ( defensive ) and Dark ( offensive ) , and each Force power has three ranks , with the power increasing in effectiveness with each rank . In both single @-@ player and multiplayer , players choose how to rank up their powers , adding a layer of customization . During gameplay , the player has a " Force meter " which is depleted when powers are used , and recharges when no powers are in use . 
 Jedi Academy places a heavy emphasis on lightsaber combat . The player can create a custom lightsaber by selecting a hilt and one of five blade colors . Later in the game , the player can choose to wield a single saber , one saber in each hand , or a " saber staff " similar to the double ended lightsaber Darth Maul used in The Phantom Menace which also adds a kicking ability unavailable with any other lightsaber . The different sabers each have unique styles and special moves . When using a single saber , the player can choose between three stances which affect the speed and power of attacks ; if using dual sabers , the player can switch off the second saber and use the " Fast " -style single @-@ saber stance , or if using a saber staff , the player can switch the staff into a single @-@ bladed saber that uses the " Medium " -style saber stance . 
 = = = Single @-@ player = = = 
 The player initially chooses the character 's species and gender , and begins the game with a single lightsaber . Midway through the game , the player can choose to use dual sabers or a saber staff if desired . The campaign alternates between linear plot driven missions and user @-@ selected missions . For user @-@ selected missions , the player is given a list of five missions , and chooses the order in which to complete them . The player is only required to complete four of the missions before advancing , although the option is available to complete all five . Between missions the player can choose one of their force skills to upgrade . This will increase the impact of that force power , so making the character more powerful as the game progresses . The game also introduces player @-@ controllable vehicles and vehicle @-@ based levels . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 In multiplayer mode , one can play online or via a local area network ( LAN ) with other players , as well as computer @-@ controlled bots . The player can create their avatar using a series of options , similar to the character creation in single @-@ player . Alternatively the player can choose to play as one of almost all of the characters from Jedi Outcast and Jedi Academy . Before a match begins , the server specifies the Force ranking to be used ; this controls how many points the players have to invest in different Force powers . Players can then customize their powers for the match . The server can also disable normal weapons to create a lightsaber @-@ only game . There are different multiplayer modes such as " Capture the flag " ( dominated by Alpha ) , " Power Duel " and " Siege " . Depending on the mode , players can play on their own or as part of a team . There are six multiplayer modes in total . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The player takes the role of Jaden Korr ( voiced by Philip <unk> if male , and by Jennifer Hale if female ) . Jaden is a new student arriving at the Jedi Academy on Yavin IV , along with fellow student Rosh <unk> ( Jason Marsden ) . On their way to the Academy , the students ' shuttle is shot down by an unknown enemy . As Jaden and Rosh make their way to the Academy on foot , they encounter stormtroopers and a Dark Jedi , whom Jaden defeats . Jaden then sees a woman using a staff to drain energy from the Jedi Temple , but he is detected and knocked unconscious by the beam . Awakening , Jaden is met by Kyle Katarn ( Jeff Bennett ) and Luke Skywalker ( Bob Bergen ) , who both express concern about the incident . Jaden and Rosh become apprenticed to Kyle ; however , in their first training session , Rosh 's over @-@ competitiveness endangers Jaden . Jaden is then dispatched on various peace @-@ keeping missions across the galaxy . 
 After completing several missions Jaden returns to the temple and overhears Rosh talking to another student , saying that he feels like the Jedi masters are trying to hold them back . Luke tells the assembled students that the Dark Jedi who attacked the Temple are members of a Sith cult called the Disciples of Ragnos . A member of the cult , a Twi 'lek named Alora ( Grey DeLisle ) , was able to infiltrate the Academy during the attack and stole Luke 's journal . This allowed the cult to find numerous places strong with the Force and drain the energy there . The students are sent out to investigate the locations in Luke 's journal . Jaden is sent to Hoth to investigate Echo Base , where he encounters Imperials and Alora . Jaden defeats her , and she flees . Returning to the Academy , Jaden finds that Rosh did not return from his mission to Byss . 
 After completing several more missions , Jaden accompanies Kyle in an investigation of Darth Vader 's fortress on <unk> . There , Jaden discovers that Rosh has joined the Disciples of Ragnos , having fallen to the dark side to avoid being killed . Jaden defeats Rosh ( who is accompanied by two surviving Reborn Dark Jedi from Jedi Outcast ) as Kyle arrives . At this point , the leader of the cult , who is revealed to be Tavion <unk> ( Kath Soucie ) arrives . She was the former apprentice of Kyle 's nemesis Desann from Jedi Outcast . Tavion has recovered the " Scepter of Ragnos " , which has the power to drain and release Force energy . Tavion disables Jaden and Kyle , causing the room to cave @-@ in as she escapes with Rosh . Kyle and Jaden narrowly escape and return to the Academy . Jaden is promoted to Jedi Knight , and constructs a new lightsaber . Luke comes to the conclusion that Tavion plans to restore the Sith to power by using the stolen Force energy to resurrect the ancient Sith Lord , Marka Ragnos ( Peter Lurie ) . As the Jedi prepare to battle Tavion and her followers on Korriban , Kyle informs Jaden that he has received a call for help from Rosh . Though skeptical , Jaden agrees to help . Fighting through a mining facility on <unk> III , Jaden is again confronted by Alora , who continues to taunt him as he chases her through the complex . Eventually , Jaden finds Rosh , who asks for help and claims to have seen the error of his ways . <unk> by anger , Jaden is goaded by Alora to kill Rosh and join Tavion . At this point , the player can choose to either let him live and thus stay on the light side or kill Rosh and turn to the dark side . 
 On the light path , Jaden spares Rosh and saves him from Alora , who cuts off Rosh 's left arm . Jaden Kills Alora and heads to the Tomb of Ragnos to confront Tavion , fighting his way through her followers with other students . Jaden defeats her ; however , she 's able to use the scepter to invoke Ragnos 's spirit who possesses her body . Jaden defeats Ragnos and destroys the Scepter , banishing Ragnos ' spirit back into its tomb . Back at the Academy Jaden sees Rosh , who has recovered , and is honored by Luke , Kyle and the rest of the order . 
 On the dark path , Jaden kills Rosh but refuses to join the Sith or help resurrect Marka Ragnos , instead killing Alora and heading to Korriban . Jaden leaves a trail of destruction behind him , killing Jedi and Sith alike before he confronts Tavion . Killing her , Jaden steals the Scepter only to be confronted by Kyle . Jaden defeats and apparently kills Kyle escaping with the scepter . Kyle is found to have survived the duel by Luke , and laments losing both Rosh and Jaden , vowing to hunt Jaden down . Luke , wishes Kyle good luck , and notes that although Jaden has turned to the dark side , there is always hope and Jaden may not be beyond redemption . Jaden is then seen on the bridge of a Star Destroyer beginning a campaign of conquest . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 After Jedi Outcast was completed , LucasArts immediately approached Raven Software to develop a sequel . Production began and Raven was given a one @-@ year development cycle . Like Jedi Outcast , Jedi Academy uses a heavily modified Quake III : Team Arena game engine , and the development team was made up of people who worked on Jedi Outcast , as well as Star Trek : Voyager – Elite Force . 
 An early decision made during development was whether or not to have Kyle Katarn as the playable character . This was due to the character already being a powerful Jedi Knight , and , as such , starting off with the force skills would affect the gameplay . To resolve this issue , Raven chose to make the playable character a student in the Jedi Academy . By using a completely new character , the developers were able to insert features that allowed the player to customize the character , including race and gender , as well as the lightsaber color , hilt , and type . The Kyle Katarn character was then made an instructor in the academy so as to remain integral to the plot , to ensure Jedi Academy built upon the existing Jedi Knight series storyline . Raven extended the customization further as the game progresses by allowing the player to choose specific force powers to train upon completion of missions . This was done with the intention of giving freedom to choose the way and style the game is played . 
 Another decision made early on was to include locations and aspects from the Star Wars movies . The designers wanted to use locations such as Tatooine ( seen in The Prequel Trilogy , A New Hope and Return of the Jedi ) and Hoth ( seen in The Empire Strikes Back ) , as well as the Rancor creature . To develop the map for Hoth , the designers obtained as much source material from Empire Strikes Back as possible so to create an authentic reproduction . Level Designer Justin Negrete says that Hoth was one of the most challenging areas to design . The general level design process started by planning out the level on paper . These ideas were then " fleshed out " to get the size and flow of the level . Once this had been done , features of the Quake III engine were used to add more detail such as lighting effects . The final stage of level design was adding aspects that improved the gameplay and fun of the level . 
 The mission based format of Jedi Academy was used by Raven to reduce the linearity of the game , allowing the player to progress through levels mostly in the order they desire . The reduction in linearity was also achieved by only requiring 80 % of levels to be completed before the plot can move on . Raven provided modding tools with Jedi Academy , but the company specified that such tools are unsupported by customer support , so to avoid receiving calls on the subject . Brett Tosti , a producer for LucasArts , stated that the customization of the player that is provided by the game out of the box will mean that people are less likely to need to create their own " skins " . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 The game was published and distributed within the United States by LucasArts . Activision took control of publishing and distributing the game in Europe . The game was released for Microsoft Windows and OS X ( published by Aspyr ) on September 17 , 2003 and for Xbox ( developed by Vicarious Visions ) in November 2003 , and received positive reviews . 
 In September 2009 , the game was re @-@ released with the other Star Wars : Jedi Knight games ( Star Wars : Dark Forces , Star Wars Jedi Knight : Dark Forces II , Star Wars Jedi Knight : Mysteries of the Sith and Star Wars Jedi Knight II : Jedi Outcast ) through the digital distributor Steam and Direct2Drive . 
 = = = Source @-@ code release = = = 
 Following Disney 's decision to close LucasArts on April 3 , 2013 , the developers at Raven Software released the source code for the game on SourceForge under GNU <unk> licensing . A few days after release , the source code disappeared from SourceForge without explanation . SourceForge later explained to media outlet Kotaku that Raven Software had requested its removal . Kotaku speculated this was due to the presence of licensed code , such as for the Bink Video format from Rad Game Tools , that was not intended to be made public . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Both the PC and Xbox versions of the game were well received . The PC version holds an aggregate score of 81 out of 100 on Metacritic , based on thirty @-@ five reviews , and 80 @.@ 18 % on GameRankings , based on fifty @-@ one reviews . The Xbox version holds aggregate scores of 76 out of 100 on Metacritic , based on thirty reviews , and 75 @.@ 22 % on GameRankings , based on forty @-@ five reviews . 
 = = = PC = = = 
 Positive reviews praised the fact that , unlike in Dark Forces II and Jedi Outcast , players could use a lightsaber from the beginning . Game Over Online scored the game 92 % and commented that " You start instantly with your lightsaber , rather than wading through six painfully bland FPS levels to get your lightsaber as you did in Jedi Outcast " . Critics lauded the lightsaber interface and player customization options . Ernie Halal of Gaming Age gave the game an A- , writing , " You choose not only the gender and race of your character , but also which powers and fighting styles to develop [ ... ] Third person adventure games rarely offer that much customization . " 
 Critics noted that , despite its age , the Quake III engine was used well . PC Gamer UK , who scored the game 70 out of 100 , wrote " the engine , which although hardly groundbreaking any more , perfectly evokes the glow of the lightsaber and the grimy , metallic backgrounds of the films . " Some critics did , however , note that the engine was starting to look dated . 
 The multiplayer , in particular the objective @-@ based Siege mode , was well received . The music , sound effects , and voice acting also received acclaim , although some critics found it odd that all aliens spoke English . 
 The story and level design received mixed reactions . Some critics commended the levels as varied ( both in terms of length and content ) . GameZone scored the game 9 out of 10 , writing " Some are a fast blast that can be beat in ten or so minutes . Others [ ... ] can take as long as hours [ ... ] The change of pace is very refreshing . " The story was described as " great " by GameZone and as " strong " by Gaming Age . IGN 's Steve Butts , however , disliked the plot , feeling that " Jedi Outcast was more satisfying in terms of involvement with the story . Jedi Academy dishes out more action sooner but fails to put it in as solid a context as the previous game . " 
 Game Over Online was critical of the mission structure , writing " This kind of free @-@ form mission assignment [ ... ] only serves to weaken the plotline . It also leads to a <unk> to the missions [ ... ] it seems more like roaming than any actual story advancement . " GameSpot 's Craig Beers , however , praised the mission structure ; " Jedi Academy does an excellent job of balancing its missions . " IGN also defended the system ; " It 's nice that the game offers a series of fairly short , relatively unconnected missions at the start . It 's a great way to get your feet wet and ease you in to the environments and the saber fighting before the challenge level ramps up . " 
 The AI was criticized by PC Gamer UK as " laughable " ; " Every encounter you have is filled with people too stupid to realise that running away or taking some sort of cover would be the best option . [ Jedi Academy ] requires little to no skill to play through . " This opinion was echoed by GameSpot : " Stormtroopers usually just stand there shooting away at you [ ... ] Dark Jedi rush at you , even after watching four of their brethren plummet to a horrible death . Occasionally , you 'll see an enemy accidentally commit suicide by falling off a cliff or falling into lava , enemies will not even dive for cover or try and throw it back if you throw an uncooked thermal detonator at them . " 
 Despite his criticism of the AI , GameSpot 's Craig Beers scored the game 8 @.@ 4 out of 10 , writing " It manages to take all the fun parts from its predecessor and greatly expands them to create an engaging , new action game in its own right . " IGN 's Steve Butts scored the game 8 @.@ 8 out of 10 , giving it an " Editor 's Choice Award " and writing " If you like Star Wars and think flipping around chopping up Stormtroopers and flinging Dark Jedi off of conveniently placed precipices is fun , then this game is definitely for you . " Eurogamer 's Kristan Reed was less impressed , scoring the game 7 out of 10 , writing " The harsh reality is , for all the plentiful additions , there 's much work to be done before LucasArts can boast it has created the ultimate Star Wars FPS . Sure , it 's the best one yet , but with some often laughable AI and creaking tech underpinning it , the flaws are there for all to see . " 
 = = = Xbox = = = 
 Kevin Gifford of 1UP.com scored the Xbox version a B- . He lauded the addition of Xbox Live support and the ability to use a lightsaber from the opening , two of biggest criticisms of Jedi Outcast . However , he called the graphics " worryingly out of date by current Xbox standards " , saying that when playing in first @-@ person mode " the game looks more like a two @-@ year @-@ old PC shooter than a modern Star Wars game . " He concluded that " The Xbox Live games make Jedi Academy worth at least a rental to online players , but otherwise , this game 's worth it to Star Wars fans only . " Eurogamer 's Kristan Reed was also somewhat unimpressed , scoring the game 6 out of 10 and criticizing the controls ; " In common with the PC version , you still find yourself going into battle and fumbling furiously through cyclical menus while numerous baddies are busy blasting seven shades out of you . " She was also critical of the AI and the graphics , concluding that " It 's good to see Live make the package this time around , but we 're disappointed that after all these years LucasArts is still scratching around abusing the Star Wars brand in this way . There are some good ideas here that haven 't been realised , and we 're once again left waiting for the definitive Star Wars FPS to appear . " 
 IGN were more impressed , scoring the game 8 out of 10 . Although they were critical of the graphics and frame rate , and found the game to be inferior to Jedi Outcast , reviewer Steve Butts concluded " For the 15 or so hours that it lasted , I enjoyed Jedi Academy . " GameSpot 's Craig Beers scored the game 8 @.@ 1 out of 10 . He praised the mapping of the PC version 's controls to the Xbox Controller and the implementation of Xbox Live , but like IGN , he was critical of the frame rates . He concluded that " The game may not look great , but it translates well to the <unk> those who would prefer to play it on a console . It even caters to those who aren 't familiar with the Star Wars universe and just want pure action . In general , Jedi Knight : Jedi Academy is highly recommendable . " GameZone 's Nick Valentino scored the game 8 @.@ 2 out of 10 and was especially impressed with the use of Xbox live ; " the biggest <unk> the one that has me playing this one very <unk> the fact that the multiplayer modes can also be played online using the Xbox Live service . That 's right , you read it correctly . You can duel against other Xbox gamers out there using any of the seven multiplayer modes and even talk trash using your Xbox Communicator . Here 's your chance to see if you 're truly good with the lightsaber . " 
 = Final Fantasy II = 
 Final Fantasy II ( <unk> , Fainaru Fantajī Tsū ) is a fantasy role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Square ( now Square Enix ) in 1988 for the Family Computer as the second installment of the Final Fantasy series . The game has received numerous enhanced remakes for the WonderSwan Color , the PlayStation , the Game Boy Advance , the PlayStation Portable , and multiple mobile and smartphone types . As neither this game nor Final Fantasy III were initially released outside Japan , Final Fantasy IV was originally released in North America as Final Fantasy II , so as not to confuse players . The most recent releases of the game are enhanced versions for the iOS and Android , which were released worldwide in 2010 and 2012 , respectively . 
 The game 's story centers on four youths whose parents were killed during an army invasion by the empire of Palamecia , who are using <unk> to conquer the world . Three of the four main characters join a rebellion against the empire , embarking on missions to gain new magic and weapons , destroy enemy superweapons , and rescue leading members of the resistance . The Game Boy Advance remake adds a bonus story after the game is completed . 
 Final Fantasy II introduced many elements that would later become staples of the Final Fantasy franchise , including chocobos and the recurring character Cid . It also eliminated the traditional experience point leveling system of the previous and later games in the series , instead introducing an activity @-@ based progression system where the characters ' statistics increase according to how they are used or acquired . Despite being a sequel to Final Fantasy , the game includes no characters or locations from the first game . Final Fantasy II received little attention at the time from non @-@ Japanese reviewers , though its remakes have garnered favorable reviews . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Final Fantasy II features gameplay similar to that of its predecessor , Final Fantasy . The player can freely roam an overworld containing several towns and dungeons . A menu @-@ based system allows the player to outfit each character with equipment and up to two — often disposable — items for battle . Magic spells are assigned to the character from the item menu , and certain spells , such as " Cure " , can be used outside of battle . The player can also save their progress on the overworld . Weapons , armor , items , and magic spells can be purchased at shops , and townspeople provide useful information for the player 's progression through the game . One new feature is the " Word Memory " system : when in conversation with non @-@ player characters ( NPCs ) , the player can " ask " about and " memorize " special keywords or phrases , which can later be repeated to other NPCs to gain more information or unlock new actions . Similarly , there exist a handful of special items that can be shown to NPCs during conversation or used on certain objects , which have the same effect . Characters and monsters are no longer separated into separate windows in the battle screen as they were in the first Final Fantasy , and players can see their current and total hit points below the battle . Players can also fight with less than four characters in their party , which was not possible in the first game . Final Fantasy II introduced the chocobo , the signature Final Fantasy mascot , which lets characters ride to a location at great speed without being attacked by enemies . The recurring character Cid was also introduced in II ; a character of the same name has appeared in every main @-@ series game since . 
 On the overworld and within dungeons , random encounters with enemies can be fought to improve each character 's attributes . Unlike the original Final Fantasy , players could not upgrade their characters ' classes . The game is also one of the few games in the series to not use experience @-@ based levels . Instead , each character participating in battle develops depending on what actions they take . For instance , characters who frequently use a particular type of weapon will become more adept at wielding a weapon of that type , and will also increase in physical strength and accuracy . Attributes include hit points , magic points , magic power , stamina , strength , spirit , agility , intelligence , and evasion . Players can also increase their ability to wield certain types of weapon , and repeated use in combat causes the ability to level up . Hit points ( HP ) and magic points ( MP ) increase with their use ; a character who takes a heavy amount of damage in a battle might earn an increase in maximum HP , while a character who uses a lot of MP during battle might increase their maximum MP . This experience system had several unintended consequences that allowed characters to gain much more experience than intended , such as players having their characters attack each other and repeatedly cast spells , thus causing their HP and abilities to grow extensively . Final Fantasy II uses the same turn @-@ based battle system seen in the original Final Fantasy , with battle parties consisting of up to four characters at a time . The game introduces a " back row " in battle , within which characters or enemies are immune to most physical attacks , but can be harmed with bows and magical attacks . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Final Fantasy II features four playable characters as well as several secondary characters who are only briefly controlled by the player . Primary characters include Firion ( <unk> , <unk> , " <unk> " in the Japanese release and English NES prototype ) , a resident of the country of Fynn and the main protagonist ; Maria ( <unk> ) , a soft @-@ spoken archer and dedicated enemy of the Empire ; Guy ( <unk> , Gai , " Gus " in the remake for the PlayStation ) , a simple monk who communicates with animals ; and Leon ( <unk> , <unk> , " Leonhart " in the Japanese release and English NES prototype ) , a conflicted dark knight who is missing for most of the game . Five playable characters temporarily join the party to assist Firion , Maria , and Guy in their missions for the rebellion . These are Gordon ( <unk> , <unk> ) , the prince of Kas <unk> and a member of the rebellion ; Josef ( <unk> , <unk> ) , a villager in the town of <unk> ; Leila ( <unk> , <unk> , " <unk> " in the Japanese release and English NES prototype ) , a pirate ; <unk> ( <unk> , Min 'u , " Mindu " in the PlayStation remake and " Ming @-@ Wu " in the Japanese release and English NES prototype ) , who is a White Mage with the rebellion , and Ricard Highwind ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> , " Gareth " in the PlayStation remake , Edward in the English NES prototype and " Richard " in the Japanese release ) , who is the first dragoon to appear in the series . 
 Firion and the Emperor of Palamecia ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) ( named Mateus ( <unk> , <unk> ) in Kenji Terada 's novelization of the game ) are the respective hero and villain representing Final Fantasy II in Dissidia Final Fantasy , a fighting game featuring characters from across the series . Firion is voiced by Hikaru Midorikawa in the Japanese version and by Johnny Yong Bosch in the English version ; Mateus is voiced by <unk> Horiuchi in the Japanese version and Christopher Corey Smith in the English version . In the PlayStation 's opening FMV of Final Fantasy II , Firion is also voiced by <unk> Obi , while Maria is played by Noriko <unk> , Guy by Kenta Miyake , and Leon by Takayuki Yamaguchi . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Final Fantasy II begins as Firion , Maria , Guy and Leon are attacked by <unk> Black Knight soldiers and left for dead . Firion , Maria , and Guy are rescued by Princess Hilda , who has established a rebel base in the town of Altair after her kingdom of Fynn was invaded by the Emperor . Hilda denies their request to join the rebel army because they are too young and inexperienced . The three set off for Fynn in search of Leon ; there they find a dying Prince Scott of <unk> , Hilda 's fiancé , who informs them that a former knight of Fynn , <unk> , betrayed the rebellion and became a General in the Imperial army . The party returns to Altair to inform Hilda . She allows the group to join the rebellion and asks them to journey north to find mythril , a metal which could be used to create powerful weapons . The party makes its way north to the occupied village of <unk> , saves the villagers forced to work in the nearby mines , and retrieves the mythril . 
 For their next mission , the party is sent to the city of <unk> to prevent the construction of a large airship known as the Dreadnought ; however , it takes off just as they arrive . After retrieving the Sunfire , a weapon which can blow up the Dreadnought , they watch helplessly as an airship with Hilda on board is captured by the Dreadnought . When the Dreadnought lands to stock up on supplies , the party rescues Hilda and throws the Sunfire into the airship 's engine . Before escaping from the explosion , the party encounters a dark knight whom Maria thinks she recognizes as Leon . 
 On his deathbed , the King of Fynn tasks the party to seek the help of the seemingly extinct dragoons of Deist . In Deist , the party finds only a mother with her son , learning that all but one of the Dragoons are dead , partly as a result of Imperial poison . After placing an egg of the last wyvern in a cavern , the party returns to Altair and rescues Hilda from the Empire a second time , before successfully reclaiming Fynn from the Imperial forces . They then travel west in search of a powerful magic item , joining forces with the last surviving dragoon on the way . The party returns to Fynn and sees that many towns have been destroyed by a cyclone summoned by the Emperor . The party calls upon the newly born last wyvern to take them to a castle inside the cyclone , where they confront and kill the Emperor . Back at Fynn , everyone celebrates the Empire 's defeat , but a mortally wounded Fynn soldier arrives and reveals that Leon has taken the throne and plans to destroy the Rebels with the Imperial army . 
 The party enters the castle of Palamecia and confronts Leon . However , the Emperor reappears in the throne room in a new demonic form , revealing he has returned from Hell with the intention of destroying the entire world . The party and Leon escape Palamecia Castle with the wyvern , as the castle is replaced with the palace of Hell , Pandaemonium . Leon agrees to help the group seal the Emperor away . The party travels to the Jade Passage , an underground passage to the underworld , and finds the portal to Pandaemonium , where they finally defeat the Emperor . 
 The Dawn of Souls remake of the game for the Game Boy Advance includes an additional mission that takes place after the game , called " Soul of Rebirth " . The story of the bonus mission follows several characters who died during the story of the game as they travel through alternate versions of several locations in the game and defeat another version of the Emperor . 
 = = Development = = 
 During the development of the first installment in the series , Square 's management decided to manufacture 400 @,@ 000 copies of the game to make a sequel possible . As there were no concrete ideas for Final Fantasy II from the start , it was eventually taken in a new direction and included none of the previous game 's characters or locations . Hironobu Sakaguchi , who had previously served as the main planner for Final Fantasy , assumed the role of director to accommodate for the larger development team . Using the experience gained from the first installment , which focused more on fitting story ideas into their new gameplay system and game world , the developers fully crafted the story of Final Fantasy II first . The gameplay was then built around the narrative . The experience system was designed to be a more realistic advancement system than that of the first game . Several members of the original staff from the first game reprised their jobs for Final Fantasy II . Sakaguchi again created the plot for the title , with the actual scenario written by Kenji Terada . Nobuo Uematsu composed the music , as he had for the first game , while Yoshitaka Amano was again the concept artist . As with the original , Final Fantasy II was programmed by Nasir Gebelli . Midway through the development of the game , Gebelli was forced to return to Sacramento , California from Japan due to an expired work visa . The rest of the development staff followed him to Sacramento with necessary materials and equipment and finished production of the game there . The game was released one day less than a year after the first game came out . 
 In April 1989 , the game was novelized by its original scenario writer Kenji Terada under the title Final Fantasy II : <unk> no Meikyū ( lit . " The Labyrinth of Nightmares " ) . It was published in Japan exclusively by Kadokawa Shoten . 
 = = Music = = 
 The music for Final Fantasy II was later arranged by Tsuyoshi Sekito for the WonderSwan Color , PlayStation , and Game Boy Advance remakes . Although the two soundtracks were composed separately , the soundtrack to II has only been released as a combined album with the soundtrack to Final Fantasy I. They were first released as All Sounds of Final Fantasy I • II in 1989 , which was then republished in 1994 . An arranged album of music from the two soundtracks titled Symphonic Suite Final Fantasy was also released in 1989 , while Final Fantasy & Final Fantasy II Original Soundtrack , a combined soundtrack album for the PlayStation versions of the games , was released in 2002 and re @-@ released in 2004 . The music of Final Fantasy II has also appeared in various official concerts and live albums , such as 20020220 music from Final Fantasy , a live recording of an orchestra performing music from the series including several pieces from the games . Additionally , several songs from the game were performed as part of a medley by the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra for the Distant Worlds – Music from Final Fantasy concert tour , while a different medley of songs from the game were performed by the New Japan Philharmonic Orchestra in the Tour de Japon : Music from Final Fantasy concert series . 
 = = Versions and re @-@ releases = = 
 Final Fantasy has been remade several times for different platforms , and has frequently been packaged with Final Fantasy I in various collections . While all of these remakes retain the same basic story and battle mechanics , various tweaks have been made in different areas , including graphics , sound , and specific game elements . 
 = = = Unreleased English version = = = 
 Following the successful North American release of the original Final Fantasy by Nintendo in 1990 , Square Soft , Square 's North American subsidiary , began work on an English language localization of Final Fantasy II , to be called Final Fantasy II : Dark Shadow Over <unk> . Assigned to the project was Kaoru Moriyama , whose later work included script translations for Final Fantasy IV and Secret of Mana ( known as Seiken Densetsu 2 in Japan ) . Although a beta version was produced , and the game was advertised in several Square Soft trade publications , the long development time , the age of the original Japanese game and the arrival of the Super Nintendo Entertainment System , the NES 's successor console , led Square Soft to cancel work on the Final Fantasy II localization in favor of the recently released Final Fantasy IV ( which , to avoid confusing North American players , was retitled Final Fantasy II to reflect the jump in releases ) . 
 Although a prototype cartridge of the English NES Final Fantasy II was produced , the project was , by Moriyama 's own admission , still far from complete ; " We had so very limited memory capacity we could use for each game , and it was never really " translating " but chopping up the information and cramming them back in ... [ Additionally ] our boss had no understanding in putting in extra work for the English version at that time . " In 2003 , when the game was finally released to English @-@ speaking audiences as part of Final Fantasy Origins , it was released with new graphics , music , and a brand new translation under the supervision of Akira Kashiwagi . A fan translation of the original game was also created prior to the release of Origins , and makes use of an original translation as the existence of the prototype cartridge was not common knowledge at the time . 
 = = = Re @-@ releases = = = 
 In addition to its original Famicom release , Final Fantasy II was re @-@ released on the WonderSwan Color in 2001 , and both singularly and as part of a collection with Final Fantasy I for the PlayStation in 2002 . It was released on the Game Boy Advance in 2004 as part of Final Fantasy I & II : Dawn of Souls , on the PlayStation Portable in 2007 , and for the Japanese Wii Virtual Console on June 16 , 2009 . 
 The Final Fantasy I • II collection included the original game with only minor changes . The WonderSwan Color remake of the game was first released on May 3 , 2001 , and later included as a bundle with a special Final Fantasy II edition of the console . It included completely redone graphics in the manner of the 16 @-@ bit generation Final Fantasy games and includes larger character sprites , remixed music by Tsuyoshi Sekito , and full graphical backgrounds in battle mode . The PlayStation version featured even more graphical updates over the WonderSwan version , and the soundtrack was again remixed by Tsuyoshi Sekito to a higher quality so as to utilise the audio capabilities of the PlayStation . Sekito also composed a few new tracks to be used in the new cutscenes . It was published both individually ( in Japan only ) and alongside Final Fantasy I in a collection entitled Final Fantasy Origins ( or Final Fantasy I + II Premium Collection in Japan ) ; this was the first release of the game outside Japan . On December 18 , 2012 the port was re @-@ released as part of the Final Fantasy 25th Anniversary Ultimate Box package . 
 Final Fantasy II was again released in a new format in 2004 for the Game Boy Advance as part of Final Fantasy I & II : Dawn of Souls . The primary change for this version was the addition of a bonus storyline entitled Soul of Rebirth accessible to the player after completing the game . In 2004 and 2006 , Square Enix released a version of Final Fantasy II for three Japanese mobile phone networks . To celebrate the Final Fantasy series ' 20th anniversary , the game was released in Japan for the PlayStation Portable in 2007 . The remake features improved graphics , the cutscenes and soundtrack from Final Fantasy Origins , and the bonus quest and dungeons from Final Fantasy I & II : Dawn of Souls . It additionally includes two new dungeons in which more character @-@ specific equipment can be found , alongside powerful enemies and a new boss . The release for the Japanese Virtual Console on June 16 , 2009 for the Wii , December 11 , 2013 for the Wii U and on February 12 , 2014 for the Nintendo 3DS is identical to the original Famicom release , incorporating none of the updates of the later versions . On February 25 , 2010 , Square Enix released a port of the PSP version modified with touchscreen controls for the iOS platform . Following this , a touchscreen port was brought to Android in 2012 through the Google Play store . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to Square 's publicity department , the original Famicom release sold 800 @,@ 000 copies . As of March 31 , 2003 , the game , including all re @-@ releases at the time , had shipped 1 @.@ 28 million copies worldwide , with 1 @.@ 08 million of those copies being shipped in Japan and 200 @,@ 000 abroad . Despite having only been released in June of that year , as of September 2007 the PlayStation Portable version had shipped 90 @,@ 000 copies in Japan and 70 @,@ 000 in North America . Despite these high sales , the game had sold the least copies of any of the first ten main games in the Final Fantasy series . 
 Upon release , Famicom Tsūshin ( now Famitsu ) gave the original Famicom version a score of 35 out of 40 , based on a panel of four reviewers giving it ratings of 9 , 9 , 9 and 8 out of 10 . This made it one of their three highest @-@ rated games of 1988 , along with Dragon Quest III ( which scored 38 / 40 ) and Super Mario Bros. 3 ( which scored 35 / 40 ) . It was also one of the magazine 's five highest @-@ rated games up until 1988 , along with Dragon Quest II ( which scored 38 / 40 ) and Zelda II : The Adventure of Link ( which scored 36 / 40 ) . The 1989 " All Soft Catalog " issue of Famicom Tsūshin included Final Fantasy II in its list of the best games of all time , giving it the Best Scenario award . Retrospectively , G4 described the stat @-@ building system as an " Innovation " , noting that " Computer RPGs took the “ level ” system wholesale from tabletop role @-@ playing games and made it a genre staple , but <unk> eliminated levels altogether , " but that what " sounds novel at first wound up being a huge mess " . 
 The game 's re @-@ releases have been more heavily reviewed . Famitsu magazine scored the WonderSwan version of the game a 30 out of 40 , and GameSpot noted the Dawn of Souls ' mostly outdated graphics but praised its length and bonus content . IGN noted the great improvement in the translation of the story over Final Fantasy I and the addition of later Final Fantasy features , such as being able to save anywhere in the overworld map without a tent or cabin . The Dawn of Souls release was named the IGN Game Boy " Game of the Month " for March 2004 , and the package was rated 76th in Nintendo Power 's Top 200 Games list . The dialogue system was thought to be time consuming and stilted , but was still a milestone for interactivity . The story was considered to be much more involved and deep than the first Final Fantasy , as it involved romance and the death of characters . The game 's plot was thought by some reviewers to mirror elements of Star Wars : A New Hope in its use of an orphan joining a rebellion against an empire that was building a massive ship , with a captive princess inside . GameSpy praised the addition of the ability to save the game at any time , calling the feature crucial for a game on a handheld game console , and in contrast to GameSpot , praised the graphics , saying that while they were primitive , they were " well @-@ suited " to the Game Boy Advance . 
 The PSP version was met with generally average reviews . GameSpot described the " more intriguing " story and " key words " system as " notable " in " the evolution of the series and genre " but called the level up system " chaotic " and noted that unlike previous versions , this was shipped without a version of Final Fantasy I. IGN described the " dialogue and story " as " much more interesting than " its predecessor and the " proficiency system not unlike what 's found in The Elder Scrolls " as a " semi @-@ innovation " for its time , but also complained about the gameplay , saying , " If you 're the type of player who puts a higher emphasis on more satisfying gameplay experiences [ ... ] then <unk> definitely isn 't the upgrade it appears to be . " Both sources praised the graphics , however . GameSpy , however , while echoing similar complaints about the " quirky and sometimes confusing " leveling system and praises for the graphics , also applauded the supposed decrease in difficulty of the game , which in the reviewers ' opinion eliminated the necessity to abuse the leveling system in order to progress in the game as the player had to do in the original game . 
 = Heroes of Mana = 
 Heroes of Mana , originally released in Japan as Seiken Densetsu : Heroes of Mana , is a 2007 real @-@ time strategy game for the Nintendo DS . It was developed by Brownie Brown and Square Enix and published by Square Enix . It is the ninth game of the Mana series and the fourth entry in the World of Mana subseries , following the release of Dawn of Mana three months prior . Set in a high fantasy universe , Heroes of Mana follows a young soldier , Roget , as he journeys to defend several nations from the ruthless aggression of his own country in a series of battles . 
 While it contains some small role @-@ playing elements , Heroes of Mana diverges from the prior action role @-@ playing game titles of the series to instead be a real @-@ time strategy game . Composed of a series of strategic battles , the player gathers resources , constructs buildings and units , and fights enemy forces to achieve objectives on fixed isometric grid maps . The Nintendo DS 's second screen displays a map of the ongoing battle , and buildings and units are constructed inside of the player 's airship and dropped onto the map by the flying base . Players can fight several dozen required and optional battles in the single @-@ player game , as well as local multiplayer matches . 
 Heroes of Mana was produced by series creator Koichi Ishii and directed by Takeo Oin . The story was written by Masato Kato , and the music was composed by Yoko Shimomura . The game was not a commercial success , selling around 180 @,@ 000 copies worldwide by the end of 2007 , less than contemporary Mana games . While critics generally praised the graphics , they were dismissive of the plot , mixed on the actual gameplay and sharply negative on what they saw as poor artificial intelligence and pathfinding inhibiting actual play . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Like previous games in the Mana series , Heroes of Mana features a top @-@ down perspective , in which the player characters navigate the terrain and fight off hostile creatures and enemies . Unlike prior games in the series , which are typically action role @-@ playing games , Heroes is a real @-@ time strategy game ( RTS ) , in which the player controls up to 25 units in battles on fixed maps . Units are controlled via the Nintendo DS touch screen , selected by tapping on them and sent to destinations or to attack by tapping on their target . The game world is divided into an isometric grid , with one unit allowed per space . The Nintendo DS 's second screen shows a map of the current mission , including which parts of the map can currently be seen by the player 's units and which parts are covered by fog of war . Individual units and enemies are shown on the map in the visible areas . 
 Some of the units available to the player are characters in the game 's storyline , while the rest are monsters which can be summoned by the player . Resources , divided into berries and minerals , are gathered from resource nodes by Rabite units . Minerals are used to create buildings , while berries are used to create units from those buildings . Both buildings and units are built inside of the player 's airship , and units are then dropped onto the battlefield by the movable ship . The game features some role @-@ playing elements ; characters during the course of the game learn new skills over time , and can be given equipment to increase their attack and defense . New equipment is obtained through completing story and bonus missions and finding hidden treasure . During the course of the game 's story the player also acquires new summons and heroes . Missions can have different ending conditions , such as destroying an enemy carrier or defeating all enemies in the area . There are over 20 missions in the game 's story , as well as dozens of bonus missions which become available as the player advances through the game which do not advance the plot but can give the player more items and summons . 
 Heroes of Mana features a local multiplayer option , where players can battle against each other using the progress they have made in the single @-@ player game . There is no multiplayer support on the Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection service , though players can use it to access the Wi @-@ Fi Heroes Ranking system to download additional maps , missions , and items . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Heroes of Mana opens with a reconnaissance mission by a group of soldiers from Pedda into the <unk> kingdom of <unk> . The group , including the soldier Roget and his captain Yerchael , are on their airship , the <unk> , when they are shot down by <unk> ships . After crash @-@ landing in a forest and getting separated , Roget and Yurchael fight their way back to the rest of the group through the <unk> army before running into the Peddan military . The <unk> claim not to know about the group and attack them ; after fleeing Roget and Yurchael discover that Pedda is invading <unk> , and attacking peaceful villages as they do . Unable to support the invasion , the group rebels against Pedda and joins forces with the <unk> . 
 They soon learn that the king of Pedda and Roget 's childhood friend , Inath , has been driven mad and is launching Operation Psi with the aim of taking over the world . Roget and Yerchael journey to the other nations in order to help stop the Peddan army . They join forces with the rulers and warriors of several countries , including the defeated Amazons of Laurent , the rebels of <unk> , which has allied itself with Pedda , and the warriors of Valsena and Altena . As they fight the Peddan army , they discover that Inath is installing Black Mirrors in the conquered kingdoms , which are corrupting those around them . Roget and Yurchael are joined in their quest by the elemental spirits , which are concerned about the mirrors . After confronting Roget 's twin brother , the Mirage Bishop , they discover that Inath and the Mirage Bishop have been corrupted by the ancient witch Anise , who is planting the mirrors in order to summon a dark energy for her own power . 
 Roget and Yerchael join forces with <unk> , the Oracle of Shadows from the holy city of Wendel , who discovers that Anise is hoping to use the dark energy from the mirrors to turn herself into a goddess . Roget and his allies journey to the Mirage Castle to confront Anise , only for her to finish pulling the dark energy from the mirrors before they can stop her . The dark energy kills Inath and the Mirage Bishop , and Anise combines her form with a possessed Peddan general to create the Goddess of Doom . The allied forces fight and defeat the Goddess , ending the threat from Pedda , and return to their home countries . 
 = = Development = = 
 In 2003 , Square Enix began a drive to begin developing " polymorphic content " , a marketing and sales strategy to " [ provide ] well @-@ known properties on several platforms , allowing exposure of the products to as wide an audience as possible " . The first of these was the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII , and Square Enix intended to have campaigns for other series whereby multiple games in different genres would be developed simultaneously . In early 2005 , Square Enix announced a " World of Mana " project , the application of this " polymorphic content " idea to the Mana franchise , which would include several games across different genres and platforms . These games , as with the rest of the series , would not be direct sequels or prequels to one another , even if appearing so at first glance , but would instead share thematic connections . The fourth release in this project and the ninth release in the Mana series was announced in September 2006 as Heroes of Mana , the second Nintendo DS game in the World of Mana series and the first real @-@ time strategy game in the series . It was first announced in Famitsu magazine and subsequently featured at the Tokyo Game Show . 
 Heroes of Mana was produced by series creator Koichi Ishii , directed by Takeo Oin , and written by Masato Kato . Ishii had previously produced or directed all of the previous Mana games , while Kato also wrote the stories for Children of Mana ( 2006 ) and Dawn of Mana ( 2006 ) . The game was developed by Brownie Brown , who previously helped develop Sword of Mana ( 2003 ) . Ishii created the overall design , and Brownie Brown worked directly with him to implement it . As the series creator , Ishii felt it was important to be directly involved in all stages of development . Heroes of Mana was created as an RTS game to complement the other titles in the World of Mana project , which all offer a spin on the original Seiken Densetsu formula . Ishii stated that it was also to help expose Japanese gamers to real @-@ time strategy games , a genre that is relatively obscure in Japan , while simultaneously satisfying players abroad with an RTS for an unconventional console , as most real @-@ time strategy games are released for personal computers . To match this mission , the game was designed for more casual players than the typical fan of the traditionally role @-@ playing game series . The Nintendo DS was chosen as the platform partially due to the system 's multiplayer potential as well as giving the sensation of touching the game . The team found developing an RTS for the Nintendo DS to be difficult , and had to start development over at one point . Although prior to the World of Mana project Ishii has said that the games in the series are only thematically connected , Heroes is explicitly set as a prequel to Seiken Densetsu 3 ( 1995 ) , depicting battles between the nations present in that game . It is set one generation prior to Seiken Densetsu 3 , with some characters noted as the parents of characters in the other game . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The score for Heroes of Mana was composed by Yoko Shimomura , who had previously composed the music for Legend of Mana in 1999 . The musical style of the soundtrack is primarily orchestral , with the addition of a strong piano and drums that sometimes verge on a more tribal rhythm . The album Seiken Densetsu : Heroes of Mana Original Soundtrack collects 49 tracks from the game on 2 discs and is nearly two and a half hours long . It was published by Square Enix on April 18 , 2007 . Three of the game 's tracks were released as part of Drammatica : The Very Best Works of Yoko Shimomura , a 2008 arranged album highlighting the composer 's work : " To the Heroes of Old ~ Opening Theme from Heroes of Mana ~ " , " The Way the Heart Is " ( as " Tango Appassionata " ) , and " The Tale Told by the Wind ~ Ending Theme from Heroes of Mana ~ " . Shimomura carefully chose the songs to be included on the album based on their apparent popularity among fans and how suitable they are for orchestra . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Heroes of Mana sold over 98 @,@ 500 copies in Japan by the end of 2007 . It sold 30 @,@ 000 copies in North America and 50 @,@ 000 in Europe as of November 2007 , a few weeks after release in North America . Initial sales were lower than those for Children of Mana , the other Nintendo DS title in the series released one year earlier . Koichi Ishii attributed this to the overall lack of experience and popularity of the RTS genre in Japan . 
 Upon its release , Heroes of Mana received generally poor to middling reviews over a wide range , with numerical scores that range from 35 to 85 out of 100 . Reviewers praised Dawn of Mana 's graphics and visual style ; IGN 's Bozon praised the " classic character art " and " hand @-@ painted backdrops " , GameSpot 's Kevin VanOrd noted the colorful graphics and " overflowing " animations , and Eurogamer 's Simon Parkin said that the " fantastic presentation and artwork " " sugar @-@ coated " the game . Patrick Gann of RPGFan , on the other hand , said that besides the cinematics and character portraits the graphics were not impressive , with poor sprites and animation . The plot was not as highly received ; while Bozon called it a " pretty involving piece of Mana mythos " , VanOrd said only that it was not " particularly engaging , but it 's pleasant enough " , while Parkin called the story " lingering intrusions " and Gann found it well @-@ written , but too linear and cliched . The reviewer for GamePro said that " the overall story doesn 't grip players " and that there were too many characters too get attached to any of them . Gann called out the music as beautiful , though it was not mentioned by other reviewers . 
 The gameplay received very mixed reviews , with the artificial intelligence universally derided and other gameplay elements garnering a range of opinions . Bozon said that " the A.I. can be a real pain , as characters often take extremely odd routes to destinations or show command issues when engaging enemies " , Joe Juba of Game Informer called the pathfinding " laughably terrible " , a criticism echoed by Jeremy Parish of 1UP.com , and Parkin called it " an unmitigated disaster " . VanOrd termed it " the worst , most broken system of unit pathfinding ever devised " , and Gann felt it was so bad that it showed that the developers " had no idea what they were doing " in making an RTS . Bozon felt that the overall real @-@ time strategy gameplay , however , was deep , if a bit slow , as did VanOrd . Parkin felt that the gameplay was " easy and intuitive " , though slow , while Parish felt that the limitations of the Nintendo DS 's small screens made the game too streamlined for an RTS game . Juba and the GamePro reviewer felt that the restrictions necessary to fit an RTS on a system the size of the DS made the game too simple and easy . The Japanese Famitsu review , however , felt that the game worked well as an RTS for the Nintendo DS , and was well @-@ suited to the console . Both Bozon and Parish felt that the local multiplayer was better than the single @-@ player game , though Bozon felt that the lack of online multiplayer was stifling and VanOrd felt that the tie between the multiplayer game and the player 's single @-@ player progress imbalanced any game where both players had not fully completed the storyline . 
 = Adventure Time ( pilot ) = 
 " Adventure Time " is an animated short created by Pendleton Ward , as well as the pilot to the Cartoon Network series of the same name . The short follows the adventures of Pen ( voiced by Zack Shada ) , a human boy , and his best friend Jake ( voiced by John DiMaggio ) , a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will . In this episode , Pen and Jake have to rescue Princess Bubblegum ( voiced by Paige Moss ) from the antagonistic Ice King ( voiced by John Kassir ) . 
 " Adventure Time " first aired as a stand @-@ alone short on Nicktoons Network in January 2007 , after which it subsequently went viral on the internet ; as of April 2008 , the pilot has had over 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 views . It was then re @-@ aired as part of Nicktoons Network 's Random ! Cartoons series showcase on December 7 , 2008 , subsequently leading to the creation of the animated series . It was nominated for an Annie Award for Best Animated Short Subject . The short and the later @-@ produced television series share elements , but the two differ slightly in setting , conception and continuity , especially in regard to the post @-@ apocalyptic setting , which is only featured in the television series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The short focused on a boy named Pen and a dog named Jake as they learn from the Rainicorn that the Ice King has kidnapped Princess Bubblegum , in the hope of marrying her . Declaring that it 's " Adventure Time " , Pen and Jake set off to the Ice King 's mountain lair . Pen and the Ice King fight while Jake remains outside flirting with Lady Rainicorn , ignoring the battle . Just when Pen seems to be gaining the upper hand , the Ice King uses his " frozen lightning bolts " to freeze Pen in a block of ice . For unexplained reasons , this transports Pen 's mind back in time , and to Mars , where he has a short motivational conversation with Abraham Lincoln . After being told to believe in himself , Pen 's mind is returned to the present , where he breaks out of the ice , just in time to see the Ice King fly away with Princess Bubblegum . Chasing after him using Jake 's extendable legs , Pen rescues the princess from the Ice King 's grasp . Jake pushes the magical crown off the Ice King 's head , thereby removing the King 's source of power . The Ice King then plummets off screen , yelling a long list of complex threats of things he will do when he returns . The story closes with Princess Bubblegum giving Pen a kiss ; he enjoys it , but is also greatly embarrassed by the act . He attempts to leave , but Jake claims that they have nowhere else to go and that there are no adventures that need them . However , some nearby ninjas are stealing an old man 's diamonds , and they both run off in pursuit . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Pen ( voiced by Zack Shada ) – One of the two main protagonists of the short . According to Ward , he is " a little boy " who is " just hanging out " . For the television series , he was renamed to Finn ; the character would also go on to be voiced by Zack 's younger brother Jeremy Shada . 
 Jake ( voiced by John DiMaggio ) – The other main protagonists of the short . Jake is Pen 's " pal " , according to Ward . DiMaggio would voice the character in both the short and the later series . 
 Princess Bubblegum ( voiced by Paige Moss ) – Princess Bubblegum is the damsel in distress . Voiced by Moss in the short , Bubblegum would later be voiced by Hynden Walch in the series . 
 Rainicorn ( voiced by Dee Bradley Baker ) – Rainicorn would later be renamed " Lady Rainicorn " for the series , and would be voiced by Korean storyboard artist Niki Yang , rather than Dee Bradley Baker . 
 Ice King ( voiced by John Kassir ) – The main antagonist of the short ; Ward later called him a " <unk> " in an interview . Kassir voiced the character in the short , but Tom Kenny would later voice the Ice King in the series . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Adventure Time " was created by Pendleton Ward . The short 's style was influenced by his time at California Institute of the Arts ( CalArts ) . " Adventure Time " was Ward 's first job in animation after he graduated from CalArts . Ward had been contacted by Eric Homan , the vice president of Development at Frederator Studios after Homan saw one of Wards films at a CalArts animation screening called " The Producer 's Show " . Homan told Ward that he should consider pitching an idea to the Frederator incubator series Random ! Cartoons . Ward spent approximately one to two weeks storyboarding the outline for " Adventure Time " . He described the process as " exciting " because he was " jumping into it not knowing whether [ he ] would sink or swim . " 
 During the initial storyboard pitch to Frederator Studios , Ward brought a guitar and played the episode 's theme song . Frederator 's CEO Fred Seibert was initially disinclined to make the short , feeling it was too much of a " student film " and without much commercial appeal . Longtime colleagues , development executive Homan and production executive Kevin <unk> , convinced him otherwise , arguing that Seibert had actually laughed in the presentation , something that he did not often do . Frederator approved the pitch , and " Adventure Time " soon went into production . 
 Ward hired several of his recently graduated CalArts friends to work on the short with him . Neil Graf was tasked with coloring , Julian <unk> was the background designer , and Adam Muto drew the props . Graf and <unk> later got jobs with other series and studios — King of the Hill and Laika studio , respectively — but Muto continued working with Ward and currently serves as Adventure Time 's co @-@ executive producer and showrunner . The finished short ran for seven minutes , and production wrapped up in the spring of 2006 . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Adventure Time " first aired as a stand @-@ alone short on Nicktoons network on January 11 , 2007 , and it was re @-@ aired as part of Frederator Studios ' Random ! Cartoons on December 7 , 2008 . In between airings , it leaked onto the internet and went viral . According to Frederator Studios producer and founder Fred Seibert the short , " between all of its distribution points , " had been viewed almost 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 times by April 2008 . The feature was later nominated for an Annie Award for Best Animated Short Subject , although it did not win . 
 After its release and success , Frederator Studios then pitched an Adventure Time series to Nicktoons , but the network passed on it twice . The studio then approached Cartoon Network . The network said they would be willing to produce the series if Ward could prove that " the seven @-@ minute short made for Nick wasn ’ t a one @-@ hit wonder " . Ward quickly retooled the concept of the pilot ; he wanted a potential series to be " fully realized " , rather than possess the " pre @-@ school vibe " that the original pilot had . Initially , Ward submitted a rough storyboard that featured Finn and an " oblivious " Princess Bubblegum going on a spaghetti @-@ supper date . However , the network was not happy with this story , and specifically asked for an episode that contained the same things that had " made the short so special , like the crazy opening dance , the ' Abe Lincoln moment , ' funny <unk> , and the awkward princess / kiss moment at the end . Ward then created an early storyboard for the episode " The Enchiridion ! " , which was his attempt to emulate the style of the original short . Eventually , Cartoon Network approved the first season in September 2008 , and " The Enchiridion ! " became the first episode to enter into production . 
 = Ohlone people = 
 Ohlone people , named Costanoan by early Spanish colonists ( the Spanish word costa means " coast " ) , are a Native American people of the central California coast . When Spanish explorers and missionaries arrived in the late 18th century , the Ohlone inhabited the area along the coast from San Francisco Bay through Monterey Bay to the lower Salinas Valley . At that time they spoke a variety of languages , the Ohlone languages , belonging to the Costanoan sub @-@ family of the Utian language family , which itself belongs to the proposed Penutian language phylum . The term " Ohlone " has been used in place of " Costanoan " since the 1970s by some descendant groups and by most ethnographers , historians , and writers of popular literature . In pre @-@ colonial times , the Ohlone lived in more than 50 distinct landholding groups , and did not view themselves as a distinct group . They lived by hunting , fishing , and gathering , in the typical ethnographic California pattern . The members of these various bands interacted freely with one another as they built friendships and marriages , traded tools and other necessities , and partook in cultural practices . The Ohlone people practiced the Kuksu religion . Before the Gold Rush , the northern California region was one of the most densely populated regions north of Mexico . However , in the years 1769 to 1833 , the Spanish missions in California had an effect on Ohlone culture . The Ohlone population declined steeply during this period . 
 The Ohlone living today belong to one or another of a number of geographically distinct groups , most , but not all , in their original home territory . The Muwekma Ohlone Tribe has members from around the San Francisco Bay Area , and is composed of descendants of the Ohlones / Costanoans from the San Jose , Santa Clara , and San Francisco missions . The Ohlone / Costanoan Esselen Nation , consisting of descendants of intermarried Rumsen Costanoan and Esselen speakers of Mission San Carlos Borromeo , are centered at Monterey . The Amah @-@ Mutsun Tribe are descendants of Mutsun Costanoan speakers of Mission San Juan Bautista , inland from Monterey Bay . Most members of another group of Rumsien language , descendants from Mission San Carlos , the Costanoan Rumsien Carmel Tribe of Pomona / Chino , now live in southern California . These groups , and others with smaller memberships ( see groups listed under the heading Present Day below ) are separately petitioning the federal government for tribal recognition . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The Ohlone inhabited fixed village locations , moving temporarily to gather seasonal foodstuffs like acorns and berries . The Ohlone people lived in Northern California from the northern tip of the San Francisco Peninsula down to Big Sur in the south , and from the Pacific Ocean in the west to the Diablo Range in the east . Their vast region included the San Francisco Peninsula , Santa Clara Valley , Santa Cruz Mountains , Monterey Bay area , as well as present @-@ day Alameda County , Contra Costa County and the Salinas Valley . Prior to Spanish contact , the Ohlone formed a complex association of approximately 50 different " nations or tribes " with about 50 to 500 members each , with an average of 200 . Over 50 distinct Ohlone tribes and villages have been recorded . The Ohlone villages interacted through trade , intermarriage and ceremonial events , as well as some internecine conflict . Cultural arts included basket @-@ weaving skills , seasonal ceremonial dancing events , female tattoos , ear and nose piercings , and other ornamentation . 
 The Ohlone subsisted mainly as hunter @-@ gatherers and in some ways harvesters . " A rough husbandry of the land was practiced , mainly by annually setting of fires to burn @-@ off the old growth in order to get a better yield of seeds – or so the Ohlone told early explorers in San Mateo County . " Their staple diet consisted of crushed acorns , nuts , grass seeds , and berries , although other vegetation , hunted and trapped game , fish and seafood ( including mussels and abalone from the San Francisco Bay and Pacific Ocean ) , were also important to their diet . These food sources were abundant in earlier times and maintained by careful work , and through active management of all the natural resources at hand . Animals in their mild climate included the grizzly bear , elk ( Cervus elaphus ) , pronghorn , and deer . The streams held salmon , perch , and stickleback . Birds included plentiful ducks , geese , quail , great horned owls , red @-@ shafted flickers , downy woodpeckers , goldfinches , and yellow @-@ billed magpies . Waterfowl were the most important birds in the people 's diet , which were captured with nets and decoys . The Chochenyo traditional narratives refer to ducks as food , and Juan <unk> observed in his journal that geese were stuffed and dried " to use as decoys in hunting others " . 
 Along the ocean shore and bays , there were also otters , whales , and at one time thousands of sea lions . In fact , there were so many sea lions that according to Crespi it " looked like a pavement " to the incoming Spanish . 
 In general , along the <unk> and valleys , the Ohlone constructed dome @-@ shaped houses of woven or bundled mats of tules , 6 to 20 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 to 6 m ) in diameter . In hills where redwood trees were accessible , they built conical houses from redwood bark attached to a frame of wood . Redwood houses were remembered in Monterey . One of the main village buildings , the sweat lodge was low into the ground , its walls made of earth and roof of earth and brush . They built boats of tule to navigate on the bays propelled by double @-@ bladed paddles . 
 Generally , men did not wear clothing in warm weather . In cold weather , they might don animal skin capes or feather capes . Women commonly wore deerskin aprons , tule skirts , or shredded bark skirts . On cool days , they also wore animal skin capes . Both wore ornamentation of necklaces , shell beads and abalone pendants , and bone wood earrings with shells and beads . The ornamentation often indicated status within their community . 
 = = Religion = = 
 = = = Ohlone as ethnographers to connect with their past = = = 
 It is imperative as researchers to be sensitive to limitations in historical knowledge , and careful not to place the spiritual and religious beliefs of all Ohlone people into a single unified worldview . Due to the displacement of Indian people in the Missions between 1769 @-@ 1833 , cultural groups are working as ethnographers to discover for themselves their ancestral history , and what that information tells about them as a cultural group . Therefore , this section about the Ohlone religious and spiritual beliefs and practices is a lot less about the specific details about their cosmologies , considering that the religion is different depending on the band one is referring to , but a lot more of a general overview of shared components of their worldview as native people of central California . 
 The pre @-@ contact Ohlone practiced Kuksu . They believed that spiritual doctors could heal and prevent illness , and they had a " probable belief in bear shamans " . Their spiritual beliefs were not recorded in detail by missionaries . However , some of the villages probably learned and practiced Kuksu , a form of shamanism shared by many Central and Northern California tribes ( although there is some question whether the Ohlone people learned Kuksu from other tribes while at the missions ) . Kuksu included elaborate acting and dancing ceremonies in traditional costume , an annual mourning ceremony , puberty rites of passage , intervention with the spirit world and an all @-@ male society that met in subterranean dance rooms . 
 Kuksu was shared with other indigenous ethnic groups of Central California , such as their neighbors the Miwok and Esselen , also Maidu , Pomo , and northernmost Yokuts . However Kroeber observed less " specialized cosmogony " in the Ohlone , which he termed one of the " southern Kuksu @-@ dancing groups " , in comparison to the Maidu and groups in the Sacramento Valley ; he noted " if , as seems probable , the southerly Kuksu tribes ( the Miwok , Costanoans , Esselen , and northernmost Yokuts ) had no real society in connection with their Kuksu ceremonies . " 
 The conditions upon which the Ohlone joined the Spanish missions are subject to debate . Some have argued that they were forced to convert to Catholicism , while others have insisted that forced baptism was not recognized by the Catholic Church . All who have looked into the matter agree , however , that baptized Indians who tried to leave mission communities were forced to return . The first conversions to Catholicism were at Mission San Carlos Borromeo , alias Carmel , in 1771 . In the San Francisco Bay area the first baptisms occurred at Mission San Francisco in 1777 . Many first @-@ generation Mission Era conversions to Catholicism were <unk> incomplete and " external " . 
 = = = Spirituality and healing = = = 
 It is apparent that the pre @-@ contact Ohlone had distinguished medicine persons among their tribe . Some of these people healed through the use of herbs , and some were shamans who were believed to heal through their ability to contact the spirit world . Some shamans typically engaged in more ritualistic healing in the form of dancing , ceremony , and singing . Some shamans were also believed to be able to tell and influence the future , therefore they were equally able to bring about fortune and misfortune among the community . 
 = = = Indian Canyon : prayer houses / sweat lodges for ceremony and purification = = = 
 Additionally , some Ohlone bands built prayer houses , also called sweat lodges , for ceremonial and spiritual purification purposes . These lodges were built near stream banks because water was believed to be capable of great healing . Men and women would gather in the sweat lodges to " cleanse , purify , and empower themselves " for a task like hunting and spirit dancing . Today , there is a place located in Hollister called Indian Canyon , where a traditional sweat lodge , or <unk> , has been built for the same ceremonial purposes . Along with the development of the sweat lodge in the early 1990s , the construction of an <unk> tah @-@ <unk> , or round house / assembly house , was underway as well . These areas are meant to provide a gathering place for tribal meetings , traditional dances and ceremonies , and education activities Indian Canyon is an important place because it is open to all Native American groups in the United States and around the world as a place to hold traditional native practices without federal restrictions . Indian Canyon is also home to many Ohlone people , specifically of the <unk> band , and serves as an educational , cultural , and spiritual environment for all visitors . Indian Canyon allows Natives to reclaim their heritage and implement their ancestral beliefs and practices into their lives . 
 = = = Sacred narratives and mythology = = = 
 The storytelling of sacred narratives has been an important component of Ohlone indigenous culture for hundreds and thousands of years , and continues to be of importance today . The narratives often teach specific moral or spiritual lessons , and are illustrative of the cultural spiritual and religious beliefs of the tribe . Because not all the Ohlone bands shared a unified identity , and therefore have varying religious and spiritual beliefs , the stories are unique to the tribe . Today , sacred narratives are still an important part of the Ohlone culture . Sadly , only a minimal number of sacred stories have survived Spanish colonization during the 1700s and 1800s due to ethnographic efforts in the Missions . Many Ohlone bands refer to anthropologic records to reconstruct their sacred narratives because some Ohlone people living in the missions acted as " professional consultants " for anthropologic research , and therefore told their past stories . The problem with this type of recording is that the stories are not always complete due to translation differences where meaning can be easily misunderstood . 
 Therefore , many Ohlone bands today feel responsible for re @-@ adopting these narratives and discussing them with cultural representatives and other Ohlone people to decide what their meanings are . This process is important because the Ohlone can further piece together a cultural identity of their past ancestors , and ultimately for themselves as well . Additionally , through knowing sacred narratives and sharing them with the public through live performances or storytelling , the Ohlone people are able to create an awareness that their cultural group is not extinct , but actually surviving and wanting recognition . 
 Ohlone folklore and legend centered around the Californian culture heroes of the Coyote trickster spirit , as well as Eagle and Hummingbird ( and in the Chochenyo region , a falcon @-@ like being named <unk> ) . Coyote spirit was clever , wily , lustful , greedy , and irresponsible . He often competed with Hummingbird , who despite his small size regularly got the better of him . 
 Ohlone mythology creation stories mention that the world was covered entirely in water , apart from a single peak Pico Blanco near Big Sur ( or Mount Diablo in the northern Ohlone 's version ) on which Coyote , Hummingbird , and Eagle stood . Humans were the descendants of Coyote . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Columbian era = = = 
 The predominant theory regarding the settlement of the Americas date the original migrations from Asia to around 20 @,@ 000 years ago across the Bering Strait land bridge , but one anthropologist claims that the Ohlone and some other northern California tribes descend from Siberians who arrived in California by sea around 3 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 Some archeologists and linguists think that these people migrated from the San Joaquin @-@ Sacramento River system and arrived into the San Francisco and Monterey Bay Areas in about the 6th century CE , displacing or assimilating earlier Hokan @-@ speaking populations of which the Esselen in the south represent a remnant . <unk> of ancient shell mounds in Newark and Emeryville suggest the villages at those locations were established about 4000 BCE . 
 Through shell mound dating , scholars noted three periods of ancient Bay Area history , as described by F.M. Stanger in La Peninsula : " Careful study of artifacts found in central California mounds has resulted in the discovery of three distinguishable epochs or cultural ' horizons ' in their history . In terms of our time @-@ counting system , the first or ' Early Horizon ' extends from about 4000 BCE to 1000 BCE in the Bay Area and to about 2000 BCE in the Central Valley . The second or Middle Horizon was from these dates to 700 CE , while the third or Late Horizon was from 700 CE to the coming of the Spaniards in the 1770s . " 
 = = = Mission era ( 1769 – 1833 ) = = = 
 The arrival of missionaries and Spanish explorers in the mid @-@ 1700s had a negative impact on the Ohlone people who inhabited Northern California . The Ohlone territory consisted of the northern tip of the San Francisco Peninsula down to Big Sur in the south . There were more than fifty Ohlone landholding groups prior to the arrival of the Spanish Missionaries . The Ohlone were able to thrive in this area by hunting , fishing , and gathering , in the typical pattern found in California coastal tribes . Each of the Ohlone villages interacted with each other through trade , intermarriage , and ceremonial events , as well as through occasional conflict . 
 The Ohlone culture was relatively stable until the first Spanish soldiers and missionaries arrived with the double @-@ purpose of Christianizing the Native Americans by building a series of missions and of expanding Spanish territorial claims . The Rumsien were the first Ohlone people to be encountered and documented in Spanish records when , in 1602 , explorer Sebastian Vizcaíno reached and named the area that is now Monterey in December of that year . Despite Vizcaíno 's positive reports , nothing further happened for more than 160 years . It was not until 1769 that the next Spanish expedition arrived in Monterey , led by Gaspar de Portolà . This time , the military expedition was accompanied by Franciscan missionaries , whose purpose was to establish a chain of missions to bring Christianity to the native people . Under the leadership of Father Junípero Serra , the missions introduced Spanish religion and culture to the Ohlone . 
 Spanish mission culture soon disrupted and undermined the Ohlone social structures and way of life . Under Father Serra 's leadership , the Spanish Franciscans erected seven missions inside the Ohlone region and brought most of the Ohlone into these missions to live and work . The missions erected within the Ohlone region were : Mission San Carlos <unk> de Carmelo ( founded in 1770 ) , Mission San Francisco de Asís ( founded in 1776 ) , Mission Santa Clara de Asís ( founded in 1777 ) , Mission Santa Cruz ( founded in 1791 ) , Mission Nuestra Señora de la Soledad ( founded in 1791 ) , Mission San José ( founded in 1797 ) , and Mission San Juan Bautista ( founded in 1797 ) . The Ohlone who went to live at the missions were called Mission Indians , and also neophytes . They were blended with other Native American ethnicities such as the Coast Miwok transported from the North Bay into the Mission San Francisco and Mission San José . 
 Spanish military presence was established at two <unk> , the Presidio of Monterey , and the Presidio of San Francisco , and mission outposts , such as San Pedro y San Pablo Asistencia founded in 1786 . The Spanish soldiers traditionally escorted the Franciscans on missionary outreach <unk> but declined to camp overnight . For the first twenty years the missions accepted a few converts at a time , slowly gaining population . Between November 1794 and May 1795 , a large wave of Bay Area Native Americans were baptized and moved into Mission Santa Clara and Mission San Francisco , including 360 people to Mission Santa Clara and the entire <unk> village populations of the East Bay to Mission San Francisco . In March 1795 , this migration was followed almost immediately by the worst @-@ seen epidemic , as well as food shortages , resulting in alarming statistics of death and escapes from the missions . In pursuing the runaways , the Franciscans sent neophytes first and ( as a last resort ) soldiers to go round up the runaway " Christians " from their relatives , and bring them back to the missions . By running to tribes outside of the missions , escapees and those sent to bring them back to the mission spread illness outside of the missions . 
 Indians did not thrive when the missions expanded both their populations and operations in their geographical areas . " A total of 81 @,@ 000 Indians were baptized and 60 @,@ 000 deaths were recorded " . The cause of death varied , but most were the result of European diseases such as smallpox , measles , and diphtheria against which the Indians had no natural immunity . Other causes were a drastic diet change from hunter and gatherer fare to a diet high in carbohydrates and low in vegetables and animal protein , harsh lifestyle changes , and unsanitary living conditions . 
 = = = = Land and property disputes = = = = 
 Under Spanish rule , the intent for the future of the mission properties is difficult to ascertain . Property disputes arose over who owned the mission ( and adjacent ) lands , between the Spanish crown , the Catholic Church , the Natives and the Spanish settlers of San Jose : There were " heated debates " between " the Spanish State and ecclesiastical bureaucracies " over the government authority of the missions . Setting the precedent in an interesting petition to the Governor in 1782 , the Franciscan priests claimed the " Missions Indians " owned both land and cattle , and they represented the Natives in a petition against the San Jose settlers . The fathers mentioned the " Indians ' crops " were being damaged by the San Jose settlers ' livestock and also mentioned settlers " getting mixed up with the livestock belonging to the Indians from the mission . " They also stated the Mission Indians had property and rights to defend it : " Indians are at liberty to slaughter such ( San Jose pueblo ) livestock as trespass unto their lands . " " By law " , the mission property was to pass to the Mission Indians after a period of about ten years , when they would become Spanish citizens . In the interim period , the Franciscans were mission administrators who held the land in trust for the Natives . 
 = = = Secularization = = = 
 In 1834 , the Mexican government ordered all Californian missions to be secularized and all mission land and property ( administered by the Franciscans ) turned over to the government for redistribution . At this point , the Ohlone were supposed to receive land grants and property rights , but few did and most of the mission lands went to the secular administrators . In the end , even attempts by mission leaders to restore native lands were in vain . Before this time , 73 Spanish land grants had already been deeded in all of Alta California , but with the new régime most lands were turned into Mexican @-@ owned rancherias . The Ohlone became the laborers and <unk> ( cowboys ) of Mexican @-@ owned rancherias . 
 = = = Survival = = = 
 The Ohlone eventually regathered in multi @-@ ethnic rancherias , along with other Mission Indians from families that spoke the Coast Miwok , Bay Miwok , Plains Miwok , <unk> , Yokuts , and Esselen languages . Many of the Ohlone that had survived the experience at Mission San Jose went to work at <unk> Rancheria in Pleasanton , and El Molino in Niles . Communities of mission survivors also formed in Sunol , Monterey and San Juan Bautista . In the 1840s a wave of United States settlers encroached into the area , and California became annexed to the United States . The new settlers brought in new diseases to the Ohlone . 
 The Ohlone lost the vast majority of their population between 1780 and 1850 , because of an abysmal birth rate , high infant mortality rate , diseases and social upheaval associated with European immigration into California . By all estimates , the Ohlone were reduced to less than ten percent of their original pre @-@ mission era population . By 1852 the Ohlone population had shrunk to about 864 – 1 @,@ 000 , and was continuing to decline . By the early 1880s , the northern Ohlone were virtually extinct , and the southern Ohlone people were severely impacted and largely displaced from their communal land grant in the Carmel Valley . To call attention to the plight of the California Indians , Indian Agent , reformer , and popular novelist Helen Hunt Jackson published accounts of her travels among the Mission Indians of California in 1883 . 
 Considered the last fluent speaker of an Ohlone language , Rumsien @-@ speaker Isabella Meadows died in 1939 . Some of the people are attempting to revive Rumsien , Mutsun , and Chochenyo . 
 = = Burial practices = = 
 = = = Sacred sites and importance = = = 
 The arrival of the Spanish in the 1776 decelerated the culture , sovereignty , religion , and language of the Ohlone . Before the Spanish invasion , the Muwekma Ohlone had an estimated 500 shellmounds lining the sea and shores of the San Francisco Bay . <unk> are essentially Ohlone habitation sites where peopled lived and died and often buried . The mounds consist <unk> of molluscan shells , with lesser amounts mammal and fish bone , vegetal materials and other organic material deposited by the Ohlone for thousands of years . These shellmounds are the direct result of village life . Archaeologists have examined the mounds and often refer to them as " middens , " or " kitchen midden " meaning an accumulation of refuse . One theory is that the massive amount of shellfish remains represent Ohlone ritual behavior , whereas they would spend months mourning their dead and feasting on large amounts of shellfish which were disposed of ever growing the girth and height of the mound . <unk> were once found all over the San Francisco Bay area near marshlands , creeks , wetlands , and rivers . San Bruno Mountain is home to the nation 's largest intact <unk> . These mounds are also thought to have served a practical purpose as well , since these shellmounds were usually near waterways or the ocean , they protected the village from high tide as well as to provide high ground for line of sight navigation for watercraft on San Francisco Bay . The Emeryville <unk> is an site standing at over 60 feet tall and 350 feet in diameter , and was believed to be occupied between 400 and 2800 years ago . 
 = = = Burial practices = = = 
 In the San Francisco region , the Ohlone burial practices changed over time with cremation being <unk> before the arrival of the Spanish . Once the cremation was complete the loved ones and friends would place ornaments as well as other valuables as an offering to the dead . Ohlone believed that this would give them good fortune in the afterlife . Many of these artifacts have been found in and around the shellmounds . They often include a wide variety of shell beads and ornaments as well as frequently used everyday items such as stone and bone tools . These burials also showcase genealogies and territorial rights . The mounds were seen as a cultural statement because the villages on top were clearly visible and their sacred aura was very dominant . 
 = = = Present day burial and sacred sites = = = 
 Glen Cove 
 Ohlone tribes have protested in Vallejo , California and insist that Glen Cove , a sacred site for many Natives , is one of the last native village sites in the San Francisco Bay that has escaped urban development . Ohlone feel that the public land should remain undisturbed and their ancestors deserve a place where they can rest forever . The city of Vallejo is planning on turning the sacred burial ground into a park intended for families . Local tribes consider the proposed idea to be an offensive desecration of the sacred land . In order to compensate the Native people , the Vallejo Recreation District wants to place educational signs in the parking lot to respect the culturally sensitive area . Archaeologists have found pottery , animal bones , human remains , shell fragments , mortars and pestles and arrowheads at the site . Tribe members are willing to block the bulldozers when and if they roll into the sacred site . 
 Santa Cruz 
 A 6 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old grave site was found at a KB Home construction site in the city of Santa Cruz . The city of Santa Cruz as well as other builders in the area believes that more housing development and profit take precedence over natural habitats and Ohlone ancestral lands . The City shows its typical compromise @-@ politics side that prevails across the nation , and simply allows destruction . The City of Santa Cruz continues to allow this development and destruction of ancient Ohlone remains , is to claim it ( the City ) has a legal obligation to follow through on an agreement . Volunteers have picketed at the front gate of the <unk> Creek construction site , holding signs , handing out flyers and engaging passersby . 
 Santa Clara 
 A similar situation is happening in Santa Clara , California where the Ohlone are making an effort to preserve one of the last remaining sacred sites in the area . The San Francisco 49ers plan on destroying the sacred site containing many different species of plants that had been planted by city residents . Native Ohlone have joined with the residents because the site was once home to an Ohlone village . The park is said to have been an Ohlone burial ground and contains five habitats , including wetlands and woodlands . The city has tried to bargain and says that only about 11 acres of the site would be used for the soccer complex . But residents and Natives fear that the bright lights and the amount of games per year pose a threat to the wildlife on the site . 
 = = = Revitalizing and reclaiming heritage = = = 
 The determination and passion to preserve sacred ground is largely influenced by the desire to revive and preserve the Ohlone cultural heritage . Natives today are engaging in extensive cultural research to bring back knowledge , narratives , beliefs , and practices of the post @-@ contact days with the Spanish . The Spanish eradicated and stripped the Ohlones of their cultural heritage by causing the death of ninety percent of the population , and forcing cultural assimilation with military fortification and Catholic reform . After the arrival of the Americans , many land grants were contested in court . Preserving their burial sites is a way to gain acknowledgment as a cultural group . 
 Site CA @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> <unk> Unix or Three Wolves Site 
 The Muwekma Ohlone tribe are active participants in the revival of Ohlone people across the East and South Bay . Key to their success is in their involvement in unearthing and analyzing their ancestral remains in ancient burial sites , which allows them to " recapture their history and to reconstruct the present and future of their people " . Due to Spanish colonization in the 1700s so much cultural history , knowledge , and identity was lost due to death and forced assimilation of so many natives . Only some sacred cultural narratives survive through the recording of stories told from various Ohlone elders living in the missions between 1769 @-@ 1833 . This makes analyzing pre @-@ contact Ohlone sites so difficult because so much of the symbolism and ritual are unknown . Therefore , the Muwekma see their participation in archeological projects as a way to bring tribal members together as a unified community , and as a way to reestablish the link between the Ohlone people today and their pre @-@ contact ancestors through their ability to analyze remains and be coauthors in the archeological reports . One major archeological site the Muwekma tribe actively helped excavate , is the burial site CA @-@ <unk> @-@ 732 in San Jose , dating between 1500 @-@ 2700 BCE . In this burial site , excavated in 1992 , the remains of three ritually buried wolves were found among human remains . In other grave site , the skeletal remains of two more wolves were found with " braided , <unk> yucca or soap root fiber cordage around their necks " . There were many other fragments of remains of animals like deer , squirrel , mountain lion , grizzly bear , fox , badger , blue goose , and elk found as well . From the excavations it is clear that the animals were ritually buried , along with beads and other ornamentations . 
 Although the truth may not be known about exactly what these findings mean , the Muwekma and the archeological team analyzed the ritual burial of the animal remains as a way to learn what they may tell about the Ohlone cosmology and cultural system before pre contact influence . One way the team did this was utilizing known narratives of the Ohlone , as ascribed by previous ethnographers who recorded the sacred narratives of various Ohlone elders in the missions across the Bay , well as the narratives telling of other central California cosmologies to make references about what the meaning of the possible kinship between the animals and the Ohlone in these burials were . Together the archeological team made three hypotheses : animals served as " moieties , clans , lineages , families , and so on , " animals were " dream helpers , " or personal spirit allies for individuals , and lastly , the animals were representations of " sacred deity @-@ like figures " . 
 = = = Indian People Organizing for Change = = = 
 Indian People Organizing for Change ( <unk> ) is a community @-@ based organization in the San Francisco Bay Area . Its members , including Ohlone tribal members and conservation activists , work together in order to accomplish social and environmental justice within the Bay Area American Indian community . Current projects include the preservation of Bay Area shellmounds , which are the sacred burial sites of the Ohlone Nation , whose homeland is the San Francisco Bay Area . Currently , <unk> has spread awareness throughout the community through shellmounds walks and has advocated for the preservation of sacred burial sites in the Emeryville Mall , Glen Cove Site , Hunters Point in San Francisco , just to name a few . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Costanoan is an externally applied name ( exonym ) . The Spanish explorers and settlers referred to the native groups of this region collectively as the <unk> ( the " coastal people " ) circa 1769 . Over time , the English @-@ speaking settlers arriving later Anglicized the word <unk> into the name of Costanoans . ( The suffix " -an " is English ) . For many years , the people were called the Costanoans in English language and records . 
 Since the 1960s , the name of Ohlone has been used by some of the members and the popular media to replace the name Costanoan . Ohlone might have originally derived from a Spanish rancho called <unk> , and referred to a single band who inhabited the Pacific Coast near Pescadero Creek . The name Ohlone was traced by Teixeira through the mission records of Mission San Francisco , Bancroft 's Native Races , and Frederick Beechey 's Journal regarding a visit to the Bay Area in 1826 @-@ 27 . <unk> , <unk> and <unk> are spelling variations of Ohlone found in Mission San Francisco records . However , because of its tribal origin , Ohlone is not universally accepted by the native people , and some members prefer to either to continue to use the name Costanoan or to revitalize and be known as the Muwekma . Teixeira maintains Ohlone is the common usage since 1960 , which has been traced back to the Rancho <unk> on the Pescadero Creek . Teixeira states in part : " A tribe that once existed along the San Mateo County coast . " Milliken states the name came from : " A tribe on the lower drainages of San Gregorio Creek and Pescadero Creek on the Pacific Coast " . The popularity of the name Ohlone is largely because of the book The History of San Jose and Surroundings by Frederic Hall ( 1871 ) , in which he noted that : " The tribe of Indians which roamed over this great [ Santa Clara ] valley , from San Francisco to near San Juan Bautista Mission ... were the Ohlones or ( <unk> ) . " Two other names are growing in popularity and use by the tribes instead of Costanoan and Ohlone , notably Muwekma in the north , and Amah by the Mutsun . Muwekma is the native people 's word for the people in the language of Chochenyo and Tamyen . Amah is the native people 's word for the people in Mutsun . 
 = = Divisions = = 
 Linguists identified eight regional , linguistic divisions or subgroups of the Ohlone , listed below from north to south : 
 Karkin ( also called <unk> ) : The Karkin resided on the south side of the Carquinez Strait . The name of the Carquinez Strait derives from their name . Karkin was a dialect quite divergent from the rest of the family . 
 Chochenyo ( also called <unk> , <unk> and East Bay Costanoan ) : The Chochenyo speaking tribal groups resided in the East Bay , primarily in what is now Alameda County and the western ( <unk> ) portion of Contra Costa County . 
 Ramaytush ( also called San Francisco Costanoan ) : The Ramaytush resided between San Francisco Bay and the Pacific in the area which is now San Francisco and San Mateo Counties . The Yelamu grouping of the Ramaytush included the villages surrounding Mission Dolores , <unk> and <unk> on Mission Creek , <unk> and <unk> in Visitation Valley , <unk> from near the Presidio , and to the southwest , the villages of <unk> on Calera Creek and <unk> on San Pedro Creek in modern @-@ day Pacifica . 
 Tamyen ( also called <unk> , <unk> , and Santa Clara Costanoan ) : The Tamyen resided on Coyote Creek and Calaveras Creek , and the language was spoken in the Santa Clara Valley . ( Linguistically , Chochenyo , Tamyen and Ramaytush were very close , perhaps to the point of being dialects of a single language . ) The Tamyen village was near the original site of the first Mission Santa Clara located on the Guadalupe River ; Father Pena mentioned in a letter to Junípero Serra that the area around the mission was called <unk> by the Ohlone . 
 Awaswas ( also called Santa Cruz Costanoan ) : Local bands of Awaswas speakers resided on the Santa Cruz coast and adjacent Santa Cruz Mountains between Point Año Nuevo and the Pajaro Rivers ( Davenport and <unk> ) . 
 Mutsun ( also called <unk> , San Juan Bautista Costanoan ) : A number of distinct local territorial tribes of Mutsun speakers lived in the Hollister Valley ( along the lower San Benito River , middle Pajaro River , and San Felipe Creek ) and along nearby creeks of the eastern Coast Range valleys ( including San Luis and <unk> creeks ) . 
 Rumsien ( also called Rumsen , Carmel or <unk> ) : A few independent Rumsien @-@ speaking local territorial tribes resided from the Pajaro River to Point Sur , and the lower courses of the Pajaro , as well as the lower Salinas , Sur and Carmel Rivers ( San Carlos , Carmel , and Monterey Counties ) . 
 Chalon ( also called Soledad ) : Local bands of Chalon speakers resided along the upper course of the San Benito River and farther east in the Coast Range valleys of Silver and <unk> creeks . Kroeber also mapped them on the middle course of the Salinas River , but some recent studies give that area to the Esselen people . 
 These division designations are mostly derived from selected local tribe names . They were first offered in 1974 as direct substitutes for Kroeber 's earlier designations based upon the names of local Spanish missions . The spellings are anglicized from forms first written down ( often with a variety of spellings ) by Spanish missionaries and soldiers who were trying to capture the sounds of languages foreign to them . 
 Within the divisions there were over 50 Ohlone tribes and villages who spoke the Ohlone @-@ Costanoan languages in 1769 , before being absorbed into the Spanish Missions by 1806 . 
 = = Present day = = 
 The Mutsun ( of Hollister and <unk> ) and the Muwekma Ohlone Tribe ( of the San Francisco Bay Area ) are among the surviving groups of Ohlone today petitioning for tribal recognition . The Esselen Nation also describes itself as Ohlone / Costanoan , although they historically spoke both the southern Costanoan ( Rumsien ) and an entirely different Hokan language Esselen . 
 = = = Contemporary Ohlone groups = = = 
 Ohlone tribes with petitions for Federal Recognition pending with the Bureau of Indian Affairs are : 
 Muwekma Ohlone Tribe , San Francisco Bay Area : 
 With 397 enrolled members in 2000 , the Muwekma Ohlone Tribe comprises " all of the known surviving Native American lineages aboriginal to the San Francisco Bay region who trace their ancestry through the Missions Dolores , Santa Clara and San Jose " and who descend from members of the historic Federally Recognized Verona Band of Alameda County . On 21 September 2006 , they received a favorable opinion from the U.S. District in Washington , D.C. , of their court case to expedite the reaffirmation of the tribe as a federally recognized tribe . The Advisory Council on California Indian Policy has assisted in their case . They lost the case in 2011 , and have filed an appeal . 
 Amah @-@ Mutsun Band of Ohlone / Costanoan Indians , Woodside : 
 The Amah @-@ Mutsun Band has over 500 enrolled members and comprises " various surviving lineages who spoke the <unk> or Mutsun Ohlone language . " The majority descend from the native people baptized at Mission San Juan Bautista . 
 Ohlone / Costanoan Esselen Nation , Monterey and San Benito Counties : 
 The Ohlone / Costanoan Esselen Nation has approximately 500 enrolled members . Their tribal council claims enrolled membership is currently at approximately 500 people from thirteen core lineages that trace direct <unk> to the Missions San Carlos and Soledad . The tribe was formerly federally recognized as the " Monterey Band of Monterey County " ( 1906 – 1908 ) . Approximately 60 % reside in Monterey and San Benito Counties . 
 Costanoan Band of Carmel Mission Indians , Monrovia . 
 Costanoan Ohlone Rumsen @-@ <unk> Tribe , <unk> . 
 Costanoan @-@ Rumsen Carmel Tribe , Pomona / Chino 
 Indian Canyon Band of Costanoan , Mutsun Indians , near Hollister . 
 = = Population = = 
 Published estimates of the pre @-@ contact Ohlone population in 1769 range between 7 @,@ 000 and 26 @,@ 000 combined with Salinans . Historians differ widely in their estimates , as they do with the entire population of Native California . However , modern researchers believe that American anthropologist Alfred L. Kroeber 's projection of 7 @,@ 000 Ohlone " Costanoans " was much too low . Later researchers such as Richard Levy estimated " 10 @,@ 000 or more " Ohlone . 
 The highest estimate comes from Sherburne F. Cook , who in later life concluded there were 26 @,@ 000 Ohlone and Salinans in the " Northern Mission Area " . Per Cook , the " Northern Mission Area " means " the region inhabited by the Costanoans and Salinans between San Francisco Bay and the headwaters of the Salinas River . To this may be added for convenience the local area under the jurisdiction of the San Luis Obispo even though there is an infringement of the Chumash . " In this model , the Ohlone people 's territory was one half of the " Northern Mission Area " . It was however known to be more densely populated than the southern Salinan territory , per Cook : " The Costanoan density was nearly 1 @.@ 8 persons per square mile with the maximum in the Bay region . The Esselen was approximately 1 @.@ 3 , the Salinan must have been still lower . " We can estimate that Cook meant about 18 @,@ 200 Ohlone based on his own statements ( 70 % of " Northern Mission Area " ) , plus or minus a few thousand margin for error , but he does not give an exact number . 
 The Ohlone population after contact in 1769 with the Spaniards spiralled downwards . Cook describes rapidly declining indigenous populations in California between 1769 and 1900 , in his posthumously published book , The Population of the California Indians , 1769 – 1970 . Cook states in part : " Not until the population figures are examined does the extent of the havoc become evident . " The population had dropped to about 10 % of its original numbers by 1848 . 
 The population stabilized after 1900 , and as of 2005 there were at least 1 @,@ 400 on tribal membership rolls . 
 = = Language = = 
 The Ohlone language family is commonly called " Costanoan " , sometimes " Ohlone " . Costanoan is a member of the hypothetical Penutian language phylum , and ( along with the Miwok languages ) the Utian language family . The most recent work suggests that Costanoan , Miwok , and Yokuts may all be sub @-@ families within a single Yok @-@ Utian language family . 
 Costanoan comprises eight dialects or separate languages : Awaswas , Chalon , Chochenyo ( aka <unk> ) , Karkin , Mutsun , Ramaytush , Rumsien , and Tamyen . 
 = = Salvaging records = = 
 The chroniclers , <unk> , and linguists of the Ohlone population began with : Alfred L. Kroeber who researched the California natives and authored a few publications on the Ohlone from 1904 to 1910 , and C. Hart Merriam who researched the Ohlone in detail from 1902 to 1929 . This was followed by John P. Harrington who researched the Ohlone languages from 1921 to 1939 , and other aspects of Ohlone culture , leaving volumes of field notes at his death . Other research was added by Robert Cartier , Madison S. Beeler , and Sherburne F. Cook , to name a few . In many cases , the Ohlone names they used vary in spelling , translation and tribal boundaries , depending on the source . Each tried to chronicle and interpret this complex society and language ( s ) before the pieces vanished . 
 There was noticeable competition and some disagreement between the first scholars : Both Merriam and Harrington produced much in @-@ depth Ohlone research in the shadow of the highly published Kroeber and competed in print with him . In the Editor 's Introduction to Merriam ( 1979 ) , Robert F. Heizer ( as the protege of Kroeber and also the curator of Merriam 's work ) states " both men disliked A. L. Kroeber . " Harrington , independently working for the Smithsonian Institution cornered most of the Ohlone research as his own specialty , was " not willing to share his findings with Kroeber ... Kroeber and his students neglected the Chumash and Costanoans , but this was done because Harrington made it quite clear that he would resent Kroeber 's ' muscling in . ' " 
 Recent Ohlone historians that have published new research are Lauren Teixeira , Randall Milliken and Lowell J. Bean . They all note the availability of mission records allow for continual research and understanding . 
 = = Notable Ohlone people = = 
 1777 : <unk> , chief of the local Yelamu tribe at the time of the establishment of the Mission San Francisco , and thus the earliest known San Francisco leader . 
 1779 : Baltazar , baptized from the Rumsen village of <unk> in 1775 , he became the first Indian alcalde of Mission San Carlos in 1778 . After his wife and child died , he fled to the Big Sur coast in 1780 to lead the first extensive Ohlone resistance to colonization . 
 1807 : Hilarion and George ( their baptismal names ) were two Ohlone men from the village <unk> who served as alcaldes ( mayors ) of the Mission San Francisco in 1807 . As such , they were at the beginning of a long line of Mayors of San Francisco . 
 1877 : Lorenzo <unk> was a Mission Santa Cruz man who provided three surviving narratives about life at the mission , primarily from stories told to him by his own father . 
 1913 : Barbara <unk> died 1913 , Mutsun linguistic consultant to C. Hart Merriam 1902 @-@ 04 , from San Juan Bautista . 
 1930 : <unk> <unk> de Cervantes , died 1930 , renowned Mutsun doctor , principal linguistic and cultural informant to J. P. Harrington . 
 1934 : Jose Guzman died 1934 , he was one of the principal Chochenyo linguistic and cultural consultants to J. P. Harrington . 
 1939 : Isabel Meadows , died 1939 , the last fluent speaker of Rumsen and a primary Rumsen consultant to J.P. Harrington . 
 2006 : Ralph Allan Espinoza , Director and founder of the only non @-@ profit , Native American affiliated food bank in the U.S. , " God Provides " located in El Monte , California . 
 2016 : Anne Marie Sayers , <unk> Ohlone leader , tribal chair of the Indian Canyon , California , the only federally recognised Indian country from Sonoma to Santa Barbara . 
 = 1862 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1862 Atlantic hurricane season featured six tropical cyclones , with only one making landfall . The season had three tropical storms and three hurricanes , none of which became major hurricanes . However , in the absence of modern satellite and other remote @-@ sensing technologies , only storms that affected populated land areas or encountered ships at sea were recorded , so the actual total could be higher . An undercount bias of zero to six tropical cyclones per year between 1851 and 1885 has been estimated . Jose Fernandez @-@ Partagas and Henry Diaz initially documented five tropical cyclones in a 1995 report on this season . A sixth system was added by Michael Chenoweth in 2003 from records taken in Colón , Panama . 
 The first tropical cyclone was observed as a tropical storm offshore the East Coast of the United States from June 15 to June 17 . The second and third systems were active in mid @-@ August and mid @-@ September , respectively , and both attained Category 2 intensity at their peaks on the modern @-@ day Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale and neither made landfall . A fourth tropical cyclone caused flooding in Saint Lucia and brought heavy rain to parts of Barbados on October 5 , but its track prior to that date is unknown . The fifth hurricane was known to be active for a few days in October off the East Coast of the United States . Finally , a sixth system was centered near Panama – between November 22 and November 25 . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with a low Accumulated Cyclone Energy ( ACE ) rating of 46 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . ACE is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 Based on reports from four ships , a tropical storm is known to have existed for two days in mid @-@ June off the East Coast of the United States . It formed approximately 340 miles ( 550 km ) east of Savannah , Georgia on June 15 and moved slowly north before dissipating two days later , while located about 250 miles ( 400 km ) east of Virginia Beach , Virginia . 
 = = = Hurricane Two = = = 
 A Category 2 hurricane on the modern @-@ day Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale was first seen on August 18 , while located approximately 620 miles ( 1 @,@ 000 km ) east of Florida . Over the next three days , it tracked north and moved parallel to the East Coast of the United States . The system dissipated roughly 310 miles ( 500 km ) south of Newfoundland on August 21 . 
 = = = Hurricane Three = = = 
 On September 12 , a Spanish ship , the Julian de <unk> , was de @-@ masted by a strong gale and thrown onto its beam ends . A few days later , she docked at Saint Thomas in the U.S. Virgin Islands . On September 13 , the barques Montezuma and Gazelle were also both de @-@ masted by a hurricane near Barbados . No information is available on the hurricane between September 14 to September 16 , but on September 17 , the barques <unk> and Elias Pike encountered the hurricane , roughly 500 miles ( 800 km ) off the coast of North Carolina . Several ships reported encountering hurricane conditions on September 19 off the East Coast of the United States , some as far north as Sable Island . Based on these reports , the track began about 500 miles ( 800 km ) northeast of the Virgin Islands on September 12 and ended on September 20 off the coast of Nova Scotia . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Four = = = 
 On October 5 , a tropical storm caused flooding in Saint Lucia . That day and throughout the next , high winds and heavy rain were observed in <unk> , Barbados . The storm may also have affected Saint Vincent . No track has been identified for the storm and it has been assigned a single location in the HURDAT database . 
 = = = Hurricane Five = = = 
 A modern @-@ day Category 1 hurricane was first seen on October 14 approximately 310 miles ( 500 km ) west of Bermuda . A schooner , Albert Treat , encountered the storm and was thrown onto its beam ends . The schooner suffered considerable damage and three men drowned . The next day , further north , the barque Acacia fell onto its beam ends , but managed to reach safety . Throughout October 16 the hurricane traveled northward , parallel to the East Coast of the United States . The ship Oder reported losing its sails in a hurricane off Sable Island that day . The storm became extratropical around midday on October 16 and dissipated completely by October 17 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Six = = = 
 Based on meteorological records kept by an officer of the U.S. steamer James <unk> , a strong tropical storm was centered to the northwest of Aspinwall , Panama from November 22 through to November 25 . The storm weakened late on November 24 and began drifting slowly westward on November 25 before dissipating later that day . 
 = Einar Jolin = 
 Einar Jolin ( 7 August 1890 – 29 August 1976 ) was a Swedish painter best known for his decorative and slightly naïve Expressionist style . After studying at <unk> , Stockholm in 1906 and at the Konstnärsförbundet <unk> ( the Artists Association Art School ) , Jolin and his friend Isaac Grünewald went to Paris for further studies at Henri Matisse 's academy from 1908 to 1914 . 
 He painted portraits , still lifes and cityscapes , always accentuating what he called " the beautiful " in his motifs . He mainly worked in oils and watercolors , using delicate brush strokes and light colors . His most noted works are his paintings of Stockholm during the 1910s and 1920s in his trademark naïve style . 
 Jolin made numerous travels , collecting impressions and inspiration for his paintings . He journeyed to Africa , India and the West Indies , but favored the countries around the Mediterranean Sea , especially the island of Capri where he also exhibited his works . 
 He had several exhibitions at Liljevalchs konsthall in Stockholm and in 1954 , he toured the United States with an exhibition , during which Dag Hammarskjöld purchased a painting for his office in the United Nations building . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and education = = = 
 Einar Jolin was born 7 August 1890 in Stockholm . He was the son of professor Severin Jolin and grandson of actor Johan Christopher Jolin . He grew up on <unk> 45 in the <unk> Huset ( Jolin Residence ) , a three @-@ story townhouse with a garden , built by his grandfather . Jolin grew up in the middle of Stockholm close to <unk> , Adolf Fredrik Church and <unk> , which may have influenced his depiction of houses , roof tops , and views of Stockholm in his paintings . Jolin loved his house with its exotic furnishings . For interior paintings , he often selected props from things in the house – Gustavian and Empire style furniture , Chinese embroideries and East Indian tableware . Other residents in the house were his parents , brother Eric , sisters Ingrid and Signe , grandmother Mathilde <unk> @-@ Jolin and his aunt , artist Ellen Jolin ( 1854 – 1939 ) who was the first to teach Jolin the basic techniques of painting . 
 Jolin 's artistic education started at the Technical School ( later known as <unk> ) in Stockholm in 1906 . The school mainly taught painting techniques and Jolin was more interested in learning about style . Within the year , he started looking for another place to continue his studies . At the beginning of the 20th century , the Konstnärsförbundet ( The Artist 's Association ) had a school on <unk> in Stockholm . Jolin applied there in the autumn of 1907 . His future teacher Karl Nordström reviewed his drawings and Jolin was admitted to the school the same year . Jolin joined the inner circle at the school , a group of Scandinavian artists who would later become known as De Unga ( The Young Ones ) or 1909 års <unk> ( The Men of 1909 ) . Among these were Isaac Grünewald , Leander Engström , Birger Simonsson and Gösta Sandels . Jolin described the pupils at the school as : " ... a bunch of individuals with long hair , great muffler scarves and slouch hats worn askew in a way that really impressed me since I was only seventeen and the youngest of the bunch . The most amazing of them all was of course Isaac who had longer and more raven hair than anybody else and a fluttering violet scarf . I had not yet beheld such a creature . We became good friends . " Jolin 's education at the Artist 's Association was curtailed by the school 's closure in the spring of 1908 . 
 = = = Paris = = = 
 In 1908 , Jolin and Isaac Grünewald left Sweden for the vibrant life in Paris and its art community . The Swedish painter , graphic artist and forester Carl Palme knew Henri Matisse and helped the artist to find a suitable location for the new Matisse Academy . An abandoned nunnery in central Paris became the first home for the academy . Together with Grünewald and Leander Engström , Jolin joined the Matisse Academy , where their friends from Stockholm had already been accepted as pupils . At the Academy , Jolin would develop his sense for a stylish line in combination with bright and clean colours in his paintings . 
 Jolin 's time at the Academy proved more educational for him than the schools he had previously attended and the experience he got from having an established artist as mentor , was important for his development as an artist . Even so , the influence of Matisse on his young pupils should not be exaggerated . Jolin learned croquis at the academy and also developed a natural , spontaneous speed in his brushwork . He mostly painted models and still life , and during a visit to the south of France in 1911 , he made his earliest landscapes . At the school , Jolin got his first nickname ; the other students , as well as Matisse , used to call him " The Puppy " since he was the youngest of the students . 
 During his time in Paris , Jolin became good friends with Nils Dardel . Jolin also spent some time in Senlis where he depicted its street life 1913 , before returning to Stockholm the following year . 
 = = = Return to Stockholm = = = 
 In the spring of 1914 , when Jolin and his friends from the Matisse Academy returned to Stockholm , the group became known as De Unga ( The Young Ones ) . Their participation and paintings created uproar in the Baltic Exhibition in Malmö . Albert Engström , artist and influential member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Arts as well as other members of the Swedish art world at that time , stated that they were perplexed and unable to understand The Young Ones ' works . 
 Jolin had planned to return to Paris the following summer , but the outbreak of World War I on 28 July 1914 , forced him to reconsider his decision . With the road to France closed , he decided to stay in Stockholm , and managed to obtain a studio workshop on <unk> 9 , in the so @-@ called " Scandalous House " near Katarina Church in the southern part of town . From his window he had a wide view of the city , the Stockholms ström and the harbour entrance . In that apartment , during the years 1914 – 1915 , he created some of his best @-@ known vistas of Stockholm . 
 In 1917 , Jolin rented a studio at <unk> in Stockholm and painted diligently . At the end of that year he was visited by Herman <unk> , a wholesaler from Malmö , who had recently taken up art collecting as a hobby . He studied Jolin 's numerous works and , as at this time the artists sold very few paintings , it came as a surprise to him when <unk> bought 16 canvases . Jolin received seven thousand crowns ( <unk> ) for the paintings , and at home the same evening he was able to show his parents the money from his first major sales , saying : " Look here , this is what I earned today " . 
 Jolin spent most of 1918 in Copenhagen , where he showed his paintings at an art gallery at <unk> . They sold well enough for him to stay in Denmark almost a year . Jolin enjoyed life in the Danish capital , the social life was more spontaneous than in Stockholm and people from different professions , or social standings , mixed with each other in a way that appealed to him . 
 = = = Travelling = = = 
 After World War I , traveling was once again possible for the many young artists who had been forced to stay home during the six years of war . In 1920 , Jolin went on a journey , first to Italy , North Africa and Spain for new international impressions , and then on to India , Africa and the West Indies . In the spring of 1924 , Jolin went to Spain with his first wife , Britt von <unk> . Like many other artists he painted the bullfights , but contrary to the strong , and sometimes bloody , bullfight painted by his colleague and close friend Gösta Adrian @-@ Nilsson ( GAN ) , Jolin 's works were created in the calm and orderly manner that had earned him his second nickname : <unk> Einar ( Einar , the Elegant ) . 
 In 1931 , <unk> friend , GAN moved to <unk> 25 , and in 1936 , Jolin followed his example and rented an apartment in the same building , where he lived until 1943 . At that time the street was home to numerous artists and writers . The Swedish writer Ivar Lo @-@ Johansson , who had a studio apartment at number 21 , described life in the area thus : " In a part of a street , no longer than three hundred meters , everything existed . <unk> had become a kind of Montmartre to art , a concept . " In 1990 , Lo @-@ Johansson 's apartment was converted into a literary museum by the Ivar Lo @-@ Johansson Society . 
 During the years from 1935 to 1956 , Jolin spent much of his time travelling . In 1954 , he toured the United States with an exhibition . It was opened in January , by Swedish ambassador Erik Boheman , at Galerie St. Etienne in New York . Secretary @-@ General of the United Nations Dag Hammarskjöld , attended the exhibition and bought a painting depicting Riddarholmen for his study of the United Nations building . The exhibition was shown on national TV in the United States . Jolin also exhibited his works at galleries in several other countries , and in 1957 , the Liljevalchs konsthall hosted a retrospective exhibition featuring over 200 of his paintings . 
 = = = Family and later life = = = 
 With the birth of his first daughter , Michaela , in 1958 , Jolin settled down to a more quiet life as a father and family man . His second daughter Angelina was born in 1966 . He continued to paint , mostly still life and portraits , at his studio apartment at <unk> 34 , in <unk> . He spent most summers with his family in <unk> in the Dalarna County or at Villa San Michele on the island of Capri . Although he held some minor exhibitions , his work from the 1960s to his death in 1976 , did not receive the same acclaim as his earlier paintings . 
 Jolin married three times and had three children . His first marriage was to Britt von <unk> , 1921 – 1936 , during which time they had a son , Christopher Jolin , born in 1925 . He was married secondly to Clorinda Campbell Kissack in the years 1943 – 1950 , and thirdly in 1952 – 1976 ( his death ) to singer Tatjana Angelini @-@ <unk> . Einar Jolin died on 29 August 1976 , and is buried at Norra <unk> in Stockholm . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Style = = = 
 Although influenced by Matisse , the Oriental art that Jolin discovered at Musée <unk> was even more important to his style . Chinese and Japanese art became the base for the decorative , slightly naïve style in light colours , that he developed during the 1910s and 1920s . Jolin 's style deviates from that of the traditional Expressionists , in that he simplifies his motifs in an almost primitive way , painting an imagined reality rather than raw emotions . 
 Jolin , as well as Dardel , used a naïve style in their paintings before this concept had been introduced into the Swedish art world . Both Jolin and Dardel were inspired by French <unk> , not just by Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau , but also by <unk> Louis who lived in <unk> and Wilhelm <unk> , a specialist in naïve painting . Matisse , Jolin 's and Dardel 's mentor , was no stranger to naïve art but it was not prominent in his work . Jolin also appreciated the cultivated and sophisticated , older painting , and was deeply impressed during his visits to the Louvre , where he was inspired by the works of masters such as Rubens , Watteau and Chardin . 
 = = = Expressionism = = = 
 In 1913 to 1914 Jolin started to paint in his own naïve interpretation of Expressionism . By the end of the 1910s his works became more expressed and the shapes more plastic , but in 1916 , Jolin 's paintings were still inspired by the years he spent in France . That spring , members of the Konstnärsförbundet ( The Artists Association ) and their young pupils , were invited to present the new style , Expressionism , to the Swedish audience as exhibition number two ( number one being Anders Zorn , Bruno Liljefors and Carl Larsson ) at the new art venue , the Liljevalchs konsthall , in Djurgården . Participating in the second exhibition were a number of noted Swedish artists at that time , including Leander Engström , Isaac Grünewald , Gösta Sandels , Birger Simonsson and Jolin who exhibited thirteen paintings . 
 Two so dissimilar painters and tempers as Einar Jolin and GAN were both called Expressionists . During most of the 1910s this term was used in a number of contexts in Sweden . In 1915 , the Herwarth Walden gallery Der Sturm in Berlin , a venue for Expressionists , presented an exhibition , <unk> <unk> ( Swedish Expressionism ) , with works by Swedish artists . Jolin participated with six paintings , three of these were vistas from Stockholm . The rest of the participants were Isaac Grunewald , Edward <unk> , GAN and Sigrid <unk> . In the autumn of 1915 , Jolin and GAN held a joint exhibition in Lund University 's art museum . Despite their differences , their friendship continued during GAN 's years in Stockholm ( 1916 – 1919 ) . Jolin was tired of Isaac <unk> increasingly dominant role among the young Swedish artists at that time , a sentiment shared by GAN . Expressionism never became a dominant style for Jolin , not in the way GAN and other members of the group embraced it . GAN always objected to Jolin 's choice to include colors such as pearl gray and light purple or violet in his paintings . 
 During the years 1925 – 35 , Jolin 's style is characterized by light , soft , grey notes and pastels . Later on , still life featuring Oriental porcelain , preferably displayed on a reflecting mahogany tabletop , became a more common motif . He also painted numerous portraits of the Swedish socialites at that time . 
 In the 1930s , Nils Palmgren , named a group of Swedish painters " The Purists " , an expression originally coined by the French artists <unk> Ozenfant and Le Corbusier . Palmgren referred to painters such as Torsten <unk> , Erik <unk> , Wilhelm Wik and Helge Linden . But , according to Palmgren , Einar Jolin could also be called a Purist since he constantly stressed that colors should be kept pure , contours clear and the composition of the motif orderly . During his more than 70 @-@ year career , Jolin always followed his own path . Through his motifs , characteristic portrayals , still lifes and pictures of Stockholm , an observer can follow Jolin on his journeys to other cultures , explore the collected artifacts in his house or get acquainted with what Stockholm looked like during the first part of the 1900s . Nils Palmgren ends his 1947 biography on Einar Jolin with the words : 
 Nils Palmgren on Jolin : 
 Let us just say this : The artistic hallmark of Einar Jolin comes from his eternal worship of natures beauty , the beauty in landscapes , women , flowers and animals , fabrics and things . He is a tenderhearted , although a bit pretentious guardian of the artistic purity , the simple line , the clear spaces and the poet of soft shapes . His best human qualities are character , pride and courage to walk alone against the tide . 
 = = = Depicting Stockholm = = = 
 Jolin started to depict Stockholm when he moved to <unk> , on the tall cliffs of southern Stockholm in 1914 . From his studio he could see most of the city . He divided the view , facing <unk> or Riddarholmen , into smaller frames for his <unk> . Noted works from that time are : Strömmen mot Kastellholmen ( Over the Strömmen on to the Kastellholmen ) 1914 , now in the Stockholm City Museum ; <unk> <unk> Riddarholmen ( View of Riddarholmen ) 1914 , bought by the Nationalmuseum but kept in the Moderna <unk> , and <unk> mot Kastellholmen ( View towards the Kastellholmen ) 1915 , now in the Malmö <unk> . In the Stockholm från <unk> <unk> ( Stockholm from the heights of <unk> ) 1938 , elements from Oriental art are present in the naked , branches of the trees and the red buoys looking like Chinese lanterns hanging in the trees . These paintings are defined by swift , flowing brushwork and forceful contours framing fresh , light colours . His composition of the motif involved putting details against big blocks of cool pink , sheer blue , ivory turquoise and emerald , thereby creating a populated setting . There is always an air of teaming <unk> along the docks and busy boating on the water of the Strömmen in these paintings . 
 Jolin was a strong advocate for the architectural and aesthetic preservation of the capital , as is written in his draft for a pamphlet called Mot <unk> ( Against the Tide ) . According to him , Stockholm had become an ugly town , by insensitive mixing of styles , <unk> , and centuries of eager renovation . Jolin wanted to bring out the beautiful and the genuine in the cityscape , as well as restore , what he considered to be distorted parts of the city , to their former glory . According to Palmgren , perhaps it was that dream Jolin expressed in his depictions of Stockholm . At the end of the 19th century , and during some decades into the 20th century , artists depicted Stockholm in a variety of ways , each according to his own mind and individualism . Traditionalists worked side by side with Modernists , old with young , seasoned pursuers of the established view of the city and young enthusiastic individuals , such as Jolin . By the middle of the 20th century , his focus shifted from the cityscape to other motifs such as chinoiserie settings , but in his youth , he and his friends from his years in Paris found inspiration in Stockholm and its surroundings . 
 Einar Jolin said of his 1957 retrospective exhibition at the Liljevalchs konsthall : 
 In my art I want to express what I have experienced when I have concentrated and immersed myself . There is this everyday view — man has named everything that surrounds her in life and she finds all this self evident and do not see the wonder of it . To me , art is to give form to the wonders of creation , to create beauty and harmony , to be able to lift a receptive observer from the trivial everyday life into the beautiful and <unk> in which we live . If I have succeeded in this , my life have not been in vain . 
 Throughout his life he continued to paint romanticized exteriors of Stockholm , whether in spring sunshine or winter haze , the city was always depicted as beautiful and unspoiled . He expressed the idea that only through the emotions of an individual could nature be depicted the right way . In the magazine <unk> ( Art ) 1913 – 14 , he writes on False perspective and exaggerations in modern art etc. that : " Nature is wonderful , but a photo is nothing , because nature becomes wonderful only when it is seen and understood by a great human , and a great human always sees and feels something special in nature , something she wants to reproduce . " 
 = = Award = = 
 In 1957 , Jolin received the Prince Eugen Medal from His Majesty King Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden . 
 = = Exhibitions = = 
 Some of the exhibitions of his work during his lifetime were : 
 1912 Salong Joël , Stockholm 
 1914 Baltic Exhibition , Malmö 
 1915 Stockholm 
 1916 Liljevalchs konsthall , Stockholm 
 1918 Liljevalchs konsthall , Stockholm 
 1918 <unk> , Gothenburg 
 1918 Copenhagen , Denmark 
 1919 Liljevalchs konsthall , Stockholm 
 1922 Svensk @-@ <unk> <unk> , Stockholm 
 1931 Galerie Moderne , Stockholm 
 1933 <unk> , Stockholm 
 1945 Galerie Blanche , Stockholm 
 1953 Sunset Club , Seattle , USA 
 1954 Galerie St Etienne , New York , USA 
 1954 Swedish Institute , Minneapolis , USA 
 1954 Upsala College , New Jersey , USA 
 1955 Swedish @-@ American Historical Museum , Philadelphia , USA 
 1957 Liljevalchs konsthall , Stockholm 
 1970 Royal Swedish Academy of Arts , Stockholm 
 1975 <unk> , Stockholm 
 In 2010 – 2011 , The Liljevalchs art venue held a commemorative exhibition showcasing some of <unk> best works . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 As of 2009 , Jolin 's pictures continue to be popular at art auctions . At Stockholm auctioneer Bukowski 's fall auction in 2009 , one of Jolin 's paintings sold for 2 @.@ 53 million crowns ( about US $ 390 @,@ 000 ) . 
 = Nick Griffin = 
 Nicholas John Griffin ( born 1 March 1959 ) is a British politician who represented North West England as a Member of the European Parliament ( MEP ) from 2009 to 2014 . He served as chairman and then president of the far @-@ right British National Party ( BNP ) from 1999 to 2014 , when he was expelled from the party . 
 Born in Barnet , Griffin was educated at Woodbridge School in Suffolk . He joined the National Front at the age of 14 and , following his graduation from the University of Cambridge , became a political worker for the party . In 1980 he became a member of its governing body , and later wrote articles for several right @-@ wing magazines . He was the National Front 's candidate for the seat of Croydon North West in 1981 and 1983 , but left the party in 1989 . In 1995 he joined the BNP and in 1999 became its leader . He stood as the party 's candidate in several elections and became a member of the European Parliament for North West England in the 2009 European elections . 
 In 1998 Griffin was convicted of distributing material likely to incite racial hatred , for which he received a suspended prison sentence . In 2006 he was acquitted of separate charges of inciting racial hatred . Griffin has been criticised for many of his comments on political , social , ethical and religious matters , but after becoming leader of the BNP he sought to distance himself from some of his previously held positions , which include Holocaust denial . In recent years , events where Griffin has been invited to participate in public debates or political discussions have proven controversial and often resulted in protests and cancellations . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 The son of former Conservative councillor Edgar Griffin and his wife Jean , Nicholas John Griffin was born on 1 March 1959 in Barnet and moved to Southwold in Suffolk aged eight . He was educated at Woodbridge School before winning a sixth – form scholarship to the independent Saint Felix School in Southwold , one of only two boys in the all @-@ girls school . 
 Griffin read Adolf Hitler 's Mein Kampf when he was 14 , and " found all but one chapter extremely boring " . He joined the National Front in 1974 , while he was still 14 , though he had to pretend he was 15 , and at the age of 16 is reported to have stayed at the home of National Front organiser Martin Webster . In a four @-@ page leaflet written in 1999 , Webster claimed to have had a homosexual relationship with Griffin , then the BNP 's publicity director . Griffin has denied any such relationship . 
 From 1977 , Griffin studied history , then law , at Downing College , Cambridge . His affiliation with the National Front was revealed during a Cambridge Union debate , and his photograph was published in a student newspaper . He later founded the Young National Front Student organisation . He graduated with a second @-@ class honours degree in law ( 2 : 2 ) , and a boxing blue , having taken up the sport following a brawl in Lewisham with a member of an anti @-@ fascist party . He boxed three times against Oxford in the annual Varsity match , winning twice and losing once . In an interview with The Independent , he said he gave it up because of a hand injury . He is a fan of Ricky Hatton and Joe Calzaghe , and an admirer of Amir Khan . 
 = = Political career = = 
 = = = 1970s – 1990 = = = 
 Following his graduation , Griffin became a political worker at the National Front headquarters . As a teenager he had accompanied his father to a National Front meeting , and by 1978 , he was a national organiser for the party . He helped set up the White Noise Music Club in 1979 , and several years later worked with white power skinhead band , <unk> . In 1980 , he became a member of the party 's governing body , the National Directorate , and in the same year launched Nationalism Today with the aid of Joe Pearce , then editor of the NF youth paper Bulldog . As a National Front member , Griffin contested the seat of Croydon North West twice , in the 1981 by @-@ election and 1983 general election , securing 1 @.@ 2 % and 0 @.@ 9 % of the vote . 
 Membership of the National Front declined significantly following the election of the Conservatives under Margaret Thatcher . As a result , the party became more radicalised , and a dissatisfied Griffin , along with fellow NF activists Derek Holland and Patrick Harrington , began to embrace the ideals of Italian fascist Roberto Fiore , who had arrived in the UK in 1980 . By 1983 , the group had broken away to form the NF Political Soldier faction , which advocated a revival of country " values " and a return to feudalism with the establishment of nationalist communes . Writing for Bulldog in 1985 , Griffin praised the black separatist Louis Farrakhan , but his comments were unpopular with some members of the party . He also attempted to form alliances with Libya 's Muammar al @-@ Gaddafi and Iran 's Ayatollah Khomeini , and praised the efforts of Welsh nationalist movement <unk> Glyndŵr . 
 Following a disagreement with Harrington ( who subsequently formed the Third Way ) , and objections over the direction the party was heading , in 1989 , Griffin left the National Front . Along with Holland and Fiore , he helped form the International Third Position ( ITP ) , a development of the Political Soldier movement , but left the organisation in 1990 . In the same year , he lost his left eye when a discarded shotgun cartridge exploded in a pile of burning wood , since when he has worn a glass eye . The accident left him unable to work , and owing to other financial problems he subsequently petitioned for bankruptcy ( the accident occurred in France , where he later lost money in a failed business project ) . For several years thereafter , he abstained from politics and was supported financially by his parents . He later <unk> a public Holocaust denial meeting hosted by David Irving . 
 = = = 1993 – 1999 = = = 
 Griffin re @-@ entered politics in 1993 and , in 1995 , at the behest of John Tyndall , joined the British National Party ( BNP ) . He also became editor of two right @-@ wing magazines owned by Tyndall , Spearhead and The Rune . Referring to the election of the BNP 's first councillor , Derek <unk> , at a 1993 council by @-@ election in Millwall , he wrote : 
 The electors of Millwall did not back a post modernist rightist party , but what they perceived to be a strong , disciplined organisation with the ability to back up its slogan " Defend Rights for Whites " with well @-@ directed boots and fists . 
 Tyndall , also previously in the National Front , had founded the BNP in 1982 , but his " brutal , <unk> background " and admiration for Hitler and the Nazis had made any kind of respectability impossible . In his 1999 leadership campaign , Griffin embarked on a strategy to make the party electable , by taking it away from Tyndall 's extremist image . He was helped by Tyndall 's lack of familiarity with the mainstream media , and in the party 's September election he defeated Tyndall to become head of the BNP . One of Griffin 's changes included moderating the party 's emphasis on the removal of multiculturalism , a policy it claims has a destructive influence on both immigrant and British cultures . This realignment was designed to position the BNP alongside successful European far @-@ right groups , such as the French Front National . Street protests were replaced by electoral campaigning , and some policies were moderated ( the compulsory repatriation of ethnic minorities was instead made voluntary ) . Other policies included the introduction of capital punishment for paedophiles , rapists , drug dealers and some murderers , and corporal punishment for less serious crimes such as juvenile delinquency . Griffin 's image as a Cambridge @-@ educated family man was in contrast to the extremist image presented by the BNP under Tyndall 's leadership . In October 1999 , Nick Griffin , supported by Tony <unk> stood against Tyndall for leadership of the BNP . John Tyndall received just 411 ( 30 % ) of the votes , while Griffin the majority , 70 % . 
 = = = 2000 – present = = = 
 Griffin has stood as his party 's candidate in several English elections since joining the BNP . In 2000 , he stood in West Bromwich West , in a by @-@ election triggered by the resignation of Betty Boothroyd . He came fourth , with 794 votes ( 4 @.@ 21 % of those cast ) . Following the Oldham race riots he ran in Oldham West and Royton in the 2001 general election . He received 6 @,@ 552 votes ( 16 % ) , coming third ahead of the Liberal Democrats , but closely behind the second place Conservatives , who received 7 @,@ 076 votes . He again stood for election in the 2003 Oldham Council election , for a seat representing the Chadderton North ward . He came second to the Labour candidate , receiving 993 votes ( 28 % ) . In the 2004 European Parliament election , when he was the BNP candidate for the North West England constituency , the party received 134 @,@ 959 votes ( 6 @.@ 4 % of those cast ) , but won no seats . In the 2005 general election he contested Keighley in West Yorkshire , and polled 4 @,@ 240 votes ( 9 @.@ 2 % ) , finishing in fourth place . 
 Griffin was the BNP candidate in the 2007 Welsh National Assembly Elections , in the South Wales West region . The BNP received 8 @,@ 993 votes ( 5 @.@ 5 % of those cast ) , behind the Labour party 's 58 @,@ 347 votes ( 35 @.@ 8 % ) . In October 2007 , he was an unsuccessful candidate in the Thurrock Council election . In November 2008 , the entire membership list of the BNP was posted on the Internet ( though the list may have included lapsed members of the party and people who had expressed an interest in joining the party , but had not signed up ) . Griffin claimed that he knew the identity of the individual responsible , describing him as a hard @-@ line senior employee who had left the party in the previous year . He welcomed the publicity that the story generated , using it to describe the common perception of the average BNP member as a " skinhead <unk> " as untrue . 
 He was elected as a member of the European Parliament for North West England in the 2009 European Elections . The BNP polled 943 @,@ 598 votes ( 6 @.@ 2 % ) , gaining two MEPs . Griffin and fellow MEP Andrew <unk> were subsequently pelted with eggs as they attempted to stage a celebratory press conference outside the Houses of Parliament . A second venue – a public house near Manchester – was chosen the following day . A line of police blocked a large group of protesters , who chanted " No platform for Nazi Nick " and " Nazi scum off our streets " . Griffin viewed the election as an important victory , claiming that his party had been demonised and blocked from holding public meetings . " In Oldham alone there have been hundreds of thousands of pounds spent on employing bogus community workers to keep us out . To triumph against that level of pressure as a political party has never been done before . " 
 In May 2009 , he was invited by the BNP representative on the London Assembly , Richard <unk> , to accompany him to a Buckingham Palace garden party hosted by Queen Elizabeth II . The invitation prompted objections from several organisations and public figures , including the Mayor of London Boris Johnson , and the anti @-@ fascist organisation Searchlight . Griffin declined this first invitation , but when invited personally in 2010 he accepted : 
 This event shows just how far this party has come in the last few years but I won 't be at the Palace for myself or my family . No ! I will be there to represent the patriots who made this possible ; I 'll be there for you . I 'll be there for all the stout @-@ hearted men and women who down through the turbulent years tramped the streets with me in all weathers knocking doors , and those who ran the gauntlets of hate wherever we went . 
 The Palace later decided to deny Griffin entry to the event , claiming that he had used his invitation " for party political purpose through the media " , and citing security concerns . Griffin claimed the decision was an " absolute scandal " , and appeared to be " a rule invented for me . " 
 In September 2009 , he appealed to party activists for £ 150 @,@ 000 of extra funding for the BNP . In the letter , he said that the party 's ailing fortunes were a direct result of " attacks on the party " . He also defended questions by the Electoral Commission about the transparency of BNP funding . In November 2009 , Griffin was a witness at the trial of an Asian man , <unk> Khalid , at Preston Crown Court . The prosecution claimed that in November 2008 Khalid repeatedly drove past a demonstration that Griffin was attending , and on the second occasion shouted " white bastards " . Khalid admitted shouting derisory comments at Griffin and other demonstrators , telling the jury he shouted " Nick Griffin , you fucking wanker " and " Get the fuck out of Burnley , you 're not welcome here " , but denied shouting " white bastard " . Griffin gave evidence against Khalid , and affirmed that Khalid had shouted " white bastard " at him . Griffin said the man " leaned out of the car and pointed at me and made a gun and gang gesture " , and that he threatened him by shouting " I 'm going to ... " . Griffin said he had left the demonstration early , fearing for his safety . The 23 @-@ year @-@ old defendant denied his comments had any racial intent , and was found not guilty . Griffin later commented " I think it 's unfortunate and I think it 's wrong , but that 's the jury 's right . They saw all the evidence , I accept their decision . I 'm not going to lose any sleep over it . " 
 In the 2010 general election he contested the Barking constituency polling 6 @,@ 620 votes and finishing in third place . In 2011 , following the loss of many of the council seats the BNP held in England , Griffin narrowly survived a leadership challenge . 
 In 2010 Griffin announced that by 2013 he would stand down as leader , to focus on his European Parliament election campaign . He lost his seat in Europe in the May 2014 European election and stepped down as BNP leader on 19 July 2014 , becoming the organisation 's president . But on 1 October , the party announced that it had expelled Griffin , who , it claimed , was " deliberately fabricating a crisis " and leaking " damaging and defamatory allegations " . Following his departure from the BNP , he founded the British Unity Party , which has been described as a " non @-@ membership organisation with around two thousand followers on Facebook " . 
 = = Criminal charges = = 
 = = = 1998 = = = 
 In 1998 , Griffin was convicted of violating section 19 of the Public Order Act 1986 , relating to the offence of ' publishing or distributing racially inflammatory written material ' in issue 12 of The Rune , published in 1996 . Griffin 's comments in the magazine were reported to the police by Alex Carlile , then the Liberal Democrat Member of Parliament for Montgomeryshire . Following a police raid at Griffin 's home , he was charged with distributing material likely to incite racial hatred . Fellow BNP member Paul Ballard was also charged , but entered a guilty plea and did not stand trial . Griffin pleaded not guilty , and was tried at Harrow Crown Court . He called the French Holocaust denier Robert Faurisson and the nationalist Osiris <unk> as witnesses , was found guilty and given a nine @-@ month sentence , suspended for two years , and a £ 2 @,@ 300 fine . Ballard was given a six @-@ month sentence , also suspended for two years . He said : 
 I am well aware that the orthodox opinion is that six million Jews were gassed and cremated and turned into lampshades . Orthodox opinion also once held that the world is flat . 
 Griffin claimed that the law under which he was convicted was an unjust law and he therefore had no obligation to follow it . He was secretly recorded by the ITV programme The Cook Report in 1997 describing Carlile as " this bloody Jew ... whose only claim is that his grandparents died in the Holocaust " . 
 = = = 2004 – 2006 = = = 
 On 14 December 2004 , Griffin was arrested at his home in Wales , on suspicion of incitement to racial hatred , over remarks he made about Islam in an undercover BBC documentary titled The Secret Agent . He was questioned at a police station in Halifax , West Yorkshire , before being freed on police bail . He said that the arrest was " an electoral scam to get the Muslim block vote back to the Labour party " and that the Labour government was attempting to influence the results of the following year 's general election . 
