 Griffin 's arrest was made two days after those of John Tyndall and several other people , over remarks they had made in the same programme . Following its broadcast on 15 July 2004 , the police began an investigation into the programme 's contents . The following April he was charged with four offences of using words or behaviour intended or likely to stir up racial hatred . The trial began in January 2006 . Griffin stood alongside fellow party activist Mark Collett , who faced similar charges . Prosecuting , Rodney Jameson QC told the jury of six speeches that the accused had made in the Reservoir Tavern in Keighley on 19 January 2004 . Reading excerpts from them , he claimed that they included threatening , abusive and insulting words directed at " people of Asian ethnicity " , with the intention of " stirring up racial hatred " . 
 Griffin was also accused of calling murdered black teenager Stephen Lawrence a drug dealer and bully who stole younger pupils ' dinner money . In the witness box he defended himself by quoting passages from the Qur 'an , saying that his comments describing Islam as a " vicious , wicked faith " were attacking not a race , but a religion . During the two @-@ week trial he used a laptop to post daily updates on a blog on the BNP 's website . In his closing address , defence barrister Timothy King QC said : 
 The British National Party is a legal , political entity . It has a right in a democratic society to put forward ideas and policies which some might find uncomfortable and some might find even offensive . There has been a tendency in this case to over @-@ analyse speeches , to take one line here and one line there . You have got to look at the overall impact of these speeches — remember the context of each speech . 
 Griffin and Collett were cleared of half the charges against them — the jury remained divided on the other charges , and a retrial was ordered . On 10 November 2006 , after five hours of deliberations , the jury cleared them of all charges . They were met outside the court by about 200 supporters , who Griffin addressed with a megaphone . He attacked Tony Blair and the BBC , and defended the BNP 's right to freedom of speech . BNP Deputy Chairman Simon Darby later claimed that had Griffin been convicted , the BNP leader planned to go on hunger strike . 
 = = Public debates = = 
 Following his election as BNP leader , Griffin was invited to participate in debates at several universities . In November 2002 , the Cambridge Union Society invited him to take part in a debate the following January . Titled " This house believes that Islam is a threat to the west " , the resolution was controversial ; alongside more moderate speakers , one of those invited was Abu Hamza al @-@ Masri , a fundamentalist Muslim cleric . Some participants threatened to withdraw , and several official bodies criticised the invitations . The two had met earlier in the year , in a debate chaired by Rod Liddle , then editor of BBC Radio 4 's Today programme . He was also invited by the Cambridge Forum to a debate on extremism in December 2002 , with Liberal Democrat MP Lembit Öpik . The venue was changed twice after protests from property owners , but the threat of a violent confrontation between the Anti @-@ Nazi League and BNP supporters forced the president of the Cambridge Forum , Chris Paley , to cancel the event . Paley called the decision an " own goal " for the values of free speech , and Öpik criticised it , emphasising his belief in " people 's right to make their own decisions in a democracy " . 
 In February 2005 , Griffin was asked to take part in a debate on multiculturalism at the University of St Andrews in Scotland . He was invited by the president of the students ' debating society , who said " We believe that the only way to get the truth of what the BNP are saying and to combat them is to do it in public in a debate . " The move was attacked by anti @-@ racist groups , some of whom refused to participate in the discussion . Griffin said " I am coming up because I was invited by the students at the university because they have a debate on an intelligent subject on which I have something to say . The people against it are the usual bunch of people who cannot win the argument and refuse to stand on a platform . " The society withdrew the invitation before the event was to take place . 
 In May 2007 , Griffin was invited to address a meeting at the University of Bath by politics student and BNP youth leader Danny Lake . Lake wanted Griffin to visit the university and explain the BNP 's policies to lecturers and students . The invitation was viewed by some as an attempt by the party to establish a foothold on the university campus . Eleven union general secretaries wrote to the university 's vice @-@ chancellor and asked her to reconsider the decision to allow the meeting . A large protest was planned , and following students ' concerns over their personal safety , the University cancelled the invitation . 
 Several months later , the Oxford Union invited Griffin to speak at a forum on the limits of free speech , along with other speakers including David Irving . The invitation was condemned by the Equality and Human Rights Commission head Trevor Phillips and the president of the Oxford Students ' Union . The Conservative MP Dr Julian Lewis resigned his membership of the Union . A rally against the invitation was held at Oxford Town Hall on 20 November , and included the Oxford Students ' Union president , the National Union of Students black students ' officer , and the Trades Union Congress south east regional secretary . Representatives of Unite Against Fascism also attended , as well as the University of Oxford 's Jewish student chaplain . Several Holocaust survivors spoke at the rally . Stephen Altmann @-@ Richer , co @-@ president of the Oxford University Jewish Society , said " I don 't think these people should be invited to the Oxford Union , by having them speak , it legitimises their views ... " On the night of the debate , about 50 protesters forced their way into the venue , and a crowd of hundreds gathered outside carrying banners bearing anti @-@ racist slogans and voicing anti @-@ BNP chants . Police blocked the entrances to the building , and removed the protesters encamped inside . Griffin was accompanied into the premises by security guards . The event was eventually split between two rooms , with Griffin speaking in one , and Irving in the other ; many Union Society members were unable to gain access . Although many present found the debate objectionable , some were supportive of both Griffin and Irving 's right to freedom of speech . The Oxford Union later endorsed the debate as a success . 
 Griffin travelled to the United States and spoke at Clemson University and Texas A & M University , but the reception he received in October 2007 at Michigan State University was markedly different from that in the other venues . Intending to address the " overpopulation of Islamists in Europe " , he was repeatedly interrupted , to the point where the event became a question and answer session . He was heckled by hostile elements of the audience , and at one point the fire alarm was activated . 
 = = = 2009 appearance on Question Time = = = 
 On 22 October 2009 , Griffin took part in the BBC 's topical debate programme , Question Time , as a representative of the BNP . He appeared alongside Bonnie Greer , Jack Straw , Baroness Warsi and Chris Huhne . He was challenged by members of the studio audience , and questioned by host David Dimbleby on comments he had previously made on the Holocaust . He was also critical of Islam . His invitation followed the election of two BNP MEPs to the European Parliament , and led to significant debate over the merits of the BBC 's decision . The appearance sparked a protest outside the BBC Television Centre prior to the recording of the programme , in which an estimated 500 people picketed the front entrance of the complex , many chanting anti @-@ Nazi slogans and others trying to break into the building to stop the programme being filmed . Some got past the police and security , but were expelled . Six protesters were arrested , and three police officers were injured , one needing hospital treatment . 
 The programme was watched by an estimated 8 @.@ 2 million viewers , more than three times the average figure for Question Time , and on a comparable level with prime time entertainment shows . Griffin 's appearance dominated the following day 's media ; a follow @-@ up report in the New York Times said that " the early reading by many of Britain ’ s major newspapers was that Mr. Griffin lost heavily on points . " 
 In a press conference held on 23 October , Griffin stated that he would make a formal complaint about the format of the programme , which he said was " ... not a genuine Question Time ; that was a lynch mob " . He suggested that he should appear again , but that " ... [ we ] should do it properly , and talk about the issues of the day " , and added : " That audience was taken from a city that is no longer British ... That was not my country any more . Why not come down and do it in Thurrock , do it in Stoke , do it in Burnley ? Do it somewhere where there are still significant numbers of English and British people , and they haven 't been ethnically cleansed from their own country . " 
 = = Policies and views = = 
 Griffin describes himself as a " <unk> " , and " new nationalist " , and after his election as leader of the BNP , according to The Guardian contributor Francis Wheen , was " contemptuous " of the party 's traditional supporters . He has changed the BNP 's traditional focus on immigration and race , to a defence of what it sees as " our traditional principles against the politically correct agenda " espoused by mainstream politicians . He has portrayed himself as a defender of free speech , and has repeatedly spoken out against multiculturalism . During 2000 , he attempted to further the BNP 's popular appeal by targeting specific groups , including lorry drivers — some of whom were at the time engaged in mass protests against fuel prices — and farmers . The BNP also produced a journal devoted to rural matters . 
 The BNP 's constitution grants its chairman full executive power over all party affairs , and Griffin thus carried sole responsibility for the party 's legal and financial liabilities , and had the final say in all decisions affecting the party . The BNP 's policies include a halt to all immigration , the forced repatriation of all illegal immigrants , and the deportation of criminals whose original nationality was not British . It supports British withdrawal from the European Union ( EU ) . 
 Upon his election to the European Parliament Griffin unsuccessfully tried to form an alliance with right @-@ wing parties , which would have entitled the group members to extra funding . He also held talks with other far @-@ right European parties , such as Vlaams Belang and <unk> . The BNP maintains ties with Roberto Fiore and fascist groups across Europe . Griffin criticised Gordon Brown 's Labour government for its attitude toward the BNP , accusing it of treating elected representatives of the BNP as " second @-@ class citizens " . Following his election , in a press conference held at a public house in Manchester , he criticised the privatisation of national industries , such as the railway network , and accused MPs generally of being involved in this " ... giant looting of Britain " . He accused private corporations and the " ruling elite " in Britain of building a " <unk> state " , a process he called " Mussolini fascism ... under Gordon Brown . " He supported the Gurkhas , stating that the BNP would allow them and their families entry to the country for medical treatment " for as long as they needed treatment , or for as long as they lived . " He also suggested the removal of 100 @,@ 000 Muslims " disloyal to Britain " and their replacement with the Gurkhas . 
 Griffin has frequently expressed views on Judaism , Islam and homosexuality . His comments on the Holocaust ( which he once referred to as " the <unk> " ) made as an editor of The Rune demonstrate revisionism . He criticised Holocaust denier David Irving for admitting that up to four million Jews might have died in the Holocaust ; he wrote " True <unk> will not be fooled by this new twist to the sorry tale of The Hoax of the Twentieth Century . " In 1997 , he told an undercover journalist that he had updated Richard <unk> 's booklet Did Six Million Really Die ? and , in the same year , he wrote Who are the Mindbenders ? , about a perceived domination of the media by Jewish figures . Despite this , the BNP had a Jewish councillor , Patricia Richardson , and spokesman Phil Edwards has stated that the party also has Jewish members . The BNP has stated that it does not deny the Holocaust , and that " Dredging up quotes from 10 , 15 , 20 years ago is really pathetic and , in a sense , rather fascist . " In an interview with the BNP deputy leader Simon Darby , Griffin claimed that the English Defence League was a " Zionist false flag operation " , and added that the organisation is " a neo @-@ con operation " . He also claimed that the EDL 's activities are an attempt to provoke civil war . 
 After assuming control of the party , Griffin sought to move it away from its historic identity , although on the BBC 's Newsnight on 26 June 2001 he stated that Hindus and whites had both been targeted in the " Muslim " riots of 2001 , and in the August 2001 issue of Identity ( a BNP publication ) he claimed that radical Muslim clerics wanted " ... militant Muslims to take over British cities with AK @-@ 47 rifles " . When interviewed in August 2009 for RT , he distanced himself from the present @-@ day National Front , which he claimed is " ... a group of skinheads running around with no political direction , other than that we suspect which their masters give them . " On The Politics Show on 9 March 2003 , he appeared to accept ethnic minorities who were already legally living in the country , and , on 6 March 2008 , he was again interviewed on Newsnight ; when told of a poll that demonstrated that most working @-@ class Britons were more concerned about drugs and alcohol than immigration , he linked the UK 's drug problem with Islam , specifically Pakistani immigrants . His inclusion on the programme was criticised by contributor and radio presenter Jon Gaunt , who branded the decision as " pathetic " . When asked by The Times about concerns that his recent success was presaged in Enoch Powell 's Rivers of Blood speech , Griffin replied : 
 The divisions are already there . They were created by that monstrous experiment : the multi @-@ cultural destruction of old Britain . There is no clash between the indigenous population and , for instance , settled West Indians , Sikhs and Hindus . There is , however , an enormous correlation between high BNP votes and nearby Islamic populations . The reason for that is nothing to do with Islamophobia ; it is issues such as the grooming of young English girls for sex by a criminal minority of the Muslim population ... I am now there to give political articulation to the concerns of the mainly indigenous population . The ethnic populations have always had Labour to speak up for them . Finally their neighbours have got someone who speaks up for them . 
 In a June 2009 interview with Channel 4 News , Griffin claimed that " There 's no such thing as a black Welshman " , which was criticised by Vaughan <unk> , the first black president of the Welsh NUS and the Welsh TUC , and the first black candidate for the Welsh assembly . Commenting on Griffin 's claim , he said " On that basis , most white people wouldn 't qualify . It 's quite clear that Nick Griffin just doesn 't accept that black British people or black Welsh people are entitled to call themselves proper , full citizens of the country . " Griffin 's interview with Channel 4 News was in response to a decision by the Equality and Human Rights Commission to investigate the BNP 's membership criteria , which , it stated , " appeared to discriminate on the grounds of race and colour , contrary to the Race Relations Act . " He rejected claims that the BNP was " acting unlawfully " and said " ... because we are here , as it was pointed out , for specific ethnic groups — it 's nothing to do with colour , your reporter there said that we 'll only lift a finger for white people — that 's a simple lie . " In an interview with the BBC on 8 July 2009 , during a discussion on European immigration , he proposed that the EU should sink boats carrying illegal immigrants , to prevent them from entering Europe . Although the interviewer , BBC correspondent Shirin Wheeler , implied that Griffin may have wished the EU to " murder people at sea " , he quickly corrected her by saying " I didn 't say anyone should be murdered at sea — I say boats should be sunk , they can throw them a life raft and they can go back to Libya " ( a staging post for migrants from Egypt and sub @-@ Saharan Africa ) . 
 Following the Admiral Duncan pub bombing by former BNP member David Copeland , Griffin stated " The TV footage of dozens of ' gay ' demonstrators flaunting their perversion in front of the world 's journalists showed just why so many ordinary people find these creatures so repulsive . " The BNP states that , privately , homosexuality should be tolerated , but that it " should not be promoted or encouraged " . It opposed the introduction of civil partnerships and wishes to ban what it perceives as the promotion of homosexuality in schools and the media . A series of messages he posted in October 2012 on the social network Twitter , regarding a discrimination claim won by a gay couple , sparked widespread opprobrium . Cambridgeshire police investigated the tweets , which included the couple 's address and a suggestion that a " British Justice team " would give them " a bit of drama " , but took no further action . In 2012 , although he denied being " anti @-@ gay " , he claimed that civil partnerships undermined " the institution of marriage , and as a result of that , children will die over the next few years , because they ’ ll be brought up in homes which aren ’ t married " . In 2009 he also said that : " a lot of people find the sight of two grown men kissing in public really creepy . I understand that homosexuals don 't understand that but that 's how a lot of us [ Christians ] feel . " He also suggests that gay pride marches " [ verge ] on <unk> which , like its twin <unk> , is on the rise . " 
 Writing for The Rune , Griffin praised the wartime Waffen SS and attacked the Royal Air Force for its bombing of Nazi Germany . At Coventry Cathedral he distributed leaflets that referred to " mass murder " during the Second World War bombing of Dresden . Although unconnected , on 9 June 2009 the Royal British Legion wrote an open letter to Griffin asking him not to wear a poppy lapel badge . 
 In a BBC interview on 8 June 2009 , Griffin claimed that " global warming is essentially a hoax " and that it " is being exploited by the liberal elite as a means of taxing and controlling us and the real crisis is peak oil " . He was a representative of the European Parliament at the 2009 UN Climate Change Conference , where he repeated his claim that global warming is a hoax , and called advocates of action on climate change such as Al Gore " mass murderers " by supporting biofuels , claiming that their use would lead to the " third and the greatest famine of the modern era " . A Greenpeace spokesman said , " In reality the environmental and development groups he has been disparaging have been in the forefront of concerns about biofuels . Griffin 's claims that climate change is a hoax is one of many curious things going on between his ears . " 
 = = Family and personal life = = 
 = = = Parents = = = 
 Griffin 's father , Edgar Griffin ( born 1921 , Brighton , East Sussex ) was previously a long @-@ standing Conservative Party member and from 1959 to 1965 a councillor for the Metropolitan Borough of St Marylebone . He also served as a councillor on <unk> District Council during the 1980s . Griffin 's mother , Jean ( née Thomas ) , whom Edgar married in 1950 , was an unsuccessful BNP candidate for Enfield North in the 1997 general election , in Chingford & Woodford Green for the 2001 general election and for London in the 1999 European elections . 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 Griffin lives with his family in a farmhouse in <unk> , near Welshpool , in Wales . He is married to Jackie Griffin , a former nurse who also acts as his assistant and a BNP administrator . He has four children , some of whom are actively involved with the party , and a sister . He was declared bankrupt in January 2014 . 
 = = Elections contested = = 
 UK Parliament elections 
 Welsh Assembly elections ( Additional members region ; party list ) 
 European Parliament elections ( Multi @-@ member constituency ; party list ) 
 = Mongalla , South Sudan = 
 Mongalla or <unk> is a community in Central Equatoria state in South Sudan , on the east side of the Bahr al Jebel or White Nile river . It lies about 75 km by road northeast of Juba . The towns of <unk> and Bor lie downstream , north of Mongalla . 
 During the colonial era , Mongalla was capital of Mongalla Province , which reached south to Uganda and east towards Ethiopia . On 7 December 1917 the last of the northern Sudanese troops were withdrawn from Mongalla , replaced by Equatorial troops . These southern and at least nominally Christian troops remained the only permanent garrison of the town and province until their mutiny in August 1955 . Mongalla and the surrounding province was then absorbed into Equatoria Province in 1956 . The town was taken and retaken more than once during the Second Sudanese Civil War ( 1983 – 2005 ) . 
 An experimental station was established to grow sugar at Mongalla in the 1950s , and there were plans to establish commercial operations . However , after independence in 1956 the Khartoum government shifted the sugar project to the north , where it is grown under much less favorable conditions with heavy irrigation . A sugar , clothing , and a weaving factory was established in Mongalla in the 1970s but operations failed to get beyond their trial phase and diminished as conflict grew in the region in the early 1980s . In April 2006 the President of Southern Sudan , Salva <unk> <unk> , named Mongalla as one of the Nile ports to be the first to be rehabilitated . 
 Mongalla is an important center for gauging the flow of the Nile , with measurements taken regularly from 1905 until 1983 , and since 2004 . 
 = = History and politics = = 
 = = = Early colonial period = = = 
 After the final defeat of the Caliphate ( Khalifa ) by the British under General Herbert Kitchener in 1898 , the Nile up to the Uganda border became part of the Anglo @-@ Egyptian Sudan . An expedition upriver from Omdurman ( <unk> ) arrived in December 1900 . The post that had been established at Kiro was transferred to Mongalla in April 1901 since Kiro was claimed to be in Belgian territory . During 1904 posts were established where needed in the Mongalla districts to suppress the activities of " Abyssinian brigands who infested the country " . 
 Until 1906 Mongalla province was part of the Upper Nile province , after which it became a separate administration . The first governor was Angus Cameron , appointed in January 1906 . A party from the Anglican Church Missionary Society ( CMS ) arrived the same month , but decided it was not suitable for a base and instead located the mission downstream at Bor . The colonial administration opposed efforts by the CMS to convert the Bari people of Mongalla . The missionaries interpreted this as due to the influence of Islam in weakening the spiritual ideals of the <unk> desired to avoid friction with the Muslims who had undertaken most of the work of building and servicing the new provincial capital . 
 In 1910 Theodore Roosevelt visited the province . Before his arrival , Governor <unk> Owen informed Governor General Sir Reginald Wingate that everything would be done for the former president of the United States , but also pointed out that his troops had not even one donkey . Roosevelt 's expedition reached Mongalla at the end of February , coming from the Belgian Congo via the Lado Enclave . He was impressed by the Egyptian and Sudanese troops , but when visiting a native dance he commented on the lack of middle @-@ aged men , a result of the Mahdist wars that had ended over ten years ago . In June 1910 the British Sudanese forces took over the Lado Enclave from the Belgians , becoming part of the province of Mongalla . The Anglican and Roman Catholic missionaries requested that Sunday be retained as a sabbath at Lado , as it had been under the Belgians , rather than changed to Friday as it had in the rest of the Sudan . However , Governor Owen opposed retaining Sunday ; he felt that the more " bigoted " Muslims in the army would object to working on Friday , and noted that all recruits to the army were instructed in the Muslim religion . 
 A few months later , however , Owen proposed creation of an Equatorial battalion composed entirely of southerners . This force would be taught to follow English commands and the Christian faith , which would , over time , unite with Uganda and would prevent spread of the Muslim faith farther south . He was against Islam on the basis that it " may at any time break out into a wave of fanaticism " . Owen 's plan was approved by Wingate . Wingate said " ... we must remember that the bulk of the inhabitants ... are not Moslems ( Muslims ) at all , that the whole of Uganda has accepted <unk> almost without a murmur , and that furthermore English is a very much easier language to learn than Arabic ... " . 
 In 1913 , the government increased restrictions on private travel and immigrants , which meant anybody arriving in Mongalla and wishing to go north from the Uganda or the Belgian Congo could be examined for sleeping sickness by a medical officer . The maximum punishment for any breach of the new regulations was a £ 10 fine or a 6 month prison sentence . 
 On 7 December 1917 the last of the northern Sudanese troops were withdrawn from Mongalla , replaced by Equatorial troops . These southern and at least nominally Christian troops remained the only permanent garrison of the town and province until their mutiny in August 1955 . 
 When Hasan Sharif , son of Khalifa Muhammad <unk> , was exiled to Mongalla in 1915 after taking place in a conspiracy in Omdurman , Governor Owen said " ... I told him he is lucky to come and see this part of Sudan for nothing , when tourists pay hundreds of pounds ... I fear he doesn 't see the joke ... " . Owen retired in 1918 . Major Cecil Stephen Northcote succeeded him as Governor of <unk> from 1918 to 1919 , then moved on to become Governor of the Nuba Mountains province . 
 The Sudan was very lightly administered . As late as 1919 there were just 17 British administrators in the Bahr al @-@ Ghazal and Mongalla provinces , with a combined area twice that of Britain . In the early years , British officials depended on native officials for advice and to act as interpreters . However , they had to be careful about ethnic rivalries . Thus Fadl el @-@ Mula , a Dinka who had been a police quartermaster , greatly impressed the Governor of Mongalla and was appointed assistant superintendent of the <unk> Dinka in 1909 . He was credited with keeping the peace between the Dinka and the Nuer people , two groups with a history of fighting and cattle raiding . However , Fadl el @-@ Mula was so strongly biased towards the Dinka that his police were attacked by angry Nuer and he had to be removed from his post . 
 The Arabic language and the Muslim religion continued to be spread in South Sudan by merchants and administrators from the North , and even by British officials who preferred to speak Arabic rather than learn the local language . A rising by the <unk> Dinka in 1919 was suppressed harshly in 1920 . That year the Nuer were attacking both the Dinka and the <unk> people on the border with Ethiopia . The governor of Mongalla in 1920 , <unk> Woodland , said that Mongalla at the time was " in such a muck @-@ up state he doesn 't know where to start " . Woodland called for a decision ; either South Sudan should be separated from the north and administered as a territory in the same way as Uganda , or the British should encourage development by the Arabs within the structure of the North Sudan . Nothing was done . 
 = = = Later colonial period ( 1920 @-@ 1956 ) = = = 
 The Mongalla region suffered an outbreak of cerebrospinal meningitis ( CSM ) between 1918 and 1924 , apparently introduced by Ugandan porters who had served in German East Africa during World War I. CSM caused high mortality for a six @-@ year period as it spread from one family to another . A less devastating CSM epidemic started in 1926 , causing 335 deaths in 1928 , 446 in 1929 and 335 in the first three months of 1930 before rapidly dying out . Dr. Alexander Cruikshank of the Sudan Medical Services attributed the epidemic in part to poor housing conditions . The <unk> people of the western part of the province avoided the disease . They had a better diet and less crowded quarters than the Dinka and Nuer people in the centre of the province . 
 Airplanes began being used in the Sudan in the 1920s , with revolutionary effect on military and civilian administration . Flying was hazardous , however . On 4 July 1929 a Fokker <unk> / 3m owned by the Belgian financier Albert Lowenstein crashed at Mongalla . There were no deaths , but the plane was severely damaged . A Singapore flying boat built by Short Brothers made a flight around Africa in 1929 . Starting from Benghazi , the plane flew to Aboukir Bay , then up the Nile to Mongalla , which was reached at the end of January , and onward to Entebbe on Lake Victoria . 
 During the 1920s the British steadily expanded control over the South Sudan . The Deputy governor of Mongalla , Major <unk> Brock , estimated that he had added 50 @,@ 000 <unk> and related people to the eastern half of his province , a somewhat inflated figure . By establishing strong central control , the British eroded whatever authority the traditional rulers may have had . In 1929 the British governor of Mongalla province said " the government support which can be given to the chiefs is not worth their while to have " . 
 In 1925 Major G.D. Gould was denied a license to prospect for gold and oil in the east of Mongalla province beyond the <unk> Hills . Travel in the <unk> country was dangerous without a large armed escort , and if the Ethiopians had got word of the survey they would have tried to occupy that part of the country . The British began to follow an " Africanization " policy . A directive issued on 25 January 1930 by the Civil Secretary of Sudan to the governors of Upper Nile , Bahr al @-@ Ghazal and Mongalla said : " The policy of the government in the southern Sudan is to build up series of self @-@ contained racial or tribal units with structures and organization based to whatever extent the requirement of equity and good government permits , upon indigenous customs , traditional usage and beliefs " . 
 In 1930 the capital of Equatoria ( southern Sudan ) was transferred from Mongalla to Juba , further upstream to the south . The governor of Mongalla province from 1930 until 1936 was Leonard Fielding Nalder , formerly governor of Fung province from 1927 to 1930 . In 1935 Nalder reported after a survey of his province that there was a general lack of tribal cohesion . Governor @-@ General Sir Stewart Symes at Khartoum had little interest in development of the south of Sudan and he advised the local officials that chiefs should have territorial rather than ethnic authority . In 1936 Mongalla and the Bahr al @-@ Ghazal provinces were incorporated into the Equatoria province , with headquarters at Juba , with parts of Upper Nile province detached . 
 = = = Civil war = = = 
 Sudan became independent in 1956 , after the outbreak of the First Sudanese Civil War ( 1955 – 1972 ) . After the Addis Ababa Agreement ( 1972 ) the <unk> Bor and <unk> people lived in relative peace , sharing grazing areas , especially Gok Bor . In mid 1981 this harmony broke down when <unk> bandits attacked <unk> Bor cattle camps in several locations around Mongalla . The police were called in by the commissioner of Mongalla , and turned against the Bor Dinka . The SPLM / A exploited this hostility to the Bor Dinka by some <unk> tribes to gain recruits from the Dinka . Peace broke down and the civil war resumed in 1983 . 
 Early in 1985 the Southern Axis of the SPLA under Major Arok Thon Arok challenged government forces in Southern Upper Nile , Eastern Equatoria and Central Equatoria . The Southern Axis captured <unk> @-@ ki @-@ Bul and Mongalla without difficulty , then crossed the Nile , captured <unk> and besieged Juba . Later in 1985 the forces of the Sudan People 's Liberation Army ( SPLA ) received a setback at the village of Gut @-@ <unk> near Mongalla when they were confronted by well @-@ armed <unk> people . Although willing to fight the Sudan army , the <unk> were not willing to do so under Dinka leadership . 
 In March 1989 Alternate Commander <unk> <unk> of the SPLA Mainstream recaptured Mongalla with a relatively small force . In the last half of 1989 the SPLA consolidated in towns like Mongalla that surrounded Juba . In late 1991 , Mongalla was the scene of clashes between two arms of the SPLA . <unk> Machar of the SPLM / A Nasir was pushing south towards Torit , while the SPLM / A Mainstream commander for Equatoria <unk> <unk> <unk> wanted to push <unk> 's forces back to <unk> . Due to disunity among the southerners , between 1991 and 1994 the NIR was able to recapture many places in South Sudan including Mongalla and also <unk> , Leer , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Nasir , Kit , <unk> , <unk> , Bor , Torit , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Government forces coming from Bor took Mongalla in June 1992 and then turned east toward Torit . 
 = = = Post @-@ civil war = = = 
 The Second Sudanese Civil War finally ended in January 2005 . However , Mongalla continued to suffer at the hands of the Lord 's Resistance Army . Due to the civil war , Mongalla had suffered considerable physical neglect and damage , and population loss . In April 2006 the President of Southern Sudan , Salva <unk> <unk> , named Mongalla as one of the Nile ports to be the first to be rehabilitated . He warned that demands for reconstruction spending would be much greater than available funding , so work had to be prioritized . Clearance of the Mongalla minefield was complete in July 2009 . Mongalla is an important center for gauging the flow of the Nile , with measurements taken regularly from 1905 until 1983 . During most of the Second Sudanese Civil War ( 1983 – 2005 ) the gauging stopped , resuming in 2004 . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 Mongalla lies about 75 km ( 47 mi ) by road northeast of Juba on the road to Bor in the north , but nearer 50 km ( 31 mi ) as the crow flies . Mongalla is situated on the east bank of the White Nile in Central Equatoria state at an altitude of 443 metres ( 1 @,@ 455 ft ) . Rainfall is relatively low between November and February , then increasing with two peaks in June and August . Annual precipitation is about 1 @,@ 000 mm ( 40 in ) . Winds are northerly in the dry season and southerly in the rainy season . Based on observations taken between April 1903 and December 1905 , the mean temperature was 26 @.@ 4 ° C ( 79 @.@ 5 ° F ) , with mean maximum 33 @.@ 7 ° C ( 92 @.@ 6 ° F ) and mean minimum 20 @.@ 9 ° C ( 69 @.@ 7 ° F ) . Mean relative humidity was 74 % . 
 The river flowing past Mongalla combines seasonal torrential runoff in the rainy season with the more constant discharge from Lake Victoria , influenced by evaporation and by the damping and storage effects of Lake Albert , Lake Edward and Lake <unk> . The Sudd , a vast area of swampland , stretches downriver from Mongalla to near the point where the Sobat River joins the White Nile just upstream from <unk> . Due to evaporation , only half the water that enters the Sudd at Mongalla emerges from the northern end of the swamps . The much smaller <unk> Swamp lies about 32 km ( 20 mi ) to the east , separated from Mongalla by a region of open grassland . The belt along the Nile about 10 km wide and 146 km long from Mongalla to Bor is inhabited by the <unk> and Dinka peoples . 
 = = Economic development = = 
 The district commissioners initiated the development of cotton at Mongalla in the 1920s and 1930s , but the price paid for Mongalla cotton fell from 50 piastres per <unk> in 1929 @-@ 30 to 18 piastres in 1931 and the industry failed to develop as <unk> " Southern Scales " , which defined the rates of pay for officials and workers in the southern provinces of Sudan , were extremely low , making it impossible for the administrators to undertake any development such as a school , hospital or economic projects . Use of money was restricted , and even in 1945 taxes were still being paid in kind . 
 In 1937 J.C. Myers was commissioned to undertake a botanical survey of Mongalla province , later extended to all of Equatoria . In contrast to the pessimistic view of the south taken by the Khartoum administration , he was enthusiastic about the wealth and diversity of plants . He noted that the people had adapted to cultivating non @-@ native plants such as cassava , maize , sweet potato and groundnuts . He also noted that the government was restricting commercial development of sugarcane , tobacco and coffee , which grew wild , and thus preventing economic development . In 1938 Governor Symes made a tour of Equatoria and left with " contempt intensified " . He consistently rejected schemes for development . 
 An experimental station was established to grow sugar at Mongalla in the 1950s , and there were plans to establish commercial operations . However , after independence in 1956 the Khartoum government shifted the sugar project to the north , where it is grown under much less favorable conditions with heavy irrigation . After the First Sudanese Civil War ended in 1972 , there were plans to revive sugar production at Mongalla , and although Mongalla Sugar Processing Factory operated on a low @-@ scale in the 1970s , it ceased production when civil war broke out again in <unk> clothing mill also operated in the 1970s but was deactivated due to the unrest in the early 1980s . A paper mill was also planned at Mongalla , to be fed by eucalyptus species planted in a 70 @,@ 000 <unk> <unk> was supplied from Denmark between 1975 and 1976 for use in an agro @-@ industrial complex at Mongalla . This would include a power station and pump station to support an <unk> , poultry project , fish @-@ receiving plant and wood @-@ working factory . The equipment arrived but was not installed , and eventually rusted away . A project funded by Khartoum also established six textile @-@ manufacturing units in Sudan , one at Mongalla , and the other five factories located in the north at Ed <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Nyala , and <unk> . An agreement was made with a Belgian firm , <unk> , to supply the weaving factory of 256 looms and at one point it was estimated to produce around 9 million meters of grey fabric per annum , but it failed to get past the trial phase due to lack of raw materials , capital , and transportation facilities . 
 = Reg Pollard ( general ) = 
 Lieutenant General Sir Reginald George Pollard , KCVO , KBE , CB , DSO ( 20 January 1903 – 9 March 1978 ) was a senior commander in the Australian Army , serving as Chief of the General Staff from 1960 to 1963 . Born in Bathurst , New South Wales , Pollard graduated from the Royal Military College , Duntroon , in 1924 . A regular officer , he served as adjutant / quartermaster in several battalions of the Citizens Military Forces ( CMF ) during the 1920s and 1930s . In 1938 he was posted to England to undertake staff training , which was cut short by the outbreak of the Second World War . Pollard joined the Second Australian Imperial Force in 1940 , and the following year saw action with the 7th Division in the Middle East , where he was mentioned in despatches . Promoted to colonel in 1942 , he became senior staff officer of the 7th Division in New Guinea , and was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for his actions . He spent much of the remainder of the war in staff and training positions in Australia . 
 Pollard 's early post @-@ war roles involved recruit training , land / air warfare , administration , and planning . In 1953 , he was promoted to brigadier and took command of the Australian Army Component of the British Commonwealth Forces Korea . He joined the Military Board as a major general in 1954 , and was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire the following year . In 1957 he was promoted to lieutenant general and took charge of Eastern Command in Sydney ; two years later he was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath . Knighted in 1961 , as Chief of the General Staff he presided over the Army 's reorganisation as a pentropic structure , and worked towards making Duntroon a degree @-@ granting institution . In 1962 , he oversaw deployment of the first team of Australian military advisors to South Vietnam . After retiring from the military in 1963 , Pollard became Honorary Colonel of the Royal Australian Regiment ; he served as Australian Secretary to Queen Elizabeth II during the Royal Visit in 1970 and was appointed a Knight Commander of the Royal Victorian Order the same year . He died at Wyrallah , New South Wales , in 1978 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Reginald George Pollard was born on 20 January 1903 in Bathurst , New South Wales , the third son of Albert Edgar Pollard , an English accountant , and his Australian wife Thalia Rebecca , née McLean . Schooled in Bathurst , Reg entered the Royal Military College , Duntroon , in 1921 , and graduated with the Sword of Honour for " exemplary conduct and performance " in 1924 . Pollard and fellow graduate Frederick Scherger , winner of the King 's Medal and future air chief marshal , applied to transfer to the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) under a scheme designed to augment the RAAF 's officer corps , but only Scherger was accepted . The previous year , Pollard and Scherger had inaugurated a Duntroon tradition when they found a horse 's jawbone during a field exercise . Inspired by the Biblical tale in which Samson slays the Philistines with the jawbone of an ass , they declared their find a lucky charm and brought it back to the college as a mascot ; it became known as " <unk> " ( reportedly because " jawbone seemed so commonplace , an <unk> sounded much more interesting and spelt backwards sounded both mysterious and respectable " ) . 
 Ranked lieutenant in the Permanent Military Force ( PMF ) , Pollard was appointed adjutant / quartermaster of the 17th Battalion ( Citizens Military Forces ) , headquartered at North Sydney , in July 1925 . He married Daisy Ethel Potter , a typist , at St Andrew 's Anglican Church , Strathfield , on 31 October ; The Bathurst Times reported that Daisy cut the cake with her husband 's Sword of Honour . Pollard departed for India on attachment to the British Army in September 1927 , serving with the Royal Fusiliers and the York and Lancaster Regiment . He returned to Sydney in November the following year and was posted as adjutant / quartermaster to , successively , the 18th Battalion ( CMF ) and , in September 1932 , the 44th Battalion ( CMF ) . In December 1932 , while serving with the 44th in Western Australia , he was promoted to captain . Pollard was camp commandant of the National Rifle Association of Western Australia from 1934 to 1936 . He was transferred to Army Headquarters , Melbourne , in October 1936 . His next posting , in July 1938 , was as General Staff Officer Grade 3 , Training and General Duties , at the 2nd District Base , Sydney . In November 1938 , Pollard travelled to England to attend Staff College , Camberley ; he graduated in September 1939 , the planned two @-@ year course having been curtailed owing to the outbreak of the Second World War . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Following the declaration of war , Pollard served as Assistant Military Liaison Officer at the Australian High Commission , London ; during this posting he spent two weeks attached to the British Expeditionary Force in France . Promoted major , he joined the Second Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) in June 1940 . The provisions of the Defence Act ( 1903 ) prohibited members of the PMF ( or the CMF ) fighting outside Australian territory except as volunteers in the AIF . Pollard was appointed brigade major of the 25th Brigade , an Australian infantry formation raised in England mostly from logistics personnel to help combat a possible invasion by Nazi Germany . The brigade became part of the Australian 9th Division , and in January 1941 sailed for the Middle East ; it was transferred to the 7th Division on arrival . In March , Pollard was assigned to the 7th Division 's headquarters staff in Libya under Lieutenant General John Lavarack . On 24 April , towards the end of the campaign in Cyrenaica , Pollard led a raiding party on Giarabub , Libya , to remove Senussi civilians and destroy wells and ammunition . He took command of the 2 / 31st Battalion at the end of June 1941 , during the Syrian campaign , after the battalion 's commanding officer , Lieutenant Colonel Selwyn Porter , was wounded . A cease @-@ fire on 12 July ended the campaign in Syria , and Pollard was mentioned in despatches for his service ; the award was gazetted on 30 December 1941 . 
 Pollard was promoted to lieutenant colonel in August 1941 , and was responsible for establishing the AIF Junior Staff School in Palestine . He was raised to temporary colonel in March 1942 and posted to the AIF Staff in Ceylon , where the 16th and 17th Brigades had been garrisoned while on their way back to Australia from the Middle East . Returning to Australia in August , Pollard was appointed General Staff Officer Grade 1 of the 6th Division ; he served on its headquarters in Papua from September until mid @-@ November 1942 , when he became Major General George Vasey 's senior staff officer at the 7th Division . Pollard received the Distinguished Service Order for his actions in operations at Gona and Sanananda , during which he " displayed unlimited energy and ascertained vital information for use in future operations " ; the award was promulgated on 21 December 1943 . At the conclusion of the Papuan campaign in January 1943 , Pollard was posted to Queensland with the 6th Division , which was undergoing training and reinforcement . He was Chief Instructor of the Senior Staff School at Duntroon from December 1943 until February 1945 , when he became Deputy Director of Military Operations at General Sir Thomas Blamey 's Allied Land Forces Headquarters , based in Melbourne . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 = = = Rise to Chief of the General Staff = = = 
 Pollard held command of the Army 's Recruit Training Centre at Greta , New South Wales , from February to May 1946 . He spent the next two months attached to the headquarters staff of Northern Command . In August he was posted to England to undertake a course at the Royal Air Force 's School of Air Support in Old Sarum , and following his return in February 1947 was allotted to instruct at the soon @-@ to @-@ be @-@ opened RAAF School of Air Support at Laverton , Victoria . It was redesignated the School of Land / Air Warfare in March 1948 and relocated to RAAF Station Williamtown , New South Wales . Pollard was appointed Director of Personnel Administration at Army Headquarters in January 1949 . One of his tasks was to prepare the ground for the reintroduction of compulsory national service ; the new scheme was enacted in 1951 and remained in force until 1959 . Pollard 's lieutenant @-@ colonelcy had been made substantive in September 1946 and his colonelcy in July 1949 . He attended the Imperial Defence College , London , throughout 1951 ; he served as aide @-@ de @-@ camp to King George VI from April that year until August 1952 , and in the same capacity for Queen Elizabeth II until April 1954 . 
 In January 1952 , Pollard succeeded Colonel John Wilton as Director of Military Operations and Plans at Army Headquarters , and became Chairman of the Joint Planning Committee . That August he was one of the Australian delegates joining the Minister for External Affairs , Richard Casey , for the inaugural meeting of the ANZUS Council in Honolulu ; the US and New Zealand delegations were led , respectively , by Secretary of State Dean Acheson and Minister for External Affairs Clifton Webb . Pollard also took part in planning for the atomic test at Montebello , Western Australia , in October 1952 . Promoted to temporary brigadier in March 1953 , Pollard acted as Australian military advisor to Prime Minister Robert Menzies at the Commonwealth Prime Ministers ' Conference in London that June . From July to November he served as commander of the Australian Army Component of the British Commonwealth Forces Korea ; the role was responsible for managing the turnover of Australian troops in the theatre and the upkeep of their personal records . Pollard was later appointed Deputy Adjutant General at Army Headquarters , and his rank of brigadier became substantive in December 1953 . 
 In September 1954 , Pollard was promoted to temporary major general and appointed Quartermaster General and Third Military Member of the Military Board . At fifty @-@ two , he was the youngest member of the Board . His promotion to major general was made substantive in December 1954 . Inspecting conditions for Australian troops deployed to Malaya in December 1955 , Pollard was quoted as saying that there were " one or two " serious complaints but that he was " amazed how few there were , considering that the average soldier complains considerably all the time " . In August 1957 , he was promoted lieutenant general and succeeded Eric Woodward as General Officer Commanding Eastern Command , upon Woodward 's appointment as Governor of New South Wales . Headquartered in Sydney , Eastern Command covered the state of New South Wales and was the superior headquarters for the 2nd Division ( CMF ) . Pollard was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the Queen 's Birthday Honours promulgated on 9 June 1955 , and a Companion of the Order of the Bath in the Birthday Honours promulgated on 13 June 1959 . 
 = = = Chief of the General Staff = = = 
 On 1 July 1960 , Pollard succeeded Lieutenant General Sir Ragnar Garrett as Chief of the General Staff ( CGS ) , and was raised to Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the Queen 's Birthday Honours promulgated on 2 June 1961 . Although favoured by Garrett , Pollard 's succession had not been a foregone conclusion . The Minister for the Army , John Cramer , attempted to appoint Major General Ivan Dougherty , a retired CMF officer , but the proposal was defeated in cabinet on the advice of the Minister for Defence , Athol Townley , who feared the antagonism it was likely to engender among the senior ranks of the Regular Army . 
 As CGS , Pollard oversaw a major restructure of the Army . Following the lead of the US military , in 1960 the Australian Army replaced its " triangular " divisional structure of three infantry battalions under brigade headquarters , with a " pentropic " organisation consisting of five larger battalions without a brigade layer between division and battalion headquarters . The reorganisation had been sponsored by Garrett and agreed to by Townley in December 1959 . According to historian Chris Clark , Pollard was " personally ambivalent " about the change , which was intended to rationalise resources and strengthen the battalions for overseas deployments but also resulted in the disbandment of the citizens ' brigades and many other militia units . The US in any case abandoned the pentropic system in June 1961 , and the Australian Army ultimately returned to the triangular formation following a review commissioned by Pollard 's successor as CGS , Lieutenant General Wilton , in October 1964 . Another of Pollard 's focus areas as CGS was the academic qualifications of Army officers . Concerned that Duntroon graduates would begin to fall behind their tertiary @-@ educated peers in the community , he worked to make the college a degree @-@ granting institution , though this did not come to fruition until 1968 . 
 In December 1961 , Pollard told the Secretary of the Defence Committee that he considered the Army 's strength inadequate to support the government 's policy of " forward defence " , which involved meeting Communist aggression in South East Asia , well away from the Australian mainland . The CMF , he contended , was not properly equipped to provide relief for regular forces deployed overseas , and conscription " would appear to be politically and economically out of the question " . Nevertheless , the government reintroduced conscription in 1964 . As the threat of South Vietnam falling to a Communist takeover became more apparent , the Army began in 1962 to exercise specifically to combat counter @-@ insurgency operations , a type of warfare Pollard characterised as " frustrating groping at an elusive enemy " ; he added that " no purely military solution to a Communist insurgency situation is possible " . In May that year , the Federal government agreed to South Vietnam 's request for military instructors ; Pollard was responsible for laying down guidelines for the thirty advisors deployed in August as part of the Australian Army Training Team Vietnam , led by his friend Colonel Ted Serong . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Upon reaching the mandatory retirement age of sixty , Pollard left the military on 20 January 1963 , having recommended Wilton as his successor . He became a grazier on a farm at <unk> , Victoria . In July 1965 , he was made Honorary Colonel ( later Colonel Commandant ) of the Royal Australian Regiment , in which capacity he visited Australian troops in South Vietnam . He served as Australian Secretary to Queen Elizabeth II for the Royal Visit in 1970 , and was appointed a Knight Commander of the Royal Victorian Order in recognition of his services ; the honour was promulgated on 29 May 1970 , backdated to 3 May . In 1974 , he moved to a new property , which he christened Duntroon , at Wyrallah , New South Wales . Pollard died suddenly at his Wyrallah home on 9 March 1978 . He was survived by his wife and two sons , and cremated . 
 = The Damage a Man Can Do = 
 " The Damage a Man Can Do " is the eighth episode of the third season of the American television drama series Dexter , which first aired on November 16 , 2008 on Showtime in the United States . The episode was written by Scott Buck and directed by Marcos Siega . In the episode , assistant district attorney Miguel Prado ( Jimmy Smits ) asks Dexter Morgan ( Michael C. Hall ) for his assistance in killing a murderous gambler . Meanwhile , Dexter 's sister <unk> . Debra Morgan ( Jennifer Carpenter ) finds her boyfriend and informant Anton Briggs ( David Ramsey ) to be missing after she tells him that he is no longer legally obligated to work for her . 
 The episode marked the first time that another character had joined Dexter with a victim in one of his murder scenes . While filming this scene during October 2008 , Smits accidentally stabbed stunt man Jeff Chase with a real knife rather than the scene 's prop knife . The knife struck a small piece of plastic on Chase 's chest and he was unharmed . " The Damage a Man Can Do " received generally positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Miguel introduces Dexter to former football player Billy Fleeter ( Jeff Chase ) , a debt enforcer who kills other gamblers to pay off his own debts . Dexter is initially hesitant when Miguel suggests that Dexter teach him how to murder Fleeter , but the two go to a casino where Dexter tries to explain his deceased father Harry 's ( James Remar ) " code " to Miguel . They later break into Fleeter 's house and , although they find the murder weapon , Dexter says that they need evidence proving that Fleeter has the incentive to kill again . Dexter finds a ledger recording each of Fleeter 's bets and he returns with Miguel to the casino where they prepare an unused storeroom for the murder . They arrange to kill Fleeter that night , but somebody recognizes Miguel in the casino and Dexter calls off the plan . Dexter is angered when Miguel criticizes Harry 's code , but he agrees to go ahead with Fleeter 's murder after Miguel mentions that he severely beat his abusive father and found it to be one of the most satisfying moments of his life . They drug Fleeter and take him to the casino storeroom . Miguel stabs and kills Fleeter , telling Dexter afterwards that he feels " fantastic " . While cleaning up the crime scene , Dexter has a vision in which his father tells him that sharing the code was a mistake and that Dexter is now responsible for Miguel 's actions . 
 Debra finds a bag of marijuana hidden in a cereal box in Anton 's apartment and asks her partner Det . Joey Quinn ( Desmond Harrington ) about Anton 's previous charges for drug possession . Quinn tells her vaguely that it can be found on file , but when she asks Anton for his informant number , he tells her that he has none . She discovers that he had been working for Quinn unofficially and that he is not legally obligated to disclose any information to the police . After she tells him that he no longer has to work as an informant due to a " clerical error " in the filing of his report , he disappears . Debra and Quinn continue to work on the case of serial killer " The Skinner " . Believing that The Skinner may be a tree @-@ trimmer , they bring in a number of them for questioning ; one contractor , George King ( Jesse Borrego ) , tells Debra about one of his suspicious workers , Mario ( Jerry <unk> ) . When Mario tries to run from them , Debra and Quinn arrest him and he pleads to be sent back to Nicaragua at the mention of King 's name . Debra later visits Anton 's apartment and realizes that he has been taken by The Skinner , who recently trimmed the trees . 
 Dexter 's fiancée Rita Bennett ( Julie Benz ) is unusually temperamental due to her pregnancy hormones . She complains to Miguel 's wife Syl ( Valerie Cruz ) that Dexter refuses to help with the organization of their upcoming wedding . Despite having told Dexter that she did not want an engagement ring , Debra and Dexter choose a ring for Rita , and she apologizes for her behavior . Meanwhile , defense attorney Ellen Wolf ( Anne Ramsay ) tells her friend Lt. María LaGuerta ( Lauren Vélez ) that she thinks that Miguel is going out of his way to make her job harder . At the end of the episode , after killing Fleeter , Miguel makes an unannounced visit to Ellen 's house . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Damage a Man Can Do " was filmed in early October 2008 . On playing Harry as a figment of Dexter 's imagination , James Remar told Vanity Fair that " it 's challenging to play a specter in somebody ’ s current existence . " He said : " In my own life , I find myself doing some task [ ... ] and having a conversation with my mother or father , who are both deceased . [ ... ] I suspect lots of people do it . And when I hold that conversation , different images of my parents appear to me . And so it 's my job to do my best to be that image in Dexter 's mind . " When asked about playing the only character to join Dexter in his " kill room , " Jimmy Smits said : " The crew has a great respect for what they are doing in those scenes . They are energized because those moments are the staple of the show , but at the same time they are very somber . Michael doesn 't really like to interface with a lot of people on those days , because it 's such a serious subject matter . " 
 Filming one take of the scene in which Miguel kills Fleeter , Smits accidentally picked up a real knife instead of a prop knife and stabbed Jeff Chase in the chest . Though he was not wearing " a metal breastplate like a lot of actors do in a scene like that , " Chase had a piece of plastic " the size of a Post @-@ it note " over his heart which was struck by the knife . He was unable to stop Smits when he picked up the knife as he was bound in Saran wrap and had his mouth taped shut with duct tape for the scene . Chase said that in rehearsals Smits had missed the plastic with the prop knife " eight out of ten times . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Overall , the episode was received well by critics . Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger thought that " The Damage a Man Can Do " had " some major foundational problems " , but he said that both Michael C. Hall and Jimmy Smits ' performances were " wonderful " . Paste magazine 's Jeffrey Bloomer likened the episode simply to pulp and felt that Dexter 's voice overs lacked their usual " dry , dark humor and gonzo wisdom " . IGN critic Matt Fowler believed that Dexter and Miguel 's conversations contained " traces of overly awkward dialogue all over " and that the pairings of Debra and Quinn , and LaGuerta and Ellen were " forced " while Miguel 's desire to kill seemed " unnatural " . Writing for TV Guide , Paula Paige said that her favorite part of the episode was Dexter 's spinning Fleeter on the table like a roulette wheel and also she enjoyed Rita 's storyline , calling her a " hormonal hoot " . TV Squad 's Debra McDuffee thought that Angel and Barbara 's romance was " painfully awkward " to watch and Rita 's storyline was " lame and stereotypical " . The A.V. Club 's Scott Tobias believed the episode to be " awesome " and said that he was " more anxious than usual to see what Dexter was up to , and equally anxious to get away from the peripheral dramas " . BuddyTV critic John Kubicek named " The Damage a Man Can Do " the sixty @-@ fourth best television episode of 2008 . 
 = Redux ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Redux " is the collective name for the two @-@ part fifth season premiere of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . " Redux I " first aired on November 2 , 1997 on Fox in the United States , with " Redux II " airing on November 9 . Both episodes subsequently aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland . Both episodes were written by series creator Chris Carter , with " Redux " directed by R. W. Goodwin and " Redux II " helmed by Kim Manners . " Redux " became the second @-@ most @-@ watched episode ever broadcast , earning more than 27 million viewers in the United States alone . The first part of the episode received mixed to negative reviews , whereas the second part received mixed to positive reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . The episodes ' story continues on from the fourth season finale " Gethsemane " . " Redux I " follows Scully , who helps Mulder to fake his own death in an effort to discover which members of the FBI they can trust before the agents individually search for an answer to Scully 's cancer . " Redux II " continues immediately afterwards with Scully hospitalized , and Mulder is offered a deal to ally with The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) . 
 " Redux " , being a part of a three @-@ part episode arc , became a storyline milestone for the series . It marked the first episode in which Fox Mulder loses his belief in extraterrestrial life and the revelation that someone inside the FBI has tried to discredit Mulder and Scully 's work on the X @-@ Files . When writing the episode , Carter wanted to tie up loose ends from the previous seasons . Despite being the first two episodes of the season aired , they were the second and third episodes produced , the first being " Unusual Suspects " , which explained the origins of The Lone Gunmen . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In Canada 's St. Elias Mountains , a frozen extraterrestrial body is discovered by an expedition team . Professor Arlinsky , the team 's leader , sends ice core samples containing presumably alien DNA to Fox Mulder . Both Mulder and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) eventually meet Michael Kritschgau ( John Finn ) , a Defense Department employee who claims that everything Mulder thinks he knows about aliens is a lie . Kritschgau tells Mulder that his sister Samantha Mulder 's abduction was fabricated , that all evidence of alien biology are merely scientific anomalies , and that the alien body discovered in Canada was fake . Kritschgau claims that the entire alien mythos is a hoax perpetrated by the U.S. government as a cover for the military – industrial complex . Distraught by Kritschgau 's claims , Mulder loses his faith . Later , the FBI investigates Mulder 's apparent suicide . Scully confirms the unseen body 's identity . 
 = = = Redux = = = 
 As a distraught Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) sits in his apartment , he receives a phone call from Kritschgau , who tells him that " they " may be listening . Mulder , spotting a small hole in his ceiling , rushes upstairs and bursts into the apartment above his and kills government employee Scott Ostelhoff . He tells Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) about the incident , telling her that Ostelhoff had made numerous calls to the FBI . 
 The FBI looks into the situation and finds Ostelhoff 's body ; however , they believe it is the body of a suicidal Mulder . The next day Scully identifies Ostelhoff 's body as Mulder and is met by assistant director Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) who tells her that Section Chief Scott Blevins ( Charles Cioffi ) is looking for her . She meets with them , and tells them about the previous incidents leading to Mulder 's apparent suicide . Meanwhile , Mulder has broken into the Department of Defense . 
 While Mulder is gone , The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) searches Mulder 's apartment , believing he is not dead . Scully does some research into the phone records , coming to the conclusion that Ostelhoff was calling Skinner . Mulder meanwhile continues through the Department of Defense Headquarters finding more fake alien bodies inside . He heads through a tunnel to The Pentagon , where he finds an elaborate filing system and warehouse of evidence , the same warehouse that The Smoking Man was seen leaving at the very end of " Pilot " . Mulder ultimately tracks down a small metal vial that he believes may contain Scully 's cure . 
 Scully <unk> the FBI panel and explains that Mulder was a victim of an elaborate conspiracy and that she was given a fatal disease by someone in the room . As she is about to present her evidence , her nose bleeds and she collapses . Mulder brings the vial he found to the Lone Gunmen , who tell him it is not a cure , only deionized water . 
 = = = Redux II = = = 
 After hearing of Scully collapsing , Mulder arrives at the hospital where Scully is being treated . Before he is able to make contact with her , he is detained by Skinner and two FBI agents . Mulder is then brought to Blevins and a senior agent who demands information on why Scully lied about Mulder 's death . After the meeting , Mulder tells Skinner that a traitor in the FBI gave Scully her cancer . In the meantime , The Smoking Man has a meeting with the First Elder ( Don S. Williams ) , trying to convince him that Mulder will join their side if he is given a good reason to do so . 
 Mulder later tells Scully that he wants to reveal the conspiracy to the public . As he is leaving , he meets with The Smoking Man who tells him that he can cure Scully 's cancer by using a chip included in the vial Mulder took from the Pentagon . Meanwhile , Kritschgau goes before the FBI panel , denying any knowledge of Ostelhoff 's murderer , also revealing that his son died that morning . Kritschgau claims to work for not only the Department of Defense but also a congressional lobbying firm known as Roush . Mulder sees Scully and her doctor about the chip . Scully 's family is skeptical , particularly her brother Bill , who is quite upset with Mulder . Scully decides to go ahead and have the chip inserted in her neck . 
 The Smoking Man contacts Mulder , arranging a meeting at a nearby diner . There Mulder meets his sister Samantha , who calls The Smoking Man her father . Samantha claims to not remember anything about her abduction and is reluctant to stay or tell Mulder where he can find her . The next day , The Smoking Man offers Mulder the truth if he quits the FBI and comes work for him ; Mulder refuses . Mulder later meets with Blevins , who now has evidence Skinner was withholding information concerning Ostelhoff 's death . Blevins tells Mulder he can help him if he names Skinner as the traitor in the FBI . Later , Mulder meets with Scully , telling her he was going to make the deal with The Smoking Man but now will not after his meeting with Blevins . Despite Scully 's pleas , he refuses to name Skinner as the traitor in the FBI . 
 Mulder meets with the FBI panel while " Quiet Willy " follows The Smoking Man with a long barrel revolver , equipped with silencer , telescopic sight and targeting laser . Mulder tells the panel of the conspiracy against him and Scully . Questioned by Blevins and the senior agent about whether he killed Ostelhoff , Mulder instead names Blevins as the traitor in the FBI . The Smoking Man , looking at a picture of a young Mulder and Samantha , is shot by " Quiet Willy " . Blevins is killed by the senior agent in his office , who makes it appear like a suicide . At the hospital , Skinner meets with Mulder , telling him that The Smoking Man is dead , although his body was not found . Mulder admits that he guessed when he named Blevins , who Skinner reveals was on the payroll for Roush . Mulder tells Skinner that Scully 's cancer has gone into remission . 
 = = Production = = 
 Chris Carter , when talking about " Redux " and " Redux II " , noted that he " wanted to tie up a lot of loose ends from the past season , and play the idea that the conspiracy is a hoax and that it had been done to hide various terrestrial and temporal misdeeds " . Despite being the season premiere , " Redux " was the second episode produced of the season due to David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson being needed for filming on The X @-@ Files movie . In " Redux II " , the role of " Quiet Willy " was originally intended for the character the " Gray @-@ Haired Man " , but was re @-@ written for a new character when actor Morris Panych was unavailable . The role went to Willy Ross , whose real name is Steve Allen . The tagline for " Redux " is changed to " All Lies Lead to the Truth " . Director R. W. Goodwin has said that the crew filming " Redux " were so impressed by actor John Finn 's monologue detailing the supposed military hoax that he received a round of applause after finishing his takes . The script for this speech was particularly long , with Goodwin comparing it to " the Yellow Pages " . 
 " Redux II " had four different storylines : Mulder 's quest , the medical treatment , Scully 's religious faith , and The Smoking Man 's cure for Dana Scully 's cancer . It was normal for the writers to add one or two different storylines for the different episodes , to create different interpretations , but Carter felt it took " the idea of the show " and spun it " in the most interesting way " . The episode also started what would become Fox Mulder 's loss of belief in extraterrestrials until the episode , " The Red and the Black " . While the writers kept " playing " with the idea of Mulder 's loss of faith , fans and viewers could not grow to accept his loss of faith , which left The Smoking Man victorious . 
 " Redux II " was highly praised by Carter , saying that " I think that Redux II is one of the best episodes we 've ever done " . Frank Spotnitz said " Redux II is one of my favorite episodes . I think the story has a crystal purity and clarity , and it just comes to a perfect point for me " . Anderson said " I thought it was a terrific episode , especially the scenes in the hearing room , and the whole progression of Scully praying . How it was written and shot and how it was edited . Fabulous " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Redux " first aired on November 2 , 1997 on Fox in the United States , with " Redux II " airing on November 9 . " Redux I " earned a Nielsen rating of 16 @.@ 1 , with a 22 share . It was viewed by 27 @.@ 34 million people . It was the highest rated episode of the season , and the second highest watched episode , in terms of viewers , after " Leonard Betts " , which aired after Super Bowl XXXI . " Redux II " earned a Nielsen rating of 15 @.@ 0 , with a 21 share . It was viewed by 24 @.@ 84 million people . Part of the reason " Redux I " was so widely viewed was because the show 's previous episode , " Gethsemane " , had created speculation about whether or not Mulder was actually dead . An article in the Wall Street Journal discussed fan theories behind Mulder 's madness while a cartoon ran in The New Yorker a few weeks later surrounding Mulder 's " death " . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Redux " received mixed to negative reviews from critics . Todd VanDerWerff , writing for The A.V. Club , awarded the first episode a C + rating and wrote that " ' Redux [ Part 1 ] ' was a pretty good episode back in 1997 . It ’ s not a very good episode now " . VanDerWerff noted that the idea that Mulder had killed himself was not effective because the show 's audience knew that a movie had been scheduled for release in the summer of 1998 . Finally , he called the episode 's ending " one of the show ’ s weaker cliffhangers " . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the first part of the episode a negative review and awarded it one star out of four . She heavily criticized the story 's pacing , noting that the episode " is all plot , plot , plot . [ And ] much of the plot is unbelievable . " Furthermore , Vitaris criticized several plot holes in the episode , including Mulder 's easy entrance into the Department of Defense and the characters antics , such as his attack of Ostelhoff . However , despite the overall negative review , Vitaris did mention that , " There 's only one truly galvanizing scene , as that 's the confrontation between Scully and Skinner after he follows her to the lab where she is performing her DNA test . " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode one star out of five . The two heavily criticized the " Skinner @-@ as @-@ traitor " plot , noting sardonically that " the production team aren 't going to do [ reveal he is the antagonist ] , and the shock ' villain in the room ' reveal will be Section Chief <unk> – a character so important in the framework of the series that , barring his appearance in the Season Four finale , we haven 't seen him in ninety @-@ four episodes . " Not all reviews were so negative . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examination : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files named " Redux " and " Redux II " , together , as the tenth best " Episode of All Time " . In his critique of " Redux " , he noted " While many people don 't care for ' Redux ' , I think it does a good job of preparing us for the second hour ( although , it invalidates Gillian 's emotional context from the S4 finale ) . " In the 1999 FX Thanksgiving Marathon , containing fan @-@ selected episodes , " Redux " ( along with " Gethsemane " and " Redux II " ) was presented as the " Best Mythology Episode " . 
 " Redux II " received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club awarded the episode an A rating and noted that " whatever reservations I may have over a three @-@ episode story arc , this final entry does a good job of re @-@ investing us in the show 's basic ideals , returning us to a rough form of the status quo in a way that 's exciting , emotionally powerful , and satisfying despite only incremental forward momentum " . In addition , Handlen praised David Duchovny 's performance , stating that he " was on fire the whole episode " . Tom Kessenich praised the second part of the episode and wrote " ' Redux II ' is the standout hour of the two without question . With Scully on her deathbed , Mulder meets his sister only to lose her again and is put in a position where he may deal with the devil . The finale moments [ ... ] are quite simply perfect and as good as any the show ever produced . " Shearman and Pearson rated the episode two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . The two noted " [ ' Redux II ' ] is a likable enough little romp , but it 's too leisurely to be exciting , too predictable to be revealing , and – most crucially , not really funny enough to be comedy . Vitaris gave the second part of the episode a slightly less negative review than the first , but only awarded it one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . She criticized the ending , noting that " it 's all wrapped up neatly yet ambiguously . " However , Vitaris did note that " what makes ' Redux II ' tolerable is Duchovny , who always hits the right notes of anger , despair , grief , relief , or emotional numbness . " In the 1999 FX Thanksgiving Marathon , containing fan @-@ selected episodes , " Redux II " ( along with " Gethsemane " and " Redux " ) was presented as the " Best Mythology Episode " . 
 = Typhoon Agnes ( 1981 ) = 
 Typhoon Agnes produced among the heaviest rains recorded during the 20th century in South Korea , with 710 mm ( 28 in ) falling over a two @-@ day span . The storm originated as a tropical depression near Guam on August 25 , 1981 . Moving along a west @-@ northwest to northwest track , the system gradually strengthened as deep convection organized around it . The depression was assigned the name Agnes on August 27 following the development of gale @-@ force winds . Further intensification to typhoon @-@ status occurred by August 29 . Agnes attained its peak intensity on August 31 over the East China Sea as a Category 2 @-@ equivalent on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale with winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) . Subsequent interaction with a mid @-@ latitude trough induced an extratropical transition as the cyclone slowed and turned north . The system had lost most of its tropical characteristics by September 1 , with the majority of convection sheared northeast over South Korea and Japan . Agnes later accelerated northeast and completed its transition on September 3 . The remnants continued along this course , impacting northern Japan and the Kamchatka Peninsula before last being noted on September 6 near the International Dateline . 
 Throughout the course of Agnes ' existence , several countries were affected by torrential rains and typhoon @-@ force winds . Hardest hit was South Korea where record @-@ breaking rains triggered widespread flooding . More than 12 @,@ 000 structures were damaged or destroyed by the storm and 191 @,@ 000 acres ( 77 @,@ 300 hectares ) of farmland was inundated . A total of 113 people lost their lives in the country while damage reached $ 134 million . Taiwan saw similarly destructive rains which left 32 people dead of missing . A further 14 lives were lost in mainland China where coastal flooding from the typhoon 's slow movement coincided with the spring tide , resulting in the greatest storm surge since 1949 along the Yangtze estuary and Hangzhou Bay . Much of Japan saw rains from the storm , though no significant damage or loss of life took place in the country . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 23 , 1981 , following several days of tranquil weather , a Tropical Upper Tropospheric Trough ( TUTT ) began building westward from the International Dateline , near Wake Island . Over the following 36 hours , an expansive area of convection developed southwest of the organizing TUTT . On August 25 , surface observations on Guam in the Mariana Islands indicated the presence of a low pressure system . Coinciding with this , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) declared the formation of a tropical depression at 06 : 00 UTC . Weather reconnaissance missions throughout the day indicated a 1006 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 71 inHg ) center west of Guam , prompting the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) to issue a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert . Following improvement in the convective structure , the JTWC began warning on the cyclone as Tropical Depression 18W at 18 : 00 UTC , at which time the depression was situated roughly 665 km ( 415 mi ) west @-@ northwest of Guam . 
 Tracking west @-@ northwest and later northwest around the southwestern edge of a subtropical ridge , steady intensification of the cyclone ensued . Early on August 27 , a reconnaissance plane measured a central pressure of 994 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 36 inHg ) and flight @-@ level winds of 85 km / h ( 53 mph ) , indicating the system had become a tropical storm . In light of this , the JTWC assigned the name Agnes to the storm . Additionally due to its proximity to the Philippines , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration dubbed the system with the local name Pining . Strengthening occurred at a climatological rate , with Agnes attaining typhoon @-@ status on August 29 . A large , banding eye @-@ feature developed within the core of Agnes as it approached the Ryukyu Islands of southwestern Japan . The storm passed 170 km ( 105 mi ) south of Okinawa around 06 : 00 UTC on August 30 and emerged over the East China Sea . Early on August 31 , Agnes achieved its peak strength with winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) and an estimated central pressure of 947 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 96 inHg ) . This ranked it as a Category 2 @-@ equivalent on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . The JMA estimated the system to have been slightly weaker , with ten @-@ minute sustained winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) and a pressure of 950 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 05 inHg ) . 
 As the storm moved over the East China Sea on September 1 , Agnes began to interact with a mid @-@ latitude trough situated south of South Korea and began a prolonged extratropical transition . Increasing wind shear exposed the center of the typhoon and displaced convection to the north and east . Subsequent slowing of the cyclone 's forward speed as it turned northward resulted in an extended period of heavy rain for much of South Korea . The JTWC estimated Agnes to have become predominantly extratropical by the end of September 1 , coinciding with the system weakening below typhoon intensity . The JMA , however , maintained the storm as a tropical system as it began moving northwest . The diminishing cyclone moved over the Korea Strait on September 3 and completed its extratropical transition that afternoon . Accelerating over the Sea of Japan , the remnant storm deepened slightly before striking the northern Japanese island of Hokkaido on September 4 with an estimated pressure of 976 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 82 inHg ) . After moving over the Sea of Okhotsk , Agnes impacted the Kamchatka Peninsula of Russia on September 5 . The system then moved over the open waters of the North Pacific and was last noted near the International Dateline on September 6 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Japan = = = 
 On August 30 , Typhoon Agnes moved through the southern Ryukyu Islands , bringing strong winds and heavy rain to the region . Several islands received more than 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) of rain , and a peak value of 304 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) was measured on Ishigaki Island . Despite passing through as a typhoon , only <unk> received winds of such intensity with a peak gust of 122 km / h ( 76 mph ) . A few other islands reported winds greater than 90 km / h ( 56 mph ) . 
 After moving over the Sea of Japan , the storm 's remnants brought heavy rains to much of Japan the day after a 6 @.@ 6 Mw earthquake rocked eastern parts of the country . Air and sea transportation across the Korean Strait was cancelled for September 3 . Landslides were reported across Kyushu , though no casualties occurred . On Shin @-@ <unk> , Nagasaki , rain fell at rates of 69 mm ( 2 @.@ 7 in ) per hour on September 3 as Agnes passed to the north . Rainfall in the mainland peaked at 208 mm ( 8 @.@ 2 in ) on <unk> in Aichi Prefecture . 
 = = = China and Taiwan = = = 
 Though Agnes did not directly impact Taiwan , prolonged southwesterly flow associated with the typhoon brought torrential rains to the island . Flooding in southern Taiwan was considered the worst in 30 years ; 32 people were killed or left missing . More than 510 mm ( 20 in ) of rain fell in the cities of Chiayi , Tainan , Kaohsiung , and Pingtung . Flood waters , reaching depths of 2 @.@ 0 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) , inundated 238 @,@ 256 acres ( 96 @,@ 419 hectares ) of farmland and destroyed 140 homes . An estimated 3 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . 
 Significant water rise occurred along Yangtze estuary and Hangzhou Bay in mainland China as Agnes remained just east of the area for 36 hours and the coincidence of the spring tide . A peak storm surge of 1 @.@ 6 m ( 5 @.@ 2 ft ) was measured in the region with continuous onshore flow , the highest since 1949 ; conversely , in areas with continuous offshore flow , water levels fell by 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) . Model simulations of the event estimated that a 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) surge affected the <unk> Free Trade Zone in Shanghai . Offshore , 300 vessels sank while the resulting inland floods killed 14 people . Authorities in Shanghai mobilized 100 @,@ 000 personnel to limit the extent of the floods as 200 sections of seawall collapsed . According to local newspapers , 59 @,@ 700 acres ( 24 @,@ 100 hectares ) of farmland flooded and 4 @,@ 280 homes were damaged . Losses were estimated in the millions of dollars . 
 High winds downed many trees across the region and debris littered the streets of Shanghai . United States President Jimmy Carter , wrapping up an inspection of the Chinese Navy , was scheduled to take a cruise out of the Huangpu River ; however , the typhoon forced the vessel to remain at port . 
 = = = South Korea = = = 
 Between September 1 and 3 , torrential rains affected much of South Korea , with the heaviest falling well @-@ ahead of the storm itself . Regarded as the heaviest on record in the 20th century , at least 710 mm ( 28 in ) fell over a two @-@ day span in the country , resulting in tremendous flash flooding and landslides . This surpassed the previous two @-@ day record of 570 mm ( 22 @.@ 3 in ) measured in 1928 in Seoul . A record @-@ breaking 24 ‑ hour rainfall of 547 @.@ 4 mm ( 21 @.@ 55 in ) was also measured ; however , this was later greatly surpassed by Typhoon Rusa in 2002 which produced 870 @.@ 5 mm ( 34 @.@ 27 in ) during the same time span . The coastal counties of <unk> , <unk> , and Goheung all saw approximately half of their annual precipitation , between 394 and 548 mm ( 15 @.@ 5 and 21 @.@ 6 in ) , in one day 's time . In addition to the rains , winds up to 144 km / h ( 89 mph ) were measured . 
 Communications with severed with towns along the southwestern coastline as roads and rail lines were washed away . Thousands of residents sought refuge by moving to higher ground . The Korean relief center reported that 762 homes were destroyed and another 11 @,@ 700 flooded due to the storm . Other reports indicated that upwards of 5 @,@ 900 homes were destroyed . More than 191 @,@ 000 acres ( 77 @,@ 300 hectares ) of farmland was washed out . Throughout South Korea , 113 people lost their lives . Most of the deaths resulted from landslides , swollen rivers , and collapsed embankments . Total damage in the country amounted to $ 134 million , with agriculture accounting for at least $ 24 million . Additionally , 28 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . The disaster relief agency Hope Bridge provided 7 @.@ 5 billion won ( $ 10 @.@ 2 million ) in aid to areas affected by the storm . 
 = Michael of Zahumlje = 
 Michael of Zahumlje , also known as Michael <unk> ( Croatian / Bosnian / Serbian : Mihajlo <unk> , Cyrillic : <unk> <unk> ) or rarely as Michael <unk> , was an independent Slavic ruler of Zahumlje , in present @-@ day western Herzegovina and southern Croatia , who flourished in the early part of the 10th century . A neighbour of the Kingdom of Croatia and Serbia as well as an ally of Bulgaria , he was nevertheless able to maintain independent rule throughout at least a good part of his reign . 
 Michael came into territorial conflict with Petar of Serbia , who attempted to expand his power westwards . To eliminate the threat , Michael warned his ally , the Bulgarian Tsar Simeon I , about the alliance between Peter and Symeon 's enemy , the Byzantine Empire . Symeon attacked Serbia and captured Peter , who later died in prison . 
 Michael was mentioned together with Tomislav of Croatia in Pope John X 's letter of 925 . In that same year , he participated in the first church councils in Split , something that some historians have taken as evidence of Zahumlje being a vassal of Croatia . In any case , Michael , with grand titles of the Byzantine court as anthypatos and patrician ( patrikios ) , remained ruler of Zahumlje through the 940s , while maintaining good relations with the Pope . 
 = = Background = = 
 Compiled in c . 950 , the historical work De administrando imperio , ascribed to Constantine Porphyrogenitus , notes that Michael was a son of <unk> ( Greek : <unk> ) and that unlike many other Slavs in the Dalmatian region , his family did not descend from the " unbaptized Serbs " . According to Constantine , his family belonged to the <unk> ( <unk> ) , a unbaptized people on the River Vistula from south Poland . The region around upper Vistula was also known as a part of White Croatia ( <unk> ) , from where the Croats have migrated to the Roman Dalmatia invited by the Eastern Roman ( Byzantine ) Emperor Heraclius . However , H. T. Norris notes that Croats and Serbs were intermixed in those parts of Poland . 
 The area controlled by Michael comprised Zahumlje , later known as Hum ( what is now western Herzegovina and southern Croatia ) , as well as Travunia ( now eastern Herzegovina and southern Croatia with center at Trebinje ) and a good part of Duklja ( modern Montenegro ) . His territory therefore formed a block along the southern Dalmatian coast , from the Neretva river to Ragusa ( Dubrovnik ) , latter serving as a tributary region . 
 Before the annexation of Serbia in 924 , Bulgaria did not yet border on Zahumlje and a part of Croatia lay between both lands . For instance , the chronicler John the Deacon ( d . 1009 ) says that in 912 , a Venetian traveller who had just passed through Bulgaria and Croatia on his way home , next found himself in Zahumlje . 
 = = Alliance with Simeon I of Bulgaria = = 
 Michael was a close ally of Simeon I of Bulgaria , who had been mounting a number of successful campaigns against the Byzantine Empire . The traveler of John the Deacon 's account was an ambassador , son of the Venetian doge Ursus <unk> II , who was returning from a diplomatic mission to Constantinople . When he entered Zahumlje , Michael " a prince of the Slavs " ( dux <unk> ) had him captured and sent as a gift to Simeon . 
 Simeon 's march for power posed such a great threat to the Byzantine Empire that it looked for allies in the area . Leo <unk> , the strategos of Dyrrhachium , found one such ally in Serbia , Peter Gojniković , who had been subject to Bulgaria since 897 . Peter had been busy extending his power westwards , and appears to have come into territorial conflict with Michael in the process of doing so . Constantine writes that Michael , " his jealousy aroused by this " , warned Symeon of the conspiracy . Symeon attacked Serbia and captured Peter , who died in prison . Most scholars prefer to date the war on Serbia to 917 , after 20 August , when Simeon had massacred much of the invading Byzantine army at its landing place at Anchialos . In 924 , Simeon conquered Serbia and , instead of appointing a vassal to govern on his behalf , placed it under his direct authority . In effect , Simeon became a neighbour of Michael and of Croatia , which was then under King Tomislav and had good relations with Byzantium . It seems probable that Michael remained loyal to Simeon until the latter 's death in 927 . 
 = = Church councils in Split , Croatia = = 
 The sources show Michael involved in important church affairs which were conducted on Croatian territory in the mid @-@ 920s . Two church councils were convened in Split ( Latin : <unk> ) , in 925 and 928 , which officially established or confirmed the recognition of Split as the archiepiscopal see of all Dalmatia ( rather than just the Byzantine cities ) . Another major issue of concern was the language of liturgy : since the conversion of the Slavs by Cyril and Methodius in the previous century , the Slavic church was accustomed to use Slavonic rather than Latin for its church services . 
 The Historia <unk> , whose composition may have begun in the late 13th century , cites a letter of Pope John X to Tomislav , " king ( rex ) of the Croats " , in which he refers to the first council in some detail . If the letter is authentic , it shows that the council was attended not only by the bishops of Croatian and Byzantine Dalmatia , but also by Tomislav , whose territory also included the Byzantine cities of Dalmatia , and by a number of Michael 's representatives . In this letter , John describes Michael as " the most excellent leader of the <unk> " ( <unk> dux <unk> ) . The sources have nothing to say about the nature of the relationship between Michael and Tomislav . Some historians have taken Michael 's participation at the church council as evidence for the idea that Michael had switched allegiance to Croatia . John V. A. Fine , however , rejects this line of reasoning , saying that the events represented an important ecclesiastical affair for all Dalmatia and stood under papal authority . Moreover , Michael appears to have retained a neutral position when Croatia and Bulgaria were at war in 926 and so it may be that Michael was on good terms with the rulers of both lands at the same time . 
 Michael apparently sacked <unk> ( Latin : <unk> ) , which was a Byzantine town in Apulia on 10 July 926 . It remains unknown if he did this by Tomislav 's supreme command as suggested by some historians . According to <unk> , Tomislav sent the Croatian navy under Michael 's leadership to drive the Saracens from that part of southern Italy and free the city . Interesting , Constantine in his De administrando imperio makes no mention of Michael 's raid , nor does he mention Church councils in Split . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Constantine remembers Michael as a prince ( archon ) of the <unk> , but also uses such grand titles of the Byzantine court as anthypatos and patrician ( patrikios ) to describe his political rank and status . These titles have been interpreted as reflecting a more subordinate position after Simeon 's death in 927 , when Michael lost the Bulgarian support needed for any higher recognition . Michael does not appear in the sources for events after 925 , but historian Fine thinks that his reign lasted into the 940s . Časlav , who became ruler of Serbia after Symeon 's death , may have seized some of Michael 's territory while securing his conquest of Travunia . 
 = Polytolypa = 
 Polytolypa is a monotypic genus of fungus containing the single species Polytolypa hystricis . First classified in the Onygenaceae family , as of 2008 it is considered to be in the <unk> , although there is still uncertainty as to its phylogenetic relationships with other similar genera . This species is only known from a single specimen derived in the laboratory from a specimen of dung of the North American porcupine , Erethizon <unk> , collected in Ontario , Canada . Polytolypa hystricis contains bioactive compounds that have antifungal activity . 
 = = Taxonomy , phylogeny , and naming = = 
 The genus was first described in 1993 by University of Toronto botanists J.A. Scott and D.W. Malloch , who grew the fungus in moist chamber cultures of porcupine dung collected in Stoneleigh , Ontario , Canada . The generic name Polytolypa is from the Greek word poly ( <unk> ) meaning " many " , and <unk> ( <unk> ) , meaning " <unk> of yarn " . The specific epithet hystricis comes from the Greek hystrix ( <unk> ) , or " porcupine " . 
 The genus has been classified in the Onygenaceae , a fungal family characterized by species capable of digesting human hair in vitro , and with spores that are punctate ( with minute surface punctures ) when viewed with scanning electron microscopy . However , as Scott and colleagues demonstrated using traditional laboratory tests to determine <unk> activity , P. <unk> is not able to digest hair . There is still uncertainty as to its phylogenetic relationships with other similar genera . Polytolypa is thought to be evolutionarily most closely related to the genera <unk> and <unk> . The grouping of Polytolypa and <unk> represent a sister clade to the <unk> clade , based on analysis of partial nuclear LSU sequence data . However , the phylogenetics of Polytolypa are still unclear and await further study . The 10th edition of the Dictionary of the Fungi ( 2008 ) considers the genus to be in the <unk> family , although uncertainty with this classification is indicated in the entry ; in contrast , the online mycological database MycoBank classifies the genus in the Onygenaceae . 
 = = Description = = 
 The ascus @-@ containing reproductive structures , or ascomata , are minute , spherical bodies , typically 200 – 400 μm in diameter . They start out white , but gradually become rusty brown in maturity . The ascomata , which may be clustered together in groups or scattered about , grow in a shallow layer of " hairs " ( actually fungal mycelia ) called a tomentum . The ascomata have " appendages " composed of numerous coiled , sometimes branched helices of hyphae that are coiled 3 – 15 times . 
 The ascospores produced by Polytolypa are ellipsoidal , yellow to yellow @-@ orange in color , with dimensions of 2 @.@ 5 – 5 by 3 – 4 μm . Viewed with a light microscope their surfaces appear to be smooth , but under scanning electron microscopy , they are revealed to be densely marked with punctures and small , hard , sharp projections . The structures that produce the ascospores are called asci . In Polytolypa they are numerous , spherical , and measure 9 – 10 by 12 – 13 μm . Each ascus contains eight ascospores , which are released when the ascus dissolves away at maturity . The anamorph ( asexual form of the fungus ) resembles the genus <unk> . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Polytolypa hystricis is known only from the dung of the North American porcupine , Erethizon <unk> . Porcupine dens accumulate thick layers of nutrient @-@ rich dung , hair and urine that are degraded by a succession of fungi . These fungi are disseminated by arthropods ( such as insects ) or by the porcupine themselves . 
 = = Bioactive compounds = = 
 Chemical analysis has shown that Polytolypa hystricis contains a unique <unk> chemical named <unk> , as well two compounds known previously as metabolites from <unk> <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) . Both <unk> and one of the previously identified compounds have " moderate " antifungal activity against the species <unk> furfuraceous , while <unk> alone can inhibit the growth of Candida albicans . 
 = 2000 Italian Grand Prix = 
 The 2000 Italian Grand Prix ( formally the LXXI Gran Premio Campari d 'Italia ) was a Formula One motor race held on 10 September 2000 at the Autodromo Nazionale Monza near Monza , Lombardy , Italy . It was the fourteenth race of the 2000 Formula One season and the 71st Italian Grand Prix . The 53 @-@ lap race was won by Ferrari driver Michael Schumacher after starting from pole position . Mika Häkkinen finished second in a McLaren car with Ralf Schumacher third for the Williams team . 
 Michael Schumacher maintained his start line advantage and withstood Häkkinen 's attempts to pass him going into the first corner . Further around the lap , a collision involving four cars prompted the deployment of the safety car and a fire marshal Paolo Gislimberti was struck by a flying wheel . When the safety car pulled into the pit lane on lap eleven , Michael Schumacher began to immediately pull clear from Häkkinen and kept the lead until his pit stop on the 39th lap . When Häkkinen made his own pit stop three laps later , Michael Schumacher regained the lead which he held to clinch his sixth victory of the 2000 season ; Häkkinen finished almost four seconds behind . 
 As a consequence of the race , Schumacher reduced Häkkinen 's lead in the Drivers ' Championship to two points , with David Coulthard a further 17 points back . Rubens Barrichello who was caught up in the first lap accident was mathematically ruled out of clinching the title . In the Constructors ' Championship , McLaren 's eight point advantage going into the race was reduced to four , with three races of the season remaining . Gislimberti later died in hospital and his death caused safety measures in Formula One to be reviewed . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Grand Prix was contested by eleven teams , each of two drivers . The teams , also known as constructors were , McLaren , Ferrari , Jordan , Jaguar , Williams , Benetton , Prost , Sauber , Arrows , Minardi and BAR . Tyre supplier Bridgestone brought two different tyre types to the race : two dry compounds , the medium and the hard . 
 Going into the race , McLaren driver Mika Häkkinen led the Drivers ' Championship with 74 points , ahead of Michael Schumacher on 68 points and David Coulthard on 61 points . Rubens Barrichello was fourth with 49 points with Ralf Schumacher fifth on 20 points . In the Constructors ' Championship McLaren were leading with 125 points , Ferrari and Williams were second and third with 117 and 30 points , respectively , while Benetton with 18 points and Jordan with 13 points contended for fourth place . Ferrari and McLaren had so far dominated the championship winning the previous thirteen races . Benetton driver Giancarlo Fisichella had gained one second place podium finish , while Ralf Schumacher , Heinz @-@ Harald Frentzen had achieved third place podium finishes . 
 At the previous race in Belgium , the gap between Häkkinen and Michael Schumacher had extended by four points . Häkkinen started from pole position and maintained the lead until he lost control of his car at Stavelot corner on the 13th lap . He later managed to lap faster than Michael Schumacher and passed the German while both drivers were lapping BAR driver Ricardo Zonta with four laps remaining and held it to win the race . The overtaking manoeuvre was <unk> by the worldwide press and many people involved in Formula One as " the best ever manoeuvre in grand prix racing " . Michael Schumacher remained confident about his title chances : " With only six points between Mika and I and four more races to go , I am still optimistic about our chances . One win or a retirement before the end of the season can change the whole picture either way . " 
 Over the month of July , the Autodromo Nazionale Monza race track 's main straight was straightened and the Variante Goodyear and Seconda Variante chicanes were reconfigured by the race organisers to become a series of narrower corners with the exit away from the entry of turn one . The run @-@ off areas around the two sections of the circuit were <unk> . Some of the drivers , however , were unhappy with the modifications , though , as there were fears of a multi @-@ car accident on the first lap . Coulthard claimed that the new corner would make braking more difficult and was concerned over the amount of penalties issued to other competitors . However , Michael Schumacher believed his and other teams would be less concerned with suspension damage . Jean Alesi who was the first driver to test the new circuit , said that it would be easier for drivers to pull off the track in the event of a technical issue . 
 Following the Belgian Grand Prix on 27 August , the teams conducted a four @-@ day testing session at the Monza circuit and concentrated on optimising their car set @-@ ups for low downforce . Jos Verstappen set the quickest times on the first day , ahead of Pedro Diniz . Coulthard was quickest on the second day . Fisichella suffered a high speed crash going into the Ascari chicane , bringing a brief halt to testing . He visited Rome to undergo a medical examination and was diagnosed with an inflamed tendon in his right ankle , but was cleared to race having been advised to take five days of rest . Jacques Villeneuve set the quickest times on the third day as rain shortened the team 's running . Minardi 's Gastón Mazzacane suffered a high speed accident at the Ascari chicane , forcing testing to be stopped . Ralf Schumacher was fastest on the fourth and final day of testing . Michael Schumacher 's car developed a malfunction and pulled off the race track , limiting Ferrari 's testing time as the car 's power unit was changed . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Four practice sessions were held before the Sunday race — two on Friday , and two on Saturday . The Friday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted an hour . The third and final practice sessions were held on Saturday morning and lasted 45 minutes . Barrichello set the first session 's fastest time with a lap of 1 : 25 @.@ 057 , three @-@ tenths of a second ahead of Jarno Trulli . Michael Schumacher was one @-@ tenth of a second off Trulli 's pace , while Coulthard set the fourth fastest time . The two Arrows drivers were fifth and sixth fastest ; Pedro de la Rosa ahead of Jos Verstappen . Frentzen , Fisichella , Villeneuve and Alexander Wurz rounded out the top ten fastest drivers of the session . In the second practice session , Barrichello was again fastest despite not improving his time from the first session ; Michael Schumacher finished with the second fastest time . Trulli set the third fastest time , with the two McLaren drivers fourth and fifth , Häkkinen ahead of Coulthard . Eddie Irvine recorded the sixth quickest lap. de la Rosa , Diniz , Verstappen and Mika Salo completed the top ten drivers . Alesi 's Prost was afflicted by a hydraulic leak ; this restricted him to three timed laps , and he was slowest overall . Wurz suffered a similar problem and set the 18th fastest time . Mazzacane spun off and did not take any further part in the session . 
 The Saturday practice sessions were again held in dry and sunny conditions . Michael Schumacher set the fastest time of the third session , a 1 : 24 @.@ 262 . The Williams drivers were running quickly — Jenson Button in second and Ralf Schumacher fifth — they were separated by Coulthard and Barrichello in third and fourth . Fisichella recorded the sixth fastest lap time . Villeneuve , Häkkinen , Salo and Johnny Herbert rounded out the top ten . In the final practice session , Michael Schumacher again set the fastest time , a 1 : 23 @.@ 904 ; Barrichello set the third fastest time . They were separated by Häkkinen with teammate Coulthard clinching the fourth fastest time . The Williams drivers continued to run quickly with Ralf Schumacher fifth , ahead of Button in sixth . Fisichella , Zonta , Villeneuve and Irvine ( who suffered a rear suspension failure but regained control of his car ) completed the top ten ahead of qualifying . Mazzacane again suffered problems with his car when his engine ran out of air pressure and was forced to stop on the track while Wurz did not record any laps because of a fuel pick @-@ up issue . 
 Saturday 's afternoon qualifying session lasted for one hour . Each driver was limited to twelve laps , with the grid order decided by the drivers ' fastest laps . During this session , the 107 % rule was in effect , which necessitated each driver set a time within 107 % of the quickest lap to qualify for the race . The session was held in dry conditions ; the air temperature was 22 ° C ( 72 ° F ) and the track temperature was 34 ° C ( 93 ° F ) . Michael Schumacher achieved his sixth pole position of the season , his second at Monza , with a time of 1 : 23 @.@ 770 . Although he was happy with his car and tyres , he said that he did not make the best of session because of making a mistake at the first chicane during his first run . Michael Schumacher was joined on the front row by Barrichello who recorded a lap time 0 @.@ 027 seconds slower and was happy to start alongside his teammate . Häkkinen qualified third , though he believed he could have set a faster time as he struggled with the handling on his car and his McLaren misfired on his final two timed laps . Villeneuve qualified fourth , nearly half a second behind Michael Schumacher , and stated that he was happy with his performance . Häkkinen 's teammate Coulthard qualified fifth and was disappointed with his starting position because he encountered traffic during the session and was blocked by Frentzen . Trulli and Frentzen set the sixth and eighth fastest times respectively for Jordan ; Trulli reported no problems while Frentzen was impeded by de la Rosa . Ralf Schumacher recorded the seventh quickest time and was disappointed in his performance . De la Rosa completed the top ten fastest qualifiers . His teammate Verstappen qualified eleventh having been forced to use two of his team 's cars when they developed hydraulic and engine problems . Button qualified twelfth and said he overheated his tyres after running insufficient amounts of downforce . Wurz , who qualified in 13th , used the session to familiarise himself with Benetton 's spare car . He was ahead of Irvine in the faster of the two Jaguar 's , who set a best time that was one @-@ tenth of a second faster than his own teammate Johnny Herbert in 18th ; both were disadvantaged at the lack of straightline speed . Salo was 15th quickest for the Sauber team , ahead of his own teammate Diniz whose car handled badly under braking . The pair were marginally quicker than Zonta who encountered gear selection problems in his race car , and switched to his team 's spare monocoque . The grid was completed by Alesi and Nick Heidfeld in the Prost 's who qualified in front of the Minardi 's of Marc Gené and Gastón Mazzacane . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The drivers took to the track at 09 : 30 CEST ( UTC + 1 ) for a 30 @-@ minute warm @-@ up session . It took place in dry weather conditions . Zonta set the fastest time of the session , a 1 : 26 @.@ 448 , six hundredths of a second faster than Häkkinen , in second place . Michael Schumacher had the third fastest time , ahead of Coulthard in fourth and Verstappen in fifth , with Salo rounding out the top six . 
 The race started at 14 : 00 local time . The conditions for the race were dry with the air temperature 25 ° C ( 77 ° F ) and the track temperature 34 and 37 ° C ( 93 and 99 ° F ) . Heidfeld 's car was being worked on by mechanics who managed to get to the side of the track before the formation lap begun to avoid incurring a penalty . Michael Schumacher maintained his lead going into the first corner withstanding Häkkinen 's attempts to pass . Barrichello dropped to third position . Heading into the first corner , Salo and Irvine made contact , with the Finn suffering a puncture and the Jaguar driver retired from the race . Going into the chicane , Frentzen collided with Barrichello and collected Trulli and Coulthard . Trulli 's car lost its left rear tyre which struck fire marshal Paolo Gislimberti . Behind them , de la Rosa collided with Herbert and was sent airborne . The accidents prompted the deployment of the safety car at the end of the first lap for marshals to clear up strands of carbon fibre on the circuit and the cars in the gravel trap . Both Sauber drivers , Herbert and Zonta all made pit stops for repairs . Gislimberti suffered from head and chest injuries and was given a heart massage before being taken to Monza Hospital . Salo became the fifth driver to pit on lap eight and his mechanics fitted a new engine cover and sidepods to repair handling problems . During the end of the safety car period , Button swerved to avoid teammate Ralf Schumacher and collided with the barriers on the back straight , sustaining damage to his car . He later went off at the Parabolica corner and became the race 's seventh retirement on lap eleven . 
 When the race restarted on lap twelve , Michael Schumacher led , while Häkkinen and Villeneuve were running second and third . Behind them were Ralf Schumacher , Fisichella , Wurz , Gene , Heidfeld , Zonta , Mazzacane , Diniz , Salo and Alesi . Michael Schumacher began to immediately pull away from Häkkinen as he set consecutive fastest laps . Further down the field , Wurz overtook Diniz and Mazzacane for tenth position . By the start of lap 13 , Michael Schumacher led Häkkinen by 2 @.@ 1 seconds . Further back , Zonta passed Heidfeld to take ninth . On lap 14 , Zonta moved up into seventh position after passing Gené and Wurz . Villeneuve became the third retirement of the race when he pulled over to the side of the track with gearbox problems on the same lap . Meanwhile , Verstappen overtook Fisichella to take fourth position . Heidfeld retired after his engine failed and spun off at Variante della Roggia chicane on lap 15 . One lap later , Ralf Schumacher lost two positions after being passed by Verstappen and Zonta . Salo passed Mazzacane to claim ninth position on lap 17 . At the start of the 19th lap , Zonta tried to pass Verstappen heading into the Variante Goodyear chicane , but Verstappen moved onto an early defensive line to prevent Zonta from moving ahead . Zonta attempted to overtake Verstappen into the Variante della <unk> chicane to take third place four laps later , but was unable to complete it as he ran wide . He managed to get ahead after exiting the chicane on the same lap . 
 Michael Schumacher lapped consistently in the 1 : 26 range , setting the new fastest lap of the race on lap 22 , a 1 : 26 @.@ 428 , to extend his lead over Häkkinen to 5 @.@ 4 seconds , who in turn was 9 @.@ 9 seconds in front of Zonta . Verstappen in fourth was a further 2 @.@ 9 seconds behind , but was drawing ahead of Ralf Schumacher in fifth . On lap 23 , Zonta became the first front runner to make a scheduled pit stop and emerged in eleventh position . Salo continued to move up the field when he passed Wurz for sixth on lap 25 . Three laps later , Zonta moved into ninth position after he overtook Mazzacane and Diniz . Salo made a pit stop for the second time on lap 29 and emerged in tenth place . Verstappen took his pit stop three laps later and came out in seventh position . Zonta made his third and final pit stop of the race on lap 36 and dropped to eighth position . Michael Schumacher took his pit stop on lap 39 and rejoined 13 @.@ 6 seconds behind Häkkinen , who now led the race . Three laps later , Häkkinen made a pit stop and rejoined behind Michael Schumacher with a deficit on eleven seconds . Fisichella was the final driver to make a scheduled stop on lap 44 . Fisichella 's pit stop was problematic : he stalled when he encountered a problem with his clutch system and his mechanics push @-@ started his Benetton and he rejoined in eleventh . 
 At the completition of lap 45 , with the scheduled pit stops completed , the race order was Michael Schumacher , Häkkinen , Ralf Schumacher , Verstappen , Wurz , Zonta , Salo , Diniz , Gené , Mazzacane , Fisichella and Alesi . Zonta went straight down the escape road near the Variante Goodyear chicane but retained sixth position . Häkkinen was able to close the gap to Michael Schumacher on lap 50 to five seconds , but it appeared that the German would be unchallenged . Michael Schumacher crossed the finish line on lap 53 to clinch his sixth victory of the season in a time of 1 ' 27 : 31 @.@ 368 , at an average speed of 130 @.@ 260 miles per hour ( 209 @.@ 633 km / h ) . Häkkinen finished in second position 3 @.@ 8 seconds behind , ahead of Ralf Schumacher in third , Verstappen in fourth , Wurz in fifth and Zonta rounding out the points scoring positions in sixth . Salo , Diniz , Gené , Mazzacane and Fisichella completed the next five positions and were one lap behind the winner , with Alesi the last of the classified finishers . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The top three drivers appeared on the podium to collect their trophies and in the subsequent press conference . Michael Schumacher broke into tears when asked if matching Ayrton Senna 's number of victories meant a lot to him . He later regained his composure and spoke about how important it was to maintain the life of the engine at the circuit . Michael Schumacher revealed that the cause of his emotion was of him thinking about Senna 's death at the 1994 San Marino Grand Prix and said that he was surprised at how the media reacted to the moment which said that Schumacher " was human after all " . Häkkinen revealed that his team made modifications to his car at his pit stop which contributed to him setting the fastest lap of the race . He also admitted that he was unable to catch Michael Schumacher due to the presence of the two Minardis which cost him time . Ralf Schumacher said he was not worried from being challenged by Verstappen and Zonta during the event because of the Williams ' quick pace . He also was confident that Williams had confirmed itself as the third strongest team in Formula One . 
 Barrichello placed blame upon Frentzen for starting the lap one accident at the Variante della Roggia corner . He demanded that the Jordan driver be banned for ten races . He also added that his helmet was damaged from his collision with de la Rosa . Frentzen reacted by suggesting that Barrichello braked earlier which forced him to make contact with teammate Trulli . FIA Race Director Charlie Whiting defended his decision not to stop the race saying that the safety car was deployed as all cars involved were in the run @-@ off areas and that he believed stopping the race would be dangerous . However , he admitted that he was not aware about Gislimberti 's condition when making the decision . Jordan team principal Eddie Jordan believed that Whiting had made the right decision and praised the safety of the modern Formula One car for protecting drivers . 
 Bernie Ecclestone , the owner of Formula One 's commercial rights , called for the removal of chicanes from racing circuits labelling them " silly and unnecessary " . FIA president Max Mosley subsequently announced that safety measures would be reviewed and stated a review of the Monza track would take place . Mosley believed that no driver was responsible for causing the accident but stressed to competitors that it was their responsibility for being aware when bunched up at the start of a Grand Prix . Former driver Jacques Laffite advocated an electronic warning system for marshals and believed that a review of chicanes should have taken place . 
 Gislimberti was later pronounced dead at Monza Hospital . His autopsy was released two days later and determined that the cause of death was head trauma . On 15 September , he was given a funeral at the San <unk> church , Lavis and attended by several drivers , friends and colleagues . Hours after the race , five cars involved in the accident were impounded by Italian authorities . Race stewards concluded the incident was a " racing accident " with no further action being taken . Magistrate Salvatore Bellomo opened a formal investigation into the crash and interviewed drivers . The investigating body examined all five cars which were released back to the teams on 12 September . The investigation was closed in June 2001 following a technical examination which concluded that Gislimberti was killed instantly . As a result of Gislimberti 's death , the strength of the wheel tethers were doubled to stop flying tyres being a danger to the drivers , safety officials and fans . The chassis would be strengthened and enhanced crash resistance would be tested . 
 As a consequence of the race , Michael Schumacher reduced Häkkinen 's advantage in the Drivers ' Championship was reduced to be two points behind . Coulthard remained in third on 61 points . Barrichello 's retirement at the Grand Prix ruled out any chance of him claiming the title and Ralf Schumacher retained fifth place on 24 points . In the Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari 's victory allowed them to reduce McLaren 's lead to be four points behind . Williams remained in third place on 34 points . Benetton increased the gap over Jordan in fifth place to a seven @-@ point advantage , with three races of the season remaining . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Bold text indicates who still has a theoretical chance of becoming World Champion . 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = USS Indiana ( BB @-@ 1 ) = 
 USS Indiana ( BB @-@ 1 ) was the lead ship of her class and the first battleship in the United States Navy comparable to foreign battleships of the time . Authorized in 1890 and commissioned five years later , she was a small battleship , though with heavy armor and ordnance . The ship also pioneered the use of an intermediate battery . She was designed for coastal defense and as a result her decks were not safe from high waves on the open ocean . 
 Indiana served in the Spanish – American War ( 1898 ) as part of the North Atlantic Squadron . She took part in both the blockade of Santiago de Cuba and the battle of Santiago de Cuba , which occurred when the Spanish fleet attempted to break through the blockade . Although unable to join the chase of the escaping Spanish cruisers , she was partly responsible for the destruction of the Spanish destroyers <unk> and Furor . After the war she quickly became obsolete — despite several modernizations — and spent most of her time in commission as a training ship or in the reserve fleet , with her last commission during World War I as a training ship for gun crews . She was decommissioned for the third and final time in January 1919 and was shortly after reclassified Coast Battleship Number 1 so that the name Indiana could be reused . She was sunk in shallow water as a target in aerial bombing tests in 1920 and her hull was sold for scrap in 1924 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Indiana was constructed from a modified version of a design drawn up by a US navy policy board in 1889 for a short @-@ range battleship . The original design was part of an ambitious naval construction plan to build 33 battleships and 167 smaller ships . The United States Congress saw the plan as an attempt to end the U.S. policy of isolationism and did not approve it , but a year later the United States House of Representatives approved funding for three coast defense battleships , which would become Indiana and her sister ships Massachusetts and Oregon . The " coast defense " designation was reflected in Indiana 's moderate endurance , relatively small displacement and low freeboard , or distance from the deck to the water , which limited seagoing capability . She was however heavily armed and armored ; Conway 's All The World 's Fighting Ships describes her design as " attempting too much on a very limited displacement . " 
 Construction of the ships was authorized on 30 June 1890 and the contract for Indiana — not including guns and armor — was awarded to William Cramp & Sons in Philadelphia , who offered to build it for $ 3 @,@ 020 @,@ 000 . The total cost of the ship was almost twice as high , approximately $ 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . The contract specified the ship had to be built in three years , but slow delivery of armor plates caused a two @-@ year delay . Indiana 's keel was laid down on 7 May 1891 and she was launched on 28 February 1893 , attended by around 10 @,@ 000 people , including President Benjamin Harrison , several members of his cabinet and the two senators from Indiana . During her fitting @-@ out in early March 1894 , the ship undertook a preliminary sea trial to test her speed and machinery . At this point her side armor , guns , turrets and conning tower had not yet been fitted , and her official trials would not take place until October 1895 due to the delays in armor deliveries . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Indiana was commissioned on 20 November 1895 under the command of Captain Robley D. Evans . After further trials , the ship joined the North Atlantic Squadron under the command of Rear Admiral Francis M. Bunce , which conducted training exercises along the East Coast of the United States . In late 1896 , both main turrets broke loose from their clamps in heavy seas . Because the turrets were not centrally balanced , they swung from side to side with the motion of the ship , until they were secured with heavy ropes . Heavier clamps were installed , but in February 1896 , while conducting fleet maneuvers with the North Atlantic squadron , the Indiana encountered more bad weather and started rolling heavily . Her new captain , Henry Clay Taylor , promptly ordered her back to port for fear the clamps would break again . This convinced the navy that bilge keels — omitted during construction because with them , the ship could not fit in most American dry docks — were necessary to reduce the rolling , and they were subsequently installed on all three ships of the Indiana @-@ class . 
 = = = Spanish – American War = = = 
 At the outbreak of the Spanish – American War in April 1898 , Indiana was at Key West with the rest of the North Atlantic Squadron , at the time commanded by Rear Admiral William T. Sampson . His squadron was ordered to the Spanish port of San Juan in an attempt to intercept and destroy Admiral Cervera 's Spanish squadron , which was en route to the Caribbean from Spain . The harbor was empty , but Indiana and the rest of the squadron bombarded it for two hours on 12 May 1898 before realizing their mistake . The squadron returned to Key West , where news arrived three weeks later that Commodore Schley 's Flying Squadron had found Cervera and was now blockading him in the port of Santiago de Cuba . Sampson reinforced Schley on 1 June and assumed overall command . 
 In an attempt to break the stalemate , it was decided to attack Santiago from land . A transport convoy was assembled in Key West and Indiana was sent back to lead it . The expeditionary force , under the command of Major General William Rufus Shafter , landed east of the city and attacked it on 1 July . Cervera saw that his situation was desperate and attempted to break through the blockade on 3 July 1898 , resulting in the battle of Santiago de Cuba . The cruisers New Orleans and Newark and battleship Massachusetts had left the day before to load coal in Guantanamo Bay . Admiral Sampson 's flagship , the cruiser New York , had also sailed east earlier that morning for a meeting with General Shafter , leaving Commodore Schley in command . This left the blockade weakened and unbalanced on the day of the battle , as three modern battleships ( Indiana , Oregon and Iowa ) and the armed yacht Gloucester guarded the east , while the west was only defended by the second @-@ class battleship Texas , cruiser Brooklyn and armed yacht Vixen . 
 Occupying the extreme eastern position of the blockade , Indiana fired at the cruisers Infanta María Teresa and Almirante Oquendo as they left the harbor , but , due to engine problems , was unable to keep up with the Spanish cruisers as they fled to the west . When the Spanish destroyers <unk> and Furor emerged , Indiana was near the harbor entrance and , together with Iowa , she supported the armed yacht Gloucester in the destruction of the lightly armored enemy ships . She was then ordered to keep up the blockade of the harbor in case more Spanish ships came out and so played no role in the chase and sinking of the two remaining Spanish cruisers , Vizcaya and Cristóbal Colón . 
 = = = Post Spanish – American War = = = 
 After the war , Indiana returned to training exercises with the North Atlantic Squadron . In May 1900 , she and Massachusetts were placed in reserve as the navy had an acute officer shortage and needed to put the new Kearsarge @-@ class and Illinois @-@ class battleships into commission . The battleships were reactivated the following month as an experiment in how quickly this could be achieved , but Indiana was placed in the reserve fleet again that winter . In March 1901 , it was decided to use her that summer for a midshipman practice cruise , and this would be her regular summer job for the next few years , while the rest of the time she would serve as a training ship . She was decommissioned on 29 December 1903 to be overhauled and modernized . The obsolete battleship received several upgrades : new Babcock & Wilcox boilers , counterweights to balance her main turrets and electric traversing mechanisms for her turrets . She was recommissioned on 9 January 1906 and manned by the former crew of her sister ship Massachusetts , including Captain Edward D. Taussig , commanding . Massachusetts had been decommissioned the day before to receive similar modernization . 
 During her second commission , Indiana spent most of her time laid up in the reserve fleet , occasionally participating in practice cruises . In January 1907 she helped provide relief in the aftermath of the 1907 Kingston earthquake . In 1908 , the 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) / 40 caliber guns and most of the lighter guns were removed to compensate for the counterweights added to the main battery turrets and because the ammunition supply for the guns was considered problematic . A year later , twelve 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) / 50 caliber single @-@ purpose guns were added midships and in the fighting tops . At the same time a cage mast was added . By 1913 it was speculated that the ship might soon be used for target practice , but instead the ship was decommissioned on 23 May 1914 . After the United States entered World War I , Indiana was commissioned for the third time and served as a training ship for gun crews near Tompkinsville , Staten Island and in the York River , and placed under the command of George <unk> . 
 On 31 January 1919 she was decommissioned for the final time , and two months later she was renamed Coast Battleship Number 1 so that the name Indiana could be assigned to the newly authorized — but never completed — battleship Indiana ( BB @-@ 50 ) . The old battleship was brought to shallow waters in Chesapeake Bay near the wreck of the battleship San Marcos ( ex @-@ Texas ) . Here she was subjected to aerial bombing tests conducted by the navy . She was hit with dummy bombs from aircraft and explosive charges were set off at the positions where the bombs hit . The tests were a response to claims from Billy Mitchell — at the time assistant to the Chief of Air Service — who stated to Congress that the Air Service could sink any battleship . The conclusions drawn by the navy from the experiments conducted on Indiana were very different , as Captain William D. Leahy stated in his report : " The entire experiment pointed to the improbability of a modern battleship being either destroyed or completely put out of action by aerial bombs . " The subject remained a matter of dispute between Mitchell and the Navy and several more bombing tests were conducted with other decommissioned battleships , culminating in the sinking of SMS Ostfriesland . Indiana sank during the test and settled in the shallow water , where she remained until her wreck was sold for scrap on 19 March 1924 . 
 = The Host ( Star Trek : The Next Generation ) = 
 " The Host " is the 23rd episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation and the 98th episode overall . It was originally released on May 11 , 1991 , in broadcast syndication . Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Federation starship Enterprise . It was the first episode to be directed by Marvin V. Rush , the director of photography , and was written by Michel Horvat . 
 In this episode , Doctor Beverly Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) falls in love with Odan ( Franc Luz ) , a Trill mediator . But after he is mortally injured , she discovers that " Odan " is actually a symbiotic creature that lives inside a humanoid host body . Commander William Riker ( Jonathan Frakes ) volunteers to act as a temporary host , complicating the relationship between Crusher and Odan . The mediation proves successful , but after Odan is transferred to a new , female Trill host ( Nicole Orth @-@ Pallavicini ) , Crusher chooses not to continue the relationship . 
 At the time of filming , McFadden was seven months pregnant , resulting in filming techniques used to conceal her abdomen . A two part makeup appliance was designed for the Trill host , as well as the symbiont itself which was based on a caterpillar and an octopus . The Trill would subsequently return in Star Trek : Deep Space Nine , although the makeup was redesigned . " The Host " received a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 3 percent during the first week of release in syndication . The ending of the episode has received a mixed reception , with Zack Handlen for the A.V. Club saying that the reaction by Crusher made " perfect sense " , while others suggested that the statement regarding Crusher 's views on homosexuality should have been confined as a character trait rather than a general statement on the opinions of the species . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Odan ( Franc Luz ) , a mediator , boards the Enterprise to negotiate a peace treaty between two hostile races . Doctor Beverly Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) is charmed by the man , and the two share a love affair during the trip . Odan refuses to use the transporter and requests that a shuttle and pilot be provided for him ; Commander William Riker ( Jonathan Frakes ) honors this request . During the mission , the shuttle is attacked by a dissident faction and Odan is mortally injured . While trying to save the alien in sickbay , Dr. Crusher comes to learn that Odan is a Trill , a species which symbiotically lives within its host 's body . It is a further revealed by Lt. Commander Data ( Brent Spiner ) that the transporter would have harmed the symbiotic lifeform . Following the death of Odan 's host body , Commander Riker volunteers to allow Odan use him as a host to conduct the necessary negotiations until a new host arrives . 
 Odan 's presence becomes dominating over Riker , and Dr. Crusher finds herself initially confused when Odan continues to try to engage with her to continue their relationship . Dr. Crusher is puzzled and full of emotion as she later confides to Counselor Deanna Troi ( Marina Sirtis ) and wonders about the true depth of her feelings for Odan . With some effort , Odan in Riker 's body , manages to convince the delegates from the warring planets to work with him . However , Riker 's body begins to deteriorate due to the incompatibility of different biologies . The ship transporting the new host has encountered engine malfunctions . Dr. Crusher does everything she can to extend Riker 's and Odan 's chances while the Enterprise races to meet the Trill ship , and has a deeply emotional moment with Captain Picard . 
 The Enterprise successfully rendezvous in time to bring aboard the new host , a female ( Nicole Orth @-@ Pallavicini ) , much to Dr. Crusher 's surprise . She helps with the other Trill to transplant Odan into the new host , and both Riker and Odan fully recover . When Odan attempts to continue their relationship , Dr. Crusher is uncomfortable , knowing both that the Trill appear to have no preferences on gender orientation , and that Odan will continue to live on in any number of hosts ' bodies . Odan admits he still loves Dr. Crusher , but understands her confusion and discomfort , and promises to never forget her or their short time together . And Dr. Crusher replies that she loves Odan too ; in Odan 's new , female host body , Odan then kisses the inner wrist of her hand . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Direction and writing = = = 
 " The Host " was written by Michael Horvat and directed by Marvin V. Rush . Rush had been the director of photography for the series since the start of the third season and was the first of three members of the series ' staff to direct an episode . The filming of Gates McFadden 's scenes was complicated by the fact that she was seven months pregnant at the time , requiring different camera angles than would normally be used . Jonathan Frakes , who played Commander Riker , explained later that " they would not address the fact that the actress was pregnant " , requiring the cast and crew to hide McFadden 's stomach from the camera with furniture or by using camera angles which only showed her from her breasts upwards . Rush was not told which episode he was going to direct beforehand , other than that it was going to be a ship @-@ based episode . He later directed two episodes of Star Trek : Voyager and two of Star Trek : Enterprise . 
 Story editor Brannon Braga was pleased with the episode , calling it " one of the most outstanding stories we 've ever done " as it was originally suggested as a " squirmy worm " story , which was " unique " as it went on to become " the most touching love story " . Ronald D. Moore stated that it had become a Star Trek story by focusing the episode on the relationship rather than on the negotiations . Rush suggested that some viewers were disappointed with the ending , due to Crusher not accepting her lover in his new female body . He said that it was a valid point of view , and that McFadden 's lines in the final scene made it clear that it put forward a hope that homosexuality may be better accepted in the future . The subject matter was revisited in the Star Trek : Deep Space Nine episode " Rejoined " , which featured one of the earliest televised lesbian kisses . 
 The character of Odan would return in non @-@ canon Star Trek publications , including in the short story " First Steps " within The Lives of Dax anthology . It also made two appearances in licensed comics , first in DC Comics Star Trek : The Next Generation Annual issue four and then in Divided we Fall , a crossover between The Next Generation and Deep Space Nine published under the WildStorm imprint . 
 = = = Makeup and set design = = = 
 The makeup for the Trill host featured a separate nose and forehead pieces , as the intention was to retain the general look of a human . Air bladders were placed inside a fake abdomen to create the shot in which the symbiont appeared to move under the host 's skin . A second fake abdomen was created for the surgery scene in which the symbiont is moved into Riker , which worked by having a crew member lie under the surgery table , pulling the symbiont into the opening using a concealed string . The design of the symbiont was based on a caterpillar with an octopus for a head , which featured a further air bladder in order to give the appearance that it was pulsating and painted in fluorescent paint to glow when a black light was shone on it during that scene . 
 The Trill later recurred in Deep Space Nine , with multiple hosts of the Dax symbiont appearing on screen . The same makeup was initially used as in their originally appearance in The Next Generation , however after two days of filming with Terry Farrell in the prosthetics , she was sent to back to the makeup department to change it . The shuttle set was the same one which had been used previously , with parts created for different episodes since work began in the first season episode " Coming of Age " . In " The Host " , it was named Hawking for the theoretical physicist Professor Stephen Hawking . He would later guest star in the first part of the episode " Descent " at his request . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " The Host " aired in broadcast syndication during the week commencing May 12 , 1991 . It received Nielsen ratings of 11 @.@ 3 , reflecting the percentage of all households watching the episode during its timeslot . This placed it as the highest viewed syndicated show of the week , despite the ratings being near the average for the season . 
 James van Hise , in his book The Unauthorized Trek : The Complete Next Generation , called the introduction of the Trill an " element crucial " to Deep Space Nine , but was critical of the decision to have Crusher not be interested in Odan once he had transferred to his new female host . This " apparent homophobia " was said to have resulted in the episode being " widely criticized " by David Greven in his book Gender and Sexuality in Star Trek . Keith DeCandido , in his article for Tor.com , said it was difficult to give a fair review of the episode due to the Trill being explored in greater depth in Deep Space Nine , and the subsequent alterations made for that series compared to " The Host " . He said more generally of the episode that the romance felt rushed , and he would have liked to see the exploration of Riker 's feelings about his body being used to have sex with a friend . A further criticism was levelled at the ending , as Crusher stated that it was humans who have a problem with homosexuality rather than limiting it to be her own problem . He gave it a rating of four out of ten . 
 Nick Keppler , writing for Nerve.com , listed " The Host " as one of the " gayest " episodes of the franchise and described the twist at the end of the episode with the gender of Odan 's new host as " <unk> " . He criticised the reaction of Crusher at the end of the episode , saying that she would " get into bed with shifty aliens with weird ridged foreheads but for some reason draws the line at space ladies " . Zack Handlen gave the episode a rating of B + in his review for The A.V. Club , saying that the idea at the core of the episode was better than the execution . But he said that the ending made " perfect sense " as he said that love wasn 't solely <unk> but that " we fall in love with features , with shapes , with bodies , as well as with minds . " He added that Odan 's reaction was also right , as " everyone has a line , and if you love them , you won 't ask them to cross it . " 
 The first home media release of " The Host " was on VHS cassette , appearing on July 23 , 1996 in the United States and Canada . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season four DVD box set , released in the United States on September 3 , 2002 . The fourth season was subsequently released on blu @-@ ray in the UK on July 29 , 2013 , and July 30 in the United States . 
 = Mercyful Fate = 
 Mercyful Fate is a Danish heavy metal band from Copenhagen , formed in 1981 by vocalist King Diamond and guitarist Hank Shermann . Influenced by progressive rock and hard rock , with lyrics dealing with Satan and the occult , Mercyful Fate were part of the first wave of black metal in the early to mid @-@ 1980s . Many of the bands from this movement went on to influence later black metal musicians in the 1990s , particularly in Norway . Since the band 's inception in 1981 , Mercyful Fate have released seven studio albums , two extended plays and four compilations . 
 After several line @-@ up changes and self @-@ made demos , Mercyful Fate released their self @-@ titled EP in 1982 , with the line @-@ up of King Diamond ( vocals ) , Hank Shermann ( guitar ) , Michael Denner ( guitar ) , Timi Hansen ( bass ) and Kim Ruzz ( drums ) . With this line @-@ up the group recorded their first two studio albums ( 1983 's Melissa and 1984 's Don 't Break the Oath ) , until 1985 when the band broke up due to musical differences . In 1993 , four out of the five members of Mercyful Fate reunited to record the album In the Shadows , which was released the same year . During the 1990s , the band released four more studio albums and went through several line @-@ up changes . Since 1999 , Mercyful Fate have been on hiatus , but have reunited on occasion during the 2000s . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and first releases ( 1981 – 1985 ) = = = 
 Mercyful Fate was originally formed in Copenhagen , Denmark , in 1981 , following the dissolution of the band Brats . Brats had been a punk / metal band , featuring future Mercyful Fate members , vocalist King Diamond , and guitarists Hank Shermann and Michael Denner . After two studio albums and several line @-@ up changes ( including the addition of Diamond and the departure of Denner ) , Diamond and Shermann began writing new material that was much heavier than any of Brats ' previous work . The band 's record label CBS was not pleased with the material , and demanded they stop singing in English and become more commercial . As a result , Diamond and Shermann quit the group and went on to form Mercyful Fate . After several line @-@ up changes and semi @-@ professional demo tapes , Mercyful Fate released their self @-@ titled EP in 1982 . This line @-@ up , consisting of King Diamond , Hank Shermann , bassist Timi Hansen , drummer Kim Ruzz and guitarist Michael Denner , would go on to record the group 's first two studio albums . 
 In July , 1983 , Mercyful Fate recorded their debut album at Easy Sound Recording , in Copenhagen , Denmark . Entitled Melissa , the album was produced by Henrik Lund and released on October 30 , 1983 on Roadrunner Records . After a number of concerts around Denmark , Mercyful Fate entered the studio in May 1984 to record their second studio album Don 't Break the Oath , which was released on September 7 , 1984 . During the album 's supporting tour , the band played the US for two months and made festival appearances in Germany . Despite winning a cult following around the world , Mercyful Fate broke up in April , 1985 , due to musical differences . Guitarist Hank Shermann wanted the band to move to a more commercial sound , to which King Diamond refused and announced his departure from Mercyful Fate , which led to the band breaking @-@ up . 
 = = = After disbanding ( 1985 – 1992 ) = = = 
 After Mercyful Fate broke up in 1985 , King Diamond , along with Michael Denner and Timi Hansen , formed the eponymous King Diamond band . Both Denner and Hansen stayed with the group until 1987 's Abigail , after which both left King Diamond . They were replaced by Mike Moon and Hal <unk> , respectively , and King Diamond continued releasing albums even after Mercyful Fate had reformed . After leaving King Diamond , Michael Denner opened up a <unk> in Copenhagen , until 1988 , when he formed the band <unk> ( which would later become <unk> <unk> ) , along with former bandmate Hank Shermann . Hank Shermann had formed the hard rock band Fate in 1985 , after having left Mercyful Fate . With Fate , Shermann released two albums : 1985 's Fate and 1986 's A Matter of Attitude . After leaving the band , Shermann joined @-@ up with Michael Denner to form <unk> . 
 During the time Mercyful Fate were disbanded , Roadrunner Records released three Mercyful Fate compilation albums . The Beginning was released on June 24 , 1987 , and featured material from the band 's 1982 self @-@ titled EP , as well as rare live and studio recordings . On May 12 , 1992 , Return of the Vampire was released , which was another compilation of rare studio recordings . On October 6 , 1992 , Roadrunner released A Dangerous Meeting ; a split @-@ release featuring material from both Mercyful Fate and King Diamond . 
 = = = Reunion ( 1992 – 1999 ) = = = 
 In 1993 , King Diamond , Hank Shermann , Michael Denner and Timi Hansen reunited to reform Mercyful Fate ( drummer Kim Ruzz was replaced by Morten Nielsen ) . The result was the album In the Shadows , which was released on June 22 , 1993 , through Metal Blade Records . The album also featured a guest appearance by Metallica drummer Lars Ulrich ( a fellow Dane ) , on the track " Return of the Vampire " . For the album 's supporting tour , Morten Nielsen was replaced by King Diamond drummer Snowy Shaw , due to a knee injury Nielsen had sustained . Bassist Timi Hansen was also replaced by Sharlee D 'Angelo , as Hansen did not want to take part in touring . On June 27 , 1994 , the band released The Bell Witch , an EP of live tracks , as well as studio recordings from In the Shadows . 
 On September 25 , 1994 , Mercyful Fate released the album Time , which was recorded and mixed at the Dallas Sound Lab during May – August 1994 . After the album 's release drummer Snowy Shaw was replaced by Bjarne T. Holm for the Time Tour . Holm had originally been asked to join Mercyful Fate back in 1981 , but had declined due to prior commitments . The band spent January through February 1996 recording and mixing the album Into the Unknown , which was released on August 20 , 1996 . After the album 's release , guitarist Michael Denner left the band and was replaced by Mike Wead . In October 1997 , Mercyful Fate began recording the album Dead Again at the Nomad Recording Studio in Carrollton , Texas . Dead Again was released on June 9 , 1998 . In February 1999 , Mercyful Fate began recording the album 9 , which was released on May 15 , 1999 . 
 = = = Recent activity ( 1999 – present ) = = = 
 After the supporting tour for 9 , Mercyful Fate was put on hiatus . King Diamond focused on his eponymous band , along with guitarist Mike Wead , who joined the group during the European House of God tour . Hank Shermann and Bjarne T. Holm reunited with Michael Denner to form Force of Evil , while Sharlee D 'Angelo joined the band Arch Enemy . When asked about the current state of the band in 2008 , Diamond stated that Mercyful Fate is currently " hibernating " , and that " it 's definitely not finished , at least in my book . " In August 2008 , King Diamond was asked by Metallica drummer Lars Ulrich if Mercyful Fate would be willing to participate in Activision 's Guitar Hero : Metallica video game . Ulrich requested the original masters for two of the band 's songs , so they could be used in the game . Unable to locate them , Diamond suggested to Activision the band re @-@ record the songs , and as a result , King Diamond , Hank Shermann , Michael Denner , Timi Hansen and Bjarne T. Holm reunited to re @-@ record the songs " Evil " and " Curse of the Pharaohs " . King Diamond was also made into a playable character in the game . 
 On December 7 , 2011 , King Diamond , Hank Shermann , Michael Denner and Timi Hansen reunited onstage at Metallica 's 30th Anniversary concert , at the Fillmore in San Francisco , California , where they , alongside Metallica , performed Metallica 's " Mercyful Fate " medley from Garage Inc . 
 = = Style and legacy = = 
 Mercyful Fate were a part of the first wave of black metal , along with other groups , such as Venom , Bathory and Hellhammer . Many of these groups helped establish the style upon which future black metal artists would later build . Unlike the other first wave bands , typical elements of Mercyful Fate 's style are influences from progressive rock , epic 1970s hard rock and traditional heavy metal . As many of the band 's songs featured lyrics about Satanism and the occult and King Diamond was among the first black metal musicians to use the now famous corpse paint , Mercyful Fate was a pioneer in developing black metal , although their musical style was not as much an influence as that of other first wave bands . 
 Various musicians have cited Mercyful Fate as an influence . Kerry King , the guitarist for the thrash metal band Slayer , has stated , that he and Jeff Hanneman were big fans of Mercyful Fate when Slayer recorded the album Hell Awaits , so much so that the album was very influenced by Mercyful Fate . Fellow thrash metal band Metallica recorded a medley of Mercyful Fate songs on their 1998 Garage Inc. cover album . Since then , the band has performed the song various times live with several members of Mercyful Fate . 
 = = Members = = 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Melissa ( 1983 ) 
 Don 't Break the Oath ( 1984 ) 
 In the Shadows ( 1993 ) 
 Time ( 1994 ) 
 Into the Unknown ( 1996 ) 
 Dead Again ( 1998 ) 
 9 ( 1999 ) 
 = Barbara Gittings = 
 Barbara Gittings ( July 31 , 1932 – February 18 , 2007 ) was a prominent American activist for gay equality . She organized the New York chapter of the Daughters of Bilitis ( DOB ) from 1958 to 1963 , edited the national DOB magazine The Ladder from 1963 – 66 , and worked closely with Frank Kameny in the 1960s on the first picket lines that brought attention to the ban on employment of gay people by the largest employer in the US at that time : the United States government . Her early experiences with trying to learn more about lesbianism fueled her lifetime work with libraries . In the 1970s , Gittings was most involved in the American Library Association , especially its gay caucus , the first such in a professional organization , in order to promote positive literature about homosexuality in libraries . She was a part of the movement to get the American Psychiatric Association to drop homosexuality as a mental illness in 1972 . Her self @-@ described life mission was to tear away the " shroud of invisibility " related to homosexuality , which had theretofore been associated with crime and mental illness . 
 She was awarded a lifetime membership in the American Library Association , and the ALA named an annual award for the best gay or lesbian novel the The Barbara Gittings Award . The Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation ( GLAAD ) also named an activist award for her . At her memorial service , Matt Foreman , the executive director of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force said , " What do we owe Barbara ? Everything . " 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Barbara Gittings was born to Elizabeth ( née Brooks ) Gittings and John Sterett Gittings in Vienna , Austria , where her father was serving as a U.S. diplomat . Barbara and her siblings attended Catholic schools in Montreal . She was so immersed in Catholicism at one point in her childhood that she considered becoming a nun . Her family returned to the United States at the outbreak of World War II and settled in Wilmington , Delaware . Although aware of her attraction to other girls , Gittings said she first heard the word " homosexual " when she was rejected for membership in the National Honor Society in high school . Despite being an excellent student , a teacher who had reservations about her character took her aside and told her that the rejection was based on what the teacher believed were " homosexual inclinations " . 
 While majoring in drama at Northwestern University , Gittings developed a close but non @-@ sexual friendship with another female student , prompting rumors that the two were lesbians , which led Gittings to examine her own sexual orientation . In her attempts to understand it , she had her suspicions confirmed by a psychiatrist who offered to cure her . Not having enough money to make regular visits , she was unable to get the money from her father , who reasoned there were no problems a psychiatrist could solve that a priest could not . A close friend suggested they see less of each other so as not to further encourage the rumors about them . 
 Having no one to talk to about the issues that were consuming her , she decided to read as much as she could on the topic . She found very little , and much of what she found described homosexuals as " deviants " , " perverts " , and " abnormal " in medical books and texts on abnormal psychology , or odd generalizations that stated homosexuals were unable to whistle , or that their favorite color was green . She found all the information focused on homosexual men . She recalled in a 2001 interview , " I thought , this is not about me . There is nothing here about love or happiness . There has to be something better " . Her research took up so much of her time at Northwestern that she ended up failing out of the school . Gittings found a purpose during this time , saying , " My mission was not to get a general education but to find out about myself and what my life would be like . So I stopped going to classes and started going to the library . There were no organizations to turn to in those days only libraries were safe , although the information contained was dismal . " 
 = = = After college = = = 
 At age 17 , she returned from Northwestern " in disgrace " after failing out of school and unable to tell her family why . But she was compelled to continue her search for information . She found some in the novels available at the time : Nightwood , The Well of Loneliness , and Extraordinary Women . Soon thereafter , her father discovered The Well of Loneliness in a pile of other things in her bedroom . He was so appalled at what he found that he instructed her to burn the book , but did so in a letter as he was unable to speak to her about it face to face . Still eager to learn more about homosexuality , Gittings took a night course in abnormal psychology where she met a woman , with whom she had a brief affair , her first . At age 18 , she left home to be on her own and moved to Philadelphia . 
 Gittings began to hitchhike on weekends to New York City , dressed as a man , to visit gay bars since she knew of none in Philadelphia , and knew of no other places to go to get " plugged into the gay community . " In a 1975 interview , she recalled , " I wore drag because I thought that was a way to show I was gay . It 's changed now , but in the early 50s there were basically two types of women in the gay bars : the so @-@ called butch ones in short hair and plain masculine attire and the so @-@ called femme ones in dresses and high heels and makeup . I knew high heels and makeup weren 't my personal style , so I thought ... I must be the other kind ! " However , Gittings found very little in common with the women she met in the bars , and after witnessing a gay male acquaintance get beaten up after leaving a bar , began to focus her energies on collecting books . 
 = = Activism in the 1950s and 1960s = = 
 = = = Daughters of Bilitis = = = 
 In 1956 , Gittings traveled to California on the advice of Donald Webster Cory , to visit the office of the new ONE , Inc . , an early homophile organization that dedicated itself to providing support to homosexuals in the US . While in California , she met Phyllis Lyon and Del Martin , who had co @-@ founded the Daughters of Bilitis ( DOB ) in San Francisco . " She was a cute , curly @-@ haired young woman wearing a shift and sandals . I remember she had this satchel , a backpack — I 'd never seen anything like it . Or her " , Lyon remembered . At her first meeting of the Daughters of Bilitis in someone 's living room , Gittings brought up the obscurity of the name , which she thought was impractical , difficult to pronounce and spell , and referenced a fictional bisexual character , not even homosexual . " Even then I was pretty assertive ... What were they doing with a name like that ? It wasn 't very nice of me , but they seemed to take it with reasonably good spirits . " 
 In 1958 , Martin and Lyon asked Gittings to start a chapter in New York City , which she did when less than a dozen women responded to her notice in the Mattachine Society newsletter asking for " all women in the New York area who are interested in forming a chapter of the DOB " on September 20 , 1958 . Gittings served as the chapter 's first president for three years commuting to New York from Philadelphia twice a month . 
 In 1982 , Gittings remembered , " I joined the movement in 1958 , when the subject of homosexuality was still shrouded in complete silence . There were no radio talk shows or TV documentaries . In all the United States , there were maybe a half dozen groups , two hundred people active in all . " The Daughters of Bilitis served as a social alternative to bars for lesbians , but took great care to deny that they were " arranging for ' immoral contacts ' . " While president of the DOB in New York , attending members numbered between ten and forty per meeting . They met twice a month and often invited doctors , psychiatrists , ministers and attorneys to address their meetings , even if the message was clearly disparaging to lesbians . Gittings recalled , " At first we were so grateful just to have people — anybody — pay attention to us that we listened to and accepted everything they said , no matter how bad it was ... anything that helped to break the silence , no matter how silly or foolish it may look to us today , was important . " 
 Gittings admitted that early meetings and writings in the Daughters of Bilitis urged their members not to upset mainstream heterosexual society ; that integration and acceptance would be won if heterosexuals could see that gays and lesbians were not dramatically different from themselves . She worked in clerical positions during this time , spending ten years as a mimeograph operator for an architectural firm . The New York chapter of the DOB distributed a newsletter to about 150 people , and Gittings worked on it while being required to stay overtime at her job . In 1959 , after using company envelopes to mail the newsletter out and covering the firm 's name with a sticker , someone wrote to the firm to notify them that a newsletter addressing lesbianism was being distributed . Gittings was sure that she would be fired , but her boss , a woman , stated cryptically that she was familiar with the topic , having served in the armed forces . She was not fired but cautioned to be more careful instead . 
 = = = The Ladder = = = 
 From 1963 @-@ 66 , she edited the organization 's magazine , The Ladder , following both Lyon and Martin as editors . Although the Daughters of Bilitis did take a political stand in the 1959 San Francisco mayoral race , Martin and Lyon preferred The Ladder to remain apolitical . Gittings was impressed with how her influence as editor impacted the magazine and the opinions of its readers . " I discovered the power of the press , the power to put in what you want in order to influence readers , " she said . 
 At the 1963 convention of the newly formed East Coast Homophile Organizations , the audience heard a speaker named Dr. Albert Ellis tell them that " the exclusive homosexual " was a psychopath . Articles and essays in The Ladder sometimes carried these viewpoints , since it was difficult to get psychiatrists and doctors to address homosexuality in any form . Gittings said , " People like Ellis talked about homosexuality being a sickness . And they talked about a cure ... We 'd sit there and listen and politely applaud and then go for the social hour afterward . " However , after Dr. Ellis spoke , so did gay activist Frank Kameny , making an impression upon Gittings with his point that it is useless to try to find cures and causes for homosexuality since there is no valid evidence that it is an illness . Said Gittings , " My thinking didn 't change until Frank Kameny came along and he said plainly and firmly and unequivocally that homosexuality is no kind of sickness or disease or disorder or malfunction , it is fully on par with heterosexuality ... Suddenly I found that I was looking at things that had happened in the past in a very different light and I was taking a position that was increasingly diverging from DOB ’ s positions . " 
 Gittings began to implement changes in The Ladder that included adding " A Lesbian Review " underneath the title on the cover and replacing the line drawings on the cover with photographs of actual lesbians , often taken by her partner , Kay Lahusen . Gittings distributed The Ladder in six bookstores in New York and Philadelphia , and one Greenwich Village store displayed the magazine prominently , selling 100 copies a month . The focus of the magazine shifted as well to tackling more controversial issues to spark debate , printing such articles titled " I Hate Women " remarking on women who are politically apathetic , and " To Act or to Teach ? " that was a back @-@ and @-@ forth debate on whether it was more effective to educate the public or take political action . 
 = = = Protests = = = 
 Gittings participated in many of the earliest LGBT actions in the United States . In 1965 , Gittings marched in the first gay picket lines at the White House , the US State Department , and at Independence Hall in Philadelphia to protest the federal government 's policy on discrimination of homosexuals , holding a sign that read " Sexual preference is irrelevant to federal employment . " The men who agreed to picket had to wear suits and ties , and the women who participated were to wear dresses , heels , and pantyhose so as to look employable by the federal government . Reactions from passersby were varied . A tourist witnessing the demonstration remarked , " I still don 't believe it . Somebody 's kidding . " A stunned high school student pointed out , " They all look so normal . " 
 Gittings recalled , " I remember a man said to his kids , ' Hold your noses — it 's dirty here . ' And there was a woman dragging a string of kids who said , very angrily , ' You should all be married and have children like me . ' " Leaflets were distributed to passersby that described their reasons for picketing , surprising some recipients who were unaware gays and lesbians could be fired so easily , and disgusting others . Gittings remembered , " It was risky and we were scared . <unk> was not a popular tactic at the time . And our cause seemed outlandish even to most gay people . " The evening prior to the group 's picketing the State Department , Secretary of State Dean Rusk announced the pickets at a press conference . Gittings connected the high @-@ profile visibility with a " breakthrough into mainstream publicity . " 
 From 1965 @-@ 69 , she and Frank Kameny led the Annual Reminder , picketing at Independence Hall in Philadelphia on July 4 , until the Stonewall Riots in June 1969 . After the riots , the annual Gay Pride Parade commemorating the riots took its place . Differences in Gittings ' political stance and the leadership of the DOB began to show , and came to a culmination in 1966 when she was ousted as the editor of The Ladder for , as one source claims , creating the issue that reported on the DOB convention late , but according to another source because she removed " For Adults Only " on the cover of the magazine without consulting the DOB . 
 In November 1967 , Gittings and Kameny worked together as co @-@ counsel in hearings held by the Department of Defense to discredit an expert witness named Dr. Charles Socarides , who testified that homosexuals could be converted to heterosexuality , and to call in question the policy held by the Department of Defense that homosexual employees could be fired for being named as homosexuals . " Publicity was the objective " , Gittings recalled many years later . Kameny and Gittings dressed conservatively , but wore buttons that said " Gay is Good " and " Pray for Sodomy . " " We held press conferences for the benefit of sharp @-@ eyed reporters . When we first went into a hearing room , we made certain to shake hands with all ... participants so ( they ) could not avoid reading our buttons . Although neither was an attorney , at the end of their cross @-@ examination , the Department of Defense removed Socarides from their lists of expert witnesses . 
 Gittings made hundreds of appearances as a speaker in the late 1960s . She carried on her mission to convince heterosexuals and homosexuals alike that homosexuality is not an illness , stating in a letter in 1967 : 
 " I keep trying to convince people in the movement that the charge of sickness is perhaps our greatest problem ... we can 't really progress in other directions until the unsubstantiated assumption of sickness ... is demolished ! It 's almost always there , however slyly or covertly or even unconsciously , however ' sympathetic ' the person : the attitude that homosexuality is somehow undesirable , some sort of twist or malfunction or failure or <unk> or other kind of psychic sickness . And in our society sick people , by any definition of sick , just DO not get equal treatment . Equal treatment — no more , no less — is what we want ! And compassion — which many homosexuals gladly swallow because they think it represents an improvement in attitudes toward them — is not equal treatment . " 
 = = Activism in the 1970s and later = = 
 = = = American Library Association = = = 
 In the 1970s , Gittings continued her search for resources in libraries that addressed homosexuality in a positive , supportive way . In discussing her pursuit of the improvement of materials for gays and lesbians in libraries , she said , " For years I would haunt libraries and secondhand book shops trying to find stories to read about my people , and then I became active in other arenas of the gay rights movement , but I always kept an eye on the emerging literature ... It began to talk about homosexuals who were healthy and happy and wholesome and who had good lives ... That rang the bells for me — libraries , gay books ! " 
 Gittings found a home in the gay group that formed in 1970 in the American Library Association , the first gay caucus in a professional association , and became its coordinator in 1971 . She pushed the American Library Association for more visibility for gays and lesbians in the profession . She staffed a kissing booth at the Dallas convention of the ALA , underneath the banner " Hug a Homosexual , " with a " women only " side and a " men only " side . When no one took advantage of it , she and Patience and Sarah author Alma <unk> ( pen name : Isabel Miller ) kissed in front of rolling television cameras . In describing its success , despite most of the reaction being negative , Gittings said , " We needed to get an audience . So we decided , let 's show gay love live . We were offering free — mind you , free — same @-@ sex kisses and hugs . Let me tell you , the aisles were mobbed , but no one came into the booth to get a free hug . So we hugged and kissed each other . It was shown twice on the evening news , once again in the morning . It put us on the map . " 
 Gittings made an appearance on the Phil Donahue Show in 1970 and on PBS ' David Susskind Show in 1971 , along with six other lesbians , including Lilli Vincenz and Barbara Love . They were among the first open lesbians to appear on television in the US , and debated long @-@ held stereotypes about gays with Susskind . A week after her appearance on the David Susskind Show , a middle @-@ aged couple approached Gittings in the supermarket to claim , " You made me realize that you gay people love each other just the way Arnold and I do . " 
 = = = American Psychiatric Association = = = 
 In 1972 , Gittings and Kameny organized a discussion with the American Psychiatric Association entitled " Psychiatry : Friend or Foe to Homosexuals : A Dialogue " , where a panel of psychiatrists were to discuss homosexuality . When Gittings ' partner Kay Tobin Lahusen noticed that all the psychiatrists were heterosexual , she protested . Gittings remembered , " My partner , Kay , said , ' This isn 't right — here you have two psychiatrists pitted against two gays , and what you really need is someone who is both . ' The panel moderator , Dr. Kent Robinson , agreed to add a gay psychiatrist if we could find one . In 1972 who would come forward ? ... Kay and I wrote letters and made phone calls around the country . " A gay psychiatrist in Philadelphia finally agreed to appear on the panel in heavy disguise , and with a voice distorting microphone , calling himself " Dr. H. Anonymous " . He was John E. Fryer , and he discussed how he was forced to be closeted while practicing psychiatry . Gittings read aloud letters from psychiatrists she had solicited who declined to appear for fear of professional ostracism . She described the event as " transformative " . 
 In 1973 , homosexuality was removed from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual as a mental disorder , and Gittings celebrated by being photographed with the Philadelphia newspaper headlines , " Twenty Million Homosexuals Gain Instant Cure . " 
 Gittings spent 16 years working with libraries and campaigning to get positive gay and lesbian @-@ themed materials into libraries and to eliminate censorship and job discrimination . She wrote Gays in Library Land : The Gay and Lesbian Task Force of the American Library Association : The First Sixteen Years . , a brief history of the group . She helped start what was then called the National Gay Task Force , later to be named the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force ( <unk> ) in 1973 . Gittings served on the board of the <unk> throughout the 1980s . She inspired nurses to form the Gay Nurses Alliance in 1973 . She held exhibits at APA conventions in 1972 , 1976 , and 1978 , her last one being " Gay Love : Good Medicine " that portrayed gays as happy and healthy . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Gittings appeared in the documentary films Gay Pioneers , Before Stonewall , After Stonewall , Out of the Past , and Pride Divide . In 1991 she remembered her decisions to be as open as she was throughout her life when she said , " Every time I had to make a decision to put myself forward or to stay back , to use my real name or not , to go on television or decline , to get out on some of the earliest picket lines or remain behind . I usually took the public position because there weren 't many of us yet that could afford the risk . " 
 In 1999 , Gittings was honored for her contributions to the LGBT cause at the seventh annual <unk> America , in Philadelphia . The organization described Gittings as " the Rosa Parks of the gay and lesbian civil rights movement " . 
 Gittings was renowned for her " ferocious dedication to the cause with a cock @-@ eyed optimism , kindness , and gentle sense of humor . " As recognition for Gittings ' contributions to the promotion of gay and lesbian literature , in 2002 the Gay , Lesbian , Bisexual , and Transgender Round Table of the ALA renamed one of their three book awards the Stonewall Book Award @-@ Barbara Gittings Literature Award . In 2001 , the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation honored her by bestowing her the first Barbara Gittings Award , highlighting dedication to activism . The same year , the Free Library of Philadelphia announced its Barbara Gittings Collection of books dedicated to gay and lesbian issues . There are more than 2000 items in the collection , the second largest gay and lesbian collection of books in the US outside that of the San Francisco Public Library . 
 In 2003 , the American Library Association rewarded her with its highest tribute , lifetime honorary membership . She also earned the first John E. Fryer Award from the American Psychiatric Association in 2006 with Frank Kameny . The award goes to people who have made a significant impact on the mental health of gays and lesbians . In October 2006 , The Smithsonian Institution acquired a sign she carried in her picketing in 1965 , donated by Frank Kameny . In 2007 , readers of The Advocate included Gittings on a list of their 40 favorite gay and lesbian heroes . 
 On October 1 , 2012 , the city of Philadelphia named a section of Locust Street " Barbara Gittings Way " in Gittings ' memory . Also in 2012 she was inducted into the Legacy Walk , an outdoor public display which celebrates LGBT history and people . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Gittings was an avid music lover , most interested in Baroque and Renaissance music . She sang in choral groups for most of her life , spending over 50 years in the Philadelphia Chamber Chorus . She was also a hiking and canoeing enthusiast . She and her lifelong partner , Kay Tobin ( also known as Kay Tobin Lahusen ; born 1930 ) met in 1961 at a picnic in Rhode Island . Gittings described how they began : " We hit it off , we started courting . I flew to Boston [ to see her ] and got off the plane with a big bunch of flowers in my hand . I couldn 't resist . I did not care what the world thought . I dropped the flowers , grabbed her and kissed her . That was not being done in 1961 . " 
 Gittings and Lahusen were together for 46 years . They donated copies of some materials and photographs covering their activism to the Cornell University Rare and Manuscript Collections . In 2007 , Lahusen donated all of their original papers and photographs to the New York City Public Library ( NYPL ) , whose head , Paul LeClerc , said , " The collection donated by Barbara Gittings and Kay Tobin Lahusen is a remarkable first @-@ hand chronicle detailing the battles of gays and lesbians to overcome the prejudice and restrictions that were prevalent prior to the activism and protest movements that started in the 1960s . " 
 The University of Massachusetts Amherst main library received a donation of over 1 @,@ 000 of Gittings ' and Lahusen 's books in 2007 ; it is the Gittings @-@ Lahusen Gay Book Collection , Call no . : RB 005 . 
 In 1997 , Gittings and Lahusen pushed the American Association of Retired Persons ( AARP ) to grant couple 's membership to them , for a reduced price on health insurance . One of her last acts as an activist was to come out in the newsletter published by the assisted living facility they reside in . On February 18 , 2007 , Gittings died in Kennett Square , Pennsylvania after a long battle with breast cancer . She is survived by her life partner , Kay Tobin Lahusen , and her sister , Eleanor Gittings Taylor . In 1999 , Gittings summed up her inspiration for her activism : " As a teenager , I had to struggle alone to learn about myself and what it meant to be gay . Now for 48 years I 've had the satisfaction of working with other gay people all across the country to get the bigots off our backs , to oil the closet door hinges , to change prejudiced hearts and minds , and to show that gay love is good for us and for the rest of the world too . It 's hard work — but it 's vital , and it 's gratifying , and it 's often fun ! " 
 = Kew Asylum = 
 Kew Lunatic Asylum is a decommissioned psychiatric hospital located between Princess Street and Yarra Boulevard in Kew , a suburb of Melbourne , Australia . Operational from 1871 to 1988 , Kew was one of the largest asylums ever built in Australia . Later known as Willsmere , the complex of buildings were constructed between 1864 and 1872 to the design of architects G.W. Vivian and Frederick Kawerau of the Victorian Public Works Office to house the growing number of " lunatics " , " inebriates " , and " idiots " in the Colony of Victoria . 
 The first purpose built asylum in the Colony of Victoria , Kew was also larger and more expensive than its sister asylums at Ararat and Beechworth . The asylum 's buildings are typical examples of the Italianate architecture style which was popular in Victorian Melbourne . Designed to be elegant , beautiful , yet substantial , and to be viewed as " a magnificent asylum for the insane " with the aim of portraying Melbourne as a civilised and benevolent city whilst avoiding the jail @-@ like appearance of other asylums . These aims were furthered by the use of low ha @-@ ha walls and extensively landscaped grounds . Long considered of cultural and historic significance to Melbourne , Kew Asylum and its complex of buildings were registered on the Register of the National Estate in March 1978 . 
 Despite initial grand plans and ideals , Kew Asylum had a difficult and chequered history , contributing to several inquiries throughout its 117 years of operation , including a Royal Commission . Overcrowding , mismanagement , lack of resources , poor sanitation and disease were common criticisms during the asylum 's first five decades ; out @-@ dated facilities and institutionalisation were criticisms of Kew 's later period . 
 Kew continued to operate throughout the 20th century as a " hospital for the insane " , " mental hospital " , or " psychiatric hospital " , treating acute , long @-@ term and geriatric patients until it closed in December 1988 . The main building and surrounding grounds were sold by the State Government in the 1980s and were redeveloped as residential properties . 
 = = Site and planning = = 
 During the 1850s , the existing lunatic asylums of the Colony of Victoria were overcrowded . Yarra Bend Asylum , while only six years old , was considered unsuitable and Carlton Lunatic Asylum ( which was originally a gaol ) was in a state of disrepair . As a result , in 1854 the Government of the Colony of Victoria commissioned a report proposing sites and designs for a new lunatic asylum . Contemporary educated opinion was that lunatic asylums should be built " on a healthy site , freely admitting light and air , and drainage ... [ on ] a gentle eminence in a fertile and agreeable country " . In a report by the New South Wales ' Inspector of Asylums , Frederick Norton Manning stated that " the site chosen is of primary importance . On it must depend the comfort , happiness and health of the inmates . " Thus a hilltop site , across the Yarra River from Yarra Bend was recommended in a report by G.W. Vivian of the Public Works Office . Vivian described the site as : 
 a section of land , about 400 acres in extent , situated on the River Yarra , about 4 miles from Melbourne , and ½ a mile to the north of the village of Kew ... the site selected is a fine slope , elevated about 100 feet above the level of the river , admitting of proper drainage and admirably adapted for ornamental grounds , the aspect chosen is south @-@ east , and during the summer months the refreshing influence of the sea @-@ breeze will be felt , without being exposed to south west gales . 
 G. W. Vivian , Report on the Proposed Kew Lunatic Asylum 
 The idea that breezes or wind @-@ swept locations were healthy came from a wider Victorian belief that associated disease with congestion and squalor , and that <unk> of impure air caused epidemics . The area Vivian recommended for the asylum had originally been set aside for a village reserve . Locals from Kew were upset by the proposal and petitioned the government , to no avail . 340 acres ( 1 @.@ 4 km2 ; 0 @.@ 5 sq mi ) of land in the County of Bourke , parish of Boroondara , city of Kew were permanently reserved as a " Site for Lunatic Asylum " in the Government Gazette of 1864 . Construction began in 1864 , however was halted almost immediately with reports of inferior works on the foundations . An investigation followed and Frederick Kawerau resigned . Contractor Samuel <unk> continued construction at Kew using Kawerau 's designs . They were derived from plans earlier outlined by Vivian , and were basically identical to Kawerau 's designs for Ararat and Beechworth , though Kew was much larger , and more expensive at a cost of ₤ 198 @,@ 334 . 
 = = Distinctive features = = 
 The asylum complex is an example of the E @-@ plan lunatic asylums based on the model 1850s asylum in Colney Hatch , England , which itself was based on the 1830 design of Hanwell Asylum in London . Kew was also considered a barracks style asylum due to its perceived resemblance to stockades or gaols . The buildings are constructed from oversize bricks , made from local clay which was quarried on @-@ site . The bricks were then rendered with cement . The central administration block is three storied with a mansard roof and cupola . Two storeyed ward wings extend to each side , one for each sex . Each wing has a four storey , mansard @-@ roofed tower , which contained water tanks . The ward wings were surrounded by courtyards lined with iron columned verandas , many of which were retained when the complex was redeveloped . Internally , the dormitories had 14 ft ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) ceilings and brightly coloured walls with the beds aligned in neat rows . The floors were of timber , principally so they could be scrubbed . The primary access to the complex was from a tree @-@ lined drive from Princess Street ( now known as " Main Drive " ) culminating in an elliptical carriageway in front of the main building . A second drive ( now known as " Lower Drive " ) extended from Princess Street to the rear gates of the asylum . This road was commonly used for deliveries to and from the asylum via the rear gatehouse . 
 While Kew 's plan and detail are similar to its sister asylums at Ararat and Beechworth , the Kew asylum is much larger with the front buildings and towers more impressive architecturally . Kew 's distinctive towers and mansard roofs make it one of the most prominent architectural landmarks in Melbourne and is clearly visible on the eastern skyline . 
 = = = Ha @-@ Ha walls = = = 
 Another distinctive feature of Kew Asylum and its sister asylums is the use of a variation on ha @-@ ha walls around the patients ' courtyards . They consisted of a trench , one side of which was vertical and faced with stone or bricks , the other side sloped and turfed . From the inside , the walls presented a tall face to patients , deterring them from escaping , while from outside the walls looked low so as not to suggest imprisonment . A journalist with The Argus described the walls as an " excellent arrangement , as it enables the patients to see the outside world , and does away with that gaol appearance and feeling inculcated by the walls of the old asylums " . Many of Kew 's ha @-@ ha walls were retained and remain intact , unlike those at Beechworth and Ararat which were partially dismantled or the trenches were filled in . 
 = = = Grounds and landscaping = = = 
 The grounds of the Kew Asylum were originally landscaped in the tradition of an English country park . This was consistent with the Victorian idea that pleasant or beautiful surroundings would help ease the mental anguish of the inmates . It has been proposed that the initial plantings on the site were supplied by Baron Ferdinand von Mueller , director of the Botanic Gardens . Initially , the grounds were planted with many conifers and large growing trees , oaks , elms and Moreton Bay figs ; and trees indigenous to the area , river red gum , yellow box , and <unk> were retained in the landscape . In 1913 the landscape gardener Hugh Linaker was employed to lay out the grounds of Mont Park Asylum . As landscape gardener for the State Lunacy Department he commenced a program of landscape improvements and tree plantings at other asylums in Victoria , including Kew . 
 The conifer plantings and oak avenues along Main and Lower Drives were well established and of a mature size by the 1940s . Conifers were widely planted from the 1860s along with Moreton Bay figs and occasionally oaks . Oaks and elms were more widely planted from the 1880s . It is not known if Linaker was responsible for the oak avenues , but it appears that many of the conifers , Monterey pines , Canary Island pines , Monterey cypress , hoop pine , Bunya Bunya pines and Himalayan cedars , predate Linaker and the oaks and elms may have been planted soon after his appointment . The use of Bhutan cypress in the landscape is almost certainly due to Linaker as he favoured upright trees . It is possible that the two remnant Monterey cypress along Main Drive and a Monterey pine along Lower Drive are trees from an earlier planting scheme . Several trees and plants on the grounds of Kew Asylum and Kew Cottages have been classified as of historical significance by the Victorian Heritage Council and the National Trust of Australia ( Victoria ) , and have been protected during the property 's redevelopment . 
 In addition to the asylum 's ornamental gardens , the grounds featured vegetable gardens , farms and recreational areas such as cricket ovals and bowling greens . Little evidence remains of these structures except that there is now a road that encircles the former cricket oval . 
 = = Patients = = 
 Many of Kew 's early patients were transferred from Yarra Bend Asylum and Carlton Lunatic Asylum and were housed in the two main wings — men in the right wing , women in the left . The wards were dormitory style and were divided by patient type — male / female , paying / pauper , manageable / refractory . The area of the women 's wards was smaller due to the laundries and drying courtyards being located on the women 's side of the asylum . 
 = = = Admission process = = = 
 Under the Lunacy Statute of 1867 , Lunacy Acts from 1880 to 1928 and Mental Hygiene Act of 1933 , people could be admitted to the asylum by a number of means : 
 At the request of a friend , relative or acquaintance , with medical certificates written by two medical practitioners . This method was amended by The Mental Health Act 1959 which stated a person could be admitted upon the recommendation of a medical practitioner who had examined the person . As soon as possible after admission the superintendent of the hospital was required to examine the patient and either approve the recommended admission or discharge the patient . 
 Any ( lunatic ) person found wandering at large or not under proper care and control could be brought before two justices who could order the person 's removal to an asylum . The police were usually responsible for bringing the person before the two justices . 
 Any prisoner of the Crown thought to be a lunatic could be removed from a jail to an asylum by order of the Chief Secretary . 
 Voluntary Boarders were those who requested that they be admitted for a mutually agreed period of time ( from 1915 onwards ) . 
 Until the end of World War I , there was little change in the admission process at Kew . Upon arriving , a variable amount of data was collected on the person being admitted . These basic details included age , sex , marital status and former address ( or name of the asylum / jail transferred from ) . Other details requested included names of relatives or friends , the person 's religion and occupation and whether others in the family have ever been classified as insane . Other information recorded , where available , were dates of previous admissions , " form of mental disorder " , bodily condition ( " satisfactory " , " unsatisfactory " , " feeble " , etc . ) and " duration of existing attack " . From approximately 1900 onwards , photographs were usually taken on admission . If the person was very restless , the photograph was omitted . <unk> , such as books and clothes , were often returned to friends or family . Inmates were required to dress in institutional clothes . This was useful in a number of ways as it assisted the public in easily identifying escaped inmates ; reduced the need to request clothes ( or money for clothes ) from the inmate 's family or their estate ; and minimised inmate conflict when inmates swapped or stole clothes from each other . The property and estates of people who were deemed to be insane were controlled and administered by the Master @-@ in @-@ Equity , also known as the Master @-@ in @-@ Lunacy . 
 = = = Diagnoses = = = 
 The diagnoses given to patients during Kew 's first fifty years were the common ailments found in most lunatic asylums of the pre @-@ Kraepelin era 
 <unk> insanity 
 Dementia 
 Epilepsy 
 General paralysis / paresis of the insane 
 Idiocy 
 <unk> 
 Melancholia 
 <unk> mania 
 It should be noted that some of these terms are still in use today , however they may now have different meanings . For example , from examining the notes on some of Kew 's early " dementia " patients , it can be deduced that many were most likely suffering from what we now term severe depression , catatonia or schizophrenia . 
 = = = Children at Kew = = = 
 In the early days of Kew Asylum , the distinction between " lunatics " and " idiots " ( or " <unk> " ) was not made . Therefore , many wards of the state , " difficult " children and children with mental retardation were housed with the adults at Kew . By 1879 nearly 600 children , representing a quarter of all inmates , were accommodated in various institutions in Victoria . In the 1880s the government decided that a separate building should be built to accommodate child inmates . The Zox Commission recommended the Yarra Bend Asylum site as appropriate for buildings for " imbecile " children . However , a site between the main building and the entrance gates of Kew was chosen and in 1885 a contract was let for the erection of cottage units . The Kew Idiot Ward ( Kew Cottages ) was opened in May 1887 . The Idiot Ward was initially considered a ward of Kew Lunatic Asylum , however later became known as a separate institution – Kew Idiot Asylum . Although the Idiot Asylum only admitted children , many of those children remained in residence at the Cottages as adults . 
 = = = Inebriates at Kew = = = 
 Under the Lunacy Statute of 1867 , the Master @-@ in @-@ Lunacy was able commit inebriates to an asylum for any period up to twelve months . Inebriates who were able to pay the lodging fees at private inebriate asylums were able to be housed in inebriate @-@ specific institutions such as Northcote Inebriate Asylum . Paupers were placed in lunatic asylums . After the 1888 Zox Commission into Asylums , all private / semi @-@ private inebriate asylums were abolished under the provisions of the Inebriate Asylums Act 1888 . Northcote was taken over by the Government of Victoria in 1890 and converted into a public inebriate retreat . Brightside and Lara Inebriate <unk> were opened soon after , and many alcoholics were moved out of the lunatic asylums . 
 = = = Famous patients = = = 
 Ambrose Dyson – Political cartoonist and satirist . Died in Kew Asylum . 
 Edward / Ellen De Lacy Evans – Picaresque cross @-@ dressing woman from the 1870s . 
 Patrick McShane – Test cricketer & umpire . Died in Kew Asylum in 1903 . 
 Billy Midwinter – Test cricketer who played for both Australia and England . Died in Kew Asylum in 1890 . 
 Paris Nesbit – barrister , politician and newspaper editor . 
 Walter Richardson – father of Henry Handel Richardson , Australian author . 
 Harry Trott – Australian Test cricketer and Australian team captain . 
 Tom Wills – Victorian cricketer , one of the founders of Australian rules football . 
 = = Investigations and inquiries = = 
 Despite initial grand plans and ideals , Kew Asylum had a difficult and chequered history resulting in several inquiries , including a Royal Commission . The first inquiry occurred in 1876 , only five years after Kew opened . Another notable inquiry occurred in 1907 after a severe outbreak of Typhoid fever , which at the time was thought to have been virtually eradicated in Melbourne . This inquiry in turn led to amendments to the Lunacy Act , improvements to Kew ( and the state 's other asylums ) and the planned construction of Mont Park Asylum . 
 = = = Zox Royal Commission = = = 
 Public outcry at the treatment of the insane in the colony 's lunatic asylums increased in the 1870s , fueled by articles and woodcuts in magazines and the writings of " The Vagabond " in The Argus . Officially known as Royal Commission on Asylums for the Insane and Inebriate 1884 – 1886 , the Royal Commission chaired by Ephraim Zox was required to inquire into and report upon the state and condition of Asylums for the Insane and Inebriates , both public and private . The Royal Commission made some sixty five recommendations in its final report . A number of the Commission 's recommendations were implemented prior to the presentation of its final report , others were implemented through the Lunacy Amendment Act 1888 and some recommendations were not implemented until proclamation of the Lunacy Act 1903 in 1905 . 
 The Commission recommended that criminal patients be kept apart from other patients , thus male criminally insane patients were moved to J Ward of the Ararat Asylum and female dangerous patients to Sunbury Asylum . 
 The Commission also recommended that inebriates and idiots be housed in asylums separate from the insane which led to the construction of Kew Idiot Ward and various Inebriate Asylums . 
 The Zox Commission further recommended increasing the role of medical doctors at the asylums and that " Medical men have the sole and exclusive right to determine whether their fellow citizens are sane or insane . The medical expert therefore stands in the position of witness , jury and judge " . Prior to ( and in some instances , for a time after ) the Zox Commission , many superintendents at asylums did not have any training in insanity . 
 = = Changing names , changing society = = 
 During its 120 years of operation , Kew 's title changed numerous times . This has been in response to society 's changing views towards the treatment and care of mentally ill persons ; improvements in treatment leading to better health outcomes and changes in the Victorian Government 's various Health Acts . From its establishment until 1905 the institution at Kew was known as an asylum – a title which emphasised its function as a place of detention rather than a place where people could possibly be cured . Kew was also for a short period known as the Metropolitan Lunatic Asylum at Kew , possibly to differentiate it from its sister country asylums at Ararat and Beechworth . During this period , all people committed to the asylum were termed ' inmates ' rather than patients – again emphasising detention rather than cure . 
 The Lunacy Act of 1903 changed the title of all Victorian " asylums " to " hospitals for the insane " however this Act didn ’ t come into operation until March 1905 . From this time onwards , inmates began being referred to as patients . The Mental Hygiene Act of 1933 again altered Kew 's title to " Kew Mental Hospital " . The move from ' asylum ' to ' hospital ' and ' inmate ' to ' patient ' also reflected the increased involvement of the medical profession in the management and treatment of mental illness . 
 After World War II there was a period of significant change in the treatment and prognosis for people with a mental illness . Drugs such as lithium carbonate ( discovered in 1948 by Australian psychiatrist John Cade ) and chlorpromazine ( discovered in 1950 's ) lead to improvements in treatment . Thus many people with a mental illness could in many cases be treated in hospital for a shorter period and return to the community . The Mental Health Act of 1959 designated hospitals providing short @-@ term diagnosis and accommodation as " psychiatric hospitals " . Therefore , any institution could have a section designated as a mental hospital for long @-@ term or indefinite hospitalisation and a section designated as a psychiatric hospital for short term diagnosis and treatment of acute psychiatric illness . 
 In 1962 the decision was made to no longer house acute or short @-@ term patients at Kew and therefore it was formally proclaimed a Mental Hospital under the Mental Health Act of 1959 . Up until this time , Kew Mental Hospital was still colloquially known as " Kew Asylum " . In the 1960s Kew began to be known as " Willsmere " , however some authors state the name change to " Willsmere " was later . 
 In January 1982 three wards of Kew Mental Hospital were proclaimed a Psychiatric Hospital under the provisions of the Mental Health Act 1959 . These wards were then known as the Willsmere Unit and were established to receive and accommodate short @-@ term acute patients . 
 = = Shrinking grounds = = 
 When opened , Kew 's extensive 340 acres ( 1 @.@ 4 km2 ; 0 @.@ 5 sq mi ) of grounds were intended to be used for farming , agriculture and recreation for the inmates . However , as treatment methods , inmate profiles , superintendents and societal factors changed , use of the grounds changed accordingly . 
 A large area of the grounds between the asylum main buildings and Princess Street was allocated to Children 's Cottages in 1885 . When the Children 's Cottages became a separate institution , the area surrounding the cottages became no longer under asylum management and was no longer for asylum inmate use . Widening and straightening of Princess Street in 1939 @-@ 1940 resulted in the demolishing of Kew 's gatehouses , loss of land and the relocation of the main gates to Victoria Park , Kew . Construction of Yarra Boulevard during the 1930s lead to a section of the asylum 's river frontage being acquired by the roads department . 
 In 1958 , 58 acres ( 0 @.@ 2 km2 ; 0 @.@ 1 sq mi ) of the northern section of the asylum grounds were offered under a Crown Grant to the Talbot Colony for <unk> . Later known as Royal Talbot ( now part of Austin Health ) , the hospital and training centre continue to operate on the site to this day . An area of Kew 's grounds adjacent to the Talbot Colony was granted to the Guide Dog Association of Victoria for the building of a guide dog breeding and training centre , which opened in 1962 . The construction of the Eastern Freeway in the early 1970s also resulted in property loss for both Royal Talbot and Kew Asylum . 
 = = Decommissioning and redevelopment = = 
 In June 1943 the town clerk of the City of Kew , W. D. Birrell , produced a report on the immediate post @-@ war priorities for Kew . Birrell strongly urged the council to propose the closure of Kew Asylum , with the grounds to be subdivided and " ... laid out on modern town planning principles with some 700 to 800 homes " . According to Birrell , this would have been an ideal post @-@ war scheme as it would provide employment and much needed land for housing . Birrell 's proposal was not new ; ever since the establishment of the asylum , proposals for its closure and redevelopment had recurred every few years . Birrell 's plans did not eventuate as overcrowding at other mental hospitals throughout Victoria necessitated Kew 's continued operation . 
 By 1986 Willsmere Hospital 's bed numbers had been reduced to 430 , three quarters of which were for psychogeriatric patients . As a result of ongoing mental health reform , the then Labor Government of Victoria commissioned the " Willsmere Project " , the purpose of which was to plan for decommissioning the hospital and develop services and facilities in the community . Long @-@ term psychogeriatric patients were transferred to new psychogeriatric nursing homes in the suburbs , to a re @-@ opened ward of Plenty Psychiatric Hospital in <unk> , to the refurbished Heatherton Tuberculosis Sanatorium or to other psychiatric institutions . <unk> unwell patients that would have previously been admitted to Willsmere were now sent to newly built units at <unk> Hospital , Monash Medical Centre or Peninsula Hospital . Willsmere was finally closed in December 1988 and sold by the Government of Victoria in the late 1980s . An extensive conservation analysis was completed in 1988 that recommended the bulk of the original buildings be conserved . 
 The hospital complex was eventually developed by Central Equity into residential apartments . The Willsmere residential development was officially opened on 27 October 1993 by Premier Jeff Kennett . 
 The remaining grasslands between the Eastern Freeway and the main hospital buildings , including the site of the asylum 's cricket field were developed as the Kew Gardens residential estate . The Kew Gardens project was completed in 1995 . The buildings and grounds of the Kew Cottages ( formerly the grounds of Kew Asylum ) are currently being redeveloped as the " Main Drive " project by Walker Corporation . 
 One of the conditions of the development permit from the Historic Buildings Council required that a section of the building be set aside and maintained as a museum that documented the history of the site . This led to the creation of an interpretive display in a section of the old " Female Paying Patients Ward " , development of an archive and resource collection consisting of the few remaining records and artifacts left behind when Central Equity gained control of the site from A.V. Jennings . <unk> and resource collection was created by the Australian Science Archives Project ( ASAP ) at the University of Melbourne . 
 = = Documented histories = = 
 There are few documented or published histories of Kew Asylum . The majority of information available on the asylum comes from the Kew 's official records which are now held by the Public Record Office Victoria . Some of the early documents are open ( or part open ) to the public for viewing such as admission books , case notes , registers , and medical journals . However , the majority of documents dating from 1915 onwards are closed , due to the sensitive nature of the material they contain and the possibility that first degree relatives may still be alive . 
 A number of photographs of Kew Asylum are kept by the Victorian Mental Health Library at Royal Melbourne Hospital . The State Library of Victoria also holds a number of early photographs of Kew . The University of Melbourne has a small number of theses on Kew – the majority of which are short in length and are architecture @-@ based . The exception to this is Cheryl Day 's unpublished PhD thesis which is an ethnographic description of the first fifty years of Kew 's existence . While the thesis was unpublished , it is available in PDF form through the University of Melbourne Library website . 
 Some contemporary accounts of life in Kew are available . Paul Ward Farmer wrote an essay " Three weeks in the Kew Lunatic Asylum " , describing his admission to Kew in the 1890s . Julian Thomas , an American reporter , wrote a series of articles for The Argus in 1876 – 1877 under the pseudonym of " The Vagabond " . Thomas was an attendant at Kew at the time . There are also excerpts of affidavits from patients , doctors , and attendants at Kew ( as well as other Victorian mental hospitals such as Royal Park , Mont Park and Sunbury ) detailing the terrible conditions in the asylums during the 1920s in the book A Plea for Better Treatment of the Mentally Afflicted by Hon. William G. Higgs . 
 = Mahoning Creek ( Susquehanna River ) = 
 Mahoning Creek is a tributary of the Susquehanna River in Columbia County and Montour County , in Pennsylvania , in the United States . It is approximately 10 @.@ 6 miles ( 17 @.@ 1 km ) long and flows through Madison Township in Columbia County and West Hemlock Township , Derry Township , Valley Township , Mahoning Township , and Danville in Montour County . The watershed of the creek has an area of 39 @.@ 6 square miles ( 103 km2 ) . Its tributaries include Kase Run , Mauses Creek , and Sechler Run . Mahoning Creek is designated as a Trout @-@ Stocking Fishery and a Migratory Fishery for part of its length and as a Warmwater Fishery and a Migratory Fishery for the remainder . 
 Mahoning Creek is considered by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection to be impaired by siltation . The main rock formations in the watershed include the Trimmers Rock Formation , the Clinton Group , the Catskill Formation , the Hamilton Group , the Bloomsburg and Mifflintown Formation , the Onondaga and Old Port Formation , and the Wills Creek Formation . The main soils include the Berks @-@ Weikert @-@ Alvira series , the Chenango @-@ Pope @-@ Holly series , the Clymer @-@ Buchanan @-@ Norwich series , and the Leck Kill @-@ Meckesville @-@ Calvin series . Most of the watershed is forested or agricultural land , but there is some developed land . 
 There was historically a village of the Delaware tribe near the mouth of Mahoning Creek . The first people of European descent arrived in the area in the 1760s and 1770s . Various mills were constructed on it in the 1700s and 1800s . Numerous bridges have also been constructed across the creek . Part of the creek is in the Montour Ridge Landscape Corridor . 
 = = Course = = 
 Mahoning Creek begins in a valley in Madison Township , Columbia County . It flows south for a short distance before turning west @-@ southwest for several tenths of a mile , exiting Columbia County . 
 Upon exiting Columbia County , Mahoning Creek enters West Hemlock Township , Montour County . It flows south @-@ southwest alongside Pennsylvania Route 642 for a few miles before crossing Pennsylvania Route 642 and entering Derry Township . The creek then turns south for a few miles and enters Valley Township . In Valley Township , it continues flowing south in its valley and crosses Pennsylvania Route 642 before continuing south . The creek eventually enters a much broader valley and flows away from Pennsylvania Route 642 . After several tenths of a mile , it crosses Interstate 80 and receives Kase Run , its first named tributary , from the left . The creek then meanders west for several tenths of a mile and then turns southwest , flowing alongside Pennsylvania Route 642 again . Not far from Mausdale , Mahoning Creek crosses Pennsylvania Route 642 and Pennsylvania Route 54 and receives the tributary Mauses Creek from the right . The creek then turns southeast and begins flowing alongside Pennsylvania Route 54 into Mahoning Township and through a water gap in Montour Ridge . It enters Danville and leaves behind the water gap , turning south @-@ southwest and crossing US Route 11 . After a few tenths of a mile , the creek receives Sechler Run , its last named tributary , from the left , and turns west @-@ northwest . After several tenths of a mile , it exits Danville and enters Mahoning Township briefly before turning sharply southeast and reentering Danville . After a short distance , the creek reaches its confluence with the Susquehanna River . 
 Mahoning Creek joins the Susquehanna River 136 @.@ 26 miles ( 219 @.@ 29 km ) upstream of its mouth . 
 = = = Tributaries = = = 
 Mahoning Creek has three named tributaries , which are known as Kase Run , Mauses Creek , and Sechler Run . The creek also has a number of unnamed tributaries . There are a total of 92 stream miles in the watershed of the creek . 90 of these stream miles are in Montour County and the other two stream miles are in Columbia County . 
 The watershed of the tributary Sechler Run has an area of 7 @.@ 76 square miles ( 20 @.@ 1 km2 ) . The tributary Mauses Creek joins Mahoning Creek 3 @.@ 00 miles ( 4 @.@ 83 km ) upstream of its mouth and has a watershed area of 11 @.@ 40 square miles ( 29 @.@ 5 km2 ) . The tributary Kase Run reaches its confluence with the creek 4 @.@ 70 miles ( 7 @.@ 56 km ) upstream of its mouth . Its watershed has an area of 7 @.@ 27 square miles ( 18 @.@ 8 km2 ) . 
 = = Hydrology = = 
 The daily sediment load in Mahoning Creek is 48 @,@ 768 @.@ <unk> pounds ( 22 @,@ 120 @.@ <unk> kg ) and daily load of phosphorus is 26 @.@ <unk> pounds ( 11 @.@ <unk> kg ) . The total maximum daily loads for these substances are 22 @,@ 751 @.@ <unk> pounds ( 10 @,@ 319 @.@ <unk> kg ) and 22 @.@ <unk> pounds ( 10 @.@ <unk> kg ) , respectively . 
 There is significant stormwater flow and sedimentation in Mahoning Creek , as well as agricultural and urban runoff . However , the creek is less environmentally damaged than the nearby Chillisquaque Creek . Mahoning Creek is considered by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection to be impaired downstream of Kase Run , part of which is also impaired . Additionally , the tributary Mauses Creek is considered to be impaired , as are the upper reaches of the tributary Sechler Run . The cause of the impairment of Mahoning Creek is siltation and the source is agriculture and urban runoff / storm sewers . Sections of all three of its named tributaries are impaired , with the cause being siltation and the source being agriculture . 
 A total of 24 @,@ 960 @.@ <unk> pounds ( 11 @,@ 321 @.@ <unk> kg ) of sediment from stream banks flows through Mahoning Creek daily . A daily load of 19 @,@ 396 @.@ 7123 pounds ( 8 @,@ 798 @.@ 2007 kg ) of sediment in the creek comes from croplands , 1 @,@ 609 @.@ <unk> pounds ( 730 @.@ 1470 kg ) comes from land classified as " low @-@ intensity development " by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection , and 1 @,@ 564 @.@ <unk> pounds ( 709 @.@ <unk> kg ) per day comes from hay and pastures . 936 @.@ <unk> pounds ( 425 @.@ <unk> kg ) per day comes from forests , 147 @.@ <unk> pounds ( 66 @.@ <unk> kg ) comes from land classified as " transition " by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection , and 87 @.@ <unk> pounds ( 39 @.@ <unk> kg ) comes from unpaved roads . Turf grass contributes 48 @.@ <unk> pounds ( 22 @.@ 1950 kg ) of sediment to the creek daily and land classified as " high @-@ intensity development " by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection contributes 16 @.@ 1644 pounds ( 7 @.@ <unk> kg ) per day . 0 @.@ <unk> pounds ( 24 @.@ 9 g ) per day comes from wetlands . 
 15 @.@ <unk> pounds ( 7 @.@ <unk> kg ) of phosphorus from croplands flows through Mahoning Creek daily , as do 4 @.@ <unk> pounds ( 2 @.@ 2241 kg ) of phosphorus from groundwater and 3 @.@ 4425 pounds ( 1 @.@ 5615 kg ) from hay and pastures . 0 @.@ <unk> pounds ( 0 @.@ <unk> kg ) of phosphorus comes from forests , 0 @.@ <unk> pounds ( 0 @.@ <unk> kg ) comes from stream banks , 0 @.@ <unk> pounds ( 0 @.@ <unk> kg ) comes from land classified as " low @-@ intensity development " by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection , and 0 @.@ 2594 pounds ( 0 @.@ 1177 kg ) comes from land classified as " high @-@ intensity development " by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection . 0 @.@ 1677 pounds ( 76 @.@ 1 g ) of phosphorus per day comes from land classified as " transition " by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection , 0 @.@ <unk> pounds ( 35 @.@ 2 g ) comes from turf grass , 0 @.@ 0750 pounds ( 34 @.@ 0 g ) comes from septic systems , and 0 @.@ <unk> pounds ( 33 @.@ 5 g ) comes from unpaved roads . Wetlands contribute 0 @.@ 0002 pounds ( 0 @.@ 091 g ) of phosphorus to the creek daily . 
 On average , 39 @.@ 3 inches ( 100 cm ) of precipitation fall in the watershed of Mahoning Creek each year . The average annual runoff is 0 @.@ 23 inches ( 0 @.@ 58 cm ) . 
 = = Geology and geography = = 
 The elevation near the mouth of Mahoning Creek is 463 feet ( 141 m ) above sea level . The elevation near the source of the creek is between 1 @,@ 080 and 1 @,@ 100 feet ( 330 and 340 m ) above sea level . The highest parts of the watershed are in its eastern section . The watershed of Mahoning Creek is in the ridge and valley physiographic region 's Appalachian Mountain Section . 
 In the upland parts of the watershed of Mahoning Creek , 95 percent of the rock is sedimentary rock , mainly of the Trimmers Rock Formation , the Clinton Group , the Catskill Formation , the Hamilton Group , the Bloomsburg and Mifflintown Formation , the Onondaga and Old Port Formation , and the Wills Creek Formation . The Catskill Formation occurs in a large area in the northeastern part of the watershed and the Trimmers Rock Formation occurs in the rest of the northern part of the watershed and in the southernmost part of the watershed . The Hamilton Group is to the south of the northern area of the Trimmers Rock Formation and to the north of the southern area of the formation . The Onondaga and Old Port Formation occurs south of the Hamilton Group and near Sechler Run , as does the Keyser and Tonoloway Formation . The Wills Creek Formation is found in the central part of the watershed , as is the Bloomsburg and Mifflintown Formation . The Clinton Group occurs south of these formations and south of the Clinton Group is more of the aforementioned formations . 
 50 percent of the rock in the Mahoning Creek watershed is of the Trimmers Rock Formation , 15 percent is of the Clinton Group , and 10 percent is of the Hamilton Group . The Bloomsburg and Mifflintown Formation occupies 8 percent of the watershed . The Keyser and Tonoloway Formation , the Wills Creek Formation , and the Catskill Formation each occupy 5 percent , while the Onondaga and Old Port Formation makes up 2 percent . 
 The most common soil series in the watershed of Mahoning Creek is the Berks @-@ Weikert @-@ Alvira series , a shaly silt loam . Other soil series in the watershed include the Chenango @-@ Pope @-@ Holly series , the Clymer @-@ Buchanan @-@ Norwich series , and the Leck Kill @-@ Meckesville @-@ Calvin series . The Chenango @-@ Pope @-@ Holly series is found in the lower reaches of the watershed , the Leck Kill @-@ <unk> @-@ Calvin series is found in the northwestern part of it , and the Clymer @-@ Buchanan @-@ Norwich series occurs in the southwestern part of the watershed . All other parts of it are occupied by the Berks @-@ Weikert @-@ Alvira series . 
 The Berks @-@ Weikert @-@ Alvira makes up 90 percent of the soil in the Mahoning Creek watershed . 5 percent is of the Leck Kill @-@ Meckesville @-@ Calvin series , 3 percent is of the Clymer @-@ Buchanan @-@ Norwich , and 2 percent is of the Chenango @-@ Pope @-@ Holly series . 
 Mahoning Creek cuts through Montour Ridge . It has a forested floodplain in Mahoning Township . Parts of the creek experience stream bank erosion . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The watershed of Mahoning Creek has an area of 39 @.@ 6 square miles ( 103 km2 ) . It primarily drains the central portion of Montour County and is almost entirely in Montour County . However , a small portion of the creek 's watershed lies in the neighboring Columbia County . The watershed makes up 30 percent of the area of Montour County . Mahoning Creek drains the area in the vicinity of Danville . The mouth of the creek is in the United States Geological Survey quadrangle of Riverside . However , its source is in the quadrangle of Millville . It also passes through the quadrangle of Danville . 
 47 @.@ 15 percent of the watershed of Mahoning Creek consists of forested land . 36 @.@ 47 percent of the watershed is agricultural land and 16 @.@ 38 percent is developed land . Most of the developed land is classified as " low @-@ intensity development " , but some is classified as " high @-@ intensity development " . There are 7 @.@ 4 acres of wetlands in the watershed . 
 Much of the land near the mouth of Mahoning Creek is developed . A strip of land crossing the watershed in its central section is also developed . The southernmost part of the watershed is largely agricultural land . North of this is an area of mostly forested land and the central part of the watershed is mostly agricultural land . The northern part includes both forested and agricultural land . The fastest development in Montour County is occurring in the watershed of the creek . 
 Interstate 80 runs in an east @-@ west direction through the watershed of Mahoning Creek . There are also a number of township roads near the creek and its tributaries . Pennsylvania Route 54 , Pennsylvania Route 642 , and US Route 11 are in the watershed as well . 
 = = History and etymology = = 
 Mahoning Creek was entered into the Geographic Names Information System on August 2 , 1979 . Its identifier in the Geographic Names Information System is <unk> . The word " <unk> " is a Native American word for " at the lick " . 
 There used to be a village of Delaware Indians at the mouth of Mahoning Creek . One of the first buildings in Danville , a gristmill built by George Montgomery 's father , was built on Mahoning Creek . A tract of 180 acres in Danville , including an area along the creek , was once owned by the Penn family . Phillip Maus was among the first settlers in Valley Township , Montour County , having settled there in 1769 . In 1772 , Robert Curry settled on Mahoning Creek and was one of the first settlers in that part of Pennsylvania . 
 The first woolen mill in Danville was built on Mahoning Creek . An agricultural fair was held on the creek in February 1856 . Phillip Maus once built a sawmill on Mahoning Creek . This sawmill contributed significantly to the construction of numerous wooden buildings in the vicinity . 
 Numerous bridges have been constructed over Mahoning Creek . A concrete tee beam bridge with a length of 49 @.@ 9 feet ( 15 @.@ 2 m ) was constructed in 1930 and repaired in 1971 . A two @-@ span prestressed box beam or girders bridge with a length of 69 @.@ 9 feet ( 21 @.@ 3 m ) was constructed over the creek in 1955 and repaired in 1988 . Two bridge of the same type , but with one span and lengths of 44 @.@ 9 feet ( 13 @.@ 7 m ) was built across the creek in 1963 . These bridges carry Interstate 80 . A bridge of the same type was constructed over the creek in 1971 with a length of 50 @.@ 9 feet ( 15 @.@ 5 m ) and was repaired in 2008 . Three more bridges of that type were constructed in Danville in 1974 . They are 26 @.@ 9 feet ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) , 42 @.@ 0 feet ( 12 @.@ 8 m ) , and 100 @.@ 1 feet ( 30 @.@ 5 m ) in length . Another prestressed box beam or girders bridge was constructed across the creek in 1994 with a length of 51 @.@ 8 feet ( 15 @.@ 8 m ) . In 1995 , a prestressed slab bridge with a length of 33 @.@ 1 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) was built over the creek . In the same year , a prestressed box beam or girders bridge with a length of 79 @.@ 1 feet ( 24 @.@ 1 m ) was constructed over the creek . 
 Mahoning Creek has a watershed association , which is known as the Mahoning Creek Watershed Association . It is one of two active watershed associations in Montour County . The association has carried out watershed assessments and water quality measurements of the creek . They have also worked on a watershed restoration plan . 
 = = Biology = = 
 Mahoning Creek is a Trout @-@ Stocked Fishery and a Migratory Fishery from its source to the Pennsylvania Route 54 bridge . From that point to its mouth , it is a Warmwater Fishery and a Migratory Fishery . However , the tributaries Sechler Run , Mauses Creek , and Kase Run are Coldwater Fisheries and Migratory Fisheries , as are the unnamed tributaries of Mahoning Creek . Part of Mahoning Creek , its floodplain , and the nearby slopes are part of the Montour Ridge Landscape Corridor . 
 Wild trout naturally reproduce in Mahoning Creek from its headwaters downstream to the US Route 11 bridge , a distance of 9 @.@ 19 miles ( 14 @.@ 79 km ) . It is one of only two such streams in Montour County , the other being West Branch Chillisquaque Creek . In the 1820s , there were large shad , salmon and rockfish to be found in the creek 's waters . These species of fish could weigh up to 7 , 15 , and 30 pounds ( 3 @.@ 2 , 6 @.@ 8 , and 13 @.@ 6 kilograms ) , respectively . 
 Eight species of birds inhabit the floodplains and slopes near Mahoning Creek . These include scarlet tanagers , black @-@ throated green warblers , belted kingfishers , gray catbirds , black @-@ capped chickadees , eastern wood @-@ <unk> , Louisiana waterthrushes , and wood thrushes . 
 Mahoning Creek lacks a riparian buffer in some places . However , the Mahoning Creek floodplain and the nearby slopes are listed as a Locally Significant site on the Montour County Natural Areas Inventory . Eastern hemlock trees inhabit the slopes and river birch , silver maple , and silky dogwood inhabit the floodplain itself . American basswood also grows in the vicinity of the creek here . Additionally , spring wildflowers grow in this area . The site has a high level of plant biodiversity . However , many trees in the area are affected by an aphid species known as the hemlock wooly adelgid . 
 Five species of shrubs grow in the vicinity of Mahoning Creek , its floodplain , and the nearby slopes : smooth alder , silky dogwood , gray dogwood , spicebush , and American elderberry . 11 herb species also grow in this location . These include skunk cabbage , bloodroot , sensitive fern , sedge , wood anemone , <unk> , and others . There are also invasive plants such as multiflora rose , Japanese knotweed , and garlic mustard in the area . 
 = 1948 Tinker Air Force Base tornadoes = 
 The 1948 Tinker Air Force Base tornadoes were two tornadoes which struck Tinker Air Force Base in Oklahoma City , Oklahoma on March 20 and 25 , 1948 . Both tornadoes are estimated to have been equivalent to F3 in intensity on the modern Fujita scale of tornado intensity , which was not devised until 1971 . The March 20 tornado was the costliest tornado in Oklahoma history at the time . On March 25 , meteorologists at the base noticed the extreme similarity between the weather conditions of that day and March 20 , and later in the day issued a " tornado forecast " , which was verified when a tornado struck the base that evening . This was the first official tornado forecast , as well as the first successful tornado forecast , in recorded history . 
 = = March 20 tornado = = 
 Weather forecasting was still crude and prone to large errors in the era before weather satellites and computer modeling . Thunderstorms were not even in the forecast for the evening of March 20 . However , around 9 : 30 pm storms were reported about 20 miles ( 32 km ) to the southwest , and at 9 : 52 a tornado was sighted near Will Rogers Airport 7 miles ( 11 km ) away , along with a 92 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour ( 148 km / h ) wind gust , moving northeast towards the base . 
 At 10 : 00 , the tornado reached the southwest corner of the base . Illuminated by nearly constant lightning , the tornado was highly visible as it bisected the base , tossing around planes which were parked in the open . The control tower reported a 78 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour ( 126 km / h ) wind gust before the windows shattered , injuring several personnel with flying glass . The tornado dissipated at the northeast corner of the base . 
 The tornado missed most structures on the base , but the damage to expensive military aircraft was substantial . The total damage cost came to around $ 10 million , or $ 98 million in 2016 United States dollars . This was the most damaging tornado in Oklahoma up to that date . 
 = = Investigation and tornado forecast = = 
 In the aftermath of the first tornado , an official inquiry was conducted into the failure to predict the destructive tornado . Air Force investigators came to the conclusion that " due to the nature of the storm it was not <unk> given the present state of the art . " They also made recommendations that the meteorological community determine a tornado warning system for the public , as well as a protocol for protecting life and property at military bases . 
 Both of these investigations began almost immediately . In the days following the tornado , Tinker 's meteorologists Major Ernest J. <unk> and Captain Robert C. Miller investigated surface and upper @-@ air weather data from this and past tornado outbreaks , hoping to be able to identify conditions which were favorable for tornadoes . By March 24 , they had compiled several possible tornado indicators , and decided it would be difficult , but possible , to identify large tornado threat areas in the future . 
 On the morning of March 25 , base meteorologists noticed that weather charts for the day were strikingly similar to those before the March 20 tornado . Forecasts issued by the Weather Bureau indicated that almost the same conditions would be present in the evening of March 25 as were present on March 20 . In the morning , they issued a forecast for " heavy thunderstorms " effective for 5 – 6 pm that evening . This would allow the base 's commander to alert base personnel that they may institute their brand @-@ new tornado precautions . 
 As the day wore on , conditions appeared more and more favorable for thunderstorms , and more and more similar to the events of March 20 . Weather radar images showed a severe squall line had formed to the west , and weather stations to the west reported cumulonimbus clouds and thunderstorms . In an afternoon meeting , under some pressure from their commanding officer , base meteorologists composed and issued the first official tornado forecast . Although they were aware of the small chance of success , they felt they had no choice , since the conditions were so similar to March 20 . Equipment which could be was moved to bomb @-@ proof shelters , and base personnel were moved to safer areas . 
 = = March 25th tornado = = 
 Although storms were relatively benign up to the point where they reached Tinker , a supercell formed just west of the base , and at around 6 pm a tornado touched down on the base for the second time in six days . This second tornado caused $ 6 million in damage , or $ 59 million in 2016 dollars . However , due to precautions enacted because of the tornado forecast , no injuries were reported , and damage totals could have been much higher . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The tornado prediction proved to be successful , even if its precision was mostly due to chance . Before this point , the Weather Bureau had a policy against issuing tornado warnings , mainly due to fear of panic by the public , and subsequent complacency if forecasts turned out to be false alarms . 
 Due to lives and costs saved , <unk> and Miller continued their tornado forecasts , which verified at quite a high rate over the next three years . At first , they kept their forecasts secret . In the spring and summer of 1949 , they issued eighteen forecasts for tornadoes within a 100 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 260 km2 ) ≈ area , and all eighteen proved successful . In the subsequent years , while not explicitly using the word " tornado " , the Weather Bureau used the pair 's forecasts to predict " severe local storms " . 
 The synoptic pattern which occurred on March 25 later became known as the " Miller type @-@ B " pattern and is recognized as one of the most potent severe weather setups . 
 = Flag of Tunisia = 
 The red and white flag of Tunisia , adopted as national flag in 1959 , has its origins the naval ensign of the Kingdom of Tunis adopted in 1831 by Al @-@ Husayn II ibn Mahmud . The star and crescent recalls the Ottoman flag and is therefore an indication of Tunisia 's history as a part of the Ottoman Empire . The current official design dates to 1999 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Previous flags = = = 
 Until the mid @-@ 18th century , the design and significance of maritime flags flying on ships in Tunis were unknown . However , various sources have been able to distinguish certain similarities among the flags : they were designed with a crescent @-@ oriented shape in the presence of the colors blue , green , red , and white . Thereafter , and until the early 19th century , the flag was composed of horizontal blue , red and green stripes , identifying the Ottoman regency in Tunis . This kind of flag with multiple bands and irregular contours floated on top of ships all along the coast of North Africa ; similar flags with different colors and arrangements were also used on the continent . 
 According to <unk> Neubecker , the bey of Tunis also had his own flag . This flag was most likely a simple personal banner of the ruler , as it floated above the Bardo Palace , the Citadel of Tunis , on navy ships , and also in the center of the coat of arms in Tunisia . It was used at a number of public ceremonies — including at the proclamation of the Ottoman constitution on 21 March 1840 — until the abolition of the Bey monarchy on 25 July 1957 . 
 Believed to have been introduced by Al @-@ Husayn II ibn Mahmud , although some sources , such as Abdel @-@ Wahab , claim that it was in use three centuries earlier , the flag was rectangular in shape and divided into nine stripes , the middle one green and double the size of all other bands , while the others alternated between yellow and red . Featured in the center of the green stripe was the Zulfiqar , the legendary Islamic sword of Ali , with the blade in white and the hilt multicolored . The red and yellow stripes each contained five equidistant symbols , whose order was alternated between each stripe . These symbols were divided into two categories : one red six @-@ sided star voided with a disk of a different color in the center — either a red star and green disk or a white star and blue disk — , and a large disk voided in its lower right by a small disk of different color , with the combination being either a small red disk within a larger blue disk or a small yellow disk within a larger red disk . The first yellow stripe contains three red stars and two blue disks . The second stripe , red in color , contains three green <unk> two white stars . The third stripe ( second yellow one ) is identical to the first , with the exception that the star in its center is white , while the fourth stripe ( second white one ) is identical to the second stripe . 
 = = = Origin of the current flag = = = 
 Several Muslim countries along the south coast of the Mediterranean Sea used a red flag similar to the flag of the Ottoman Empire . After the destruction of the Tunisian naval division at the Battle of Navarino on 20 October 1827 , the sovereign <unk> Dynasty leader Al @-@ Husayn II ibn Mahmud decided to create a flag to use for the fleet of Tunisia , to distinguish it from other fleets . There are some discrepancies over the date of the flag 's adoption , as the government states that it was adopted in 1831 , while other sources like Siobhan Ryan 's Ultimate Pocket Flags of the World claim that it was adopted in 1835 . 
 = = = French protectorate = = = 
 During the era of the French protectorate in Tunisia , French authorities did not change the Tunisian flag . However , according to an article in the Flag Bulletin publishing in Fall 2000 , for a short period of time during the French protectorate , the flag of France was placed in the canton ( upper left ) of the Tunisian flag . In the same vein , vexillologist Whitney Smith stated that the addition of the French flag was " modification of the unofficial Tunisian national flag , used for a few years " . He added : 
 Tunisia , a French protectorate , retained its national flag on land and at sea . Nevertheless , in the late 19th Century or early 20th Century an unofficial version of the flag was used with the tricolor canton . In 1925 a formal proposal was made to adopt that flag as official , but no action was taken . That flag , featured on the cover of this issue [ of the Flag Bulletin ] , does not appear to have been illustrated in any <unk> source . 
 Confusion arose when an issue of the French daily newspaper Le Petit Journal , published on 24 July 1904 on the occasion of the bey of Tunis 's visit to France , reproduced an illustration showing the flag used while was visiting the Hôtel de Ville , Paris . Ivan <unk> of Flags of the World claimed that this flag design , which hadn 't been seen earlier , may have been inaccurate , suggesting that the journalist might not have been at the affair or he had reproduced a drawing of the wrong flag . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Tunisian flag was defined in Article 4 of the 1 June 1959 constitution under these terms : " The flag of the Republic of Tunisia is red , it has , under the conditions defined by law , in the middle , a white disk containing a five @-@ pointed star surrounded by a red crescent . " 
 The Organic Law No. 99 @-@ 56 of 30 June 1999 , adopted on 3 July by the Chamber of Deputies , formalized the Tunisian flag for the first time in law , clarifying Article 4 of the constitution . The flag is in the form of a red rectangle with a width equal to two @-@ thirds of its length . In the middle of the flag is a white disk whose diameter is equal to one @-@ third of the length of the rectangle and whose center is located at the intersection of the diagonals of the rectangle . A red five @-@ pointed star is located to the right of the disk , whose center is at a distance equal to one @-@ thirtieth of the length of the flag from the center of the disk . 
 The location of the star 's five points is determined by an imaginary disk centered on the star 's center , its diameter equal to roughly 15 % the length of the flag . The points of the star are equidistant from each other , and one of the points is located on the horizontal median of the flag to the left of the center of the imaginary disk . The star is surrounded on its left by a red crescent made by the intersection of two arcs , an outer arc whose diameter is equal to one @-@ fourth of the length of the flag , and an internal arc with a diameter equal to one @-@ fifth of the flag 's length . In addition , at the top of the flag used by the President of the Republic , the words " for the nation " ( Arabic : <unk> ) are written in gold . The three outer edges of the flag are lined with golden yellow fringe and a red ribbon , with golden fringe on the right vertical side and a white disk with a star and crescent near the fringe , is attached to the flag pole above the flag . 
 Article 4 of the 1959 constitution specifies the presence of a technical dossier containing a model of the flag , a guide to drawing it , which includes the proper measurements , and technical specifications of its colors . 
 = = Symbolism = = 
 For the Tunisian embassy in France , the color red represents the blood of martyrs killed during the Turkish conquest of Tunisia in 1574 . However , the Tunisians invited the Turkish to liberate them from the Spanish invaders and from what is left of the <unk> dynasty . Another interpretation is that the " red <unk> flag spread light throughout the Muslim world " . The white symbolizes peace , the disk symbolizes the radiance of the nation as the sun , while the crescent and five @-@ pointed star represent unity of all Muslims and the Five Pillars of Islam , respectively . 
 According to Ludvík Mucha , author of Webster 's Concise Encyclopedia of Flags & Coats of Arms , the white disk located in the center of the flag represents the sun . The red crescent and the five @-@ pointed star , two ancient symbols of Islam , were most notably used on Ottoman flag and have since appeared on many flags of Islamic countries . The crescent is , from the viewpoint of an Arabic observer , supposed to bring good luck . The color red is a symbol of resistance against Turkish supremacy . Whitney Smith states that the crescent was first emblazoned on standards and buildings in the Punic state of Carthage , located in present @-@ day Tunisia . Since appearing on the Ottoman flag , they were widely adopted by Muslim countries , and have become known as symbols of Islam , when in fact , they may be cultural symbols . Likewise , the sun is often represented with the crescent on ancient Punic artifacts and is associated with the ancient Punic religion , especially with Tanit symbol . 
 = = Protocol = = 
 The Tunisian flag is visible on all public and military buildings . The flag also floats on the seats of Tunisian ambassadors at regional and international meetings as well as at buildings housing Tunisian representatives around the world . It is deployed during commemorations and national honors in a strictly ceremonial manner . On the listed Flag Days below , the Tunisian flag is flown in public buildings , compulsory by law : 
 Article 129 of Penal Code of Tunisia punishes the insult either " publicly , by words , writings , gestures or any other manner " of the Tunisian flag and also foreign flags with one year imprisonment . 
 = = Variants = = 
 The colors of the flag are included in other Tunisian symbols , such as the coat of arms , which contains a crescent and star enclosed in a disk with red border . In addition , equipment belonging to the Tunisian army are visually recognized by the presence of a cockade . 
 Most political parties of Tunisia reflect the colors of the flag or the flag itself . Many postal stamps reflect the motifs of the flag , which radiate " with brightness " on them . 
 = Boston Massacre = 
 The Boston Massacre , known as the Incident on King Street by the British , was an incident on March 5 , 1770 , in which British Army soldiers killed five male civilians and injured six others . The incident was heavily propagandized by leading Patriots , such as Paul Revere and Samuel Adams , to fuel animosity toward the British authorities . British troops had been stationed in Boston , capital of the Province of Massachusetts Bay , since 1768 in order to protect and support crown @-@ appointed colonial officials attempting to enforce unpopular Parliamentary legislation . Amid ongoing tense relations between the population and the soldiers , a mob formed around a British sentry , who was subjected to verbal abuse and harassment . He was eventually supported by eight additional soldiers , who were subjected to verbal threats and thrown objects . They fired into the crowd , without orders , instantly killing three people and wounding others . Two more people died later of wounds sustained in the incident . 
 The crowd eventually dispersed after Acting Governor Thomas Hutchinson promised an inquiry , but reformed the next day , prompting the withdrawal of the troops to Castle Island . Eight soldiers , one officer , and four civilians were arrested and charged with murder . Defended by the lawyer and future American president , John Adams , six of the soldiers were acquitted , while the other two were convicted of manslaughter and given reduced sentences . The men found guilty of manslaughter were sentenced to branding on their hand . Depictions , reports , and propaganda about the event , notably the colored engraving produced by Paul Revere ( shown at right ) , further heightened tensions throughout the Thirteen Colonies . 
 = = Background = = 
 Boston , the capital of the Province of Massachusetts Bay and an important shipping town , was a major center of resistance to unpopular acts of taxation by the British Parliament in the 1760s . In 1768 , the Townshend Acts were placed upon the colonists , by which a variety of common items that were manufactured in Britain and exported to the colonies were subjected to import tariffs . Colonists objected that the Townshend Acts were a violation of the natural , charter , and constitutional rights of British subjects in the colonies . The Massachusetts House of Representatives began a campaign against the Townshend Acts by sending a petition to King George III asking for the repeal of the Townshend Revenue Act . The House also sent what became known as the Massachusetts Circular Letter to other colonial assemblies , asking them to join the resistance movement , and called for a boycott of merchants importing the affected goods . 
 In Great Britain , Lord Hillsborough , who had recently been appointed to the newly created office of Colonial Secretary , was alarmed by the actions of the Massachusetts House . In April 1768 he sent a letter to the colonial governors in America , instructing them to dissolve the colonial assemblies if they responded to the Massachusetts Circular Letter . He also ordered Massachusetts Governor Francis Bernard to direct the Massachusetts House to rescind the letter . The house refused to comply . 
 Boston 's chief customs officer , Charles Paxton , wrote to Hillsborough , asking for military support because " the Government is as much in the hands of the people as it was in the time of the Stamp Act . " Commodore Samuel Hood responded by sending the fifty @-@ gun warship HMS Romney , which arrived in Boston Harbor in May 1768 . On June 10 , 1768 , customs officials seized the Liberty , a sloop owned by leading Boston merchant John Hancock , on allegations that the ship had been involved in smuggling . Bostonians , already angry because the captain of the Romney had been impressing local sailors , began to riot . Customs officials fled to Castle William for protection . 
 Given the unstable state of affairs in Massachusetts , Hillsborough instructed General Thomas Gage , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , North America , to send " such Force as You shall think necessary to Boston " . On October 1 , 1768 , the first of four British Army regiments began disembarking in Boston . Two regiments were removed from Boston in 1769 , but the 14th and the 29th Regiments of Foot remained . 
 The Journal of Occurrences , an anonymously written series of newspaper articles , chronicled clashes between civilians and soldiers while troops were stationed in Boston , feeding tensions with its sometimes exaggerated accounts of the events . Tensions rose markedly after Christopher Seider , " a young lad about eleven Years of Age " , was killed by a customs employee on February 22 , 1770 . Seider 's death was glorified in the Boston Gazette , and his funeral was described as one of the largest of the time in Boston . The killing and subsequent propaganda inflamed tensions , with gangs of colonists looking for soldiers to harass , and soldiers also on occasion looking for confrontation . 
 = = Incident = = 
 On the evening of March 5 , Private Hugh White , a British soldier , stood on guard duty outside the Custom house on King Street , today known as State Street . A young wigmaker 's apprentice named Edward Garrick called out to a British officer , Captain @-@ Lieutenant John Goldfinch , that Goldfinch had not paid a bill due to Garrick 's master . Goldfinch had in fact settled his account and ignored the insult . Private White called out to Garrick that he should be more respectful of the officer . Garrick exchanged insults with Private White , who left his post , challenged the boy , and struck him on the side of the head with his musket . As Garrick cried in pain , one of his companions , Bartholomew <unk> , began to argue with White . This attracted a larger crowd . Henry Knox , a 19 @-@ year @-@ old bookseller ( who would later serve as a general in the revolution ) , came upon the scene and warned White , " if he fired he must die for it . " 
 As the evening progressed , the crowd around Private White grew larger and more boisterous . Church bells were rung , which usually signified a fire , bringing more people out . Over fifty Bostonians pressed around White , led by a mixed @-@ race runaway slave named Crispus Attucks , throwing objects at the sentry and challenging him to fire his weapon . White , who had taken up a somewhat safer position on the steps of the Custom House , sought assistance . Runners alerted the nearby barracks and Captain Thomas Preston , the officer of the watch . According to his report , Preston dispatched a non @-@ commissioned officer and six privates of the 29th Regiment of Foot , with fixed bayonets , to relieve White . The soldiers Preston sent were Corporal William <unk> , Hugh Montgomery , John Carroll , William McCauley , William Warren , and Matthew Kilroy . Accompanied by Preston , they pushed their way through the crowd . En route , Henry Knox , again trying to reduce tensions , warned Preston , " For God 's sake , take care of your men . If they fire , you must die . " Captain Preston responded " I am aware of it . " When they reached Private White on the custom house stairs , the soldiers loaded their muskets , and arrayed themselves in a semicircular formation . Preston shouted at the crowd , estimated to number between three and four hundred , to disperse . 
 The crowd continued to press around the soldiers , taunting them by yelling , " Fire ! " , by spitting at and throwing snowballs and other small objects at them . Richard Palmes , a local innkeeper who was carrying a cudgel ( i.e. , club ) , came up to Preston and asked if the soldiers ' weapons were loaded . Preston assured him they were , but that they would not fire unless he ordered it , and ( according to his own deposition ) that he was unlikely to do so , since he was standing in front of them . A thrown object then struck Private Montgomery , knocking him down and causing him to drop his musket . He recovered his weapon , and was thought to angrily shout " Damn you , fire ! " , then discharged it into the crowd although no command was given . Palmes swung his cudgel first at Montgomery , hitting his arm , and then at Preston . He narrowly missed Preston 's head , striking him on the arm instead . 
 There was a pause of uncertain length ( eyewitness estimates ranged from several seconds to two minutes ) , after which the soldiers fired into the crowd . Rather than a disciplined volley ( Preston gave no orders to fire ) , a ragged series of shots was fired , which hit eleven men . Three Americans — <unk> Samuel Gray , mariner James Caldwell , and Crispus Attucks — died instantly . Samuel Maverick , an apprentice ivory turner of seventeen , was struck by a ricocheting musket ball at the back of the crowd , and died a few hours later , in the early morning of the next day . An Irish immigrant , Patrick Carr , died two weeks later . Christopher Monk , another apprentice , was one of those seriously wounded in the attack . Although he recovered to some extent , he was crippled and eventually died in 1780 , purportedly due to the injuries he had sustained in the attack a decade earlier . 
 The crowd moved away from the immediate area of the custom house , but continued to grow in nearby streets . Captain Preston immediately called out most of the 29th Regiment , which adopted defensive positions in front of the state house . Acting Governor Thomas Hutchinson was summoned to the scene , and was forced by the movement of the crowd into the council chamber of the state house . From its balcony he was able to minimally restore order , promising there would be a fair inquiry into the shootings if the crowd dispersed . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Investigation = = = 
 Hutchinson immediately began investigating the affair , and by morning , Preston and the eight soldiers had been arrested . In a meeting of the governor 's council held late the morning after the shootings , Boston 's selectmen asked Hutchinson to order the removal of troops from the city to Castle William on Castle Island , while a town meeting at Faneuil Hall met to discuss the affair . The governor 's council was at first opposed to ordering the troop withdrawal , with Hutchinson correctly claiming he did not have the authority to order the troops to move . Lieutenant Colonel William Dalrymple , commander of the troops , did not offer to move them . The town meeting , however , became more restive when it learned of this . Under an imminent threat of further violence , the council changed its position , and unanimously ( " under duress " , according to Hutchinson 's report ) agreed to request the troops ' removal . Secretary of State Andrew Oliver reported that , had the troops not been removed , " that they would probably be destroyed by the people — should it be called rebellion , should it incur the loss of our charter , or be the consequence what it would . " This decision left the governor without effective means to police the town . The 14th was transferred to Castle Island without incident about a week later , with the 29th following shortly after . The first four victims were buried amid great ceremony on March 8 ; Patrick Carr , the fifth and final victim , died on March 14 and was buried with them on March 17 . 
 On March 27 the eight soldiers , Captain Preston , and four civilians who were in the Customs House and were alleged to have fired shots , were all indicted for murder . Bostonians continued to be hostile to the troops and their dependents . General Gage , convinced the troops were doing more harm than good , ordered the 29th Regiment out of the province in May . Governor Hutchinson took advantage of the ongoing high tensions to orchestrate delays of the trials until later in the year . 
 = = = Propaganda battle = = = 
 In the days and weeks following the incident , a propaganda battle was waged between Boston 's radicals and supporters of the government . Both sides published pamphlets that told strikingly different stories , which were principally published in London in a bid to influence opinion there . The Boston Gazette 's version of events , for example , characterized the massacre as part of an ongoing scheme to " quell a Spirit of Liberty " , and harped on the negative consequences of quartering troops in the city . 
 A young Boston artist , Henry Pelham , half @-@ brother of the celebrated portrait painter John Singleton Copley , depicted the event . Silversmith and engraver Paul Revere closely copied Pelham 's image , and is often credited as its originator . In order to further public outrage , the engraving contained several inflammatory details . Captain Preston is shown ordering his men to fire , and a musket is seen shooting out of the window of the customs office , which is labeled " Butcher 's Hall . " Artist Christian Remick hand @-@ colored some prints . Some copies of the print show a man with two chest wounds and a somewhat darker face , matching descriptions of Attucks ; others show no victim as a person of color . The image was published in the Boston Gazette , circulating widely , and became an effective piece of anti @-@ British propaganda . The image of bright red " lobster backs " and wounded men with red blood was hung in farmhouses across New England . 
 Anonymous pamphlets were published describing the event from significantly different perspectives . A Short Narrative of the Horrid Massacre , published under the auspices of the Boston town meeting , was principally written by James Bowdoin , a member of the governor 's council and a vocal opponent of British colonial policy , along with Samuel Pemberton , and Joseph Warren . It described the shooting and other lesser incidents that took place in the days before as unprovoked attacks on peaceful , law @-@ abiding inhabitants , and was , according to historian Neal Langley York , probably the most influential description of the event . The account it provided was drawn from more than 90 depositions taken after the event , and it included accusations that the soldiers sent by Captain Preston had been deployed with the intention of causing harm . In the interest of minimizing impact on the jury pool , city leaders held back local distribution of the pamphlet , but sent copies to other colonies and to London , where they knew depositions collected by Governor Hutchinson were en route . A second pamphlet , Additional Observations on the Short Narrative , furthered the attack on crown officials by complaining that customs officials ( one of whom had left Boston to carry Hutchinson 's gathered depositions to London ) were abandoning their posts under the pretense that it was too dangerous for them to do their duties . 
 The depositions that Hutchinson collected and sent to London were eventually published in a pamphlet entitled A Fair Account of the Late Unhappy Disturbance in Boston . Drawn mainly from depositions by soldiers , its account of affairs sought to blame selfish Bostonians for denying the validity of Parliamentary laws . It also blamed the city 's hoodlums and gangs for the lawlessness preceding the event , and claimed that they set up an ambush of the soldiers . However , as it was not published until well after the first pamphlet had arrived in London , it ended up having a much smaller impact on the public debate there . 
 = = = Trials = = = 
 The government was determined to give the soldiers a fair trial so there could be no grounds for retaliation from the British and so that moderates would not be alienated from the Patriot cause . After several lawyers with Loyalist leanings refused to defend him , Preston sent a request to John Adams , pleading for him to work on the case . Adams , who was already a leading Patriot and who was contemplating a run for public office , agreed to help , in the interest of ensuring a fair trial . Adams was joined by Josiah Quincy II after the latter was assured that the Sons of Liberty would not oppose his appointment , and by Robert Auchmuty , a Loyalist . They were assisted by Sampson Salter Blowers , whose chief duty was to investigate the jury pool , and Paul Revere , who drew a detailed map of the bodies to be used in the trial of the British soldiers held responsible . Massachusetts Solicitor General Samuel Quincy and private attorney Robert Treat Paine , hired by the town of Boston , handled the prosecution . Preston was tried separately in late October 1770 . He was acquitted after the jury was convinced that he had not ordered the troops to fire . 
 The trial of the eight soldiers opened on November 27 , 1770 . Adams told the jury to look beyond the fact the soldiers were British . He argued that if the soldiers were endangered by the mob , which he called " a motley rabble of saucy boys , negroes , and <unk> , Irish <unk> and outlandish jack <unk> [ i.e. sailors ] " , they had the legal right to fight back , and so were innocent . If they were provoked but not endangered , he argued , they were at most guilty of manslaughter . 
 The jury agreed with Adams and acquitted six of the soldiers after two and one @-@ half hours deliberation . Two of the soldiers were found guilty of manslaughter because there was overwhelming evidence that they had fired directly into the crowd . The jury 's decisions suggest that they believed the soldiers had felt threatened by the crowd , but should have delayed firing . Patrick Carr , the fifth victim , corroborated this with deathbed testimony delivered to his doctor . The convicted soldiers were granted reduced sentences by invoking Benefit of clergy , which reduced their punishment from a death sentence to branding of the thumb in open court . 
 The four civilians were tried on December 13 . The principal prosecution witness , a servant of one of the accused , made claims that were easily rebutted by defense witnesses . In the face of this weak testimony , as well as waning public interest , the prosecution allegedly failed to press its case very hard . The civilians were all acquitted , and the servant was eventually convicted of perjury , whipped , and banished from the province . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Contribution to American Revolution = = = 
 The Boston Massacre is considered one of the most important events that turned colonial sentiment against King George III and British Parliamentary authority . John Adams wrote that the " foundation of American independence was laid " on March 5 , 1770 , and Samuel Adams and other Patriots used annual commemorations ( Massacre Day ) of the event to fulminate against British rule . Christopher Monk , the boy who was wounded in the attack and died in 1780 , was paraded before the crowds as a reminder of British hostility . Later events , such as the Boston Tea Party , further illustrated the crumbling relationship between Britain and its colonies . Although five years passed between the massacre and outright revolution , and direct connections between the massacre and the later war are ( according to historian Neil Langley York ) somewhat tenuous , it is widely perceived as a significant event leading to the violent rebellion that followed . 
 = = = Commemorations = = = 
 The massacre was remembered in 1858 in a celebration organized by William Cooper Nell , an African American abolitionist who saw the death of Crispus Attucks as an opportunity to demonstrate the role of African Americans in the Revolutionary War . Partly because of this activism , artwork commemorating the massacre was produced that changed the color of a victim 's skin to black ( which in Revere 's original engraving was white ) to emphasize Attucks ' claimed martyrdom . In 1888 , a monument was erected on the Boston Common to the men killed in the massacre , and the five victims , along with Christopher Seider , were reinterred in a prominent grave in the Granary Burying Ground . 
 The massacre is reenacted annually on March 5 under the auspices of the Bostonian Society . The Old State House , the massacre site , and the Granary Burying Ground are all part of Boston 's Freedom Trail , connecting sites important in the city 's revolutionary @-@ era history . 
 = Swabian War = 
 The Swabian War of 1499 ( <unk> , also called <unk> ( " Swiss War " ) in Germany and <unk> Krieg [ " War of the Engadin " ] in Austria ) was the last major armed conflict between the Old Swiss Confederacy and the House of Habsburg . What had begun as a local conflict over the control of the Val Müstair and the <unk> Pass in the Grisons soon got out of hand when both parties called upon their allies for help ; the Habsburgs demanding the support of the Swabian League , and the Federation of the Three Leagues of the Grisons turning to the Swiss Eidgenossenschaft . Hostilities quickly spread from the Grisons through the Rhine valley to Lake Constance and even to the Sundgau in southern Alsace , the westernmost part of Habsburg Further Austria . 
 Many battles were fought from January to July 1499 , and in all but a few minor skirmishes , the experienced Swiss soldiers defeated the Swabian and Habsburg armies . After their victories in the Burgundian Wars , the Swiss had battle tested troops and commanders . On the Swabian side , distrust between the knights and their foot soldiers , disagreements amongst the military leadership , and a general reluctance to fight a war that even the Swabian counts considered to be more in the interests of the powerful Habsburgs than in the interest of the Holy Roman Empire proved fatal handicaps . When his military high commander fell in the battle of Dornach , where the Swiss won a final decisive victory , king Maximilian I had no choice but to agree to a peace treaty signed on September 22 , 1499 in Basel . The treaty granted the Confederacy far @-@ reaching independence from the empire . Although the Eidgenossenschaft officially remained a part of the empire until the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648 , the peace of Basel exempted it from the imperial jurisdiction and imperial taxes and thus de facto acknowledged it as a separate political entity . 
 = = Background = = 
 One source of conflict was the ancient distrust , rivalry , and hostility between the Old Swiss Confederacy and the House of Habsburg , which had risen to the throne of the Holy Roman Emperor since 1438 . Since the late 13th century , the members of the Swiss Confederacy had gradually taken control of territories that once had belonged to the Habsburg realm . The Swiss had attained the status of imperial immediacy , being subject only to the emperor himself , and not to any intermediate Princes or liege lords . This status granted them a far @-@ reaching autonomy within the Holy Roman Empire , even more so as the emperor was a distant overlord . Before 1438 , the empire and the emperor had been an <unk> to the Habsburg dukes for the Swiss . Previous emperors had repeatedly supported the confederates in their struggles against the Habsburgs , whom they saw as strong rivals . They had confirmed the Imperial immediacy of the Swiss on several occasions ; and the Swiss had succeeded in defending their privileged status against Habsburg dukes who had tried to regain their former territories . 
 = = = The Habsburgs in the Holy Roman Empire in the 15th century = = = 
 When Frederick III of Habsburg ascended to the throne , the Swiss suddenly faced a new situation in which they could no longer count on support from the empire . Worse yet , conflicts with the Habsburg dukes threatened to become conflicts with the empire itself . Under Frederick 's reign , this did not occur yet . Frederick had sided in 1442 against the confederacy in the Old Zürich War where he had supported the city of Zürich , and he also refused to reconfirm the imperial immediacy of the members of the Confederacy . But Frederick 's troubled reign did not leave room for military operations against the Swiss . In Austria , Frederick was in conflict first with his brother Albert and then faced the pressure of Matthias Corvinus , who even drove him from Vienna and forced Frederick 's court to assume an itinerant lifestyle . 
 In the empire , Frederick faced the opposition of the Bavarian Wittelsbach dynasty and of his cousin Sigismund , who was duke in Tyrol , Vorarlberg , and Further Austria then . Sigismund had been in conflict with the Swiss Confederacy , too . When he had been banned by Pope Pius II in a conflict over the nomination of a bishop in Tyrol , the Swiss had annexed the formerly Habsburg territories of the Thurgau . In 1468 , Sigismund clashed with the Swiss in the War of <unk> , which he could end without significant territorial losses only by paying a large ransom , which he financed by pawning territories in the Sundgau and the Alsace to Charles the Bold of Burgundy in 1469 . Charles did not , however , help Sigismund against the Swiss , and so Sigismund bought back the territories in 1474 and concluded a peace treaty with the Confederacy , the Ewige <unk> , although the emperor never recognized it . In the following Burgundy Wars , the Swiss and Sigismund both fought against Charles the Bold . 
 In 1487 , Sigismund arranged the marriage of Frederick 's daughter Kunigunde to duke Albert IV of Bavaria against her father 's will , and he also signed away some of his territories in Tyrol and Further Austria to Albert IV . Frederick intervened by force : he founded the Swabian League in 1488 , an alliance of the Swabian cities , the Swabian knights of the League of St. George 's Shield and the counts of Württemberg and Tyrol and Vorarlberg . With their help , he forced the Wittelsbach house to return the territories signed over by Sigismund . 
 In 1490 , Sigismund was forced to abdicate and turn over all his territories to Frederick 's son Maximilian I. Maximilian had married Mary of Burgundy in 1477 after the death of Charles the Bold in the Burgundy Wars and thus inherited the Burgundian territories : Duchy and County of Burgundy and the Netherlands . He took over and expanded the Burgundian administration with a more centralized style of government , which in 1482 , caused the outbreak of a rebellion of the cities and counts , allied with Charles VIII of France , against Maximilian . The Duchy of Burgundy was also a French fiefdom and immediately claimed by Charles VIII . The first phase of this conflict would last until 1489 , keeping Maximilian occupied in the Low Countries . He even fell into the hands of his enemies and was held <unk> for four months in Bruges in 1488 . He was freed only when his father sent an army under the command of duke Albert of Saxony to his rescue . Maximilian subsequently returned to Germany , leaving his cousin Albert as his representative . Albert would , in the following years , manage to assert the Habsburg hegemony in the Netherlands . 
 Maximilian had been elected King of the Romans in 1486 on his father 's initiative , and they had been ruling jointly since then . Upon the death of Frederick in 1493 , Maximilian also took over his father 's possessions and thus united the whole Habsburg territory in his hands . In the same year , the Peace of Senlis also marked the end of his wars against the French about his Burgundian possessions ; he kept the territories in the Netherlands and also the County of Burgundy , but had to cede the Duchy of Burgundy to the French king . Maximilian controlled thus territories that nearly encircled the Old Swiss Confederacy : Tyrol and Vorarlberg in the east , Further Austria in the north , and the County of Burgundy in the west . 
 = = = Swabia and the Swiss = = = 
 When asked by emperor Frederick to also join the Swabian League , the Eidgenossen flatly refused : they saw no reason to join an alliance designed to further Habsburg interests , and they were wary of this new , relatively closely knit and powerful alliance that had arisen on their northern frontier . Furthermore , they resented the strong aristocratic element in the Swabian League , so different from their own organization , which had grown over the last two hundred years liberating themselves from precisely such an aristocratic rule . 
 On the Swabian side , similar concerns existed . For the common people in Swabia , the independence and freedom of the Eidgenossen was a powerful and attractive role model . Many a baron in southern Swabia feared that his own subjects might revolt and seek adherence to the Swiss Confederacy . These fears were not entirely without foundation : the Swiss had begun to form alliances north of the Rhine river , concluding a first treaty with Schaffhausen in 1454 and then also treaties with cities as far away as Rottweil ( 1463 ) or Mulhouse ( 1466 ) . 
 The city of Constance and its bishop were caught in the middle between these two blocks : they held possessions in Swabia , but the city also still exercised the high justice over the Thurgau , where the Swiss had assumed the low justice since the annexation in 1460 . The foundation of the Swabian League prompted the Swiss city states of Zürich and Bern to propose accepting Constance into the Swiss Confederacy . The negotiations failed , though , due to the opposition of the founding cantons of the Confederacy and Uri in particular . The split jurisdiction over the Thurgau was the cause of many quarrels between the city and the Confederacy . In 1495 , one such disagreement was answered by a punitive expedition of soldiers of Uri and the city had to pay the sum of 3 @,@ 000 guilders to make them retreat and cease their plundering . ( The Thurgau was a condominium of the Swiss Confederacy , and Uri was one of the cantons involved in its administration . ) Finally , Constance joined the Swabian League as a full member on November 3 , 1498 . Although this did not yet definitively define the position of the city — during the Reformation , it would be allied again with Zürich and Bern , and only after the defeat of the Schmalkaldic League in 1548 its close connections to the Eidgenossenschaft would be finally severed — it was another factor contributing to the growing estrangement between the Swiss and the Swabians . 
 The competition between Swiss ( <unk> ) and Swabian mercenaries ( <unk> ) , who both fought in armies throughout Europe , sometimes opposing each other on the battlefield , sometimes competing for contracts , intensified . Contemporary chronicles agree in their reports that the Swiss , who were considered the best soldiers in Europe at the time after their victories in the Burgundian Wars , were subject to many taunts and abuses by the <unk> ; they were called " <unk> " and ridiculed in other ways . Such insults were neither given nor taken lightly , and frequently led to bloodshed . Indeed , such incidents would contribute to prolong the Swabian War itself by triggering skirmishes and looting expeditions that the military commands of neither side had ever wanted or planned . 
 = = = The imperial reform of 1495 = = = 
 Maximilian I , like other Holy Roman Emperors before and after him , had to face struggles with other powerful princes in the empire and he thus sought to secure his position and the imperial monarchy by furthering centralisation . At the Imperial Diet held in Worms in 1495 , he was partly successful , but he also had to make concessions in favor of the princes . The imperial reform proclaimed an " eternal public peace " ( <unk> <unk> ) to put an end to the abounding feuds and the anarchy of the robber barons and it defined a new standing Imperial Army to enforce that peace , to which each imperial estate ( <unk> ) would have had to send troops . It also mandated the common penny ( <unk> ) , a new head tax to finance this army . Among the concessions Maximilian had to make was the institution of a new supreme court , the Reichskammergericht , thus separating the highest judicial authority from the person and the whereabouts of the emperor . He also had to agree to the formation of a governmental council of princes called the <unk> . It would never play a significant role : it convened for the first time in 1500 , but was dissolved by Maximilian two years later . 
 The Swiss did not accept these resolutions of the Imperial Diet , and they explicitly refused to pay the common penny . They had no interest whatsoever in sending troops to serve in an army under Habsburg authority , nor in paying taxes , nor would they accept any foreign court 's jurisdiction ; and they had succeeded in securing public peace within their territories reasonably well by themselves . They simply considered the whole proposal a curtailing of their freedom . The Swiss were by far not the only members of the empire who refused to accept the resolutions , but Maximilian would use their refusal later as a pretext to place the Swiss Confederacy under an imperial ban ( <unk> ) . 
 = = The course of the war = = 
 Open war broke out over a territorial conflict in the Grisons , where during the 15th century a federation similar to the Eidgenossenschaft had developed . Like the Swiss , these Three Leagues had achieved a far @-@ reaching autonomy , but also were involved in constant struggles with the Habsburgs , who ruled the neighbouring territories to the east and who kept trying to bring the Grisons under their influence . During the 1470s and 1480s , duke Sigismund had succeeded in acquiring step by step the high justice over most of the communes of the <unk> ( " League of the Ten Jurisdictions " in the <unk> , the youngest of the Three Leagues that had sprung up in the Grisons , having been founded only in 1436 ) , and Maximilian continued this expansionist strategy . The Habsburg pressure prompted the Three Leagues to sign a close military alliance with the Swiss Confederacy in 1497 @-@ 98 . 
 At the same time , the Habsburgs had been involved in a major power struggle with the French kings of the House of Valois over the control of the remains of the realm of Charles the Bold , whose daughter and heiress Mary Maximilian had married . Maximilian 's second marriage in 1493 with Bianca Maria Sforza from Milan then got the Habsburgs directly involved in the Italian Wars , clashing again with the French kings over the control of the Duchy of Milan . 
 As a direct connection between Tyrol and Milan , the Grisons and in particular the Val Müstair became strategically important to the Habsburgs . The <unk> Pass in the Val Müstair connects the Vinschgau valley ( Val <unk> ) in southern Tyrol with the <unk> in northern Italy . Furthermore , the Habsburgs and the Bishop of Chur had been quarrelling over the judicial rights over the region for some time . On January 20 , 1499 , Habsburg troops occupied the valley and plundered the Benedictine Convent of Saint John at Müstair , but were soon driven back by the forces of the Three Leagues , and an armistice was signed already on February 2 in <unk> ( <unk> ) , a village in the upper Vinschgau . 
 But the Three Leagues had already called upon the Swiss for help and troops from Uri had already arrived in Chur . Upon learning about the truce , they withdrew , but met a small troop of Habsburg soldiers on their way back home . When those engaged in the usual insults on the Swiss , the latter crossed the Rhine and killed the <unk> . In retaliation , Habsburg troops sacked the village of Maienfeld on February 7 and called the Swabian League for help . Only five days later , Swiss troops from several cantons had been assembled and reconquered the village and moved towards Lake Constance , pillaging and plundering along the way . On February 20 , they again met a Habsburg army , which they defeated in the battle of Hard on the shores of Lake Constance near the estuary of the Rhine , and at about the same time , other Swiss troops invaded the Hegau region between Schaffhausen and Constance . On both sites , the Swiss retreated after a few days . 
 Meanwhile , the Swabian League had completed its recruitment , and undertook a raid on Dornach on March 22 , but suffered a defeat against numerically inferior Swiss troops in the battle of <unk> that same evening . In early April , both sides raided each other 's territories along the Rhine ; the Swiss conquered the villages of <unk> and <unk> in the <unk> west of Schaffhausen . A larger attack of the Swabian League took place on April 11 , 1499 : the Swabian troops occupied and plundered some villages on the southern shore of Lake Constance , just south of Constance . The expedition ended in a shameful defeat and open flight when the Swiss soldiers , who had their main camp just a few miles south at <unk> , arrived and met the Swabians in the battle of <unk> . The Swabians lost more than 1 @,@ 000 soldiers ; 130 from the city of Constance alone ; and the Swiss captured their heavy equipment , including their artillery . 
 Again , the Swiss raided the <unk> and the Hegau and pillaged several fortified smaller Swabian cities such as <unk> or <unk> before retreating again . This whole war was characterized by many such smaller raids and plundering expeditions of both sides between a few larger battles . On the eastern front , a new Habsburg attack on the Rhine valley provoked a counterstrike of the Eidgenossen , who remained victorious in the battle of <unk> near Feldkirch on April 20 , 1499 . 
 The continued defeats of both Habsburg and Swabian armies made king Maximilian , who had hitherto been occupied in the Netherlands , travel to Constance and assume the leadership of the operations himself . He declared an imperial ban over the Swiss Confederacy in an attempt to gain wider support for the operation amongst the German princes by declaring the conflict an " imperial war " . However , this move had no success . Maximilian then decided that the next decisive attack should take place again in the Val Müstair , since he didn 't have enough troops near Constance to risk attacking there . An abandoned attack attempt in the west in early May 1499 had drawn significant Swiss forces there , who subsequently raided the Sundgau . On May 21 , the Swiss undertook a third raid in the Hegau , but abandoned the operation one week later after the city of Stockach withstood a siege long enough for Swabian relief troops to come dangerously close . 
 Simultaneously , the Three Leagues attacked the Habsburg troops that camped again at <unk> on May 22 , 1499 , before Maximilian could arrive with reinforcements . They overran the fortifications and routed the Austrian army in the battle of <unk> and then ravaged the Vinschgau , before retreating after three days . Maximilian and his troops arrived one week late , on May 29 . In revenge , his troops pillaged the Engadin valley , but retreated quickly before reinforcements from the Swiss Confederacy arrived . 
 The refusal of the military leaders of the Swabian League to withdraw troops from the northern front to send them to the Grisons as Maximilian had demanded made the king return to Lake Constance . The differences between the Swabians , who preferred to strike in the north , and the king , who still hoped to convince them to help him win the struggle in the Val Müstair , led to a pause in the hostilities . Troops were assembled at Constance , but an attack did not occur . Until July , nothing of significance happened along the whole front . 
 By mid @-@ July , Maximilian and the Swabian leaders suddenly were under pressure from their own troops . In the west , where there lay an army under the command of count Heinrich von Fürstenberg , a large contingent of mercenaries from Flanders and many knights threatened to leave as they had not received their pay . The foot soldiers of the Swabian troops also complained : most of them were peasants and preferred to go home and bring in the harvest . Maximilian was forced to act . 
 An attack by sea across Lake Constance on <unk> and Rorschach on July 21 was one of the few successful Swabian operations . The small Swiss detachment was taken by surprise , the villages plundered and burnt . A much larger attack of an army of about 16 @,@ 000 soldiers in the west on Dornach , however , met a quickly assembled but strong Swiss army . In the battle of Dornach on July 22 , 1499 , the Swabian and mercenary troops suffered a heavy defeat after a long and hard battle . Their general Heinrich von Fürstenberg fell early in the fight , about 3 @,@ 000 Swabian and 500 Swiss soldiers died , and the Swabians lost all of their artillery again . 
 One of the last skirmishes of the war took place on July 25 . A Swabian army marched from the Hegau on Schaffhausen , but met with fierce defense at <unk> . Although the small force of defenders was finally overcome , and the village was pillaged , the defenders inflicted heavy casualties and the attack was held up long enough for the Swiss to send troops from Schaffhausen to meet the Swabians in the field . Misunderstandings between the Swabian knights and their foot soldiers made the Swabians retreat , and nightfall then prevented a larger battle . 
 A major problem for the Swiss was the lack of any unified command . The cantonal contingents only took orders from their own leaders . Complaints of insubordination were common . The Swiss Diet had to adopt this resolution on 11 March 1499 : " Every canton shall impress upon its soldiers that when the Confederates are under arms together , each one of them , whatever his canton , shall obey the officers of the others . " 
 The war was paid for largely by the French and Italian allies of the Swiss as well as by ransoming prisoners of war . 
 = = Peace negotiations = = 
 Early mediation attempts in March 1499 had failed because of mutual distrust between the parties . But after the battle of Dornach , the Swabian League was war @-@ weary and had lost all confidence in the king 's abilities as a military leader , and thus refused Maximilian 's demands to muster a new army . The Swabian and Habsburg armies had suffered far higher human losses than the Swiss , and were also short on artillery , after repeatedly having lost their equipment to the Swiss . The Swiss also had no interest to prolong the war further , though they refused a first peace proposal that Maximilian presented at Schaffhausen in August 1499 . 
 However , events in the Italian Wars helped bring the Swabian War to an end . The French king Louis XII tried to bring the Duchy of Milan under his control . As long as the Swabian War continued , the Milanese ruler Ludovico il Moro — whose niece Bianca Maximilian had married in 1493 — could not expect help from either Swiss mercenaries or Maximilian , and thus his envoy Galeazzo Visconti tried to mediate between the Swiss and the king . The French delegation at the Tagsatzung , the federal diet and war council of the Swiss , tried to prevent any agreement for the same reason . The Milanese delegation prevailed in these <unk> and succeeded to persuade both sides to moderate their demands . Finally , a peace treaty between Maximilian I and the Swiss was signed in Basel on September 22 , 1499 . The peace treaty carefully played down the whole war from the " imperial war " that Maximilian had tried to make it by declaring the ban over the Confederacy to what it actually was : a war between two equal members of the empire ( Imperial estate , or <unk> ) , namely the House of Habsburg and the Swiss Confederacy . The document referred to Maximilian only as " duke of Habsburg " , not as " king of the Germans " or even " Holy Roman Emperor " . 
 With the Peace of Basel , the relations between the Old Swiss Confederacy and the empire returned to the status quo ante from before the Diet of Worms in 1495 . The imperial ban was dropped silently . Maximilian had to accept the refusal of the cantons and to abandon implicitly the Habsburg claims on their territories , acknowledging their independence . Consequently , the then ten members of the Swiss Confederacy remained exempt from the jurisdiction of the Reichskammergericht . The Swiss henceforth exercised also the high justice over the Thurgau . The war had not caused any territorial changes , except in the area around Schaffhausen , where the city had succeeded to assert its hegemony over some places that had formerly belonged to the Bishop of Constance . 
 In the Grisons , the situation also reverted to pre @-@ war conditions . The Habsburgs could keep their rights over eight of the communes of the <unk> , but also had to accept that league 's alliance with the two other leagues and with the Swiss Confederacy . Ultimately , this arrangement would lead to the Habsburgs losing the <unk> to the Three Leagues , with the exception of a temporary re @-@ occupation during the Thirty Years ' War nearly 130 years later . 
 = = Further consequences = = 
 Basel had remained studiously neutral throughout the whole war . Although allied with some cantons of the Swiss Confederacy , it also had strong economic ties in the Alsace and further down along the Rhine . But the events of the war had strengthened the pro @-@ confederate party in the city council , and the Swiss recognized the city 's strategic position as a bridgehead on the Rhine ( like Schaffhausen , too ) . On June 9 , 1501 , a delegation from Basel and the Swiss cantons ' representatives signed the alliance contract , which the city council of Basel ratified on July 13 , 1501 . 
 Schaffhausen had fought alongside the Eidgenossen during the Swabian War , and thus its acceptance into the Confederacy was a mere formality . The city had been an imperial city since 1415 and an associate state of the Confederacy since 1454 through a 25 @-@ year contract that had been renewed in 1479 . On August 10 , 1501 , it became the twelfth member of the Confederacy . 
 With the end of the war , the Swiss troops were no longer bound along the Rhine and in the Grisons . The cantons concluded new mercenary contracts , so called capitulations , with the Duchy of Milan and soon got deeply involved in the Italian Wars , where Swiss mercenaries ended up fighting on both sides . The involvement of the Old Swiss Confederacy , acting in its own interests in these wars , was brought to an end by the defeat against French forces in the battle of Marignano in 1515 and a subsequent peace treaty with the French king in 1516 , the so @-@ called Eternal Peace . However , Swiss mercenaries from individual cantons of the federation continued to participate in the Italian Wars well beyond ( until the middle of the 16th century ) in the service of various parties and , following that peace with France , in particular in the service of the French king . 
 The Swiss Confederacy remained an independent <unk> of the Holy Roman Empire , but as it wasn 't even obliged to participate in the Imperial Diet , this relation was degraded to a purely formal one that would lose significance throughout the 16th century . However , the Swiss still considered themselves as members of the empire with the status of imperial immediacy ; the empire was still considered the foundation of all privileges , rights , or political identity as can be witnessed in the continued use of the imperial insignia . The relations between the Habsburgs and the Confederacy were fully normalized in the <unk> of 1511 , a renewal of the earlier Ewige <unk> of 1474 and a first <unk> of 1477 . In that treaty , the Habsburgs finally and officially gave up all their territorial claims of old , and even designated the Confederacy the protecting power of the County of Burgundy . In the Treaty of Westphalia of 1648 , all members and associate states of the Confederacy would gain official full exemption from the empire and recognition as a national and political entity on their own right . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = Chaim Koppelman = 
 Chaim Koppelman ( November 17 , 1920 – December 6 , 2009 ) was an American artist , art educator , and Aesthetic Realism consultant . Best known as a printmaker , he also produced sculpture , paintings , and drawings . A member of the National Academy of Design since 1978 , he was president of the Society of American Graphic Artists ( SAGA ) , which presented him with a Lifetime Achievement Award in 2004 . He established the Printmaking Department of the School of Visual Arts in 1959 , and taught there until 2007 . 
 Koppelman was an early student of Aesthetic Realism , the philosophy founded in 1941 by Eli Siegel , which is based on the principle , " All beauty is a making one of opposites , and the making one of opposites is what we are going after in ourselves " . This principle informed Koppelman 's art , teaching , and his work as an Aesthetic Realism consultant . About the importance of this principle to art and life , Koppelman stated , " When Eli Siegel showed that what makes a work of art beautiful – the oneness of opposites – is the same as what every individual wants , it was one of the mightiest and kindest achievements of man 's mind " . 
 Koppelman 's art is noted for its originality , masterful technique , humor , and power . He is represented in most major print collections , including New York 's Museum of Modern Art , Guggenheim Museum , Whitney Museum , Metropolitan Museum , New York Public Library , Brooklyn Museum , Philadelphia Museum of Art , National Gallery , Smithsonian Institution , and Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden in Washington , DC , and the Victoria and Albert Museum in London . A retrospective exhibition at the Museo Napoleonico in Rome ( 2011 – 12 ) exposed his work to an international audience . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Chaim Koppelman was born in Brooklyn , New York City , to Sam and Sadie Koppelman , whose images appear in several of his works . At the age of 9 , he drew a profile of Napoleon in a geography book , and images of the Emperor would reappear throughout his long career . He began his study of art in Works Progress Administration ( WPA ) classes at the Brooklyn Museum in 1936 , and continued at Brooklyn College , the Educational Alliance , and the American Artists School . He studied sculpture with William Koss , abstract painting with Carl <unk> , and lithography with Eugene Morley . At the Art Students League , he studied sculpture with Jose de <unk> and etching with Martin Lewis and Will Barnet . 
 In the early 1940s Koppelman worked at the Museum of Non @-@ Objective Painting on 54th Street in Manhattan ( which later became the Guggenheim Museum ) with , among others , Jackson Pollock , Robert De Niro , Sr. , Rolph Scarlett , Lucia <unk> , and Ward Jackson . Two of his early , abstract pen and ink drawings are in the Guggenheim collection . The first recorded exhibition of Koppelman 's work was held in the Lounge Gallery of the Eighth Street Playhouse in 1942 , and included drawings , paintings , and sculpture . The following year , he had a solo exhibition at the Outlines Gallery in Pittsburgh . 
 = = Aesthetic Realism and artistic development = = 
 In 1940 Koppelman began attending poetry classes with Eli Siegel , the American poet and critic who first came to national attention in 1925 , when his poem , " Hot Afternoons Have Been in Montana " won the esteemed poetry prize of The Nation . This poem , Siegel later stated , arose from a way of seeing that in 1941 became Aesthetic Realism , the philosophy that reality is aesthetic , and that " The resolution of conflict in self is like the making one of opposites in art . " In Koppelman 's opinion , Siegel was " the most important philosopher of the 20th century – perhaps of all time " . 
 In Aesthetic Realism classes and lessons , Koppelman learned that ethical problems are also artistic problems . He felt his work suffered from a fight between rigidity and flexibility . He learned he could go after precision in the studio as penance for being careless at other times , wanting to get away from things . As freedom and order , truth and imagination became more integrated in his life , his art became more imaginative . “ I had always had a classical bent in my work , ” he wrote . “ But there was also a wildness in me that had not come into my work sufficiently or gracefully . ” As a result of his study , Koppelman noted , “ <unk> and abandon , the classical and the wild , even the conservative and the rebel seemed to be working better together ” resulting in art that was “ more imaginative , freer in concept ” Boldness of imagination and an unerring sense of detail were two qualities Koppelman ’ s work became noted for . 
 He also learned that art does not arise from suffering or depression , but rather from the hope to respect and honestly like the world by seeing opposites as one . This , according to Aesthetic Realism , is the deepest desire of every person , but it is opposed by the desire for contempt — the false notion that one adds to self by lessening the value of other things . Koppelman ’ s art is permeated with his understanding of this conflict . His works are often allegories which point to the discrepancy between , and the need to integrate , opposites such as pride and humility , generosity and selfishness , idealism and cynicism . “ That art could be a vehicle for understanding individual behavior seems always to have inspired <unk> ’ s creative process ” wrote John B. Ravenal of the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts , noting that his works “ offer intimate rendering of closely observed detail , by which , paradoxically , they evoke universal truths ” 
 In November 1942 , Koppelman was drafted into the United States Army and in 1943 he married painter Dorothy Myers . He worked as a radio weatherman during World War II , guiding ships through the rough waters of the English Channel , which was a critical part of the Invasion of Normandy . He manned an anti @-@ aircraft machine gun in the D @-@ Day landing on Omaha Beach , and later , as staff sergeant , was awarded a Bronze Star . Before the invasion , he had been able to study at the Art College of Western England in Bristol , and later at the École des Beaux @-@ Arts in Reims . While on leave , he visited Picasso 's studio in Paris , and it was Picasso and Louis Aragon who told Koppelman that the war in Europe was over . Letters describing his wartime experience are in the Chaim and Dorothy Koppelman papers at the Smithsonian Archives of American Art . 
 Upon returning to New York , Koppelman continued his study of Aesthetic Realism , and under the G.I. Bill , he studied at the Amédée Ozenfant School and became Ozenfant 's assistant . While he continued to exhibit sculpture and drawings , he also began printmaking , a medium which , he said , combines the carving quality of sculpture with the subtleties of light and shade in drawing and painting . 
 = = Influence in the art community = = 
 In the early 1950s Koppelman was part of the Stanley William Hayter Atelier 17 in New York . Later he worked at the Printmaking Workshop founded by Robert Blackburn and Will Barnet . Blackburn credited Koppelman with saving the workshop when it faced financial difficulties in 1956 , by transforming it into a seven @-@ member artists cooperative with annual dues to keep its doors open . 
 Blackburn , Chaim and Dorothy Koppelman , and Leo Katz – the head of Atelier 17 after Hayter – were among the artists who attended Beauty Conferences and Art Inquiries conducted by Eli Siegel , classes in which he discussed current work of contemporary artists with the artists present and participating . " The depth of the discussions that took place , " Koppelman later wrote , " encouraged the artists to understand more deeply what their work was about , and what their intention was " . 
 In 1955 , the Terrain Gallery opened with Dorothy Koppelman as founding director . She and Chaim Koppelman , as print curator , were responsible for major print exhibitions which included the work of Roy Lichtenstein , Claes Oldenburg , Alex Katz , Ad Reinhardt , Fay <unk> , John von <unk> , Leonard Baskin , Robert Conover , Will Barnet , Harold Krisel , Vincent Longo and others . The motto of the Terrain was Siegel 's statement : " In reality opposites are one ; art shows this . " The gallery held exhibitions of contemporary art , with works frequently accompanied by the artists ' comments on Siegel 's fifteen questions , Is Beauty the Making One of Opposites ? , published by the Terrain and reprinted in The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism . After one @-@ person shows at the Terrain , both Chaim and Dorothy Koppelman had work included in the 1962 exhibition " Recent Painting USA : The Figure " at the Museum of Modern Art . 
 Koppelman opened his own studio and graphic workshop in 1964 at 498 Broome Street , pioneering the SoHo artists ' community . The Broome Street Workshop remained open more than forty years , and was used and cared for by various artists , including Michael <unk> , Sally Brody , Carl Shishido , Reynolds <unk> , and others . 
 In 1967 the Terrain Gallery held an exhibition to benefit napalm @-@ burned and crippled Vietnamese children . Titled All Art Is for Life and Against the War in Vietnam , it included the work of 105 painters , sculptors , printmakers , and photographers . " Vietnam " , a Koppelman aquatint originally in the Terrain exhibit , is included in The Indignant Eye : The Artist as Social Critic in Prints and Drawings from the Fifteenth Century to Picasso , by Ralph E. <unk> , which quotes Koppelman about his artistic intention : " I wanted a sense of a mother 's dignity in the midst of tragedy . " 
 " Our Injustice , Vietnam " , an embossed print with metallic paint on paper , described as a " stark political statement " in The New York Times , is in the collections of the Whitney Museum of American Art and the Brooklyn Museum . 
 Koppelman was commissioned in 1968 to interview Roy Lichtenstein , Richard <unk> , and Clayton Pond on the relevance of the Siegel Theory of Opposites to their work . Recordings of these interviews are part of the Smithsonian Archives of American Art . The following year , essays by Dorothy and Chaim Koppelman appeared in the book , Aesthetic Realism : We Have Been There – Six Artists on the Siegel Theory of Opposites ( New York : Definition Press , 1969 ) . 
 After having tested his aesthetic concepts in literally thousands of works of different periods , in different styles , in different media , for more than twenty years , I say that Eli Siegel 's Theory of Opposites is the key to what is good or beautiful in art . I have seen that the greater the work of art , the richer , more surprising and subtle the play and fusion of the opposing qualities in it . In a bad work of art , the opposites are present , but either they fight too much , or they are limply there ... Contempt is the greatest enemy of art ... Contempt , according to Aesthetic Realism , is the difference between what a thing deserves and what we give it ... Beauty can only arise from a mind that is just , wants to see things exactly and give them all the meaning they deserve . You can 't switch from contempt outside to respect in the studio , and get away with it . 
 = = Critical reception and awards = = 
 Koppelman 's prints were compared to William Blake and Francisco Goya . ARTnews wrote of his " superb use of allegory . " Critics praised his work at the Terrain Gallery , the Kennedy Gallery , the <unk> Gallery , the Brooklyn Museum , the National Academy of Design , and the National Gallery in Washington , D.C. " Koppelman 's concern is man , good and evil ... He is a superb technician whose work has grandeur and emotional impact , " wrote Bennett Schiff . " Chaim Koppelman brings a totally new concept and technique to the field of graphic art , " wrote critic and gallery director Sylvan Cole , Jr . " Siegel 's Theory of Opposites has had a profound effect upon his work " . Una Johnson , Curator Emeritus of Prints and Drawings at the Brooklyn Museum said , " He has harnessed his skills and his unblinking imagery to the troubled , often controversial problems of our times . " Fellow artist Will Barnet said , " He was brilliant , both in printmaking and painting . His work has a sense of darkness and light that is unique ... There was this profundity in him , and this sense of humanity . And it was developed through Aesthetic Realism " . 
 Koppelman received the SAGA Markel Prize in 1956 , and Tiffany Grants in 1967 and 1969 . He represented the United States in the <unk> II exhibition , Kassel , West Germany in 1969 . In the SAGA annual exhibition of 1967 , Koppelman 's print " Exodus " was awarded the Vera List Prize . The following year , his work was shown and discussed on Channel 31 , WNYC @-@ TV . In 1976 , he won a New York State CAPS ( Creative Artists Public Service ) Grant for a suite of lithographs titled <unk> and Clash in Couples and Domestic Life . In 1998 , his charcoal drawing " The Dark Angels " won the Gladys Emerson Cook Award for general excellence from the National Academy . In 1992 Koppelman , Blackburn , and Barnet received a New York Artists Equity Award for their dedicated service to the printmaking community . Legends of the Printmaking Workshop , a 2011 exhibition at the LaGrange Museum in Georgia , featured prints of all three artists and Tom <unk> , selected by , and now part of , the collection of Wesley Cochran . , 
 = = Teaching , writing , and later work = = 
 In 1959 , Koppelman began the Printmaking Department at the School of Visual Arts , where he taught until 2007 . He also taught at the National Academy , New York University , SUNY New Paltz , the Rhodes Preparatory School , and the 92nd Street Y. In 1973 , he became a consultant on the faculty of the not @-@ for @-@ profit Aesthetic Realism Foundation . As part of the trio , The <unk> Art , he gave consultations to artists and others , teaching that art answers the deepest question in life : how to be fully oneself by being fair to the outside world . He taught The Art of Drawing : Surface and Depth . He studied Aesthetic Realism with Eli Siegel until 1978 , and then in professional classes with the Chairman of Education , Ellen Reiss . 
 His scholarly writing as an Aesthetic Realism consultant showing the relation of art and life includes considerations of the lives and works of sculptors Augustus Saint @-@ Gaudens and Jacques Lipchitz ; painters René Magritte , Giorgio de Chirico , Henri Matisse , Rembrandt , Fernand Léger , Henri de Toulouse @-@ Lautrec , Masaccio ; and many American printmakers . He is the author of The Art of the Print , essays on works of Picasso , Daumier , Munch , Hogarth , and Duane Hanson . His drawings illustrate Siegel 's book , Damned Welcome : Aesthetic Realism Maxims ( New York : Definition Press , 1972 , 2011 ) . 
 Although known mostly for his work in black and white , Koppelman 's painterly interest in color took a new form in the 1970s , when he began using color in his prints . After 1980 , he worked increasingly in pastel and watercolor . 
 = = Collections and exhibitions = = 
 Koppelman 's work appears in major print collections , including the Museum of Modern Art , the Metropolitan , Whitney , Brooklyn and Guggenheim Museums ; Peabody Essex Museum , Yale University Art Gallery , the National Gallery , Pennell Collection @-@ Library of Congress , the Minneapolis Institute of Art , Los Angeles County Museum , the Walker Art Center , the Victoria and Albert Museum in London , the Fine Arts Museum in Anchorage , and the Museum of Fine Arts in Caracas . Both Chaim and Dorothy Koppelman kept " object books " begun in 1949 , containing sketches of ordinary objects along with , at the suggestion of Eli Siegel , three descriptive sentences about each object . These sketches and notes continued to the year 2000 , and some volumes are among the Chaim and Dorothy Koppelman papers in the Archives of American Art collection of the Smithsonian Institution . 
 In 2000 , a retrospective exhibition of Koppelman 's works on paper was held at the Beatrice Conde gallery . Chaim Koppelman died on December 6 , 2009 of natural causes at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan , New York City . A memorial exhibition spanning seven decades of his work was held at the Terrain Gallery in 2010 . 
 = = Museo Napoleonico exhibit = = 
 Throughout Koppelman 's long career , the image of Napoleon is recurrent , and a retrospective exhibition of over eighty works and studies dealing with Napoleon was held at the Museo Napoleonico in Rome ( 11 October 2011 – 6 May 2012 ) . Titled Napoleon Entering New York : Chaim Koppelman and the Emperor , Works 1957 – 2007 , it included paintings , pastels , drawings , collage , watercolors , intaglio etchings , linocuts , and many of the artist 's notes on paper . The exhibition also included selections from a lecture Siegel gave in 1951 , Napoleon Bonaparte : or , Orderly Energy , which Koppelman had attended and which he credited with inspiring much of the work displayed . 
 In his review , " Chaim Koppelman 's Napoleon Entering Brighton Beach , Coney Island " , artist Richard Sloat , past president of SAGA , wrote : " In his art , Chaim Koppelman was a maker of stories about our inner self . ... For Napoleon to be leading his army in retreat down the boardwalk of Coney Island is a bit heroic , a bit tragic , a bit funny , a bit absurd , but also glorious . Is this not a wonderful metaphor of our living this life ? " 
 In reviewing this exhibition , the Italian daily newspaper , Corriere della Sera described Koppelman as " one of the greatest American printmakers " . 
 = = Books and essays = = 
 Koppelman , Chaim ( 1969 ) . This Is the Way I See Aesthetic Realism . New York : Terrain Gallery & Definition Press . 
 Koppelman , Chaim . " I Believe This About Art " . In Kranz , Sheldon . Aesthetic Realism : We Have Been There – Six Artists on the Siegel Theory of Opposites . New York : Definition Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 11 @-@ 5 . 
 Koppelman , Chaim ( 2004 ) . Four Essays on the Art of the Print . New York : Orange Angle Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 @-@ 7 . 
 Koppelman , Chaim ( 24 July 2003 ) . " The Sculpture of Augustus St. Gaudens : Its Meaning for Our Lives " . The Southampton Press . ISSN <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 = Wannsee Conference = 
 The Wannsee Conference ( German : <unk> ) was a meeting of senior officials of Nazi Germany , held in the Berlin suburb of Wannsee on 20 January 1942 during World War II . The purpose of the conference was to ensure the cooperation of administrative leaders of various departments in the implementation of the final solution to the Jewish question . The conference , called by Chief of the Reich Main Security Office ( RSHA ) Reinhard Heydrich , was attended by representatives from several government ministries , including state secretaries from the Foreign Office , the justice , interior , and state ministries , and representatives from the Schutzstaffel ( SS ) . 
 In the course of the meeting , Heydrich outlined the proposal of final extermination of European Jews in German @-@ occupied Europe under the pretext of resettlement . The plan called for removing them from their home environment and deporting them by train to extermination camps in the General Government territory of occupied Poland , where they would be murdered out of sight primarily by gassing . 
 Soon after the invasion of Poland in September 1939 , the unprecedented persecution of European Jewry was introduced , but the indiscriminate killings of men , women and children began in June 1941 after the onset of Operation Barbarossa against the Soviets . On 31 July 1941 Hermann Göring gave written authorization to Heydrich to prepare and submit a plan for a " total solution of the Jewish question " in territories under German control and to coordinate the participation of all involved government organisations . At Wannsee , Heydrich emphasised that once the mass deportation strategy was complete , the exterminations would become an internal matter of the SS . A secondary goal was to arrive at a definition of who was formally Jewish and thus determine the scope of the genocide . 
 One copy of the Protocol with circulated minutes of the meeting survived the war . It was found by the Allies in March 1947 among files that had been seized from the German Foreign Office . It was used as evidence in the Subsequent Nuremberg Trials . The Wannsee House , site of the conference , is now a Holocaust memorial . 
 = = Background = = 
 Legalized discrimination against Jews in Germany began immediately after the Nazi seizure of power in January 1933 . Violence and economic pressure were used by the Nazi regime to encourage Jews to voluntarily leave the country . The ideology of Nazism brought together elements of antisemitism , racial hygiene , and eugenics , and combined them with pan @-@ Germanism and territorial expansionism with the goal of obtaining more Lebensraum ( living space ) for the Germanic people . Nazi Germany attempted to obtain this new territory by attacking Poland and the Soviet Union , intending to deport or exterminate the Jews and Slavs living there , who were viewed as being inferior to the Aryan master race . 
 Discrimination against Jews , longstanding but extralegal throughout much of Europe at the time , was codified in Germany immediately after the Nazi seizure of power on 30 January 1933 . The Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service , passed on 7 April of that year , excluded most Jews from the legal profession and the civil service . Similar legislation soon deprived Jewish members of other professions of the right to practise . Violence and economic pressure were used by the regime to force Jews to leave the country . Jewish businesses were denied access to markets , forbidden to advertise in newspapers , and deprived of access to government contracts . Citizens were harassed and subjected to violent attacks and boycotts of their businesses . 
 In September 1935 the Nuremberg Laws were enacted . These laws prohibited marriages between Jews and people of Germanic extraction , extramarital relations between Jews and Germans , and the employment of German women under the age of 45 as domestic servants in Jewish households . The Reich Citizenship Law stated that only those of German or related blood were defined as citizens . Thus Jews and other minority groups were stripped of their German citizenship . A supplementary decree issued in November defined as Jewish anyone with three Jewish grandparents , or two grandparents if the Jewish faith was followed . By the start of World War II in 1939 , around 250 @,@ 000 of Germany 's 437 @,@ 000 Jews emigrated to the United States , Palestine , Great Britain , and other countries . 
 After the invasion of Poland in September 1939 , Hitler ordered that the Polish leadership and intelligentsia should be destroyed . The Sonderfahndungsbuch Polen ( Special Prosecution Book Poland ) — lists of people to be killed — had been drawn up by the SS as early as May 1939 . The Einsatzgruppen ( special task forces ) performed these murders with the support of the Volksdeutscher Selbstschutz ( Germanic Self @-@ Protection Group ) , a paramilitary group consisting of ethnic Germans living in Poland . Members of the SS , the Wehrmacht ( German Armed Forces ) , and the Ordnungspolizei ( Order Police ; Orpo ) also shot civilians during the Polish campaign . Approximately 65 @,@ 000 civilians were killed by the end of 1939 . In addition to leaders of Polish society , they killed Jews , prostitutes , Romani people , and the mentally ill . 
 On 31 July 1941 Hermann Göring gave written authorization to SS @-@ Obergruppenführer ( Senior Group Leader ) Reinhard Heydrich , Chief of the Reich Main Security Office ( RSHA ) , to prepare and submit a plan for a " total solution of the Jewish question " in territories under German control and to coordinate the participation of all involved government organisations . The resulting Generalplan Ost ( General Plan for the East ) called for deporting the population of occupied Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union to Siberia , for use as slave labour or to be murdered . The minutes of the Wannsee Conference estimated the Jewish population of the Soviet Union to be five million , with another three million in Ukraine . 
 In addition to eliminating Jews , the Nazis also planned to reduce the population of the conquered territories by 30 million people through starvation in an action called the Hunger Plan . Food supplies would be diverted to the German army and German civilians . Cities would be razed and the land allowed to return to forest or resettled by German colonists . The objective of the Hunger Plan was to inflict deliberate mass starvation on the Slavic civilian populations under German occupation by directing all food supplies to the German home population and the Wehrmacht on the Eastern Front . According to the historian Timothy Snyder , " 4 @.@ 2 million Soviet citizens ( largely Russians , Belarusians , and Ukrainians ) were starved " by the Nazis ( and the Nazi @-@ controlled Wehrmacht ) in 1941 – 1944 as a result of Backe 's plan . 
 <unk> were poor in Germany in 1940 and 1941 and food supplies were short , as large numbers of forced labourers had been brought into the country to work in the armaments industry . If these workers — as well as the German people — were to be adequately fed , there must be a sharp reduction in the number of " useless mouths " , of whom the millions of Jews under German rule were , in the light of Nazi ideology , the most obvious example . 
 At the time of the Wannsee Conference , the killing of Jews in the Soviet Union had already been underway for some months . Right from the start of Operation Barbarossa — the invasion of the Soviet Union — Einsatzgruppen were assigned to follow the army into the conquered areas and round up and kill Jews . In a letter dated 2 July 1941 Heydrich communicated to his SS and Police Leaders that the Einsatzgruppen were to execute Comintern officials , ranking members of the Communist Party , extremist and radical Communist Party members , people 's commissars , and Jews in party and government posts . Open @-@ ended instructions were given to execute " other radical elements ( saboteurs , propagandists , snipers , assassins , agitators , etc . ) . " He instructed that any pogroms spontaneously initiated by the occupants of the conquered territories were to be quietly encouraged . On 8 July , he announced that all Jews were to be regarded as partisans , and gave the order for all male Jews between the ages of 15 and 45 to be shot . By August the net had been widened to include women , children , and the elderly — the entire Jewish population . By the time planning was underway for the Wannsee Conference , hundreds of thousands of Polish , Serbian , and Russian Jews had already been killed . The initial plan was to implement Generalplan Ost after the conquest of the Soviet Union . European Jews would be deported to occupied parts of Russia , where they would be worked to death in road @-@ building projects . 
 = = Planning the conference = = 
 On 29 November 1941 , Heydrich sent invitations for a ministerial conference to be held on 9 December at the offices of Interpol at 16 Am <unk> Wannsee . He changed the venue on 4 December to the eventual location of the meeting . He enclosed a copy of a letter from Göring dated 31 July that authorised him to plan a Final Solution to the Jewish question . The ministries to be represented were Interior , Justice , the Four @-@ year plan , Propaganda , and the Reich Ministry for the Occupied Eastern Territories . 
 Between the date the invitations to the conference went out ( 29 November ) and the date of the cancelled first meeting ( 9 December ) , the situation changed . On 5 December , the Soviet Army began a counter @-@ offensive in front of Moscow , ending the prospect of a rapid conquest of the Soviet Union . On 7 December , the Japanese attacked the United States at Pearl Harbor , causing the U.S. to declare war on Japan the next day . The Reich government declared war on the U.S. on 11 December . Some invitees were involved in these preparations , so Heydrich postponed his meeting . Somewhere around this time , Hitler resolved that the Jews of Europe were to be exterminated immediately , rather than after the war , which now had no end in sight . At the Reich Chancellery meeting of 12 December 1941 he met with top party officials and made his intentions plain . The war was still ongoing , and since transporting masses of people into a combat zone was impossible , Heydrich decided that the Jews currently living in the General Government ( the German @-@ occupied area of Poland ) would be killed in extermination camps set up in occupied areas of Poland , as would Jews from the rest of Europe . 
 On 8 January 1942 , Heydrich sent new invitations to a meeting to be held on 20 January . The venue for the rescheduled conference was a villa at 56 – 58 Am <unk> Wannsee , overlooking the Großer Wannsee . The villa had been purchased from Friedrich <unk> in 1940 by the Sicherheitsdienst ( Security Force ; SD ) for use as a conference centre and guest house . 
 = = Attendees = = 
 Heydrich invited representatives from several government ministries , including state secretaries from the Foreign Office , the justice , interior , and state ministries , and representatives from the SS . The process of disseminating information about the fate of the Jews was already well underway by the time the meeting was held . Of the 15 who attended , 8 held academic doctorates . 
 = = Proceedings = = 
 In preparation for the conference , Eichmann drafted a list of the numbers of Jews in the various European countries . Countries were listed in two groups , " A " and " B " . " A " countries were those under direct Reich control or occupation ( or partially occupied and quiescent , in the case of Vichy France ) ; " B " countries were allied or client states , neutral , or at war with Germany . The numbers reflect actions already completed by Nazi forces ; for example , Estonia is listed as Judenfrei ( free of Jews ) , since the 4 @,@ 500 Jews who remained in Estonia after the German occupation had been exterminated by the end of 1941 . Occupied Poland was not on the list because by 1939 the country was split three ways between Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany in the west , the territories of Poland annexed by the Soviet Union in the east , and the General Government , where many Polish and Jewish expellees had already been resettled . 
 Heydrich opened the conference with an account of the anti @-@ Jewish measures taken in Germany since the Nazi seizure of power in 1933 . He said that between 1933 and October 1941 , 537 @,@ 000 German , Austrian , and Czech Jews had emigrated . This information was taken from a briefing paper prepared for him the previous week by Eichmann . 
 Heydrich reported that there were approximately eleven million Jews in the whole of Europe , of whom half were in countries not under German control . He explained that since further Jewish emigration had been prohibited by Himmler , a new solution would take its place : " evacuating " Jews to the east . This would be a temporary solution , a step towards the final solution of the Jewish question . 
 Under proper guidance , in the course of the final solution the Jews are to be allocated for appropriate labor in the East . Able @-@ bodied Jews , separated according to sex , will be taken in large work columns to these areas for work on roads , in the course of which action doubtless a large portion will be eliminated by natural causes . The possible final remnant will , since it will undoubtedly consist of the most resistant portion , have to be treated accordingly , because it is the product of natural selection and would , if released , act as the seed of a new Jewish revival . 
 German historian Peter Longerich notes that vague orders couched in terminology that had a specific meaning for members of the regime were common , especially when people were being ordered to carry out criminal activities . Leaders were given briefings about the need to be " severe " and " firm " ; all Jews were to be viewed as potential enemies that had to be dealt with ruthlessly . The wording of the Wannsee Protocol — the distributed minutes of the meeting — made it clear to participants that evacuation east was a euphemism for death . 
 Heydrich went on to say that in the course of the " practical execution of the final solution " , Europe would be " combed through from west to east " but that Germany , Austria , and the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia would have priority " due to the housing problem and additional social and political necessities " . This was a reference to increasing pressure from the Gauleiters ( regional Nazi Party leaders ) in Germany for the Jews to be removed from their areas to allow accommodation for Germans made homeless by Allied bombing , as well as to make space for laborers being imported from occupied countries . The " evacuated " Jews , he said , would first be sent to " transit ghettos " in the General Government , from which they would be transported eastward . Heydrich said that to avoid legal and political difficulties , it was important to define who was a Jew for the purposes of " evacuation " . He outlined categories of people who would not be killed . Jews over 65 years old , and Jewish World War I veterans who had been severely wounded or who had won the Iron Cross , might be sent to Theresienstadt concentration camp instead of being killed . " With this expedient solution , " he said , " in one fell swoop many interventions will be prevented . " 
 The situation of people who were half or quarter Jews , and of Jews who were married to non @-@ Jews , was more complex . Under the Nuremberg Laws of 1935 , their status had been left deliberately ambiguous . Heydrich announced that Mischlings ( a Nazi pejorative for mixed @-@ race persons ) of the first degree ( persons with two Jewish grandparents ) would be treated as Jews . This would not apply if they were married to a non @-@ Jew and had children by that marriage . It would also not apply if they had been granted written exemption by " the highest offices of the Party and State . " Such persons would be sterilised or deported if they refused sterilisation . " Mischlings of the second degree " ( persons with one Jewish grandparent ) would be treated as Germans unless they were married to Jews or Mischlings of the first degree , had a " racially especially undesirable appearance that marks him outwardly as a Jew " , or had a " political record that shows that he feels and behaves like a Jew " . Persons in these latter categories would be killed even if married to non @-@ Jews . In the case of mixed marriages , Heydrich recommended that each case should be evaluated individually and the impact on any German relatives assessed . If such a marriage had produced children who were being raised as Germans , the Jewish partner would not be killed . If they were being raised as Jews , they might be killed or sent to an old @-@ age ghetto . These exemptions applied only to German and Austrian Jews , and were not always observed even for them . In most of the occupied countries , Jews were rounded up and killed en masse , and anyone who lived in or identified with the Jewish community in any given place was regarded as a Jew . 
 Heydrich commented , " In occupied and unoccupied France , the registration of Jews for evacuation will in all probability proceed without great difficulty " , but in the end the great majority of French @-@ born Jews survived . More difficulty was anticipated with Germany 's allies Romania and Hungary . " In Romania the government has [ now ] appointed a commissioner for Jewish affairs " , Heydrich said . In fact the deportation of Romanian Jews was slow and inefficient despite a high degree of popular antisemitism . " In order to settle the question in Hungary , " Heydrich said , " it will soon be necessary to force an adviser for Jewish questions onto the Hungarian government " . The Hungarian regime of Miklós Horthy continued to resist German interference in its Jewish policy until the spring of 1944 , when the Wehrmacht invaded Hungary . Very soon , 600 @,@ 000 Jews of Hungary ( and parts of Czechoslovakia , Romania , and Yugoslavia occupied by Hungary ) were sent to their deaths by Eichmann , with the collaboration of Hungarian authorities . 
 Heydrich spoke for nearly an hour . Then followed about thirty minutes of questions and comments , followed by some less formal conversation . Otto Hofmann ( head of the SS Race and Settlement Main Office ( RuSHA ) ) and Wilhelm <unk> ( State Secretary of the Reich Interior Ministry ) pointed out the legalistic and administrative difficulties over mixed marriages , and suggested compulsory dissolution of mixed marriages or the wider use of sterilisation as a simpler alternative . Erich Neumann from the Four Year Plan argued for the exemption of Jews who were working in industries vital to the war effort and for whom no replacements were available . Heydrich assured him that this was already the policy ; such Jews would not be killed . Josef Bühler , State Secretary of the General Government , stated his support for the plan and his hope that the killings would commence as soon as possible . Towards the end of the meeting cognac was served , and after that the conversation became less restrained . " The gentlemen were standing together , or sitting together " , Eichmann said , " and were discussing the subject quite bluntly , quite differently from the language which I had to use later in the record . During the conversation they minced no words about it at all ... they spoke about methods of killing , about liquidation , about extermination " . Eichmann recorded that Heydrich was pleased with the course of the meeting . He had expected a lot of resistance , Eichmann recalled , but instead he had found " an atmosphere not only of agreement on the part of the participants , but more than that , one could feel an agreement which had assumed a form which had not been expected " . 
 = = Wannsee Protocol = = 
 At the conclusion of the meeting Heydrich gave Eichmann firm instructions about what was to appear in the minutes . They were not to be verbatim : Eichmann ensured that nothing too explicit appeared in them . He said at his trial : " How shall I put it — certain over @-@ plain talk and jargon expressions had to be rendered into office language by me " . Eichmann condensed his records into a document outlining the purpose of the meeting and the intentions of the regime moving forward . He stated at his trial that it was personally edited by Heydrich , and thus reflected the message he intended the participants to take away from the meeting . Copies of the minutes ( known from the German word for " minutes " as the " Wannsee Protocol " ) were sent by Eichmann to all the participants after the meeting . Most of these copies were destroyed at the end of the war as participants and other officials sought to cover their tracks . It was not until 1947 that Luther 's copy ( number 16 out of 30 copies prepared ) was found by Robert Kempner , a U.S. prosecutor in the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg , in files that had been seized from the German Foreign Office . 
