 = = Interpretation = = 
 The Wannsee Conference lasted only about ninety minutes . The enormous importance which has been attached to the conference by postwar writers was not evident to most of its participants at the time . Heydrich did not call the meeting to make fundamental new decisions on the Jewish question . Massive killings of Jews in the conquered territories in the Soviet Union and Poland were ongoing and a new extermination camp was already under construction at Belzec at the time of the conference ; other extermination camps were in the planning stages . The decision to exterminate the Jews had already been made , and Heydrich , as Himmler 's emissary , held the meeting to ensure the cooperation of the various departments in conducting the deportations . According to Longerich , a primary goal of the meeting was to emphasise that once the deportations had been completed , the implementation of the Final Solution became an internal matter of the SS , totally outside the purview of any other agency . A secondary goal was to determine the scope of the deportations and arrive at definitions of who was Jewish , who was Mischling , and who ( if anybody ) should be spared . " The representatives of the ministerial bureaucracy had made it plain that they had no concerns about the principle of deportation per se . This was indeed the crucial result of the meeting and the main reason why Heydrich had detailed minutes prepared and widely circulated " , said Longerich . Their presence at the meeting also ensured that all those present were accomplices and accessories to the murders that were about to be undertaken . 
 Eichmann 's biographer David <unk> agrees with Longerich 's interpretation ; he notes that Heydrich 's main purpose was to impose his own authority on the various ministries and agencies involved in Jewish policy matters , and to avoid any repetition of the disputes that had arisen earlier in the annihilation campaign . " The simplest , most decisive way that Heydrich could ensure the smooth flow of deportations " , he writes , " was by asserting his total control over the fate of the Jews in the Reich and the east , and [ by ] cow [ ing ] other interested parties into toeing the line of the RSHA " . 
 = = Wannsee House Holocaust Memorial = = 
 In 1965 , historian Joseph Wulf proposed that the Wannsee House should be made into a Holocaust memorial and document centre , but the West German government was not interested at that time . The building was in use as a school , and funding was not available . Despondent at the failure of the project and the West German government 's failure to pursue and convict Nazi war criminals , Wulf committed suicide in 1974 . 
 = = House of the Wannsee Conference = = 
 On 20 January 1992 , on the fiftieth anniversary of the conference , the site was finally opened as a Holocaust memorial and museum known as the Haus der Wannsee @-@ <unk> ( House of the Wannsee Conference ) . The museum also hosts permanent exhibits of texts and photographs that document events of the Holocaust and its planning . The Joseph Wulf Bibliothek / <unk> on the second floor houses a large collection of books on the Nazi era , plus other materials such as microfilms and original Nazi documents . 
 = Kohlberg Kravis Roberts = 
 KKR & Co . L.P. ( formerly known as Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co . ) is an American multinational private equity firm , specializing in leveraged buyouts , headquartered in New York City . The firm sponsors and manages private equity investment funds . A pioneer in the leveraged buyout industry , the firm has completed over $ 400 billion of private equity transactions since its inception . 
 The firm was founded in 1976 by Jerome Kohlberg , Jr . , and cousins Henry Kravis and George R. Roberts , all of whom had previously worked together at Bear Stearns , where they completed some of the earliest leveraged buyout transactions . Since its founding , KKR has completed a number of landmark transactions including the 1989 leveraged buyout of RJR Nabisco , which was the largest buyout in history to that point , as well as the 2007 buyout of TXU , which is currently the largest buyout completed to date . KKR has completed investments in over 160 companies since 1977 , completing at least one investment in every year except in 1982 and in 1990 . 
 KKR has 13 additional offices in the United States , Europe and Asia . The firm is currently located in the Solow Building ( 9 W. 57th Street ) , but recently announced its intentions to occupy a newly constructed 30 Hudson Yards . 
 In October 2009 , KKR listed shares in the company through KKR & Co . , an affiliate that holds 30 % of the firm 's ownership equity , with the remainder held by the firm 's partners . In March 2010 , KKR filed to list its shares on the New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) , with trading commencing four months later , on July 15 , 2010 . 
 = = The Firm KKR = = 
 KKR is operated by its managing partners Henry Kravis and George R. Roberts and a team of approximately 140 investment professionals and 400 total employees , organized into industry @-@ focused groups . KKR is headquartered in the Solow Building at 9 West 57th Street , Manhattan , New York , with U.S. offices in Menlo Park , San Francisco , Houston , and Washington , D.C. , and offices abroad in London , Paris , Hong Kong , Tokyo , Beijing , Mumbai , Dubai , Seoul , São Paulo and Sydney . 
 KKR invests primarily through leveraged buyouts as well as growth capital investments ( including " PIPE " investments in public companies ) . It has traditionally specialized in private equity investments , focusing on specific industry sectors where the firm has created nine dedicated investment groups . The industries in which KKR has developed a specialization include : 
 Chemicals 
 Consumer products 
 Energy & natural resources 
 Financial services 
 Health care 
 Industrial 
 Media and communications 
 Retail 
 Technology 
 The professionals in each of KKR 's industry @-@ focused groups are expected to have developed a proficiency in their respective industries . The firm has traditionally had strong ties with its investors . 
 = = Investment funds and other affiliates = = 
 = = = Private equity funds = = = 
 KKR has historically relied primarily on private equity funds , pools of committed capital that are raised from a broad array of institutional investors ( e.g. , pension funds , insurance companies , investment banks , commercial banks , endowments , fund of funds , high @-@ net @-@ worth individuals , sovereign wealth funds ) . As of March 31 , 2014 , KKR had completed fund @-@ raising for approximately 23 traditional investment funds in the US , Europe and Asia with total committed capital of approximately US $ 80 billion : 
 Source : SEC Filings 
 = = = KKR Financial = = = 
 KKR Financial ( NYSE : KFN ) is a real estate investment trust ( REIT ) and specialty finance company that invests in residential and commercial mortgage loans and mortgage @-@ backed securities as well as corporate loans and debt securities , asset @-@ backed securities and equity securities . KFN was founded in 2004 raising $ 795 million in a private placement and raised $ 849 million in a June 2005 initial public offering , increasing the size of the offering from an original $ 600 million target . KKR had initially considered structuring KFN as a business development company like Apollo Management 's Apollo Investment Corporation but chose to pursue the REIT structure to capitalize on the strength in REIT valuations at the time . 
 KFN was an early casualty of the subprime mortgage crisis and in September 2007 , Henry Kravis and George Roberts injected $ 270 million into the company . On February 20 , 2008 , KFN was once again forced to delay the repayment of billions of dollars of commercial paper , and began a new round of talks with creditors . In April , KFN sold a controlling interest in a real estate subsidiary to an investment firm to raise cash and entered an agreement with the <unk> of certain secured commercial paper issued by two asset @-@ backed entities . Following the transaction , KFN converted from a REIT to a LLC . 
 = = = KKR Private Equity Investors = = = 
 KKR Private Equity Investors ( Euronext : KPE ) is a publicly traded private equity fund that invests as a fund of funds in KKR private equity funds . KPE also co @-@ invests in transactions alongside KKR 's private equity funds . KPE was founded in 2006 . In May 2006 , KKR raised $ 5 billion in an initial public offering for a KPE to serve as a new permanent investment vehicle listing it on the Euronext exchange in Amsterdam . KKR raised three times more than it expected , as many of the investors in KPE were hedge funds seeking exposure to private equity but could not make long term commitments to private equity funds . As private equity had been booming in preceding years , investing in a KKR fund was attractive to investors . 
 However , KPE 's first @-@ day performance was lackluster , trading down 1 @.@ 7 % and trading volume was limited . Initially , a handful of other private equity firms and hedge funds had planned to follow KKR 's lead but shelved those plans when KPE 's performance continued to falter after its IPO . KPE 's stock declined from an IPO price of € 25 per share to € 18 @.@ 16 ( a 27 % decline ) at the end of 2007 and a low of € 11 @.@ 45 ( a 54 @.@ 2 % decline ) per share in Q1 2008 . 
 KPE disclosed in May 2008 that it had completed approximately $ 300 million of secondary sales of selected limited partnership interests in , and <unk> commitments to , certain KKR @-@ managed funds in order to generate liquidity and repay borrowings . 
 In October 2009 KPE changed its name to KKR & Co . ( Guernsey ) L.P. , which was delisted from Euronext Amsterdam in July 2010 while common units of KKR & Co . L.P. began trading on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “ KKR ” . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding and early history = = = 
 Running the corporate finance department for Bear Stearns in the 1960s and 1970s , Jerome Kohlberg and later with protégés Henry Kravis and George Roberts completed a series of what they described as " bootstrap " investments beginning in 1964 – 65 . They targeted family @-@ owned businesses , many of which had been founded in the years following World War II which by the 1960s and 1970s were facing succession issues . Many of these companies lacked a viable or attractive exit for their founders as they were too small to be taken public and the founders were reluctant to sell out to competitors and so a sale to a financial buyer could prove attractive . 
 Their acquisition of <unk> Exterminating Company in 1964 is among the first significant leveraged buyout transactions . In the following years the three Bear Stearns bankers would complete a series of buyouts including Stern Metals ( 1965 ) , <unk> ( a division of Rockwood International , 1971 ) , Cobblers Industries ( 1971 ) , and Boren Clay ( 1973 ) , as well as Thompson Wire , Eagle Motors and Barrows through their investment in Stern Metals . Despite a number of highly successful investments , the $ 27 million investment in Cobblers ended in bankruptcy . 
 By 1976 , tensions had built up between Bear Stearns and Kohlberg , Kravis and Roberts , which led to the formation of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. in that year . Most notably , Bear Stearns executive Cy Lewis had rejected repeated proposals to form a dedicated investment fund within Bear Stearns and Lewis took exception to the amount of time spent on outside activities . In 1976 , Kravis had been required to serve as interim CEO of a failing direct mail company named <unk> . 
 The new KKR completed its first buyout , that of manufacturer A.J. Industries , in 1977 . KKR raised capital from a small group of investors including the Hillman Company and First Chicago Bank . By 1978 , with the revision of the ERISA regulations , the nascent KKR was successful in raising its first institutional fund with over $ 30 million of investor commitments . In 1981 , KKR expanded its investor base significantly when the Oregon State Treasury 's public pension fund invested in KKR 's acquisition of retailer Fred Meyer , Inc . Oregon State remains an active investor in KKR funds . 
 KKR closed out the 1970s completing the public @-@ to @-@ private buyout of <unk> Industries in 1979 , probably the largest take @-@ private of a public company to that point . As the 1980s began , KKR was among the most prominent practitioner of leveraged buyouts and would prove the most prolific of the private equity investors in the 1980s . Among the firm 's most notable acquisitions during the 1980s buyout boom were the following : 
 = = = Barbarians at the Gate – KKR 's leveraged buyout of RJR Nabisco = = = 
 After the 1987 resignation of Jerome Kohlberg at age 61 ( he later founded his own private equity firm , Kohlberg & Co . ) , Henry Kravis succeeded him as senior partner . Under Kravis and Roberts , the firm was responsible for the 1988 leveraged buyout of RJR Nabisco . RJR Nabisco proved to be not only the largest buyout in history to that time , at $ 25 billion ( $ 31 @.@ 1 billion , including assumed debt ) as well as a high @-@ water mark and sign of the end of the 1980s buyout boom . RJR — Nabisco , which would remain the largest buyout for the next 17 years , was chronicled in Barbarians at the Gate : The Fall of RJR Nabisco , and later made into a television movie starring James Garner . 
 In 1988 , F. Ross Johnson was the President and CEO of RJR Nabisco , formed in 1985 by the merger of Nabisco Brands and R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company , a leading producer of food products ( <unk> Wheat , Oreo cookies , Ritz crackers , Planters peanuts , Life Savers , Del Monte Fruit and Vegetables , and Snickers Chocolate ) as well as Winston , Camel and Salem cigarettes . In October 1988 , Johnson proposed a $ 17 billion ( $ 75 per share ) management buyout of the company with the financial backing of investment bank Shearson Lehman Hutton and its parent company , American Express . 
 Several days later , Kravis , who had originally suggested the idea of the buyout to Johnson , presented a new bid for $ 20 @.@ 3 billion ( $ 90 per share ) financed with an aggressive debt package . KKR had the support of significant equity co @-@ investments from leading pension funds and other institutional investors . Investors included Coca @-@ Cola , Georgia @-@ Pacific and United Technologies corporate pension funds , as well as endowments from MIT , Harvard and the New York State Common Retirement Fund However , KKR faced criticism from existing investors over the firm 's use of hostile tactics in the buyout of RJR . 
 KKR proposed to provide a joint offer with Johnson and Shearson Lehman but was rebuffed and Johnson attempted to stonewall KKR 's access to financial information from RJR . Rival private equity firm , Forstmann Little & Co. was invited into the process by Shearson Lehman but attempted to provide a bid for RJR with a consortium of Goldman Sachs Capital Partners , Procter & Gamble , Ralston Purina and Castle & Cooke . 
 Ultimately the Forstmann consortium came apart and did not provide a final bid for RJR . Many of the major banking players of the day , including Shearson Lehman Hutton , Drexel Burnham Lambert , Morgan Stanley , Goldman Sachs , Salomon Brothers and Merrill Lynch were actively involved in advising and financing the parties . 
 In November 1988 , RJR set guidelines for a final bid submission at the end of the month . The management and Shearson group submitted a final bid of $ 112 , a figure they felt certain would enable them to outflank any response by Kravis and KKR . KKR 's final bid of $ 109 , while a lower dollar figure , was ultimately accepted by the board of directors of RJR Nabisco . KKR 's offer was guaranteed , whereas the management offer lacked a " reset " , meaning that the final share price might have been lower than their stated $ 112 per share . 
 Additionally , many in RJR 's board of directors had grown concerned at recent disclosures of Ross Johnson ' unprecedented golden parachute deal . Time Magazine featured Ross Johnson on the cover of their December 1988 issue along with the headline , " A Game of Greed : This man could pocket $ 100 million from the largest corporate takeover in history . Has the buyout craze gone too far ? " . KKR 's offer was welcomed by the board , and , to some observers , it appeared that their elevation of the reset issue as a deal @-@ breaker in KKR 's favor was little more than an excuse to reject Ross Johnson 's higher payout of $ 112 per share . Johnson received $ 53 million from the buyout . KKR collected a $ 75 million fee in the RJR takeover . At $ 31 @.@ 1 billion of transaction value ( including assumed debt ) , RJR Nabisco was by far the largest leveraged buyout in history . 
 In 2006 and 2007 , a number of leveraged buyout transactions were completed which , for the first time , surpassed the RJR Nabisco leveraged buyout in terms of nominal purchase price . The deal was first surpassed in July 2006 by the $ 33 billion buyout of U.S. hospital operator Hospital Corporation of America , in which KKR participated , though the RJR deal was larger , adjusted for inflation . However , adjusted for inflation , none of the leveraged buyouts of the 2006 – 07 period would surpass RJR Nabisco . The RJR transaction benefited many of the parties involved . Investment bankers and lawyers who advised KKR walked away with over $ 1 billion in fees . Kravis and Roberts attracted an unprecedented amount of publicity that turned the cousins into instant celebrities . Size did not , however , guarantee success as the high purchase price and debt load would burden the performance of the investment , which KKR overcame , raising a new investment fund and continuing to invest throughout the 1990s . 
 = = = Early 1990s : The aftermath of RJR Nabisco = = = 
 The buyout of RJR Nabisco was completed in April 1989 and KKR would spend the early 1990s repaying the RJR 's enormous debt load through a series of asset sales and restructuring transactions . After the RJR Nabisco deal , KKR did not complete a single investment in 1990 , the first and only other year , besides 1982 , with no new investment activity . They would not complete another major leveraged buyout transaction for more than three years , largely because of the shutdown of the high yield bond market and the collapse of Drexel Burnham Lambert which filed for bankruptcy in February 1990 . KKR began to focus primarily on its existing portfolio companies acquired during the buyout boom of the late 1980s . Six of KKR 's portfolio companies completed IPOs in 1991 , including RJR Nabisco and Duracell . 
 As the new decade began , KKR began restructuring RJR . In January 1990 , it completed the sale of RJR 's Del Monte Foods to a group led by Merrill Lynch . KKR had originally identified a group of divisions that it could sell to reduce debt . Over the coming years , RJR would pursue a number of additional restructurings , equity injections and public offerings of stock to provide the company with added financial flexibility . KKR contributed $ 1 @.@ 7 billion of new equity into RJR in July 1990 to complete a restructuring of the company 's balance sheet that appeased unhappy bondholders . KKR 's equity contribution as part of the original leveraged buyout of RJR had been only $ 1 @.@ 5 billion . In mid @-@ December 1990 , RJR announced an exchange offer that would swap debt in RJR for a new public stock in the company , effectively an unusual means of taking RJR public again and simultaneously reducing debt on the company . 
 RJR issued additional stock to the public in March 1991 to further reduce debt , resulting in an upgrade of the credit rating of RJR 's debt from junk to investment grade . KKR began to reduce its ownership in RJR in 1994 , when its stock in RJR was used as part of the consideration for its leveraged buyout of Borden , Inc . , a producer of food and beverage products , consumer products , and industrial products , in an unprecedented and complex transaction . The following year , in 1995 , KKR would divest itself of its final stake in RJR Nabisco when Borden sold a $ 638 million block of stock . 
 While KKR no longer had any ownership of RJR Nabisco by 1995 , its original investment would not be fully realized until KKR exited its last investment in 2004 . After sixteen years of efforts , including contributing new equity , taking RJR public , asset sales and exchanging shares of RJR for the ownership of Borden , Inc . , KKR finally sold the last remnants of its 1989 investment . In July 2004 , KKR agreed to sell its stock in Borden Chemical to Apollo Management for $ 1 @.@ 2 billion . 
 = = = Early 1990s : Investments = = = 
 In the early 1990s , the absence of an active high yield market prompted KKR to change its tactics , avoiding large leveraged buyouts in favor of industry consolidations through what were described as leveraged buildups or <unk> . One of KKR 's largest investments in the 1990s was the leveraged buildup of Primedia in partnership with former executives of Macmillan Publishing , which KKR had failed to acquire in 1988 . KKR created Primedia 's predecessor , K @-@ III Communications , a platform to buy media properties , initially completing the $ 310 million divisional buyout of the book club division of Macmillan along with the assets of <unk> Publishing Corporation in May 1989 . 
 During the early 1990s , K @-@ III continued acquiring publishing assets , including a $ 650 million acquisition from News Corporation in 1991 . K @-@ III went public , however instead of cashing out , KKR continued to make new investments in the company in 1998 , 2000 and 2001 to support acquisition activity . In 2005 , Primedia redeemed KKR 's preferred stock in the company but KKR was estimated to have lost hundreds of millions of dollars on its common stock holdings as the price of the company 's stock collapsed . 
 In 1991 , KKR partnered with Fleet / Norstar Financial Group in the 1991 acquisition of the Bank of New England , from the US Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation . In January 1996 , KKR would exchange its investment for a 7 @.@ 5 % interest in Fleet Bank . KKR completed the 1992 buyout of American Re Corporation from Aetna as well as a 47 % interest in TW Corporation , later known as The <unk> Companies and owner of Denny 's in 1992 . Among the other notable investments KKR completed in the early 1990s included World Color Press ( 1993 – 95 ) , <unk> Corporation ( 1995 ) and Bruno 's ( 1995 ) . 
 = = = 1996 – 1999 = = = 
 By the mid @-@ 1990s , the debt markets were improving and KKR had moved on from the RJR Nabisco buyout . In 1996 , KKR was able to complete the bulk of fundraising for what was then a record $ 6 billion private equity fund , the KKR 1996 Fund . However , KKR was still burdened by the performance of the RJR investment and repeated obituaries in the media . KKR was required by its investors to reduce the fees it charged and to calculate its carried interest based on the total profit of the fund ( i.e. , offsetting losses from failed deals against the profits from successful deals ) . 
 KKR 's activity level would accelerate over the second half of the 1990s making a series of notable investments including Spalding Holdings Corporation and <unk> ( 1996 ) , Newsquest ( 1996 ) , <unk> Learning Centers ( 1997 ) , <unk> Corporation ( 1997 ) , Randalls Food Markets ( 1997 ) , The Boyds Collection ( 1998 ) , <unk> Corporation ( 1998 ) , Willis Group Holdings ( 1998 ) , Smiths Group ( 1999 ) , and <unk> <unk> ( 1999 ) . 
 KKR 's largest investment of the 1990s would be one of its least successful . In January 1998 , KKR and Hicks , Muse , Tate & Furst agreed to the $ 1 @.@ 5 billion buyout of Regal Entertainment Group . KKR and Hicks Muse had initially intended to combine Regal with Act III Cinemas , which KKR had acquired in 1997 for $ 706 million and United Artists Theaters , which Hicks Muse had agreed to acquire for $ 840 million in November 1997 . Shortly after agreeing to the Regal takeover , the deal with United Artists fell apart , destroying the strategy to eliminate costs by building a larger combined company . Two years later , in 2000 , Regal encountered significant financial issues and was forced to file for bankruptcy protection ; the company passed to billionaire investor Philip Anschutz . 
 = = = 2000 – 2005 = = = 
 At the start of the 21st century , the landscape of large leveraged buyout firms was changing . Several large and storied firms , including Hicks Muse Tate & Furst and Forstmann Little & Company were dragged down by heavy losses in the bursting of the telecom bubble . Although , KKR 's track record since RJR Nabisco was mixed , losses on such investments as Regal Entertainment Group , Spalding , <unk> and Primedia ( previously K @-@ III Communications ) were offset by successes in Willis Group , Wise Foods , Inc . , <unk> <unk> and MTU Aero Engines , among others . 
 Additionally , KKR was one of the few firms that was able to complete large leveraged buyout transactions in the years immediately following the collapse of the Internet bubble , including Shoppers Drug Mart and Bell Canada Yellow Pages . KKR was able to realize its investment in Shoppers Drug Mart through a 2002 IPO and subsequent public stock offerings . The directories business would be taken public in 2004 as Yellow Pages Income Fund , a Canadian income trust . 
 In 2004 a consortium comprising KKR , Bain Capital and real estate development company Vornado Realty Trust announced the $ 6 @.@ 6 billion acquisition of Toys " R " Us , the toy retailer . A month earlier , Cerberus Capital Management , made a $ 5 @.@ 5 billion offer for both the toy and baby supplies businesses . The Toys ' R ' Us buyout was one of the largest in several years . Following this transaction , by the end of 2004 and in 2005 , major buyouts were once again becoming common and market observers were stunned by the leverage levels and financing terms obtained by financial sponsors in their buyouts . 
 In 2005 , KKR was one of seven private equity firms involved in the buyout of SunGard in a transaction valued at $ 11 @.@ 3 billion . KKR 's partners in the acquisition were Silver Lake Partners , Bain Capital , Goldman Sachs Capital Partners , Blackstone Group , Providence Equity Partners , and TPG Capital . This represented the largest leveraged buyout completed since the takeover of RJR Nabisco in 1988 . SunGard was the largest buyout of a technology company until the Blackstone @-@ led buyout of Freescale Semiconductor . The SunGard transaction was notable given the number of firms involved in the transaction , the largest club deal completed to that point . The involvement of seven firms in the consortium was criticized by investors in private equity who considered cross @-@ holdings among firms to be generally unattractive . 
 = = = Since 2005 and the Buyout Boom = = = 
 In 2006 , KKR raised a new $ 17 @.@ 6 billion fund the KKR 2006 Fund , with which the firm began executing a series of some of the largest buyouts in history . KKR 's $ 44 billion takeover of Texas @-@ based power utility , TXU , in 2007 , proved to be the largest leveraged buyout of the mid @-@ 2000s buyout boom and the largest buyout completed to date . Among the most notable companies acquired by KKR in 2006 and 2007 were the following : 
 Other non @-@ buyout investments completed by KKR during this period included Legg Mason , Sun Microsystems , <unk> , Longview Power Plant and Seven Network . In October 2006 , KKR acquired a 50 % stake in <unk> , a France @-@ based distributor of flooring products , in a deal valued at about € 1 @.@ 4 billion ( $ 1 @.@ 8 billion ) . On November 20 , 2006 , KKR announced it would form a A $ 4 billion partnership with the Seven Network of Australia . On January 23 , 2007 , KKR announced it would invest $ 700 million through a PIPE investment in Sun Microsystems . In January 2008 , KKR announced it had made a $ 1 @.@ 25 billion PIPE investment in Legg Mason through a convertible preferred stock offering . 
 In addition to its successful buyout transactions , KKR was involved in the failed buyout of Harman International Industries ( NYSE : <unk> ) , an upscale audio equipment maker . On April 26 , 2007 , Harman announced it had entered an agreement to be acquired by KKR and Goldman Sachs . As the financing markets became more adverse in the summer of 2007 , the buyout was on tenuous ground . In September 2007 , KKR and Goldman backed out of the $ 8 billion buyout of Harman . By the end of the day , Harman 's shares had plummeted by more than 24 % upon the news . 
 = = = Initial public offering = = = 
 In 2007 , KKR filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to raise $ 1 @.@ 25 billion by selling an ownership interest in its management company . The filing came less than two weeks after the initial public offering of rival private equity firm Blackstone Group . KKR had previously listed its KPE vehicle in 2006 , but for the first time , KKR would offer investors an ownership interest in the management company itself . The onset of the credit crunch and the shutdown of the IPO market dampened the prospects of obtaining a valuation attractive to KKR . The flotation was repeatedly postponed , and called off by the end of August . 
 The following year , in July 2008 , KKR announced a new plan to list its shares . The plan called for KKR to complete a reverse takeover of its listed affiliate KKR Private Equity Investors in exchange for a 21 % interest in the firm . In November 2008 , KKR announced a delay of this transaction until 2009 . Shares of KPE had declined significantly in the second half of 2008 with the onset of the credit crunch . KKR has announced that it expects to close the transaction in 2009 . In October 2009 , KKR listed shares in KKR & Co. on the Euronext exchange , replacing KPE and anticipates a listing on the New York Stock Exchange in 2010 . The public entity represents a 30 % interest in Kohlberg Kravis Roberts . In October 2010 , KKR acquired about nine members of Goldman Sachs Group proprietary trading team after entertaining offers from investment firms such as Perella Weinberg and Blackrock . With Goldman shutting down its proprietary trading operations , its executives , led by Bob Howard , will help KKR expand beyond leveraged buyouts into areas such as hedge funds . 
 = = = 2010 to present day = = = 
 In January 2014 , KKR acquired Sedgwick Claims Management Services Inc for $ 2 @.@ 4 billion from two private equity companies - Stone Point , and Hellman & Friedman . 
 In June 2014 , KKR announced it was taking a one @-@ third stake in a Spanish energy business of Acciona Energy , at a cost of € 417 million ( $ 567 million ) . The international renewable energy generation business operates renewable assets , largely wind farms , across 14 countries including the United States , Italy and South Africa . 
 In August 2014 , KKR announced it was investing $ 400 million to acquire Fujian <unk> Development , China 's largest chicken farmer , which breeds , processes and supplies frozen and fresh chickens to consumers and corporate clients , such as KFC and McDonald 's , across China . 
 In September 2014 , the firm invested $ 90 million in a lighting and electrics firm Savant Systems . 
 In January 2015 , KKR confirmed its purchase of British rail ticket website <unk> , previously owned by Exponent . The purchase sum is unknown . 
 In October 12 , 2015 , KKR announced that it has entered into definitive agreement with Allianz Capital Partners to acquire their majority stake in Selecta Group , a European vending services operator . 
 = = Notable current and former employees = = 
 Over the years , KKR has seen the departure of many of its original partners , the most notable being original co @-@ founder Jerome Kohlberg . After a leave of absence due to an illness in 1985 , Kohlberg returned to find increasing differences in strategy with his partners Kravis and Roberts . In 1987 , Kohlberg left KKR to found a new private equity firm Kohlberg & Company . Kohlberg & Company returned to the investment style that Kohlberg had originally practiced at Bear Stearns and in KKR 's earlier years , acquiring smaller , middle @-@ market companies . 
 Since 1996 , general partners of KKR have included Henry Kravis , George R. Roberts , Paul <unk> , Robert MacDonnell , Jose <unk> , Michael Michelson , Saul Fox , James Greene , Michael <unk> , Clifton Robbins , Scott Stuart , Perry <unk> and Edward Gilhuly . Among those who left were Saul Fox , Ted Ammon , Ned Gilhuly , Mike <unk> and Scott Stuart who had been instrumental in establishing KKR 's reputation and track record in the 1980s . KKR remains tightly controlled by Kravis and Roberts . The issue of succession has remained an important consideration for KKR 's future as an ongoing institutionalized firm . 
 Saul A. Fox left KKR in 1997 to found Fox Paine & Company , a middle market private equity firm with over $ 1 @.@ 5 billion of capital under management 
 Clifton S. Robbins left KKR to join competitor General Atlantic Partners in 2000 and later founded Blue Harbour Group , a private investment firm based in Greenwich , Connecticut . 
 Edward A. Gilhuly and Scott Stuart left KKR in 2004 to launch <unk> Capital . Prior to this , Gilhuly was the managing partner of KKR 's European operations , based in London ; Stuart managed KKR 's energy and consumer products industry groups . 
 Ted Ammon , started several new ventures including Big Flower Press , which printed newspaper circulars , and Chancery Lane Capital , a boutique private equity firm , before being murdered in his Long Island home October 2001 . The lover of his estranged , now deceased wife , <unk> , was later convicted . 
 Paul Hazen , served as chairman and CEO of Wells Fargo ( 1995 – 2001 ) . Hazen later returned to KKR to serve as chairman of Accel @-@ KKR , a joint venture with Accel Partners and later as chairman of KKR 's publicly listed affiliate , KFN . 
 Clive Hollick , Baron Hollick , CEO of United News and Media ( 1996 – 2005 ) 
 Ken Mehlman joined KKR in 2008 as Global Head of Public Affairs . 
 Scott C. Nuttall ( born 1972 ) , heads KKR 's fastest @-@ growing department , the Global Capital and Asset Management Group , which includes Asset Management , Capital Markets and Client and Partner Group . He joined KKR in November 1996 after leaving the Blackstone Group . His group , the firm 's fastest @-@ growing division , has $ 25 billion under management . With the support of co @-@ founder George Roberts , Nuttall has largely spearheaded the campaign to expand KKR beyond its institutional investors ( legacy and otherwise ) into credit investment , and alternative investments , pointing out that there are billions " in revenues up for grabs " . 
 David Petraeus , selected to serve as chairman of the newly formed KKR Global Institute ( 2013 — present ) 
 Joseph <unk> , Professor at Stanford Law School and youngest SEC Commissioner 
 = = Works about KKR = = 
 = Voyage of the James Caird = 
 The voyage of the James Caird was a small @-@ boat journey from Elephant Island in the South Shetland Islands to South Georgia in the southern Atlantic Ocean , a distance of 800 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 500 km ; 920 mi ) . Undertaken by Sir Ernest Shackleton and five companions , its objective was to obtain rescue for the main body of the Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition of 1914 – 17 , stranded on Elephant Island after the loss of its ship Endurance . Polar historians regard the voyage as one of the greatest small @-@ boat journeys ever undertaken . 
 In October 1915 , Endurance had been sunk by the pack ice in the Weddell Sea , leaving Shackleton and his companions adrift on a precarious ice surface . Throughout the duration of their survival , the group drifted northward until April 1916 , when the floe on which they had encamped , broke up . They then made their way in the ship 's lifeboats to Elephant Island , where Shackleton decided that the most effective means of obtaining rescue would be to sail one of the lifeboats to South Georgia . 
 Of the three lifeboats , the James Caird was deemed the strongest and most likely to survive the journey . It had been named by Shackleton after Sir James Key Caird , a Dundee jute manufacturer and philanthropist , whose sponsorship had helped finance the expedition . Before its voyage , the boat was strengthened and adapted by ship 's carpenter Harry McNish , to withstand the mighty seas of the Southern Ocean . Surviving a series of dangers , including a near capsizing , the boat reached the southern coast of South Georgia after a voyage lasting 16 days . Shackleton and two companions then crossed the island 's mountainous interior to reach a whaling station on the northern side . Here he was able to organise the relief of the Elephant Island party , and to return his men home without loss of life . After the end of the First World War , the James Caird was brought back from South Georgia to England , and is now on permanent display at Shackleton 's old school , Dulwich College . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 5 December 1914 , Shackleton 's expedition ship Endurance left South Georgia for the Weddell Sea , on the first stage of the Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition . It was making for Vahsel Bay , the southernmost explored point of the Weddell Sea at 77 ° 49 ' S , where a shore party was to land and prepare for a transcontinental crossing of Antarctica . Before it could reach its destination the ship was trapped in pack ice , and by 14 February 1915 was held fast , despite prolonged efforts to free her . During the following eight months she drifted northward until , on 27 October , she was crushed by the pack 's pressure , finally sinking on 21 November . 
 As his 27 @-@ man crew set up camp on the slowly moving ice , Shackleton 's focus shifted to how best to save his party . His first plan was to march across the ice to the nearest land , and try to reach a point that ships were known to visit . The march began , but progress was hampered by the nature of the ice 's surface , later described by Shackleton as " soft , much broken up , open leads intersecting the floes at all angles " . After struggling to make headway over several days , the march was abandoned ; the party established " Patience Camp " on a flat ice floe , and waited as the drift carried them further north , towards open water . They had managed to salvage three lifeboats , which Shackleton had named after the principal backers of the expedition : Stancomb Wills , Dudley Docker and James Caird . The party waited until 8 April 1916 , when they finally took to the boats as the ice started to break up . Over a perilous period of seven days they sailed and rowed through stormy seas and dangerous loose ice , to reach the temporary haven of Elephant Island on 15 April . 
 = = On Elephant Island = = 
 Elephant Island , on the eastern limits of the South Shetland Islands , was remote from anywhere that the expedition had planned to go , and far beyond normal shipping routes . No relief ship would search for them there , and the likelihood of rescue from any other outside agency was equally negligible . The island was bleak and inhospitable , and its terrain devoid of vegetation , although it had fresh water , and a relative abundance of seals and penguins to provide food and fuel for immediate survival . The rigours of an Antarctic winter were fast approaching ; the narrow shingle beach where they were camped was already being swept by almost continuous gales and blizzards , which destroyed one of the tents in their temporary camp , and knocked others flat . The pressures and hardships of the previous months were beginning to tell on the men , many of whom were in a run @-@ down state both mentally and physically . 
 In these conditions , Shackleton decided to try to reach help , using one of the boats . The nearest port was Stanley in the Falkland Islands , 540 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 000 km ; 620 mi ) away , but made unreachable by the prevailing westerly winds . A better option was to head for Deception Island , at the western end of the South Shetland chain . Although it was uninhabited , Admiralty records indicated that this island held stores for shipwrecked mariners , and was also visited from time to time by whalers . However , reaching it would also involve a journey against the prevailing winds — though in less open seas — with ultimately no certainty when or if rescue would arrive . After discussions with the expedition 's second @-@ in @-@ command , Frank Wild , and ship 's captain Frank Worsley , Shackleton decided to attempt to reach the whaling stations of South Georgia , to the north @-@ east . This would mean a much longer boat journey , of 800 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 500 km ; 920 mi ) across the Southern Ocean , in conditions of rapidly approaching winter , but with the help of following winds it appeared feasible . Shackleton thought that " a boat party might make the voyage and be back with relief within a month , provided that the sea was clear of ice , and the boat survive the great seas " . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The South Georgia boat party could expect to meet hurricane @-@ force winds and waves — the notorious Cape Horn Rollers — measuring from trough to crest as much as 60 feet ( 18 m ) . Shackleton therefore selected the heaviest and strongest of the three boats , the 22 @.@ 5 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 9 m ) long James Caird . It had been built as a whaleboat in London to Worsley 's orders , designed on the " double @-@ ended " principle pioneered by Norwegian shipbuilder Colin Archer . Shackleton asked the expedition 's carpenter , Harry McNish , if he could make the vessel more seaworthy . Using improvised tools and materials , McNish raised the boat 's sides and built a makeshift deck of wood and canvas , sealing his work with oil paints , lamp wick , and seal blood . The craft was strengthened by having the mast of the Dudley Docker lashed inside , along the length of her keel . She was then fitted as a ketch , with a mainmast and a mizzenmast , rigged to carry <unk> and a jib . The weight of the boat was increased by the addition of approximately 1 long ton ( 1 @,@ 016 kg ) of ballast , to lessen the risk of capsizing in the high seas that Shackleton knew they would encounter . 
 The boat was loaded with provisions to last six men one month ; as Shackleton later wrote , " if we did not make South Georgia in that time we were sure to go under " . They took ration packs that had been intended for the transcontinental crossing , biscuits , Bovril , sugar and dried milk . They also took two 18 @-@ gallon casks of water ( one of which was damaged during the loading and let in sea water ) , two Primus stoves , paraffin , oil , candles , sleeping bags and odd items of spare clothing . 
 Shackleton 's first choices for the boat 's crew were Worsley and Tom Crean — the latter , he said , " begged to go " . Crean was a shipmate from the Discovery Expedition , 1901 – 04 , and had also been with Scott 's Terra Nova Expedition in 1910 – 13 , where he had distinguished himself on the fatal polar march . Shackleton was confident that Crean would persevere to the bitter end , and had great faith in Worsley 's skills as a navigator , especially his ability to work out positions in difficult circumstances . Worsley later wrote : " We knew it would be the hardest thing we had ever undertaken , for the Antarctic winter had set in , and we were about to cross one of the worst seas in the world " . 
 For the remaining places Shackleton requested volunteers , and of the many who came forward he chose two strong sailors in John Vincent and Timothy McCarthy . He offered the final place to the carpenter , McNish . " He was over fifty years of age " , wrote Shackleton of McNish ( he was in fact 41 ) , " but he had a good knowledge of sailing boats and was very quick " . Vincent and McNish had each proved their worth during the difficult boat journey from the ice to Elephant Island . They were both somewhat awkward characters , and their selection may have reflected Shackleton 's wish to keep potential troublemakers under his personal charge rather than leaving them on the island where personal animosities could fester . 
 = = The open @-@ boat journey = = 
 Before leaving , Shackleton instructed Frank Wild that he was to assume full command as soon as the James Caird departed , and that should the journey fail , he was to attempt to take the party to Deception Island the following spring . The James Caird was launched from Elephant Island on 24 April 1916 . The wind was a moderate south @-@ westerly , which aided a swift getaway , and the boat was quickly out of sight of the land . 
 Shackleton ordered Worsley to set a course due north , instead of directly for South Georgia , to get clear of the menacing ice @-@ fields that were beginning to form . By midnight they had left the immediate ice behind , but the sea swell was rising . At dawn the next day , they were 45 nautical miles ( 83 km ; 52 mi ) from Elephant Island , sailing in heavy seas and force 9 winds . Shackleton established an on @-@ board routine : two three @-@ man watches , with one man at the helm , another at the sails , and the third on bailing duty . The off @-@ watch trio rested in the tiny covered space in the bows . The difficulties of exchanging places as each watch ended would , Shackleton wrote , " have had its humorous side if it had not involved us in so many aches and pains " . Their clothing , designed for Antarctic sledging rather than open @-@ boat sailing , was far from waterproof ; repeated contact with the icy seawater left their skins painfully raw . 
 Success depended on Worsley 's navigation , based on sightings attempted during the very brief appearances of the sun , as the boat pitched and rolled . The first observation was made after two days , and showed them to be 128 nautical miles ( 237 km ; 147 mi ) north of Elephant Island . The course was now changed to head directly for South Georgia . They were clear of the dangers of floating ice but had reached the dangerous seas of the Drake Passage , where giant waves sweep round the globe , unimpeded by any land . The movement of the ship made preparing hot food on the Primus nearly impossible , but Crean , who acted as cook , somehow kept the men fed . 
 The next observation , on 29 April , showed that they had travelled 238 nautical miles ( 441 km ; 274 mi ) . Thereafter , navigation became , in Worsley 's words , " a merry jest of guesswork " , as they encountered the worst of the weather . The James Caird was taking on water in heavy seas and in danger of sinking , kept afloat by continuous bailing . The temperature fell sharply , and a new danger presented itself in the accumulations of frozen spray , which threatened to capsize the boat . In turns , they had to crawl out on to the pitching deck with an axe and chip away the ice from deck and rigging . For 48 hours they were stopped , held by a sea anchor , until the wind dropped sufficiently for them to raise sail and proceed . Despite their travails , Worsley 's third observation , on 4 May , put them only 250 nautical miles ( 460 km ; 290 mi ) from South Georgia . 
 On 5 May the worst of the weather returned , and brought them close to disaster in the largest seas so far . Shackleton later wrote : " We felt our boat lifted and flung forward like a cork in breaking surf " . The crew bailed frantically to keep afloat . Nevertheless , they were still moving towards their goal , and a dead reckoning calculation by Worsley on the next day , 6 May , suggested that they were now 115 nautical miles ( 213 km ; 132 mi ) from the western point of South Georgia . The strains of the past two weeks were by now taking their toll on the men . Shackleton observed that Vincent had collapsed and ceased to be an active member of the crew , McCarthy was " weak , but happy " , McNish was weakening but still showing " grit and spirit " . 
 On 7 May Worsley advised Shackleton that he could not be sure of their position within ten miles . To avoid the possibility of being swept past the island by the fierce south @-@ westerly winds , Shackleton ordered a slight change of course so that the James Caird would reach land on the uninhabited south @-@ west coast . They would then try to work the boat round to the whaling stations on the northern side of the island . " Things were bad for us in those days " , wrote Shackleton . " The bright moments were those when we each received our one mug of hot milk during the long , bitter watches of the night " . Late on the same day floating seaweed was spotted , and the next morning there were birds , including cormorants which were known never to venture far from land . Shortly after noon on 8 May came the first sighting of South Georgia . 
 As they approached the high cliffs of the coastline , heavy seas made immediate landing impossible . For more than 24 hours they were forced to stand clear , as the wind shifted to the north @-@ west and quickly developed into " one of the worst hurricanes any of us had ever experienced " . For much of this time they were in danger of being driven on to the rocky South Georgia shore , or of being wrecked on the equally menacing <unk> Island , five miles from the coast . On 10 May , when the storm had eased slightly , Shackleton was concerned that the weaker members of his crew would not last another day , and decided that whatever the hazard they must attempt a landing . They headed for Cave Cove near the entrance to King Haakon Bay , and finally , after several attempts , made their landing there . Shackleton was later to describe the boat journey as " one of supreme strife " ; historian Caroline Alexander comments : " They could hardly have known — or cared — that in the carefully weighted judgement of authorities yet to come , the voyage of the James Caird would be ranked as one of the greatest boat journeys ever accomplished " . 
 = = South Georgia = = 
 As the party recuperated , Shackleton realised that the boat was not capable of making a further voyage to reach the whaling stations , and that Vincent and McNish were unfit to travel further . He decided to move the boat to a safer location within King Haakon Bay , from which point he , Worsley and Crean would cross the island on foot , aiming for the station at Stromness . 
 On 15 May the James Caird made a run of about 6 nautical miles ( 11 km ; 6 @.@ 9 mi ) to a shingle beach near the head of the bay . Here the boat was beached and up @-@ turned to provide a shelter . The location was christened " Peggotty Camp " ( after <unk> 's boat @-@ home in Charles Dickens 's David Copperfield ) . Early on 18 May Shackleton , Worsley and Crean began what would be the first confirmed land crossing of the South Georgia interior . Since they had no map , they had to improvise a route across mountain ranges and glaciers . They travelled continuously for 36 hours , before reaching Stromness . Shackleton 's men were , in Worsley 's words , " a terrible trio of scarecrows " , dark with exposure , wind , frostbite and accumulated blubber soot . Later that evening , 19 May , a motor @-@ vessel was despatched to King Haakon Bay to pick up McCarthy , McNish and Vincent , and the James Caird . Worsley wrote that the Norwegian seamen at Stromness all " claimed the honour of helping to haul her up to the wharf " , a gesture which he found " quite affecting " . 
 The advent of the southern winter and adverse ice conditions meant that it was more than three months before Shackleton was able to achieve the relief of the men at Elephant Island but finally , with the aid of the steam @-@ tug Yelcho commanded by Luis Pardo , the entire party was brought to safety , reaching Punta Arenas in Chile on 3 September 1916 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The James Caird was returned to England in 1919 . In 1921 Shackleton went back to Antarctica , leading the Shackleton – Rowett Expedition . On 5 January 1922 he died suddenly of a heart attack , while the expedition ’ s ship Quest was moored at South Georgia . 
 Later that year John Quiller Rowett , who had financed this last expedition and was a former schoolfriend of Shackleton ’ s from Dulwich College , South London , decided to present the James Caird to the college . It remained there until 1967 , although its display building was severely damaged by bombs in 1944 . In 1967 , the boat was given to the care of the National Maritime Museum , and underwent restoration . It was then displayed by the museum until 1985 , when it was returned to Dulwich College and placed in a new location in the North Cloister , on a bed of stones gathered from South Georgia and Aberystwyth . This site has become the James Caird 's permanent home , although the boat is sometimes lent to major exhibitions and has taken part in the London Boat Show and in events at Greenwich , Portsmouth , and Falmouth . It has travelled overseas to be exhibited in Washington , D.C. , New York , Sydney , Australia and Bonn , Germany . 
 The James Caird Society was established in 1994 , to " preserve the memory , honour the remarkable feats of discovery in the Antarctic , and commend the outstanding qualities of leadership associated with the name of Sir Ernest Shackleton " . 
 In the Year 2000 the German polar explorer Arved Fuchs built a detailed copy of Shackletons ship named James Caird II . In his expedition titled „ Shackleton 2000 “ he succeeded to replicate the voyage of Shackleton and his crew from Elephant Island to South Georgia . The James Caird II was among the first expositions when the International Maritime Museum in Hamburg was first opened . 
 = England = 
 England is a country that is part of the United Kingdom . It shares land borders with Scotland to the north and Wales to the west . The Irish Sea lies northwest of England and the Celtic Sea lies to the southwest . England is separated from continental Europe by the North Sea to the east and the English Channel to the south . The country covers much of the central and southern part of the island of Great Britain , which lies in the North Atlantic ; and includes over 100 smaller islands such as the Isles of Scilly , and the Isle of Wight . 
 The area now called England was first inhabited by modern humans during the Upper Palaeolithic period , but takes its name from the Angles , one of the Germanic tribes who settled during the 5th and 6th centuries . England became a unified state in the 10th century , and since the Age of Discovery , which began during the 15th century , has had a significant cultural and legal impact on the wider world . The English language , the Anglican Church , and English law – the basis for the common law legal systems of many other countries around the world – developed in England , and the country 's parliamentary system of government has been widely adopted by other nations . The Industrial Revolution began in 18th @-@ century England , transforming its society into the world 's first industrialised nation . 
 England 's terrain mostly comprises low hills and plains , especially in central and southern England . However , there are uplands in the north ( for example , the mountainous Lake District , Pennines , and Yorkshire Dales ) and in the south west ( for example , Dartmoor and the Cotswolds ) . The capital is London , which is the largest metropolitan area in both the United Kingdom and the European Union . England 's population of over 53 million comprises 84 % of the population of the United Kingdom , largely concentrated around London , the South East , and conurbations in the Midlands , the North West , the North East , and Yorkshire , which each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century . 
 The Kingdom of England — which after 1284 included Wales — ceased being a separate sovereign state on 1 May 1707 , when the Acts of Union put into effect the terms agreed in the Treaty of Union the previous year , resulting in a political union with the Kingdom of Scotland to create the Kingdom of Great Britain . In 1801 , Great Britain was united with the Kingdom of Ireland through another Act of Union to become the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland . In 1922 the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom , leading to the latter being renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . 
 = = Toponymy = = 
 The name " England " is derived from the Old English name Englaland , which means " land of the Angles " . The Angles were one of the Germanic tribes that settled in Great Britain during the Early Middle Ages . The Angles came from the Angeln peninsula in the Bay of Kiel area of the Baltic Sea . The earliest recorded use of the term , as " Engla <unk> " , is in the late ninth century translation into Old English of Bede 's Ecclesiastical History of the English People . The term was then used in a different sense to the modern one , meaning " the land inhabited by the English " , and it included English people in what is now south @-@ east Scotland but was then part of the English kingdom of Northumbria . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle recorded that the Domesday Book of 1086 covered the whole of England , meaning the English kingdom , but a few years later the Chronicle stated that King Malcolm III went " out of <unk> into Lothian in Englaland " , thus using it in the more ancient sense . According to the Oxford English Dictionary , its modern spelling was first used in 1538 . 
 The earliest attested reference to the Angles occurs in the 1st @-@ century work by Tacitus , Germania , in which the Latin word <unk> is used . The etymology of the tribal name itself is disputed by scholars ; it has been suggested that it derives from the shape of the Angeln peninsula , an angular shape . How and why a term derived from the name of a tribe that was less significant than others , such as the Saxons , came to be used for the entire country and its people is not known , but it seems this is related to the custom of calling the Germanic people in Britain Angli <unk> or English Saxons . In Scottish Gaelic , another language which developed on the island of Great Britain , the Saxon tribe gave their name to the word for England ( <unk> ) ; similarly , the Welsh name for the English language is " <unk> " . 
 An alternative name for England is Albion . The name Albion originally referred to the entire island of Great Britain . The nominally earliest record of the name appears in the Aristotelian Corpus , specifically the 4th century BC De Mundo : " Beyond the Pillars of Hercules is the ocean that flows round the earth . In it are two very large islands called Britannia ; these are Albion and <unk> " . But modern scholarly consensus ascribes De Mundo not to Aristotle but to Pseudo @-@ Aristotle , i.e. it was written later in the Graeco @-@ Roman period or afterwards . The word Albion ( <unk> ) or insula <unk> has two possible origins . It either derives from a cognate of the Latin albus meaning white , a reference to the white cliffs of Dover , the only part of Britain visible from the European Continent , or from the phrase the " island of the <unk> " in the now lost <unk> Periplus , that is attested through Avienus ' Ora Maritima to which the former presumably served as a source . Albion is now applied to England in a more poetic capacity . Another romantic name for England is <unk> , related to the Welsh word for England , <unk> , and made popular by its use in Arthurian legend . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Prehistory and antiquity = = = 
 The earliest known evidence of human presence in the area now known as England was that of Homo <unk> , dating to approximately 780 @,@ 000 years ago . The oldest proto @-@ human bones discovered in England date from 500 @,@ 000 years ago . Modern humans are known to have inhabited the area during the Upper Paleolithic period , though permanent settlements were only established within the last 6 @,@ 000 years . After the last ice age only large mammals such as mammoths , bison and woolly rhinoceros remained . Roughly 11 @,@ 000 years ago , when the ice sheets began to recede , humans repopulated the area ; genetic research suggests they came from the northern part of the Iberian Peninsula . The sea level was lower than now and Britain was connected by land bridge to Ireland and Eurasia . As the seas rose , it was separated from Ireland 10 @,@ 000 years ago and from Eurasia two millennia later . 
 The Beaker culture arrived around 2 @,@ 500 BC , introducing drinking and food vessels constructed from clay , as well as vessels used as reduction pots to smelt copper ores . It was during this time that major Neolithic monuments such as Stonehenge and Avebury were constructed . By heating together tin and copper , which were in abundance in the area , the Beaker culture people made bronze , and later iron from iron ores . The development of iron smelting allowed the construction of better ploughs , advancing agriculture ( for instance , with Celtic fields ) , as well as the production of more effective weapons . 
 During the Iron Age , Celtic culture , deriving from the Hallstatt and La Tène cultures , arrived from Central Europe . Brythonic was the spoken language during this time . Society was tribal ; according to Ptolemy 's Geographia there were around 20 tribes in the area . Earlier divisions are unknown because the Britons were not literate . Like other regions on the edge of the Empire , Britain had long enjoyed trading links with the Romans . Julius Caesar of the Roman Republic attempted to invade twice in 55 BC ; although largely unsuccessful , he managed to set up a client king from the <unk> . 
 The Romans invaded Britain in 43 AD during the reign of Emperor Claudius , subsequently conquering much of Britain , and the area was incorporated into the Roman Empire as Britannia province . The best @-@ known of the native tribes who attempted to resist were the Catuvellauni led by <unk> . Later , an uprising led by Boudica , Queen of the Iceni , ended with Boudica 's suicide following her defeat at the Battle of Watling Street . This era saw a Greco @-@ Roman culture prevail with the introduction of Roman law , Roman architecture , aqueducts , sewers , many agricultural items and silk . In the 3rd century , Emperor Septimius Severus died at Eboracum ( now York ) , where Constantine was subsequently proclaimed emperor . 
 There is debate about when Christianity was first introduced ; it was no later than the 4th century , probably much earlier . According to Bede , missionaries were sent from Rome by <unk> at the request of the chieftain Lucius of Britain in 180 AD , to settle differences as to Eastern and Western ceremonials , which were disturbing the church . There are traditions linked to Glastonbury claiming an introduction through Joseph of Arimathea , while others claim through Lucius of Britain . By 410 , during the Decline of the Roman Empire , Britain was left exposed by the end of Roman rule in Britain and the withdrawal of Roman army units , to defend the frontiers in continental Europe and partake in civil wars . Celtic Christian monastic and missionary movements flourished : Patrick ( 5th @-@ century Ireland ) and in the 6th century Brendan ( Clonfert ) , Comgall ( Bangor ) , David ( Wales ) , Aiden ( Lindisfarne ) and Columba ( Iona ) . This period of Christianity was influenced by ancient Celtic culture in its sensibilities , polity , practices and theology . Local " congregations " were centred in the monastic community and monastic leaders were more like chieftains , as peers , rather than in the more hierarchical system of the Roman @-@ dominated church . 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 Roman military withdrawals left Britain open to invasion by pagan , seafaring warriors from north @-@ western continental Europe , chiefly the Angles , Saxons and Jutes who had long raided the coasts of the Roman province and began to settle , initially in the eastern part of the country . Their advance was contained for some decades after the Britons ' victory at the Battle of Mount Badon , but subsequently resumed , over @-@ running the fertile lowlands of Britain and reducing the area under Brythonic control to a series of separate enclaves in the more rugged country to the west by the end of the 6th century . Contemporary texts describing this period are extremely scarce , giving rise to its description as a Dark Age . The nature and progression of the Anglo @-@ Saxon settlement of Britain is consequently subject to considerable disagreement . Roman @-@ dominated Christianity had in general disappeared from the conquered territories , but was reintroduced by missionaries from Rome led by Augustine from 597 onwards . Disputes between the <unk> and Celtic @-@ dominated forms of Christianity ended in victory for the Roman tradition at the Council of Whitby ( 664 ) , which was ostensibly about haircuts and the date of Easter , but more significantly , about the differences in Roman and Celtic forms of authority , theology , and practice ( Lehane ) . 
 During the settlement period the lands ruled by the incomers seem to have been fragmented into numerous tribal territories , but by the 7th century , when substantial evidence of the situation again becomes available , these had coalesced into roughly a dozen kingdoms including Northumbria , Mercia , Wessex , East Anglia , Essex , Kent and Sussex . Over the following centuries this process of political consolidation continued . The 7th century saw a struggle for hegemony between Northumbria and Mercia , which in the 8th century gave way to Mercian preeminence . In the early 9th century Mercia was displaced as the foremost kingdom by Wessex . Later in that century escalating attacks by the Danes culminated in the conquest of the north and east of England , overthrowing the kingdoms of Northumbria , Mercia and East Anglia . Wessex under Alfred the Great was left as the only surviving English kingdom , and under his successors it steadily expanded at the expense of the kingdoms of the Danelaw . This brought about the political unification of England , first accomplished under Æthelstan in 927 and definitively established after further conflicts by Eadred in 953 . A fresh wave of Scandinavian attacks from the late 10th century ended with the conquest of this united kingdom by Sweyn Forkbeard in 1013 and again by his son Cnut in 1016 , turning it into the centre of a short @-@ lived North Sea Empire that also included Denmark and Norway . However the native royal dynasty was restored with the accession of Edward the Confessor in 1042 . 
 A dispute over the succession to Edward led to the Norman conquest of England in 1066 , accomplished by an army led by Duke William of Normandy . The Normans themselves originated from Scandinavia and had settled in Normandy in the late 9th and early 10th centuries . This conquest led to the almost total dispossession of the English elite and its replacement by a new French @-@ speaking aristocracy , whose speech had a profound and permanent effect on the English language . 
 Subsequently the House of Plantagenet from Anjou inherited the English throne under Henry II , adding England to the budding Angevin Empire of fiefs the family had inherited in France including Aquitaine . They reigned for three centuries , some noted monarchs being Richard I , Edward I , Edward III and Henry V. The period saw changes in trade and legislation , including the signing of the Magna Carta , an English legal charter used to limit the sovereign 's powers by law and protect the privileges of freemen . Catholic monasticism flourished , providing philosophers , and the universities of Oxford and Cambridge were founded with royal patronage . The Principality of Wales became a Plantagenet fief during the 13th century and the Lordship of Ireland was given to the English monarchy by the Pope . 
 During the 14th century , the Plantagenets and the House of Valois both claimed to be legitimate claimants to the House of Capet and with it France ; the two powers clashed in the Hundred Years ' War . The Black Death epidemic hit England ; starting in 1348 , it eventually killed up to half of England 's inhabitants . From 1453 to 1487 civil war occurred between two branches of the royal family — the Yorkists and Lancastrians — known as the Wars of the Roses . Eventually it led to the Yorkists losing the throne entirely to a Welsh noble family the Tudors , a branch of the Lancastrians headed by Henry Tudor who invaded with Welsh and Breton mercenaries , gaining victory at the Battle of Bosworth Field where the Yorkist king Richard III was killed . 
 = = = Early Modern = = = 
 During the Tudor period , the Renaissance reached England through Italian courtiers , who reintroduced artistic , educational and scholarly debate from classical antiquity . England began to develop naval skills , and exploration to the West intensified . 
 Henry VIII broke from communion with the Catholic Church , over issues relating to his divorce , under the Acts of Supremacy in 1534 which proclaimed the monarch head of the Church of England . In contrast with much of European Protestantism , the roots of the split were more political than theological . He also legally incorporated his ancestral land Wales into the Kingdom of England with the 1535 – 1542 acts . There were internal religious conflicts during the reigns of Henry 's daughters , Mary I and Elizabeth I. The former took the country back to Catholicism while the latter broke from it again , forcefully asserting the supremacy of Anglicanism . 
 Competing with Spain , the first English colony in the Americas was founded in 1585 by explorer Walter Raleigh in Virginia and named Roanoke . The Roanoke colony failed and is known as the lost colony , after it was found abandoned on the return of the late @-@ arriving supply ship . With the East India Company , England also competed with the Dutch and French in the East . In 1588 , during the Elizabethan period , an English fleet under Francis Drake defeated an invading Spanish Armada . The political structure of the island changed in 1603 , when the King of Scots , James VI , a kingdom which was a longtime rival to English interests , inherited the throne of England as James I — creating a personal union . He styled himself King of Great Britain , although this had no basis in English law . Under the auspices of King James VI and I the Authorised King James Version of the Holy Bible was published in 1611 . It has not only been ranked with Shakespeare 's works as the greatest masterpiece of literature in the English language but also was the standard version of the Bible read by most Protestant Christians for four hundred years , until modern revisions were produced in the 20th century . 
 Based on conflicting political , religious and social positions , the English Civil War was fought between the supporters of Parliament and those of King Charles I , known colloquially as Roundheads and Cavaliers respectively . This was an interwoven part of the wider multifaceted Wars of the Three Kingdoms , involving Scotland and Ireland . The Parliamentarians were victorious , Charles I was executed and the kingdom replaced by the Commonwealth . Leader of the Parliament forces , Oliver Cromwell declared himself Lord Protector in 1653 ; a period of personal rule followed . After Cromwell 's death and the resignation of his son Richard as Lord Protector , Charles II was invited to return as monarch in 1660 , in a move called the Restoration . After the Glorious Revolution of 1688 , it was constitutionally established that King and Parliament should rule together , though Parliament would have the real power . This was established with the Bill of Rights in 1689 . Among the statutes set down were that the law could only be made by Parliament and could not be suspended by the King , also that the King could not impose taxes or raise an army without the prior approval of Parliament . Also since that time , no British monarch has entered the House of Commons when it is sitting , which is annually commemorated at the State Opening of Parliament by the British monarch when the doors of the House of Commons are slammed in the face of the monarch 's messenger , symbolising the rights of Parliament and its independence from the monarch . With the founding of the Royal Society in 1660 , science was greatly encouraged . 
 In 1666 the Great Fire of London gutted the City of London but it was rebuilt shortly afterwards with many significant buildings designed by Sir Christopher Wren . In Parliament two factions had emerged — the Tories and Whigs . Though the Tories initially supported Catholic king James II , some of them , along with the Whigs , deposed him in the Revolution of 1688 and invited Dutch prince William of Orange to become William III . Some English people , especially in the north , were Jacobites and continued to support James and his sons . After the parliaments of England and Scotland agreed , the two countries joined in political union , to create the Kingdom of Great Britain in 1707 . To accommodate the union , institutions such as the law and national churches of each remained separate . 
 = = = Late Modern and contemporary = = = 
 Under the newly formed Kingdom of Great Britain , output from the Royal Society and other English initiatives combined with the Scottish Enlightenment to create innovations in science and engineering , while the enormous growth in British overseas trade protected by the Royal Navy paved the way for the establishment of the British Empire . Domestically it drove the Industrial Revolution , a period of profound change in the socioeconomic and cultural conditions of England , resulting in industrialised agriculture , manufacture , engineering and mining , as well as new and pioneering road , rail and water networks to facilitate their expansion and development . The opening of Northwest England 's Bridgewater Canal in 1761 ushered in the canal age in Britain . In 1825 the world 's first permanent steam locomotive @-@ hauled passenger railway — the Stockton and Darlington Railway — opened to the public . 
 During the Industrial Revolution , many workers moved from England 's countryside to new and expanding urban industrial areas to work in factories , for instance at Manchester and Birmingham , dubbed " Warehouse City " and " Workshop of the World " respectively . England maintained relative stability throughout the French Revolution ; William Pitt the Younger was British Prime Minister for the reign of George III . During the Napoleonic Wars , Napoleon planned to invade from the south @-@ east . However this failed to manifest and the Napoleonic forces were defeated by the British at sea by Lord Nelson and on land by the Duke of Wellington . The Napoleonic Wars fostered a concept of Britishness and a united national British people , shared with the Scots and Welsh . 
 London became the largest and most populous metropolitan area in the world during the Victorian era , and trade within the British Empire — as well as the standing of the British military and navy — was prestigious . Political agitation at home from radicals such as the Chartists and the suffragettes enabled legislative reform and universal suffrage . Power shifts in east @-@ central Europe led to World War I ; hundreds of thousands of English soldiers died fighting for the United Kingdom as part of the Allies . Two decades later , in World War II , the United Kingdom was again one of the Allies . At the end of the Phoney War , Winston Churchill became the wartime Prime Minister . Developments in warfare technology saw many cities damaged by air @-@ raids during the Blitz . Following the war , the British Empire experienced rapid decolonisation , and there was a speeding up of technological innovations ; automobiles became the primary means of transport and Frank Whittle 's development of the jet engine led to wider air travel . Residential patterns were altered in England by private motoring , and by the creation of the National Health Service ( NHS ) in 1948 . The UK 's NHS provided publicly funded health care to all UK permanent residents free at the point of need , being paid for from general taxation . Combined , these changes prompted the reform of local government in England in the mid @-@ 20th century . 
 Since the 20th century there has been significant population movement to England , mostly from other parts of the British Isles , but also from the Commonwealth , particularly the Indian subcontinent . Since the 1970s there has been a large move away from manufacturing and an increasing emphasis on the service industry . As part of the United Kingdom , the area joined a common market initiative called the European Economic Community which became the European Union . Since the late 20th century the administration of the United Kingdom has moved towards devolved governance in Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland . England and Wales continues to exist as a jurisdiction within the United Kingdom . Devolution has stimulated a greater emphasis on a more English @-@ specific identity and patriotism . There is no devolved English government , but an attempt to create a similar system on a sub @-@ regional basis was rejected by referendum . 
 = = Governance = = 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 As part of the United Kingdom , the basic political system in England is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary system . There has not been a government of England since 1707 , when the Acts of Union 1707 , putting into effect the terms of the Treaty of Union , joined England and Scotland to form the Kingdom of Great Britain . Before the union England was ruled by its monarch and the Parliament of England . Today England is governed directly by the Parliament of the United Kingdom , although other countries of the United Kingdom have devolved governments . In the House of Commons which is the lower house of the British Parliament based at the Palace of Westminster , there are 532 Members of Parliament ( MPs ) for constituencies in England , out of the 650 total . 
 In the United Kingdom general election , 2015 , the Conservative Party won an absolute majority in the 650 contested seats with 10 seats more than all other parties combined ( the Speaker of the House not being counted as a Conservative ) . The Conservative party , headed by the prime minister David Cameron , won 98 more seats than the Labour Party , whose leader Ed Miliband subsequently stood down . The Scottish National Party ( Scotland only ) won 56 out of 59 Scottish seats in the House of Commons replacing the Liberal Democrats as the third largest party overall in the UK . 
 As the United Kingdom is a member of the European Union , there are elections held regionally in England to decide who is sent as Members of the European Parliament . The 2014 European Parliament election saw the regions of England elect the following MEPs : 22 UK Independence Party ( UKIP ) , 17 Conservatives , 17 Labour , 3 Greens , and one Liberal Democrat . 
 Since devolution , in which other countries of the United Kingdom — Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland — each have their own devolved parliament or assemblies for local issues , there has been debate about how to counterbalance this in England . Originally it was planned that various regions of England would be devolved , but following the proposal 's rejection by the North East in a referendum , this has not been carried out . 
 One major issue is the West Lothian question , in which MPs from Scotland and Wales are able to vote on legislation affecting only England , while English MPs have no equivalent right to legislate on devolved matters . This when placed in the context of England being the only country of the United Kingdom not to have free cancer treatment , prescriptions , residential care for the elderly and free top @-@ up university fees , has led to a steady rise in English nationalism . Some have suggested the creation of a devolved English parliament , while others have proposed simply limiting voting on legislation which only affects England to English MPs . 
 = = = Law = = = 
 The English law legal system , developed over the centuries , is the basis of common law legal systems used in most Commonwealth countries and the United States ( except Louisiana ) . Despite now being part of the United Kingdom , the legal system of the Courts of England and Wales continued , under the Treaty of Union , as a separate legal system from the one used in Scotland . The general essence of English law is that it is made by judges sitting in courts , applying their common sense and knowledge of legal precedent — stare decisis — to the facts before them . 
 The court system is headed by the Senior Courts of England and Wales , consisting of the Court of Appeal , the High Court of Justice for civil cases , and the Crown Court for criminal cases . The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom is the highest court for criminal and civil cases in England and Wales . It was created in 2009 after constitutional changes , taking over the judicial functions of the House of Lords . A decision of the Supreme Court is binding on every other court in the hierarchy , which must follow its directions . 
 Crime increased between 1981 and 1995 , but fell by 42 % in the period 1995 – 2006 . The prison population doubled over the same period , giving it the highest incarceration rate in Western Europe at 147 per 100 @,@ 000 . Her Majesty 's Prison Service , reporting to the Ministry of Justice , manages most prisons , housing over 85 @,@ 000 convicts . 
 = = = Regions , counties , and districts = = = 
 The subdivisions of England consist of up to four levels of subnational division controlled through a variety of types of administrative entities created for the purposes of local government . The highest tier of local government were the nine regions of England : North East , North West , Yorkshire and the Humber , East Midlands , West Midlands , East , South East , South West , and London . These were created in 1994 as Government Offices , used by the UK government to deliver a wide range of policies and programmes regionally , but there are no elected bodies at this level , except in London , and in 2011 the regional government offices were abolished . The same boundaries remain in use for electing Members of the European Parliament on a regional basis . 
 After devolution began to take place in other parts of the United Kingdom it was planned that referendums for the regions of England would take place for their own elected regional assemblies as a counterweight . London accepted in 1998 : the London Assembly was created two years later . However , when the proposal was rejected by the northern England devolution referendums , 2004 in the North East , further referendums were cancelled . The regional assemblies outside London were abolished in 2010 , and their functions transferred to respective Regional Development Agencies and a new system of local authority leaders ' boards . 
 Below the regional level , all of England is divided into 48 ceremonial counties . These are used primarily as a geographical frame of reference and have developed gradually since the Middle Ages , with some established as recently as 1974 . Each has a Lord Lieutenant and High Sheriff ; these posts are used to represent the British monarch locally . Outside Greater London and the Isles of Scilly , England is also divided into 83 metropolitan and non @-@ metropolitan counties ; these correspond to areas used for the purposes of local government and may consist of a single district or be divided into several . 
 There are six metropolitan counties based on the most heavily urbanised areas , which do not have county councils . In these areas the principal authorities are the councils of the subdivisions , the metropolitan boroughs . Elsewhere , 27 non @-@ metropolitan " shire " counties have a county council and are divided into districts , each with a district council . They are typically , though not always , found in more rural areas . The remaining non @-@ metropolitan counties are of a single district and usually correspond to large towns or sparsely populated counties ; they are known as unitary authorities . Greater London has a different system for local government , with 32 London boroughs , plus the City of London covering a small area at the core governed by the City of London Corporation . At the most localised level , much of England is divided into civil parishes with councils ; they do not exist in Greater London . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Landscape and rivers = = = 
 Geographically England includes the central and southern two @-@ thirds of the island of Great Britain , plus such offshore islands as the Isle of Wight and the Isles of Scilly . It is bordered by two other countries of the United Kingdom — to the north by Scotland and to the west by Wales . England is closer to the European continent than any other part of mainland Britain . It is separated from France by a 21 @-@ mile ( 34 km ) sea gap , though the two countries are connected by the Channel Tunnel near Folkestone . England also has shores on the Irish Sea , North Sea and Atlantic Ocean . 
 The ports of London , Liverpool , and Newcastle lie on the tidal rivers Thames , Mersey and Tyne respectively . At 220 miles ( 350 km ) , the Severn is the longest river flowing through England . It empties into the Bristol Channel and is notable for its Severn Bore tidal waves , which can reach 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) in height . However , the longest river entirely in England is the Thames , which is 215 miles ( 346 km ) in length . There are many lakes in England ; the largest is Windermere , within the aptly named Lake District . 
 In geological terms , the Pennines , known as the " backbone of England " , are the oldest range of mountains in the country , originating from the end of the Paleozoic Era around 300 million years ago . Their geological composition includes , among others , sandstone and limestone , and also coal . There are karst landscapes in calcite areas such as parts of Yorkshire and Derbyshire . The Pennine landscape is high moorland in upland areas , indented by fertile valleys of the region 's rivers . They contain three national parks , the Yorkshire Dales , Northumberland , and the Peak District . The highest point in England , at 978 metres ( 3 @,@ 209 ft ) , is Scafell Pike in Cumbria . Straddling the border between England and Scotland are the Cheviot Hills . 
 The English Lowlands are to the south of the Pennines , consisting of green rolling hills , including the Cotswold Hills , Chiltern Hills , North and South Downs — where they meet the sea they form white rock exposures such as the cliffs of Dover . The granite Southwest Peninsula in the West Country includes upland moorland , such as Dartmoor and Exmoor , and enjoys a mild climate ; both are national parks . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 England has a temperate maritime climate : it is mild with temperatures not much lower than 0 ° C ( 32 ° F ) in winter and not much higher than 32 ° C ( 90 ° F ) in summer . The weather is damp relatively frequently and is changeable . The coldest months are January and February , the latter particularly on the English coast , while July is normally the warmest month . Months with mild to warm weather are May , June , September and October . Rainfall is spread fairly evenly throughout the year . 
 Important influences on the climate of England are its proximity to the Atlantic Ocean , its northern latitude and the warming of the sea by the Gulf Stream . Rainfall is higher in the west , and parts of the Lake District receive more rain than anywhere else in the country . Since weather records began , the highest temperature recorded was 38 @.@ 5 ° C ( 101 @.@ 3 ° F ) on 10 August 2003 at Brogdale in Kent , while the lowest was − 26 @.@ 1 ° C ( − 15 @.@ 0 ° F ) on 10 January 1982 in <unk> , Shropshire . 
 = = = Major conurbations = = = 
 The Greater London Urban Area is by far the largest urban area in England and one of the busiest cities in the world . It is considered a global city and has a population larger than other countries in the United Kingdom besides England itself . Other urban areas of considerable size and influence tend to be in northern England or the English Midlands . There are fifty settlements which have been designated city status in England , while the wider United Kingdom has sixty @-@ six . 
 While many cities in England are quite large in size , such as Birmingham , Sheffield , Manchester , Liverpool , Leeds , Newcastle , Bradford , Nottingham and others , a large population is not necessarily a prerequisite for a settlement to be afforded city status . Traditionally the status was afforded to towns with diocesan cathedrals and so there are smaller cities like Wells , Ely , Ripon , Truro and Chichester . According to the Office for National Statistics the ten largest , continuous built @-@ up urban areas are : 
 = = Economy = = 
 England 's economy is one of the largest in the world , with an average GDP per capita of £ 22 @,@ 907 . Usually regarded as a mixed market economy , it has adopted many free market principles , yet maintains an advanced social welfare infrastructure . The official currency in England is the pound sterling , whose ISO 4217 code is GBP . Taxation in England is quite competitive when compared to much of the rest of Europe – as of 2014 the basic rate of personal tax is 20 % on taxable income up to £ 31 @,@ 865 above the personal tax @-@ free allowance ( normally £ 10 @,@ 000 ) , and 40 % on any additional earnings above that amount . 
 The economy of England is the largest part of the UK 's economy , which has the 18th highest GDP PPP per capita in the world . England is a leader in the chemical and pharmaceutical sectors and in key technical industries , particularly aerospace , the arms industry , and the manufacturing side of the software industry . London , home to the London Stock Exchange , the United Kingdom 's main stock exchange and the largest in Europe , is England 's financial centre — 100 of Europe 's 500 largest corporations are based in London . London is the largest financial centre in Europe , and as of 2014 is the second largest in the world . 
 The Bank of England , founded in 1694 by Scottish banker William Paterson , is the United Kingdom 's central bank . Originally established as private banker to the government of England , since 1946 it has been a state @-@ owned institution . The bank has a monopoly on the issue of banknotes in England and Wales , although not in other parts of the United Kingdom . The government has devolved responsibility to the bank 's Monetary Policy Committee for managing the monetary policy of the country and setting interest rates . 
 England is highly industrialised , but since the 1970s there has been a decline in traditional heavy and manufacturing industries , and an increasing emphasis on a more service industry oriented economy . Tourism has become a significant industry , attracting millions of visitors to England each year . The export part of the economy is dominated by pharmaceuticals , cars ( although many English marques are now foreign @-@ owned , such as Land Rover , Lotus , Jaguar and Bentley ) , crude oil and petroleum from the English parts of North Sea oil along with Wytch Farm , aircraft engines and alcoholic beverages . 
 Most of the UK 's £ 25 billion aerospace industry is primarily based in England . The wings for the Airbus A380 and the Airbus A350 XWB are designed and manufactured at Airbus UK 's world @-@ leading facility in Broughton . GKN Aerospace – an expert in metallic and composite <unk> is involved in almost every civil and military fixed and rotary wing aircraft in production is based in Redditch . 
 BAE Systems makes large sections of the Typhoon Eurofighter at its sub @-@ assembly plant in <unk> and assembles the aircraft for the RAF at its Warton plant , near Preston . It is also a principal subcontractor on the F35 Joint Strike Fighter – the world 's largest single defence project – for which it designs and manufactures a range of components including the aft fuselage , vertical and horizontal tail and wing tips and fuel system . As well as this it manufactures the Hawk , the world 's most successful jet training aircraft . 
 Rolls @-@ Royce PLC is the world 's second @-@ largest aero @-@ engine manufacturer . Its engines power more than 30 types of commercial aircraft , and it has more 30 @,@ 000 engines currently in service across both the civil and defence sectors . With a workforce of over 12 @,@ 000 people , Derby has the largest concentration of Rolls @-@ Royce employees in the UK . Rolls @-@ Royce also produces low @-@ emission power systems for ships ; makes critical equipment and safety systems for the nuclear industry and powers offshore platforms and major pipelines for the oil and gas industry . 
 Much of the UK 's space industry is centred on EADS Astrium , based in Stevenage and Portsmouth . The company builds the buses – the underlying structure onto which the payload and propulsion systems are built – for most of the European Space Agency 's spacecraft , as well as commercial satellites . The world leader in compact satellite systems , Surrey Satellites , is also part of Astrium . Reaction Engines Limited , the company planning to build Skylon , a single @-@ stage @-@ to @-@ orbit spaceplane using their SABRE rocket engine , a combined @-@ cycle , air @-@ breathing rocket propulsion system is based Culham . 
 Agriculture is intensive and highly mechanised , producing 60 % of food needs with only 2 % of the labour force . Two thirds of production is devoted to livestock , the other to arable crops . 
 = = = Science and technology = = = 
 Prominent English figures from the field of science and mathematics include Sir Isaac Newton , Michael Faraday , Robert Hooke , Robert Boyle , Joseph Priestley , J. J. Thomson , Charles Babbage , Charles Darwin , Stephen Hawking , Christopher Wren , Alan Turing , Francis Crick , Joseph Lister , Tim Berners @-@ Lee , Paul Dirac , Andrew Wiles and Richard Dawkins . Some experts claim that the earliest concept of a metric system was invented by John Wilkins , the first secretary of the Royal Society , in 1668 . 
 As the birthplace of the Industrial Revolution , England was home to many significant inventors during the late 18th and early 19th centuries . Famous English engineers include Isambard Kingdom Brunel , best known for the creation of the Great Western Railway , a series of famous steamships , and numerous important bridges , hence revolutionising public transport and modern @-@ day engineering . Thomas Newcomen 's steam engine helped spawn the Industrial Revolution . The Father of Railways , George Stephenson , built the first public inter @-@ city railway line in the world , the Liverpool and Manchester Railway , which opened in 1830 . With his role in the marketing and manufacturing of the steam engine , and invention of modern coinage , Matthew Boulton ( business partner of James Watt ) is regarded as one of the most influential entrepreneurs in history . The physician Edward Jenner 's smallpox vaccine is said to have " saved more lives ... than were lost in all the wars of mankind since the beginning of recorded history . " 
 Inventions and discoveries of the English include : the jet engine , the first industrial spinning machine , the first computer and the first modern computer , the World Wide Web along with HTML , the first successful human blood transfusion , the motorised vacuum cleaner , the lawn mower , the seat belt , the hovercraft , the electric motor , steam engines , and theories such as the Darwinian theory of evolution and atomic theory . Newton developed the ideas of universal gravitation , Newtonian mechanics , and calculus , and Robert Hooke his eponymously named law of elasticity . Other inventions include the iron plate railway , the <unk> , tarmac , the rubber band , the mousetrap , " cat 's eye " road marker , joint development of the light bulb , steam locomotives , the modern seed drill and many modern techniques and technologies used in precision engineering . 
 = = = Transport = = = 
 The Department for Transport is the government body responsible for overseeing transport in England . There are many motorways in England , and many other trunk roads , such as the A1 Great North Road , which runs through eastern England from London to Newcastle ( much of this section is motorway ) and onward to the Scottish border . The longest motorway in England is the M6 , from Rugby through the North West up to the Anglo @-@ Scottish border , a distance of 232 miles ( 373 km ) . Other major routes include : the M1 from London to Leeds , the M25 which encircles London , the M60 which encircles Manchester , the M4 from London to South Wales , the M62 from Liverpool via Manchester to East Yorkshire , and the M5 from Birmingham to Bristol and the South West . 
 Bus transport across the country is widespread ; major companies include National Express , Arriva and Go @-@ Ahead Group . The red double @-@ decker buses in London have become a symbol of England . There is a rapid rail network in two English cities : the London Underground ; and the Tyne and Wear Metro in Newcastle , Gateshead and Sunderland . There are several tram networks , such as the Blackpool tramway , Manchester Metrolink , Sheffield Supertram and Midland Metro , and the Tramlink system centred on Croydon in South London . 
 Rail transport in England is the oldest in the world : passenger railways originated in England in 1825 . Much of Britain 's 10 @,@ 000 miles ( 16 @,@ 000 km ) of rail network lies in England , covering the country fairly extensively , although a high proportion of railway lines were closed in the second half of the 20th century . There are plans to reopen lines such as the Varsity Line between Oxford and Cambridge . These lines are mostly standard gauge ( single , double or quadruple track ) though there are also a few narrow gauge lines . There is rail transport access to France and Belgium through an undersea rail link , the Channel Tunnel , which was completed in 1994 . 
 England has extensive domestic and international aviation links . The largest airport is London Heathrow , which is the world 's busiest airport measured by number of international passengers . Other large airports include Manchester Airport , London Stansted Airport , Luton Airport and Birmingham Airport . By sea there is ferry transport , both local and international , including to Ireland , the Netherlands and Belgium . There are around 4 @,@ 400 miles ( 7 @,@ 100 km ) of navigable waterways in England , half of which is owned by the Canal and River Trust , however water transport is very limited . The Thames is the major waterway in England , with imports and exports focused at the Port of Tilbury in the Thames Estuary , one of the United Kingdom 's three major ports . 
 = = Healthcare = = 
 The National Health Service ( NHS ) is the publicly funded healthcare system in England responsible for providing the majority of healthcare in the country . The NHS began on 5 July 1948 , putting into effect the provisions of the National Health Service Act 1946 . It was based on the findings of the Beveridge Report , prepared by economist and social reformer William Beveridge . The NHS is largely funded from general taxation including National Insurance payments , and it provides most of its services free at the point of use , although there are charges for some people for eye tests , dental care , prescriptions and aspects of personal care . 
 The government department responsible for the NHS is the Department of Health , headed by the Secretary of State for Health , who sits in the British Cabinet . Most of the expenditure of the Department of Health is spent on the NHS — £ 98 @.@ 6 billion was spent in 2008 – 2009 . In recent years the private sector has been increasingly used to provide more NHS services despite opposition by doctors and trade unions . The average life expectancy of people in England is 77 @.@ 5 years for males and 81 @.@ 7 years for females , the highest of the four countries of the United Kingdom . 
 = = Demography = = 
 = = = Population = = = 
 With over 53 million inhabitants , England is by far the most populous country of the United Kingdom , accounting for 84 % of the combined total . England taken as a unit and measured against international states has the fourth largest population in the European Union and would be the 25th largest country by population in the world . With a density of 407 people per square kilometre , it would be the second most densely populated country in the European Union after Malta . 
 The English people are a British people . Some genetic evidence suggests that 75 – 95 % descend in the paternal line from prehistoric settlers who originally came from the Iberian Peninsula , as well as a 5 % contribution from Angles and Saxons , and a significant Scandinavian ( Viking ) element . However , other geneticists place the Germanic estimate up to half . Over time , various cultures have been influential : Prehistoric , Brythonic , Roman , Anglo @-@ Saxon , Viking ( North Germanic ) , Gaelic cultures , as well as a large influence from Normans . There is an English diaspora in former parts of the British Empire ; especially the United States , Canada , Australia , South Africa and New Zealand . Since the late 1990s , many English people have migrated to Spain . 
 In 1086 , when the Domesday Book was compiled , England had a population of two million . About ten per cent lived in urban areas . By 1801 the population had grown to 8 @.@ 3 million , and by 1901 had grown to 30 @.@ 5 million . Due in particular to the economic prosperity of South East England , it has received many economic migrants from the other parts of the United Kingdom . There has been significant Irish migration . The proportion of ethnically European residents totals at 87 @.@ 50 % , including Germans and Poles . 
 Other people from much further afield in the former British colonies have arrived since the 1950s : in particular , 6 % of people living in England have family origins in the Indian subcontinent , mostly India , Pakistan and Bangladesh . 2 @.@ 90 % of the population are black , from both the Caribbean and countries in Africa itself , especially former British colonies . There is a significant number of Chinese and British Chinese . In 2007 , 22 % of primary school children in England were from ethnic minority families , and in 2011 that figure was 26 @.@ 5 % . About half of the population increase between 1991 and 2001 was due to immigration . Debate over immigration is politically prominent ; according to a 2009 Home Office poll , 80 % of people want to cap it . The ONS has projected that the population will grow by six million between 2004 and 2029 . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 As its name suggests , the English language , today spoken by hundreds of millions of people around the world , originated as the language of England , where it remains the principal tongue spoken by 98 % of the population . It is an Indo @-@ European language in the Anglo @-@ Frisian branch of the Germanic family . After the Norman conquest , the Old English language was displaced and confined to the lower social classes as Norman French and Latin were used by the aristocracy . 
 By the 15th century , English was back in fashion among all classes , though much changed ; the Middle English form showed many signs of French influence , both in vocabulary and spelling . During the English Renaissance , many words were coined from Latin and Greek origins . Modern English has extended this custom of flexibility , when it comes to incorporating words from different languages . Thanks in large part to the British Empire , the English language is the world 's unofficial lingua franca . 
 English language learning and teaching is an important economic activity , and includes language schooling , tourism spending , and publishing . There is no legislation mandating an official language for England , but English is the only language used for official business . Despite the country 's relatively small size , there are many distinct regional accents , and individuals with particularly strong accents may not be easily understood everywhere in the country . 
 As well as English , England has two other indigenous languages , Cornish and Welsh . Cornish died out as a community language in the 18th century but is being revived , and is now protected under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages . It is spoken by 0 @.@ 1 % of people in Cornwall , and is taught to some degree in several primary and secondary schools . 
 When the modern border between Wales and England was established by the Laws in Wales Acts 1535 and 1542 , many Welsh @-@ speaking communities found themselves on the English side of the border . Welsh was spoken in Archenfield in Herefordshire into the nineteenth century . Welsh was spoken by natives of parts of western Shropshire until the middle of the twentieth century if not later . 
 State schools teach students a second language , usually French , German or Spanish . Due to immigration , it was reported in 2007 that around 800 @,@ 000 school students spoke a foreign language at home , the most common being Punjabi and Urdu . However , following the 2011 census data released by the Office for National Statistics , figures now show that Polish is the main language spoken in England after English . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 According to the 2011 census , 59 @.@ 4 % of the population is Christian , 24 @.@ 7 % non @-@ religious , 5 % is Muslim while 3 @.@ 7 % of the population belongs to other religions and 7 @.@ 2 did not give an answer . Christianity is the most widely practised religion in England , as it has been since the Early Middle Ages , although it was first introduced much earlier in Gaelic and Roman times . This Celtic Church was gradually joined to the Catholic hierarchy following the 6th @-@ century Gregorian mission to Kent led by St Augustine . The established church of England is Church of England , which left communion with Rome in the 1530s when Henry VIII was unable to annul his divorce to the aunt of the king of Spain . The religion regards itself as both Catholic and Reformed . 
 There are High Church and Low Church traditions , and some Anglicans regard themselves as Anglo @-@ Catholics , following the Tractarian movement . The monarch of the United Kingdom is the Supreme Governor of the church , which has around 26 million baptised members ( of whom the vast majority are not regular churchgoers ) . It forms part of the Anglican Communion with the Archbishop of Canterbury acting as its symbolic worldwide head . Many cathedrals and parish churches are historic buildings of significant architectural importance , such as Westminster Abbey , York Minster , Durham Cathedral , and Salisbury Cathedral . 
 The 2nd @-@ largest Christian practice is the Latin Rite of the Catholic Church . Since its reintroduction after the Catholic Emancipation , the Church has organised ecclesiastically on an England and Wales basis where there are 4 @.@ 5 million members ( most of whom are English ) . There has been one Pope from England to date , Adrian IV ; while saints Bede and Anselm are regarded as Doctors of the Church . 
 A form of Protestantism known as Methodism is the third largest Christian practice and grew out of Anglicanism through John Wesley . It gained popularity in the mill towns of Lancashire and Yorkshire , and amongst tin miners in Cornwall . There are other non @-@ conformist minorities , such as Baptists , Quakers , Congregationalists , Unitarians and The Salvation Army . 
 The patron saint of England is Saint George ; his symbolic cross is included in the flag of England , as well as in the Union Flag as part of a combination . There are many other English and associated saints ; some of the best @-@ known are : Cuthbert , Edmund , Alban , Wilfrid , Aidan , Edward the Confessor , John Fisher , Thomas More , Petroc , Piran , Margaret Clitherow and Thomas Becket . There are non @-@ Christian religions practised . Jews have a history of a small minority on the island since 1070 . They were expelled from England in 1290 following the Edict of Expulsion , only to be allowed back in 1656 . 
 Especially since the 1950s , religions from the former British colonies have grown in numbers , due to immigration . Islam is the most common of these , now accounting for around 5 % of the population in England . Hinduism , Sikhism and Buddhism are next in number , adding up to 2 @.@ 8 % combined , introduced from India and South East Asia . 
 A small minority of the population practice ancient Pagan religions . Neopaganism in the United Kingdom is primarily represented by Wicca and Witchcraft religions , <unk> , and Heathenry . According to the 2011 UK Census , there are roughly 53 @,@ 172 people who identify as Pagan in England , and 3 @,@ 448 in Wales , including 11 @,@ 026 Wiccans in England and 740 in Wales . 
 = = Education = = 
 The Department for Education is the government department responsible for issues affecting people in England up to the age of 19 , including education . State @-@ run and state @-@ funded schools are attended by approximately 93 % of English schoolchildren . Of these , a minority are faith schools ( primarily Church of England or Roman Catholic schools ) . Children who are between the ages of 3 and 5 attend nursery or an Early Years Foundation Stage reception unit within a primary school . Children between the ages of 5 and 11 attend primary school , and secondary school is attended by those aged between 11 and 16 . After finishing compulsory education , students take GCSE examinations . Students may then opt to continue into further education for two years . Further education colleges ( particularly sixth form colleges ) often form part of a secondary school site . A @-@ level examinations are sat by a large number of further education students , and often form the basis of an application to university . 
 Although most English secondary schools are comprehensive , in some areas there are selective intake grammar schools , to which entrance is subject to passing the Eleven @-@ Plus exam . Around 7 @.@ 2 % of English schoolchildren attend private schools , which are funded by private sources . Standards in state schools are monitored by the Office for Standards in Education , and in private schools by the Independent Schools Inspectorate . 
 Higher education students normally attend university from age 18 onwards , where they study for an academic degree . There are over 90 universities in England , all but one of which are public institutions . The Department for Business , Innovation and Skills is the government department responsible for higher education in England . Students are generally entitled to student loans to cover the cost of tuition fees and living costs . The first degree offered to undergraduates is the Bachelor 's degree , which usually takes three years to complete . Students are then able to work towards a postgraduate degree , which usually takes one year , or towards a doctorate , which takes three or more years . 
 England 's universities include some of the highest @-@ ranked universities in the world ; Cambridge University , Imperial College London , Oxford University , University College London and King 's College London are all ranked in the global top 20 in the 2014 – 2015 QS World University Rankings . The London School of Economics has been described as the world 's leading social science institution for both teaching and research . The London Business School is considered one of the world 's leading business schools and in 2010 its MBA programme was ranked best in the world by the Financial Times . Academic degrees in England are usually split into classes : first class ( 1st ) , upper second class ( 2 : 1 ) , lower second class ( 2 : 2 ) , third ( 3rd ) , and unclassified . 
 The King 's School , Canterbury and King 's School , Rochester are the oldest schools in the English @-@ speaking world . Many of England 's most well @-@ known schools , such as Winchester College , Eton , St Paul 's School , Harrow School and Rugby School are fee @-@ paying institutions . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 Many ancient standing stone monuments were erected during the prehistoric period , amongst the best @-@ known are Stonehenge , Devil 's Arrows , Rudston Monolith and Castlerigg . With the introduction of Ancient Roman architecture there was a development of basilicas , baths , amphitheaters , triumphal arches , villas , Roman temples , Roman roads , Roman forts , stockades and aqueducts . It was the Romans who founded the first cities and towns such as London , Bath , York , Chester and St Albans . Perhaps the best @-@ known example is Hadrian 's Wall stretching right across northern England . Another well @-@ preserved example is the Roman Baths at Bath , Somerset . 
 Early Medieval architecture 's secular buildings were simple constructions mainly using timber with thatch for roofing . Ecclesiastical architecture ranged from a synthesis of Hiberno — Saxon monasticism , to Early Christian basilica and architecture characterised by pilaster @-@ strips , blank arcading , baluster shafts and triangular headed openings . After the Norman conquest in 1066 various Castles in England were created so law lords could uphold their authority and in the north to protect from invasion . Some of the best @-@ known medieval castles are the Tower of London , Warwick Castle , Durham Castle and Windsor Castle . 
 Throughout the Plantagenet era an English Gothic architecture flourished — the medieval cathedrals such as Canterbury Cathedral , Westminster Abbey and York Minster are prime examples . Expanding on the Norman base there was also castles , palaces , great houses , universities and parish churches . Medieval architecture was completed with the 16th @-@ century Tudor style ; the four @-@ centred arch , now known as the Tudor arch , was a defining feature as were wattle and daub houses domestically . In the aftermath of the Renaissance a form of architecture echoing classical antiquity , synthesised with Christianity appeared — the English Baroque style , architect Christopher Wren was particularly championed . 
 Georgian architecture followed in a more refined style , evoking a simple Palladian form ; the Royal Crescent at Bath is one of the best examples of this . With the emergence of romanticism during Victorian period , a Gothic Revival was launched — in addition to this around the same time the Industrial Revolution paved the way for buildings such as The Crystal Palace . Since the 1930s various modernist forms have appeared whose reception is often controversial , though traditionalist resistance movements continue with support in influential places . 
 = = = Folklore = = = 
 English folklore developed over many centuries . Some of the characters and stories are present across England , but most belong to specific regions . Common folkloric beings include pixies , giants , elves , bogeymen , trolls , goblins and dwarves . While many legends and folk @-@ customs are thought to be ancient , for instance the tales featuring Offa of Angel and Wayland the Smith , others date from after the Norman invasion ; Robin Hood and his Merry Men of Sherwood and their battles with the Sheriff of Nottingham being , perhaps , the best known . 
 During the High Middle Ages tales originating from Brythonic traditions entered English folklore — the Arthurian myth . These were derived from Anglo @-@ Norman , Welsh and French sources , featuring King Arthur , Camelot , Excalibur , Merlin and the Knights of the Round Table such as Lancelot . These stories are most centrally brought together within Geoffrey of Monmouth 's Historia Regum Britanniae ( History of the Kings of Britain ) . Another early figure from British tradition , King Cole , may have been based on a real figure from Sub @-@ Roman Britain . Many of the tales and pseudo @-@ histories make up part of the wider Matter of Britain , a collection of shared British folklore . 
 Some folk figures are based on semi or actual historical people whose story has been passed down centuries ; Lady Godiva for instance was said to have ridden naked on horseback through Coventry , Hereward the Wake was a heroic English figure resisting the Norman invasion , Herne the Hunter is an equestrian ghost associated with Windsor Forest and Great Park and Mother Shipton is the archetypal witch . On 5 November people make bonfires , set off fireworks and eat toffee apples in commemoration of the foiling of the Gunpowder Plot centred on Guy Fawkes . The chivalrous bandit , such as Dick Turpin , is a recurring character , while Blackbeard is the archetypal pirate . There are various national and regional folk activities , participated in to this day , such as Morris dancing , Maypole dancing , Rapper sword in the North East , Long Sword dance in Yorkshire , Mummers Plays , bottle @-@ kicking in Leicestershire , and cheese @-@ rolling at Cooper 's Hill . There is no official national costume , but a few are well established such as the Pearly Kings and Queens associated with <unk> , the Royal Guard , the Morris costume and Beefeaters . 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 Since the early modern period the food of England has historically been characterised by its simplicity of approach and a reliance on the high quality of natural produce . During the Middle Ages and through the Renaissance period , English cuisine enjoyed an excellent reputation , though a decline began during the Industrial Revolution with the move away from the land and increasing urbanisation of the populace . The cuisine of England has , however , recently undergone a revival , which has been recognised by the food critics with some good ratings in Restaurant 's best restaurant in the world charts . An early book of English recipes is the Forme of Cury from the royal court of Richard II . 
 Traditional examples of English food include the Sunday roast , featuring a roasted joint ( usually beef , lamb , chicken or pork ) served with assorted vegetables , Yorkshire pudding , and gravy . Other prominent meals include fish and chips and the full English breakfast ( generally consisting of bacon , sausages , grilled tomatoes , fried bread , black pudding , baked beans , mushrooms , and eggs ) . Various meat pies are consumed such as steak and kidney pie , steak and ale pie , cottage pie , pork pie ( the latter usually eaten cold ) and the Cornish Pasty . 
 Sausages are commonly eaten , either as bangers and mash or toad in the hole . Lancashire hotpot is a well known stew in the northwest . Some of the more popular cheeses are Cheddar , Red Leicester and Wensleydale together with Blue Stilton . Many Anglo @-@ Indian hybrid dishes , curries , have been created such as chicken tikka masala and <unk> . Traditional English dessert dishes include apple pie or other fruit pies ; spotted dick – all generally served with custard ; and , more recently , sticky toffee pudding . Sweet pastries include scones ( either plain or containing dried fruit ) served with jam and / or cream , dried fruit loaves , Eccles cakes and mince pies as well as a wide range of sweet or spiced biscuits . Common drinks include tea , whose popularity was increased by Catherine of Braganza , whilst frequently consumed alcoholic drinks include wines , <unk> and English beers , such as bitter , mild , stout , and brown ale . 
 = = = Visual arts = = = 
 The earliest known examples are the prehistoric rock and cave art pieces , most prominent in North Yorkshire , Northumberland and Cumbria , but also feature further south , for example at Creswell Crags . With the arrival of Roman culture in the 1st century , various forms of art utilising statues , busts , glasswork and mosaics were the norm . There are numerous surviving artefacts , such as those at <unk> and Aldborough . During the Early Middle Ages the style favoured sculpted crosses and ivories , manuscript painting , gold and enamel jewellery , demonstrating a love of intricate , interwoven designs such as in the Staffordshire Hoard discovered in 2009 . Some of these blended Gaelic and Anglian styles , such as the Lindisfarne Gospels and Vespasian Psalter . Later Gothic art was popular at Winchester and Canterbury , examples survive such as Benedictional of St. Æthelwold and Luttrell Psalter . 
 The Tudor era saw prominent artists as part of their court , portrait painting which would remain an enduring part of English art , was boosted by German Hans Holbein , natives such as Nicholas Hilliard built on this . Under the Stuarts , Continental artists were influential especially the Flemish , examples from the period include — Anthony van Dyck , Peter Lely , Godfrey Kneller and William Dobson . The 18th century was a time of significance with the founding of the Royal Academy , a classicism based on the High Renaissance prevailed — Thomas Gainsborough and Joshua Reynolds became two of England 's most treasured artists . 
 The Norwich School continued the landscape tradition , while the Pre @-@ Raphaelite Brotherhood with their vivid and detailed style revived the Early Renaissance style — Holman Hunt , Dante Gabriel Rossetti and John Everett Millais were leaders . Prominent amongst 20th @-@ century artists was Henry Moore , regarded as the voice of British sculpture , and of British modernism in general . Contemporary painters include Lucian Freud , whose work Benefits Supervisor Sleeping in 2008 set a world record for sale value of a painting by a living artist . 
 = = = Literature , poetry and philosophy = = = 
 Early authors such as Bede and Alcuin wrote in Latin . The period of Old English literature provided the epic poem Beowulf and the secular prose of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , along with Christian writings such as Judith , Cædmon 's Hymn and hagiographies . Following the Norman conquest Latin continued amongst the educated classes , as well as an Anglo @-@ Norman literature . 
 Middle English literature emerged with Geoffrey Chaucer , author of The Canterbury Tales , along with Gower , the Pearl Poet and Langland . William of Ockham and Roger Bacon , who were Franciscans , were major philosophers of the Middle Ages . Julian of Norwich , who wrote Revelations of Divine Love , was a prominent Christian mystic . With the English Renaissance literature in the Early Modern English style appeared . William Shakespeare , whose works include Hamlet , Romeo and Juliet , Macbeth , and A Midsummer Night 's Dream , remains one of the most championed authors in English literature . 
 Christopher Marlowe , Edmund Spenser , Philip Sydney , Thomas Kyd , John Donne , and Ben Jonson are other established authors of the Elizabethan age . Francis Bacon and Thomas Hobbes wrote on empiricism and materialism , including scientific method and social contract . Filmer wrote on the Divine Right of Kings . Marvell was the best @-@ known poet of the Commonwealth , while John Milton authored Paradise Lost during the Restoration . 
 Some of the most prominent philosophers of the Enlightenment were John Locke , Thomas Paine , Samuel Johnson and Jeremy Bentham . More radical elements were later countered by Edmund Burke who is regarded as the founder of conservatism . The poet Alexander Pope with his satirical verse became well regarded . The English played a significant role in romanticism : Samuel Taylor Coleridge , Lord Byron , John Keats , Mary Shelley , Percy Bysshe Shelley , William Blake and William Wordsworth were major figures . 
 In response to the Industrial Revolution , agrarian writers sought a way between liberty and tradition ; William Cobbett , G. K. Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc were main exponents , while the founder of guild socialism , Arthur Penty , and cooperative movement advocate G. D. H. Cole are somewhat related . <unk> continued through John Stuart Mill and Bertrand Russell , while Bernard Williams was involved in analytics . Authors from around the Victorian era include Charles Dickens , the Brontë sisters , Jane Austen , George Eliot , Rudyard Kipling , Thomas Hardy , H. G. Wells and Lewis Carroll . Since then England has continued to produce novelists such as George Orwell , D. H. Lawrence , Virginia Woolf , C. S. Lewis , Enid Blyton , Aldous Huxley , Agatha Christie , Terry Pratchett , J. R. R. Tolkien , and J. K. Rowling . 
 = = = Performing arts = = = 
 The traditional folk music of England is centuries old and has contributed to several genres prominently ; mostly sea shanties , jigs , hornpipes and dance music . It has its own distinct variations and regional peculiarities . Wynkyn de Worde printed ballads of Robin Hood from the 16th century are an important artefact , as are John Playford 's The Dancing Master and Robert Harley 's Roxburghe Ballads collections . Some of the best @-@ known songs are Greensleeves , Pastime with Good Company , Maggie May and Spanish Ladies amongst others . Many nursery rhymes are of English origin such as Twinkle Twinkle Little Star , Roses are red , Jack and Jill , London Bridge Is Falling Down , The Grand Old Duke of York , Hey Diddle Diddle and Humpty Dumpty . Traditional English Christmas carols include " We Wish You a Merry Christmas " , " The First Noel " and " God Rest You Merry , Gentlemen " . 
 Early English composers in classical music include Renaissance artists Thomas Tallis and William Byrd , followed up by Henry Purcell from the Baroque period . German @-@ born George Frideric Handel became a British subject and spent most of his composing life in London , creating some of the most well @-@ known works of classical music , The Messiah , Water Music , and Music for the Royal Fireworks . One of his four Coronation Anthems , Zadok the Priest , composed for the coronation of George II , has been performed at every subsequent British coronation , traditionally during the sovereign 's anointing . There was a revival in the profile of composers from England in the 20th century led by Edward Elgar , Benjamin Britten , Frederick Delius , Gustav Holst , Ralph Vaughan Williams and others . Present @-@ day composers from England include Michael Nyman , best known for The Piano , and Andrew Lloyd Webber , whose musicals have achieved enormous success in the West End and worldwide . 
 In the field of popular music , many English bands and solo artists have been cited as the most influential and best @-@ selling musicians of all time . Acts such as The Beatles , Led Zeppelin , Pink Floyd , Elton John , Queen , Rod Stewart and The Rolling Stones are among the highest selling recording artists in the world . Many musical genres have origins in ( or strong associations with ) England , such as British invasion , progressive rock , hard rock , Mod , glam rock , heavy metal , Britpop , indie rock , gothic rock , shoegazing , acid house , garage , trip hop , drum and bass and dubstep . 
 Large outdoor music festivals in the summer and autumn are popular , such as Glastonbury , V Festival , and the Reading and Leeds Festivals . The most prominent opera house in England is the Royal Opera House at Covent Garden . The Proms – a season of orchestral classical concerts held at the Royal Albert Hall in London – is a major cultural event in the English calendar , and takes place yearly . The Royal Ballet is one of the world 's foremost classical ballet companies , its reputation built on two prominent figures of 20th @-@ century dance , prima ballerina Margot Fonteyn and choreographer Frederick Ashton . 
 = = = Cinema = = = 
 England ( and the UK as a whole ) has had a considerable influence on the history of the cinema , producing some of the greatest actors , directors and motion pictures of all time , including Alfred Hitchcock , Charlie Chaplin , David Lean , Laurence Olivier , Vivien Leigh , John Gielgud , Peter Sellers , Julie Andrews , Michael Caine , Gary Oldman , Helen Mirren , Kate Winslet and Daniel Day @-@ Lewis . Hitchcock and Lean are among the most critically acclaimed of all @-@ time . Hitchcock 's first thriller , The Lodger : A Story of the London Fog ( 1926 ) , helped shape the thriller genre in film , while his 1929 film , Blackmail , is often regarded as the first British sound feature film . 
 Major film studios in England include Pinewood , Elstree and Shepperton . Some of the most commercially successful films of all time have been produced in England , including two of the highest @-@ grossing film franchises ( Harry Potter and James Bond ) . Ealing Studios in London has a claim to being the oldest continuously working film studio in the world . Famous for recording many motion picture film scores , the London Symphony Orchestra first performed film music in 1935 . 
 The BFI Top 100 British films includes Monty Python 's Life of Brian ( 1979 ) , a film regularly voted the funniest of all time by the UK public . English producers are also active in international co @-@ productions and English actors , directors and crew feature regularly in American films . The UK film council ranked David Yates , Christopher Nolan , Mike Newell , Ridley Scott and Paul Greengrass the five most commercially successful English directors since 2001 . Other contemporary English directors include Sam Mendes , Guy Ritchie and Steve McQueen . Current actors include Tom Hardy , Daniel Craig , Benedict Cumberbatch and Emma Watson . Acclaimed for his motion capture work , Andy Serkis opened The Imaginarium Studios in London in 2011 . The visual effects company Framestore in London has produced some of the most critically acclaimed special effects in modern film . Many successful Hollywood films have been based on English people , stories or events . The ' English Cycle ' of Disney animated films include Alice in Wonderland , The Jungle Book and Winnie the Pooh . 
 = = = Museums , libraries , and galleries = = = 
 English Heritage is a governmental body with a broad remit of managing the historic sites , artefacts and environments of England . It is currently sponsored by the Department for Culture , Media and Sport . The charity National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty holds a contrasting role . 17 of the 25 United Kingdom UNESCO World Heritage Sites fall within England . Some of the best @-@ known of these are : Hadrian 's Wall , Stonehenge , Avebury and Associated Sites , Tower of London , Jurassic Coast , Saltaire , Ironbridge Gorge , Studley Royal Park and various others . 
 There are many museums in England , but perhaps the most notable is London 's British Museum . Its collection of more than seven million objects is one of the largest and most comprehensive in the world , sourced from every continent , illustrating and documenting the story of human culture from its beginning to the present . The British Library in London is the national library and is one of the world 's largest research libraries , holding over 150 million items in all known languages and formats ; including around 25 million books . The most senior art gallery is the National Gallery in Trafalgar Square , which houses a collection of over 2 @,@ 300 paintings dating from the mid @-@ 13th century to 1900 . The Tate galleries house the national collections of British and international modern art ; they also host the famously controversial Turner Prize . 
 = = Sports = = 
 England has a strong sporting heritage , and during the 19th century codified many sports that are now played around the world . Sports originating in England include association football , cricket , rugby union , rugby league , tennis , boxing , badminton , squash , rounders , hockey , snooker , billiards , darts , table tennis , bowls , netball , thoroughbred horseracing , greyhound racing and fox hunting . It has helped the development of golf , sailing and Formula One . 
 Football is the most popular of these sports . The England national football team , whose home venue is Wembley Stadium , played Scotland in the first ever international football match in 1872 . Referred to as the " home of football " by FIFA , England hosted the 1966 FIFA World Cup , and won the tournament by defeating West Germany 4 – 2 in the final , with Geoff Hurst scoring a hat @-@ trick . With a British television audience peak of 32 @.@ 30 million viewers , the final is the most watched television event ever in the UK . 
 At club level England is recognised by FIFA as the birthplace of club football , due to Sheffield F.C. founded in 1857 being the world 's oldest club . The Football Association is the oldest governing body in the sport , with the rules of football first drafted in 1863 by Ebenezer Cobb Morley . The FA Cup and The Football League were the first cup and league competitions respectively . In the modern day the Premier League is the world 's most @-@ watched football league , most lucrative , and amongst the elite . 
 As is the case throughout the UK , football in England is renowned for the intense rivalries between clubs and the passion of the supporters , which includes a tradition of football chants , such as , " You 're Not Singing Any More " ( or its variant " We Can See You Sneaking Out ! " ) , sung by jubilant fans towards the opposition fans who have gone silent ( or left early ) . The European Cup ( now UEFA Champions League ) has been won by Liverpool , Manchester United , Nottingham Forest , Aston Villa and Chelsea , while Arsenal , and Leeds United have reached the final . Other English clubs have enjoyed success , Tottenham Hotspur , Ipswich Town , Chelsea , and Liverpool have won the UEFA Cup , renamed UEFA Europa League . 
 Cricket is generally thought to have been developed in the early medieval period among the farming and metalworking communities of the Weald . The England cricket team is a composite England and Wales team . One of the game 's top rivalries is The Ashes series between England and Australia , contested since 1882 . The climax of the 2005 Ashes was viewed by 7 @.@ 4 million as it was available on terrestrial television . England has hosted four Cricket World Cups ( 1975 , 1979 , 1983 , 1999 ) and will host the 2019 edition , but never won the tournament , reaching the final 3 times . However they have hosted the ICC World Twenty20 in 2009 , winning this format in 2010 beating rivals Australia in the final . In the domestic competition , the County Championship , Yorkshire are by far the most successful club having won the competition 31 times . Lord 's Cricket Ground situated in London is sometimes referred to as the " Mecca of Cricket " . 
 William Penny Brookes was prominent in organising the format for the modern Olympic Games . In 1994 , then President of the IOC , Juan Antonio Samaranch , laid a wreath on Brooke 's grave , and said , " I came to pay homage and tribute to Dr Brookes , who really was the founder of the modern Olympic Games " . London has hosted the Summer Olympic Games three times , in 1908 , 1948 , and 2012 . England competes in the Commonwealth Games , held every four years . Sport England is the governing body responsible for distributing funds and providing strategic guidance for sporting activity in England . 
 Rugby union originated in Rugby School , Warwickshire in the early 19th century . The England rugby union team won the 2003 Rugby World Cup , the country was one of the host nations of the competition in the 1991 Rugby World Cup and is set to host the 2015 Rugby World Cup . The top level of club participation is the English Premiership . Leicester Tigers , London Wasps , Bath Rugby and Northampton Saints have had success in the Europe @-@ wide Heineken Cup . 
 Rugby league was born in Huddersfield in 1895 . Since 2008 , the England national rugby league team has been a full test nation in lieu of the Great Britain national rugby league team , which won three World Cups but is now retired . Club sides play in Super League , the present @-@ day embodiment of the Rugby Football League Championship . Rugby League is most popular among towns in the northern English counties of Lancashire , Yorkshire and Cumbria . All eleven English clubs in Super League are based in the north of England . Some of the most successful clubs include Wigan Warriors , St Helens , Leeds Rhinos and Huddersfield Giants ; the former three have all won the World Club Challenge previously . 
 Golf has been prominent in England ; due in part to its cultural and geographical ties to Scotland , the home of Golf . There are both professional tours for men and women , in two main tours : the PGA and the European Tour . England has produced grand slam winners : Cyril Walker , Tony Jacklin , Nick Faldo , and Justin Rose in the men 's and Laura Davies , Alison Nicholas , and Karen <unk> in the women 's . The world 's oldest golf tournament , and golf 's first major , is The Open Championship , played both in England and Scotland . The biennial golf competition , the Ryder Cup , is named after English businessman Samuel Ryder who sponsored the event and donated the trophy . Nick Faldo is the most successful Ryder Cup player ever , having won the most points ( 25 ) of any player on either the European or U.S. teams . 
 Tennis was created in Birmingham , England in the late 19th century , and the Wimbledon Championships is the oldest tennis tournament in the world , and widely considered the most prestigious . Fred Perry was the last Englishman to win Wimbledon in 1936 . He was the first player to win all four Grand Slam singles titles and helped lead the Great Britain team to victory over France in the Davis Cup in 1933 . English women who have won Wimbledon include : Ann Haydon Jones won in 1969 and Virginia Wade in 1977 . 
 In boxing , under the Marquess of Queensberry Rules , England has produced many world champions across the weight divisions internationally recognised by the governing bodies . World champions include Bob Fitzsimmons , Ted " Kid " Lewis , Randolph Turpin , Nigel Benn , Chris Eubank , Frank Bruno , Lennox Lewis , Ricky Hatton , Naseem Hamed , Amir Khan , Carl Froch , and David Haye . In women 's boxing , Nicola Adams became the world 's first woman to win an Olympic boxing Gold medal at the 2012 Summer Olympics . 
 The 1950 British Grand Prix at Silverstone was the first race in the newly created Formula One World Championship . Since then , England has produced some of the greatest drivers in the sport , including ; John Surtees , Stirling Moss , Graham Hill ( only driver to have won the Triple Crown ) , Nigel Mansell ( only man to hold F1 and IndyCar titles at the same time ) , Damon Hill , Lewis Hamilton and Jenson Button . It has manufactured some of the most technically advanced racing cars , and many of today 's racing companies choose England as their base of operations for its engineering knowledge and organisation . McLaren Automotive , Williams F1 , Team Lotus , Honda , Brawn GP , Benetton , Renault , and Red Bull Racing are all , or have been , located in the south of England . England also has a rich heritage in Grand Prix motorcycle racing , the premier championship of motorcycle road racing , and produced several World Champions across all the various class of motorcycle : Mike Hailwood , John Surtees , Phil Read , Geoff Duke , and Barry Sheene . 
 Darts is a widely popular sport in England ; a professional competitive sport , darts is a traditional pub game . The sport is governed by the World Darts Federation , one of its member organisations is the BDO , which annually stages the Lakeside World Professional Championship , the other being the Professional Darts Corporation ( PDC ) , which runs its own world championship at Alexandra Palace in London . Phil Taylor is widely regarded as the best darts player of all time , having won 187 professional tournaments , and a record 16 World Championships . Trina Gulliver is the ten @-@ time Women 's World Professional Darts Champion of the British Darts Organisation . Another popular sport commonly associated with pub games is Snooker , and England has produced several world champions , including Steve Davis and Ronnie O 'Sullivan . 
 The English are keen sailors and enjoy competitive sailing ; founding and winning some of the worlds most famous and respected international competitive tournaments across the various race formats , including the match race , a regatta , and the America 's Cup . England has produced some of the world 's greatest sailors , including , Francis Chichester , Herbert Hasler , John Ridgway , Robin Knox @-@ Johnston , Ellen MacArthur , Mike Golding , Paul Goodison , and the most successful Olympic sailor ever Ben Ainslie . 
 = = National symbols = = 
 The St George 's Cross has been the national flag of England since the 13th century . Originally the flag was used by the maritime Republic of Genoa . The English monarch paid a tribute to the Doge of Genoa from 1190 onwards , so that English ships could fly the flag as a means of protection when entering the Mediterranean . A red cross was a symbol for many Crusaders in the 12th and 13th centuries . It became associated with Saint George , along with countries and cities , which claimed him as their patron saint and used his cross as a banner . Since 1606 the St George 's Cross has formed part of the design of the Union Flag , a Pan @-@ British flag designed by King James I. 
 There are numerous other symbols and symbolic artefacts , both official and unofficial , including the Tudor rose , the nation 's floral emblem , and the Three Lions featured on the Royal Arms of England . The Tudor rose was adopted as a national emblem of England around the time of the Wars of the Roses as a symbol of peace . It is a syncretic symbol in that it merged the white rose of the Yorkists and the red rose of the Lancastrians — cadet branches of the Plantagenets who went to war over control of the nation . It is also known as the Rose of England . The oak tree is a symbol of England , representing strength and endurance . The Royal Oak symbol and Oak Apple Day commemorate the escape of King Charles II from the grasp of the parliamentarians after his father 's execution : he hid in an oak tree to avoid detection before safely reaching exile . 
 The Royal Arms of England , a national coat of arms featuring three lions , originated with its adoption by Richard the Lionheart in 1198 . It is blazoned as gules , three lions passant guardant or and it provides one of the most prominent symbols of England ; it is similar to the traditional arms of Normandy . England does not have an official designated national anthem , as the United Kingdom as a whole has God Save the Queen . However , the following are often considered unofficial English national anthems : Jerusalem , Land of Hope and Glory ( used for England during the 2002 Commonwealth Games ) , and I Vow to Thee , My Country . England 's National Day is 23 April which is St George 's Day : St George is the patron saint of England . 
 = Global financial system = 
 The global financial system is the worldwide framework of legal agreements , institutions , and both formal and informal economic actors that together facilitate international flows of financial capital for purposes of investment and trade financing . Since emerging in the late 19th century during the first modern wave of economic globalization , its evolution is marked by the establishment of central banks , multilateral treaties , and intergovernmental organizations aimed at improving the transparency , regulation , and effectiveness of international markets . In the late 1800s , world migration and communication technology facilitated unprecedented growth in international trade and investment . At the onset of World War I , trade contracted as foreign exchange markets became paralyzed by money market illiquidity . Countries sought to defend against external shocks with protectionist policies and trade virtually halted by 1933 , worsening the effects of the global Great Depression until a series of reciprocal trade agreements slowly reduced tariffs worldwide . Efforts to revamp the international monetary system after World War II improved exchange rate stability , fostering record growth in global finance . 
 A series of currency devaluations and oil crises in the 1970s led most countries to float their currencies . The world economy became increasingly financially integrated in the 1980s and 1990s due to capital account liberalization and financial deregulation . A series of financial crises in Europe , Asia , and Latin America followed with contagious effects due to greater exposure to volatile capital flows . The global financial crisis , which originated in the United States in 2007 , quickly propagated among other nations and is recognized as the catalyst for the worldwide Great Recession . A market adjustment to Greece 's noncompliance with its monetary union in 2009 ignited a sovereign debt crisis among European nations known as the Eurozone crisis . 
 A country 's decision to operate an open economy and <unk> its financial capital carries monetary implications captured by the balance of payments . It also renders exposure to risks in international finance , such as political deterioration , regulatory changes , foreign exchange controls , and legal uncertainties for property rights and investments . Both individuals and groups may participate in the global financial system . Consumers and international businesses undertake consumption , production , and investment . Governments and intergovernmental bodies act as purveyors of international trade , economic development , and crisis management . Regulatory bodies establish financial regulations and legal procedures , while independent bodies facilitate industry supervision . Research institutes and other associations analyze data , publish reports and policy briefs , and host public discourse on global financial affairs . 
 While the global financial system is edging toward greater stability , governments must deal with differing regional or national needs . Some nations are trying to orderly discontinue unconventional monetary policies installed to cultivate recovery , while others are expanding their scope and scale . Emerging market policymakers face a challenge of precision as they must carefully institute sustainable macroeconomic policies during extraordinary market sensitivity without provoking investors to retreat their capital to stronger markets . Nations ' inability to align interests and achieve international consensus on matters such as banking regulation has perpetuated the risk of future global financial catastrophes . 
 = = History of international financial architecture = = 
 = = = Emergence of financial globalization : 1870 – 1914 = = = 
 The world experienced substantial changes prior to 1914 , which created an environment favorable to an increase in and development of international financial centers . Principal among such changes were unprecedented growth in capital flows and the resulting rapid financial center integration , as well as faster communication . Before 1870 , London and Paris existed as the world 's only prominent financial centers . Soon after , Berlin and New York grew to become major financial centres . An array of smaller financial centers became important as they found market niches , such as Amsterdam , Brussels , Zurich , and Geneva . London remained the leading international financial center in the four decades leading up to World War I. 
 The first modern wave of economic globalization began during the period of 1870 – 1914 , marked by transportation expansion , record levels of migration , enhanced communications , trade expansion , and growth in capital transfers . During the mid @-@ nineteenth century , the passport system in Europe dissolved as rail transport expanded rapidly . Most countries issuing passports did not require their carry , thus people could travel freely without them . The standardization of international passports would not arise until 1980 under the guidance of the United Nations ' International Civil Aviation Organization . From 1870 to 1915 , 36 million Europeans migrated away from Europe . Approximately 25 million ( or 70 % ) of these travelers migrated to the United States , while most of the rest reached Canada , Australia , Argentina , and Brazil . Europe itself experienced an influx of foreigners from 1860 to 1910 , growing from 0 @.@ 7 % of the population to 1 @.@ 8 % . While the absence of meaningful passport requirements allowed for free travel , migration on such an enormous scale would have been prohibitively difficult if not for technological advances in transportation , particularly the expansion of railway travel and the dominance of steam @-@ powered boats over traditional sailing ships . World railway mileage grew from 205 @,@ 000 kilometers in 1870 to 925 @,@ 000 kilometers in 1906 , while steamboat cargo tonnage surpassed that of sailboats in the 1890s . Advancements such as the telephone and wireless telegraphy ( the precursor to radio ) revolutionized telecommunication by providing instantaneous communication . In 1866 , the first transatlantic cable was laid beneath the ocean to connect London and New York , while Europe and Asia became connected through new landlines . 
 Economic globalization grew under free trade , starting in 1860 when the United Kingdom entered into a free trade agreement with France known as the Cobden – Chevalier Treaty . However , the golden age of this wave of globalization endured a return to protectionism between 1880 and 1914 . In 1879 , German Chancellor Otto von Bismarck introduced protective tariffs on agricultural and manufacturing goods , making Germany the first nation to institute new protective trade policies . In 1892 , France introduced the <unk> tariff , greatly raising customs duties on both agricultural and manufacturing goods . The United States maintained strong protectionism during most of the nineteenth century , imposing customs duties between 40 and 50 % on imported goods . Despite these measures , international trade continued to grow without slowing . Paradoxically , foreign trade grew at a much faster rate during the protectionist phase of the first wave of globalization than during the free trade phase sparked by the United Kingdom . 
 Unprecedented growth in foreign investment from the 1880s to the 1900s served as the core driver of financial globalization . The worldwide total of capital invested abroad amounted to US $ 44 billion in 1913 ( $ 1 @.@ 02 trillion in 2012 dollars ) , with the greatest share of foreign assets held by the United Kingdom ( 42 % ) , France ( 20 % ) , Germany ( 13 % ) , and the United States ( 8 % ) . The Netherlands , Belgium , and Switzerland together held foreign investments on par with Germany at around 12 % . 
 = = = = Panic of 1907 = = = = 
 In October 1907 , the United States experienced a bank run on the Knickerbocker Trust Company , forcing the trust to close on October 23 , 1907 , provoking further reactions . The panic was alleviated when U.S. Secretary of the Treasury George B. Cortelyou and John Pierpont " J.P. " Morgan deposited $ 25 million and $ 35 million , respectively , into the reserve banks of New York City , enabling withdrawals to be fully covered . The bank run in New York led to a money market crunch which occurred simultaneously as demands for credit heightened from cereal and grain exporters . Since these demands could only be serviced through the purchase of substantial quantities of gold in London , the international markets became exposed to the crisis . The Bank of England had to sustain an artificially high discount lending rate until 1908 . To service the flow of gold to the United States , the Bank of England organized a pool from among twenty @-@ four different nations , for which the Banque de France temporarily lent £ 3 million ( GBP , 305 @.@ 6 million in 2012 GBP ) in gold . 
 = = = = Birth of the U.S. Federal Reserve System : 1913 = = = = 
 The United States Congress passed the Federal Reserve Act in 1913 , giving rise to the Federal Reserve System . Its inception drew influence from the Panic of 1907 , underpinning legislators ' hesitance in trusting individual investors , such as John Pierpont Morgan , to serve again as a lender of last resort . The system 's design also considered the findings of the Pujo Committee 's investigation of the possibility of a money trust in which Wall Street 's concentration of influence over national financial matters was questioned and in which investment bankers were suspected of unusually deep involvement in the directorates of manufacturing corporations . Although the committee 's findings were inconclusive , the very possibility was enough to motivate support for the long @-@ resisted notion of establishing a central bank . The Federal Reserve 's overarching aim was to become the sole lender of last resort and to resolve the inelasticity of the United States ' money supply during significant shifts in money demand . In addition to addressing the underlying issues that precipitated the international ramifications of the 1907 money market crunch , New York 's banks were liberated from the need to maintain their own reserves and began undertaking greater risks . New access to <unk> facilities enabled them to launch foreign branches , bolstering New York 's rivalry with London 's competitive discount market . 
 = = = Interwar period : 1915 – 1944 = = = 
 Economists have referred to the onset of World War I as the end of an age of innocence for foreign exchange markets , as it was the first geopolitical conflict to have a destabilizing and paralyzing impact . The United Kingdom declared war on Germany on August 4 , 1914 following Germany 's invasion of France and Belgium . In the weeks prior , the foreign exchange market in London was the first to exhibit distress . European tensions and increasing political uncertainty motivated investors to chase liquidity , prompting commercial banks to borrow heavily from London 's discount market . As the money market tightened , discount lenders began <unk> their reserves at the Bank of England rather than discounting new pounds sterling . The Bank of England was forced to raise discount rates daily for three days from 3 % on July 30 to 10 % by August 1 . As foreign investors resorted to buying pounds for remittance to London just to pay off their newly maturing securities , the sudden demand for pounds led the pound to appreciate beyond its gold value against most major currencies , yet sharply depreciate against the French franc after French banks began liquidating their London accounts . <unk> to London became increasingly difficult and culminated in a record exchange rate of $ 6 @.@ 50 USD / GBP . Emergency measures were introduced in the form of <unk> and extended bank holidays , but to no effect as financial contracts became informally unable to be negotiated and export embargoes thwarted gold shipments . A week later , the Bank of England began to address the deadlock in the foreign exchange markets by establishing a new channel for transatlantic payments whereby participants could make remittance payments to the U.K. by depositing gold designated for a Bank of England account with Canada 's Minister of Finance , and in exchange receive pounds sterling at an exchange rate of $ 4 @.@ 90 . Approximately $ 104 million USD in remittances flowed through this channel in the next two months . However , pound sterling liquidity ultimately did not improve due to inadequate relief for merchant banks receiving sterling bills . As the pound sterling was the world 's reserve currency and leading vehicle currency , market illiquidity and merchant banks ' hesitance to accept sterling bills left currency markets paralyzed . 
 The U.K. government attempted several measures to revive the London foreign exchange market , the most notable of which were implemented on September 5 to extend the previous moratorium through October and allow the Bank of England to temporarily loan funds to be paid back upon the end of the war in an effort to settle outstanding or unpaid acceptances for currency transactions . By mid @-@ October , the London market began functioning properly as a result of the September measures . The war continued to present unfavorable circumstances for the foreign exchange market , such as the London Stock Exchange 's prolonged closure , the redirection of economic resources to support a transition from producing exports to producing military armaments , and myriad disruptions of freight and mail . The pound sterling enjoyed general stability throughout World War I , in large part due to various steps taken by the U.K. government to influence the pound 's value in ways that yet provided individuals with the freedom to continue trading currencies . Such measures included open market interventions on foreign exchange , borrowing in foreign currencies rather than in pounds sterling to finance war activities , outbound capital controls , and limited import restrictions . 
 In 1930 , the Allied powers established the Bank for International Settlements ( BIS ) . The principal purposes of the BIS were to manage the scheduled payment of Germany 's reparations imposed by the Treaty of Versailles in 1919 , and to function as a bank for central banks around the world . Nations may hold a portion of their reserves as deposits with the institution . It also serves as a forum for central bank cooperation and research on international monetary and financial matters . The BIS also operates as a general trustee and facilitator of financial settlements between nations . 
 = = = = Smoot – Hawley tariff of 1930 = = = = 
 U.S. President Herbert Hoover signed the Smoot – Hawley Tariff Act into law on June 17 , 1930 . The tariff 's aim was to protect agriculture in the United States , but congressional representatives ultimately raised tariffs on a host of manufactured goods resulting in average duties as high as 53 % on over a thousand various goods . Twenty @-@ five trading partners responded in kind by introducing new tariffs on a wide range of U.S. goods . Hoover was pressured and compelled to adhere to the Republican Party 's 1928 platform , which sought protective tariffs to alleviate market pressures on the nation 's struggling <unk> and reduce the domestic unemployment rate . The culmination of the Stock Market Crash of 1929 and the onset of the Great Depression heightened fears , further pressuring Hoover to act on protective policies against the advice of Henry Ford and over 1 @,@ 000 economists who protested by calling for a veto of the act . Exports from the United States plummeted 60 % from 1930 to 1933 . Worldwide international trade virtually ground to a halt . The international ramifications of the Smoot @-@ Hawley tariff , comprising protectionist and discriminatory trade policies and bouts of economic nationalism , are credited by economists with <unk> and worldwide propagation of the Great Depression . 
 = = = = Formal abandonment of the Gold Standard = = = = 
 The classical gold standard was established in 1821 by the United Kingdom as the Bank of England enabled redemption of its banknotes for gold bullion . France , Germany , the United States , Russia , and Japan each embraced the standard one by one from 1878 to 1897 , marking its international acceptance . The first departure from the standard occurred in August 1914 when these nations erected trade embargoes on gold exports and suspended redemption of gold for banknotes . Following the end of World War I on November 11 , 1918 , Austria , Hungary , Germany , Russia , and Poland began experiencing hyperinflation . Having informally departed from the standard , most currencies were freed from exchange rate fixing and allowed to float . Most countries throughout this period sought to gain national advantages and bolster exports by depreciating their currency values to predatory levels . A number of countries , including the United States , made unenthusiastic and uncoordinated attempts to restore the former gold standard . The early years of the Great Depression brought about bank runs in the United States , Austria , and Germany , which placed pressures on gold reserves in the United Kingdom to such a degree that the gold standard became unsustainable . Germany became the first nation to formally abandon the post @-@ World War I gold standard when the Dresdner Bank implemented foreign exchange controls and announced bankruptcy on July 15 , 1931 . In September 1931 , the United Kingdom allowed the pound sterling to float freely . By the end of 1931 , a host of countries including Austria , Canada , Japan , and Sweden abandoned gold . Following widespread bank failures and a hemorrhaging of gold reserves , the United States broke free of the gold standard in April 1933 . France would not follow suit until 1936 as investors fled from the franc due to political concerns over Prime Minister Léon Blum 's government . 
 = = = = Trade liberalization in the United States = = = = 
 The disastrous effects of the Smoot – Hawley tariff proved difficult for Herbert Hoover 's 1932 re @-@ election campaign . Franklin D. Roosevelt became the 32nd U.S. president and the Democratic Party worked to reverse trade protectionism in favor of trade liberalization . As an alternative to cutting tariffs across all imports , Democrats advocated for trade reciprocity . The U.S. Congress passed the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act in 1934 , aimed at restoring global trade and reducing unemployment . The legislation expressly authorized President Roosevelt to negotiate bilateral trade agreements and reduce tariffs considerably . If a country agreed to cut tariffs on certain commodities , the U.S. would institute corresponding cuts to promote trade between the two nations . Between 1934 and 1947 , the U.S. negotiated 29 such agreements and the average tariff rate decreased by approximately one third during this same period . The legislation contained an important most @-@ favored @-@ nation clause , through which tariffs were equalized to all countries , such that trade agreements would not result in preferential or discriminatory tariff rates with certain countries on any particular import , due to the difficulties and inefficiencies associated with differential tariff rates . The clause effectively generalized tariff reductions from bilateral trade agreements , ultimately reducing worldwide tariff rates . 
 = = = Rise of the Bretton Woods financial order : 1945 = = = 
 As the inception of the United Nations as an intergovernmental entity slowly began formalizing in 1944 , delegates from 44 of its early member states met at a hotel in Bretton Woods , New Hampshire for the United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference , now commonly referred to as the Bretton Woods conference . Delegates remained cognizant of the effects of the Great Depression , struggles to sustain the international gold standard during the 1930s , and related market instabilities . Whereas previous discourse on the international monetary system focused on fixed versus floating exchange rates , Bretton Woods delegates favored pegged exchange rates for their flexibility . Under this system , nations would peg their exchange rates to the U.S. dollar , which would be convertible to gold at $ 35 USD per ounce . This arrangement is commonly referred to as the Bretton Woods system . Rather than maintaining fixed rates , nations would peg their currencies to the U.S. dollar and allow their exchange rates to fluctuate within a 1 % band of the agreed @-@ upon parity . To meet this requirement , central banks would intervene via sales or purchases of their currencies against the dollar . Members could adjust their pegs in response to long @-@ run fundamental <unk> in the balance of payments , but were responsible for correcting imbalances via fiscal and monetary policy tools before resorting to <unk> strategies . The adjustable pegging enabled greater exchange rate stability for commercial and financial transactions which fostered unprecedented growth in international trade and foreign investment . This feature grew from delegates ' experiences in the 1930s when excessively volatile exchange rates and the reactive protectionist exchange controls that followed proved destructive to trade and prolonged the deflationary effects of the Great Depression . Capital mobility faced de facto limits under the system as governments instituted restrictions on capital flows and aligned their monetary policy to support their pegs . 
 An important component of the Bretton Woods agreements was the creation of two new international financial institutions , the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( IBRD ) . Collectively referred to as the Bretton Woods institutions , they became operational in 1947 and 1946 respectively . The IMF was established to support the monetary system by facilitating cooperation on international monetary issues , providing advisory and technical assistance to members , and offering emergency lending to nations experiencing repeated difficulties restoring the balance of payments equilibrium . Members would contribute funds to a pool according to their share of gross world product , from which emergency loans could be issued . Member states were authorized and encouraged to employ capital controls as necessary to manage payments imbalances and meet pegging targets , but prohibited from relying on IMF financing to cover particularly short @-@ term capital hemorrhages . While the IMF was instituted to guide members and provide a short @-@ term financing window for recurrent balance of payments deficits , the IBRD was established to serve as a type of financial intermediary for channeling global capital toward long @-@ term investment opportunities and postwar reconstruction projects . The creation of these organizations was a crucial milestone in the evolution of the international financial architecture , and some economists consider it the most significant achievement of multilateral cooperation following World War II . Since the establishment of the International Development Association ( IDA ) in 1960 , the IBRD and IDA are together known as the World Bank . While the IBRD lends to middle @-@ income developing countries , the IDA extends the Bank 's lending program by offering concessional loans and grants to the world 's poorest nations . 
 = = = = General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade : 1947 = = = = 
 In 1947 , 23 countries concluded the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) at a UN conference in Geneva . Delegates intended the agreement to suffice while member states would negotiate creation of a UN body to be known as the International Trade Organization ( ITO ) . As the ITO never became ratified , GATT became the de facto framework for later multilateral trade negotiations . Members emphasized trade <unk> as an approach to lowering barriers in pursuit of mutual gains . The agreement 's structure enabled its signatories to codify and enforce regulations for trading of goods and services . GATT was centered on two precepts : trade relations needed to be equitable and nondiscriminatory , and subsidizing non @-@ agricultural exports needed to be prohibited . As such , the agreement 's most favored nation clause prohibited members from offering preferential tariff rates to any nation that it would not otherwise offer to fellow GATT members . In the event of any discovery of non @-@ agricultural subsidies , members were authorized to offset such policies by enacting countervailing tariffs . The agreement provided governments with a transparent structure for managing trade relations and avoiding protectionist pressures . However , GATT 's principles did not extend to financial activity , consistent with the era 's rigid discouragement of capital movements . The agreement 's initial round achieved only limited success in reducing tariffs . While the U.S. reduced its tariffs by one third , other signatories offered much smaller trade concessions . 
 = = = Resurgence of financial globalization = = = 
 = = = = Flexible exchange rate regimes : 1973 @-@ present = = = = 
 Although the exchange rate stability sustained by the Bretton Woods system facilitated expanding international trade , this early success masked its underlying design flaw , wherein there existed no mechanism for increasing the supply of international reserves to support continued growth in trade . The system began experiencing insurmountable market pressures and deteriorating cohesion among its key participants in the late 1950s and early 1960s . Central banks needed more U.S. dollars to hold as reserves , but were unable to expand their money supplies if doing so meant exceeding their dollar reserves and threatening their exchange rate pegs . To accommodate these needs , the Bretton Woods system depended on the United States to run dollar deficits . As a consequence , the dollar 's value began exceeding its gold backing . During the early 1960s , investors could sell gold for a greater dollar exchange rate in London than in the United States , signaling to market participants that the dollar was overvalued . Belgian @-@ American economist Robert <unk> defined this problem now known as the <unk> dilemma , in which a country 's national economic interests conflict with its international objectives as the custodian of the world 's reserve currency . 
 France voiced concerns over the artificially low price of gold in 1968 and called for returns to the former gold standard . Meanwhile , excess dollars flowed into international markets as the United States expanded its money supply to accommodate the costs of its military campaign in the Vietnam War . Its gold reserves were assaulted by speculative investors following its first current account deficit since the 19th century . In August 1971 , President Richard Nixon suspended the exchange of U.S. dollars for gold as part of the Nixon Shock . The closure of the gold window effectively shifted the adjustment burdens of a devalued dollar to other nations . Speculative traders chased other currencies and began selling dollars in anticipation of these currencies being revalued against the dollar . These influxes of capital presented difficulties to foreign central banks , which then faced choosing among inflationary money supplies , largely ineffective capital controls , or floating exchange rates . Following these woes surrounding the U.S. dollar , the dollar price of gold was raised to $ 38 USD per ounce and the Bretton Woods system was modified to allow fluctuations within an augmented band of 2 @.@ 25 % as part of the Smithsonian Agreement signed by the G @-@ 10 members in December 1971 . The agreement delayed the system 's demise for a further two years . The system 's erosion was expedited not only by the dollar devaluations that occurred , but also by the oil crises of the 1970s which emphasized the importance of international financial markets in <unk> recycling and balance of payments financing . Once the world 's reserve currency began to float , other nations began adopting floating exchange rate regimes . 
 = = = = = The post @-@ Bretton Woods financial order : 1976 = = = = = 
 As part of the first amendment to its articles of agreement in 1969 , the IMF developed a new reserve instrument called special drawing rights ( SDRs ) , which could be held by central banks and exchanged among themselves and the Fund as an alternative to gold . SDRs entered service in 1970 originally as units of a market basket of sixteen major vehicle currencies of countries whose share of total world exports exceeded 1 % . The basket 's composition changed over time and presently consists of the U.S. dollar , euro , Japanese yen , Chinese yuan , and British pound . Beyond holding them as reserves , nations can <unk> transactions among themselves and the Fund in SDRs , although the instrument is not a vehicle for trade . In international transactions , the currency basket 's portfolio characteristic affords greater stability against the uncertainties inherent with free floating exchange rates . Special drawing rights were originally equivalent to a specified amount of gold , but were not directly redeemable for gold and instead served as a surrogate in obtaining other currencies that could be exchanged for gold . The Fund initially issued 9 @.@ 5 billion XDR from 1970 to 1972 . 
 IMF members signed the Jamaica Agreement in January 1976 , which ratified the end of the Bretton Woods system and reoriented the Fund 's role in supporting the international monetary system . The agreement officially embraced the flexible exchange rate regimes that emerged after the failure of the Smithsonian Agreement measures . In tandem with floating exchange rates , the agreement endorsed central bank interventions aimed at clearing excessive volatility . The agreement retroactively formalized the abandonment of gold as a reserve instrument and the Fund subsequently demonetized its gold reserves , returning gold to members or selling it to provide poorer nations with relief funding . Developing countries and countries not endowed with oil export resources enjoyed greater access to IMF lending programs as a result . The Fund continued assisting nations experiencing balance of payments deficits and currency crises , but began imposing conditionality on its funding that required countries to adopt policies aimed at reducing deficits through spending cuts and tax increases , reducing protective trade barriers , and <unk> monetary policy . 
 The second amendment to the articles of agreement was signed in 1978 . It legally formalized the free @-@ floating acceptance and gold demonetization achieved by the Jamaica Agreement , and required members to support stable exchange rates through macroeconomic policy . The post @-@ Bretton Woods system was decentralized in that member states retained autonomy in selecting an exchange rate regime . The amendment also expanded the institution 's capacity for oversight and charged members with supporting monetary sustainability by cooperating with the Fund on regime implementation . This role is called IMF surveillance and is recognized as a pivotal point in the evolution of the Fund 's mandate , which was extended beyond balance of payments issues to broader concern with internal and external stresses on countries ' overall economic policies . 
 Under the dominance of flexible exchange rate regimes , the foreign exchange markets became significantly more volatile . In 1980 , newly elected U.S. President Ronald Reagan 's administration brought about increasing balance of payments deficits and budget deficits . To finance these deficits , the United States offered artificially high real interest rates to attract large inflows of foreign capital . As foreign investors ' demand for U.S. dollars grew , the dollar 's value appreciated substantially until reaching its peak in February 1985 . The U.S. trade deficit grew to $ 160 billion in 1985 ( $ 341 billion in 2012 dollars ) as a result of the dollar 's strong appreciation . The G5 met in September 1985 at the Plaza Hotel in New York City and agreed that the dollar should depreciate against the major currencies to resolve the United States ' trade deficit and pledged to support this goal with concerted foreign exchange market interventions , in what became known as the Plaza Accord . The U.S. dollar continued to depreciate , but industrialized nations became increasingly concerned that it would decline too heavily and that exchange rate volatility would increase . To address these concerns , the G7 ( now G8 ) held a summit in Paris in 1987 , where they agreed to pursue improved exchange rate stability and better coordinate their macroeconomic policies , in what became known as the Louvre Accord . This accord became the provenance of the managed float regime by which central banks jointly intervene to resolve under- and <unk> in the foreign exchange market to stabilize otherwise freely floating currencies . Exchange rates stabilized following the embrace of managed floating during the 1990s , with a strong U.S. economic performance from 1997 to 2000 during the Dot @-@ com bubble . After the 2000 stock market correction of the Dot @-@ com bubble the country 's trade deficit grew , the September 11 attacks increased political uncertainties , and the dollar began to depreciate in 2001 . 
 = = = = = European Monetary System : 1979 = = = = = 
 Following the Smithsonian Agreement , member states of the European Economic Community adopted a narrower currency band of 1 @.@ 125 % for exchange rates among their own currencies , creating a smaller scale fixed exchange rate system known as the snake in the tunnel . The snake proved unsustainable as it did not compel EEC countries to coordinate macroeconomic policies . In 1979 , the European Monetary System ( EMS ) phased out the currency snake . The EMS featured two key components : the European Currency Unit ( ECU ) , an artificial weighted average market basket of European Union members ' currencies , and the Exchange Rate Mechanism ( ERM ) , a procedure for managing exchange rate fluctuations in keeping with a calculated parity grid of currencies ' par values . The parity grid was derived from <unk> each participating country established for its currency with all other currencies in the system , denominated in terms of <unk> . The weights within the ECU changed in response to variances in the values of each currency in its basket . Under the ERM , if an exchange rate reached its upper or lower limit ( within a 2 @.@ 25 % band ) , both nations in that currency pair were obligated to intervene collectively in the foreign exchange market and buy or sell the under- or overvalued currency as necessary to return the exchange rate to its par value according to the parity matrix . The requirement of cooperative market intervention marked a key difference from the Bretton Woods system . Similarly to Bretton Woods however , EMS members could impose capital controls and other monetary policy shifts on countries responsible for exchange rates approaching their bounds , as identified by a divergence indicator which measured deviations from the ECU 's value . The central exchange rates of the parity grid could be adjusted in exceptional circumstances , and were modified every eight months on average during the systems ' initial four years of operation . During its twenty @-@ year lifespan , these central rates were adjusted over 50 times . 
 = = = = Birth of the World Trade Organization : 1994 = = = = 
 The Uruguay Round of GATT multilateral trade negotiations took place from 1986 to 1994 , with 123 nations becoming party to agreements achieved throughout the negotiations . Among the achievements were trade liberalization in agricultural goods and textiles , the General Agreement on Trade in Services , and agreements on intellectual property rights issues . The key manifestation of this round was the Marrakech Agreement signed in April 1994 , which established the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) . The WTO is a chartered multilateral trade organization , charged with continuing the GATT mandate to promote trade , govern trade relations , and prevent damaging trade practices or policies . It became operational in January 1995 . Compared with its GATT secretariat predecessor , the WTO features an improved mechanism for settling trade disputes since the organization is membership @-@ based and not dependent on consensus as in traditional trade negotiations . This function was designed to address prior weaknesses , whereby parties in dispute would invoke delays , obstruct negotiations , or fall back on weak enforcement . In 1997 , WTO members reached an agreement which committed to softer restrictions on commercial financial services , including banking services , securities trading , and insurance services . These commitments entered into force in March 1999 , consisting of 70 governments accounting for approximately 95 % of worldwide financial services . 
 = = = Financial integration and systemic crises : 1980 @-@ present = = = 
 Financial integration among industrialized nations grew substantially during the 1980s and 1990s , as did liberalization of their capital accounts . Integration among financial markets and banks rendered benefits such as greater productivity and the broad sharing of risk in the macroeconomy . The resulting interdependence also carried a substantive cost in terms of shared vulnerabilities and increased exposure to systemic risks . Accompanying financial integration in recent decades was a succession of deregulation , in which countries increasingly abandoned regulations over the behavior of financial intermediaries and simplified requirements of disclosure to the public and to regulatory authorities . As economies became more open , nations became increasingly exposed to external shocks . Economists have argued greater worldwide financial integration has resulted in more volatile capital flows , thereby increasing the potential for financial market turbulence . Given greater integration among nations , a systemic crisis in one can easily infect others . The 1980s and 1990s saw a wave of currency crises and sovereign defaults , including the 1987 Black Monday stock market crashes , 1992 European Monetary System crisis , 1994 Mexican peso crisis , 1997 Asian currency crisis , 1998 Russian financial crisis , and the 1998 – 2002 Argentine peso crisis . These crises differed in terms of their breadth , causes , and <unk> , among which were capital flights brought about by speculative attacks on fixed exchange rate currencies perceived to be <unk> given a nation 's fiscal policy , self @-@ fulfilling speculative attacks by investors expecting other investors to follow suit given doubts about a nation 's currency peg , lack of access to developed and functioning domestic capital markets in emerging market countries , and current account reversals during conditions of limited capital mobility and dysfunctional banking systems . 
 Following research of systemic crises that plagued developing countries throughout the 1990s , economists have reached a consensus that liberalization of capital flows carries important prerequisites if these countries are to observe the benefits offered by financial globalization . Such conditions include stable macroeconomic policies , healthy fiscal policy , robust bank regulations , and strong legal protection of property rights . Economists largely favor adherence to an organized sequence of encouraging foreign direct investment , liberalizing domestic equity capital , and embracing capital outflows and short @-@ term capital mobility only once the country has achieved functioning domestic capital markets and established a sound regulatory framework . An emerging market economy must develop a credible currency in the eyes of both domestic and international investors to realize benefits of globalization such as greater liquidity , greater savings at higher interest rates , and accelerated economic growth . If a country embraces unrestrained access to foreign capital markets without maintaining a credible currency , it becomes vulnerable to speculative capital flights and sudden stops , which carry serious economic and social costs . 
 Countries sought to improve the sustainability and transparency of the global financial system in response to crises in the 1980s and 1990s . The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision was formed in 1974 by the G @-@ 10 members ' central bank governors to facilitate cooperation on the supervision and regulation of banking practices . It is headquartered at the Bank for International Settlements in Basel , Switzerland . The committee has held several rounds of deliberation known collectively as the Basel Accords . The first of these accords , known as Basel I , took place in 1988 and emphasized credit risk and the assessment of different asset classes . Basel I was motivated by concerns over whether large multinational banks were appropriately regulated , stemming from observations during the 1980s Latin American debt crisis . Following Basel I , the committee published recommendations on new capital requirements for banks , which the G @-@ 10 nations implemented four years later . In 1999 , the G @-@ 10 established the Financial Stability Forum ( reconstituted by the G @-@ 20 in 2009 as the Financial Stability Board ) to facilitate cooperation among regulatory agencies and promote stability in the global financial system . The Forum was charged with developing and codifying twelve international standards and implementation thereof . The Basel II accord was set in 2004 and again emphasized capital requirements as a safeguard against systemic risk as well as the need for global consistency in banking regulations so as not to competitively disadvantage banks operating internationally . It was motivated by what were seen as inadequacies of the first accord such as insufficient public disclosure of banks ' risk profiles and oversight by regulatory bodies . Members were slow to implement it , with major efforts by the European Union and United States taking place as late as 2007 and 2008 . In 2010 , the Basel Committee revised the capital requirements in a set of enhancements to Basel II known as Basel III , which centered on a leverage ratio requirement aimed at restricting excessive leveraging by banks . In addition to strengthening the ratio , Basel III modified the formulas used to weight risk and compute the capital thresholds necessary to mitigate the risks of bank holdings , concluding the capital threshold should be set at 7 % of the value of a bank 's risk @-@ weighted assets . 
 = = = = Birth of the European Economic and Monetary Union 1992 = = = = 
 In February 1992 , European Union countries signed the Maastricht Treaty which outlined a three @-@ stage plan to accelerate progress toward an Economic and Monetary Union ( EMU ) . The first stage centered on liberalizing capital mobility and aligning macroeconomic policies between countries . The second stage established the European Monetary Institute which was ultimately dissolved in tandem with the establishment in 1998 of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) and European System of Central Banks . Key to the Maastricht Treaty was the outlining of convergence criteria that EU members would need to satisfy before being permitted to proceed . The third and final stage introduced a common currency for circulation known as the Euro , adopted by eleven of then @-@ fifteen members of the European Union in January 1999 . In doing so , they <unk> their sovereignty in matters of monetary policy . These countries continued to circulate their national legal tenders , exchangeable for euros at fixed rates , until 2002 when the ECB began issuing official Euro coins and notes . As of 2011 , the EMU comprises 17 nations which have issued the Euro , and 11 non @-@ Euro states . 
 = = = = Global financial crisis = = = = 
 Following the market turbulence of the 1990s financial crises and September 11 attacks on the U.S. in 2001 , financial integration intensified among developed nations and emerging markets , with substantial growth in capital flows among banks and in the trading of financial derivatives and structured finance products . Worldwide international capital flows grew from $ 3 trillion to $ 11 trillion U.S. dollars from 2002 to 2007 , primarily in the form of short @-@ term money market instruments . The United States experienced growth in the size and complexity of firms engaged in a broad range of financial services across borders in the wake of the Gramm – Leach – Bliley Act of 1999 which repealed the Glass – Stegall Act of 1933 , ending limitations on commercial banks ' investment banking activity . Industrialized nations began relying more on foreign capital to finance domestic investment opportunities , resulting in unprecedented capital flows to advanced economies from developing countries , as reflected by global imbalances which grew to 6 % of gross world product in 2007 from 3 % in 2001 . 
 The global financial crisis precipitated in 2007 and 2008 shared some of the key features exhibited by the wave of international financial crises in the 1990s , including accelerated capital influxes , weak regulatory frameworks , relaxed monetary policies , herd behavior during investment bubbles , collapsing asset prices , and massive deleveraging . The systemic problems originated in the United States and other advanced nations . Similarly to the 1997 Asian crisis , the global crisis entailed broad lending by banks undertaking unproductive real estate investments as well as poor standards of corporate governance within financial intermediaries . Particularly in the United States , the crisis was characterized by growing securitization of non @-@ performing assets , large fiscal deficits , and excessive financing in the housing sector . While the real estate bubble in the U.S. triggered the financial crisis , the bubble was financed by foreign capital flowing from many different countries . As its contagious effects began infecting other nations , the crisis became a precursor for the global economic downturn now referred to as the Great Recession . In the wake of the crisis , total volume of world trade in goods and services fell 10 % from 2008 to 2009 and did not recover until 2011 , with an increased concentration in emerging market countries . The global financial crisis demonstrated the negative effects of worldwide financial integration , sparking discourse on how and whether some countries should decouple themselves from the system altogether . 
 = = = = Eurozone crisis = = = = 
 In 2009 , a newly elected government in Greece revealed the falsification of its national budget data , and that its fiscal deficit for the year was 12 @.@ 7 % of GDP as opposed to the 3 @.@ 7 % espoused by the previous administration . This news alerted markets to the fact that Greece 's deficit exceeded the eurozone 's maximum of 3 % outlined in the Economic and Monetary Union 's Stability and Growth Pact . Investors concerned about a possible sovereign default rapidly sold Greek bonds . Given Greece 's prior decision to embrace the euro as its currency , it no longer held monetary policy autonomy and could not intervene to depreciate a national currency to absorb the shock and boost competitiveness , as was the traditional solution to sudden capital flight . The crisis proved contagious when it spread to Portugal , Italy , and Spain ( together with Greece these are collectively referred to as the PIGS ) . Ratings agencies downgraded these countries ' debt instruments in 2010 which further increased the costliness of refinancing or repaying their national debts . The crisis continued to spread and soon grew into a European sovereign debt crisis which threatened economic recovery in the wake of the Great Recession . In tandem with the IMF , the European Union members assembled a € 750 billion bailout for Greece and other afflicted nations . Additionally , the ECB pledged to purchase bonds from troubled eurozone nations in an effort to mitigate the risk of a banking system panic . The crisis is recognized by economists as highlighting the depth of financial integration in Europe , contrasted with the lack of fiscal integration and political unification necessary to prevent or decisively respond to crises . During the initial waves of the crisis , the public speculated that the turmoil could result in a disintegration of the eurozone and an abandonment of the euro . German Federal Minister of Finance Wolfgang <unk> called for the expulsion of offending countries from the eurozone . Now commonly referred to as the Eurozone crisis , it has been ongoing since 2009 and most recently began encompassing the 2012 – 13 Cypriot financial crisis . 
 = = Implications of globalized capital = = 
 = = = Balance of payments = = = 
 The balance of payments accounts summarize payments made to or received from foreign countries . Receipts are considered credit transactions while payments are considered debit transactions . The balance of payments is a function of three components : transactions involving export or import of goods and services form the current account , transactions involving purchase or sale of financial assets form the financial account , and transactions involving unconventional transfers of wealth form the capital account . The current account summarizes three variables : the trade balance , net factor income from abroad , and net unilateral transfers . The financial account summarizes the value of exports versus imports of assets , and the capital account summarizes the value of asset transfers received net of transfers given . The capital account also includes the official reserve account , which summarizes central banks ' purchases and sales of domestic currency , foreign exchange , gold , and SDRs for purposes of maintaining or utilizing bank reserves . 
 Because the balance of payments sums to zero , a current account surplus indicates a deficit in the asset accounts and vice versa . A current account surplus or deficit indicates the extent to which a country is relying on foreign capital to finance its consumption and investments , and whether it is living beyond its means . For example , assuming a capital account balance of zero ( thus no asset transfers available for financing ) , a current account deficit of £ 1 billion implies a financial account surplus ( or net asset exports ) of £ 1 billion . A net exporter of financial assets is known as a borrower , exchanging future payments for current consumption . Further , a net export of financial assets indicates growth in a country 's debt . From this perspective , the balance of payments links a nation 's income to its spending by indicating the degree to which current account imbalances are financed with domestic or foreign financial capital , which illuminates how a nation 's wealth is shaped over time . A healthy balance of payments position is important for economic growth . If countries experiencing a growth in demand have trouble sustaining a healthy balance of payments , demand can slow , leading to : unused or excess supply , discouraged foreign investment , and less attractive exports which can further reinforce a negative cycle that intensifies payments imbalances . 
 A country 's external wealth is measured by the value of its foreign assets net of its foreign liabilities . A current account surplus ( and corresponding financial account deficit ) indicates an increase in external wealth while a deficit indicates a decrease . Aside from current account indications of whether a country is a net buyer or net seller of assets , shifts in a nation 's external wealth are influenced by capital gains and capital losses on foreign investments . Having positive external wealth means a country is a net lender ( or creditor ) in the world economy , while negative external wealth indicates a net borrower ( or debtor ) . 
 = = = Unique financial risks = = = 
 Nations and international businesses face an array of financial risks unique to foreign investment activity . Political risk is the potential for losses from a foreign country 's political instability or otherwise unfavorable developments , which manifests in different forms . Transfer risk emphasizes uncertainties surrounding a country 's capital controls and balance of payments . Operational risk characterizes concerns over a country 's regulatory policies and their impact on normal business operations . Control risk is born from uncertainties surrounding property and decision rights in the local operation of foreign direct investments . Credit risk implies lenders may face an absent or unfavorable regulatory framework that affords little or no legal protection of foreign investments . For example , foreign governments may commit to a sovereign default or otherwise repudiate their debt obligations to international investors without any legal consequence or recourse . Governments may decide to expropriate or nationalize foreign @-@ held assets or enact contrived policy changes following an investor 's decision to acquire assets in the host country . Country risk encompasses both political risk and credit risk , and represents the potential for unanticipated developments in a host country to threaten its capacity for debt repayment and repatriation of gains from interest and dividends . 
 = = Participants = = 
 = = = Economic actors = = = 
 Each of the core economic functions , consumption , production , and investment , have become highly globalized in recent decades . While consumers increasingly import foreign goods or purchase domestic goods produced with foreign inputs , businesses continue to expand production internationally to meet an increasingly globalized consumption in the world economy . International financial integration among nations has afforded investors the opportunity to diversify their asset portfolios by investing abroad . Consumers , multinational corporations , individual and institutional investors , and financial intermediaries ( such as banks ) are the key economic actors within the global financial system . Central banks ( such as the European Central Bank or the U.S. Federal Reserve System ) undertake open market operations in their efforts to realize monetary policy goals . International financial institutions such as the Bretton Woods institutions , multilateral development banks and other development finance institutions provide emergency financing to countries in crisis , provide risk mitigation tools to prospective foreign investors , and assemble capital for development finance and poverty reduction initiatives . Trade organizations such as the World Trade Organization , Institute of International Finance , and the World Federation of Exchanges attempt to ease trade , facilitate trade disputes and address economic affairs , promote standards , and sponsor research and statistics publications . 
 = = = Regulatory bodies = = = 
 Explicit goals of financial regulation include countries ' pursuits of financial stability and the safeguarding of unsophisticated market players from fraudulent activity , while implicit goals include offering viable and competitive financial environments to world investors . A single nation with functioning governance , financial regulations , deposit insurance , emergency financing through discount windows , standard accounting practices , and established legal and disclosure procedures , can itself develop and grow a healthy domestic financial system . In a global context however , no central political authority exists which can extend these arrangements globally . Rather , governments have cooperated to establish a host of institutions and practices that have evolved over time and are referred to collectively as the international financial architecture . Within this architecture , regulatory authorities such as national governments and intergovernmental organizations have the capacity to influence international financial markets . National governments may employ their finance ministries , treasuries , and regulatory agencies to impose tariffs and foreign capital controls or may use their central banks to execute a desired intervention in the open markets . 
 Some degree of self @-@ regulation occurs whereby banks and other financial institutions attempt to operate within guidelines set and published by multilateral organizations such as the International Monetary Fund or the Bank for International Settlements ( particularly the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the Committee on the Global Financial System ) . Further examples of international regulatory bodies are : the Financial Stability Board ( FSB ) established to coordinate information and activities among developed countries ; the International Organization of Securities Commissions ( <unk> ) which coordinates the regulation of financial securities ; the International Association of Insurance Supervisors ( <unk> ) which promotes consistent insurance industry supervision ; the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering which facilitates collaboration in battling money laundering and terrorism financing ; and the International Accounting Standards Board ( IASB ) which publishes accounting and auditing standards . Public and private arrangements exist to assist and guide countries struggling with sovereign debt payments , such as the Paris Club and London Club . National securities commissions and independent financial regulators maintain oversight of their industries ' foreign exchange market activities . Two examples of supranational financial regulators in Europe are the European Banking Authority ( EBA ) which identifies systemic risks and institutional weaknesses and may overrule national regulators , and the European Shadow Financial Regulatory Committee ( <unk> ) which reviews financial regulatory issues and publishes policy recommendations . 
 = = = Research organizations and other fora = = = 
 Research and academic institutions , professional associations , and think @-@ tanks aim to observe , model , understand , and publish recommendations to improve the transparency and effectiveness of the global financial system . For example , the independent non @-@ partisan World Economic Forum facilitates the Global Agenda Council on the Global Financial System and Global Agenda Council on the International Monetary System , which report on systemic risks and assemble policy recommendations . The Global Financial Markets Association facilitates discussion of global financial issues among members of various professional associations around the world . The Group of Thirty ( G30 ) formed in 1978 as a private , international group of consultants , researchers , and representatives committed to advancing understanding of international economics and global finance . 
 = = Future of the global financial system = = 
 The IMF has reported that the global financial system is on a path to improved financial stability , but faces a host of transitional challenges borne out by regional vulnerabilities and policy regimes . One challenge is managing the United States ' disengagement from its accommodative monetary policy . Doing so in an elegant , orderly manner could be difficult as markets adjust to reflect investors ' expectations of a new monetary regime with higher interest rates . Interest rates could rise too sharply if exacerbated by a structural decline in market liquidity from higher interest rates and greater volatility , or by structural deleveraging in short @-@ term securities and in the shadow banking system ( particularly the mortgage market and real estate investment trusts ) . Other central banks are contemplating ways to exit unconventional monetary policies employed in recent years . Some nations however , such as Japan , are attempting stimulus programs at larger scales to combat deflationary pressures . The Eurozone 's nations implemented myriad national reforms aimed at strengthening the monetary union and alleviating stress on banks and governments . Yet some European nations such as Portugal , Italy , and Spain continue to struggle with heavily leveraged corporate sectors and fragmented financial markets in which investors face pricing inefficiency and difficulty identifying quality assets . Banks operating in such environments may need stronger provisions in place to withstand corresponding market adjustments and absorb potential losses . Emerging market economies face challenges to greater stability as bond markets indicate heightened sensitivity to monetary easing from external investors flooding into domestic markets , rendering exposure to potential capital flights brought on by heavy corporate leveraging in expansionary credit environments . <unk> in these economies are tasked with transitioning to more sustainable and balanced financial sectors while still fostering market growth so as not to provoke investor withdrawal . 
 The global financial crisis and Great Recession prompted renewed discourse on the architecture of the global financial system . These events called to attention financial integration , inadequacies of global governance , and the emergent systemic risks of financial globalization . Since the establishment in 1945 of a formal international monetary system with the IMF empowered as its guardian , the world has undergone extensive changes politically and economically . This has fundamentally altered the paradigm in which international financial institutions operate , increasing the complexities of the IMF and World Bank 's mandates . The lack of adherence to a formal monetary system has created a void of global constraints on national macroeconomic policies and a deficit of rule @-@ based governance of financial activities . French economist and Executive Director of the World Economic Forum 's Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee , Marc <unk> , has pointed out that some radical proposals such as a " global central bank or a world financial authority " have been deemed impractical , leading to further consideration of medium @-@ term efforts to improve transparency and disclosure , strengthen emerging market financial climates , bolster prudential regulatory environments in advanced nations , and better moderate capital account liberalization and exchange rate regime selection in emerging markets . He has also drawn attention to calls for increased participation from the private sector in the management of financial crises and the augmenting of multilateral institutions ' resources . 
 The Council on Foreign Relations ' assessment of global finance notes that excessive institutions with overlapping directives and limited scopes of authority , coupled with difficulty aligning national interests with international reforms , are the two key weaknesses inhibiting global financial reform . Nations do not presently enjoy a comprehensive structure for macroeconomic policy coordination , and global savings imbalances have abounded before and after the global financial crisis to the extent that the United States ' status as the steward of the world 's reserve currency was called into question . Post @-@ crisis efforts to pursue macroeconomic policies aimed at stabilizing foreign exchange markets have yet to be institutionalized . The lack of international consensus on how best to monitor and govern banking and investment activity threatens the world 's ability to prevent future global financial crises . The slow and often delayed implementation of banking regulations that meet Basel III criteria means most of the standards will not take effect until 2019 , rendering continued exposure of global finance to unregulated systemic risks . Despite Basel III and other efforts by the G20 to bolster the Financial Stability Board 's capacity to facilitate cooperation and stabilizing regulatory changes , regulation exists predominantly at the national and regional levels . 
 = = = Reform efforts = = = 
 Former World Bank Chief Economist and former Chairman of the U.S. Council of Economic Advisers Joseph E. Stiglitz referred in the late 1990s to a growing consensus that something is wrong with a system having the capacity to impose high costs on a great number of people who are hardly even participants in international financial markets , neither speculating on international investments nor borrowing in foreign currencies . He argued that foreign crises have strong worldwide repercussions due in part to the phenomenon of moral hazard , particularly when many multinational firms deliberately invest in highly risky government bonds in anticipation of a national or international bailout . Although crises can be overcome by emergency financing , employing bailouts places a heavy burden on taxpayers living in the afflicted countries , and the high costs damage standards of living . Stiglitz has advocated finding means of stabilizing short @-@ term international capital flows without adversely affecting long @-@ term foreign direct investment which usually carries new knowledge spillover and technological advancements into economies . 
 American economist and former Chairman of the Federal Reserve Paul Volcker has argued that the lack of global consensus on key issues threatens efforts to reform the global financial system . He has argued that quite possibly the most important issue is a unified approach to addressing failures of systemically important financial institutions , noting public taxpayers and government officials have grown disillusioned with deploying tax revenues to bail out creditors for the sake of stopping contagion and mitigating economic disaster . Volcker has expressed an array of potential coordinated measures : increased policy surveillance by the IMF and commitment from nations to adopt agreed @-@ upon best practices , mandatory consultation from multilateral bodies leading to more direct policy recommendations , stricter controls on national qualification for emergency financing facilities ( such as those offered by the IMF or by central banks ) , and improved incentive structures with financial penalties . 
 Governor of the Bank of England and former Governor of the Bank of Canada Mark Carney has described two approaches to global financial reform : shielding financial institutions from cyclic economic effects by strengthening banks individually , and defending economic cycles from banks by improving systemic resiliency . Strengthening financial institutions necessitates stronger capital requirements and liquidity provisions , as well as better measurement and management of risks . The G @-@ 20 agreed to new standards presented by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision at its 2009 summit in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . The standards included leverage ratio targets to supplement other capital adequacy requirements established by Basel II . Improving the resiliency of the global financial system requires protections that enable the system to withstand singular institutional and market failures . Carney has argued that policymakers have converged on the view that institutions must bear the burden of financial losses during future financial crises , and such occurrences should be well @-@ defined and pre @-@ planned . He suggested other national regulators follow Canada in establishing staged intervention procedures and require banks to commit to what he termed " living wills " which would detail plans for an orderly institutional failure . 
 At its 2010 summit in Seoul , South Korea , the G @-@ 20 collectively endorsed a new collection of capital adequacy and liquidity standards for banks recommended by Basel III . Andreas <unk> of the Executive Board of Deutsche Bundesbank has noted a difficulty in identifying institutions that constitute systemic importance via their size , complexity , and degree of interconnectivity within the global financial system , and that efforts should be made to identify a group of 25 to 30 indisputable globally systemic institutions . He has suggested they be held to standards higher than those mandated by Basel III , and that despite the inevitability of institutional failures , such failures should not drag with them the financial systems in which they participate . <unk> has advocated for regulatory reform that extends beyond banking regulations and has argued in favor of greater transparency through increased public disclosure and increased regulation of the shadow banking system . 
 President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Vice Chairman of the Federal Open Market Committee William C. Dudley has argued that a global financial system regulated on a largely national basis is untenable for supporting a world economy with global financial firms . In 2011 , he advocated five pathways to improving the safety and security of the global financial system : a special capital requirement for financial institutions deemed systemically important ; a level playing field which discourages exploitation of disparate regulatory environments and beggar thy neighbour policies that serve " national constituencies at the expense of global financial stability " ; superior cooperation among regional and national regulatory regimes with broader protocols for sharing information such as records for the trade of over @-@ the @-@ counter financial derivatives ; improved delineation of " the responsibilities of the home versus the host country " when banks encounter trouble ; and well @-@ defined procedures for managing emergency liquidity solutions across borders including which parties are responsible for the risk , terms , and funding of such measures . 
 = HMS Cardiff ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Cardiff was a British Type 42 destroyer and the third ship of the Royal Navy to be named in honour of the Welsh capital city of Cardiff . Construction was started by Vickers Shipbuilding and Engineering in Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness , Cumbria , and completed at Swan Hunter 's Hawthorn Leslie yard in Hebburn . Cardiff was launched on 22 February 1974 . 
 During her career , Cardiff served in the Falklands War , where she shot down the last Argentine aircraft of the conflict and accepted the surrender of a 700 @-@ strong garrison in the settlement of Port Howard . During the 1991 Gulf War , her Lynx helicopter sank two Iraqi minesweepers . She later participated in the build @-@ up to the 2003 invasion of Iraq as part of the Royal Navy 's constant Armilla patrol ; Cardiff thwarted attempts to smuggle oil out of the country , but was not involved in the actual invasion . 
 Cardiff was decommissioned in July 2005 , having earned two battle honours for service in the Falklands and Gulf wars . She was sent to Turkey for scrapping despite calls by former servicemen for her to be preserved as a museum ship and local tourist attraction in Cardiff . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The Type 42 destroyers ( also known as the Sheffield class ) were made in three batches ; Cardiff was built in the first . She cost over £ 30 million , which was double her original quoted price . Her keel was laid down on 6 November 1972 , at Vickers Shipbuilding and Engineering Ltd in Cumbria . The build was interrupted by a labour shortage at Vickers . To solve this problem , she was towed to Swan Hunter in Tyne and Wear and completed there . 
 Type 42s were designed as anti @-@ aircraft vessels primarily equipped with the Sea Dart , a surface @-@ to @-@ air missile system capable of hitting targets up to 56 kilometres ( 30 nmi ) away . Cardiff 's secondary weapon system was a 4 @.@ 5 inch Mark 8 naval gun , capable of firing 21 @-@ kilogram ( 46 lb ) shells to a range of 22 kilometres ( 12 nmi ) . After the Falklands War , in which two Type 42s were sunk by enemy aircraft , the entire class was equipped with the Phalanx close @-@ in weapon system , a Gatling cannon that fires 3 @,@ 000 rounds per minute and is designed to shoot down anti @-@ ship missiles . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Cardiff was launched on 22 February 1974 by Lady Caroline Gilmore . Following fitting @-@ out and sea trials , Cardiff commissioned on 24 September 1979 under command of Captain Barry Wilson . During the next 12 months of active service she steamed over 21 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 13 @,@ 000 mi ) and undertook various duties . She returned to her place of construction , Tyne and Wear , so that the Swan Hunter crew who fitted her out could exhibit the warship to their families . In the spirit of establishing a firm association , Cardiff visited her namesake city and welcomed more than 7 @,@ 000 people on board . Her crew raised over £ 1 @,@ 000 for local charities by participating in sponsored bicycle rides and dinghy rows from Portsmouth and Newcastle upon Tyne . BBC Radio Wales based an entire programme on her and she appeared on the BBC and ITV national television channels . In November 1979 , Cardiff coordinated the search for survivors of the MV Pool Fisher , which sank off the Isle of Wight with the loss of most of her crew . 
 In 1980 , she attended the annual Navy Days event at Portsmouth and Portland Harbour , receiving a total of 17 @,@ 300 visitors . In October of the same year , she ventured abroad for the first time on a visit to Ghent , Belgium . She followed this with a fortnight of Sea Dart exercises on a range off Aberporth , in South Wales . Whilst in the region , the destroyer attended celebrations marking the 75th anniversary of Cardiff 's city status . 
 = = = Falklands War ( 1982 ) = = = 
 On 2 April 1982 , the disputed British overseas territory of the Falkland Islands was invaded by neighbouring Argentina . The United Kingdom , nearly 13 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 8 @,@ 000 mi ) away , assembled and dispatched a naval task force of 28 @,@ 000 troops to recapture the islands . The conflict ended that June with the surrender of the Argentine forces ; the battles fought on land , at sea , and in the air had cost the lives of some 900 British and Argentine servicemen . 
 Just over a month before the start of the war , Cardiff , under the command of Captain Michael Harris , had begun a six @-@ month deployment to the Persian Gulf with the Armilla Patrol . Cardiff had relieved her sister ship and class lead Sheffield of this posting , but was herself redeployed to the Falklands effort on 23 April . She sailed alone to Gibraltar and rendezvoused on 14 May with the Bristol group of British warships already heading south to the islands . 
 During the journey , Cardiff 's crew performed various training exercises , including defence against air attack ( involving simulation runs by friendly Harrier and Jaguar aircraft ) , nuclear , biological , and chemical weapons and Exocet anti @-@ ship missiles . All British Type 42 's involved in the war were instructed to paint two vertical black stripes down either side the middle of their ships . This would allow the Royal Navy submarines to distinguish them from the two Argentine Type 42 's . On 22 May , an Argentine reconnaissance Boeing 707 , no . TC @-@ 92 of the Argentine Air Force 's Grupo 1 , De Transporte <unk> <unk> II ( Spanish for " 2nd Air Transport Squadron , Group 1 " ) , was fired on by Cardiff . The aircraft was detected while shadowing the Bristol group , and Cardiff was ordered to drop back and engage . The ship fired two Sea Darts at the aircraft at 11 : 40 ( local time ) from maximum range ; the first fell short and second missed due to evasive manoeuvres taken by the aircraft 's crew . After the attack , TC @-@ 92 dropped below radar level and returned to El Palomar . On 25 May , Cardiff was tasked with the recovery of four Special Air Service ( SAS ) troopers , who had parachuted from a C @-@ 130 Hercules passing over the destroyer . 
 The Bristol group met up with the main task force on 26 May . Cardiff 's arrival allowed the damaged Glasgow to return to the United Kingdom for repairs . Cardiff 's primary role was to form part of the anti @-@ aircraft warfare picket , protecting British ships from air attack and attempting to ambush Argentine aircraft that were re @-@ supplying Port Stanley Airport . She was also required to fire at enemy positions on the islands with her 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch gun . In one engagement she fired 277 high @-@ explosive rounds . 
 Shortly after arrival , she was involved in the final Exocet raid against the aircraft carrier Invincible . In the early hours of 6 June , Cardiff shot down a friendly Army Air Corps Gazelle helicopter ( no . XX377 of 656 Squadron ) , in the belief it was a low flying enemy C @-@ 130 Hercules . All four on board were killed , the factors contributing to the accident were a poor level of communication between the army and navy , and the helicopter 's " Identification Friend or Foe " transmitter had been turned off due to it interfering with other equipment . However a board of inquiry recommended that neither negligence nor blame should be attributed to any individual and that no action should be taken against any individual . The number " 205 " was later painted at the crash site ( 51 @.@ <unk> ° S 58 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / <unk> ; <unk> ) as a memorial , the significance being that two of the helicopter 's passengers were from 205 Signal Squadron . Approximately an hour after the shoot down , Cardiff spotted four landing craft carrying troops from the 2nd Battalion , Scots Guards . Having been told there were no other British forces in the area , Cardiff 's crew assumed they were Argentine , and fired illuminating star shells over them in preparation to attack . When the Guards saw the star shells and realised Cardiff 's intentions , the officer in charge of the landing craft , Major Ewen Southby @-@ Tailyour , moved them to shallow water in an attempt to outrun her . Cardiff , still closing on the craft , signalled to them a single word " friend " via Aldis lamp , Southby @-@ Tailyour responded with " to which side " . At this point Cardiff " left them alone " , neither attacking or assisting them , nevertheless another " blue on blue " incident was avoided . 
 On the morning of 13 June , two Argentine Dagger aircraft attacked Cardiff 's Lynx helicopter , no . 335 of 829 NAS , while it was searching in the Falkland Sound area . Poor weather had forced the Argentine craft to abandon their original mission of bombing Mount Longdon , and the third Dagger of their formation had suffered a mechanical failure and returned to base . The Lynx began evasive manoeuvres and dodged the attacks ; the pilot , Lieutenant Christopher Clayton , was mentioned in despatches for his efforts . 
 Later that day , Cardiff shot down what would prove to be the last Argentine aircraft lost during the war , with a Sea Dart missile Canberra bomber B @-@ 108 of Grupo de <unk> 2 ( " Bombing Group 2 " ) en route to bomb Port Harriet House . The pilot , Captain <unk> , managed to eject but the navigator , Captain Casado , ( whose ejection seat may have been damaged by the missile ) was killed . The remains of Captain Casado were discovered in 1986 , and identified by DNA testing in September 2008 . 
 Argentina surrendered on 14 June , and Cardiff was required to accept the surrender of a 700 @-@ strong Argentine garrison in the settlement of Port Howard on West Falkland a day later . Members of Cardiff 's crew were used to man a captured Argentine patrol boat , renamed HMS Tiger Bay , in Stanley . Cardiff spent the rest of June acting as the Landing Area Air Warfare Controller ( <unk> ) around San Carlos . 
 Over the course of the war , Cardiff fired nine Sea Dart missiles and one Mk 46 torpedo . She returned to the United Kingdom on 28 July 1982 , having left the Falklands three weeks earlier along with Exeter and Yarmouth . Captain Michael Harris handed over command on 24 August 1982 , after the annual maintenance period . Following the war , all Type 42 destroyers were fitted with Oerlikon 30 mm twin cannons port and starboard , for protection against airborne threats . These were later replaced by the Phalanx close @-@ in weapon system . 
 = = = Gulf War ( 1990 – 91 ) = = = 
 When Saddam Hussein 's Iraq invaded Kuwait on 2 August 1990 , British Secretary of State for Defence Tom King soon announced that the UK military contribution to the region was to be increased . A coalition of nations was formed , and a combined naval force entered the Persian Gulf and sailed north , neutralising the Iraqi Navy as it went , and then began conducting naval gunfire support and mine counter @-@ measure missions in preparation for the main amphibious landing force . 
 Having returned from the Persian Gulf in May 1990 , after only a few months in UK Cardiff sailed again , as a reinforcement to Group X @-@ Ray , Brazen , London and Gloucester who had sailed to relieve Armilla Group Whiskey , which consisted of Battleaxe , Jupiter and York . Cardiff and Gloucester were to form part of the air defence barrier along with Bunker Hill , Princeton and Worden protecting three United States aircraft carriers : Midway , Ranger and Theodore Roosevelt . Cardiff had other responsibilities , including surface surveillance and boarding operations , to maintain the security around the task force . 
 Royal Navy <unk> worked in combination with US Seahawks during the Gulf War . The American helicopters lacked an effective anti @-@ ship missile , but had superior surveillance capability compared to the British Lynx . They would locate hostile boats for the British helicopters , which would then attack the target with its Sea Skua missiles . In total , Lynx helicopters flew nearly 600 sorties during the Gulf War , while their crews and engineers maintained flying rates three times their norm . 
 Despite her parent ship dodging mines and maintaining the air defence line as the closest non @-@ US to Kuwait for the first 4 weeks of the 1991 War , Cardiff 's Lynx helicopter , no . 335 of 815 NAS , saw more of the combat in the Gulf War than Cardiff actually did . On 24 January 1991 , no . 335 spotted Iraqi minesweepers and landing craft going to support the Iraqi land operations of the Battle of Khafji . 335 attacked and sank one - the first successful British naval engagement of the war . Later that day , <unk> Island was captured by coalition forces , becoming the first Kuwaiti territory to be liberated . Overnight five days later ( 30 – 31 January 1991 ) with <unk> from Gloucester and Brazen , no . 335 attacked at least two Iraqi missile firing fast patrol boats vessels exiting the Shatt Al Arab . Cardiff and 335 sank two more Iraqi ships in February . Cardiff and Brazen were relieved in mid February by Group Yankee , comprising Brave , Brilliant , Exeter and Manchester . 
 = = = Post Gulf War = = = 
 After the Gulf War , Cardiff 's assignments included a deployment with the Standing Naval Force Mediterranean , a post Cold War NATO immediate reaction force in the Mediterranean , and counter @-@ narcotics patrols in the West Indies , during which she also assisted with relief tasks on the island of Eleuthera in the wake of Hurricane Andrew . 
 Cardiff later returned to the Persian Gulf for seven months . 
 On 14 October 1994 , in response to renewed Iraqi deployment of troops near the Kuwaiti border , the US @-@ led Operation Vigilant Warrior began . The operation was designed to deter Saddam 's " sabre @-@ rattling " by sending large amounts of allied military forces to Kuwait ; Cornwall and Cardiff were the UK contribution . The operation ended on 21 December 1994 , when Saddam pulled back his forces . 
 Upon her return to the UK from Operation Vigilant Warrior , Cardiff participated in the 1995 NATO exercise " Strong Resolve " , a training exercise conducted every four years in dual crisis management . The ship next underwent Operational Sea Training ( OST ) at Portland , in preparation for assuming the duty of Fleet Ready Escort , which required a ship to be available to deploy anywhere in the world at short notice . After completing OST , she attended the 50th VE Day anniversary in Copenhagen and Oslo and provided navigational sea training for frigate and destroyer navigating officer candidates . A visit to her namesake city of Cardiff for VJ Day celebrations followed , after which she sailed to Plymouth for a trials and weapon training programme . She then took part in Operation Bright Star , a multi @-@ national exercise conducted every two years in Egypt . In November , Cardiff became the first Royal Navy ship to enter the Lebanese capital of Beirut in 27 years , spurring the creation of the Beirut Phoenicians Rugby Club , followed by visits to Tunisia and Gibraltar . 
 In 2000 , as part of the Royal Navy 's Atlantic Patrol Task North , Cardiff spent six months in the Caribbean with RFA Black Rover . They provided relief aid to the island of Caye Caulker , near Belize , in the wake of Hurricane Keith . In addition to clearing routes , distributing supplies , and making buildings and electrical cables safe , Cardiff 's surgeon and medical team monitored sanitation . In October , they also took part in the NATO exercise " Unified Spirit " , held off the east coast of the United States . " Unified Spirit " is a training exercise conducted every four years in NATO @-@ led " out @-@ of @-@ area " UN peace support operations . In the same year she participated in the US Navy Fleet Battle Exercise after her combat system was integrated into the Digital Fires Network . 
 Cardiff conducted her last Armilla patrol in early 2003 . During her time in the Persian Gulf , Cardiff prevented more than £ 2 million of illegal cargo from being smuggled out of Iraq , inspected 178 vessels , and seized more than 25 @,@ 000 tonnes of oil . The destroyer was relieved by Richmond before the beginning of the Iraq War and returned to Portsmouth on 4 April 2003 . In late 2003 , the ship was involved in the annual Sea Days demonstration exercise , and in October was used for tests of QinetiQ 's Maritime Tactical Network . 
 In 2005 , she participated in the Trafalgar 200 International Fleet Review , just two weeks before she was decommissioned . In this post Gulf War period , the Royal Navy 's first female chaplain also served on board . 
 = = Decommissioning and fate = = 
 Cardiff was originally to be replaced in 2009 by Daring , the first of the Royal Navy 's next generation Type 45 destroyers . However , it was announced in July 2004 that she would be one of a number of ships withdrawn from service early , in accordance with the " Delivering Security in a Changing World " white paper on the British military . 
 Cardiff was decommissioned on 14 July 2005 , after making a final visit to her namesake city , where members of the public were allowed on board . She then stayed in Portsmouth Harbour at Fareham Creek ( 50 @.@ <unk> ° N 1 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 50 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ) alongside sister ship Newcastle , where both were heavily cannibalised to keep the remaining Type 42 Destroyers running . 
 On 21 November 2008 , the two ships left Portsmouth for the last time for <unk> , Turkey under tow . Scrapping took place in the same yard which was scrapping the Tuxedo Princess , a former ferry and floating nightclub that had been berthed underneath the Tyne Bridge . Following a decommissioning ceremony at Cardiff city hall , her bell was removed and is now mounted in the north aisle of St John 's Parish Church in Cardiff . Calls were made for the conversion of the ship into a Cardiff tourist attraction by a Member of the National Assembly for Wales and former naval servicemen . 
 Dragon , a Type 45 destroyer , has been assigned as the current Royal Navy ship to be affiliated with the city of Cardiff . 
 = Immortality ( Fringe ) = 
 " Immortality " is the 13th episode of the third season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe , and the 56th episode overall . In the episode , the Fringe Division of the parallel universe investigates a series of deaths caused by flesh @-@ eating " skelter beetles " , unleashed by a mad scientist ( Alon Abutbul ) . Abutbul , Seth Gabel , Kirk Acevedo , Philip Winchester , Ryan McDonald , and Joan Chen appeared as guest stars . 
 The episode was written by co @-@ executive producer David Wilcox and story editor Ethan Gross , and was directed by filmmaker Brad Anderson . " Immortality " first aired in the United States on February 11 , 2011 to an estimated 3 @.@ 7 million viewers , a 12 @.@ 5 percent decrease from the previous week . Time shifted viewing led to an addition of 64 percent to the week 's original ratings , but lead actor Joshua Jackson still expressed concern for the show 's future , urging fans to watch the series live on Fridays . Television critics viewed the episode positively , with one praising it for offering " a creepy case , a great villain , and a pertinent plot twist " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the parallel universe , Lincoln ( Seth Gabel ) has been promoted to head of the Fringe Division , while Fauxlivia ( Anna Torv ) welcomes back Frank ( Philip Winchester ) , her boyfriend who has been working as part of the Centers for Disease Control to deal with an outbreak in North Texas for the last several weeks . The division is alerted to a case where a man has been killed , eaten from the inside by insects . They identify the insects as " skelter beetles " , which is surprising as they had been assumed to have become extinct some ten years earlier along with sheep , the only host they can survive in . Frank is brought in to consult on the case at Lincoln 's request , and later proposes marriage to Fauxlivia , who happily accepts . 
 A second case occurs a few days later , another man killed by the beetles , but they find the beetles to be larger and more mature . From the second victim 's movements , they identify the likely culprit as Dr. Armand Silva ( Alon Abutbul ) , a former scientist . Dr. Silva was working on a cure for avian flu using the skelter beetle , but his research was terminated with the extinction of the sheep . Fauxlivia and Frank postulate Dr. Silva may be trying to breed the beetles in humans , who share similar biological features with sheep . 
 Fauxlivia and Lincoln track Dr. Silva 's location , an abandoned building , and separate . Dr. Silva locks Lincoln in a cold storage room , while Fauxlivia falls through a weakened floor and passes out . She is woken by Dr. Silva , but finds herself secured to a chair . Dr. Silva explains to Fauxlivia that he wants to see through the end of his research , needing only one more human host for a final gestation cycle to birth the queen beetle from which the beetle species , and his cure , can be sustained . Fauxlivia feels pains in her body when Dr. Silva implies the last cycle has begun , believing herself to be the host . 
 By then , Lincoln has broken out of the cold locker and called for backup . Frank rushes Fauxlivia to a hospital while Lincoln interrogates Dr. Silva . Dr. Silva reveals he was the last host , and implores Lincoln to remember his name as he extracts the live queen beetle from his body and dies . Meanwhile , Frank discovers Fauxlivia is pregnant ; the adrenaline had induced morning sickness symptoms . At the hospital , the fetus is found to be six weeks old . Frank realizes he was away at that time , accuses Fauxlivia of sleeping with another man , and leaves her . Fauxlivia cries to herself , realizing her child 's father is Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) from her time in the prime universe . 
 In a side plot , Walternate ( John Noble ) has recovered the portion of the doomsday machine that Fauxlivia has secured from the prime universe , and has discovered the formulation for Cortexiphan from his tests on Olivia , but refuses to allow it to be tested on children . When he hears of Fauxlivia 's pregnancy with his grandchild , Walternate comforts her and offers his complete support for her , believing the child to be another way to bring Peter voluntarily back to the parallel universe . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Immortality " was written by co @-@ executive producer David Wilcox and story editor Ethan Gross , and was directed by frequent Fringe collaborator Brad Anderson . Around the time the episode aired , executive producer and showrunner J.H. Wyman said of Anderson , " If we come up with this great concept and say , ' That 's going to be tricky to shoot , ' we know he 's going to transcend it because he just has that way of looking at film as a feature director where anything 's possible . " Wyman and fellow executive producer and showrunner Jeff Pinkner planned the Fauxlivia pregnancy storyline since they conceived her character ; according to them , they departed from the typical television pregnancy trope by " Fringe @-@ if [ ying ] it " and adding a science fiction element . 
 The episode 's premise was based on an extinct type of beetle , which caused trouble for guest actor Kirk Acevedo , as he had a fear of bugs . Pinkner commented in an interview that Acevedo " has a primal fear of bugs and had to act with a bunch of live bugs and fake bugs , all of which equally terrified him . And we didn 't know . But he was game and heroic despite . He conquered his fears , which was awesome " . Upon discovering her character Fauxlivia would be pregnant , Wyman described Anna Torv 's reaction , " She was up for it ! All our cast has such a terrific attitude . They get as excited as we do . They really embrace the ideas . She 's had a lot of challenges and she 's met them with such aplomb . She 's really terrific . She was happy ! " 
 In addition to Acevedo , other recurring guest actors included Seth Gabel as Lincoln Lee , Philip Winchester as Frank Stanton , and Ryan McDonald as Brandon Fayette . In his only guest starring role for the series , Alon <unk> appeared as the episode 's main villain , Dr. Armand Silva . Former Twin Peaks star Joan Chen made an appearance as Reiko , Walternate 's lover . 
 After the episode broadcast , Joshua Jackson commented in an interview with Entertainment Weekly that " apparently I ’ m [ Peter 's ] gonna be a dad . And it is like the most extreme long @-@ distance relationship , which I am pretty good at as it turns out in real life . My baby mama is in another universe . I think he has to find out , but I don ’ t know exactly how we ’ re gonna work that out yet . As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan in collaboration with Science Olympiad for grade school children , focusing on the science seen in " Immortality " , with the intention of having " students learn about the influenza virus and how it spreads and impacts its host . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Two allusions to the ABC show Twin Peaks were observed by journalists . The first was the presence of Joan Chen , who starred in the role of Reiko , Walternate 's mistress , and had appeared on Twin Peaks as the femme fatale Josie Packard . The second allusion is made when the second victim orders " a piece of cherry pie " at a diner , alluding to the Twin Peaks lead character Dale Cooper 's own fondness for this item . The insect Dr Silva was trying to rescue from extinction was called a " skelter beetle " , with the scientific name <unk> <unk> . This is a reference to the Beatles song " Helter Skelter " , cult leader Charles Manson , who was obsessed with the song , and Vincent Bugliosi , the district attorney who prosecuted Manson . The second victim was identified as having eaten at the Abbey Road Diner , a reference to the recording studio that the Beatles used . The episode featured the song " I Want You to Want Me " by American rock band Cheap Trick and a cover of " Road To Nowhere " by French band Nouvelle Vague . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Immortality " was watched by about 3 @.@ 7 million viewers , drawing a 1 @.@ 4 / 4 ratings share on its initial broadcast , down 12 @.@ 5 percent from the previous episode 's viewership . During the first half hour , the episode placed second in its timeslot , but dropped to fourth for its second half . Its lead @-@ in , Kitchen Nightmares , also dropped 12 percent , as did all other network shows for that night . Time shifting viewing added 57 percent to the episode 's ratings for three days out , and 64 percent for a week following the first airing . This was the greatest DVR gain yet for the series in that timeslot . Despite this , Joshua Jackson urged fans to watch the series live in an interview with Entertainment Weekly a week after " Immortality " aired . He explained " I 'm a positive person in general , but we really need our Fringe fans to tune in and watch us on Fridays . We did good when we first moved , but last week we did not have a good week , ratings wise . It is going to take the people that like the show to watch the show and start the campaign and show their support if they want to see us stick around for another season . " 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Immortality " generally received positive reviews from television critics . Noel Murray of The A.V. Club graded the episode an A- , explaining that " after last week ’ s semi @-@ misfire , it was reassuring to see Fringe back in good form this week , with a creepy case , a great villain , and a pertinent plot twist " . Andrew Hanson from the Los Angeles Times ' enjoyed the " fun " scenes in the parallel universe , and stated he would not mind watching an entire show about their Fringe Division . IGN 's Ramsey Isler called the victims ' method of death in " Immortality " " one of the nastiest in recent memory , " and rated the episode 8 @.@ 5 / 10 . He concluded that he was " quite surprised by this episode . The storyline with the Dr. Silva [ sic ] and his beetles didn 't hold my interest at all , but everything else in this installment was fascinating material that expanded the mythos of the series far more than I could have imagined . " Den of Geek 's Billy Grifter wrote , " What this show is now quite good at is lulling us into a false sense of security , before pulling away the rug rather smartly . If you follow the show , like me , you probably got a slightly déjà vu feeling to the plot , as it rode the previously saddle worn concept of a scientist who has lost the perspective to realise that he 's killing people for science . " 
 SFScope contributor Sarah Stegall liked Frank 's final conversation concerning Fauxlivia 's pregnancy , praising the plot twist 's potential to " make for some interesting drama , perhaps even allowing the show to get past the inevitable mawkishness of most pregnancy stories . " However , there was some negative fan feedback concerning the pregnancy storyline . In reaction to this , Jeff Pinkner commented , " Our interpretation of it is that people desperately want to see Olivia and Peter together . And that Fauxlivia having a baby makes Olivia ’ s life that much harder and people are angry because of that . Anything that makes Olivia ’ s life harder , people seem to be angry at . Olivia is a hero , she will conquer all . She ’ ll deal . " After " Immortality " aired , Joshua Jackson expressed sympathy for fans of the Olivia @-@ Peter relationship , commenting that they " have been taken for quite a ride . He [ Peter ] wants to be with her [ Olivia ] , and in his mind it was her . But in her mind , he should have been able to tell the difference . " 
 = Renewable energy in Russia = 
 Renewable energy in Russia mainly consists of hydroelectric energy . The country is the fifth largest producer of renewable energy in the world , although it is 56th when hydroelectric energy is not taken into account . Some 179 TWh of Russia 's energy production comes from renewable energy sources , out of a total economically feasible potential of 1823 TWh . 16 % of Russia 's electricity is generated from hydropower , and less than 1 % is generated from all other renewable energy sources combined . Roughly 68 % of Russia 's electricity is generated from thermal power and 16 % from nuclear power . 
 While most of the large hydropower plants in Russia date from the Soviet era , the abundance of fossil fuels in the Soviet Union and the Russian Federation has resulted in little need for the development of other renewable energy sources . There are currently plans to develop all types of renewable energy , which is strongly encouraged by the Russian government . Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev has called for renewable energy to have a larger share of Russia 's energy output , and has taken steps to promote the development of renewable energy in Russia since 2008 . 
 = = History = = 
 Most sources of renewable energy are new to Russia and have experienced development in recent years . However , hydroelectric power has a long history in Russia , dating back to the Soviet era . The rapid expansion of hydroelectric power in the Soviet Union began in 1930 , when the total installed capacity equaled 600 MWh . The Soviet Union built its first windmill in 1941 , which had a capacity of 100 kW . By the time the Soviet Union collapsed in 1990 , it had a total installed capacity of 65 GWh . The largest dams that Russia currently has , including the Sayano – Shushenskaya Dam , were built in the 1950s and 1960s . From the 1970s to 2000 , the Soviet Union and Russia focused mainly on " traditional " power sources : <unk> , <unk> and nuclear power . However , in 1986 , the Soviet government announced new energy goals , which included further hydroelectric plant construction as well as the start of small @-@ scale solar and wind use for electricity production . Overall , Soviet energy policy focused on nuclear and thermal power , although renewable energy was not completely neglected . The dissolution of the Soviet Union prevented those goals from being fulfilled . 
 The construction of the large dams prominent in Soviet times largely ended in the 1990s with the creation of the Russian Federation . In addition , due to the post @-@ Soviet recession , much of the country 's infrastructure , including dams , fell into disrepair . Use of oil and gas for energy took priority in Russia and renewable energy was ignored . This policy lasted until 2008 , when Medvedev announced reforms to Russia 's energy policies in an attempt to focus more on renewable energy . Since then , there has been rapid development of new renewable energy sources . 
 = = Current status = = 
 Russia is one of the world 's largest producers of energy , most of which it obtains from oil , natural gas and coal . The country 's focus on those resources for production and export , which constitute 80 % of foreign trade earnings , means it has paid little attention to renewable energy . Out of the 203 GW of electric generation capacity that Russia has , 44 GW comes from hydroelectricity , 307 MW from geothermal , 15 MW from wind and negligible amounts from other renewable sources . In 2009 , the Russian energy industry generated a total 992 TWh of electricity , 176 TWh of which was produced by hydroelectric power stations . Some of Russia 's hydroelectric power plants are outdated and are in need of additional investment , as shown by the accident at the Sayano @-@ Shushenskaya HPP in 2009 . 
 President Dmitry Medvedev announced in May 2010 that the Russian government would strongly consider purchasing electricity generated from renewable energy sources in an attempt to encourage development of renewable energy . The government has plans for 4 @.@ 5 % of Russia 's energy output to come from non @-@ hydroelectric renewable energy sources . Additionally , in November 2010 , the government approved a US $ 300 billion program to make factories and buildings more energy efficient ; it also announced plans to construct eight energy @-@ efficient lamp production plants , promote recycling and support the construction of a hybrid car plant . Medvedev announced in late 2009 that he wanted to cut Russian energy consumption by 40 % by 2020 . At the moment , development is slowed by low investment , economic instability , low public demand and low tariffs on heat and electricity . Subsidies for natural gas are another obstacle to renewable energy development . 
 = = Hydropower = = 
 Hydropower is the most used form of renewable energy in Russia , and there is large potential in Russia for more use of hydropower . Russia has 102 hydropower plants with capacities of over 100 MW , making it fifth in the world for hydropower production . It is also second in the world for hydro potential , yet only 20 % of this potential is developed . Russia is home to 9 % of the world 's hydro resources , mostly in Siberia and the country 's far east . At the end of 2005 , the generating capacity from hydroelectric sources in Russia was 45 @,@ 700 MW , and an additional 5 @,@ 648 MW was under construction . The World Energy Council believes that Russia has much potential for using its hydro resources , with a theoretical potential of about 2 @,@ 295 TWh / yr , with 852 TWh being economically feasible . 
 The largest dams in Russia are the Sayano @-@ Shushenskaya Dam , which has an installed capacity of 6 @,@ 400 MW ; the Krasnoyarsk Dam ( 6 @,@ 000 MW ) ; the <unk> Dam ( 4 @,@ 500 MW ) ; the <unk> @-@ <unk> Dam ( 4 @,@ 320 MW ) and the <unk> Dam ( 1 @,@ 330 MW ) . Some of the most recent dam projects are the <unk> Dam ( 2010 MW ) and the <unk> Dam ( 800 MW ) . The <unk> Dam ( 1920 MW ) , <unk> Dam ( 320 MW ) , <unk> Dam ( 352 MW ) and <unk> @-@ <unk> ( 60 MW ) are currently under construction . <unk> is the largest hydroelectric company in Russia and the second largest hydroelectric producer in the world . In October 2010 , China Yangtze Power , the largest hydropower corporation in China , and <unk> , a Russian energy company , signed a cooperation agreement to expand hydroelectric energy production in Russia and export energy to China 's northern territories . The West Siberian Generating Company has plans to start construction of eight mini @-@ hydroelectric power plants in the Altai region before 2015 . 
 On 17 August 2009 , there was an explosion at the Sayano @-@ Shushenskaya hydroelectric power plant , which killed 75 plant workers and injured 13 . The Federal Service for Ecological , Technological , and Nuclear Supervision 's investigation concluded that poor management and technical flaws were responsible . The explosion was caused by a 29 @-@ year @-@ old turbine that experienced an uncontrolled and excessive vibration . Since then , officials from <unk> , the operator of the plant , have called for better oversight and safety at hydroelectric plants . 
 = = Geothermal energy = = 
 Geothermal energy is the second most used form of renewable energy in Russia but represents less than 1 % of the total energy production . The first geothermal power plant in Russia was built at <unk> , Kamchatka , in 1966 , with a capacity of 5 MW . The total geothermal installed capacity in 2005 was 79 MW , with 50 MW coming from a plant at Verkhne @-@ <unk> . Russia is currently developing a 100 MW plant at <unk> and a 50 MW plant in Kaliningrad . Most geothermal resources are currently used for heating settlements in the North Caucasus and Kamchatka . Half of the geothermal production is used to heat homes and industrial buildings , one third is used to heat greenhouses and 13 % is used for industrial processes . 
 In October 2010 , Sergei <unk> , Russia 's energy minister , stated that Russia and Iceland would work together to develop Kamchatka 's geothermal energy sources . Russia is also investigating foreign investment possibilities for developing geothermal energy in the Kuril Islands . 
 = = Solar energy = = 
 Solar energy is virtually nonexistent in Russia , despite its large potential in the country . The first Russian solar plant was opened in Belgorod Oblast in November 2010 . Russia has a total theoretical potential of 2 @,@ 213 TWh / yr for solar energy , with an economically feasible amount of 101 TWh . The southern parts of Russia , especially the North Caucasus , have the greatest potential for solar energy . Russia plans to set up an overall solar capacity of 150 MW by 2020 . 
 Plans for the construction of a new solar plant on the Black Sea have been announced and the plant is expected to begin operations by 2012 . This plant , which will have a capacity of 12 @.@ 3 MW , is being built by <unk> and <unk> . Solar Wind LLC and <unk> are building a plant that will produce double @-@ sided solar panels , which will be able to collect solar energy from both sides . Construction is expected to finish in early 2011 and the plant will have an annual manufacturing capacity of 30 MW . <unk> Solar is the largest Russian company in the area of scientific development and manufacture of products used to generate solar energy . Russia and India are currently discussing the possibility of a joint venture to produce silicon wafers for the creation of photovoltaic cells . 
 An auction in 2013 awarded contracts for 399 MW of solar , and one in 2014 an additional 505 MW . A third auction in 2015 awarded 280 MW of solar . 
 In 2015 , the Russian Solar Energy Association predicted that cumulative solar power capacity in the country would rise to 1 @,@ 500 MW by 2020 . 
 = = Wind energy = = 
 Russia has a long history of small @-@ scale wind energy use but has never developed large @-@ scale commercial wind energy production . Most of its current wind production is located in agricultural areas with low population densities where connection to the main energy grid is difficult . Russia is estimated to have a total potential of 80 @,@ 000 TWh / yr for wind energy , 6 @,@ 218 TWh / yr of which is economically feasible . Most of this potential is found in the southern steppes and the <unk> of Russia , although in many of these areas the population density is less than 1 person per square km . This low population density means that there is little existing electricity infrastructure currently in place , which hinders development of these resources . In 2006 , Russia had a total installed wind capacity of 15 MW . Current Russian wind energy projects have a combined capacity of over 1 @,@ 700 MW . The Russian Wind Energy Association predicts that if Russia achieves its goal of having 4 @.@ 5 % of its energy come from renewable sources by 2020 , the country will have a total wind capacity of 7 GW . 
 In 2010 , plans for the construction of a wind power plant in <unk> , on the Sea of Azov , were announced . It is expected to initially have a capacity of 50 MW , which will become 100 MW a year later . German engineering company Siemens announced in July 2010 , following a visit to Russia by Chancellor Angela Merkel , that it would build wind power plants in Russia . By 2015 , the company hopes to install 1 @,@ 250 MW of capacity in Russia . 
 = = Tidal energy = = 
 Russia has many tidal energy resources at its disposal , although they are currently underdeveloped as well . The Kola Bay and Sea of Okhotsk alone could produce 100 GW with tidal power stations , and the national energy potential from tidal energy can compete with current total energy production . The currently active <unk> Guba Tidal Power Station is the largest tidal power facility in Russia and has the fourth largest capacity ( 1 @.@ 7 MW ) among the world 's tidal power plants . 
 Plans for constructing an 800 MW tidal power plant in the Barents Sea were announced in 2008 . Possible long @-@ term projects include the <unk> Tidal Power Plant , which could become the largest power station in the world , with an installed capacity of up to 87 GW and an annual production of 200 TWh . 
 = = Biofuel = = 
 Russia 's biofuel industry is new , but it has been developing rapidly in recent years . Russia is one of the largest grain producers , has a well @-@ developed ethyl alcohol industry and has increasing rapeseed ( often used to create biodiesel ) production rates . The Russian government declared in 2008 that it would play an active role in developing the biofuel industry by building 30 new biofuel plants and providing tax breaks and subsidized interest rates to biofuel energy projects . Although these plans were delayed , on 13 September 2010 , Medvedev announced that construction would begin in early 2011 . <unk> , the biofuel produced by these plants , would be produced from timber by @-@ products , such as woodchips and sawdust . 
 Lada , a Russian car manufacturer , produced its first biofuel @-@ powered automobile in November 2010 . Deputy Transportation Minister Valery <unk> stated that Russian companies are currently developing helicopters that run on biofuel . Russia hopes to export biofuel to the European Union ; the country 's Biotechnology Corporation estimates that Russia is capable of exporting 40 million tons of biofuel annually . 
 = = Biomass = = 
 Biomass is already used in some parts of Russia to provide a total of 1 % , or 9 Twh / year , of Russia 's total energy . However , due to Russia 's vast forest and peat reserves , it has a total biomass technical potential of 431 Twh / year , of which 285 Twh / year is economically feasible . Most of this potential is found in northwestern Russia , which has a developed pulp and paper industry that can provide wood @-@ based waste to use as biomass energy . 
 Use of peat for energy production was prominent during the Soviet Union , with the peak occurring in 1965 and declining from that point . In 1929 , over 40 % of the Soviet Union 's electric energy came from peat , which dropped to 1 % by 1980 . Currently , Russia is responsible for 17 % of the world 's peat production , and 20 % of the peat that it produces , 1 @.@ 5 million tons , is used for energy purposes . <unk> Power Station in Moscow Oblast and Kirov Power Station in Kirov Oblast are the two largest peat power stations in the world . 
 = Somebody to Love ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " Somebody to Love " is the sixth episode of the second season of 30 Rock , and the twenty @-@ seventh episode overall . It was written by Kay Cannon and the series ' creator , Tina Fey , and was directed by Beth McCarthy . The episode first aired on November 15 , 2007 on the NBC network in the United States . Guest stars in this episode include Hamza Ahmed , Fred Armisen , Kevin Brown , Chris <unk> , Grizz Chapman , Matthieu Cornillon , Michael Devine , Edie Falco , John Lutz , Maulik Pancholy , <unk> Tisdale and Kristen Wiig . 
 The episode focuses on Jack Donaghy 's ( Alec Baldwin ) first meeting with Celeste " C.C. " Cunningham ( Edie Falco ) ; Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) believes that her new neighbor , Raheem Haddad ( Fred Armisen ) , is a terrorist ; and Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) accidentally loses a pair of Jack 's trousers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At a party in honor of Robert Novak , which is being thrown by John McCain and Jack Bauer , Jack Donaghy meets C.C. , the Democratic congresswoman for Vermont . After the party , Jack and C.C. go back to Jack 's apartment and have sex together . The following morning , Jack discovers that C.C. is suing the Sheinhardt Wig Company , the fictional subsidiary of General Electric ( GE ) and owner of NBC , the company that Jack works for . This is because the company is allegedly leaking Auburn Fantasy Dye Number 260 into the <unk> River , causing the children of <unk> to turn orange . After discovering that Jack works for GE , C.C. leaves and goes to work at Bill Clinton 's office in Harlem . Jack and Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) , follow her there and Jack and C.C. decide to carry on their relationship in secret . Liz is worried when she smells maple syrup in her apartment and Jack tells her that it could be the chemical agent <unk> . She suspects that her new neighbour , Raheem ( Fred Armisen ) , is a terrorist because he has maps in his apartment and she has seen him and his brother , Hakeem ( Hamza Ahmed ) , on an agility course in the park . Liz is shocked to discover that the pair are auditioning for The Amazing Race and , in fact , not terrorists . 
 After bringing Jack 's suit back from the dry cleaners , Kenneth discovers that he has lost the suit 's trousers . Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) , James " Toofer " Spurlock ( Keith Powell ) and Josh Girard ( Lonny Ross ) pay him to complete various dares so that he can pay for a new pair of trousers . 
 = = Production = = 
 Fred Armisen and Kristen Wiig , who play Raheem and Candace Van der Shark in the episode , have both appeared in the main cast of Saturday Night Live , a weekly sketch comedy series which airs on NBC in the United States . Tina Fey was the head writer on Saturday Night Live from 1999 until 2006 . Various other cast members of Saturday Night Live have appeared on 30 Rock , including Rachel Dratch , Will Forte , Jason Sudeikis , Molly Shannon and Chris Parnell . Tina Fey and Tracy Morgan have both been part of the main cast of Saturday Night Live . Alec Baldwin has also hosted Saturday Night Live fifteen times , the highest amount of episodes of any host of the series . 
 This episode was the second episode , after " Greenzo " , to air since the start of the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike , which began on November 5 , 2007 and ended on February 12 , 2008 , 100 days later . This episode was the first to contain reference to the strike . The reference occurs when C.C. is being interviewed on MSNBC and the news crawl below reads " News crawl affected by writers strike . Using repeat text from previous season . " This episode was filmed in early October , 2007 . This was the ninth episode written by Tina Fey and the second written by Kay Cannon . It was the third episode directed by Beth McCarthy . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Somebody to Love " brought in an average of 6 @.@ 4 million viewers . The episode also achieved a 3 @.@ 2 / 8 in the key 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic , the highest result in that demographic since the episode " SeinfeldVision " aired on October 4 , 2007 . The 3 @.@ 2 refers to 3 @.@ 2 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds in the U.S. , and the 8 refers to 8 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast in the U.S .. 30 Rock ranked in first place in the male 18 – 34 demographic , for its 8 : 30 p.m – 9 : 00 pm timeslot . 
 Robert Canning of IGN thought that the episode " was 30 Rock ’ s best episode of the season [ so far ] , if not the best episode ever from this young series . " Canning also said that " this was just a fantastic , funny episode of 30 Rock . It was also an episode that once again proved the character of Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) , who was completely absent from this half @-@ hour , simply isn 't necessary when you 've got Tracy Jordan talking to a pigeon on a trash can . " Canning rated this episode " 9 @.@ 5 out of 10 . " Matt Webb Mitovich of TV Guide wrote that " it 's not surprising that – in my opinion , at least – it fell <unk> [ sic ] a bit short . It 's almost as if the funniest parts of the Edie Falco story were played by [ Kristen ] Wiig in the Lifetime movie . " He thought that " the ' Liz suspects the neighbor is a terrorist ' story played out rather well . " Jeff Labrecque of Entertainment Weekly wrote that " Overall , [ this was ] another splendid [ episode ] . My only beef was with the Verizon bit . 30 Rock normally does a splendid job of balancing the corporate elements of television , often utilizing it for comic fodder . But the winking cell phone banter lacked subtlety , and it seemed to me like the show was trying to have its cake and eat it , too . " 
 Beth McCarthy , the director of this episode , was nominated for the Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Comedy Series . 
 = Gibanica = 
 Gibanica ( Serbian Cyrillic : <unk> , [ <unk> ͡ sa ] ) is a traditional pastry dish from Serbia popular all over the Balkans . It is usually made with white cheese and eggs . Recipes can range from sweet to savoury , and from simple to festive and elaborate multi @-@ layered cakes . 
 A derivative of the Serbian verb <unk> , meaning " to fold ; sway , swing , rock " , the pastry was mentioned in Serbian linguist Vuk Stefanović Karadžić 's Serbian dictionary in 1818 . It is traditionally served for breakfast with kefir or plain yogurt . Other than in the Balkans , Gibanica can be found worldwide in restaurants serving Serbian cuisine . It is one of the most popular and recognizable pastry dishes from the Balkans , whether served on festive occasions , or as a comforting family snack . In Serbia , the dish is often consumed at traditional events such as Christmas , Easter and Slava . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 In the vocabulary of the Yugoslav Academy , as well as in the etymological dictionary of Slavic languages , the word gibanica is a derivative of the Serbian verb <unk> / <unk> ́ <unk> , which means " to fold ; sway , swing , rock " . There are also word derivatives like the Serbo @-@ Croatian word <unk> / <unk> ( one who makes gibanica , one who loves to eat gibanica , and one who always imposes as a guest and at someone else 's expense . ) 
 = = History = = 
 The word gibanica was first mentioned in the Balkans in the 17th century as a last name , or nickname . The Serbian word <unk> / <unk> was included in the Serbian dictionary , written in 1818 by Serbian philologist and linguist Vuk Stefanović Karadžić . Karadžić traveled widely in the Balkans and recorded interesting facts relating to Serbian tradition and customs . He explained that gibanica " is a pie with soft cheese between the dough mixed with kaymak , milk and eggs . " 
 During the Second World War , while hiding from Nazi German forces in the forests of Yugoslavia , Serbian Chetniks made the so @-@ called Chetniks Gibanica from ingredients that they had received from peasants . When the commander of the Yugoslav Partisans , Josip Broz Tito , and Chetnik leader Draža Mihailović met at Ravna Gora in 1941 , Gibanica and potato under <unk> with kaymak were served specifically for them . 
 In 2007 , the Gibanica officially became an export brand of Serbia . At the Brand Fair in Belgrade , the food industry " Alexandria " presented a half @-@ baked and frozen gibanica for the international market . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 The original recipe for Gibanica included traditionally homemade phyllo dough and cow 's milk cheese . Homemade cheese can be feta or <unk> . The pie is usually made as " <unk> " ( <unk> pie ) , so the phyllo dough in the middle is crumpled and filled . Besides cheese , the fill contains eggs , milk , kaymak , lard , salt and water . Also , stuffing may include spinach , meat , nettle , potato and onion . In order to speed up preparation , phyllo dough from a store can be used and sunflower oil or olive oil can be used instead of lard . 
 Gibanica is a round @-@ shaped pastry with crispy golden @-@ brown crust . The inside is multi @-@ layered , and includes crumpled dough with small pieces of cheese between each layer . Gibanica can be served hot in the morning and is commonly accompanied by yogurt . 
 = = = Variants = = = 
 Many varieties of Gibanica and related dishes can be found throughout the Balkans ; different gibanica are known as part of the national cuisines of Bosnia and Herzegovina , Croatia , the Republic of Macedonia , Serbia , Slovenia , and Friuli @-@ Venezia Giulia ( Italy , where it is called <unk> ) , Greece , and Bulgaria , where it is usually called <unk> . 
 From the basic recipe , many local specialties have evolved . <unk> gibanica , for example , is a " fancy " multi @-@ layered cake from Prekmurje in Slovenia , served as a dessert course on festive occasions . <unk> gibanica , from the neighbouring Međimurje region of Croatia , is a closely related but simpler and less " formal " dish consisting of four layers of fillings ( prepared fresh cheese ( quark ) , <unk> , apple and walnut ) . Another gibanica variety , called <unk> gibanica , is known from <unk> to the west of the Mur River . 
 The basic concept of Gibanica , a cake or pie involving a combination of pastry with cheese in differentiated layers often combined with layers of various other fillings , is common in the cuisines of the Balkans , Anatolia , and the Eastern Mediterranean . For example , a similar dish known as <unk> ( Sh <unk> , <unk> ) is part of the cuisine of Syria and Lebanon . Gibanica can also be considered to resemble a type of cheese strudel , with which it likely shares a common ancestry in the pastry dishes of the region , and the cuisines of the Byzantine and Ottoman empires . 
 = = In culture = = 
 Gibanica is one of the most popular and recognizable pastry dishes from the Balkans , whether served on festive occasions , or as a comforting family snack . In Serbia , the dish is often consumed at traditional events such as Christmas , Easter and Slava . According to the Serbian media , the largest Gibanica ever made was in the town of <unk> in 2007 . It weighed over 1 @,@ 000 kg , and was applied for inclusion in the Guinness Book of Records . 330 kg of phyllo dough , 330 kg of cheese , 3 @,@ 300 eggs , 30 l. of oil , 110 l. of mineral water , 50 kg of lard and 500 packets of baking powder went into its creation . In Serbia , as well as in neighboring countries , there are festivals dedicated to pies . One of them , called the Gibanica festival or Days of <unk> , is held each year in Bela Palanka . It first took place in 2005 . 
 = = Nutritional information = = 
 = Bill Russell = 
 William Felton " Bill " Russell ( born February 12 , 1934 ) is an American retired professional basketball player . Russell played center for the Boston Celtics of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) from 1956 to 1969 . A five @-@ time NBA Most Valuable Player and a twelve @-@ time All @-@ Star , he was the centerpiece of the Celtics dynasty , winning eleven NBA championships during his thirteen @-@ year career . Along with Henri Richard of the National Hockey League 's Montreal Canadiens , Russell holds the record for the most championships won by an athlete in a North American sports league . Before his professional career , Russell led the University of San Francisco to two consecutive NCAA championships ( 1955 , 1956 ) . He also won a gold medal at the 1956 Summer Olympics as captain of the U.S. national basketball team . 
 Russell is widely considered one of the best players in NBA history . He was listed as between 6 ft 9 in ( 2 @.@ 06 m ) and 6 ft 10 in ( 2 @.@ 08 m ) , and his shot @-@ blocking and man @-@ to @-@ man defense were major reasons for the Celtics ' success . He also inspired his teammates to elevate their own defensive play . Russell was equally notable for his rebounding abilities . He led the NBA in rebounds four times , had a dozen consecutive seasons of 1 @,@ 000 or more rebounds , and remains second all @-@ time in both total rebounds and rebounds per game . He is one of just two NBA players ( the other being prominent rival Wilt Chamberlain ) to have grabbed more than 50 rebounds in a game . Though never the focal point of the Celtics ' offense , Russell also scored 14 @,@ 522 career points and provided effective passing . 
 Playing in the wake of pioneers like Earl Lloyd , Chuck Cooper , and Sweetwater Clifton , Russell was the first African American player to achieve superstar status in the NBA . He also served a three @-@ season ( 1966 – 69 ) stint as player @-@ coach for the Celtics , becoming the first African American NBA coach . For his accomplishments in the Civil Rights Movement on and off the court , Barack Obama awarded him the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2011 . 
 Russell is one of only seven players in history to win an NCAA Championship , an NBA Championship , and an Olympic Gold Medal . He was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame and the National Collegiate Basketball Hall of Fame . He was selected into the NBA 25th Anniversary Team in 1971 and the NBA 35th Anniversary Team in 1980 , and named as one of the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History in 1996 , one of only four players to receive all three honors . In 2007 , he was enshrined in the FIBA Hall of Fame . In 2009 , the NBA announced that the NBA Finals Most Valuable Player trophy would be named the Bill Russell NBA Finals Most Valuable Player Award in honor of Russell . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Bill Russell was born to Charles Russell and Katie Russell in West Monroe , Louisiana . Like almost all southern towns and cities of that time , West Monroe was a highly segregated place , and the Russells often struggled with racism in their daily lives . Once , Russell 's father was refused service at a gas station until the staff had taken care of all the white customers . When his father attempted to leave and find a different station , the attendant stuck a shotgun in his face and threatened to kill him if he didn 't stay and wait his turn . At another time , Russell 's mother was walking outside in a fancy dress when a policeman accosted her . He told her to go home and remove the dress , which he described as " white woman 's clothing " . Because large numbers of blacks were moving to the West during World War II to look for work there , Russell 's father moved the family out of Louisiana when Russell was eight years old and settled them in Oakland , California . While there the family fell into poverty , and Russell spent his childhood living in a series of public housing projects . 
 Charles Russell is described as a " stern , hard man " who was initially a janitor in a paper factory ( a typical low paid , intellectually unchallenging " Negro Job " , as sports journalist John Taylor commented ) , but later became a trucker when World War II broke out . Being closer to his mother Katie than to his father , Russell received a major emotional blow when she suddenly died when he was 12 . His father gave up his trucking job and became a steel worker to be closer to his semi @-@ orphaned children . Russell has stated that his father became his childhood hero , later followed up by Minneapolis Lakers superstar George " Mr. Basketball " Mikan , who he met when he was in high school . 
 In his early years , Russell struggled to develop his skills as a basketball player . Although Russell was a good runner and jumper and had large hands , he simply did not understand the game and was cut from the team in junior high school . As a freshman at <unk> High School in Oakland , California , Russell was almost cut again . However , coach George Powles saw Russell 's raw athletic potential and encouraged him to work on his fundamentals . Since Russell 's previous experiences with white authority figures were often negative , he was delighted to receive warm words from his white coach . He worked hard and used the benefits of a growth spurt to become a decent basketball player , but it was not until his junior and senior years that he began to excel , winning back to back high school state championships . Russell soon became noted for his unusual style of defense . He later recalled , " To play good defense ... it was told back then that you had to stay <unk> at all times to react quickly . When I started to jump to make defensive plays and to block shots , I was initially corrected , but I stuck with it , and it paid off . " 
 One of Russell 's high school basketball teammates was future Baseball Hall @-@ of @-@ Famer Frank Robinson . 
 = = College career = = 
 Russell was ignored by college recruiters and did not receive a single letter of interest until recruiter Hal DeJulio from the University of San Francisco ( USF ) watched him in a high school game . DeJulio was not impressed by Russell 's meager scoring and " atrocious fundamentals " , but sensed that the young center had an extraordinary instinct for the game , especially in the clutch . When DeJulio offered Russell a scholarship , the latter eagerly accepted . Sports journalist John Taylor described it as a watershed in Russell 's life , because Russell realized that basketball was his one chance to escape poverty and racism ; as a consequence , Russell swore to make the best of it . 
 At USF , Russell became the new starting center for coach Phil Woolpert . Woolpert emphasized defense and deliberate half @-@ court play , concepts that favored defensive standout Russell . Woolpert 's choices of how to deploy his players were unaffected by issues of skin color . In 1954 , he became the first coach of a major college basketball squad to start three African American players : Russell , K. C. Jones and Hal Perry . In his USF years , Russell used his relative lack of bulk to develop a unique style of defense : instead of purely guarding the opposing center , he used his quickness and speed to play help defense against opposing forwards and aggressively challenge their shots . Combining the stature and shot @-@ blocking skills of a center with the foot speed of a guard , Russell became the centerpiece of a USF team that soon became a force in college basketball . After USF kept Holy Cross star Tom Heinsohn scoreless in an entire half , Sports Illustrated wrote , " If [ Russell ] ever learns to hit the basket , they 're going to have to rewrite the rules . " 
 However , the games were often difficult for the USF squad . Russell and his African American teammates became targets of racist jeers , particularly on the road . In one notable incident , hotels in Oklahoma City refused to admit Russell and his black teammates while they were in town for the 1954 All @-@ College Tournament . In protest , the whole team decided to camp out in a closed college dorm , which was later called an important bonding experience for the group . Decades later , Russell explained that his experiences hardened him against abuse of all kinds . " I never permitted myself to be a victim , " he said . 
 Racism also shaped his lifelong paradigm as a team player . " At that time , " he has said , " it was never acceptable that a black player was the best . That did not happen ... My junior year in college , I had what I thought was the one of the best college seasons ever . We won 28 out of 29 games . We won the National Championship . I was the [ Most Valuable Player ] at the Final Four . I was first team All American . I averaged over 20 points and over 20 rebounds , and I was the only guy in college blocking shots . So after the season was over , they had a Northern California banquet , and they picked another center as Player of the Year in Northern California . Well , that let me know that if I were to accept these as the final judges of my career I would die a bitter old man . " So he made a conscious decision , he said , to put the team first and foremost , and not worry about individual achievements . 
 On the hardwood , his experiences were far more pleasant . Russell led USF to NCAA championships in 1955 and 1956 , including a string of 55 consecutive victories . He became known for his strong defense and shot @-@ blocking skills , once denying 13 shots in a game . UCLA coach John Wooden called Russell " the greatest defensive man I 've ever seen " . During his college career , Russell averaged 20 @.@ 7 points per game and 20 @.@ 3 rebounds per game . Besides basketball , Russell represented USF in track and field events . He competed in the 440 yards ( 400 m ) race , which he could complete in 49 @.@ 6 seconds . He also participated in the high jump ; Track & Field News ranked him as the seventh @-@ best high jumper in the world in 1956 . That year , Russell won high jump titles at the Central California AAU meet , the Pacific AAU meet , and the West Coast Relays . One of his highest jumps occurred at the West Coast Relays , where he achieved a mark of 6 feet 9 1 ⁄ 4 inches ( 2 @.@ 064 m ) . 
 After his years at USF , the Harlem Globetrotters invited Russell to join their exhibition basketball squad . Russell , who was sensitive to any racial prejudice , was enraged by the fact that owner Abe Saperstein would only discuss the matter with Woolpert . While Saperstein spoke to Woolpert in a meeting , Globetrotters assistant coach Harry Hanna tried to entertain Russell with jokes . The USF center was livid after this snub and declined the offer : he reasoned that if Saperstein was too smart to speak with him , then he was too smart to play for Saperstein . Instead , Russell made himself eligible for the 1956 NBA draft . 
 = = 1956 NBA draft = = 
 In the 1956 NBA draft , Boston Celtics coach Red Auerbach had set his sights on Russell , thinking his defensive toughness and rebounding prowess were the missing pieces the Celtics needed . In retrospect , Auerbach 's thoughts were unorthodox . In that period , centers and forwards were defined by their offensive output , and their ability to play defense was secondary . 
 However , Boston 's chances of getting Russell seemed slim . Because the Celtics had finished second in the previous season and the worst teams had the highest draft picks , the Celtics had slipped too low in the draft order to pick Russell . In addition , Auerbach had already used his territorial pick to acquire talented forward Tom Heinsohn . But Auerbach knew that the Rochester Royals , who owned the first draft pick , already had a skilled rebounder in Maurice Stokes , were looking for an outside shooting guard and were unwilling to pay Russell the $ 25 @,@ 000 signing bonus he requested . The St. Louis Hawks , who owned the second pick , drafted Russell , but were vying for Celtics center Ed Macauley , a six @-@ time All @-@ Star who had roots in St. Louis . Auerbach agreed to trade Macauley , who had previously asked to be traded to St. Louis in order to be with his sick son , if the Hawks gave up Russell . The owner of St Louis called Auerbach later and demanded more in the trade . Not only did he want Macauley , who was the Celtics premier player at the time , he wanted Cliff Hagan , who had been serving in the military for three years and had not yet played for the Celtics . After much debate , Auerbach agreed to give up Hagan , and the Hawks made the trade . 
 During that same draft , Boston also drafted guard K. C. Jones , Russell 's former USF teammate . Thus , in one night , the Celtics managed to draft three future Hall of Famers : Russell , Jones and Heinsohn . The Russell draft @-@ day trade was later called one of the most important trades in the history of North American sports . 
 = = 1956 Olympics = = 
 Before his NBA rookie year , Russell was the captain of the U.S. national basketball team that competed at the 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne , Australia . Avery Brundage , head of the International Olympic Committee , argued that Russell had already signed a professional contract and thus was no longer an amateur , but Russell prevailed . He had the option to skip the tournament and play a full season for the Celtics , but he was determined to play in the Olympics . He later commented that he would have participated in the high jump if he had been snubbed by the basketball team . Under coach Gerald Tucker , Russell helped the national team win the gold medal in Melbourne , defeating the Soviet Union 89 – 55 in the final game . The United States dominated the tournament , winning by an average of 53 @.@ 5 points per game . Russell led the team in scoring , averaging 14 @.@ 1 points per game for the competition . His Celtics teammate K. C. Jones joined him on the Olympic squad and contributed 10 @.@ 9 points per game . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = 1956 – 59 = = = 
 Russell could not join the Celtics for the 1956 – 57 season until December , due to his Olympic commitment . After rejoining the Celtics , Russell played 48 games , averaging 14 @.@ 7 points per game and a league @-@ high 19 @.@ 6 rebounds per game . During this season , the Celtics featured five future Hall @-@ of @-@ Famers : center Russell , forwards Heinsohn and Frank Ramsey , and guards Bill Sharman and Bob Cousy . ( K. C. Jones did not play for the Celtics until 1958 because of military service . ) 
 Russell 's first Celtics game came on December 22 , 1956 , against the St. Louis Hawks , led by star forward Bob Pettit , who held several all @-@ time scoring records . Auerbach assigned Russell to shut down St. Louis 's main scorer , and the rookie impressed the Boston crowd with his man @-@ to @-@ man defense and shot @-@ blocking . In previous years , the Celtics had been a high @-@ scoring team , but lacked the defensive presence needed to close out tight games . However , with the added defensive presence of Russell , the Celtics had laid the foundation for a dynasty . The team utilized a strong defensive approach to the game , forcing opposing teams to commit many turnovers , which led to many easy fast break points . Russell was an elite help defender who allowed the Celtics to play the so @-@ called " Hey , Bill " defense : whenever a Celtic requested additional defensive help , he would shout " Hey , Bill ! " Russell was so quick that he could run over for a quick double team and make it back in time if the opponents tried to find the open man . He also became famous for his shot @-@ blocking skills : pundits called his blocks " <unk> " , referring to the Wilson NBA basketballs he " shoved back into the faces of opposing shooters " . This skill also allowed the other Celtics to play their men aggressively : if they were beaten , they knew that Russell was guarding the basket . This approach allowed the Celtics to finish with a 44 – 28 regular season record , the team 's second @-@ best record since beginning play in the 1946 – 47 season , and guaranteed a post @-@ season appearance . 
 However , Russell also received negative attention . Constantly provoked by New York Knicks center Ray Felix during a game , he complained to coach Auerbach . The latter told him to take matters into his own hands , so after the next provocation , Russell punched Felix unconscious , paid a $ 25 fine and was no longer a target of cheap fouls . With his teammates , Russell had a cordial relationship , with the notable exception of fellow rookie and old rival Heinsohn . Heinsohn felt that Russell resented him because the former was named the 1957 NBA Rookie of the Year : many people thought that Russell was more important , but Russell also had only played half the season . Russell also ignored Heinsohn 's plea to give his cousin an autograph , and openly said to Heinsohn that he deserved half of his $ 300 Rookie of the Year check . The relationship between the two rookies remained reserved . On the other hand , despite their different ethnic backgrounds and lack of common off @-@ court interests , his relationship with Celtics point guard and fan favorite Bob Cousy was amicable . 
 In Game 1 of the Eastern Division Finals , the Celtics met the Syracuse Nationals , who were led by Dolph Schayes . In Russell 's first NBA playoff game , he finished with 16 points and 31 rebounds , along with a reported 7 blocks . ( At the time , blocks were not yet an officially registered statistic . ) After the Celtics ' 108 – 89 victory , Schayes quipped , " How much does that guy make a year ? It would be to our advantage if we paid him off for five years to get away from us in the rest of this series . " The Celtics swept the Nationals in three games to earn the franchise 's first appearance in the NBA Finals . 
 In the NBA Finals , the Celtics met the St. Louis Hawks , who were again led by Bob Pettit , as well as former Celtic Ed Macauley . The teams split the first six games , and the tension was so high that , in Game 3 , Celtics coach Auerbach punched his colleague Ben Kerner and received a $ 300 fine . In the highly competitive Game 7 , Russell tried his best to slow down Pettit , but it was Heinsohn who scored 37 points and kept the Celtics alive . However , Russell contributed by completing the famous " Coleman Play " . Here , Russell ran down Hawks guard Jack Coleman , who had received an outlet pass at midcourt , and blocked his shot despite the fact that Russell had been standing at his own baseline when the ball was thrown to Coleman . The block preserved Boston 's slim 103 – 102 lead with 40 @-@ odd seconds left to play in regulation , saving the game for the Celtics . In the second overtime , both teams were in serious foul trouble : Heinsohn had fouled out , and the Hawks were so depleted that they had only 7 players left . With the Celtics leading 125 – 123 with one second left , the Hawks had the ball at their own baseline . Reserve guard Alex Hannum threw a long alley oop pass to Pettit , and Pettit 's tip @-@ in rolled indecisively on the rim for several seconds before rolling out again . The Celtics won , earning their first NBA Championship . 
 Energized by their championship , the Celtics won 14 straight games to start the 1957 – 58 season , and they kept rolling . Russell averaged 16 @.@ 6 points per game and a league @-@ record average of 22 @.@ 7 rebounds per game . An interesting phenomenon began that year : Russell was voted the NBA Most Valuable Player , but only named to the All @-@ NBA Second Team . This would occur repeatedly throughout his career . The NBA reasoned that other centers were better all @-@ round players than Russell , but no player was more valuable to his team . The Celtics won 49 games and easily made the first berth in the 1958 NBA Playoffs , and made the 1958 NBA Finals against their familiar rivals , the St. Louis Hawks . The teams split the first two games , but then Russell went down with a foot injury in Game 3 and only returned for Game 6 . The Celtics surprisingly won Game 4 , but the Hawks prevailed in Games 5 and 6 , with Pettit scoring 50 points in the deciding Game 6 . 
 In the following 1958 – 59 season , Russell continued his strong play , averaging 16 @.@ 7 points per game and 23 @.@ 0 rebounds per game in the regular season . The Celtics broke a league record by winning 52 games , and Russell 's strong performance once again helped lead the Celtics through the post @-@ season , as they returned to the NBA Finals . In the 1959 NBA Finals , the Celtics recaptured the NBA title , sweeping the Minneapolis Lakers 4 – 0 . Lakers head coach John Kundla praised Russell , stating , " We don 't fear the Celtics without Bill Russell . Take him out and we can beat them ... He 's the guy who whipped us psychologically . " 
 = = = 1959 – 66 = = = 
 In the 1959 – 60 season , the NBA witnessed the debut of legendary 7 ft 1 in ( 2 @.@ 16 m ) Philadelphia Warriors center Wilt Chamberlain , who averaged a record 37 @.@ 6 points per game in his rookie year . On November 7 , 1959 , Russell 's Celtics hosted Chamberlain 's Warriors , and pundits called the matchup between the best offensive and best defensive center " The Big Collision " and " Battle of the Titans " . Both men awed onlookers with " nakedly awesome athleticism " , and while Chamberlain outscored Russell 30 to 22 , the Celtics won 115 – 106 , and the match was called a " new beginning of basketball " . The matchup between Russell and Chamberlain became one of basketball 's greatest rivalries . In that season , Russell 's Celtics won a record 59 regular season games ( including a then @-@ record tying 17 game win streak ) and met Chamberlain 's Warriors in the Eastern Division Finals . Chamberlain outscored Russell by 81 points in the series , but the Celtics walked off with a 4 – 2 series win . In the 1960 Finals , the Celtics outlasted the Hawks 4 – 3 and won their third championship in four years . Russell grabbed an NBA Finals @-@ record 40 rebounds in Game 2 , and added 22 points and 35 rebounds in the deciding Game 7 , a 122 – 103 victory for Boston . 
 In the 1960 – 61 season , Russell averaged 16 @.@ 9 points and 23 @.@ 9 rebounds per game , leading his team to a regular season mark of 57 – 22 . The Celtics earned another post @-@ season appearance , where they defeated the Syracuse Nationals 4 – 1 in the Eastern Division Finals . The Celtics made good use of the fact that the Los Angeles Lakers had exhausted St. Louis in a long seven @-@ game Western Conference Finals , and the Celtics convincingly won in five games . 
 The following season , Russell scored a career @-@ high 18 @.@ 9 points per game , accompanied by 23 @.@ 6 rebounds per game . While his rival Chamberlain had a record @-@ breaking season of 50 @.@ 4 points per game and a 100 @-@ point game , the Celtics became the first team to win 60 games in a season , and Russell was voted as the NBA 's Most Valuable Player . In the post @-@ season , the Celtics met the Philadelphia Warriors of Chamberlain , and Russell did his best to slow down the 50 @-@ points @-@ per @-@ game scoring Warriors center . In the pivotal Game 7 , Russell managed to hold Chamberlain to only 22 points ( 28 below his season average ) while scoring 19 himself . The game was tied with two seconds left when Sam Jones sank a clutch shot that won the Celtics the series . In the 1962 NBA Finals , the Celtics met the Los Angeles Lakers of star forward Elgin Baylor and star guard Jerry West . The teams split the first six games , and Game 7 was tied one second before the end of regular time when Lakers guard Rod Hundley faked a shot and instead passed out to Frank Selvy , who missed an open eight @-@ foot last @-@ second shot that would have won L.A. the title . Though the game was tied , Russell had the daunting task of defending against Baylor with little frontline help , as the three best Celtics forwards , Loscutoff , Heinsohn and Tom Sanders , had fouled out . In overtime , Baylor fouled out the fourth forward , Frank Ramsey , so Russell was completely robbed of his usual four @-@ men wing rotation . But Russell and little @-@ used fifth forward Gene <unk> successfully pressured Baylor into missed shots . Russell finished with a clutch performance , scoring 30 points and tying his own NBA Finals record with 40 rebounds in a 110 – 107 overtime win . 
 The Celtics lost playmaker Bob Cousy to retirement after the 1962 – 63 season , but they drafted John Havlicek . Once again , the Celtics were powered by Russell , who averaged 16 @.@ 8 points and 23 @.@ 6 rebounds per game , won his fourth regular @-@ season MVP title , and earned MVP honors at the 1963 NBA All @-@ Star Game following his 19 @-@ point , 24 @-@ rebound performance for the East . The Celtics reached the 1963 NBA Finals , where they again defeated the Los Angeles Lakers , this time in six games . 
 In the following 1963 – 64 season , the Celtics posted a league @-@ best 58 – 22 record in the regular season . Russell scored 15 @.@ 0 ppg and grabbed a career @-@ high 24 @.@ 7 rebounds per game , leading the NBA in rebounds for the first time since Chamberlain entered the league . Boston defeated the Cincinnati Royals 4 – 1 to earn another NBA Finals appearance , and then won against Chamberlain 's newly relocated San Francisco Warriors 4 – 1 . It was their sixth consecutive and seventh title in Russell 's eighth year , a streak unreached in any U.S. professional sports league . Russell later called the Celtics ' defense the best of all time . 
 Russell again excelled during the 1964 – 65 season . The Celtics won a league @-@ record 62 games , and Russell averaged 14 @.@ 1 points and 24 @.@ 1 rebounds per game , winning his second consecutive rebounding title and his fifth MVP award . In the 1965 NBA Playoffs , the Celtics played the Eastern Division Finals against the Philadelphia 76ers , who had recently traded for Wilt Chamberlain . Russell held Chamberlain to a pair of field goals in the first three quarters of Game 3 . In Game 5 , Russell contributed 28 rebounds , 10 blocks , seven assists and six steals . However , that playoff series ended in a dramatic Game 7 . Five seconds before the end , the Sixers were trailing 110 – 109 , but Russell turned over the ball . However , when the Sixers ' Hall @-@ of @-@ Fame guard Hal Greer inbounded , John Havlicek stole the ball , causing Celtics commentator Johnny Most to scream : " Havlicek stole the ball ! It 's all over ! Johnny Havlicek stole the ball ! " After the Division Finals , the Celtics had an easier time in the NBA Finals , winning 4 – 1 against the Los Angeles Lakers of Jerry West and Elgin Baylor . 
 In the following 1965 – 66 season , the Celtics won their eighth consecutive title . Russell 's team again beat Chamberlain 's Philadelphia 76ers 4 games to 1 in the Division Finals , proceeding to win the NBA Finals in a tight seven @-@ game showdown against the Los Angeles Lakers , with Russell scoring 25 points and grabbing 32 rebounds in a 95 – 93 win in the deciding seventh game . During the season , Russell contributed 12 @.@ 9 points and 22 @.@ 8 rebounds per game . This was the first time in seven years that he failed to average at least 23 rebounds a game . 
 = = = 1966 – 69 = = = 
 Before the 1966 – 67 season , Celtics coach Red Auerbach retired . Initially , he had wanted his old player Frank Ramsey as coach , but Ramsey was too occupied running his three lucrative nursing homes . His second choice Bob Cousy declined , stating he did not want to coach his former teammates , and the third choice Tom Heinsohn also said no , because he did not think he could handle the often surly Russell . However , Heinsohn proposed Russell himself as a player @-@ coach , and when Auerbach asked his center , he said yes . Russell thus became the first African American head coach in NBA history , and commented to journalists : " I wasn 't offered the job because I am a Negro , I was offered it because Red figured I could do it . " The Celtics ' championship streak ended that season at eight , however , as Wilt Chamberlain 's Philadelphia 76ers won a record @-@ breaking 68 regular season games and overcame the Celtics 4 – 1 in the Eastern Finals . The Sixers simply outpaced the Celtics , shredding the famous Boston defense by scoring 140 points in the clinching Game 5 win . Russell acknowledged his first real loss in his career ( he had been injured in 1958 when the Celtics lost the NBA Finals ) by visiting Chamberlain in the locker room , shaking his hand and saying , " Great " . However , the game still ended on a high note for Russell . After the loss , he led his grandfather through the Celtics locker rooms , and the two saw white Celtics player John Havlicek taking a shower next to his black teammate Sam Jones and discussing the game . Suddenly , Russell Sr. broke down crying . Asked by his grandson what was wrong , his grandfather replied how proud he was of him , being coach of an organization in which blacks and whites coexisted in harmony . 
 In Russell 's penultimate season , the 1967 – 68 season , his numbers slowly declined , but at age 34 , he still tallied 12 @.@ 5 points per game and 18 @.@ 6 rebounds per game ( the latter good for the third highest average in the league ) . In the Eastern Division Finals , the 76ers had the better record than the Celtics and were slightly favored . But then , national tragedy struck as Martin Luther King was assassinated on April 4 , 1968 . With eight of the ten starting players on Sixers and Celtics being African American , both teams were in deep shock , and there were calls to cancel the series . In a game called as " unreal " and " devoid of emotion " , the Sixers lost 127 – 118 on April 5 . In Game 2 , Philadelphia evened the series with a 115 – 106 win , and in Games 3 and 4 , the Sixers won , with Chamberlain suspiciously often defended by Celtics backup center Wayne Embry , causing the press to speculate Russell was worn down . Prior to Game 5 , the Celtics seemed dead : no NBA team had ever come back from a 3 – 1 deficit . However , the Celtics rallied back , winning Game 5 122 – 104 and Game 6 114 – 106 , powered by a spirited Havlicek and helped by a terrible Sixers shooting slump . In Game 7 , 15 @,@ 202 stunned Philadelphia fans witnessed a historic 100 – 96 defeat , making it the first time in NBA history a team lost a series after leading 3 – 1 . Russell limited Chamberlain to only two shot attempts in the second half . Despite this , the Celtics were leading only 97 – 95 with 34 seconds left when Russell closed out the game with several consecutive clutch plays . He made a free throw , blocked a shot by Sixers player Chet Walker , grabbed a rebound off a miss by Sixers player Hal Greer , and finally passed the ball to teammate Sam Jones , who scored to clinch the win . Boston then beat the Los Angeles Lakers 4 – 2 in the NBA Finals , giving Russell his tenth title in 12 years . For his efforts Russell was named Sports Illustrated 's Sportsman of the Year . After losing for the fifth straight time against Russell and his Celtics , Hall @-@ of @-@ Fame Lakers guard Jerry West stated , " If I had a choice of any basketball player in the league , my No.1 choice has to be Bill Russell . Bill Russell never ceases to amaze me . " 
 However , in the 1968 – 69 season , Russell seemed to reach a breaking point . Shocked by the murder of Robert F. Kennedy , disillusioned by the Vietnam War , and weary from his increasingly stale ( and later divorced ) marriage to his wife Rose , he was convinced that the U.S. was a corrupt nation and that he was wasting his time playing something as superficial as basketball . He was 15 pounds overweight , skipped mandatory NBA coach meetings and was generally lacking energy : after a New York Knicks game , he complained of intense pain and was diagnosed with acute exhaustion . Russell pulled himself together and put up 9 @.@ 9 points and 19 @.@ 3 rebounds per game , but the aging Celtics stumbled through the regular season . Their 48 – 34 record was the team 's worst since 1955 – 56 , and they entered the playoffs as only the fourth @-@ seeded team in the East . In the playoffs , however , Russell and his Celtics achieved upsets over the Philadelphia 76ers and New York Knicks to earn a meeting with the Los Angeles Lakers in the NBA Finals . L.A. now featured new recruit Wilt Chamberlain next to perennial stars Baylor and West , and were heavily favored . In the first two games , Russell ordered not to double @-@ team West , who used the freedom to score 53 and 41 points in the Game 1 and 2 Laker wins . Russell then ordered to double @-@ team West , and Boston won Game 3 . In Game 4 , the Celtics were trailing by one point with seven seconds left and the Lakers having the ball , but then Baylor stepped out of bounds , and in the last play , Sam Jones used a triple screen by Bailey Howell , Larry Siegfried and Havlicek and hit a buzzer beater which equalized the series . The teams split the next two games , so it all came down to Game 7 in L.A. , where Lakers owner Jack Kent Cooke angered and motivated the Celtics by putting " proceedings of Lakers victory ceremony " on the game leaflets . Russell used a copy as extra motivation and told his team to play a running game , because in that case , not the better , but the more determined team was going to win . 
 The Celtics were ahead by nine points with five minutes remaining ; in addition , West was heavily limping after a Game 5 thigh injury and Chamberlain had left the game with an injured leg . West then hit one basket after the other and cut the lead to one , and Chamberlain asked to return to the game . However , Lakers coach Bill van Breda Kolff kept Chamberlain on the bench until the end of the game , saying later that he wanted to stay with the lineup responsible for the comeback . The Celtics held on for a 108 – 106 victory , and Russell claimed his eleventh championship in 13 years . At age 35 , Russell contributed 21 rebounds in his last NBA game . After the game , Russell went over to the distraught West ( who had scored 42 points and was named the only NBA Finals MVP in history from the losing team ) , clasped his hand and tried to soothe him . Days later , 30 @,@ 000 enthusiastic Celtics fans cheered their returning heroes , but Russell was not there : the man who said he owed the public nothing ended his career and cut all ties to the Celtics . It came as so surprising that even Red Auerbach was blindsided , and as a consequence , he made the " mistake " of drafting guard Jo Jo White instead of a center . Although White became a standout Celtics player , the Celtics lacked an All @-@ Star center , went just 34 – 48 in the next season and failed to make the playoffs for the first time since 1950 . In Boston , both fans and journalists felt betrayed , because Russell left the Celtics without a coach and a center and sold his retirement story for $ 10 @,@ 000 to Sports Illustrated . Russell was accused of selling out the future of the franchise for a month of his salary . 
 = = = NBA statistics = = = 
 = = = = Regular season = = = = 
 = = = = Playoffs = = = = 
 = = = Post @-@ player career = = = 
 Russell 's No. 6 jersey was retired by the Celtics on March 12 , 1972 , Besides the Celtics , Russell also wore number 6 at the University of San Francisco and for the 1956 USA Olympic Team . 
 He was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 1975 . Russell , who had a difficult relationship with the media , was not present at either event . After retiring as a player , Russell had stints as head coach of the Seattle SuperSonics ( 1973 to 1977 ) and Sacramento Kings ( 1987 to 1988 ) . His time as a coach was lackluster ; although he led the struggling SuperSonics into the playoffs for the first time in franchise history , Russell 's defensive , team @-@ oriented Celtics mindset did not mesh well with the team , and he left in 1977 with a 162 – 166 record . Russell 's stint with the Kings was considerably shorter , his last assignment ending when the Kings went 17 – 41 to begin the 1987 – 88 season . 
 In addition , Russell ran into financial trouble . He had invested $ 250 @,@ 000 into a rubber plantation in Liberia , where he had wanted to spend his retirement , but it went bankrupt . The same fate awaited his Boston restaurant called " Slade 's " , after which he had to default on a $ 90 @,@ 000 government loan to purchase the outlet . The IRS discovered that Russell owed $ 34 @,@ 430 in tax money and put a lien on his house . 
 Russell became a vegetarian , took up golf and worked as a color commentator , but he was uncomfortable as a broadcaster . He later said , " The most successful television is done in eight @-@ second thoughts , and the things I know about basketball , motivation , and people go deeper than that . " On November 3 , 1979 , Russell hosted Saturday Night Live , in which he appeared in several sports @-@ related sketches . Russell also wrote books , usually written as a joint project with a professional writer , including 1979 's Second Wind . 
 After spending about a decade living as a recluse on Mercer Island near Seattle , Russell rose to prominence again at the turn of the millennium . Russell 's Rules was published in 2001 , and in January 2006 , he convinced Miami Heat superstar center Shaquille O 'Neal to bury the hatchet with fellow NBA superstar and former Los Angeles Lakers teammate Kobe Bryant , with whom O 'Neal had a bitter public feud . Later that year , on November 17 , 2006 , the two @-@ time NCAA winner Russell was recognized for his impact on college basketball as a member of the founding class of the National Collegiate Basketball Hall of Fame . He was one of five , along with John Wooden , Oscar Robertson , Dean Smith and Dr. James Naismith , selected to represent the inaugural class . On May 20 , 2007 , Russell was awarded an honorary doctorate by Suffolk University , where he served as its commencement speaker , and Russell received an honorary degree from Harvard University on June 7 , 2007 . On June 18 , 2007 , Russell was inducted as a member of the founding class of the FIBA Hall of Fame . Russell was also honored during the 2009 NBA All @-@ Star Weekend in Phoenix . 
 On February 14 , 2009 , NBA Commissioner David Stern announced that the NBA Finals Most Valuable Player Award would be renamed the " Bill Russell NBA Finals Most Valuable Player Award " in honor of the 11 @-@ time NBA champion . The following day , during halftime of the All @-@ Star game , Celtics captains Paul Pierce , Kevin Garnett , and Ray Allen presented Russell a surprise birthday cake for his 75th birthday . Russell attended the final game of the Finals that year to present his newly christened namesake award to its winner , Kobe Bryant . Russell was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2011 . 
 = = Head coaching record = = 
 = = Accomplishments and legacy = = 
 Russell is one of the most successful and decorated athletes in North American sports history . His awards and achievements include 11 NBA championships as a player with the Boston Celtics in 13 seasons ( including two NBA championships as player / head coach ) , and he is credited with having raised defensive play in the NBA to a new level . By winning the 1956 NCAA Championship with USF and the 1957 NBA title with the Celtics , Russell became the first of only four players in basketball history to win an NCAA championship and an NBA Championship back @-@ to @-@ back ( the others being Henry Bibby , Magic Johnson , and Billy Thompson ) . He also won two state championships in high school . In the interim , Russell collected an Olympic gold medal in 1956 . His stint as coach of the Celtics was also of historical significance , as he became the first black head coach in major U.S. professional sports when he succeeded Red Auerbach . 
 In his first NBA full season ( 1957 – 58 ) , Russell became the first player in NBA history to average more than 20 rebounds per game for an entire season , a feat he accomplished 10 times in his 13 seasons . Russell 's 51 rebounds in a single game is the second @-@ highest performance ever , only trailing Chamberlain 's all @-@ time record of 55 . He still holds the NBA record for rebounds in one half with 32 ( vs. Philadelphia , on November 16 , 1957 ) . Career @-@ wise in rebounds , Russell ranks second only to Wilt Chamberlain in regular season total ( 21 @,@ 620 ) and average per game ( 22 @.@ 5 ) , and he led the NBA in average rebounds per game four times . Russell is the all @-@ time playoff leader in total ( 4 @,@ 104 ) and average ( 24 @.@ 9 ) rebounds per game , he grabbed 40 rebounds in three separate playoff games ( twice in the NBA Finals ) , and he never failed to average at least 20 rebounds per game in any of his 13 post @-@ season campaigns . Russell also had seven regular season games with 40 or more rebounds , the NBA Finals record for highest rebound per game average ( 29 @.@ 5 rpg , 1959 ) and by a rookie ( 22 @.@ 9 rpg , 1957 ) . In addition , Russell holds the NBA Finals single @-@ game record for most rebounds ( 40 , March 29 , 1960 , vs. St. Louis , and April 18 , 1962 , vs. Los Angeles ) , most rebounds in a quarter ( 19 , April 18 , 1962 vs. Los Angeles ) , and most consecutive games with 20 or more rebounds ( 15 from April 9 , 1960 – April 16 , 1963 ) . He also had 51 in one game , 49 in two others , and twelve straight seasons of 1 @,@ 000 or more rebounds . Russell was known as one of the most clutch players in the NBA . He played in 11 deciding games ( 10 times in Game 7s , once in a Game 5 ) , and ended with a flawless 11 – 0 record . In these eleven games , Russell averaged 18 points and 29 @.@ 45 rebounds . 
 On the hardwood , he was considered the consummate defensive center , noted for his unmatched defensive intensity , his stellar basketball IQ and his sheer will to win . Russell excelled at playing man @-@ to @-@ man defense , blocking shots , and grabbing defensive and offensive rebounds . He also could score with <unk> and made mid @-@ air outlet passes to point guard Bob Cousy for easy fast break points . He also was known as a fine passer and pick @-@ setter , featured a decent left @-@ handed hook shot and finished strong on alley oops . However , on offense , Russell 's output was limited . His NBA career personal averages show him to be an average scorer ( 15 @.@ 1 points career average ) , a poor free throw shooter ( 56 @.@ 1 % ) , and average overall shooter from the field ( 44 % , not exceptional for a center ) . In his 13 years , he averaged a relatively low 13 @.@ 4 field goals attempted ( normally , top scorers average 20 and more ) , illustrating that he was never the focal point of the Celtics offense , instead focusing on his tremendous defense . 
 In his career , Russell won five regular season MVP awards ( 1959 , 1961 – 63 , 1965 ) — tied with Michael Jordan for second all @-@ time behind Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar 's six awards . He was selected three times to the All @-@ NBA First Teams ( 1959 , 1963 , 1965 ) and eight Second Teams ( 1958 , 1960 – 62 , 1964 , 1966 – 68 ) , and was a twelve @-@ time NBA All @-@ Star ( 1958 – 1969 ) . Russell was elected to one NBA All @-@ Defensive First Team . This took place during his last season ( 1969 ) , and was the first season the NBA All @-@ Defensive Teams were selected . In 1970 , The Sporting News named Russell the " Athlete of the Decade " . Russell is universally seen as one of the best NBA players ever , and was declared " Greatest Player in the History of the NBA " by the Professional Basketball Writers Association of America in 1980 . For his achievements , Russell was named " Sportsman of the Year " by Sports Illustrated in 1968 . He also made all three NBA Anniversary Teams : the NBA 25th Anniversary All @-@ Time Team ( 1970 ) , the NBA 35th Anniversary All @-@ Time Team ( 1980 ) and the NBA 50th Anniversary All @-@ Time Team ( 1996 ) . Russell ranked # 18 on ESPN 's 50 Greatest Athletes of the 20th Century in 1999 . In 2009 , SLAM Magazine named Russell the # 3 player of all time behind Michael Jordan and Wilt Chamberlain . Former NBA player and head coach , Don Nelson , described Bill Russell in a quote that says , " There are two types of superstars . One makes himself look good at the expense of the other guys on the floor . But there 's another type who makes the players around him look better than they are , and that 's the type Russell was . " 
 On Saturday , February 14 , 2009 , during the 2009 NBA All @-@ Star Weekend in Phoenix , NBA Commissioner David Stern announced that the NBA Finals MVP Award would be named after Bill Russell . Russell was named as a 2010 recipient of the Presidential Medal of Freedom . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Russell was married to his college sweetheart Rose Swisher from 1956 to 1973 . They had three children , namely daughter Karen Russell , the television pundit and lawyer , and sons William Jr. and Jacob . However , the couple grew emotionally distant and divorced . In 1977 , he married Dorothy <unk> , Miss USA of 1968 , but they divorced in 1980 . The relationship was shrouded in controversy because Didi was white . In 1996 , Russell married his third wife , Marilyn Nault ; their marriage lasted until her death in January 2009 . He has been a resident of Mercer Island , Washington for over four decades . His older brother was the noted playwright Charlie L. Russell . 
 In 1959 , Bill Russell became the first NBA player to visit Africa . Russell is a member of Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity , having been initiated into its Gamma Alpha chapter while a student at University of San Francisco . On October 16 , 2013 , Russell was arrested for bringing a loaded .38 @-@ caliber Smith & Wesson handgun to the Seattle – Tacoma International Airport . 
 According to a Thursday evening , July 17 , 2014 Associated Press ( AP ) news story , it was stated that , : " Boston Celtics officials say NBA Hall of Famer Bill Russell is doing OK after collapsing during a speaking engagement near Lake Tahoe . Team spokesman Brian Olive says the 80 @-@ year @-@ old Russell felt faint after the Thursday morning fall at the Hyatt Regency resort in Incline Village , Nevada , but was planning on returning home to Seattle this evening . ... " 
 = = Earnings = = 
 During his career , Russell was one of the first big earners in NBA basketball . His 1956 rookie contract was worth $ 24 @,@ 000 , only fractionally smaller than the $ 25 @,@ 000 of top earner Bob Cousy . In contrast to other Celtics , who had to work in the offseason to maintain their standard of living ( Heinsohn sold insurance , Gene <unk> was a professional guitar player , Cousy ran a basketball camp , and Auerbach invested in plastics and a Chinese restaurant ) , Russell never had to work part @-@ time . When Wilt Chamberlain became the first NBA player to earn $ 100 @,@ 000 in salary in 1965 , Russell went to Auerbach and demanded a $ 100 @,@ 001 salary , which he promptly received . 
 = = Personality = = 
 Russell was driven by " a neurotic need to win " , as his teammate Heinsohn observed . He was so tense before every game that he regularly threw up in the locker rooms ; it happened so frequently that his fellow Celtics were more worried when it did not happen . He was also known for his natural authority . When he became player @-@ coach in 1966 , Russell bluntly said to his teammates that " he intended to cut all personal ties to other players " , and seamlessly made the transition from their peer to their superior . 
 To teammates and friends , Russell was open and amicable , but was extremely distrusting and cold towards anyone else . Journalists were often treated to the " Russell <unk> " , described as an " icily contemptuous stare accompanied by a long silence " . Russell was also notorious for his refusal to give autographs or even acknowledge the Celtics fans , so far that he was called " the most selfish , surly and uncooperative athlete " by one pundit . 
 = = Russell – Chamberlain Relations = = 
 For most of his career , Russell was close friends with his perennial opponent Wilt Chamberlain . Chamberlain often invited Russell over for Thanksgiving dinner , and at Russell 's place , conversation mostly concerned Russell 's electric trains . However , the close relationship ended after Game 7 of the 1969 NBA Finals , during which Chamberlain injured his knee with six minutes left and left the game . During a conversation with students , a reporter — unknown to Russell — heard Russell describe Chamberlain as a <unk> and accuse him of " copping out " of the game when it seemed that the Lakers would lose . Chamberlain was livid with Russell and saw him as a <unk> . Chamberlain 's knee was injured so badly that he could not play the entire offseason and he ruptured it the next season . The two men did not talk to each other for over 20 years until Russell met with Chamberlain personally and apologized . When Chamberlain died in 1999 , Chamberlain 's nephew said that Russell was the second person he was told to call . At Chamberlain 's eulogy , Russell stated that he did not consider them to be rivals , but rather to have a competition , and that the pair would " be friends through eternity . " 
 = = Racist abuse , controversy , and relationship with Boston fans = = 
 Russell 's life was marked by an uphill battle against racism and controversial actions and statements in response to perceived racism . As a child , the young Russell witnessed how his parents were victims of racial abuse , and the family eventually moved into government housing projects to escape the daily torrent of bigotry . When he later became a standout amateur basketball player at USF , Russell recalled how he and his few fellow black colleagues were jeered by white students . Even after he became a star on the Boston Celtics , Russell was the victim of racial abuse . When the NBA All @-@ Stars toured the U.S. in the 1958 offseason , white hotel owners in segregated North Carolina denied rooms to Russell and his black teammates , causing him to later write in his memoir Go Up for Glory , " It stood out , a wall which understanding cannot penetrate . You are a Negro . You are less . It covered every area . A living , smarting , hurting , smelling , greasy substance which covered you . A morass to fight from . " Before the 1961 – 62 season , Russell 's team was scheduled to play in an exhibition game in Lexington , Kentucky , when Russell and his black teammates were refused service at a local restaurant . He and the other black teammates refused to play in the exhibition game and flew home , drawing a great deal of controversy and publicity . 
 As a consequence , Russell was extremely sensitive to all racial prejudice : according to Taylor , he often perceived insults even if others did not . He was active in the Black Power movement and supported Muhammad Ali 's decision to refuse to be drafted . He was often called " Felton X " , presumably in the tradition of the Nation of Islam 's practice of replacing a European slave name with an " X " , and even purchased land in Liberia . Russell 's public statements became increasingly militant , so far that he was quoted in a 1963 Sports Illustrated interview with the words : " I dislike most white people because they are people ... I like most blacks because I am black " . However , when his white Celtics teammate Frank Ramsey asked whether he hated him , Russell claimed to be misquoted , but few believed it . According to Taylor , Russell overlooked the fact that his career was only made possible by the white people who were proven anti @-@ racists , namely his white high school coach George Powles ( the person who encouraged him to play basketball ) , his white college coach Phil Woolpert ( who integrated USF basketball ) , white Celtics coach Red Auerbach ( who is regarded as an anti @-@ racist pioneer and made him the first black NBA coach ) , and white Celtics owner Walter A. Brown , who gave him a high $ 24 @,@ 000 rookie contract , just $ 1 @,@ 000 shy of the top earning veteran Bob Cousy . 
 As a result of repeated racial bigotry , Russell refused to respond to fan acclaim or friendship from his neighbors , thinking it was insincere and hypocritical . This attitude contributed to his legendary bad rapport with fans and journalists . He alienated Celtics fans by saying , " You owe the public the same it owes you , nothing ! I refuse to smile and be nice to the kiddies . " This supported the opinion of many white fans that Russell ( who was the highest @-@ paid Celtic ) was egotistical , paranoid and hypocritical . The already hostile atmosphere between Russell and Boston hit its apex when vandals broke into his house , covered the walls with racist graffiti , damaged his trophies and defecated in the beds . In response , Russell described Boston as a " flea market of racism " . In King Of The Court by Aram <unk> , he was quoted saying , " From my very first year I thought of myself as playing for the Celtics , not for Boston . The fans could do or think whatever they wanted . " After his retirement , he described the Boston press as corrupt and racist ; in response , Boston sports journalist Larry Claflin claimed that Russell himself was the real racist . 
 The FBI maintained a file on Russell ; this lends credibility to his observations that racism was an active force against him . The FBI described Russell in his file as " an arrogant Negro who won 't sign autographs for white children " . This clearly denotes a hostile attitude , and gives insight into the nature of Russell 's public persona , which was often perceived by the mostly @-@ white media as overly harsh . 
 Russell refused to attend the ceremony when his # 6 jersey was retired in 1972 , or his induction into the Hall of Fame in 1975 . While Russell still has sore feelings towards the city , there has been something of a reconciliation ; and he has even visited the city regularly in recent years , something he never did in the years immediately after his retirement . When Russell originally retired , he demanded that his jersey be retired in an empty Boston Garden . In 1995 , the Celtics left Boston Garden and entered the <unk> , now the TD Garden , and as the main festive act , the Boston organization wanted to re @-@ retire Russell 's jersey in front of a sellout audience . <unk> wary of what he long perceived as the racist city of Boston , Russell decided to make amends and gave his approval . On May 6 , 1999 , the Celtics re @-@ retired Russell 's jersey in a ceremony attended by his on @-@ court rival ( and friend ) Chamberlain , along with Celtics legend Larry Bird and Hall of Famer Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar . The crowd gave Russell a prolonged standing ovation , which brought tears to his eyes . He thanked Chamberlain for taking him to the limit and " making [ him ] a better player " and the crowd for " allowing [ him ] to be a part of their lives . " In December 2008 , the We Are Boston Leadership Award was presented to Russell . 
 = = Statue honoring Russell = = 
 In 2012 , the city and the Celtics announced that a statue honoring Russell would be placed on Boston 's City Hall Plaza . The design features a statue of Russell in game action with 11 plinths representing the 11 championships he helped the team win . The plinths will feature a key word and a related quote to illustrate Russell 's multiple accomplishments . The Bill Russell Legacy Foundation , established by the Boston Celtics Shamrock Foundation , funded the project . 
 The Bill Russell Legacy Project artwork by Ann Hirsch of Somerville , Massachusetts , in collaboration with Pressley Associates Landscape Architects of Boston , was unveiled on November 1 , 2013 , with Russell in attendance . 
 = = Selected publications = = 
 Russell , Bill ; McSweeny , William ( 1966 ) . Go Up for Glory . Coward @-@ McCann . 
 Russell , Bill ; Branch , Taylor ( 1979 ) . Second Wind . Ballantine Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 394 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Russell , Bill ; <unk> , Alan ; Faulkner , David ( 2001 ) . Russell Rules . New American Library . ISBN 0 @-@ 525 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Russell , Bill ; Steinberg , Alan ( 2009 ) . Red and Me : My Coach , My Lifelong Friend . Harper . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 06 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 = Flower Drum Song = 
 Flower Drum Song was the eighth musical by the team of Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II . It was based on the 1957 novel , The Flower Drum Song , by Chinese @-@ American author C. Y. Lee . The piece opened in 1958 on Broadway and was afterwards presented in the West End and on tour . It was subsequently made into a 1961 musical film . 
 After their extraordinary early successes , beginning with Oklahoma ! in 1943 , Rodgers and Hammerstein had written two musicals in the 1950s that did not do well and sought a new hit to revive their fortunes . Lee 's novel focuses on a father , Wang Chi @-@ yang , a wealthy refugee from China , who clings to traditional values in San Francisco 's Chinatown . Rodgers and Hammerstein shifted the focus of the musical to his son , Wang Ta , who is torn between his Chinese roots and assimilation into American culture . The team hired Gene Kelly to make his debut as a stage director with the musical and scoured the country for a suitable Asian – or at least , plausibly Asian @-@ looking – cast . The musical , much more light @-@ hearted than Lee 's novel , was profitable on Broadway and was followed by a national tour . 
 After the release of the 1961 film version , the musical was rarely produced , as it presented casting issues and fears that Asian @-@ Americans would take offense at how they are portrayed . When it was put on the stage , lines and songs that might be offensive were often cut . The piece did not return to Broadway until 2002 , when a version with a plot by playwright David Henry Hwang ( but retaining most of the original songs ) was presented after a successful Los Angeles run . Hwang 's story retains the Chinatown setting and the inter @-@ generational and immigrant themes , and emphasizes the romantic relationships . It received mostly poor reviews in New York and closed after six months but had a short tour and has since been produced regionally . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Novel = = = 
 <unk> Lee fled war @-@ torn China in the 1940s and came to the United States , where he attended Yale University 's playwriting program , graduating in 1947 with an M.F.A. degree . By the 1950s , he was barely making a living writing short stories and working as a Chinese teacher , translator and journalist for San Francisco Chinatown newspapers . He had hoped to break into playwriting , but instead wrote a novel about Chinatown , The Flower Drum Song ( originally titled Grant Avenue ) . Lee initially had no success selling his novel , but his agent submitted it to the publishing house of Farrar , Straus and Cudahy . The firm sent the manuscript to an elderly reader for evaluation . The reader was found dead in bed , the manuscript beside him with the words " Read this " scrawled on it . The publishing house did so , and bought Lee 's novel , which became a bestseller in 1957 . 
 Lee 's novel centers on Wang Chi @-@ yang , a 63 @-@ year @-@ old man who fled China to avoid the communists . The wealthy refugee lives in a house in Chinatown with his two sons . His sister @-@ in @-@ law , Madam Tang , who takes citizenship classes , is a regular visitor and urges Wang to adopt Western ways . While his sons and sister @-@ in @-@ law are integrating into American culture , Wang stubbornly resists assimilation and speaks only two words of English , " Yes " and " No " . Wang also has a severe cough , which he does not wish to have cured , feeling that it gives him authority in his household . Wang 's elder son , Wang Ta , woos Linda Tung , but on learning that she has many men in her life , drops her ; he later learns she is a nightclub dancer . Linda 's friend , seamstress Helen Chao , who has been unable to find a man despite the shortage of eligible women in Chinatown , gets Ta drunk and seduces him . On awakening in her bed , he agrees to an affair , but eventually abandons her , and she commits suicide . 
 Impatient at Ta 's inability to find a wife , Wang arranges for a picture bride for his son . However , before the picture bride arrives , Ta meets a young woman , May Li , who with her father has recently come to San Francisco . The two support themselves by singing depressing flower drum songs on the street . Ta invites the two into the Wang household , with his father 's approval , and he and May Li fall in love . He vows to marry her after she is falsely accused by the household servants of stealing a clock , though his father forbids it . Wang struggles to understand the conflicts that have torn his household apart ; his hostility toward assimilation is isolating him from his family . In the end , taking his son 's advice , Wang decides not to go to the herbalist to seek a remedy for his cough , but walks to a Chinese @-@ run Western clinic , symbolizing that he is beginning to accept American culture . 
 = = = Genesis of the musical = = = 
 Rodgers and Hammerstein , despite extraordinary early successes , such as Oklahoma ! , Carousel and South Pacific , had suffered back @-@ to @-@ back Broadway flops in the mid @-@ 1950s with Me and Juliet and Pipe Dream . While Oklahoma ! had broken new ground in 1943 , any new project in the late 1950s would have to compete with modern musicals and techniques , like the brutal realism in West Side Story , and with other Broadway musical hits such as The Music Man , My Fair Lady and The Pajama Game . Rodgers and Hammerstein had made it their rule to begin work on their next musical as soon as the last opened on Broadway , but by the start of 1957 , six months after Pipe Dream closed , the pair had no new stage musical in prospect . They had , however , been working since 1956 on the popular television version of Cinderella , which was broadcast on CBS on March 31 , 1957 . Rodgers was still recovering from an operation for cancer in a tooth socket , and he was drinking heavily and suffering from depression . In June 1957 , Rodgers checked himself into Payne Whitney Psychiatric Clinic , and he remained there for twelve weeks . According to his daughters , Mary and Linda , this did not put a stop to his drinking . 
 Hammerstein , meanwhile , was in Los Angeles at the filming of South Pacific . While at the commissary , he met longtime friend , Joe Fields , who mentioned that he was negotiating for the rights to The Flower Drum Song . Intrigued by the title , Hammerstein asked for a copy of the novel , and decided that it had potential as a musical – the lyricist described it as " sort of a Chinese Life with Father " . Hammerstein consulted with Rodgers , and they agreed to make it their next work , to be written and produced in association with Fields . Hammerstein began work in mid @-@ 1958 . In July , however , he fell ill and was hospitalized for a month . This forced him to hurry his writing , as the production team had hoped to have the show in rehearsal by the start of September ; this was postponed by two weeks . In interviews , however , Hammerstein pointed out that he had , when necessary , written songs for previous shows while in rehearsals for them . 
 The musical retained Lee 's " central theme – a theme coursing through much 20th @-@ century American literature : the conflict between Old World immigrants and their New World offspring " . Hammerstein and Fields shifted the focus of the story , however , from the elder Wang , who is central to Lee 's novel , to his son Ta . They also removed the darker elements of Lee 's work , including Helen Chao 's suicide after her desperate fling with Ta , added the festive nightclub subplot and emphasized the romantic elements of the story . According to David Lewis in his book about the musical , " Mr. Hammerstein and his colleagues were evidently in no mood to write a musical drama or even to invest their comedic approach with dramatic counterpoint of the sort that Jud Fry had given Oklahoma ! ... [ They ] took the safest commercial route by following the eldest son 's search for love – the most popular theme at the time with Broadway audiences . " Lewis notes that Chao 's role , though diminished in the musical , nevertheless gives it some of its darkest moments , and she serves much the same purpose as Jud Fry : to be , in Hammerstein 's words , " the bass fiddle that gives body to the orchestration of the story " . Though the new story was less artistically adventurous than the earlier Rodgers and Hammerstein hits , it was innovative , even daring in its treatment of Asian @-@ Americans , " an ethnic group that had long been harshly caricatured and marginalized in our mainstream pop culture . " 
 = = = 1958 plot = = = 
 Act I : Wang Ta , a young Chinese @-@ American man living in his father 's house in San Francisco 's Chinatown , discusses the problems of finding a wife with his aunt , Madam Liang ( " You Are Beautiful " ) before hurrying off on a blind date . Nightclub owner Sammy Fong arrives with an offer for Ta 's immigrant father , Master Wang , a very old @-@ fashioned Chinatown elder . Sammy 's picture bride has just arrived from China , illegally , but the shy Mei Li is clearly the wrong girl for Sammy , who already has an assertive girlfriend , a characteristic he likes . Sammy offers to sign the contract over to the Wang family : this would free Sammy from the contract and arrange a suitable wife for Ta . Sammy has taken the liberty of bringing the girl and her father with him ; Wang is charmed ( " A Hundred Million Miracles " ) and invites them to live in his home on the understanding that if the proposed marriage falls through , Fong will still be bound to marry Mei Li . 
 Ta 's blind date proves to be the thoroughly Americanized Linda Low , who we will learn is Sammy Fong 's girlfriend and a stripper at his club . On the date with Ta ( " I Enjoy Being a Girl " ) , Linda lies to Ta about her career and family . Ta , knowing that Chinese @-@ Americans with college degrees find it hard to get a job befitting their education , plans to go to law school , postponing the likely career struggle by three years . The impetuous Ta asks Linda to marry him . She agrees , but she needs family consent and lies , saying that she has a brother who will approve the marriage . Ta returns home and meets Mei Li , who is immediately attracted to him ( " I Am Going to Like It Here " ) , though Ta is unimpressed . That changes when Ta sees her in a Western dress ( " Like a God " ) . 
 Linda comes to Madam Liang 's graduation party from citizenship school with Linda 's " brother " ( actually the comedian from Sammy 's nightclub ) and presents herself as Ta 's intended , with her " brother " giving his consent for the marriage . The extroverted , Americanized woman is not what Wang has in mind for his elder son , and Wang and Ta argue . Sammy Fong arrives and quickly penetrates Linda 's scheme : Linda , frustrated by the five years she has been seeing Sammy , is determined to marry someone , and if Sammy won 't step forward , she will settle for Ta . Sammy quickly strikes back by inviting the <unk> , Mei Li and her father to watch the show at his " Celestial Bar " ( " Fan Tan Fannie " ) . Linda does her striptease , realizing too late who is sitting at the best table . Sammy 's special guests storm out , except for Ta , who is so humiliated that he does not know what to do . He is led away by childhood friend Helen Chao , a seamstress who fits Linda 's costumes for her , and whose love for Ta is unrequited . Linda , goaded beyond endurance when Sammy raises his glass to her , dumps a champagne bucket over his head . 
 Act II : The drunken Ta spends the night at Helen 's apartment ( " Ballet " ) . In the morning , Mei Li delivers Master Wang 's coat for Helen to mend and is distressed to see Ta 's dinner jacket there . Mei Li jumps to conclusions and leaves horrified . Ta leaves the lonely Helen , totally oblivious to her attempts to interest him . Wang wants the bar and its " evil spirits " shut down ; his sister @-@ in @-@ law informs him that free enterprise cannot be shut down , and the two wonder at the foibles of the younger generation ( " The Other Generation " ) . Ta arrives home to admit that his father was right , Mei Li is the girl for him . But now , Mei Li wants nothing to do with him , and the Lis leave the Wang home . Sammy Fong and Linda decide to get married ( " Sunday " ) , but when he goes to the Three Family Association ( a benevolent association ) to announce Linda as his bride , he finds Mei Li and her father there , and the elders insist that he honor his betrothal to the immigrant girl . 
 Ta brings Mei Li a wedding gift of a pair of his mother 's earrings that she wore on her wedding day and tries unsuccessfully to hide the fact that he is now deeply in love with her . The wedding procession moves down San Francisco 's Grant Avenue with the bride , heavily veiled , carried on a sedan chair ( " Wedding Parade " ) . Sammy drinks from the traditional wedding goblet , then offers the goblet to his new bride . Unveiled , Mei Li confesses to Sammy 's mother that she cannot marry Sammy as she is an illegal alien – a tactic she learned by watching American television . The contract is void , and that gives both Sammy and Ta the opportunity to marry their true loves , Linda and Mei Li . 
 = = = Casting and tryouts = = = 
 According to Rodgers biographer Meryle Secrest , Rodgers , Hammerstein and Fields had hoped to engage Yul Brynner as director . Brynner , who had gained fame in the team 's 1951 hit , The King and I , was an accomplished director . However , he was busy starring in The Sound and the Fury , and they could not negotiate his release from Twentieth @-@ Century Fox . Instead , they hired actor and dancer Gene Kelly , who had never directed on stage before . Kelly felt that the work would not be one of Rodgers and Hammerstein 's best , but " as long as I crammed the show brim @-@ full of every joke and gimmick in the book , I could get it to work " . 
 The three producers sought Chinese , or at least Asian , actors to fill the cast , an idea that was , at the time , considered " very risky " . In the 1950s , there were relatively few Asian @-@ American actors ; Rodgers believed that Asians avoided acting because of shyness . Critics note , in any case , that Asian @-@ Americans " had found few opportunities in mainstream theatre . " Joshua Logan recommended a young Japanese actress , Miyoshi <unk> , whom he had discovered and cast the previous year opposite Marlon Brando in the film Sayonara ( for which she won the Best Supporting Actress Oscar ) ; she was cast as Mei Li . They cast Keye Luke , well known as Charlie Chan 's Number One Son , as Master Wang . Rodgers and Hammerstein considered young talent from The King and I who might fit the parts , and came up with teenager Patrick Adiarte , a Filipino @-@ American who had played several of the young princes as he grew up , before finishing as the crown prince , Chulalongkorn . A talented dancer , he was cast as Wang San , Ta 's thoroughly Americanized younger brother . Pat Suzuki , a Japanese @-@ American who had been interned during World War II , was a recent arrival in New York who had made strong positive impressions for her singing on such television programs as The Tonight Show ( with Jack Paar ) and The Ed Sullivan Show . She became the first Linda Low , as Ta 's nightclub love interest was renamed . 
 The team found it difficult to fill the remaining places in the company with Asian performers , especially in the chorus . Four other shows with Asian themes had opened or were in rehearsal in New York , and the demand for the few Asian actors was strong . Kelly and the show 's choreographer , Carol Haney , journeyed to cities across the country to seek out talent . Agents were sent to other cities ; in Honolulu , they found nightclub singer and Native Hawaiian Ed Kenney , who would originate Wang Ta . Meanwhile , in New York , the three producers were visiting dance schools . An advertisement in New York Chinatown newspapers received one response . No formal audition was held in San Francisco 's Chinatown , and the only find was Forbidden City nightclub comedian Goro " Jack " Suzuki ( who soon changed his name to Jack Soo ) , who was cast as Frankie Wing , comedian at Sammy Fong 's Celestial Bar . The role of Fong proved difficult to cast . Initially , it was given to Larry Storch , a nightclub comic , but during the Boston tryouts , it was given to another Caucasian , Larry Blyden , who was married to Carol Haney , the show 's choreographer . The role of Madam Liang , Master Wang 's sister @-@ in @-@ law , fell to Juanita Hall , a light @-@ skinned African American who had played a Tonkinese ( Vietnamese ) woman , Bloody Mary , in South Pacific . Another African @-@ American performer , Diahann Carroll , was considered for the cast but not hired . Rodgers later wrote , " what was important was that the actors gave the illusion of being Chinese . This demonstrates one of the most wonderful things about theatre audiences . People want to believe what they see on a stage , and they will gladly go along with whatever is done to achieve the desired effect . Ask them to accept Ezio Pinza as a Frenchman [ in South Pacific ] , Yul Brynner as Siamese and they are prepared to meet you nine tenths of the way even before the curtain goes up . " 
 When rehearsals began in September 1958 , Hammerstein was absent , still recuperating from his surgery . Rodgers was present , but kept falling asleep . Hammerstein was told by his son James that Kelly was ineffective as a director , and began attending rehearsals . A number of changes were made to the songs . " My Best Love " , a song for Master Wang , was at first thought better suited to his sister @-@ in @-@ law , but when Juanita Hall could not make it work , the song was cut entirely . Rodgers and Hammerstein transformed a song entitled " She Is Beautiful " into " You Are Beautiful " . The team decided to include a song for Sammy Fong to explain to Mei Li that they should not wed . In the span of a few hours , they wrote the lyrics and music to " Don 't Marry Me " . Once the songs were finalized , Robert Russell Bennett , who had orchestrated several of the creators ' most successful previous shows , did the same for the score of Flower Drum Song . 
 The musical opened for tryouts on October 27 , 1958 at Boston 's Shubert Theatre . The audience gave it an enthusiastic response , causing Rodgers to leave his seat repeatedly and race to the back of the theatre , looking for someone to hug . The Boston critics thought well of the work , stating that after the show was polished , it was likely to be a hit . Shortly after the Boston opening , Fields suffered a heart attack , and , after his release from the hospital , he had to return to New York to recuperate . Author C. Y. Lee , who had quietly watched the rehearsals , recalled that , at the Boston performances , Hammerstein would have a secretary mark on the script any sound of the chairs squeaking , as indicating that the audience was restless . Hammerstein rewrote some of the book to expand the focus from Ta himself to the romantic relationships of the two couples . 
 = = Productions = = 
 = = = Original Broadway production = = = 
 After the Boston tryouts , Flower Drum Song opened on Broadway at the St. James Theatre on December 1 , 1958 . Sets were designed by Oliver Smith , costumes by Irene Sharaff and lighting by Peggy Clark . 
 <unk> Lee sat in the audience on the first night ; he later stated that he had been nervous and was " bowled over " by the positive audience reaction . The show attracted considerable advance sales ; even when these were exhausted , sales remained strong and sellouts were the norm . Cast album sales were similar to previous Rodgers and Hammerstein hits . The show received six Tony Award nominations , but won only one Tony ( Best Conductor and Musical Director , for Salvatore Dell 'Isola ) . It was overshadowed that year by Redhead , which though it received only slightly better reviews than Flower Drum Song , and had a considerably shorter run , dominated the Tony Awards in the musical categories . Flower Drum Song ran for 600 performances , a longer run than any other musical from the 1958 – 1959 season – it lasted longer than any of the shows with which it had competed for Asian performers . 
 Midway through the run , Larry Blyden left the show and was replaced in the role of Sammy Fong by Jack Soo , with Larry Leung assuming the role of Frankie Wing . The production returned $ 125 @,@ 000 profit to its backers on an investment of $ 360 @,@ 000 . Attendance began to decline in December 1959 , though it continued to draw at above the 70 % of capacity level which a Broadway play then needed to meet expenses . With the summer approaching , generally a bad time for attendance , it was decided to close the show , and the last Broadway performance was given on May 7 , 1960 . 
 In his autobiography , Rodgers wrote of the effect the success of Flower Drum Song had on his state of mind : 
 The entire experience of working on Flower Drum Song was rewarding in many ways , not the least of which was that it convinced me that I had overcome all traces of my depression . My only thought was to keep on doing what I was doing , and I saw nothing in the future that could stop me . 
 = = = Subsequent productions = = = 
 The show opened in London 's Palace Theatre on March 24 , 1960 and ran for 464 performances . Fewer Asian performers were used in London ; the West End production starred Yau Shan Tung as Mei Li , Kevin Scott as Ta , George Minami as Wang , Yama Saki as Linda Low , Tim Herbert as Sammy Fong and Ida Shepley as Madam Liang . The production used Haney 's choreography , Bennett 's orchestrations and the Broadway set and costume designs , but was directed and supervised by Jerome Whyte . Both the production and the London cast album were well received . 
 Following the closure of the Broadway production , a U.S. national tour began on May 10 , 1960 in Detroit . Four of the New York leads , Hall , Soo , Kenney and Luke , joined the tour . By this time , Hammerstein was in his final illness ( he died in August 1960 ) , and none of the three producers accompanied the show on the road . After three weeks in Detroit , the show moved to Los Angeles , where the premiere attracted a star @-@ studded audience , including three Scandinavian princesses . San Francisco gave the show a rapturous reception when it opened at the Curran Theatre on August 1 . Lee and Fields , both present for the local premiere , were given ovations . Geary Street , on which the theatre is located , was decorated with Chinese lanterns , and a marching band of " Chinese girl musicians " played outside . The tour continued to be successful , spending 21 weeks in Chicago alone . It closed on October 14 , 1961 in Cleveland , a month before the film of the musical opened . 
 Lewis calls the 1961 film version of Flower Drum Song , starring <unk> , Soo , Hall and Suzie Wong star Nancy Kwan , " a bizarre pastiche of limping mediocrity " . He comments that since the 1958 version of the musical was rarely revived , the film " would in future years come to stand for the stage musical it so crassly misrepresented " and would serve as the version that academics and latter @-@ day theatre critics would judge when they analyzed the musical . The film was the only Hollywood adaptation of a Rodgers and Hammerstein musical to lose money . Nevertheless , it was nominated for five Academy Awards and featured choreography by Hermes Pan . As early as mid @-@ 1961 , the musical was licensed for local productions . That summer , the San Diego Civic Light Opera filled the 4 @,@ 324 @-@ seat Balboa Park Bowl to overflowing for a highly successful run of the musical . It was less successfully revived by that company five years later ; though it still attracted large crowds , local critics complained that Hammerstein 's view of Asians was outdated . Other early productions included successful revivals by the St. Louis Municipal Opera in 1961 and 1965 and revivals in the San Francisco area in 1963 and 1964 , both times with Soo as Sammy Fong . 
 The musical proved difficult to produce for amateur and school groups , however , because it requires a cast either Asian or made up as Asian . Even professional companies found it difficult to round up an entire cast of Asian singer @-@ dancer @-@ actors . By the late 1960s , the musical was rarely staged , and was often relegated to dinner theater productions . The Rodgers & Hammerstein Organization , which licenses the partnership 's works , believes that the work 's loss of popularity was due in part to increased racial sensitivity in the U. S. after the civil rights movement . In addition , producers found the show to be thinly plotted , and the songs not integrated as organically with the characters and story , as compared with Rodgers and Hammerstein 's most popular musicals . 
 Flower Drum Song came to be seen by some as stereotypical and patronizing towards Asians , and that it was " inauthentic , even offensive in its relentlessly upbeat picture of a big @-@ city Chinatown " . In 1983 , the announcement that it would be produced in San Francisco started a furor ; the producers pointedly stated that the show would be set in the 1930s and would have " a greater sensitivity toward the Chinese immigration problems at that time " . They added a scene in which Mei Li listens apprehensively to a radio broadcast warning about the dangers to the United States caused by Asian immigration . Many lines of dialogue were cut , and producer Fred Van Patten stated that " [ w ] hat we 've done is cut things in the show that Asians said to make white people laugh . " The song " Chop Suey " was deleted , as was Master Wang 's line that all white men look alike ( based on a line in C. Y. Lee 's novel , in which Wang states that all foreigners look alike ) . The author gave a rare public interview to defend his novel and the musical adaptation . The production , which had been scheduled for a three @-@ week run , closed early . A well @-@ attended production in Oakland in 1993 adhered strictly to the 1958 script , though part of the ballet was cut for lack of rehearsal time ; a more heavily censored 1996 production in San Mateo also did well at the box office . 
 = = = 2002 revival = = = 
 In 1996 , while attending the successful revival of The King and I , Chinese @-@ American playwright David Henry Hwang considered whether other Rodgers and Hammerstein shows could be revived and decided to work on Flower Drum Song . To Chinese Americans , the musical " represented political incorrectness incarnate . But [ Hwang ] had a secret soft spot for the movie version . ' It was kind of a guilty pleasure ... and one of the only big Hollywood films where you could see a lot of really good Asian actors onscreen , singing and dancing and cracking jokes . ' " Ted Chapin , president of the Rodgers & Hammerstein Organization , announced that an unnamed " Asian playwright " had approached him about revising Flower Drum Song . Chapin called the musical " a naive , old fashioned , anti @-@ feminist story with a truly great score . ... It 's one that ... needs changes . " Rodgers ' will urged his heirs to do what they believed he would have agreed to ( Hammerstein 's instructions are unknown ) , but during her lifetime , his widow Dorothy had refused to countenance major changes in the plays . Hwang 's involvement was soon revealed , and in 1997 , C. Y. Lee announced that the rewrite had his approval . 
 Hwang was given a free hand with dialogue ; he was not allowed to change lyrics . Hwang was inexperienced at writing musicals , and the producers hired veteran Robert Longbottom to direct the production and collaborate on the new script , " really a new musical which has a pre @-@ existing score . " Only the character names , the San Francisco Chinatown setting and some of the relationships were retained , but the pair sought to be faithful to the spirit of both Lee 's novel and the musical 's original concept of old @-@ world and older generation values struggling with new @-@ world temptations and the desires of the younger generation . This concept is reflected in the struggle for survival of Wang 's Chinese opera company , as it competes with the more modern , Americanized night club run by Ta . The role of Mei @-@ li ( as spelled in the revision ) was expanded . The character of Madam Liang was changed " from the wise @-@ owl aunt " to a " savvy career woman " in show business . Chinatown is portrayed as a more gritty and difficult place for new immigrants , and the pursuit of material success is given a more cynical face , especially in Act II . The song " The Other Generation " was deleted ; " My Best Love " , which had been cut in tryouts in 1958 , was restored in its place , and " The Next Time It Happens " was imported from Pipe Dream . New orchestrations were by Don <unk> and music director David Chase . According to The New York Times , Hwang " has reshaped the story to elucidate two of his own abiding thematic interests : the idea of the theater as a prism for society and the generational clashes of diversely assimilated immigrants . " 
 In September 2000 , after development through a series of workshops , the new version was presented at two well @-@ attended workshops for potential backers . The show failed to raise enough money for an immediate Broadway run , but Hwang hoped that an extended Los Angeles run would lead to raising additional funds . The revival was originally planned for the 2 @,@ 000 @-@ seat Ahmanson Theatre in Los Angeles , but to save money he moved it to the nearby 739 @-@ seat Mark Taper Forum . Producer Gordon Davidson engaged an all @-@ Asian cast , including Broadway star Lea Salonga as Mei @-@ li . When it finally opened on October 14 , 2001 , the production received rave reviews from the Los Angeles critics . The show regularly sold out and was so popular it became the first show at the Taper to extend its scheduled run . It finally closed on January 13 , 2002 . 
 The success of the Los Angeles run sparked sufficient investment to move the show to Broadway . Half the cast was dismissed after the Los Angeles run for unstated reasons . Mary Rodgers later commented that Randall Duk Kim replaced Tzi Ma as Wang because she had admired Kim 's performance as the Kralahome in the 1996 revival of The King and I , but Kim was unavailable for the Los Angeles run . Hwang considerably altered and trimmed his long script during Broadway rehearsals and previews ; " The Next Time It Happens " was removed from the show . During the runup to the Broadway opening , the show received mostly positive publicity . 
 Opening night at the Virginia Theatre on October 17 , 2002 was attended by veterans of the film and 1958 production . Though it received warm applause from the audience , the critics mostly panned it . Attendance was near @-@ capacity during the first month of the run , but then dropped off precipitously . The producers hoped the show could hold out long enough to get a boost from the Tony Awards ( though nominated for three , including best book , it won none ) , but in February , they announced that the show would close on March 16 , 2003 , after 169 performances . The show 's backers lost their entire investment . 
 The production was directed and choreographed by Longbottom , with scenic design by Robin Wagner , costume design by Gregg Barnes and lighting design by Natasha Katz . Critic Karen Wada , in her afterword to the published script , blamed " the sluggish economy , post @-@ September 11 jitters , the New York Times ' mixed review , and unusually bitter winter weather " for the unexpectedly short run . Lee also felt that the influential Times review had hurt the show 's acceptance , but commented that Hwang added some dialogue to Act II after the Los Angeles run that Lee felt slowed the show down . The closing was followed by a national tour that garnered mixed reviews , although Hwang stated that it was well received in every city except New York . 
 Subsequent productions have favored the Hwang script , although the older version remains available for license and has received occasional revivals , including a 2006 staged concert as part of Ian Marshall Fisher 's Lost Musicals series . A review in London 's The Times compared this production with " the much grander production of Show Boat currently docked at the Albert Hall " and judged that " Flower Drum Song makes the more stimulating experience . " 
 = = = = 2002 plot = = = = 
 Prologue : In 1960 , Wu Mei @-@ li , a performer in Chinese opera , flees China with a flower drum after her father dies in prison for defying the Communists ( " A Hundred Million Miracles " ) . 
 Act I : On arrival in the United States , Mei @-@ li goes to the Golden Pearl Theatre in San Francisco 's Chinatown , where little @-@ attended Chinese opera is presented by her father 's old friend Wang Chi @-@ yang and Wang 's foster brother Chin . One night a week , Wang 's son Ta turns the theater into a nightclub , starring the very assimilated Linda Low , a Chinese @-@ American stripper from Seattle . Linda 's constant companion is a gay costume designer , Harvard ( so named by his success @-@ obsessed Chinese parents ) . The nightclub is profitable ; the Chinese opera is not . Mei @-@ li joins the opera company ( " I Am Going to Like It Here " ) and is soon attracted to the indifferent Ta , who favors Linda . Mei @-@ li is fascinated by Linda , who urges her to adopt the American lifestyle ( " I Enjoy Being a Girl " ) . Linda is soon signed by talent agent Rita Liang , who pushes Wang to turn the theater into a club full @-@ time ( " Grant Avenue " ) , and he reluctantly opens Club Chop Suey . 
 Ta slowly is becoming attracted to Mei @-@ li , who now serves as a waitress , but he has competition from fortune cookie factory worker Chao , whom Mei @-@ li met on the slow journey from China , and who is rapidly becoming discontented with America . Wang is also unhappy , despite the club 's success , and it is no consolation the crowd is having a good time – after all , in the old country , no crowd ever came to his theater expecting to enjoy themselves . Outraged at Harvard 's poor acting skills , Wang takes the stage in his place , his stage instincts take over ( " Gliding Through My Memories " ) , and he is soon an enthusiastic supporter of the change , taking the stage name Sammy Fong . Linda advises Mei @-@ li to put on one of her old stripper dresses to attract Ta , but the stratagem backfires , since Ta is attracted to Mei @-@ li because of her wholesomeness . Ta and Mei @-@ li quarrel ; she takes her flower drum and leaves Club Chop Suey . 
 Act II : Several months pass , and Club Chop Suey has become even flashier ( " Chop Suey " ) . Ta can not forget Mei @-@ li , and his uncle Chin ( a janitor under the new regime ) advises Ta to pursue her ( " My Best Love " ) . He finds her in a fortune cookie factory working alongside Chao . Mei @-@ li tells Ta that she and Chao have decided to return to China together , or at least to Hong Kong , then administered by the British . Meanwhile , Wang now finds himself attracted to Madam Liang , and the two have dinner together , though they decide not to marry ( " Don 't Marry Me " ) . They marry anyway . 
 Linda announces that she is leaving for Los Angeles , as Wang 's " Sammy Fong " act has effectively taken over the show , and she has received a better offer . Ta intercepts Mei @-@ li at the docks and persuades her to remain in America ; Ta leaves Club Chop Suey and the two become street performers as Chao departs for Hong Kong . Harvard announces his intention to return home and attempt a reconciliation with his disappointed parents . Despite his irritation at Ta , Wang allows him to marry Mei @-@ li at the club ( which now features Ta 's Chinese opera one day a week ) , as the company celebrates how Chinese and American cultures have converged to create this happy moment ( Finale : " A Hundred Million Miracles " ) . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 = = = Original productions = = = 
 Of the seven major New York newspaper drama reviewers , five gave the show very positive reviews . For example , New York Journal American critic John McClain stated , " Flower Drum Song is a big fat Rodgers and Hammerstein hit , and nothing written here will have the slightest effect on the proceeds . " The New York Daily Mirror termed it , " Another notable work by the outstanding craftsmen of our musical theatre ... a lovely show , an outstanding one in theme and treatment . " Less enthusiastic , however , was the longtime New York Times critic , Brooks Atkinson , who repeatedly described it as merely " pleasant " . UPI 's drama critic , Jack <unk> , scored it as " well north of Me and Juliet and Pipe Dream " but " well south " of Oklahoma ! , Carousel , South Pacific and even the team 's first flop , Allegro . Ward Morehouse applauded Suzuki for having " a brassy voice and the assurance of a younger Ethel Merman " and termed the production " an excellent Broadway show " though " [ p ] erhaps it doesn 't belong in the same world ... as The King and I and Carousel . " Critic Kenneth Tynan , in The New Yorker magazine , alluded to the show The World of Suzie Wong in dismissing Flower Drum Song with the spoonerism , " a world of woozy song " . 
 When the national tour of the show visited the city of its setting , most San Francisco reviewers gave the show very positive reviews , though the Oakland Tribune critic described the musical as one " which has little by way of witty dialogue , outstanding songs or vigorous choreography " . Nevertheless , she called the touring production superior to the Broadway one . 
 = = = 2002 revival = = = 
 Michael Phillips of the Los Angeles Times called the show " wholly revised and gleefully self @-@ aware ... a few tons short of a mega @-@ musical – no fake helicopters here , no power ballads saccharine enough to stop Communism in its tracks . " The Hollywood Reporter thought the revival was , " while not perfect , an exhilarating accomplishment " . Variety called it " a bold theatrical operation , an artistic success " . 
 Critics reviewing the New York production generally gave it poor reviews . Ben Brantley of The New York Times applauded the creative team 's " honorable intentions " in bringing back a work thought to be " terminally out @-@ of @-@ date " , but felt both the new Mei @-@ li and the show in general lacked personality . Howard Kissel of the New York Daily News termed it " an entertaining , albeit vulgar revival " , and Clive Barnes of the New York Post found it no more memorable than the earlier version . The review in Talkin ' Broadway is scathing , criticizing Hwang 's use of the songs and characters , and the orchestrations , and commenting : " Hwang 's book lacks much of the charm , warmth , and wit of the original , and never takes the high road where the low road will do . ... Hwang felt it necessary to reduce the original , uniquely colorful story into just another <unk> with a love triangle and lame jokes . " Michael Kuchwara commented about Harvard in his lukewarm review for Associated Press : " Then there 's Linda Low 's gay confidante , Harvard . Talk about stereotypes . If you are going to perpetuate one at least give him better jokes . " On the other hand , both USA Today and Time magazine gave it positive reviews . The <unk> review was mostly positive and observed that Hwang and Longbottom " were able to keep numbers like ' Chop Suey ' and milk it for its razzle @-@ dazzle fun while using its condescending stereotyping as a springboard to satirize attitudes towards Asians . " Brantley disagreed , writing , " because the show 's satiric point of view is so muddled , there 's no verve in such numbers , no joy in the performing of them . " 
 In 2006 , David Lewis compared the original script to Hwang 's version : 
 History never completely goes away . Hwang 's champions are unlikely to fade away , either , in rhetorical defeat . Dick and Oscar and Joe mined C. Y. Lee 's novel for the generational conflict and for the three women who substantiated Ta 's honorable search for love . Those themes , like it or not , still resonate today . 
 = = Music and recordings = = 
 Rodgers and Hammerstein sought to give the new work an Eastern flavor , without using existing oriental music . According to Ben Brantley in his review of the 2002 Broadway revival , the use by Rodgers " of repetitive Eastern musical structures gives the numbers a sing @-@ song catchiness that , for better or worse , exerts a sticky hold on the memory . " The most oriental @-@ sounding song in the work is " A Hundred Million Miracles " , which provides the eight @-@ note drumbeat which is the musical signature of the work from overture to curtain . Hammerstein wrote Mei Li 's first act song , " I Am Going to Like It Here " , in a Malaysian poetic form called <unk> in which the second and fourth lines of each stanza become the first and third lines of the next . One critic thought that the 2001 version 's orchestrations " boast more Asian accents and a jazzier edge than the original " , but another felt that they " pale in comparison " to Bennett 's typically lilting sound . 
 As with many of Rodgers and Hammerstein 's musicals , the work features a ballet at the start of the second act , choreographed in the original production by Carol Haney . The ballet dramatizes the confused romantic longings of Wang Ta towards the women in his life , and ends as he awakens in Helen Chao 's bed . Thomas Hischak , in his The Rodgers and Hammerstein Encyclopedia , notes that the ballets in Oklahoma ! and Carousel ( choreographed by Agnes de Mille ) broke new ground in illustrating facets of the characters beyond what is learned in songs and dialogue , but describes the ballet in Flower Drum Song as " pleasant but not memorable " . Although Hischak describes Rodgers as " the greatest waltz composer America has ever seen " , Flower Drum Song was the first Rodgers and Hammerstein musical not to feature one . 
 Several of the characters are given " I am " songs that introduce them to the audience , allowing the character to express his dreams or desires and for onlookers to establish empathy with the character . Linda Low , for example , expresses her self @-@ confidence with " I Enjoy Being a Girl " ; we learn Mei Li 's hopes with the quieter " I Am Going to Like It Here " . Although not a formal musical number , the brief " You Be the Rock , I 'll Be the Roll " , sung and danced by Linda and by Wang San , Ta 's Americanized teenage brother , was described by Lewis as " virtually the first self @-@ consciously rock and roll ditty ever sung " in a Broadway musical . Patrick Adiarte , who originated the role of Wang San , however , saw it as " corny stuff ... put in there to get a laugh " . Helen Chao 's sad " Love , Look Away " is described by Lewis as " arguably the most tautly crafted blues song Dick and Oscar ever wrote " . 
 Having decided that record companies were profiting more from the sales of their cast albums than they were , Rodgers and Hammerstein formed their own record company to produce the cast recording for the original production of Flower Drum Song . The album sold a relatively modest 300 @,@ 000 copies , compared with sales of over a million copies for Rodgers and Hammerstein 's next and final musical , The Sound of Music . Still , it was certified as a gold record for having at least a million dollars in sales , and it spent 67 weeks in the U.S. Top 40 , three of them at number 1 , and also did well in the UK when the show opened there in 1960 . The original cast album is relatively complete , even including parts of the Wedding Parade , though it does not include the ballet . 
 In 1960 , the London cast recording was released . According to Hischak , the individual performers do not sing as well as the New York cast ; the London recording 's strong points are the nightclub numbers . The 1961 album from the film uses a larger orchestra and , according to Hischak , has a fuller sound than the Broadway recording . It features dubbing by the opera singer Marilyn Horne ( " Love , Look Away " ) and band singer B. J. Baker ( for Linda Low 's songs ) . A cast album for Hwang 's revision was released in 2002 featuring strong performances from Lea Salonga as Mei @-@ li and Jose Llana as Wang Ta . This was nominated for a Grammy , though it did not win . Hischak notes that it is unfair to compare the later version with its earlier predecessors , as Hwang 's version " has some of the dark corners and richness of a musical play " . 
 = = Musical numbers ( original version ) = = 
 The 2002 revival restored " My Best Love " , a song that was cut from the original production , which is sung by Chin . " The Other Generation " was cut from the revival . 
