 = = Cast = = 
 The principal casts of major productions of the musical ( and of the film ) have been as follows : 
 * Linda Low 's singing voice was dubbed by B. J. Baker , and Chao 's " Love , Look Away " was dubbed by Marilyn Horne . 
 Dashes indicate roles cut from 2002 production . The 2002 production also featured Alvin Ing as Chin , Allen Liu as Harvard and Hoon Lee as Chao . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = = Original Broadway production = = = 
 = = = 2002 Broadway revival = = = 
 = The Best of George Harrison = 
 The Best of George Harrison is a 1976 compilation album by English musician George Harrison , released following the expiration of his EMI @-@ affiliated Apple Records contract . Uniquely among all of the four Beatles ' solo releases ( apart from live albums ) , it mixes a selection of the artist 's Beatles @-@ era songs on one side , with later hits recorded under his own name on the other . 
 The song selection caused some controversy , since it underplayed Harrison 's solo achievements during the 1970 – 75 period , for much of which he had been viewed as the most successful ex @-@ Beatle , artistically and commercially . Music critics have also noted the compilation 's failure to provide a faithful picture of Harrison 's contribution to the Beatles ' work , due to the omission of any of his Indian music compositions . In a calculated move by EMI and its American subsidiary , Capitol Records , the compilation was issued during the same month as Harrison 's debut on his Warner @-@ distributed Dark Horse label , Thirty Three & 1 / 3 . 
 The Best of George Harrison peaked at number 31 on the US Billboard 200 chart and was certified gold by the RIAA in February 1977 , but the album failed to place on Britain 's top 60 chart . It is the first of three hits @-@ oriented Harrison compilation albums , and was followed by Best of Dark Horse 1976 – 1989 and the posthumously released Let It Roll : Songs by George Harrison . The album was issued on CD in 1987 featuring the cover artwork from the original British release , rather than the design created in @-@ house by Capitol and used in the majority of territories internationally in 1976 . The compilation has yet to be remastered since this 1987 release . 
 = = Background = = 
 Ray Coleman of Melody Maker observed in December 1976 that it was " somehow ironic " that EMI , having made " millions of pounds " from the Beatles ' recordings , should put out The Best of George Harrison within days of George Harrison 's debut release on Warner <unk> Dark Horse Records . The compilation was instigated by EMI 's US counterpart , Capitol Records , a company with which Harrison had grown disaffected since August 1971 , due to what author Alan Clayson describes as its " avaricious dithering " over the release of the Concert for Bangladesh album . In a final effort to force Capitol to distribute that live album at cost price , to generate much @-@ needed funds for the refugees from East Pakistan , Harrison had gone public with the issue and embarrassed the label . 
 On 26 January 1976 , all the former Beatles ' contracts with EMI / Capitol expired , and only Paul McCartney had chosen to re @-@ sign with Capitol . The two record companies were now free to license releases featuring songs from the band 's back catalogue and the individual members ' solo work ( except for McCartney 's ) , without the need for artist 's approval . Following EMI 's reissue of the entire Beatles UK singles catalogue in February that year , Capitol 's first venture under the new arrangement was to release a double album compilation , Rock ' n ' Roll Music , along with accompanying singles . Issued in June 1976 , Rock ' n ' Roll Music contained 28 previously released tracks from throughout the Beatles ' career . John Lennon and Ringo Starr both expressed dissatisfaction with the compilation 's running order , the reversion to a pre @-@ 1967 royalty rate for the band , and what Starr termed Capitol 's " <unk> " packaging . After the record company had promised " the largest selling campaign in the history of the music business " , the album was a commercial success . 
 Late in 1975 , EMI / Capitol had issued greatest @-@ hits collections on the Apple Records imprint for Lennon and Starr – Shaved Fish and Blast from Your Past , respectively . Since Lennon and Starr were still nominally Apple artists , they each had input into the content and packaging of their solo compilation , and Lennon , in particular , was active in promoting his album . Shaved Fish and Blast from Your Past sold reasonably well , in America , but their sales failed to match record @-@ company expectations . For Harrison , there had been long delays between releases following the international success of his All Things Must Pass triple album in 1970 – 71 , due first to his commitment to the Bangladesh humanitarian aid project and later to his production work for Dark Horse Records acts Splinter and Ravi Shankar . Harrison issued his final studio album for Apple in the autumn of 1975 , Extra Texture ( Read All About It ) . As a result , by the time that Capitol came to prepare a compilation of his solo work the following year , he had effectively surrendered all artistic control over its content . 
 In the second half of 1976 , thanks to the success of both Rock ' n ' Roll Music and McCartney 's world tour with his band Wings , the public 's nostalgia for the Beatles was at a peak . Examples of this heightened interest included the increasingly generous offers from rival promoters Bill Sargent and Sid Bernstein for a one @-@ off Beatles reunion concert ; 20th Century Fox 's musical documentary All This and World War II , for which , as with the 1974 stage play John , Paul , George , Ringo … and Bert , Harrison would refuse permission for any of his songs to appear ; and Steve Harley & Cockney Rebel having a top @-@ ten hit in the UK with a cover of Harrison 's composition " Here Comes the Sun " . The planned Harrison greatest @-@ hits compilation then became an experiment by Capitol whereby Beatles tracks were mixed with solo hits on the one album . Harrison immediately disavowed the venture , he being the least attached to the band 's legacy of all the former Beatles . 
 = = Song selection = = 
 To fill one side of the LP , Capitol selected Harrison @-@ written songs that had been released by the Beatles between 1965 and 1970 . A risk @-@ free approach prevailed , commentators have noted , both with the unimaginative album title and with the predictable selection of songs . Nowhere was Indian music represented , a musical genre with which Harrison was synonymous via his long association with Ravi Shankar , and which various authors , and Shankar himself , credit Harrison with introducing to Western popular music . In this way , what McCartney has termed Harrison 's " landmark " Indian compositions , " Within You , Without You " and " The Inner Light " , were overlooked while " Taxman " received its second album release in six months ( having been issued on Rock ' n ' Roll Music ) . " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " , " Here Comes the Sun " and " Something " were also among the tracks selected , even though they had all appeared on the 1973 Beatles compilation 1967 – 1970 . 
 Side two was made up of Harrison 's biggest solo hits : " My Sweet Lord " and " What Is Life " from All Things Must Pass ( 1970 ) , " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " from Living in the Material World ( 1973 ) , the title track from Dark Horse ( 1974 ) , and " You " from Extra Texture ( 1975 ) . The sixth solo song was the non @-@ album single " Bangla Desh " , released in 1971 . 
 Aside from the financial benefits of repackaging Beatles @-@ era songs , part of the reason for Capitol reducing Harrison 's mostly successful solo years thus far to six album tracks was due to the " lackluster " commercial fate of the Lennon and Starr compilations , author Nicholas Schaffner wrote in 1977 . Another factor was Harrison 's tendency to limit his single releases to a minimum : he had been reluctant to issue any single from All Things Must Pass originally , and the scheduled second single from Material World , " Don 't Let Me Wait Too Long " – a " certain # 1 " , in biographer Simon Leng 's opinion – was cancelled altogether . In addition , authors Chip Madinger and Mark Easter write , a potentially offensive reference to the Catholic Church in " Awaiting on You All " , from All Things Must Pass , prevented that song from " being the hit single it could have been otherwise " . The big @-@ hits requirement was not applied to the Beatles selections , only one of which , " Something " , had been issued as the A @-@ side of a single . 
 In November 1976 , while promoting his new album , Thirty Three & 1 / 3 , Harrison claimed that Capitol had ignored his suggested track list and alternative title for the collection . He compared the format unfavourably with the Starr and Lennon compilations , saying that " a lot of good songs " from his solo career could have appeared , rather than " digging into Beatles records " . 
 Among the notable omissions from The Best of George Harrison , in author Robert Rodriguez 's opinion , were " Isn 't It a Pity " – one half of the double A @-@ side single with " My Sweet Lord " , and a number 1 hit in Canada in its own right – and " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " , which charted just inside the top 40 in the main markets of America and Britain but was a top ten hit in Europe . In comparison , Shaved Fish had contained " Happy Xmas ( War Is Over ) " , " Mother " and " Woman Is the Nigger of the World " , singles which , on the US Billboard Hot 100 , respectively : did not chart at all ; peaked at number 43 ; and reached number 57 . On Blast from Your Past , the non @-@ album B @-@ side " Early 1970 " was included , as were " I 'm the Greatest " ( an album track never released as a single ) and " Beaucoups of Blues " , which peaked at number 87 in the United States . On those terms , Harrison had the popular 1971 B @-@ sides " Apple Scruffs " and " Deep Blue " ; " Ding Dong " , which peaked at number 36 on Billboard ; and highly regarded album tracks such as " All Things Must Pass " , " Beware of Darkness " and " Living in the Material World " . Commentators have remarked also on the brevity of Starr 's album , at just 30 minutes in length , whereas Capitol felt the need to achieve a running time of 45 minutes for the Harrison compilation . 
 = = Album artwork = = 
 The North American and British versions of the album were released with different covers . In the United States and Canada , the front and back cover had small black @-@ and @-@ white pictures of Harrison against an image of the cosmos ; Roy Kohara of Capitol was responsible for art design , as he had been for Extra Texture and the Lennon and Starr compilations , while the illustrations were the work of Michael Bryan . Rodriguez describes this choice of sleeve as " bizarre " and notes the use of an outdated , " rather dour @-@ looking " image of Harrison . 
 The UK edition contained Bob Cato 's colour photo of Harrison sitting in front of an antique car , with art direction for the package being credited to Cream designs . The international CD release of the album uses the latter cover . The inner sleeve of the original LP in Britain contained a picture by Michael <unk> , showing Harrison on a wintry beach in Cannes , where he was attending the <unk> music @-@ industry trade fair in January 1976 . A third front @-@ cover option came with MFP 's budget reissue during the 1980s , which reproduced Harrison 's 1968 White Album portrait . 
 = = Release = = 
 Capitol Records released The Best of George Harrison on 8 November 1976 in America , with the catalogue number Capitol DT <unk> . The UK issue , as PAS <unk> on EMI 's Parlophone label , followed on 20 November . Among Beatles @-@ related releases at the time , the compilation 's arrival coincided not only with that of Thirty Three & 1 / 3 , but also with McCartney 's Wings over America triple live album ; in addition , EMI belatedly issued the Beatles ' 1967 Capitol release Magical Mystery Tour in December 1976 , after that album had long proved a popular import in Britain . Writing in the NME in November , Bob Woffinden commented that sales of Thirty Three & 1 / 3 were sure to be " adversely affected by the almost simultaneous release – next week in fact – of [ The Best of George Harrison ] " . According to author Peter Doggett , this calculated scheduling by Capitol / EMI meant that Harrison " would remain a staunch opponent " of the record companies in the concurrent litigation between Apple and its former manager , Allen Klein . 
 In the US , with Harrison actively promoting Thirty Three & 1 / 3 and enjoying some of his best reviews in years , the compilation reached number 31 on the Billboard 200 . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America on 15 February 1977 , for sales of over 500 @,@ 000 units . Like Starr 's 1975 compilation , The Best of George Harrison failed to place on the UK 's Top 60 Albums Chart . EMI , in an attempt to capitalise on recent publicity from the ruling on Bright Tunes ' plagiarism suit against Harrison , reissued " My Sweet Lord " ( backed with " What Is Life " ) as a single on 25 December 1976 . 
 = = = CD release and demand following Harrison 's death = = = 
 Together with All Things Must Pass , The Best of George Harrison was among the first of Harrison 's albums to be issued on compact disc , in 1987 . According to Madinger and Easter , the UK edition of the CD was sonically superior to the US issue , due to the application of No @-@ Noise processing on the remasters for the American market . 
 Following Harrison 's death in November 2001 – and with little of his back catalogue readily available apart from the recently issued All Things Must Pass : 30th Anniversary Edition – the compilation became highly sought @-@ after by fans of the artist . In America , it peaked at number 9 on Billboard 's Top Pop Catalog listings , on 29 December 2001 , and number 15 on the magazine 's Top Internet Albums . It also belatedly placed on the UK Albums Chart , at number 100 , in January 2002 . 
 Despite the 2009 compilation Let It Roll : Songs by George Harrison and the 2005 reissue of the Concert for Bangladesh live album , The Best of George Harrison remained the only CD release featuring pop 's first @-@ ever charity single , " Bangla Desh " , until 2014 . In September that year , the song appeared as a bonus track on the Apple Years 1968 – 75 reissue of Living in the Material World . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 = = = Contemporary reviews = = = 
 On release , Billboard 's reviewer welcomed the compilation , writing : " Harrison 's remarkable emergence to full artistic recognition after starting off as the most anonymous Beatle is documented right on this album of memorably beautiful hits . " In Melody Maker , on the same page as his mixed review of Wings over America ( which featured live versions of five of McCartney 's Beatles @-@ era songs ) , Ray Coleman provided another favourable assessment : " [ Harrison is ] a highly individual artist who always keeps creative musical company ; it 's a good album , essential for Harrison students who may not have all the records ... " 
 Writing in Swank magazine , Michael Gross recognised Capitol Records ' " slick marketing ploy " but admired the music , the " final treat " being the availability of " Bangla Desh " for the first time on an album . In a review subtitled " All I Want for Christmas is No. <unk> " ( referring to the Capitol catalogue number ) , Larry <unk> of The Washington Post described the collection as " an absolute delight " . 
 Although the album was generally well received , its content drew criticism from fans , who felt the overall effect diminished the significance of Harrison 's solo career . In the 1977 edition of their book The Beatles : An Illustrated Record , Roy Carr and Tony Tyler summed up the implication : " George 's ' Best Of ' . Half Beatle , half <unk> . But will there be a Volume II ? " Nicholas Schaffner observed a couple of minor positives on this " half @-@ baked " collection : " The Best of George Harrison does confirm that George 's big production numbers from All Things Must Pass more than hold their own alongside the seven featured Beatles tunes ... And the album is undeniably better looking than Rock ' n ' Roll Music . " Bob Woffinden similarly found that Harrison 's solo recordings matched the standard of the Beatles ' tracks while noting that " Capitol 's half @-@ and @-@ half arrangement ... made it look as though he was the only one of the four [ former Beatles ] with insufficient clout to warrant a ' Greatest Hits ' comprised entirely of his own work . " 
 = = = Retrospective assessment and legacy = = = 
 Reviewing the compilation for AllMusic in 2001 , Bruce Eder described it as " a good but routine collection " , while three years later Mac Randall wrote in The Rolling Stone Album Guide : " The Best of George Harrison takes half its contents from Beatles albums , which is a little insulting . " In his April 2004 article on Harrison 's solo releases , for Blender magazine , Paul Du Noyer said of the compilation : " Hard to fault so far as it goes and a good place to get the fine 1971 single ' Bangla Desh ' . " 
 Although compromises to the hits @-@ only formula had been permitted on the Lennon and Starr albums , AllMusic editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine comments on the controversial choice of tracks : " But all this is down to a matter of timing and circumstance : Harrison needed to have a hits collection out in 1976 , he didn 't have enough big hits to fill out 13 tracks ( even if he certainly had enough great album tracks to do so ) , and so the <unk> were brought in to fill in the cracks . " <unk> adds that " The result might be a little underwhelming in retrospect , but it 's undeniably entertaining . " 
 Writing for Rough Guides in 2006 , Chris Ingham said Harrison was " rightly annoyed " with his former record company . Ingham added that , with the " excellent Volume II " ( Best of Dark Horse 1976 – 1989 ) no longer in print , The Best of George Harrison was therefore the artist 's only available compilation album and " hardly a satisfying one @-@ stop sampler " . Reviewing Let It Roll for the music website <unk> , in 2009 , Jon Cummings wrote that " the compilation gods have never been kind to [ Harrison ] " and described the 1976 album as " downright insulting " . In her role as compiler of Let It Roll , Harrison 's widow Olivia said of The Best of George Harrison : " That album always bothered me ... I just thought that is really not fair and I think we have to put something in that place , and that 's really what this [ 2009 compilation ] is . " 
 Harrison biographer Elliot Huntley is scathing in his opinion of The Best of George Harrison , writing : " Had EMI [ and Capitol ] forgotten the great songs on All Things Must Pass ? " The inclusion of Beatles material was a " completely unnecessary public humiliation " for Harrison , Huntley continues , giving the impression that Starr and Lennon 's solo careers up to the end of 1975 had been more successful than his – " when , in reality , the opposite was the case " . In his book Fab Four FAQ 2 @.@ 0 , Robert Rodriguez likewise bemoans EMI / Capitol 's attempt to humiliate Harrison with a compilation that failed to reflect his standing as the most accomplished ex @-@ Beatle during 1970 – 73 . Rodriguez describes the company 's efforts to " effectively <unk> [ e ] " Harrison 's Thirty Three & 1 / 3 chart run as " a final touch worthy of Allen Klein " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by George Harrison . 
 Side one 
 All tracks performed by the Beatles and produced by George Martin , except track 6 , which was produced by Phil Spector . 
 " Something " – 3 : 01 
 " If I Needed Someone " – 2 : 22 
 " Here Comes the Sun " – 3 : 05 
 " Taxman " – 2 : 37 
 " Think for Yourself " – 2 : 18 
 " For You Blue " – 2 : 31 
 " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " – 4 : 45 
 Side two 
 All tracks performed by George Harrison and produced either by himself or with Phil Spector . 
 " My Sweet Lord " – 4 : 38 
 " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " – 3 : 35 
 " You " – 3 : 41 
 " Bangla Desh " – 3 : 57 
 " Dark Horse " – 3 : 53 
 " What Is Life " – 4 : 17 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Chart positions = = = 
 = Sulphur Creek ( California ) = 
 Sulphur Creek is a 4 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) tributary of Aliso Creek in Orange County in the U.S. state of California . Draining about 6 square miles ( 16 km2 ) of mostly residential land in the southern San Joaquin Hills , it is Aliso Creek 's largest tributary . 
 Geologically the Sulphur Creek watershed was once part of a large and shallow sea that covered most of southern California . As the San Joaquin Hills rose and river sediments were deposited , land gradually emerged to form the present @-@ day Orange County coast . Sulphur Creek is located in a crumpled , hilly area in the southern part of this range , formed differently from the continuous mountain chain to the north . Historically , being south of Aliso Creek , the Sulphur Creek watershed was part of the territory of the semi @-@ nomadic Acjachemen Indian group , conquered by Spanish conquistadors in the 17th and 18th centuries and renamed the Juaneño by them . 
 During the 19th century , the watershed became part of a rancho . In 1966 , the creek was dammed to form Laguna Niguel Lake , while the surrounding hills were leveled as residential communities were constructed in the area following the ' 60s and ' 70s . The creek 's basin eventually became part of the cities of Laguna Hills , Laguna Niguel , and a small portion in San Juan Capistrano . Increasing urban runoff in the 1960s caused most of the flow in the creek to be unnatural . The creek has since been channelized along most of its length to prevent floods from inundating the roads and houses that now line much of its banks . 
 The Sulphur Creek watershed includes parts of Laguna Niguel Regional Park and Aliso and Wood Canyons Regional Park . Despite its heavy pollution and increasing population of exotic species , for much of its length the creek is a riparian corridor . 
 = = Course = = 
 The creek begins as a storm culvert exiting into daylight downstream of a shopping center near the intersection of Crown Valley Parkway and Greenfield Drive . It then flows generally south through a concrete storm channel , then diverted into another culvert that takes it underneath a small access road . For the next few miles , the creek parallels Crown Valley Parkway as it winds west and south through a valley almost entirely filled by residential development . The creek flows through a concrete channel and three more culverts before regaining its natural riverbed . At the third of these four culverts , the creek enters Sulphur Creek Park , which follows the Sulphur Creek riparian corridor to where it turns west @-@ northwest into Crown Valley Park , just upstream of Laguna Niguel Regional Park . Here , it receives two small tributaries ( Niguel Storm Drain and an unnamed creek flowing from a spring on the hillside ) on the left bank . The creek then enters a box @-@ cut concrete channel that takes it to Sulphur Creek Reservoir , a 44 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 18 km2 ) lake about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) long , formed by a dam at its north end . At the lake , another small unnamed tributary , from a filled @-@ in canyon on the east side , joins Sulphur Creek . 
 The creek then exits the dam from the concrete spillway on the east side , flowing into a small valley inside Laguna Niguel Regional Park . About 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) downstream from Sulphur Creek Reservoir , it receives the water of a large storm drain on the right bank . This storm drain is responsible for much of the pollution problems in the Sulphur Creek watershed . It then flows past a small mountain on the north , known as Kite Hill , and is diverted into a large culvert underneath Alicia Parkway that drains it to a small canyon . The creek then flows into Aliso Creek , just outside the boundary of Aliso and Wood Canyons Regional Park . 
 = = Geology = = 
 About ten million years ago , much of western and southern Orange County and most of coastal Southern California was part of a warm and shallow sea . This sea receded over time , leaving a large and flat coastal plain . Over 1 @.@ 22 million years ago , the uplift of the San Joaquin Hills began along a blind thrust fault that stretches north into the Los Angeles Basin , eventually rising to an average of 500 to 700 feet ( 150 to 210 m ) above sea level , with the highest peaks topping out at about 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) . Rising at about 0 @.@ 6 to 0 @.@ 8 feet ( 0 @.@ 18 to 0 @.@ 24 m ) per one thousand years , a series of marine terraces formed along with the hills ' uplift . This uplift changed the course of Sulphur Creek to run north to Aliso Creek , instead of flowing south to Salt Creek ( see Watershed ) . 
 River sediments helped to create the broad and flat terrain and river valleys between the San Joaquin Hills and the much higher Santa Ana Mountains to the east . Sulphur Creek 's watershed is located in a southern area of the San Joaquin Hills where many smaller hills have formed in a wider area instead of a single , tall , narrow mountain chain . These lower hills are composed primarily of sedimentary rocks and date from the Miocene period . The oldest rocks in this area are referred to as the <unk> Formation , while the younger are named the Monterey Formation . This hilly area is drained by Sulphur Creek to the northwest , Salt Creek to the south , small and unnamed coastal canyons to the southwest , and small tributaries of Trabuco and Oso Creeks to the east . This area is located northwest of the San Juan Creek valley , southeast of the Aliso Creek valley , and west of the Oso Creek drainage . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The Sulphur Creek subwatershed covers about 17 percent of the entire Aliso Creek watershed , encompassing about 6 square miles ( 16 km2 ) in the southwesternmost corner of the 35 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 91 km2 ) Aliso Creek basin . Primarily residential , it is bordered on the north by the Aliso Hills Channel drainage area ( tributary to Aliso Creek ) , on the south and southwest by the basin of Salt Creek , and to the west by the Oso Creek watershed , a tributary basin of the Trabuco Creek watershed . Most of the basin of Sulphur Creek is hilly , but not very mountainous , although the creek has been largely changed by human occupation . Several canyons that originally drained into the creek have been filled in with material excavated from the surrounding mountain @-@ tops , creating smoother terrain . Many present @-@ day storm drains still follow the original course of these canyons . About 30 percent of the creek 's course has been inundated by the Sulphur Creek Reservoir , formed in the 1950s by a large dam across a broad north @-@ trending valley . 
 The Sulphur Creek watershed has had a long history of water pollution , which can be attributed to residential development . While no raw sewage flows into the creek , the creek is contaminated by large quantities of urban runoff from impervious paved surfaces that collects toxins before pouring untreated into the creek . There are over four large storm drain outlets that pour directly into Sulphur Creek . Such untreated runoff has caused E. coli and Enterovirus to increasingly harm the creek and its remaining biodiversity . Channelization is also another factor , and standing water in the Sulphur Creek Reservoir has suffered eutrophication . The primary source of bacteria contamination is the largest tributary of Sulphur Creek , now mostly underground . The channel joins the creek not too far from its mouth . It has been proved that 87 percent of the Sulphur Creek mainstem is severely degraded . 
 = = History = = 
 Located to the southwest of Aliso Creek , Sulphur Creek historically lay in the territory of the Acjachemen Indian group , whose main population center was actually farther south , at the confluence of San Juan and Trabuco creeks . A nearby village , Niguili , was located near the mouth of Aliso Creek likely near the confluence of Aliso and Sulphur Creeks . Present @-@ day Laguna Niguel takes its name from this settlement . The Acjachemen were renamed the Juaneño by Spanish priests in the 18th century , who established a mission at the present @-@ day location of San Juan Capistrano . Following the Spanish arrival , most Juaneño clustered around the mission in the south . Like many other once widespread Juaneño villages , Niguili was likely abandoned soon after , and there is no trace of it remaining . 
 From 1842 to the 1960s , the entire land area was known as Rancho Niguel , a Mexican land grant originally belonging to Juan Avila . Eventually , after passing through several ownerships , the ranch was purchased in 1881 by Lewis Moulton and Jean Pierre Daguerre , who expanded it to 21 @,@ 000 acres ( 85 km2 ) . By the 1960s , the City of Laguna Niguel bought a large portion of the ranch from the Moulton family ; it was later donated to the county for recreational use . Resultantly , the upper and lower sections of the creek are now under county ownership , and the Sulphur Creek Reservoir is managed by the Orange County Flood Control District . 
 In the 1950s , a large dam , about 485 feet ( 148 m ) long and 42 feet ( 13 m ) high , was raised across lower Sulphur Creek by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to create Sulphur Creek Reservoir ( otherwise known as Laguna Niguel Lake ) . This flooded 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) and 44 acres ( 0 @.@ 18 km2 ) of the original course of the creek , creating a 520 acre foot ( 640 @,@ 000 m3 ) impoundment . This lake was annually stocked with fish , and by the 1960s , residential communities began to rise on the hills west of the main ( southward @-@ flowing ) segment of the creek , while increasingly contaminated urban runoff began to contribute to the creek 's flow . These hills originally consisted of high , narrow ridges dissected by steep but shallow and short canyons but were leveled to make way for buildings . In 1973 the 236 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 96 km2 ) Laguna Niguel Regional Park was established in the lower third of the creek course , covering the extent of the creek from the head of Sulphur Creek Reservoir to where the creek crosses Alicia Parkway through a large culvert . In 1990 the final reach of the creek became part of Aliso and Wood Canyons Regional Park . 
 = = Wildlife and flora = = 
 Historically , the Sulphur Creek watershed was mostly hilly terrain consisting of chaparral and coastal sage scrub , with native riparian vegetation , likely consisting of live oak , sycamores , and alders ( the namesake of Aliso Creek ; Aliso is the Spanish translation of Alder ) and other small trees , lined the small and seasonally flowing creek . Fish were likely nonexistent in the historic Sulphur Creek watershed - although Aliso Creek was perennial , steelhead trout were found to not have inhabited Aliso Creek even during flow periods , despite claims of some residents . ( See Wildlife of Aliso Creek for a detailed explanation on the absence of steelhead . ) 
 With the introduction of non @-@ native species , predominantly giant reed , castor bean and tobacco tree , native plant species in the watershed began to die out . As giant reed is not suitable habitat for many species , areas infested by giant reed are biologically dead in comparison with unaffected areas . It can grow extremely fast , removing too much water from the creek , and during flood events , many parts of the giant reed can wash downstream and re @-@ establish themselves as a new colony , increasing the problem . Along with increasing concentrations of nutrients from fertilizer and other substances contained in runoff , algal blooms began to hurt the water quality of the creek , especially above Sulphur Creek Reservoir . The historically seasonal creek was replaced with a constant flow of polluted water from several large storm drains and many smaller ones . Fish thrived for a limited time in Sulphur Creek between the introduction of perennial flows and the devastating floods at the end of the 20th century . These floods wiped out many of the remaining riparian areas lining waterways in the watershed . Despite the massive environmental degradation in the Sulphur Creek watershed , it is not biologically dead , yet and still supports some native species . Work is under way in the watershed to remove non @-@ native species and restore native riparian vegetation . 
 Aliso and Wood Canyons Regional Park , which is located at the lower extreme of Sulphur Creek , supports far more native species than the Sulphur Creek watershed ( see Wildlife of Aliso Creek for detail ) . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Sulphur Creek Reservoir is the primary recreational facility in the watershed and is said to be one of the largest fisheries of Southern Orange County . The lake is annually stocked with bluegill , catfish , and bass . Aside from the reservoir , there is no body of water in the watershed that is navigable . There are several other parks in the watershed ; these are Crown Valley Park , Sulphur Creek Park , and others . A paved trail follows Sulphur Creek from near the terminus of Crown Valley Park to near its mouth at Alicia Parkway . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The Geographic Names Information System lists " Arroyo Salada " ( Spanish : Salt Canyon ) as a variant name . Cañada Salada , translated to " Valley of Salt " or " Salt Canyon " ( Durham 's Place Names of the Greater Los Angeles Area , 2001 ) is another name for the lower section of the creek . These names , dating to Spanish times , imply that the creek was naturally salty or briny . As Salt Creek to the south bears a name of similar meaning , and that the " Arroyo Salada " Storm Channel occupies the lower section of the prehistoric Sulphur Creek watershed , there is further proof by salt concentrations that the two watersheds were once linked ( see Watershed ) . 
 = Romania in the Middle Ages = 
 The Middle Ages in Romania began with the withdrawal of the Mongols , the last of the migrating populations to invade the territory of modern Romania , after their attack of 1241 – 1242 . It came to an end with the reign of Michael the Brave ( 1593 – 1601 ) who managed , for a short time in 1600 , to rule Wallachia , Moldavia and Transylvania , the three principalities whose territories were to be united some three centuries later to form Romania . 
 Over most of this period , Banat , Crişana , Maramureş and Transylvania – now regions in Romania to the west of the Carpathian Mountains – were part of the Kingdom of Hungary . They were divided into several types of administrative units , such as " counties " and " seats " . The heads of the Transylvanian counties or " counts " were subordinated to a special royal official called voivode , but the province was seldom treated as a single unit , since the Székely and Saxon seats were administered separately . In the kingdom , Romanian peasants , being Orthodox , were exempt from the tithe , an ecclesiastical tax payable by all Roman Catholic commoners . However , Romanian noblemen slowly lost the ability to participate in political life , as the 14th @-@ century monarchs pursued a zealous pro @-@ Catholic policy . Their position became even worse after 1437 when the so @-@ called " Union of Three Nations " , an alliance of the Hungarian noblemen , the Székelys , and the Saxons , was formed in order to crush the Bobâlna peasant uprising . 
 Wallachia , the first independent medieval state between the Carpathians and the lower Danube was created when Basarab I ( c . 1310 – 1352 ) terminated the suzerainty of the king of Hungary with his victory in the battle of Posada in 1330 . The independence of Moldavia , to the east of the Carpathians , was achieved by Bogdan I ( 1359 – 1365 ) , a nobleman from Maramureş , who led a revolt against the former ruler who was appointed by the Hungarian monarch . The independence of the two principalities , however , was rarely secure , and vassalage to multiple states became an important aspect of their diplomacy . Although Wallachia paid tribute to the Ottoman Empire from 1417 , and Moldavia from 1456 , their two medieval monarchs , Mircea the Old of Wallachia ( 1386 – 1418 ) and Stephen the Great of Moldavia ( 1457 – 1504 ) conducted successful military operations against the Ottoman Turks . The two principalities ' trade with other parts of Europe began to decrease after the last decades of the 15th century . Before this the sale of hides , grain , honey , and wax to the Holy Roman Empire , Venice and Poland , and the import of silk , weapons and other manufactured goods from these areas had been widespread , but by the end of the 16th century the Ottoman Empire became the main market for Romanian products . 
 Transylvania , together with the neighboring counties , gained the status of an autonomous state under Ottoman suzerainty after the central territories of the Kingdom of Hungary had been annexed by the Ottomans in 1541 . The fall of the kingdom also deprived Wallachia and Moldavia of their main ally in the struggle against the Ottoman Empire . In 1594 Michael the Brave of Wallachia joined an anti @-@ Ottoman alliance initiated by Pope Clement VIII . After a series of victory over the Ottomans , he turned against Transylvania and Moldavia where pro @-@ Polish and pro @-@ Ottoman princes were reigning . He invaded and occupied Transylvania in 1599 , and Moldavia in 1600 . Although the union of the three countries collapsed in four months , it served as an ideal for later generations working for the unification of the lands that now form Romania . 
 = = Background = = 
 At the end of the 8th century the establishment of the Khazar Khaganate north of the Caucasus Mountains created an obstacle in the path of nomadic people moving westward . In the following period , the local population of the Carpathian – Danubian area profited from the peaceful political climate and a unitary material culture , called " Dridu " , that developed in the region . Finds from the Dridu settlements , such as <unk> and sickles , confirm the role of agriculture in their economy . 
 In the 9th century centrifugal movements commenced in the Khazar <unk> . One of the subject peoples , the Hungarians left its dominion and settled in the region between the rivers Don and Dniester . They abandoned the steppes and crossed the Carpathians around 896 . According to the 13th @-@ century Gesta Hungarorum ( " Deeds of the Hungarians " ) , at the time of the Hungarian invasion Transylvania was inhabited by Romanians and Slavs and ruled by Gelou , " a certain Romanian " , while Crişana was inhabited by several peoples , among them Székelys . Whether the author of the Gesta had any knowledge of the real conditions of the turn of the 9th and 10th centuries remains debated by historians . 
 In 953 the gyula , the second leader in rank of the Hungarian tribal federation , converted to Christianity in Constantinople . Around that time , according to the Byzantine Emperor Constantine VII , the Hungarians controlled the region on the border of modern Romania and Hungary along the rivers Timiş , Mureş , <unk> , Tisa and Toutis . In 1003 , as the Annals of Hildesheim narrates , Stephen I , the first crowned monarch of Hungary ( c . 1000 – 1038 ) " led an army against his maternal uncle , King Gyula " , and occupied Gyula 's country . 
 Stephen I granted privileges to the Roman Catholic Church , for example by ordering the general imposition of the tithe upon the population . Burials in most local pre @-@ Christian cemeteries , for example at Hunedoara , only ceased around 1100 . Stephen I also divided his kingdom , including the territories of modern Romania he had occupied , into counties , that is administrative units around royal fortresses , each administered by a royal official called count . In time the voivode , a higher royal official first attested in 1176 , became the principal of all the counts in Transylvania . In contrast with Transylvania , the counts in modern Banat and Crişana remained in direct contact with the king who appointed and replaced them at will . 
 From the end of the 9th century the Pechenegs controlled the territories to the east and south of the Carpathians . According to the <unk> 's saga , they fought together with the <unk> ( " Romanians " ) in the Kievan Rus ' in the 1010s . The Pechenegs were swept aside from their territories by the Cumans between 1064 and 1078 . A late variant of the oldest Turkish chronicle , the Oghuz @-@ name relates that the Cumans defeated many nations , including the <unk> ( " Romanians " ) . Some of the Pechenegs fled into the Kingdom of Hungary where they were employed to guard the border districts , for instance in Transylvania . 
 The 11th @-@ century settlements in Transylvania are characterized by small huts with ceramic assemblages marked by clay cauldrons . The increasing number of coin finds suggests that the province experienced economic growth in the late 11th century . The first document pertaining to the province is a royal charter of 1075 referring to taxes on salt levied at Turda . The earliest precious metal mine in medieval Transylvania , the silver mine at Rodna was first mentioned in 1235 . 
 In the 12th and 13th centuries <unk> ( " guest settlers " ) arrived in Transylvania from Germany and from the French @-@ speaking regions on the river Rhine who in time became collectively known as " Saxons " . In 1224 Andrew II of Hungary ( 1205 – 1235 ) granted special liberties to the Saxons who had settled in southern Transylvania . For instance , they were authorized to choose their local leaders ; only the head of the entire community , the count of Sibiu , was appointed by the king . They were also granted the right to use " the forest of the Romanians and the Pechenegs " . The first references to <unk> in Transylvania are connected to the vineyards of the <unk> of <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 As a result of the Saxon immigration , the Székelys – Hungarian @-@ speaking free warriors cultivating communal lands – were transferred to the southeast of the province . From the 13th century they were governed independently from the voivode by a royal official , the count of the Székelys . Besides the Saxons , the Cistercians became the agents of expansion in Transylvania . When their abbey at Cârţa was established in the early 13th century , Andrew II ordered that the strip of land running up to the mountains between the rivers Olt , <unk> and <unk> be transferred from the Romanians to the new monastery . 
 Following the defeat of the Cumans by the Mongols on the river Kalka in 1223 , some chieftains of the western Cuman tribes accepted the authority of the king of Hungary . Their conversion led to the creation of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Cumania to the east of the Carpathians . However , the Orthodox Romanian population of the territory received the sacraments from " some pseudo @-@ bishops of the Greek rite " , according to a papal bull of 1234 . In 1233 Oltenia was organized into a military frontier zone of the Kingdom of Hungary , called the Banate of Severin . 
 The expansion across the Carpathians was stopped by the invasion of the Mongols that lasted from March 31 , 1241 to April , 1242 . It was a major watershed in the medieval history of the region : although the number of casualties is disputed , even the most prudent estimates do not go below 15 percent of the total population . 
 = = High Middle Ages ( 1242 – 1396 ) = = 
 = = = Outer @-@ Carpathian regions = = = 
 After the withdrawal from the Kingdom of Hungary , the Mongol forces halted at Sarai ( now Russia ) on the Volga River where their leader , Batu Khan set up his own capital . Henceforth , the steppes between the rivers Dnieper and Danube were under the influence of the Mongols of the Volga , known as the Golden Horde . From the 1260s , a relative of Batu , Nogai Khan settled at <unk> on the Lower Danube and became the absolute master of the neighboring regions . He made himself independent of the Golden Horde around 1280 , but was killed in a battle in 1299 . 
 By the middle of the 14th century , the westernmost Mongol territories had become subject to frequent Polish and Hungarian military offensives . Grand Prince <unk> of Lithuania penetrated farther into the territories controlled by the Golden Horde than any European army had hitherto done . He won a major victory over the united Mongol troops on the Dnieper near the Black Sea in 1363 . 
 = = = Intra @-@ Carpathian regions = = = 
 Having been raided twice by the Mongols within a single year , Transylvania felt the consequences of the invasion of 1241 – 1242 for more than two decades . The administrative centers of the province , such as Alba Iulia and Cetatea de Baltă , had been destroyed . Due to the severe depopulation , a process of organized colonization commenced that lasted for several decades . For example , a new wave of colonization resulted in the establishment of the Saxon seats of <unk> and Mediaş ; and the lord of Ilia received , in 1292 , royal permission to settle Romanians in the lands he owned . 
 Since only castles built of stone and walled towns had been able to resist Mongol attacks , following the withdrawal of the Mongols the kings encouraged both the landowners and the townspeople to build stone fortifications . New stone fortresses were built , for example , at Codlea , <unk> , and <unk> . The process of urbanization was characterized by the predominance of the Saxon towns : out of the eight towns in Transylvania , only Alba Iulia and Dej were situated in the counties . A charter referring to inns , bakeries , and bathhouses in Rodna proves the city @-@ like way of life of its inhabitants . Salt was still the most important item of trade in this period , but trading with oxen , maidservants , and wine is also documented in royal charters . 
 In 1257 , Béla IV of Hungary ( 1235 – 1270 ) appointed his eldest son , the future Stephen V ( 1270 – 1272 ) to govern the kingdom 's territories to the east of the Danube . Here the younger king ceded a significant part of his royal domains to noblemen . The first years of the reign of Ladislaus IV of Hungary ( 1272 – 1290 ) , were characterized by civil wars throughout the entire kingdom . In Transylvania , the Saxons engaged in a local conflict with the bishop , took Alba Iulia and set fire to the cathedral . The series of wars continued in 1285 with a second Mongol invasion . During its initial stage , the Székelys , the Romanians and the Saxons successfully blocked the Mongols ' access and later organized a series of ambushes provoking panic among the retreating invaders . 
 By that time , the Romanians ' military role had expanded from their original task of defending the kingdom 's frontiers . They participated in several military campaigns , for example against Bohemia in 1260 and against Austria in 1291 . Their economic role became also recognized , since their pastoral activities connected to cloth production of the Saxon settlements . To the monarchs , they paid a special tax in sheep , called the " fiftieth " . Andrew III of Hungary ( 1290 – 1301 ) even ordered , in 1293 , that all the Romanians who had been settled without royal permission on noble domains be returned to the royal estate of Armeni . 
 In the last decades of the 13th century , <unk> generalis ( " general assembly " ) convoked by the monarchs or their representatives became an important organ of court system . For instance , the general assembly convoked in 1279 by Ladislaus IV for seven counties – among them Bihor , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> in the territory what is now Romania – ended with sentencing a despotic person to death . The first charter referring to a general assembly of the Transylvanian counties was recorded in 1288 . A general assembly of the Transylvanian nobles , Saxons , Székelys and Romanians was convoked personally by the monarch in 1291 . 
 When Andrew III died in 1301 , the entire kingdom was in the hands of a dozen powerful noblemen . Among them , Roland Borsa ruled Crişana , Theodore of <unk> gained the upper hand in the Banat , and Ladislaus Kán governed Transylvania . The latter 's authority was also recognized by the Saxons and the Székelys . He even assumed royal prerogatives , such as taking over lands lacking rightful owners . After 1310 , he acknowledged Charles I of Hungary ( 1301 – 1342 ) as his sovereign , but in fact continued to rule independently . The king who transferred his residence to Timişoara in 1315 could only strengthen his authority after a long series of confrontations . For instance , Ciceu , the last stronghold of Ladislaus Kán 's sons surrendered in 1321 . 
 After the king 's victory , one of his loyal adherents , Thomas Szécsényi was appointed voivode who suppressed a Saxon revolt in 1324 . At that time , the autonomous Saxon province was divided into seats , each administered by a judge appointed by the king . In appreciation of the Transylvanian noblemen 's services in the crushing of the revolt , Charles I exempted them from the taxes they had so far paid to the voivodes . 
 In this period , one of the major incentives for the growth of Transylvanian towns was the trade with Wallachia and Moldavia . For instance , Braşov was granted a staple right in 1369 with respect to the trade in cloth from Poland or Germany . Thereafter , foreign merchants had to sell their most sought @-@ after merchandise , broadcloth to the tradesmen of Braşov who resold it in Wallachia in exchange for animals , cotton , wax and honey . 
 In the 14th century , the name " district " was generalized for the forms of territorial organizations of the Romanians , but only few of them , for instance their district in Bereg County ( now in Hungary and Ukraine ) , achieved official recognition . Maramureş , where Romanians were first mentioned in 1326 , was the only district that transformed , around 1380 , into a county . Louis I of Hungary ( 1342 – 1382 ) issued a royal decree in 1366 which prescribed firm judicial measures against " the malefactors of any nation , especially Romanians " . 
 Louis I 's decree also regulated the legal status of the cneazes , the Romanians ' local leaders , by establishing a distinction between cneazes " brought to " their lands by royal writ whose testimony in court weighed like that of nobles ( " noble cneazes " ) , and others whose evidence counted for less ( " commoner cneazes " ) . This distinction , however , did not mean real nobility and grant them exemption from royal taxes , even for the noble cneazes . Their status corresponded to that of the Hungarian " conditional nobles " whose nobility depended on the specified military services they were to render . 
 According to a royal decree of 1428 , Louis I had also ordered that only Catholics be granted land in the Sebeş district of Timiş county . As a result of official pressure , many Romanian noblemen converted to Catholicism . For example , the members of the powerful <unk> family turned Catholic in the 15th century . The Ottomans raided Transylvania for the first time in 1394 . Sigismund I of Hungary ( 1387 – 1437 ) organized a crusade against them , but the battle of Nicopolis ( now Nikopol , Bulgaria ) ended in disaster for the Christian forces in 1396 . 
 = = = Establishment of Wallachia = = = 
 According to a charter issued by Béla IV of Hungary for the Knights Hospitallers in 1247 , at that time at least four polities existed in the area to the south of the Carpathians . Two of them , the <unk> of John and Farcaş were granted to the knights , but the lands ruled by Litovoi and Seneslau were left " to the <unk> " ( " Romanians " ) " just as they have owned it " . In the 1270s , Litovoi extended his territory and stopped paying tribute to the king , but his army was defeated by the royal forces , and he was killed in the battle . 
 Romanian historical tradition associates the foundation of Wallachia with the " dismounting of Radu Negru " who crossed the Carpathians from Transylvania accompanied by " Romanians , papists , Saxons , and all kind of men " around 1290 . The first sovereign of Wallachia recorded in contemporary sources was Basarab I who obtained international recognition for the independence of the principality by his victory over Charles I of Hungary in the battle of Posada on November 12 , 1330 . The princes of Wallachia were chosen from among his descendants – either legitimate , or not – by an assembly of the boyars until the 16th century . 
 The boyars , members of the landed nobility , formed the most important social group in the principality . The vast majority of the population was formed by peasants who were called several names , such as <unk> ( " neighbors " ) or <unk> ( " Romanians " ) , in medieval documents . In this period , animals , especially sheep , remained the main item of export , but from the Wallachian Plain great quantities of grain were transported to the Mediterranean area . The basis of the peasants ' diet was formed by millet eaten as porridge , while the boyars also used wheat . 
 The Orthodox Metropolitan See of Wallachia was recognized by the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople in 1359 . Wallachia issued its own currency under Vladislav I ( 1364 – c . 1377 ) . The earliest written information about Gypsies in modern Romania , a deed issued by Dan I of Wallachia ( c . 1383 – 1386 ) refers to Vladislav I 's former donation of Gypsies to the <unk> monastery . Later on , all the important monasteries and boyars owned Gipsy slaves . 
 The Ottomans entered for the first time into Wallachia in 1395 . Although the invading troops were defeated somewhere in a <unk> ( " ragged marshland " ) in Oltenia , the chaos created by the threat of attacks allowed a group of boyars to put Vlad I the Usurper ( 1395 – 1397 ) on the throne . Thus Mircea I was forced to take refuge in Transylvania , where he agreed to be Sigismund I of Hungary 's vassal . He was restored to the throne and participated in the disastrous crusade of Nicopolis organized by Sigismund I. 
 = = = Establishment of Moldavia = = = 
 After 1241 the territory between the Eastern Carpathians and the Dniester was controlled by the Golden Horde . Nevertheless , the contemporary Thomas <unk> 's reference to the Romanians ' conflict with the Ruthenians in 1277 suggests that Romanian political entities existed in northern Moldavia at that time . In 1345 Andrew Lackfi , the count of the Székelys led an army over the Carpathians and occupied this region where a border province was organized by Louis I of Hungary . 
 Romanian historical tradition links the foundation of Moldavia to the " dismounting of <unk> " , a Romanian voivode from Maramureş . Although <unk> was succeeded by his son , Sas , his line did not last long . His descendants were soon expelled by Bogdan , a former voivode of Maramureş who fled to Moldavia and joined with local boyars in a revolt . 
 In Moldavia , agriculture and animal raising remained the principal economic activities . Similarly to Wallachia , wooden plow remained the main agricultural tool throughout the Middle Ages . The constant clearing of land shows that finding new land was still preferred to crop rotation . The establishment of the principality enhanced the security of travel , thus Moldavia could also profit from the transit trade between Poland and the Black Sea ports . The first local coins were minted in 1377 , under Peter I <unk> ( c . 1375 – 1391 ) . 
 The succession to the throne , similarly to Wallachia , was governed by the hereditary @-@ elective principle . Thus either a legitimate or an illegitimate member of the <unk> family could be proclaimed prince by an assembly of the boyars . In 1387 Peter I <unk> recognized Władysław II Jagiełło of Poland as his suzerain , but Hungary also maintained its claim of suzerainty over the principality . Therefore , the princes of Moldavia could counterbalance the influence of Poland and Hungary by playing one off against the other . 
 = = = Dobruja = = = 
 After 1242 most of the territory between the Danube and the Black Sea was included in the area dominated by the Mongols . Although the Byzantine Empire reestablished control over the Danube Delta in the 1260s , it fell again under the direct rule of the Golden Horde sometime before 1337 . By the end of the 13th century , flourishing communities of Genoese merchants had settled in the towns of <unk> , Chilia and <unk> . 
 Towards the middle of the 14th century a state dependent of the Byzantine Empire , known as " the country of <unk> " , developed in the region . Its first known ruler was <unk> . He was succeeded by his brother , Dobrotitsa , for whom part of his holdings , Dobruja , received its name . In about 1385 <unk> became the ruler of the territory , but he soon disappeared during an Ottoman expedition . Dobruja was occupied by Mircea I of Wallachia in 1390 and by the Ottomans in 1395 . 
 = = Towards Ottoman domination ( 1397 – 1529 ) = = 
 = = = Intra @-@ Carpathian regions = = = 
 In order to establish a zone of buffer states , Sigismund I of Hungary tried to draw the neighboring Orthodox rulers under his own suzerainty by granting them estates in his kingdom . For example , Stefan Lazarević of Serbia received Satu Mare , Baia Mare and Baia <unk> in modern Romania , and Mircea I of Wallachia was granted Făgăraş . Sigismund I was also the first monarch who recognized , in 1419 , the legislative competence of the Estates in Transylvania . On his initiative , their assembly declared that in case of an Ottoman attack , every third nobleman and every tenth serf would take up arms . Indeed , from 1420 Ottoman attacks occurred on an annual basis . In this period many Saxon churches , and later the Székely churches of the <unk> region , were fortified , which gave local architecture a distinctive appearance . 
 The increasing defense costs fell primarily on the serfs : the rent on the land was raised and extraordinary taxes were imposed . The first peasant revolt in the territory of modern Romania broke out due to the efforts taken by the bishop of Transylvania to collect the church taxes . Led by Anton Budai Nagy , the rebellious peasants , who called themselves " the commune of the rightful Hungarian and Romanian inhabitants of this part of Transylvania " , established a fortified camp on the Bobâlna hill early in 1437 . They fought two important battles against the noblemen ; the first one , at Bobâlna , was won by the peasants , and the second one , near the <unk> River , had no clear winner . The leaders of the noblemen , the Saxons and the Székelys , however , set up a " brotherly union " in order to join forces and crushed the peasants ' resistance by the end of January 1438 . 
 The Ottomans ' attempt to conquer new territories led to a better organized policy against them . The temporary union of the Eastern and Western Churches proclaimed by the Council of Florence in 1439 also created a favorable background for the concentration of Christian forces . Christendom found its champion in John Hunyadi who gained a series of victories over the Ottomans after 1441 . For instance , in 1442 he routed an Ottoman army that had been devastating Transylvania . Through his last victory over Mehmed II at the siege of Belgrade ( in modern Serbia ) in 1456 , he saved the kingdom from Ottoman occupation for several decades . During the reign of his son , Matthias I of Hungary ( 1458 – 1490 ) , the Ottomans launched only one serious attack against Transylvania in 1479 when they were defeated at Câmpul <unk> . 
 Matthias I used his officials to assert royal prerogatives that had already fallen into disuse . The noblemen found it particularly irksome that the <unk> <unk> , a tax from which they had been exempted was replaced with a new tax . In Transylvania , the " Three Nations " entered into a formal alliance against the king in 1467 , but he quickly intervened and took the disorganized rebels by surprise . 
 By that time , the land once held in common by the Székely community had gradually become divided into smaller and smaller units ; thus a vast number of the free warrior @-@ peasants had to enter the service of their more prosperous fellow Székelys . This social stratification was formally recognized by a royal decree in 1473 . Thereafter those who performed mounted military service were differentiated from those who fought as foot @-@ soldiers ; those who were unable to finance themselves even as foot @-@ soldiers were legally reduced to servitude . 
 The prominence of the German element in the towns sometimes led to conflicts along ethnic lines . Thus the struggle for leadership in Cluj ( now Cluj @-@ Napoca ) between Hungarians and Saxons only came to an end in 1458 by establishing a rule that municipal offices must be shared equally between the two groups . In 1486 , Matthias I united all the Saxon districts in Transylvania in the " University of the Saxons " under the leadership of the elected mayor of Sibiu . 
 After Matthias I 's death , the assembly of the Estates , called Diet , began to function as a regular organ of power . The peasantry suffered most from the rule of the Estates , for instance , by the limitation of their right to free movement . In 1514 thousands of peasants who had been summoned to Buda ( now Budapest , in modern Hungary ) to join the crusade proclaimed by Pope Leo X against the Ottomans turned the weapons against their masters . The rebels , led by the Székely George Dózsa , occupied several towns , such as Oradea and <unk> , but on July 15 John Szapolyai , the voivode defeated them at Timişoara . As a retaliation , the Diet decreed that peasants were to be tied to the land " perpetually " . 
 The downfall of the Kingdom of Hungary was marked by the battle of Mohács ( Hungary ) where the royal army was annihilated by the Ottomans on August 29 , 1526 . Thereafter the noblemen 's political factions engaged in conflict and elected two kings . One of them , John I Szapolyai ( 1526 – 1540 ) was supported by the lesser nobility , while Ferdinand I of Habsburg ( 1526 – 1564 ) was recognized mainly in the kingdom 's western counties , but the Transylvanian Saxons also supported him . Seeking the assistance of the Ottomans , John I had to pay homage to the sultan at Mohács in 1529 . 
 = = = Wallachia = = = 
 After the battle of Nicopolis , the Ottomans occupied Bulgaria and could attack Wallachia more easily . Mircea I the Old , however , could reoccupy Dobruja in 1402 by taking advantage of the Ottomans ' difficulties after their defeat by Timur Lenk in the battle of Ankara . He even intervened in the Ottoman civil war and supported the struggle of Musa and Mustafa against their brother , Mehmed I. After the two pretenders had been defeated , the Ottomans annexed again Dobruja and occupied Giurgiu , and Mircea I was forced to pay an annual tribute to the sultan . Under Mircea I iron mines were opened at Baia de Fier and copper mining began at Baia de <unk> . In addition , sulfur and amber were extracted in the region of Buzău . 
 After Mircea I 's death , princes succeeded one another on the throne with devastating frequency . For instance , Michael I ( 1418 – 1420 ) was overthrown by his cousin , Dan II ( 1420 – 1431 ) , and in the next decade the throne was occupied with frequent changes either by Dan II or by his cousin , Radu II the Bald ( 1421 – 1427 ) , the former being supported by Sigismund I of Hungary and the latter by the Ottomans . 
 Alexander I Aldea ( 1431 – 1436 ) was the first Romanian ruler to be forced to render military service to the Ottomans . Two decades later , Vlad III the Impaler ( 1448 , 1456 – 1462 , 1476 ) , notorious as the model for the Dracula legend , turned against the Ottoman Empire . He carried out a series of attacks across the Danube in the winter of 1461 – 1462 . The response was a massive invasion led by Mehmed II who drove Vlad III from the throne and replaced him with his brother , Radu III the Fair ( 1462 – 1475 ) . Due to the frequent military operations , the Wallachian Plain was heavily depopulated after the end of the 14th century . On the other hand , Wallachia received a steady flow of immigrants , mostly from the Balkans . 
 After 1462 Wallachia preserved its autonomy mainly through the intervention of Stephen the Great of Moldavia . At the end of the century , however , Radu IV the Great ( 1495 – 1508 ) became an obedient subject of the sultan and visited Istanbul annually to personally offer the tribute . Even so , he could only stay in power by collaborating with the powerful <unk> family , strongly connected to the Ottomans by trading . In 1512 a member of this family , Neagoe ( 1512 – 1521 ) rose to throne , but he adopted the dynastic name of Basarab in order to legitimize his rule . He wrote the first original work of Romanian literature , titled Teachings , to his son , <unk> on moral , political , and military questions . 
 Under Theodosius I ( 1521 – 1522 ) the Ottoman governor of Nicopolis take advantage of the internal fights among the boyar parties , and thus dominated the political life of Wallachia . Due to the imminent danger of annexation , the boyars grouped around Radu V of <unk> ( 1522 – 1529 ) who fought about 20 battles against the Ottomans . Finally , he was , in 1525 , forced to accept Ottoman suzerainty and the rise of the tribute . 
 = = = Moldavia = = = 
 The Orthodox Metropolitan See of Moldavia was recognized by the Ecumenical Patriarch during the reign of Alexander I the Good ( 1400 – 1432 ) . He reinforced Moldavia 's traditional pro @-@ Polish orientation and declared himself a vassal of Władysław II of Poland in 1406 . Thenceforth , the Moldavian armies fought together with the Poles against the Teutonic Knights . The first Ottoman attack on Moldavia in 1420 was also repulsed by him . Alexander I 's death was followed by a long period of political instability , characterized by frequent fights for the throne . For instance , the struggle of his sons , <unk> I ( 1432 – 1442 ) and Stephen II ( 1433 – 1447 ) ended in 1435 by the division of the country . 
 Although cottage industries , both in boyar and peasant households , were still the main source of clothing , food and construction , specialized production , such as weaving and pottery , started to develop by the middle of the 15th century . The first oil wells went into production in 1440 , but their oil was also only for household use . In Moldavia , Gypsy slaves were first mentioned in 1428 when Alexander I awarded 31 Gypsy families to the Bistriţa Monastery . In time Gypsies became specialized in several crafts : for example , throughout the Middle Ages the working of iron was an occupation reserved almost exclusively for them . 
 Peter III Aaron ( 1451 – 1457 ) was the first prince who agreed to pay tribute to the Ottomans in 1456 . He was ousted by his nephew , Stephen , with the support of Vlad the Impaler of Wallachia . Stephen III the Great was to be the most important medieval Romanian monarch who managed to uphold Moldavia 's autonomy against Hungary , Poland and the Ottoman Empire . 
 In the early years of his reign , he remained allied with Poland and the Ottoman Empire , and even joined the Ottomans in attacking Wallachia . He also supported the rebellion of 1467 of the Transylvanian Estates ; therefore Matthias I of Hungary launched an expedition against Moldavia , but the royal army was defeated in the battle of Baia . He came to view the Ottoman Empire as his chief enemy in the 1470s , and in 1474 he refused to pay tribute . He soon received the ultimatum of Mehmed II who demanded the surrender of Chilia , a fortress recently captured from Wallachia . Upon Stephen III 's refusal , a large Ottoman army was sent against Moldavia . He called on Pope Sixtus IV , pleading for a crusade . Although the pope acknowledged his merits , by naming him " the Athlete of Christ " , no anti @-@ Ottoman coalition materialized . Even without external military support , Stephen the Great led his troops to victory in the battle of Vaslui on January 10 , 1475 . Following the battle , he addressed a letter to the Christian princes , expressing the idea that the two Romanian principalities were the " gateway to the Christian world " , and if they fell " all Christendom would be in danger " . 
 He also recognized Matthias I of Hungary as his suzerain and received , in return , Ciceu and Cetatea de Baltă in Transylvania . The following year , however , he found himself alone when Mehmed II invaded Moldavia . The Moldavian army was defeated in the Battle of Valea Albă , but the Ottomans , suffering from a lack of provisions and an outbreak of the plague , were forced to retreat . Stephen the Great suffered the greatest setback of his reign in 1484 when the Ottomans captured Chilia and Cetatea Alba ( now <unk> @-@ <unk> , Ukraine ) on the Black Sea . Having tried unsuccessfully to regain the fortresses in 1485 , he concluded a peace with the sultan and agreed to pay tribute to him . 
 He was succeeded by his son , Bogdan III the One @-@ Eyed ( 1504 – 1517 ) whose reign was troubled by a long series of military conflicts with Poland and Wallachia . The good relations with Poland were reestablished under the reign of Stephen IV the Younger ( 1517 – 1527 ) . His successor , Peter IV Rareş ( 1527 – 1538 , 1541 – 1546 ) intervened in the struggle for the crown of the Kingdom of Hungary : on the order of the sultan , in 1529 he invaded the Székely Land and defeated the army of Ferdinand I 's partisans . 
 = = Ottoman suzerainty ( 1530 – 1594 ) = = 
 = = = Establishment of Principality of Transylvania = = = 
 After 1529 , resistance to John I in Transylvania was broken in a series of small campaigns . For instance , the last Transylvanian magnate to side with <unk> I , Stephen Majláth went over to John I in early 1532 , and Sibiu was occupied in 1536 . On February 24 , 1538 , a secret pact was signed in Oradea by the representatives of the two kings of Hungary . According to the treaty , both rulers were allowed to retain the territories which they then held , but the childless John I promised to recognize the Habsburgs ' succession . 
 However , John I married a daughter of Sigismund I of Poland , Isabella , who in 1540 bore him a son . Already dying , the king took an oath from his barons to evade the treaty of Oradea , and his counselor , George Martinuzzi , had the infant John II Sigismund elected as king ( 1540 – 1571 ) . Ferdinand I sent troops to take Buda , but they withdrew upon the advance of the Ottoman army . On August 29 , 1541 Suleiman I summoned the Hungarian lords to his camp , and while the reception was taking place , his troops occupied the capital of the kingdom . At the same time the sultan assigned the territories of the kingdom east of the Tisa to Queen Isabella and her son in return for an annual tribute . 
 On October 18 , the kingdom 's eastern territories , including Transylvania , swore allegiance to the infant king at the Diet of Debrecen ( Hungary ) . Thus a separate country started to emerge , although George Martinuzzi was still negotiating with Ferdinand I on the reunification of the kingdom . For this purpose , in 1551 Ferdinand I sent an army into Transylvania where he was recognized as sole ruler by the Diet . The Ottomans , however , occupied a great part of Banat in 1552 , and neither could Ferdinand I consolidate his rule over the kingdom 's eastern territories . Finally , the Diet , meeting in Sebeş on March 12 , 1556 , swore again allegiance to " the son of King John " , thus the young king and his mother returned to Transylvania . 
 The 16th century also brought about major religious changes : the Saxons converted to Lutheranism , while most of the Hungarians converted to Calvinism or Unitarianism ; only the Székelys remained more than the other " nations " Catholic . In 1568 , the Transylvanian Diet at Torda decreed the free worship of these four " received denominations " , but Orthodoxy still continued to be only tolerated . The Romanians ' status worsened in this period . The Diets of 1554 and 1555 decided that a Catholic or Protestant peasant could not be accused of a crime except there were seven Catholic or Protestant witnesses against him , while an Orthodox peasant could be accused if there were three Catholic or Protestant or seven Orthodox witnesses . The Diet of 1559 also decreed that Romanians who had settled on lands abandoned by Catholic serfs were obliged to pay the tithe . 
 It ( Transylvania ) is inhabited by three nations – Székelys , Hungarians and Saxons . I should add the Romanians who – even though they easily equal the others in number – have no liberties , no nobility and no rights of their own , except for a small number living in the district of <unk> , where it is believed that the capital of Decebalus lay , and who were made nobles during the time of John Hunyadi , a native of that place , because they always took part tirelessly in the battles against the Turks . All others are common people , serfs of the Hungarians and without settlements of their own , scattered everywhere , throughout the entire country , rarely settled in open places , most of them retired in the woods , leading an unfortunate life alongside their flocks . 
 From the Székelys , continuing warfare demanded increased military service , and the royal administration imposed special taxes on them . Although the leaders of the Székely community were exempted from taxation in 1554 , but all the foot soldiers continued to be taxed , resulting in a double burden of military and monetary obligations for them . In 1562 many Székelys took up arms against John II Sigismund , but they were defeated . The Saxon towns continued to develop even in the years of upheaval . Their population , however , increased slowly , mainly as a consequence of the Saxons ' traditional desire for segregation : even Hungarian craftsmen and merchants were prohibited from settling in their towns . 
 In the Treaty of Speyer of August 16 , 1570 , John II Sigismund acknowledged his rival , Maximilian I ( 1564 – 1576 ) as the lawful king of Hungary and adopted the title of " prince of Transylvania and parts of the Kingdom of Hungary " . The treaty also marked out the borders of the new principality , which included not only the historical province of Transylvania , but also some neighboring counties , such as Bihor and Maramureş , thenceforward collectively known as Partium . The death of John II Sigismund in 1571 threatened to throw the country again into the hands of the Habsburgs whose officers supported the Unitarian Gáspár Bekes . Now the sultan appointed Stephen Báthory , a Catholic politician , voivode . 
 The decisive battle between the two candidates was won by Stephen Báthory at <unk> on July 8 , 1575 . In the same year , he was elected king of Poland , thus a personal union was formed between the two countries that lasted until his death in 1586 . He left the administration of the principality first to his brother , Christopher Báthory ( 1575 – 1581 ) , and then to his brother 's minor son , Sigismund Báthory ( 1581 – 1602 ) , bestowing on them the title of voivode , while he himself took the title of prince . 
 In February , 1594 Sigismund Báthory announced that his country would join the anti @-@ Ottoman alliance formed by the Holy Roman Emperor , Rudolf II , Philip II of Spain and many smaller Italian and German states . Although the Estates twice refused to endorse the declaration of war , Transylvania joined the alliance on January 28 , 1595 after the leaders of the opposition had been executed on the order of the monarch . In return Rudolph II recognized Sigismund 's title of prince . 
 = = = Wallachia = = = 
 The short and unworthy reigns of Radu V ’ s successors only increased the crisis of Wallachia . Starting with Mircea the Shepherd ( 1545 – 1559 ) , the first prince placed on the throne by the sultan , the crown became negotiable , according to the largest tribute offered . Even Michael the Brave who in time would turn against the Ottomans ascended the throne with the support of some people who had influence with the Sublime Porte , among them Sir Edward Barton , the English ambassador to Istanbul . 
 He soon embarked upon a program to strengthen the central authority by replacing the members of the <unk> <unk> , an advisory body consisting of boyars , with <unk> , that is officials personally loyal to him . Michael the Brave also adopted an anti @-@ Ottoman policy , and upon his initiative Sigismund Báthory of Transylvania and Aaron the Tyrant of Moldavia ( 1591 – 1595 ) signed a treaty to form an anti @-@ Ottoman alliance . The rebellion started by the massacre of all the Ottomans in Wallachia on November 13 , 1594 . 
 = = = Moldavia = = = 
 In 1531 Peter IV Rareş invaded Poland in order to reoccupy the <unk> region ( in modern Ukraine ) , but his army was defeated . Now he concluded a secret treaty with Ferdinand I of Hungary , but soon had to seek refugee in Transylvania when Suleiman I led an army against him . This was the first occasion when a prince , Stephen V <unk> ( 1538 – 1540 ) was appointed by the sultan . At the same time , the sultan occupied Brăila and <unk> ( now in Moldova ) , and the Budjak region ( now in Ukraine ) . Peter IV Rareş recovered his throne in exchange for a large sum of money in 1541 . His death was followed by a period characterized by fights between pretenders to the throne and among the boyar parties . 
 The idea of anti @-@ Ottoman struggle was revived by John III the Terrible ( 1572 – 1574 ) who refused to pay the tribute to the sultan . As a result , Ottoman and Wallachian troops invaded Moldavia , but they were defeated by John III in a surprise attack near <unk> . Now the sultan sent a large army against Moldavia , and the prince was captured and quartered . Next Aaron the Tyrant joined the anti @-@ Ottoman coalition of Transylvania and Wallachia , and started a rebellion on November 13 , 1594 , simultaneously with Michael the Brave of Wallachia . 
 The 16th century was characterized by the flourishing of ecclesiastical mural painting whose technique have remained a secret until today . For example , the interior and exterior frescoes of the Voroneţ Monastery represent this " Moldavian style " . 
 = = Age of Michael the Brave ( 1595 – 1601 ) = = 
 Following their coordinated uprising , Michael the Brave attacked Ottoman strongholds along the Danube and recovered Giurgiu and Brăila , while Aaron the Tyrant seized Ismail ( now in Ukraine ) . In response , the sultan ordered the Grand Vizier , Sinan Pasha to invade Wallachia . The two princes needed the support of Sigismund Báthory who took advantage of the situation to make himself suzerain of Wallachia and Moldavia . When Aaron the Tyrant refused Sigismund Báthory 's conditions , he was replaced by the latter 's protégé , Ştefan Răzvan ( 1595 ) on the throne . 
 According to the treaty signed by Michael the Brave on May 20 , 1595 in Alba Iulia , Sigismund Báthory became the ruler of the three principalities and adopted the title of " prince of Transylvania , Moldavia and Transalpine Wallachia " . The treaty stipulated , that the taxes would be established in Wallachia by the Transylvanian Diet , together with a council of 12 Wallachian boyars . Around that time , the peasants were bound to the land both in Wallachia and Moldavia . 
 Ottoman troops entered Wallachia in the summer , but they were defeated by Michael the Brave at Călugăreni and by the united armies of the three principalities at Giurgiu . In the meantime , however , the Poles had invaded Moldavia and replaced Ştefan Răzvan by Ieremia Movilă ( 1595 – 1606 ) . In June 1598 Michael the Brave recognized the suzerainty of Emperor Rudolph II , who had promised to grant subsidies to him to finance his mercenaries . 
 On March 30 , 1599 Sigismund Báthory abdicated the throne in favor of his cousin , Andrew Báthory ( 1599 ) . The new prince was loyal to the Poles and promptly demanded that Michael the Brave accept his suzerainty . The latter secured the emperor 's approval for an invasion of Transylvania and attacked the principality where the Székelys also joined him . He defeated his opponent at <unk> on October 28 , 1599 and entered Alba Iulia . Here the Diet recognized him as imperial governor . He respected the traditional organization of Transylvania , and even crushed a revolt of the Romanian peasants , but forced the Diet to relieve the Orthodox priests of feudal obligations . In the spring of 1600 , he invaded Moldavia in the name of the emperor and established control over it . In July he even proclaimed himself " prince of Wallachia , Transylvania , and all of Moldavia " in Iaşi , thus bringing about the union of the three principalities . 
 However , the Hungarian noblemen , dissatisfied with the disorder , rebelled against his rule , and defeated him at <unk> on September 18 , 1600 . At the same time , the Poles invaded Moldavia and restored Ieremia Movilă to the throne ; then they entered Wallachia , where Simion Movilă defeated Michael the Brave at Buzău . In this moment of crisis , Michael the Brave left for Prague to appeal to the emperor for support . He returned to Transylvania in July 1601 at the head of an imperial army . Cooperating with the imperial general , Giorgio Basta , he defeated the Transylvanian troops at <unk> on August 3 , but on August 19 he was assassinated on the order of his former ally , Giorgio Basta . 
 = = After the first union = = 
 After Michael the Brave 's death , Transylvania was ruled by an imperial military commission , but under Stephen <unk> ( 1604 – 1606 ) the principality voluntarily accepted Ottoman suzerainty . In the next decades , the princes of Transylvania , among them Gabriel Bethlen ( 1613 – 1629 ) , made several unsuccessful attempts to unify Transylvania , Wallachia and Moldavia . 
 Wallachia and Moldavia fell back under the control of the Ottoman Empire after Michael the Brave 's death . Radu Mihnea , prince of Wallachia ( 1611 – 1616 , 1623 – 1626 ) and of Moldavia ( 1616 – 1623 ) , was the first ruler to appoint Greeks from the <unk> district of Istanbul to high government posts . This started a trend that ultimately led to the so @-@ called " <unk> period " in Romania ’ s history . 
 = Far East Man = 
 " Far East Man " is a song written by English musicians George Harrison and Ronnie Wood , each of whom released a recording of the song in 1974 . Wood 's version appeared on I 've Got My Own Album to Do , his debut solo album , and Harrison 's on Dark Horse . Their only official songwriting collaboration , " Far East Man " is an affirmation of friendship in the face of life 's obstacles and musically reflects the two guitarists ' adoption of the soul genre . Written mostly by Harrison , the composition has been interpreted as a restatement of the humanitarian message expressed in his 1971 single " Bangla Desh " , and a tribute to Indian musician Ravi Shankar . 
 The song originated during a period of romantic intrigue surrounding Harrison 's marriage to Pattie Boyd and Wood 's to his wife Krissie , which culminated in Boyd leaving Harrison for his and Wood 's mutual friend Eric Clapton . Wood recorded " Far East Man " in July 1974 at The Wick , his Surrey home that had also become an established meeting place for many leading rock musicians . Harrison sang and played slide guitar on this version , while other contributors included Wood 's Faces bandmate Ian MacLagan , Mick Taylor of the Rolling Stones , and drummer Andy Newmark . The Harrison recording took place at his Friar Park studio and features backing from Billy Preston , Tom Scott , Willie Weeks and Newmark , all of whom then played on his 1974 North American tour with Shankar . Opening with a spoken dedication to Frank Sinatra , the Dark Horse recording was marred by Harrison 's damaged singing voice – a result of his rushing to complete the album 's vocal parts in Los Angeles , while simultaneously rehearsing for the tour . 
 Several commentators have singled out " Far East Man " as a highlight of Harrison 's 1974 album . While noting the two composers ' troubled private lives during the song 's creation , author Simon Leng describes it as " a wistful shrug of the shoulders set to music " . In 2002 , Wood released a concert DVD titled Far East Man , which included a live version of the track . Recorded in December 2001 , two weeks after Harrison 's death from cancer , this performance features special guests Andrea Corr and Slash . 
 = = Background = = 
 Author Robert Rodriguez has written of " an informal musical round robin " existing in England during the early 1970s among rock music 's " elite " . From 1972 onwards , guitarist Ronnie Wood 's home in Richmond , Surrey – The Wick – was the preferred location for these get @-@ togethers , at which the participants included ex @-@ Beatle George Harrison , Wood 's Faces bandmates , and members of the Rolling Stones . Situated over a bend on the River Thames , and formerly the home of actor John Mills and novelist Mary Hayley Bell , The Wick was also where rehearsals took place for Eric Clapton 's comeback concerts at the Rainbow Theatre in January 1973 . These concerts featured Wood in the role of second guitarist and were organised by Pete Townshend of the Who , in an effort to pull Clapton out of his heroin @-@ induced seclusion . Harrison and his wife Pattie Boyd attended the Rainbow shows , on 13 January , and became friends with Wood and his wife , Krissie . 
 Musically during this period , Harrison and Wood participated in Alvin Lee 's recording of " So Sad " , a Harrison composition reflecting the failure of his marriage to Boyd . In October 1973 , the Woods stayed at Friar Park , Harrison 's estate in Oxfordshire , where he and Wood recorded together . They also began writing the song " Far East Man " , about which Harrison says in his 1980 autobiography , I , Me , Mine : " We stumbled on it and other things ... " 
 Beatles biographer Peter Doggett describes Friar Park as having become " a haven of adventurous intrigue " at this point , with Harrison conducting an affair with Maureen Starkey , the wife of his former bandmate Ringo Starr , and Clapton urging Boyd to leave her husband for him . During their stay at Friar Park , Wood began an affair with Boyd and the couple flew to the Bahamas , while Harrison and Krissie Wood holidayed together in Portugal . These details were kept from the press , but in late November 1973 , Wood issued a statement from The Wick confirming : " My romance with Patti Boyd is definitely on . " Given these developments , Rodriguez notes the irony in " Far East Man " being " a rumination on letting a friend down " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The song began as an instrumental collaboration , which Harrison then finished alone . In I , Me , Mine , Harrison says that he and Wood came up with the melody to the verses together , but that , at Wood 's request , he later turned it into a song by writing the words and adding a middle eight . Harrison biographer Simon Leng describes the chord sequence as " a grin @-@ making exploration of major and minor sevenths that oozes smoochy soul " . 
 In the first verse , Harrison states : 
 While the world wages war 
 It gets harder to see 
 Who your friends really are ... 
 Author Ian Inglis interprets " Far East Man " as being about Indian sitar maestro Ravi Shankar , for whom Harrison had staged the Concert for Bangladesh in August 1971 . Three years later , with the new nation of Bangladesh still beset by problems , and conflict clouding the issue of friendship generally for Harrison , Inglis suggests that " this is one friendship [ Harrison ] is determined to preserve " . The choruses therefore promise : " I won 't let him down ... I won 't let him drown ... " Harrison later credited Shankar with being " probably the person who has influenced my life the most " , since " Indian music was like a stepping @-@ stone to the spiritual path " . Inglis views the song as reflecting Harrison 's commitment to " all the things that India has given him " . 
 Leng identifies " Far East Man " as a " hopeful song " , where , despite his confusion , Harrison 's " answer is to follow his instinct , his heart " . Leng sums up the conclusion that Harrison provides in the middle eight 's final line , " Can only do what it tells me " : " He surveys the problems of love , social strife , and disconnection from spiritual values , but decides that taking his own advice is a good enough start . " 
 While echoing this interpretation , theologian Dale Allison also highlights Harrison 's " humanitarian impulse , his regrets about the world 's current state , [ and ] his faint utopian hope for something better " as being evident in the lyrics to " Far East Man " . Allison likens the song to Harrison 's 1971 compositions " Bangla Desh " and " The Day the World Gets ' Round " , and suggests that in the choruses to " Far East Man " , Harrison is stating " his determination to help impoverished and oppressed peoples half a world away " . 
 As reproduced in his autobiography , Harrison 's original lyrics for the final verse included lines that he would change before recording his version of the song . The rewritten verse allows for an outlook that Allison describes as " a <unk> hope ... that people might be able to make the world a truly better place " : 
 Looks like right here on earth 
 God , it 's hellish at times 
 But I feel that a heaven 's in sight ... 
 According to his recollection in I , Me , Mine , Harrison wrote much of the lyrics to " Far East Man " while driving to The Wick to record the song . The title came about because the Faces had just returned from a tour of the Far East and Wood was wearing a T @-@ shirt that carried the slogan Far East Man , a play on the phrase " far out , man " . 
 = = Ronnie Wood 's version = = 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 In Ronnie , his 2007 autobiography , Wood writes that The Wick was " a hive of recording activity as well as a thriving debauchery camp " during the year @-@ long creation of his first solo release , I 've Got My Own Album to Do ( 1974 ) . The album title originated from contributors such as Harrison and Mick Jagger " nagging me to let them go home " and work on their own projects . Wood assisted Jagger in writing and recording the Rolling Stones ' 1974 single " It 's Only Rock ' n Roll " during this period , and he similarly reciprocated Harrison , by playing on the former Beatle 's Christmas single , " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " . 
 The session for " Far East Man " took place at Wood 's home studio in June 1974 , during the same month that Boyd left Harrison and joined Clapton on tour in America . Harrison biographers note the significance of this session , since it introduced him to the rhythm section he subsequently used on his North American tour with Shankar – bassist Willie Weeks and drummer Andy Newmark . According to the musician credits , Weeks did not play on this particular song , however . 
 The recording was produced by Wood and Gary Kellgren , the co @-@ owner of New York 's Record Plant studios , and whose work in taping the Concert for Bangladesh shows at Madison Square Garden had impressed Harrison . Rodriguez describes the musical arrangement on the song as " a slow soul groove " and views Wood 's version as " more <unk> " than Harrison 's later reading . The other musicians on the track were Rolling Stones lead guitarist Mick Taylor , playing bass ; Newmark ; Wood 's fellow Face Ian MacLagan , on electric piano ; and Jean Roussel , Cat Stevens ' regular keyboard player , on organ . 
 Harrison 's slide guitar and harmony vocals are prominent in the mix , yet he received a credit only for his songwriting contribution on early editions of the album . While discussing the track in 2012 on Sky Arts HD 's The Ronnie Wood Show , Wood recalled Harrison teaching him the vocal parts for " eighteen hours " , but Harrison 's own singing contribution had to be kept to a minimum in order to satisfy the requirements of " his publishers " . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Warner Bros. Records released I 've Got My Own Album to Do in September 1974 , with " Far East Man " appearing as the second track , following Wood 's collaboration with Jagger , " I Can Feel the Fire " . With additional contributions from Keith Richards and Faces vocalist Rod Stewart , the album was well received critically . 
 Like Harrison , Wood continued to incorporate soul music in his solo recordings , working with former Valentino Bobby Womack on his follow @-@ up album , Now Look ( 1975 ) . By the time of that album 's release , Wood had replaced Taylor in the Rolling Stones , leading to Stewart announcing the break @-@ up of the Faces in December 1975 . Although Wood and Harrison never officially co @-@ wrote another song after " Far East Man " , their friendship continued , with Wood announcing in 1996 that he and Harrison were recording together . 
 The song appears on Wood 's career @-@ spanning compilation Anthology : The Essential <unk> , released in 2006 . In their respective reviews for the websites AllMusic and musicOMH , Thom Jurek and Barnaby Smith each identify " Far East Man " as a highlight of the two @-@ disc set . 
 = = George Harrison 's version = = 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 Harrison taped the basic track for his version of " Far East Man " at Friar Park over August and September 1974 , during sessions for his album Dark Horse . Having " brushed up the lyrics a bit " , as he puts it in I , Me , Mine , Harrison retained Newmark and Weeks from the sessions with Wood , and brought in keyboard player Billy Preston and saxophonist and arranger Tom Scott , both of whom would also be part of his all @-@ American tour band . Leng describes " Far East Man " as " the first <unk> to tap into 1970s soul " and notes the " supreme soul credentials " of Newmark , as the former drummer with Sly and the Family Stone , and Weeks , who had supplied the highly regarded basslines on Donny Hathaway Live ( 1972 ) . Newmark later recalled of his and Weeks ' first sessions for Harrison : " We were completely thrilled to be asked to play on his record … It was the most exciting thing to happen to me . I had to keep pinching myself to remember it was real . " 
 At the start of the song , Harrison delivers a spoken dedication to Frank Sinatra , adding : " we love you , Frank , and we hope you include this one at Caesars Palace on your next live album . " This message referred to Sinatra 's adoption of the Harrison composition " Something " , which he lauded as " the greatest love song of the past fifty years " . On " Far East Man " , Inglis finds Scott 's multiple horn parts " reminiscent of the soul stylings " of King Curtis , Junior Walker and the Funk Brothers . Unlike on the Wood recording , Harrison 's slide guitar appears only midway through the Dark Horse version ( overdubbed onto his rhythm guitar part ) , in a solo that author Elliot Huntley describes as " wonderfully complement [ ed ] " by Scott 's " bachelor @-@ pad saxophones " . 
 Harrison 's commitment to his other projects – such as starting up a new record label , Dark Horse Records , and organising Shankar 's European revue , the Music Festival from India – affected progress on the album . According to authors Chip Madinger and Mark Easter , Harrison had to overdub much of his vocals while in Los Angeles for tour rehearsals , in October . Combined with his having to sing during the rehearsals , the overexertion damaged Harrison 's voice , compromising his performance on songs such as " Far East Man " . His throat condition worsened during the subsequent tour , earning Harrison highly unfavourable concert reviews from a number of critics , who objected also to the substantial stage @-@ time afforded Shankar 's ensemble . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Dark Horse was released on Apple Records on 9 December 1974 in the United States , towards the end of the Harrison – Shankar tour . Harrison sequenced " Far East Man " as the penultimate track , between " Dark Horse " , the album 's lead single in the US , and the pop @-@ bhajan " It Is ' He ' ( Jai Sri Krishna ) " . 
 Given Harrison 's marital problems , and the generally unfavourable reception given to his tour and album , author Gary Tillery describes his new relationship with Olivia Arias as " [ t ] he one bright spot in the problematic year " . Having met Arias in Los Angeles in October , Harrison used a photo of her on the face label for side two of the Dark Horse LP . Writing in 1981 , NME critic Bob Woffinden viewed the inclusion of this image , combined with the more upbeat message of side @-@ two songs such as " Ding Dong " and " Far East Man " , as Harrison ushering in Arias , his future wife , and farewelling Boyd . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Along with Jim Miller 's opinions in Rolling Stone magazine , Woffinden 's 1974 album review for the NME was one of the most scathing critiques . Woffinden bemoaned how on Dark Horse , " the radiant light of George 's spirituality is planted firmly under a bushel and darkness is not confined to equine matters " . He then wrote of the song : " [ ' Far East Man ' ] seems to have most chance of independent survival , especially as the song turned up in quite pleasant shape on Wood 's I 've Got My Own Album To Do , but here again the production effectively smothers it , and Harrison 's drab vocals complete the assassination . " By contrast , Michael Gross of Circus Raves magazine viewed the album as the equal of Harrison 's acclaimed All Things Must Pass ( 1970 ) and praised the song and its arrangement , writing : " Scott again excels on ' Far East Man ' , with a horn solo that would vindicate any context in which it was put . " In a similarly positive assessment for Melody Maker , Brian Harrigan opined that Dark Horse " should certainly do a tremendous amount to salvage George 's battered reputation " but found the extended playout to " Far East Man " overlong – an example , he said , where " you can have just too much of a good thing " . 
 Among more recent commentators , Simon Leng considers " Far East Man " to be among Harrison 's best compositions and " one of its writer 's most beguiling pieces " , while AllMusic 's Richard Ginell describes it as " exquisite " . Leng praises the " especially attractive " middle eight and views the track as " a musical acceptance of life as an unfathomable riddle … a wistful shrug of the shoulders set to music " . Ian Inglis identifies " a lovely melodic passage " in the first line of the choruses , which he regrets " is never fully developed elsewhere " , and compares the song favourably with Marvin Gaye 's 1971 album What 's Going On . In an April 2004 article in Blender magazine , Paul Du Noyer deemed " Far East Man " to be the " standout track " on an album that displayed an " uncharacteristic spell of rock star excess " on Harrison 's part . 
 Reviewing the 2014 reissue of Harrison 's Apple catalogue , for Mojo , Tom Doyle describes the song as " the excellently smooth Steely Dan @-@ ish Far East Man " . Joe Marchese of The Second Disc writes of the " impeccable " musicianship found throughout Dark Horse and adds : " There are many stellar moments , such as ' Far East Man , ' with Scott contributing his trademark jazz @-@ rock saxophone on a deliciously fab slice of ' yacht rock . ' " Blogcritics ' Chaz Lipp similarly finds " a lot of rewarding listening " on Dark Horse , and highlights the track as " a smooth soul collaboration with Ron Wood that , once heard , lodges itself in the brain " . In his review of the 2014 reissues , for Record Collector , Oregano Rathbone cites " Far East Man " as an example of how each of Harrison 's Apple albums post @-@ All Things Must Pass " contains shivery moments of release " . 
 = = Other versions = = 
 Before leaving for Los Angeles in October 1974 , Harrison performed a portion of " Far East Man " during an interview with BBC Radio 's Alan Freeman . Harrison began playing the song , on acoustic guitar , in reply to Freeman asking whether he had felt let down by friends in the past . The interview was broadcast in the UK on <unk> , in December , but delayed until September 1975 in America , where it formed part of Freeman 's syndicated show Rock Around the World . Along with Harrison 's performances of " Dark Horse " , " Awaiting on You All " and " I Don 't Care Anymore " , this recording is available only on bootleg compilations . 
 Following his troubled tour with Shankar , Harrison 's only other tour as a solo artist took place in December 1991 , when he and Clapton performed a series of well @-@ received concerts in Japan . In 2002 , various Japanese musicians recorded the Harrison tribute album Gentle Guitar Dreams , for which Hiroshi Takano contributed a cover version of " Far East Man " . 
 = = = Far East Man live DVD = = = 
 Beginning on 8 December 2001 , less than two weeks after Harrison succumbed to cancer at the age of 58 , Wood played the song during his shows in Dublin and London , in support of his sixth solo album , Not for Beginners . A live version filmed on 11 December at the Shepherds Bush Empire , west London , appeared on the concert DVD Far East Man ( 2002 ) . Among Wood 's band were his son Jessie ( on guitar ) and daughter Leah ( vocals ) , the latter being Wood 's eldest child by his second wife , Jo Karslake . 
 The performance of " Far East Man " includes guest appearances from Andrea Corr and Slash . Wood introduces the song as " brilliant ! " , before saying of Harrison : " And we shall miss that man ... " 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Batman : Arkham City = 
 Batman : Arkham City is a 2011 action @-@ adventure video game developed by Rocksteady Studios and released by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 video game consoles , and Microsoft Windows . Based on the DC Comics superhero Batman , it is the sequel to the 2009 video game Batman : Arkham Asylum and the second installment in the Batman : Arkham series . It was released worldwide for consoles , beginning in North America on October 18 , 2011 , with a Microsoft Windows version following on November 22 . 
 Written by veteran Batman writer Paul Dini with Paul Crocker and Sefton Hill , Arkham City is based on the franchise 's long @-@ running comic book mythos . In the game 's main storyline , Batman is incarcerated in Arkham City , a huge new super @-@ prison enclosing the decaying urban slums of fictional Gotham City . He must uncover the secret behind the sinister scheme , " Protocol 10 " , orchestrated by the facility 's warden , Hugo Strange . The game 's leading characters are predominantly voiced by actors from the DC Animated Universe , with Kevin Conroy and Mark Hamill reprising their roles as Batman and the Joker , respectively . The game is presented from the third @-@ person perspective with a primary focus on Batman 's combat and stealth abilities , detective skills , and gadgets that can be used in both combat and exploration . Arkham City expands Batman 's arsenal of gadgets and combat attacks and offers a more open world structure , allowing the player to complete side missions away from the primary storyline . 
 The game received critical acclaim , particularly for its narrative , character and world designs , soundtrack , and Batman 's combat and navigation abilities . It was tied for the highest @-@ rated video game of 2011 according to review aggregator Metacritic , and was the recipient of several awards including : Game of the Year , Best Action Game , Best Action Adventure Game , Best Adventure Game , and Best Original Score from various media outlets , and it is considered one of the best games ever made . Arkham City was followed by several additional releases : a spin @-@ off mobile game , Batman : Arkham City Lockdown , on December 7 , 2011 ; a Game of the Year edition containing all of the game 's downloadable content on May 29 , 2012 ; and Wii U and OS X versions in November and December 2012 , respectively . A remastered version is in development for PlayStation 4 and Xbox One . A successor , Batman : Arkham Origins , was released in October 2013 , and a narrative sequel , Batman : Arkham Knight , was released in June 2015 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Batman : Arkham City is an open @-@ world action @-@ adventure game that incorporates tactics from stealth games . It is presented from the third @-@ person perspective , showing the playable character on screen and allowing the camera to be freely rotated around it . The game is set within Arkham City , which is open to the player from the beginning of the game , allowing them to travel freely anywhere within its boundaries . The player can move silently throughout the game , using a combination of gadgets and stealth moves to sneak up on enemies and incapacitate them . Batman can use his cape to glide around the city , diving downwards and swooping upwards to extend his flight , and he can use the grapnel gun 's retracting rope to attach to out @-@ of @-@ reach ledges . As Batman , the player is able to use " Detective Vision " , a visual mode that highlights elements of interest on @-@ screen , such as character status , collectables , and clues ; the mode is also used to perform forensic activities such as tracking the source of a sniper rifle round . The player has access to an in @-@ game criminal database which includes forensic puzzles , as well as a network for hacking communication frequencies . 
 Using an improved version of the Freeflow combat system from Arkham Asylum , the player can now counter multiple blows simultaneously , catch hurled projectiles , attack aerially , and administer a succession of consecutive strikes . Many of Batman 's gadgets can now be used in combat . Enemies are armed with varying levels of armor and weapons ; attacks from basic weapons like baseball bats and lead pipes inflict minor damage and can be countered , while guns inflict significant damage . Certain enemies must be disarmed in specific ways before they can be neutralized in combat : enemies with stun batons can only be attacked from behind ; enemies with shields require aerial attacks to disarm ; and enemies wearing body armor must be stunned with rapid successive strikes before they can be harmed . Larger enemies must be tackled with stuns and combo attacks , and can be manipulated to take out their allies . Disputes between gangs allied to rival villains often spark turf wars , which complicate the player 's ability to move about Arkham City . Combat , among other actions , rewards the player with experience points that allow the player to periodically level Batman up and purchase upgrades to his Batsuit , gadgets , and combat and stealth skills . Each category contains approximately 15 different upgrades . For instance , an upgraded grapnel gun can be used to remotely disarm enemies , while a combat upgrade makes it easier to activate special attacks . 
 Some gadgets obtained in Batman : Arkham Asylum are present at the start of Arkham City , while others become available during play . Most of these have improved or new capabilities ; for example , the Cryptographic Sequencer , used for hacking security consoles , can also monitor shortwave radio channels , and the line launcher can now be deployed as a tightrope or alter direction during flight . Other items returning from the first game include these : a remote @-@ controlled batarang ; Explosive Gel that can now be detonated to knock down enemies in combat ; and the grapnel gun , which can now be used while gliding to facilitate transportation . New items in Batman 's arsenal include : smoke bombs that disorient opponents and assist with stealth tactics ; a Remote Electric Charge ( REC ) gun that can stun enemies and temporarily power motors ; Freeze Blast grenades that encase targets in ice and can be thrown into water to create makeshift platforms ; and the Disruptor , which can remotely disable guns and explosive mines . 
 The game has approximately 40 hours of gameplay , with the main campaign lasting 25 hours and side missions lasting 15 hours . The side missions , which can be attempted at any time , feature prominent characters from the Batman universe . One such character , the Riddler , provides 440 optional " Riddler challenges " to solve . Most of these challenges consist of collecting trophies hidden in the city through the use of gadgets to disable traps and barriers . The player can mark Riddler trophies on the in @-@ game map once found if they do not initially have the necessary equipment to complete the puzzle . The player can also reveal the locations of Riddler trophies on the map by identifying the Riddler 's henchmen with " Detective Vision " and interrogating them , which requires the player to save the henchmen for last when engaging in combat with a wave of enemies . There are also environmental challenges which require the player to solve riddles by locating a specific item or location ( which are rewarded with stories relating to the answer ) , and to locate question marks painted around the city , some of which can only be viewed in whole from certain vantage points . After completing a select number of challenges , Batman must rescue a civilian hostage held in one of the Riddler 's death traps . 
 After completing the story mode on " normal " or " hard " difficulties , a " New Game Plus " mode is unlocked , enabling the player to replay the game with all of the gadgets , experience , and abilities that they have attained ; enemies are tougher and the on @-@ screen icon that warns players of imminent attacks is disabled . Arkham City features a series of challenge maps separate from the game 's story mode . The maps focus on the completion of specific goals , such as eliminating successive waves of enemies in combat , subduing patrolling enemies while employing stealth , or traveling to a specific location as efficiently as possible . The methods and variety of abilities used to achieve these goals earn an overall performance score that is ranked online against other players . 
 Catwoman is another playable character available via the Catwoman campaign , which was initially downloadable content ( DLC ) on PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 consoles but was later included with the PC version and Game of the Year editions . Catwoman 's campaign features her own heist @-@ focused storyline that intersects with the main story at specific points in the game . Her combat emphasizes agility and allows for the use of unique weapons such as clawed gauntlets , bolas , and her iconic whip . A portion of the Riddler challenges are specific to Catwoman and can only be completed by her . Batman 's allies Robin and Nightwing are also playable via optional DLC and feature their own combat abilities and gadgets . Both characters are available in the challenge maps ; Robin has his own main story narrative . 
 The PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions of Arkham City include a stereoscopic 3D ( <unk> ) mode for 3D HDTVs and for 2D HDTVs via <unk> 3D glasses , while the PC version supports Nvidia 3D Vision on compatible monitors . It uses TriOviz for Games Technology , which is integrated with Unreal Engine 3 . The Wii U version uses the Wii U 's touch screen controller to let the player manage Batman 's equipment and upgrades , selectively detonate Explosive Gel placements , and view a map of the city . The Wii U version adds a Sonar mode which highlights points of interest nearby , and the Battle Armored Tech Mode ( BAT Mode ) that allows Batman to accrue energy during combat and , when activated , inflict increased damage . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Arkham City features a large ensemble cast of characters from the history of Batman ' comics . Returning characters from Arkham Asylum include Batman ( Kevin Conroy ) , the Joker ( Mark Hamill ) — in what Hamill stated would be his final time voicing the character ; ( he subsequently reprised the role in Arkham City 's successor Batman : Arkham Knight ) — Warden @-@ turned @-@ Mayor Quincy Sharp ( Tom Kane ) , police Commissioner James Gordon ( David Kaye ) , and reporter Jack Ryder ( James Horan ) . Returning villains include the Riddler ( Wally Wingert ) , Victor Zsasz ( Danny Jacobs ) , Bane ( Fred Tatasciore ) , and Poison Ivy ( Tasia Valenza ) . Joker 's sidekick Harley Quinn also returns , voiced by Tara Strong , who replaces Arleen Sorkin . Batman 's supporting cast introduces Catwoman ( Grey DeLisle ) , Robin ( Troy Baker ) , and Batman 's butler Alfred Pennyworth ( Martin Jarvis ) , who provides radio support alongside the returning Oracle ( Kimberly Brooks ) . Nightwing appears as a playable character outside of the main story via challenge maps . 
 Other characters marking their debut in the series include the manipulative warden of Arkham City , Hugo Strange ( Corey Burton ) , Two @-@ Face ( also voiced by Baker ) , and the Penguin ( Nolan North ) . Stana Katic lends her voice as Talia al Ghul , and Maurice LaMarche voices both Mr. Freeze and Calendar Man . Other characters include the zombie Solomon Grundy ( also voiced by Tatasciore ) , the shapeshifter Clayface ( Rick D. Wasserman ) , the League of Assassins 's leader , Ra 's al Ghul ( Dee Bradley Baker ) , the mind @-@ controlling Mad Hatter ( Peter MacNicol ) , and the assassin Deadshot ( Chris Cox ) , who has infiltrated Arkham City to kill several high @-@ profile character targets . The villain Hush ( also voiced by Conroy ) , the mysterious Azrael ( Khary Payton ) , and reporter Vicki Vale ( also voiced by DeLisle ) also appear . Black Mask ( also voiced by North ) , Killer Croc ( Steven Blum ) , and Freeze 's wife , Nora Fries , make cameo appearances in the game . 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The events of Arkham City are set one year after Batman : Arkham Asylum . Quincy Sharp , the asylum 's erstwhile director , has taken sole credit for halting the Joker 's armed siege , using this distinction to become mayor of Gotham City . Declaring both the asylum and Blackgate Penitentiary no longer suitable to contain the city 's detainees , Sharp 's administration orders both facilities closed and he purchases Gotham 's most notorious slums , converting them into an immense prison enclosure known as Arkham City . This facility is subsequently placed in the care of psychiatrist Hugo Strange — who is secretly manipulating Sharp — and monitored by a rogue private military firm , TYGER Security . Strange permits the inmates to do as they please , so long as they do not attempt to escape . A wary Batman maintains his own vigil over the new project , concerned that the chaotic situation there will get out of hand . Meanwhile , the Joker is suffering from a potentially fatal disease caused by his previous consumption of the Titan formula , an unstable steroid serum which turns men into maddened monsters . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 At a press conference held by Bruce Wayne to declare his opposition to Arkham City , TYGER mercenaries arrest and imprison him in Arkham City . Hugo Strange discloses his knowledge of Wayne 's dual identity as Batman before releasing him into the prison 's criminal populace . While Strange prepares to commence " Protocol 10 " , Wayne obtains his equipment via airdrop from Alfred Pennyworth , allowing him to become Batman . He first saves Catwoman from being executed by Two @-@ Face , who hopes to gain respect by murdering her . After Joker attempts to assassinate Catwoman , Batman tracks him to his hideout in the Sionis <unk> , believing Joker may know the truth behind Protocol 10 . 
 There , Batman learns that the unstable properties of the Titan formula are mutating in Joker 's blood , gradually killing him . Joker captures Batman and performs a blood transfusion on him , infecting him with the same fatal disease . Joker also reveals that Gotham hospitals have been poisoned with his infected blood . Desperate to save himself and innocent citizens , Batman seeks out Mr. Freeze , who had been developing a cure but has since been kidnapped by the Penguin . 
 Tracking Penguin to the Cyrus Pinkney National History Institute , Batman defeats his forces , his imprisoned monster Solomon Grundy , and ultimately the Penguin himself , before liberating Mr. Freeze . Freeze tells Batman that he has already developed the cure , but its instability renders it useless . Batman deduces that the restorative properties of Ra 's al Ghul 's blood can complete the cure . Batman tracks one of Ra 's al Ghul 's assassins to his underground lair , leading Batman into a confrontation with Ra 's and his daughter Talia , Batman 's former lover . With Ra 's al Ghul 's blood , Freeze is able to develop an antidote , but it is stolen by Harley Quinn before Batman can use it . 
 When he returns to the Joker , Batman finds him restored to health . While the two fight , Strange activates Protocol 10 , which is revealed to be a scheme to wipe out the entire population of Arkham City and destroy the criminal element of Gotham . The TYGER troops begin executing inmates as Strange launches missile strikes on Arkham 's denizens from his base in Wonder Tower . A missile hits the <unk> , burying Batman under rubble . Before Joker can take advantage of the situation , Talia arrives and offers him immortality in exchange for sparing Batman 's life . After escaping with the help of Catwoman , Batman is convinced by Alfred to end Protocol 10 before pursuing Talia and Joker . 
 Batman infiltrates Wonder Tower and disables Protocol 10 . Ra 's al Ghul is revealed to be the true mastermind behind Arkham City and mortally wounds Strange for failing to defeat Batman . With his dying breath , Strange activates " Protocol 11 " , the self @-@ destruction of Wonder Tower . Batman and Ra 's escape , but Ra 's commits suicide rather than risk capture . Joker contacts Batman , threatening to kill Talia unless Batman meets him at the Monarch Theater . Once Batman arrives , Joker demands the cure but is stabbed and apparently killed by Talia while distracted . Talia admits to stealing the cure from Quinn , when she is killed by a second Joker , still stricken with the disease . The healthy Joker that Talia stabbed then reanimates into the shapeshifting Clayface , who is revealed to have been masquerading as a healthy Joker all along at the ailing villain 's request . 
 Batman incapacitates Clayface , but Joker blows up the theater floor , sending Batman plummeting into Ra 's ' lair below . Batman destroys Ra 's ' rejuvenating Lazarus Pit before the Joker can use it , and drinks a portion of the antidote . Batman debates curing his foe but is attacked by Joker before he can act , causing the antidote vial to inadvertently smash . Batman admits that in spite of everything Joker had done , he would have saved him . After Joker finally succumbs to his illness and dies , Batman carries his body out of Arkham City . As Commissioner Gordon asks what happened , Batman places Joker 's body on the hood of a police car and leaves in silence . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 Rocksteady conceived the idea of a sequel before development of Arkham Asylum had concluded , developing ideas for both the story and setting so the games ' narratives could be effectively connected ; a secret room was hidden in the asylum warden 's office in Arkham Asylum containing hints of how the sequel would progress , including blueprints for the Arkham City prison ; the blueprints are quite similar to its final layout in Arkham City . The original idea was to take the game out of the asylum setting and onto the streets of Gotham City while retaining the level of design detail put into the asylum . To that end they wanted to include locations from the Batman mythos that were notable and meaningful to the character , instead of a series of generic streets ; Rocksteady was initially unsure how technical considerations would limit the scope of this idea . 
 Serious development of the game 's story and concept started in February 2009 , as teams were moved from Arkham Asylum to Arkham City 's development as they completed the work on that game . By the time they had programmed Batman to dive and glide between buildings of the asylum , the adaption of the gameplay to the city was considered natural . Rocksteady decided to not include the Batmobile , because it would be unable to travel on the city 's broken terrain . Batman 's gliding provided a sufficient means of transportation , and it was considered that putting Batman in any vehicle would make it a completely different game . Sefton Hill , Arkham City 's director from Rocksteady Studios , stated that a key goal for the game was to deliver the " ' Batman in Gotham ' feeling . " The sequel was described by Conroy as " really , really dark " . While relating the game 's dark nature to the animated movie Batman Beyond : Return of the Joker , Conroy also said , " It involves a lot of the villains and it goes to that area – it 's that dark . " 
 = = = Design = = = 
 As part of the " Batman in Gotham " design philosophy , Batman 's arsenal of moves and actions were expanded . Although the team developed several ideas for new moves , gadgets and abilities , they only went forward with those that they felt would be authentic to Batman . They also chose to have Batman start the game with access to the gadgets unlocked in Arkham Asylum , to convey the impression that Batman is fully prepared for the inevitability of things going wrong in Arkham City . The studio reviewed the play and combat systems used in Arkham Asylum , and built the new moves as natural extensions of the existing system as a means to " add even more depth and gameplay instead of changing them fundamentally " . The number of animations were doubled to reflect the larger arsenal of moves at the player 's disposal . The X @-@ ray @-@ like " Detective Vision " mode used to highlight certain objects in @-@ game was redeveloped for Arkham City because it was considered to be too useful in Arkham Asylum , resulting in some players using it throughout almost the entire game ; the visual effect also obscured the game 's design aesthetic . One idea was to introduce a time limit on its use , but it was considered that Batman " wouldn 't make a gadget like that " . Instead , the mode was designed to be difficult to use in certain situations such as obscuring navigational information , and combat where enemy strikes will blur the screen when " Detective Vision " is active . Rocksteady art director David Hego described the new " Detective Vision " as an " augmented reality mode " . 
 Another way the developers wished to enhance the player 's Batman experience was through the larger game world . Arkham City has a virtual footprint five times larger than that of Arkham Asylum , and the navigational aspects were improved to offer the player " the freedom and exhilaration of gliding down alleyways and soaring above the skyline " . Though the concepts were compared to an open world game , Hill notes that such freeform nature would not be appropriate for a Batman game because it would inhibit the atmosphere they wanted to create , and that Arkham City was designed to challenge the player to think like Batman to survive . To counterbalance the larger game world , the developers also sought to include more challenges and side missions while keeping the player alert as to the primary mission , such that the players constantly are aware of " extreme pressure of the challenges that they face " . The Riddler Trophies were designed towards the end of the game 's development and were incorporated into every area of the map without <unk> it , resulting in 440 trophies . Rocksteady aimed to make the player think creatively when collecting trophies by requiring the use of gadgets to solve puzzles , rather than placing the trophies in obscure areas of the map as mere collection items . 
 With the open game world , Rocksteady included more villains to create challenges for Batman . Hugo Strange was selected as a primary antagonist , as his power and controlling manner help maintain the lockdown on Arkham City once Batman enters . Strange is aware of Batman 's true identity , making Batman " vulnerable and exposed in a way that he has never been before " , according to Hill . He noted that Strange is a character new to many players but that his backstory and character are detailed throughout the game . Catwoman was also included based on her long history with Batman , though she was given her own agenda running parallel to the events within Arkham City . Catwoman 's missions initially ended with her coming to Batman 's aide , but late in development , the developers decided to give the player an alternate choice , allowing them to have the morally grey Catwoman leave the city with her loot ; the addition was implemented in two days . Batman 's sidekick Robin also appears , featuring a shaved head and contemporary costume design that were intended to move away from his traditional " Boy Wonder " image . Senior concept artist Kan <unk> explained : " Our vision of Robin is the one of a troubled young individual that is calm and introverted at times , but very dangerous and aggressive if provoked . The shaved head is inspired by cage fighters , because we thought that Robin might be doing that in his spare time to keep him on his toes . Still , we kept all the classic trademarks of Robin 's appearance , such as the red and yellow colors of his outfit , the cape and the mask . " Rocksteady originally did not plan to include Robin in the main story but later decided to as an authentic means of delivering new gadgets to Batman , as well as to introduce their version of the character and his relationship with Batman . 
 Rocksteady intended for Batman , Catwoman , and Robin to offer three different playing experiences . Other villains from Batman 's comic history were selected to show that the prison was a melting pot of people from Gotham . The developers believed that providing a small part of each villain 's story rather than focusing on a select few allowed the player to meet many more characters and effectively conveyed the feeling of being in a <unk> filled with supervillains . Rocksteady decided early on that the Joker would die in the story , and developed the idea of him poisoning Batman with the same affliction , in order to show how the two diametrically opposed characters would interact in pursuit of a shared goal . Warner Bros. and Dini did not oppose killing off the character as long as it was not done for shock value , and as long as they made it clear that Batman was not at fault , since he would not intentionally kill someone . 
 The developers had considered adding a multiplayer element to the game , but ultimately decided against it . According to Hill , " If we use all of the energy that is required to create multiplayer and instead focus this on the single player , would that deliver a better overall game ? " , and decided in the affirmative . 
 Variety was added to the city itself , as certain areas were designed around the villains that control that particular territory . Dax Ginn , marketing game manager at Rocksteady Games , said , " If you move into Joker 's territory , you get a very Joker @-@ ized experience , and all the artwork on the buildings – whether that 's graffiti , signage , or whatever it might be – gives you a dense kind of Joker experience . So our art team has really put a lot of effort in making that sort of transition between one turf zone to another – really helping the player feel like they 're making a physical transition into another emotional space . " The architecture was imbued with 19th century Art Nouveau design , such as Strange 's Wonder Tower which was inspired by the Eiffel Tower , while character designs employed a modern <unk> style . To keep the environments interesting , base color schemes such as Mr Freeze 's ice @-@ themed area , Joker 's fire @-@ themed steel mill , and Poison Ivy 's jungle @-@ themed area were populated with contrasting elements : for example , the steel mill uses large , white clown faces to contrast the oranges and reds used throughout . To develop the expanded environment of Arkham City and build a " natural urban environment " for Batman , Rocksteady expanded its workforce from 75 to over 100 people . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The game 's release was accompanied by two albums of music released by WaterTower Music . Batman : Arkham City – Original Video Game Score was released on October 18 , 2011 , and features 19 tracks written for the game by Arkham Asylum composers Nick Arundel and Ron Fish . Batman : Arkham City – The Album was released on October 4 , 2011 , via CD and digital download . The album contains 11 original songs inspired by the game from mainstream artists including Daughtry , Panic ! at the Disco , and Coheed and Cambria . An extra song was made available via the Collector 's edition of the album , and the Deluxe edition included a portion of Arundel 's original score . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 Arkham City 's marketing campaign was designed to reach an audience outside of superhero fans and appeal to consumers who are attracted to games like the first @-@ person shooter series Call of Duty . Warner Bros. ' s marketing team decided that Batman 's status as a cultural icon and superhero was unavoidable , so they decided to emphasize other elements of the character that could appeal to fans of first @-@ person shooters and action games . Black @-@ and @-@ white photographs of iconic personalities like inventor Steve Jobs and actor James Dean served as inspiration and a basis for the final marketing campaign used in advertisements and the game 's cover art . The imagery , highlighted with blood and bathed in light was considered to move away from the classic superhero image and refocus on Batman 's humanity . The black and white campaign was featured on 120 magazine covers and was targeted towards approximately 15 million consumers across a variety of social media and Warner Bros. products , in addition to a series of viral marketing videos and stunts involving actors in costume attending press @-@ related events . By April 2012 , three gameplay trailers had gained approximately 6 million views . The viral segment of the campaign involved several audio recordings between characters from the game including Hugo Strange , Quincy Sharp , Riddler , and the Penguin ; each recording could be found by solving a puzzle . The entire campaign spent more than a year in development , producing artwork , videos , DLC , printed advertisements , billboards , and events , and was estimated to have cost at least $ 10 million . 
 A six @-@ issue , limited monthly comic series , also titled Batman : Arkham City was released on May 11 , 2011 . The series bridges the plot between Arkham Asylum and Arkham City . It was written by Paul Dini with art by Carlos D <unk> . Warner Bros. also developed toys based on the characters through Mattel , Hallmark cards , batarang @-@ shaped videogame controllers , and a variety of apparel by Converse , Eckō Complex , C Life , New Era , and Briefly Stated . 
 Toys " R " Us in Times Square New York City , released 500 copies of Batman : Arkham City on Monday , October 17 , one day before the game officially hit shelves . The first 100 customers to pre @-@ order a copy through the store 's " Personal Shopping Department " had a chance to get their game autographed by DC Entertainment co @-@ publisher Jim Lee , Batman voice actor Kevin Conroy , and Arkham City game director Sefton Hill . The remaining 400 copies of Arkham City could be purchased at the event , <unk> . 
 = = Release = = 
 Batman : Arkham City was released in North America on October 18 , 2011 , for Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 , followed on October 19 in Australia and October 21 in Europe . Australian retailers EB Games and Game broke the official release date two days early , selling the game on October 17 . The Windows version had been scheduled for simultaneous release with other versions , but in September 2011 , its release was pushed back to November 18 without explanation . Alongside its PC launch , the game was also released digitally on the <unk> , Origin , and Steam platforms . A Game of the Year edition was released on May 29 , 2012 , in the United States and Canada , and on September 7 , 2012 , in Europe , Australia , and other territories on PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 , except the United Kingdom where its scheduled release was pushed back to November 2 , 2012 . 
 A spin @-@ off game titled Batman : Arkham City Lockdown was developed by NetherRealm Studios for iOS and was released on December 7 , 2011 . Taking place before Arkham City , the game sees players using touchscreen controls to fight enemies one @-@ on @-@ one , including villains such as Two @-@ Face , Solomon Grundy , Joker , and the mercenary Deathstroke . Defeating enemies earns points that can be used to upgrade Batman 's stats or unlock gadgets or costumes . 
 The Wii U version of Arkham City was released on November 18 , 2012 , alongside the console 's launch in North America . Titled Batman : Arkham City Armored Edition , the release contains all of the available content from previous releases — plus a Battle Armored Tech mode , GamePad support , and other additions . The Wii U version was developed by Warner Bros. Studios in Montréal and Burbank . The Game of the Year edition was developed for OS X by Feral Interactive and released on December 13 , 2012 . 
 Batman : Return to Arkham , developed by Virtuos , features remastered versions of Arkham Asylum and Arkham City using the Unreal Engine 4 for the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One . Additionally , both games include all previously released downloadable content , and feature improved graphics , upgraded models and environments , and improvements in the lighting , effects and shaders for both games . Originally intended for release in North America on July 26 , 2016 , and in Europe on July 29 , 2016 , the collection has since been delayed indefinitely in order to give the development team " additional time to deliver a polished Batman Arkham game experience . " 
 = = = Pre @-@ order bonuses = = = 
 Warner Bros. partnered with several retailers and companies globally to provide bonus content as a reward for pre @-@ ordering , including : Best Buy , Amazon.com , GameStop , Game , Gamestation , EB Games , Tesco , and Asda . The content was only made available by pre @-@ ordering the game with a specific retailer or purchasing a product , such as a NOS beverage , to obtain an unlockable code . 
 A variety of alternate outfits for Batman were revealed in August 2011 , including suit designs worn by the character in The Dark Knight Returns , Batman : Earth One , the Bronze Age of Comics , Batman : The Animated Series , and Batman Beyond . The Batman : The Animated Series skin was initially only available to GameStop customers in the U.S. with a Power @-@ Up Rewards Membership . A PlayStation 3 @-@ exclusive Sinestro Corps outfit was revealed in August 2011 that initially was only unlockable via a unique code obtained by purchasing the extended cut edition of the Warner Bros. film , Green Lantern on Blu @-@ ray Disc . 
 Batman 's sidekick Robin ( Tim Drake ) was made available as a playable character for use in challenge maps , with his own set of combat moves and gadgets . Additional Robin skins were also released , including his appearance from Batman : The Animated Series and the Red Robin outfit . The character came with two exclusive challenge maps : " Black Mask Hideout " and " Freight Train Escape " . The " Joker 's Carnival " challenge map was also made available ; it set within the Joker 's Sionis Steel Mill base where the player is faced with multiple waves of opponents . The pre @-@ order content was considered an " early access opportunity " for customers , with Ginn confirming that all of the content would be made available for download after the game 's release date . Pre @-@ orders for Arkham City numbered more than 200 % above those of Arkham Asylum . 
 = = = Retail editions = = = 
 In the United Kingdom , the Robin Edition was announced , available exclusively through retailers Game and Gamestation , containing the game and all of the Robin pre @-@ order content including the playable character , skins and challenge maps . A series of " Steelbook Edition " versions of the game were also made available , featuring the standard game with a metallic case . The Joker @-@ themed Steelbook includes the " Joker 's Carnival " challenge map , the animated film Batman : Under the Red Hood on DVD ( Blu @-@ ray for PlayStation 3 ) , and the Bronze Age Batman skin DLC . Three other villain @-@ themed steelbook cases were also offered , featuring the likenesses of Two @-@ Face and the Penguin . A fourth steelbook featuring Catwoman was released , containing the Batman : Earth One alternative skin for Batman . 
 The Collector 's Edition contains a Batman statue by Kotobukiya , a collectible art book , Batman : Arkham City – The Album from WaterTower Music , the animated film Batman : Gotham Knight , the The Dark Knight Returns skin and the Penguin @-@ themed " Iceberg Lounge " challenge map . In July 2011 , the Microsoft Windows version of the game was revealed to use Games for Windows – Live ( GFWL ) to access online services . Confusion concerning the use of GFWL was raised when a distributor was told by Warner Bros. that the title did not use the Live system , but the use of GFWL was confirmed in late August . 
 On October 25 , 2011 , a Batman themed Xbox 360 console bundle was released , containing the game , a DVD of Batman : Gotham Knight , a DVD of the Green Lantern film , the Green Lantern video game tie @-@ in Rise of the Manhunters , and a 250GB Xbox 360 console . A bundle containing these items and a Kinect controller was also released . 
 A Game of the Year edition was announced on April 23 , 2012 , containing the game and all of the released downloadable content ( DLC ) . A free download of the animated movie Batman : Year One was also included with versions released in the United States and Canada . 
 = = = Downloadable content = = = 
 New purchases of the game for Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 are provided with a unique code that unlocks the " Catwoman " DLC , enabling a series of missions for Catwoman , with unique weapons and moves . Although the missions were presented as part of the main game , on October 13 , 2011 , Warner Bros. announced that it would be restricted to new purchases . Users can also purchase the content separately . It was later announced that pre @-@ owned copies purchased from GameStop would contain the necessary unlock code . A Warner Bros. rep confirmed that playing as Catwoman would not be required to complete the game . The Catwoman DLC also contains two alternate skins for the character : her appearances from The Animated Series and Batman : The Long Halloween . The PC version of the game includes the DLC , requiring no downloads or further installs to access . 
 Additional DLC packs were later released . The " Nightwing " pack , released on November 1 , 2011 , includes Batman 's ally Nightwing as a playable character for the game 's challenge maps , an Animated Series alternative skin for the character , and two more challenge maps : " Wayne Manor " and " Main Hall " . The " Robin " pack was released on November 22 , 2011 , and contains the Robin pre @-@ order content . A " Skins " pack containing all of the alternate Batman pre @-@ order skins was released on December 6 , 2011 . Another pack was announced for release on December 20 , 2011 , containing the pre @-@ order " Iceberg Lounge " and " Joker 's Carnival " challenge maps , and a completely new challenge map : " Batcave " . On December 19 , 2011 , a new Batman skin was released — based on the character 's outfit from Batman Incorporated — to download for free on all platforms . 
 On October 23 , 2011 , an official map app was made available to purchase on the iOS App Store that contains maps for Arkham City , the locations of in @-@ game collectibles , and the solutions to the Riddler 's riddles . 
 " Harley Quinn 's Revenge " , a story @-@ based campaign expansion , was released on May 29 , 2012 , for the PlayStation 3 and the Xbox 360 , with a PC version coming out a week later . The campaign features a new story , new areas , new enemies , and both Batman and Robin as playable characters . The story takes place two weeks after the events of Arkham City . The mega prison has since been evacuated , but Quinn returns and sets up in Joker 's former base . The game follows Robin 's search for Batman , who has gone missing while hunting Quinn ; Batman has been acting differently following the end of the main game story , concerning his allies . On the same day , it was announced that all of the released DLC , including " Harley Quinn 's Revenge " , would be made available as part of the Arkham City Game of the Year edition . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Batman : Arkham City received critical acclaim . Aggregating review websites GameRankings and Metacritic , respectively , gave the PlayStation 3 version of the game 96 % and 96 / 100 , the Xbox 360 version 94 % and 94 / 100 , and the PC version 90 % and 91 / 100 . 
 Game Informer 's Andrew Reiner awarded the game a perfect 10 score , labeling it " the best licensed video game ever made " . Reiner said that the game could be the biggest and " most enjoyable <unk> " of 2011 , and concluded that the game surpassed every standard set by Batman : Arkham Asylum " in every way and stands tall as one of Batman 's greatest moments . " Joystiq 's Griffin McElroy praised the attention to detail , and mechanical excellence of the game environment , crediting Rocksteady for " breathing life into a staggeringly beautiful world ; one which hums not only with opportunity , but ambition " . McElroy criticized the game narrative as a series of excuses to encounter villains that were " one @-@ dimensional punching [ bags ] " , and that the character dialogue was clichéd . McElroy was also critical of the Riddler challenges , stating that they were " frustrating " when the player lacks the necessary items to complete them . 
 Eurogamer 's Christian Donlan considered that the game lacked the same " surprise " as its predecessor , but praised the overall improvement of bosses , animations and the scope of activities available . Donlan said that the game environment was intricate and very detailed , and the abilities provided for its traversal made it " hard not to feel like the world 's greatest detective , on patrol " . IGN 's Greg Miller said " the voice acting , the challenges , the amazing opening , the unbelievable ending and the feeling of being the Dark Knight — these are the things that standout " . Miller said that the Catwoman missions were a fun change of pace from the main gameplay , and that he " adored " the option to replay the game with unlocked abilities and more difficult enemies . 
 The Daily Telegraph 's Tom Hoggins praised the game 's sense of progress in discovering and mastering the character abilities , and the " show @-@ stopping brutality " of the improved combat system . Hoggins highlighted the Catwoman campaign as a " delight " and fitting lithe contrast to Batman 's strength , but lamented the campaign 's short length . The Guardian 's Nick Cowen labeled it the best Batman game of all time , praising the variety of side missions and content , the large cast of iconic characters , and the satisfying challenge of the Riddler missions . The Australian Official PlayStation Magazine awarded a perfect score of 10 stating that the game " is not only the best superhero game ever made , it 's one of the best games ever made ... it brings the Caped Crusader 's world to life better than any comic , movie or television show before it " . <unk> ( Germany ) awarded a score of 92 % , calling it " the best superhero game ever made " . GamesMaster awarded a score of 97 % , saying it is " the gold standard by which all future videogames should be judged " . 
 Batman : Arkham City Armored Edition for Wii U received a mixed reception . GameRankings provided a score of 85 % , and Metacritic provided a score of 85 / 100 . Eurogamer 's Richard Leadbetter was critical of technical performance including issues with visual quality and inconsistent framerate . EGM 's Ray Carsillo said that the optional <unk> system made certain battles too easy . Carsillo also said it was the " clearly inferior version " of the game due to glitches and " tacked on gimmicks " . Nintendo World Report 's Patrick Barnett wrote that certain uses of the Wii U controller made it " the best way to experience Arkham City " , but that some new features were a " nuisance " . Barnett added that it was " on par , if not better , visually " , than its counterparts . Joystiq 's JC Fletcher opined that the persistent map screen and touch screen interface were appreciated , and complimented the use of augmented reality to explore crime scenes . Game Revolution 's Blake Peterson praised the real @-@ time management of information , upgrades and equipment that he considered made Batman more vulnerable , although Barnett included this as a point of criticism . 
 For the " Harley Quinn 's Revenge " DLC , IGN 's Greg Miller scored the content 9 out of 10 and gave it an Editor 's Choice designation . Miller said that it " is what downloadable content should be " , but criticized the lack of variety in the missions and the lack of conclusion to some plot threads . Eurogamer 's Christian Donlan gave the DLC a score of 7 out of 10 , and said that Harley Quinn worked as well as the Joker as a narrative focus . Donlan said that Robin was " enormous fun to play " , but criticized the DLC for not offering anything not present in the main game . Kotaku 's Stephen Totilo was critical of the DLC , saying that it diminished his desire to replay the main game and describing it as " delicious a dessert as a poison @-@ filled Joker pie to the face " . Totilo said it presented an emotionless , inconclusive journey , composed of unused material from the main game . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Worldwide , the game sold two million units in its first week of approximately 4 @.@ 6 million shipped units , compared to Arkham Asylum which sold 4 @.@ 3 million units in its entire release . This made Arkham City one of the fastest selling games ever . On February 8 , 2012 , it was announced that over six million units of the game had been shipped since release . 
 During the first week of sales in the United Kingdom , Batman : Arkham City became the number one selling game on all available formats , topping the all @-@ format , PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 charts , replacing FIFA 12 . It became the fourth biggest launch of 2011 after FIFA 12 , Gears of War 3 and L.A. Noire , and Warner Bros. biggest UK game launch ever , doubling the first week sales of Arkham Asylum . It was the tenth @-@ best @-@ selling game of 2011 with approximately ten weeks in release , and the 34th @-@ best @-@ selling game of 2012 . 
 According to NPD Group , Batman : Arkham City was the second @-@ best @-@ selling game in the United States for October 2011 , selling 1 @.@ 5 million copies across available formats , the tenth @-@ best @-@ selling in November , and the seventh @-@ best @-@ selling game overall in 2011 . Game @-@ rental service GameFly announced that it was the most requested game of 2011 , beating out Call of Duty : Modern Warfare 3 . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Batman : Arkham City won multiple awards at the 2011 Spike Video Game Awards including : Character of the Year ( Joker ) , Best Xbox 360 Game , Best Action Adventure Game , and Best Adapted Video Game ; and received nominations for : Best Original Score , Best Graphics , Best Performance by a Human Female ( Tara Strong ) , Best Performance by a Human Male ( Mark Hamill ) , Trailer of the Year ( Hugo Strange Reveal Trailer ) , Studio of the Year ( Rocksteady ) , and Game of the Year . As part of the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences ( AIAS ) 2011 awards , the game was named Adventure Game of the Year , and received nominations for : Outstanding Achievement in Animation ; Outstanding Achievement in Art Direction ; Outstanding Achievement in Game Play Engineering ; Outstanding Achievement in Game Direction ; and Game of the Year . The 2012 British Academy of Film and Television ( BAFTA ) awards saw the game win two awards for Performer ( Mark Hamill ) and Action game , and receive nominations for : Artistic Achievement ; Audio Achievement ; Best Game ; Design ; Original Music ; Story ; and the publicly voted GAME Award of 2011 . Paul Crocker , Paul Dini , and Sefton Hill were nominated for the Video Game Writing award by the Writers Guild of America , and Crocker won the Best Videogame Script award from the Writers ' Guild of Great Britain . 
 The Daily Telegraph awarded the game Best Original Score ( Nick Arundel ) and Game of the Year , with a statement that said : " as a video game , it 's a magnificent piece of work , but it also shines as a unique , lovingly @-@ crafted slice of Batman fiction . " The newspaper also nominated the game for : Best Director ( Sefton Hill ) ; Best Acting Performance ( Mark Hamill and Nolan North ) ; and Best Developer ( Rocksteady Studios ) . The game was nominated for Game of the Year and Best Game Design at the Game Developers Choice Awards , and Game Audio Network Guild award 's for Music of the Year , Best Soundtrack Album , Best Audio Mix , and Best Original Vocal – Choral for the track " Main Theme " . The game was named the Best Action / Adventure Game and Best Overall Game of 2011 as part of the 2011 Yahoo ! Games Game of the Year awards . Batman : Arkham City received several honors from <unk> , including Best Xbox 360 Game of the Year , Best PC Game of 2011 , as well as Best Action / Adventure game . It also won the Best Action @-@ Adventure Game award at the 2012 Golden Joystick Awards , and was nominated for Top Gaming Moment for the game 's ending , Best DLC for " Harley Quinn 's Revenge " , and the overall Ultimate Game of the Year . It was nominated for Game of the Decade at the 2012 Spike Video Game Awards . 
 According to Metacritic , the PlayStation 3 version of the game was the highest @-@ rated game of 2011 ; and across all formats , the game was tied with the role @-@ playing game The Elder Scrolls V : Skyrim as the highest @-@ rated game of 2011 . This also tied Arkham City for the sixth @-@ highest @-@ rated game ever . 
 Batman : Arkham City appeared on several lists of the top video games of 2011 , including these : number 1 by E ! Online , and CNET ; number 2 by Gamasutra ; number 3 by Digital Spy , Joystiq , VentureBeat , and Wired ; number 5 by the Associated Press , and Time ; and number 10 by the Daily Mirror . 
 GameSpot labeled it the Best Action / Adventure Game as part of its Best of 2011 series , Game Informer named it their Best Action / Adventure game of 2011 in their February 2012 issue , and highlighted specific points of the game including placing Batman number 1 on their list of the Top Ten Heroes , and the Mr. Freeze boss fight number 4 on their list of Top Ten Video Games Moments . Playstation Official Magazine UK placed Batman : Arkham City as their number 2 Game Of the Year . IGN labeled it the Best PC Action Game of 2011 . 1UP.com placed the games main theme song as number 6 on its " Top 10 Theme Songs of 2011 " . In January 2012 , Eurogamer listed it as the third best game of 2012 . In November 2012 , Time named it one of the 100 greatest video games of all time and said , " It 's hard to imagine a better superhero game than Batman : Arkham City . It 's also hard to imagine a better video game in general . " Also in November , Entertainment Weekly named it one of the ten best games of the past decade ( 2002 – 2012 ) and said , " this is the definitive superhero adventure of the decade . " In 2013 , Game Informer named it the best superhero game of all time , and GamingBolt listed it at number 62 on its list of the 100 Greatest Video Games Ever Made . In 2014 , Empire placed it as number 12 on its list of the 100 Greatest Video Games of All Time , ahead of Arkham Asylum at number 28 , PC Gamer named it the sixty @-@ eighth best PC Game , and IGN named it the twenty @-@ fourth best PC game of the preceding decade , and the sixteenth best game of the contemporary console generation . 
 = = = Technical issues = = = 
 During launch week , issues were found to exist in the code @-@ restricted content . Some customers discovered the code to be missing from their copy , preventing them from obtaining the Catwoman story missions . The problem was reported by customers in Canada , the United States , and the United Kingdom . Warner Bros. issued a statement claiming that the missing codes had affected less than 0 @.@ 5 % of customers . Upon release in the United Kingdom , a technical issue rendered the game unplayable for some players , booting them from the game with an error message that the " downloadable content is corrupt . " Rocksteady European community manager Sarah <unk> claimed that the fault lay with the PlayStation Network and Xbox Live online systems . 
 In early November 2011 , Rocksteady confirmed that it was investigating reports by numerous users that save files for the Xbox 360 version of the game were being erased without prompting , resulting in players losing their progress and being unable to complete the game . On launch , performance issues arose for the PC version when DirectX 11 features were enabled ; the developer acknowledged the inconvenience and recommended running the game with DirectX 9 until a title update was released to address this matter . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Batman : Arkham Origins , the successor to Arkham City , was announced in April 2013 . The game was developed by WB Games Montréal for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 , and Wii U , and was released on October 25 , 2013 . Set several years before the events of Arkham Asylum , Arkham Origins follows a younger and less experienced Batman on Christmas Eve on the streets of Gotham City as he faces off against eight deadly assassins . A separate title , Batman : Arkham Origins Blackgate , was developed for Nintendo 3DS and PlayStation Vita by Armature Studios , and was released on the same day . Dini stated that he would not be involved in writing a sequel . He had not been included in writing for any of Arkham City 's DLC , including the story @-@ based " Harley Quinn 's Revenge " DLC , and said that Warner Bros. and Rocksteady suggested that he take work elsewhere if offered . 
 Batman : Arkham Knight , the successor to Arkham Origins , was announced in March 2014 . Developed by Rocksteady for PlayStation 4 , Xbox One and Windows , the game was released on June 23 , 2015 . Arkham Knight is set one year after the events of Arkham City and follows Batman as he confronts an assault on Gotham City by the Scarecrow , and his ally , the Arkham Knight . 
 = Cheadle Hulme railway station = 
 Cheadle Hulme railway station is an open triangular station in Cheadle Hulme , Greater Manchester , England . It is on the West Coast Main Line and is operated by Northern . 
 Cheadle Hulme 's first railway station opened in 1842 , when the Manchester and Birmingham Railway to Crewe was completed . With the extension of the line to Macclesfield , and later Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent , a new station opened in 1845 which has served the area since . The railway transformed it from a collection of small hamlets into a suburb of over 29 @,@ 000 people . 
 2011 saw the construction of pedestrian bridges linking all four platforms and lifts enabling disabled access . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In 1833 Parliament approved the Grand Junction Railway , a railway line to connect Manchester and Birmingham . It opened in 1837 , after proposals had been made for more direct routes in 1830 and 1835 . The earlier schemes attracted little interest , but two proposals were put forward in late 1835 . The two companies , based in Manchester and Birmingham , had to negotiate with each other to develop the proposals , and they were altered somewhat over the next two years . In 1837 Parliament approved the final plans for lines to Crewe and Stoke . The companies merged to become the Manchester and Birmingham Railway company , and the first part of the line opened in June 1840 . It originally ran from a temporary station at Travis Street in Manchester , to a station in Heaton Norris just north of Stockport . A large viaduct was built over the River Mersey , and opened to trains on 10 May 1842 . It allowed services to be extended to Sandbach ; in the following August they reached Crewe . Also at this time , a new station opened to serve as the line 's northern terminus ; it later became Manchester Piccadilly . Edgeley railway station opened in February 1843 in response to complaints that the Heaton Norris station was " too inconvenient " , and it soon became Stockport 's busiest station . Three years later in 1846 the Manchester and Birmingham Railway company merged with two other companies to become the London and North Western Railway . 
 = = = Cheadle station = = = 
 The original Cheadle Hulme railway station on the Crewe line , about 0 @.@ 3 miles ( 0 @.@ 5 km ) south @-@ west of the current structure , was known simply as " Cheadle " . It was in use from May 1842 , following the opening of the viaduct . The station building , opposite the Hesketh Tavern public house , is now a private residence . It included a structure from which tickets were sold , and in the window of which a candle was lit to act as a signal during the hours of darkness . This structure , however , no longer exists . 
 When plans were made for a line to Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent , it was originally intended for a branch to be built from Stockport to Macclesfield . Instead , the junction was built south at Cheadle Hulme . The line was constructed over four years : it opened for goods traffic as far as Poynton in June 1845 , and on 24 November it reached Macclesfield and was opened to the public . In June 1846 Parliament authorised the completion of the line to Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent . By June 1849 the section between Congleton and Macclesfield was completed and the line was finished . 
 = = = New station = = = 
 After the Stoke line opened , the station was rebuilt north @-@ east at the junction so it could serve both lines . The new station opened on 9 June 1845 ; at first , southbound services ran to Crewe and Poynton . By November the line had been extended to Macclesfield , and by 1849 , when the original station closed , it had reached Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent . The new station had four platforms , and was served by trains running between Manchester and Crewe or Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent . It was renamed Cheadle Hulme in 1866 , to avoid confusion with Cheadle <unk> railway station which opened the same year . 
 Before the arrival of the railway , Cheadle Hulme was a rural and agricultural cluster of hamlets . The railway brought a huge influx of people to the area , and provided opportunities for residents to work in places such as Manchester . Cheadle Hulme gradually grew to become a large suburb of over 29 @,@ 000 people thanks to the railway . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 A special train - known as the " Lollipop Express " - carrying 234 school children from <unk> , Stafford to York for a day trip derailed at the station on 28 May 1964 . Three people , including two children , were killed and 27 were injured . The bridge , which carried the line between Macclesfield and Stoke , was in the process of being reconstructed . Passing trains were restricted to a temporary speed limit of 10 miles per hour ( 16 @.@ 1 km / h ) . A hearing determined that the train 's excessive speed had caused the derailment because the train driver was not aware of the speed restriction . 
 In July 1969 , there was another derailment near Cheadle Hulme involving a freight diesel locomotive . It injured no one but blocked services to Crewe and Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent for several hours . 
 = = = Alterations = = = 
 The original station , as it remains in 2009 , was sited above road level . The station office was located on the platform " island " that forms platforms 2 and 3 , which were accessed by a flight of stairs where the ticket office is now . Passengers accessed the other two platforms by a footbridge , which was removed after the lines were electrified . Cheadle Hulme was also used as a goods depot until 31 October 1964 , when goods trains were withdrawn . The goods yard is now a car park . 
 The lines to Crewe and Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent were electrified in 1960 and 1967 respectively . In 1963 , due to the growing amount of traffic travelling down Station Road , it was decided that the parts of the road that pass under the bridges should be widened , as they were becoming a bottleneck . The bridge carrying the line to Stoke was upgraded first . The road under it was more than doubled in width , and the bridge height was increased by 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) allowing double @-@ decker buses to pass underneath . 
 Work on the second bridge commenced on 8 June 1965 , increasing the height and width in accordance with Ministry of Transport requirements . Around this time , the station itself was upgraded : the platforms were demolished and replaced , and new waiting shelters were erected . A new booking office , facing Station Road and approached by a flight of stairs , was built alongside a new booking lobby , toilets and staff accommodation . New entrances to the platforms were built , and the entire station was installed with electric lighting . Station Road was significantly widened and rerouted slightly in 1967 in a further attempt to accommodate increasing traffic . 
 Following the privatisation of British Rail , the station operation was taken over by Railtrack , and later First North Western until 2004 when it was taken over by Northern . In 1996 Railtrack launched a £ 1 billion programme to restore and renovate every station it operated . Cheadle Hulme had £ 1 @.@ 2 million spent on repairs to its platforms , buildings and waiting shelters , and new lighting installed throughout the station . Stephen Day , the Member of Parliament ( MP ) for Cheadle Hulme , opened the updated station in March 1998 . The junction itself was revamped in 2000 and the signal box was removed , having been superseded by a central signalling point at Stockport station . In 2011 , major work was carried out after years of campaigns , with the construction of pedestrian bridges connecting all four platforms , and lifts enabling disabled access to the platforms . 
 = = Services = = 
 The station 's four platforms are all accessed via stairs – access to platform 1 is next to Pimlott 's butchers , access to platforms 2 and 3 is through the ticket office , and access to platform 4 is near the Platform 5 public house . 
 Northern provides passenger services . Three trains per hour run northeastwards to Manchester Piccadilly . In the other direction , trains run hourly on the Stoke line ( serving all stations to Kidsgrove , then Stoke ) . On the Crewe line , one train per hour runs to Alderley Edge serving all stations , and one train per hour serves the same stations and continues to Crewe . 
 = Tropical Storm Hanna ( 2002 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Hanna was a moderately strong tropical storm that affected the Gulf Coast and Southeastern regions of the United States . The tenth tropical cyclone and ninth named storm of the 2002 Atlantic hurricane season , Hanna formed through the complex interaction of a surface trough , a tropical wave , and an upper @-@ level low pressure system , a disturbance in the upper atmosphere . Designated a tropical depression at 0000 UTC on September 12 , the storm remained disorganized throughout its duration , though it attained tropical storm status and a peak intensity of 1 @,@ 001 mbar ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) , with winds of 60 miles per hour ( 100 km / h ) . Hanna crossed extreme southeastern Louisiana , and made a second landfall along the Alabama – Mississippi border . 
 Because most of the associated convective activity was east of the center of circulation , Louisiana and Mississippi received minimal damage . However , on Dauphin Island , Alabama , the storm caused coastal flooding which closed roads and forced the evacuation of residents . Florida received high wind gusts , heavy rainfall , and strong surf that resulted in the deaths of three swimmers . 20 @,@ 000 homes in the state lost electricity . The heavy rainfall progressed into Georgia , where significant flooding occurred . Crop damage was extensive , and about 335 structures were damaged by the flooding . The storm caused a total of about $ 20 million ( 2002 USD ; $ 23 @.@ 96 million 2008 USD ) in damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A broad surface trough extended from the western Atlantic Ocean into the Gulf of Mexico in early September 2002 . At the same time , a westward @-@ moving tropical wave entered the gulf on September 10 and spawned a weak low along the trough , with little associated thunderstorm activity . On September 11 , an upper @-@ level low over the United States moved into the Gulf and became cut off from the flow , allowing atmospheric convection to develop to the east of the tropical wave . The surface low organized , and convection formed closer to the center of the low . At 0000 UTC on September 12 , a Hurricane Hunters aircraft was able to find a well @-@ defined center of circulation ; the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) thus designated it a tropical depression while it was about 280 miles ( 450 km ) south of Pensacola , Florida . 
 After being designated , the cyclone became disorganized , and contained little deep and persistent convection ; with dry air infringing on the western edge of the storm , substantial intensification was deemed unlikely . Despite being sheared , the cyclone neared tropical storm status later that day , though it remained a depression due to a partially non @-@ tropical appearance . Initially , the depression meandered towards the northeast due to weak steering currents , and it intensified into a tropical storm at 0600 UTC . As such , it was named Hanna by the National Hurricane Center . Over the next 24 hours , the low @-@ level center rotated around the mid- and upper @-@ level centers , and the entire tropical storm turned southwestward by late September 12 . After a jog to the northwest , the low @-@ level center became separated from the convection . Meandering , the storm started to turn northward under the steering currents of a southwesterly flow associated with an approaching mid @-@ level trough . Hanna then strengthened sharply to reach to its peak intensity of 60 miles per hour ( 100 km / h ) at 0000 UTC on September 14 . 
 Convection shifted towards the eastern semicircle of the circulation , while the still @-@ exposed center became malformed and elongated . On September 14 , the poorly organized cyclone crossed southeastern Louisiana , turned towards the north @-@ northeast and made a second landfall close to the Alabama – Mississippi border at 1500 UTC that day , still at its peak strength . The storm dissipated rapidly as it proceeded inland , and the remnant low pressure area moved into Georgia and South Carolina . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Shortly after the formation of the storm , the National Hurricane Center issued a tropical storm watch for the coastal area between Pascagoula , Mississippi and the Suwanee River in Florida . A tropical storm warning for the region between Grand Isle , Louisiana and Apalachicola , Florida replaced the watch , though it was discontinued east of Apalachicola . All tropical cyclone warnings and watches were discontinued by 1800 UTC on September 14 , as there was no longer a need for the advisories . After the landfall , officials issued flood watches for inland parts of Mississippi and Alabama as well as for western portions of Georgia and the Carolinas . On Dauphin Island in Alabama , some residents boarded up windows and filled sandbags provided by local fire departments to prepare for Hanna . The Red Cross opened 10 shelters throughout the Gulf Coast region . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The total damage caused by Tropical Storm Hanna amounted to about $ 20 million — equivalent to $ 23 million in 2008 USD . 
 = = = U.S. Gulf Coast = = = 
 In Louisiana , damage was light , as the majority of Hanna 's convective activity was to the east . Rainfall was mostly less than 1 inches ( 25 mm ) , and little rise in tide was reported . Little or no damage occurred in neighboring Mississippi , where similar effects were reported . 
 Damage was greater in Alabama , where rain reached 7 @.@ 55 inches ( 192 mm ) at Coden and 5 @.@ 75 inches ( 146 mm ) at Belle Fontaine . Sustained winds of 40 miles per hour ( 64 km / h ) were reported at Dauphin Island , with gusts up to 51 mph ( 82 km / h ) . The lowest barometric pressure was also at Dauphin Island ; it reportedly fell to 1005 mb . Storm tides of 3 @.@ 7 feet ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) caused minor coastal flooding and beach erosion in some areas , including along the causeway that crosses the Mobile Bay . One tornado , an F0 on the Fujita Scale , touched down in south Mobile County , knocking down trees . Some residents were left without electric power , and there was flooding on both ends of Dauphin Island , leading to road closures . The storm forced the evacuation of some residents on the western end of the island . In addition to the heavy rains , trees were downed in parts of Baldwin County . 
 In Florida , peak gusts were recorded at 68 miles per hour ( 109 km / h ) near Pensacola Beach . The winds , combined with associated thunderstorms , caused minor damage , and brought down small trees and power lines . Throughout Walton County , Hanna left approximately 15 @,@ 000 customers without power , forming a statewide total of 20 @,@ 000 power outages . Due to high winds , bridges to offshore islands were closed . Minor beach erosion was reported along the coast of Walton , Bay and Gulf counties . Three people drowned in high surf ; one near Pensacola Beach , one at Seagrove Beach and another at Panama City Beach . The fatalities prompted a local Police Major to comment , " People are getting into the water and not paying attention to the warning flags . " Heavy rain fell throughout the central and western Panhandle ; the highest reported total was 9 @.@ 68 inches ( 246 mm ) , at Chipley . As a result , rivers topped their banks , while county roads and homes in Perry , as well as streets in the Tallahassee region , were flooded . The total damage in Florida is estimated at $ 400 @,@ 000 ( 2002 USD ) . 
 = = = Eastern United States = = = 
 Hanna dropped heavy rainfall across much of Georgia , peaking at 15 @.@ 56 inches ( 395 mm ) at <unk> , 12 @.@ 47 inches ( 317 mm ) at Carrollton , and 11 @.@ 23 in ( 285 mm ) at Embry . Although the heaviest rainfall was mostly confined to southwestern parts of the state , precipitation was widespread within a northwest – northeast feeder band over central and northern Georgia . Associated with the band was up to 2 inches ( 51 mm ) of rainfall in a matter of hours , as well as gusty thunderstorms . The highest rainfall totals from this individual band were limited to an area north of a line from Atlanta to Athens . The heavy rainfall helped to relieve a persistent drought , bringing vegetation back to life . However , climatologists determined that the rainfall did not fully alleviate the dry conditions . The band of thunderstorms produced gusts of 40 to 50 mph ( 64 to 80 km / h ) , downing trees and power lines . In the Atlanta metropolitan area , 48 @,@ 000 customers received power outages . The winds tore a roof off a house and damaged a number of mobile homes . The heavy rainfall caused severe flooding ; in <unk> , 250 houses and 50 businesses suffered water damage , while another 35 were damaged in nearby Miller County . Roads were flooded , including parts of U.S. Route 27 . Crop damage was significant in the state . According to the Georgia Farm Services Agency , $ 19 million ( 2002 USD ; $ 22 million 2008 USD ) in damage to cotton and peanut crops were reported . Due to the flooding and damage , Governor Roy Barnes declared Seminole , Miller and Decatur counties federal disaster areas . 
 Moderate to heavy rain extended as far north as the Carolinas , and light showers reached the Delmarva Peninsula . Locations in western South Carolina picked up around 3 inches ( 75 mm ) of rainfall , causing flooding on some roads and highways . Various streams and ponds topped their banks , and flood waters on some roads reached an estimated 4 to 6 inches ( 100 to 150 mm ) deep . On South Carolina Highway 20 , a motorist became stranded in high waters , and nearby houses were damaged . The rainfall delayed a football game at Williams @-@ Brice Stadium for about 50 minutes . Farther northward , the remnants of Tropical Storm Hanna contributed to around 1 inch ( 25 mm ) of rainfall in New England , particularly in Vermont . 
 = James White ( author ) = 
 James White ( 7 April 1928 – 23 August 1999 ) was a Northern Irish author of science fiction novellas , short stories and novels . He was born in Belfast and returned there after spending some early years in Canada . After a few years working in the clothing industry , he worked at Short Brothers Ltd . , an aircraft company based in Belfast , from 1965 until taking early retirement in 1984 as a result of diabetes . White married Margaret Sarah Martin , another science fiction fan , in 1955 and the couple had three children . He died of a stroke . 
 He became a fan of science fiction in 1941 and co @-@ wrote two fan magazines , from 1948 to 1953 and 1952 to 1965 . Encouraged by other fans , White began publishing short stories in 1953 , and his first novel was published in 1957 . His best @-@ known novels were the twelve of the Sector General series , the first published in 1962 and the last after his death . White also published nine other novels , two of which were nominated for major awards , unsuccessfully . 
 White abhorred violence , and medical and other emergencies were the sources of dramatic tension in his stories . Some critics regarded him as a second @-@ rank writer , who occasionally produced first @-@ rank works , and felt his plots and writing could be formulaic . However , the " Sector General " series is regarded as defining the genre of medical science fiction , and as introducing a memorable crew of aliens . Although missing winning the most prestigious honours four times , White gained other awards for specific works and for contributions to science fiction . He was also Guest @-@ of @-@ Honour of several conventions . 
 = = Biography = = 
 James White was born in Belfast , Northern Ireland , on 7 April 1928 , and spent part of his early life in Canada . He was educated in Belfast at St. John 's Primary School ( 1935 – 1941 ) and St. Joseph 's Technical Secondary School ( 1942 – 1943 ) . As a teenager he lived with foster parents . He wanted to study medicine but financial circumstances prevented this . Between 1943 and 1965 he worked for several Belfast tailoring firms and then as assistant manager of a Co @-@ op department store . He married Margaret ( " Peggy " ) Sarah Martin , another science fiction fan , in 1955 and the couple had three children : daughter Patricia , and sons Martin and Peter . White later worked for the aeroplane builders Short Brothers Ltd. as a technical clerk ( 1965 – 1966 ) , publicity assistant ( 1966 – 1968 ) , and publicity officer ( 1968 – 1984 ) . 
 He became a science fiction fan in 1941 , attracted particularly by the works of E. E. " Doc " Smith , which featured good aliens as well as evil ones , and of Robert A. Heinlein , many of whose stories concern ordinary people . In 1947 he met another Irish fan , Walter A. ( " Walt " ) Willis ( 1919 – 1999 ) , and the two helped to produce the fan magazines Slant ( 1948 – 1953 ) and Hyphen ( 1952 – 1965 ) , which featured stories and articles by noted authors including John Brunner , A. Bertram Chandler , and Bob Shaw . In 2004 both White and Willis were nominated for the retrospective Hugo Award for Best Fan Writer of 1953 , although neither won . White said that he started writing stories because the Slant team felt that Astounding Science Fiction was too dominated by prophesies of nuclear doom , and his friends dared him to write the kind of story that they all liked to read . He said that getting published was fairly easy during the 1950s , as the World War II restrictions on paper were ended , and there were at least 12 science magazines in Britain and about 40 in the United States . His first published short story , Assisted Passage , a parody of 1950s Anglo @-@ Australian emigration policies , appeared in the January 1953 edition of the magazine New Worlds . Further stories appeared in New Worlds during the next few years , but White 's attempt to access the more lucrative American market by submitting stories to Astounding Science Fiction stalled after the publication of The <unk> . White later said that his optimism about inter @-@ species relations was unpalatable to Astounding 's xenophobic editor , John W. Campbell . As a result , White 's work was little @-@ known outside the UK until the 1960s . 
 In 1957 , Ace Books published White 's first novel , The Secret Visitors , which included locations in Northern Ireland . The book had previously been serialised in New Worlds with the title Tourist Planet . Ace Books ' science fiction editor , Donald A. Wollheim , thought the original ending was too tame and suggested that White should insert an all @-@ out space battle just after the climactic courtroom scene . In November the same year New Worlds published White 's novelette Sector General , and editor John ( " Ted " ) Carnell requested more stories set in the same universe , founding the series for which White is known best . White gained " a steady following " for his " scientifically accurate " stories , which were notable examples of hard science fiction in New Worlds , despite the magazine 's promotion of literary " New Wave " science fiction during the 1960s . 
 White kept his job with Short Brothers and wrote in the evenings , as his stories did not make enough money for him to become a full @-@ time author . In 1980 he taught a literature course at a Belfast branch of the Workers Educational Association . When diabetes had severely impaired his eyesight , he took early retirement in 1984 and relocated to the north Antrim resort town of <unk> , where he continued to write . For many years he was a Council Member of the British Science Fiction Association and , with Harry Harrison and Anne McCaffrey , a Patron of the Irish Science Fiction Association . White was also a strong pacifist . He died of a stroke on 23 August 1999 , while his novels Double Contact and The First Protector were being prepared for publication . His wife Peggy , son Martin , and daughter Patricia survived him . 
 = = Published works = = 
 = = = Sector General = = = 
 The Sector General series consists of 12 books published originally between 1962 ( Hospital Station ) and 1999 ( Double Contact ) . Additional short stories set in the Sector General Universe ( Countercharm , Tableau , Occupation : Warrior , and Custom Fitting ) appear in other collections by White . 
 Sector General is a gigantic multi @-@ species hospital space station founded as a peace @-@ making project by two heroes from opposite sides of humanity 's only full interstellar war . The hospital accommodates patients and staff from dozens of species , with different environmental requirements , behaviours and ailments . Initially most of the stories concern the career of Doctor Conway , who rises from junior surgeon to Diagnostician . In the fourth book the Galactic Federation decides that the emergency service which the hospital offers to victims of space accidents and planetary catastrophes is the most effective means of making peaceful contact with new spacefaring species , which allows the series to expand its range of plots , characters and settings . The seventh and later books each have a different and usually alien viewpoint character , which gave them " considerable new pep " . They also expand the range of issues beyond purely medical , and in Mike Resnick 's opinion treat issues such as guilt and forgiveness better than most science fiction . 
 The series defined the subgenre of multi @-@ species medical stories , and was " the first explicitly pacifist space opera " series , when much of contemporary space opera from the USA was notably military . 
 = = = Other novels = = = 
 Second Ending ( 1961 ) , which White described as " about the last man on Earth " but with " an upbeat ending " , was short @-@ listed for a Hugo Award . 
 The Escape Orbit ( 1964 ; title Open Prison in the UK ) , which was short @-@ listed for a Nebula Award , chronicles the efforts of human prisoners of war to survive after being dumped on a hostile planet without tools or weapons . 
 All Judgement Fled ( 1968 ) , which won the 1979 Europa prize , was described by Mike Resnick as his favourite among White 's novels and as " Rendezvous with Rama done right . " 
 White 's other novels not part of the Sector General series are : 
 The Secret Visitors ( 1957 ) 
 The Watch Below ( 1966 ) 
 Tomorrow is Too Far ( 1971 ) 
 Dark Inferno ( 1972 ) ( alternate title : Lifeboat ) 
 The Dream Millennium ( 1974 ) 
 <unk> ( 1979 ) 
 Federation World ( 1988 ) 
 The Silent Stars Go By ( 1991 ) 
 Earth : Final Conflict : First Protector ( 1999 ) 
 = = = Collections and short stories = = = 
 The title story of White 's collection Deadly Litter ( 1964 ) anticipated the dangers of space debris although there had been only a few orbital missions . The White Papers was produced by NESFA ( New England Science Fiction Association ) to commemorate White 's being the Guest @-@ of @-@ Honour at the 1996 Worldcon , and includes short stories and fan magazine articles by White , plus sections of Gary Louie 's guide to the Sector General series . Among the stories , Custom Fitting ( 1976 ) was short @-@ listed for a Hugo Award , and Sanctuary ( 1988 ) won an Analog Analytical Laboratory Award . His short story Un @-@ Birthday Boy , published in the magazine Analog in 1996 but not in a collection or anthology , was short @-@ listed for a Hugo Award . 
 Other collections include : 
 The Aliens Among Us ( 1969 ) 
 Monsters and Medics ( 1977 ; published by Ballantine Books ; includes the novel Second Ending ) 
 Futures Past ( 1982 ) ( includes the Sector General story <unk> ) 
 = = Critical appraisal = = 
 Paul Kincaid described White as a second @-@ rank writer who occasionally produced first @-@ rank works , and attracted a devoted but not wide audience . Kincaid noted that his plots were often formulaic and his writing employed a predictable set of techniques and mannerisms , along with a " studied quietness . " On the other hand , John Clute wrote that " in the depiction of goodness may lie the real genius of James White , " Mike Resnick described the Sector General series ' characters as " the most memorable crew of aliens ever created , " and Graham Andrews wrote that White 's aliens are really alien , not just human minds with exotic biologies . Michael Ashley commented that the setting of the television series Star Trek : Deep Space Nine is reminiscent of Sector General , and Mark R. Leeper noted similarities between Sector General 's setting and that of television 's Babylon 5 . Chris <unk> wrote that White 's plot construction and writing , including occasionally clumsy exposition , are typical of the Golden Age of science fiction in the 1930s , ' 40s , and ' 50s . 
 Algis Budrys concluded his review of The Watch Below with " ... this is very nice writing when considered simply as prose and as an attempt to involve the reader 's emotions . " However , when reviewing All Judgment Fled he wrote , " I suspect that he generates so much tension within himself while writing a book that he literally cannot bear to come to grips with crucial scenes . " 
 White said of his approach to producing stories , " Of course , the plot idea must come first – but the characters soon take over , " and compared it to using a compass rather than a map . He explained that he was drawn to medical themes by two factors : they offered opportunities for dramatic tension without war ; and he had wanted to become a doctor , but had to go to work instead . His avoidance of violent themes is as strong in his non @-@ medical stories as in the Sector General series . 
 None of White 's works won Hugo or Nebula Awards , although four were short @-@ listed . However , he won a Europa Prize in 1979 , an Analog Analytical Laboratory Award in 1988 and a Science Fiction Chronicle Reader Award in 1996 . In 1998 , White received the NESFA ( New England Science Fiction Association ) Edward E. Smith Memorial Award ( " Skylark Award " ) for contributions to science fiction , named after a story by one of his inspirations , E. E. " Doc " Smith , and appreciated this so much that he donated his complete collection of Slant magazines to NESFA . The next year he was inducted into the European Science Fiction Society 's Hall of Fame . White was Guest @-@ of @-@ Honour at many conventions including : the 1971 and 1985 <unk> in the United Kingdom ; three <unk> ( Belgium , Netherlands and Luxembourg ) ; the 1998 <unk> ( Ireland ) ; a Nicon ( Northern Ireland ) ; and the 1996 Worldcon . 
 Since 2000 the James White Award has been presented for the best short story by a non @-@ professional writer . The judges are professional authors and editors , and have included Mike Resnick , Orson Scott Card , Lois McMaster Bujold , Peter F. Hamilton , Christopher Priest and Robert Sheckley . 
 = Lynton K. Caldwell = 
 Lynton Keith Caldwell ( November 21 , 1913 – August 15 , 2006 ) was an American political scientist and a principal architect of the 1969 National Environmental Policy Act , the first act of its kind in the world . He was educated at the University of Chicago and spent most of his career at Indiana University Bloomington , where he received tenure in 1956 and retired as Arthur F. Bentley Professor Emeritus of Political Science in 1984 . Caldwell was the internationally acclaimed author or coauthor of fifteen books and more than 250 scholarly articles , which may be found in at least 19 different languages . He served on many boards and advisory committees , as a consultant on environmental policy issues worldwide , and received numerous honors and awards . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Caldwell was born in Montezuma , Iowa to Lee Lynton and Alberta ( Mace ) Caldwell , and died in Bloomington , Indiana , at age 92 . He earned his undergraduate degree in English at the University of Chicago in 1934 , his Master 's degree at Harvard in History and Government in 1938 , and his doctoral degree in political science at the University of Chicago in 1943 . He married Helen A. Walcher on December 21 , 1940 and they raised two children . 
 = = Academic career and public service = = 
 From 1944 @-@ 1947 he was director of research and publications for The Council of State Governments in Chicago . In 1947 he was appointed professor of political science at the Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs at Syracuse University . In 1952 and 1953 he was part of U.N. sponsored missions in public administration in Colombia , the Philippines , and Japan . His next one @-@ year U.N. appointment was as co @-@ Director of the Public Administration Institute for Turkey and the Middle East in Ankara , Turkey . Indiana University then appointed him director of the Institute of Training for Public Service and Coordinator of Indonesian and Thailand Public Administration Programs . By the time of his retirement , further appointments , research and lecture tours and vacations had enabled him to visit nearly one hundred countries around the world as well as every state in the union . In 1956 , after a year as visiting professor of government at the University of California , Berkeley , he returned to Bloomington as Professor of Government at Indiana University , where he remained until his retirement . In the course of his career he secured 21 National Science Foundation grants to support his research . 
 During his career , Caldwell served on the faculties of the University of Chicago , Northwestern University , the University of Oklahoma , Syracuse University , and the University of California at Berkeley , and had shorter appointments at some 80 other collegiate institutions both within the U.S. and overseas . At various times , Caldwell served as advisor or consultant to the U.S. Senate , UNESCO , the United Nations , the Departments of Commerce , Energy , Defense , and Interior , and the National Institutes of Health . Although not a natural scientist , as part of his work towards establishing interdisciplinary study in universities and achieving a greater merging of the two worlds of science and public policy , he became deeply involved in national and international environmental affairs and worked closely with several important scientific bodies serving , among many appointments , on the Sea Grant Program of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) , the first Environmental Advisory Board of the United States Army Corps of Engineers , the Pacific Science Congress , the President ’ s National Commission on Materials Policy , the Science Advisory Board for the Great Lakes of the International Joint Commission , as chair of the first Commission on Environmental Policy , Law and Administration for the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) , and as advisor to the UNESCO Man and the Biosphere Program ( MAB ) , and the UNESCO working program for the environmental education and training of engineers . 
 He also served on the editorial boards of numerous prestigious scientific and professional journals . A lover of nature , bird watching , and botany from an early age , he was a founding member of the South Bend , Indiana chapter of the Audubon Society , and of both the first local chapter of The Nature Conservancy ( <unk> ) in New York , and the Conservancy 's Indiana Chapter . He served on the Board of Governors of <unk> from 1959 to 1965 . 
 = = Notable accomplishments = = 
 During the 1960s Caldwell was virtually a lone voice in attempting to establish policies for the environment because such a holistic and interdisciplinary approach to solving environmental problems did not then exist . In 1962 his groundbreaking article “ Environment : A New Focus for Public Policy ? ” appeared in Public Administration Review , launching development of a new subfield of environmental policy studies . After 1962 , he changed the main focus of his career towards examining policies for protecting the quality of the human environment . In 1972 he was the catalyst for founding the School of Public and Environmental Affairs ( <unk> ) at Indiana University , Bloomington . His 1976 article " Novus Ordo <unk> : The Heritage of American Public Administration " in Public Administration Review was a defining paper in the modern history of public administration . 
 Caldwell is perhaps best known as one of the principal architects of the National Environmental Policy Act ( NEPA ) , the first act of its kind in the world , signed into law on January 1 , 1970 . In drafting A National Policy on the Environment in 1968 as consultant to Senator Henry Jackson , the head of the powerful Senate Interior and Insular Affairs Committee , Caldwell realized that more was needed than a mere a policy statement : an “ action @-@ forcing mechanism ” would be necessary to secure federal agency compliance with the Act ’ s requirements . The origin of the requirement for preparation of an environmental impact statement ( EIS ) has been attributed to Caldwell , whose testimony at the Senate hearing in April 1969 laid the groundwork for inclusion of provisions requiring an evaluation of the effects of all major federal projects significantly affecting the quality of the human environment . In these “ detailed statements , ” as they were termed in the Act , all reasonably foreseeable social , economic , and environmental effects of a proposed action and any possible alternatives to it must be identified and assessed before any federal action takes place . 
 NEPA has been emulated , in one form or another , by more than one hundred other countries , and many states have also established “ mini <unk> . ” When national government agencies first started to prepare <unk> , there were no professional associations dedicated to the planning and problem solving that NEPA demanded . Subsequently , Caldwell 's efforts in formulating NEPA , and later promoting it , led to formation of the National Association of Environmental Professionals ( <unk> ) , a national professional association of persons who prepare <unk> . 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 The many awards Caldwell received included the William E. Mosher Award ( 1964 ) and the Marshall E. Dimock Award of the American Society for Public Administration ( 1981 ) ; the John M. Gaus Award from the American Political Science Association ; and the National Environmental Quality Award from the Natural Resources Council of America ( 1997 ) . In 1991 , he was named one of the United Nations Environmental Program 's ( UNEP ) Global 500 for distinguished environmental services , and in 1997 , he was awarded an honorary LLD from Western Michigan University . In 2001 he was the recipient of Indiana University 's Distinguished Service Award . He was a Fellow of the Royal Society of Arts , and an honorary member of the International Association for Impact Assessment . Annually since 1995 the American Political Science Association has awarded the Lynton Keith Caldwell Prize for the best book in environmental politics and policy published during the previous three years . Shortly after his death in 2006 , the Caldwell Center for Culture and Ecology was established in Bloomington , IN to provide environmental education for youth and adults . 
 = = Scholarly publications = = 
 The administrative theories of Hamilton & Jefferson : Their contribution to thought on public administration . New York : Russell & Russell , 1944 . 
 The government and administration of New York . New York : Crowell , 1954 . 
 Environment : A challenge for modern society . Garden City , NY : Natural History Press , 1970 . Published for the American Museum of Natural History . 
 In defense of earth : International protection of the biosphere . Bloomington : Indiana University Press , 1972 . 
 Man and his environment : Policy and administration . New York : Harper & Row , 1975 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 06 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 
 Citizens and the environment : Case studies in popular action . With Lynton R. Hayes and Isabel M. <unk> . Bloomington : Indiana University Press , 1976 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 253 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 
 Science and the National Environmental Policy Act : Redirecting policy through procedural reform . University , AL : University of Alabama Press , 1982 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 
 US interests and the global environment . Muscatine , IA : Stanley Foundation , 1985 . 
 <unk> : Public policy and the life sciences . Boulder : Westview Press , 1987 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8133 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 
 Perspectives on ecosystem management for the Great Lakes : A reader . Albany : State University of New York Press , 1988 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 765 @-@ 5 
 Between two worlds : Science , the environmental movement , and policy choice . New York : Cambridge University Press , 1990 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 International environmental policy : Emergence and dimensions , 2d ed . Durham : Duke University Press , 1990 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8223 @-@ 1058 @-@ 7 
 " <unk> environmentalism : Threshold of a new phase in international relations . In : American Environmentalism : The U.S. environmental movement , 1970 @-@ 1990 , Riley E. Dunlap and Angela G. <unk> , eds . New York : Taylor & Francis , 1992 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1730 @-@ 9 
 Policy for land : Law and ethics . With Karen S. <unk> @-@ <unk> . Lanham , MD : Rowman & Littlefield Publishers , 1993 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 
 Environment as a focus for public policy . With Robert V. Bartlett and James N. Gladden . College Station : Texas A & M University Press , 1995 . 
 International environmental policy : From the twentieth to the twenty @-@ first century , 3d ed . With Paul S. Weiland . Durham : Duke University Press , 1996 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8223 @-@ 1861 @-@ 3 
 Environmental policy : Transnational issues and national trends . With Robert V. Bartlett . Westport , CT : Quorum Books , 1997 . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 079 @-@ 9 
 The National Environmental Policy Act : An agenda for the future . Bloomington : Indiana University Press , 1998 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 253 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 = Jerry Reinsdorf = 
 Jerry M. Reinsdorf ( born February 25 , 1936 ) is a CPA , lawyer and an owner of the NBA 's Chicago Bulls and the MLB 's Chicago White Sox . He started his professional life as a tax attorney with the Internal Revenue Service . He has been the head of the White Sox and Bulls for over 25 years . 
 He made his initial fortune in real estate , taking advantage of the Frank Lyon Co. v. United States decision by the United States Supreme Court which allowed economic owners of realty to sell property and lease it back , while transferring the tax deduction for depreciation to the title owner . 
 As the owner and Chairman of the Chicago Bulls since 1985 , he has turned the franchise into a lucrative business that won six NBA Championships in the 1990s ( 1991 – 1993 and 1996 – 1998 ) . He is controversial for his involvement ( along with Jerry Krause ) in breaking up the championship team by not hiring back key personnel such as Phil Jackson and Michael Jordan . He hired Jordan as a baseball player during his sabbatical from basketball . He also moved the Bulls from Chicago Stadium to the United Center . 
 As a baseball owner since 1981 , he has brought success to the White Sox franchise . The franchise made the playoffs in 1983 for the first time since 1959 and won the World Series in 2005 for the first time since 1917 . He moved the White Sox from Comiskey Park to New Comiskey Park and then renamed the new park U.S. Cellular Field . In both sporting endeavors , he has developed a reputation as an anti @-@ labor union hardliner . Since the early 1990s , he has been considered one of the most , if not the most , influential basketball owners . He has been influential in instituting the salary cap and revenue sharing . 
 On April 4 , 2016 , Reinsdorf was elected to the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame as a contributor . 
 = = Background = = 
 Reinsdorf was born to a Jewish family in Brooklyn , New York . He attended Erasmus Hall High School in Brooklyn , and he was the son of a sewing machine salesman . A lifelong baseball fan who grew up in the shadows of Ebbets Field , Reinsdorf was in the stands the day Jackie Robinson debuted for the Brooklyn Dodgers , breaking the color barrier which prevented black players from serving on Major League teams . 
 Reinsdorf earned a bachelor 's degree from George Washington University in Washington , D.C. where he became a member of Alpha Epsilon Pi . He subsequently moved to Chicago in 1957 . Reinsdorf became a CPA and lawyer as well as a registered mortgage underwriter and a certified review appraiser . He leveraged a full scholarship offer from the University of Chicago Law School into a scholarship from the Northwestern University School of Law . His first job after graduating from Northwestern in 1960 was a tax delinquency case of Bill Veeck who at the time owned the White Sox . In 1964 , Reinsdorf went into private practice . He developed a specialty in real estate partnership tax shelters . He sold his business interests in the real estate partnership in 1973 and formed <unk> , which raised US $ 650 million to invest in buildings under construction . He sold <unk> in 1982 for $ 102 million to Shearson Lehman Brothers , the investment banking and brokerage arm of American Express . However , he continued to be President of the company for several years thereafter . 
 = = Sports ownership = = 
 = = = New purchases = = = 
 In 1981 he was wealthy enough to purchase the White Sox for $ 19 million . The purchase was brokered by American National Bank who arranged for a limited partnership . He followed previous eccentric White Sox owners Charles Comiskey , who was known as a miser , and Veeck , who was known as a prankster who gutted the team by trading away promising prospects . Soon after buying the White Sox , he signed Greg Luzinski and Carlton Fisk . He also tripled the team promotional budget and increased the number of team scouts from 12 to 20 . By the 1983 Major League Baseball season the White Sox made the playoffs with the best record in the Major Leagues . The team initially signed a television deal with the newly founded <unk> under the new leadership of Chairman Reinsdorf and Vice Chairman Eddie Einhorn , but that arrangement quickly fizzled . Einhorn continued as Vice Chairman of the White Sox until his death in 2016 . 
 In 1985 , following in the footsteps of Einhorn who had purchased a United States Football League franchise in 1984 , he purchased the Chicago Bulls as part of a syndicate for US $ 16 million and quickly turned the team from one that averaged 6 @,@ 365 fans per game at the 17 @,@ 339 @-@ seat Chicago Stadium in 1985 into one with an 8 @,@ 000 @-@ person season ticket waiting list . He did so by drafting Horace Grant and Scottie Pippen , and trading for Bill Cartwright to join John Paxson and Michael Jordan under the tutelage of head coach Doug Collins . In 1989 , the team signed Phil Jackson as the final piece of the championship puzzle . From November 20 , 1987 through Jordan 's 1999 retirement the Bulls sold out every game . 
 In the months prior to the purchase , Milwaukee businessman Marvin Fishman had been awarded a $ 16 @.@ 2 million judgment against the Bulls . Fishman had been illegally blocked from purchasing the team in 1972 . Reinsdorf purchased the team from an ownership group that included Lamar Hunt , George Steinbrenner , Walter Shorenstein , Jonathan Kovler , Lester Crown , Philip Klutznick , and the estate of Arthur Wirtz , and he held a $ 9 @.@ 2 million controlling interest in the team . Reinsdorf 's share of 56 @.@ 8 % of the team was purchased from Klutznick , Steinbrenner , Shorenstein and the estate of Wirtz . His purchase ended an era in which the Bulls were managed by committee with decisions by conference call , verdicts by vote . Reinsdorf acquired his majority interests on March 11 , 1985 and Kovler sold his 7 % stake in the team on January 29 , 1986 , bringing Reinsdorf 's interest to 63 % . The following week Reinsdorf ousted Rod Thorn as general manager and replaced him with Jerry Krause . 
 = = = Ownership history = = = 
 The White Sox have won American League regular season Division Championships in 1983 , 1993 , 2000 , 2005 and 2008 under Reinsdorf and they won the 2005 World Series . In addition , they were in first place of the central division at the conclusion of the strike @-@ shortened 1994 Major League Baseball season . The World Series victory made him only the third owner in the history of North American sports to win a championship in two different sports . The baseball championship boosted the value of the franchise to over $ 300 million . When Reinsdorf signed Jordan after Jordan 's announcement that he wanted to play baseball , many thought Jordan 's drawing power provided an ulterior motive . Reinsdorf , however , had tried to convince Jordan not to give up basketball , but he did not attempt to make Jordan the highest paid player in the game like some feel he should have . 
 As a basketball owner , he has been described by Time as a " <unk> " , a reference they also use for his baseball persona . As of 1995 , the time when Scottie Pippen was eager to either be traded or be rid of Krause , he had never renegotiated a contract . As a baseball owner , he has had a reputation as one of the most militant , anti @-@ union , hard @-@ line owners . Newsweek described him as " one of the hardest heads in the 1994 baseball strike " . In the baseball offseason between the 1992 and 1993 seasons , he completely abstained from the free agent market . Reinsdorf was one of the last holdouts to the 1996 labor agreement that instituted the salary cap while retaining arbitration rights for the players . His 1996 signing of Albert Belle made news because of his widely publicized general opposition to spiraling player salaries . The $ 55 million signing was a turning point in the decision by the baseball owners to agree to revenue sharing . The signing also made Reinsdorf the employer of the highest paid Major League Baseball player and highest paid professional basketball player ( Jordan ) at the same time . Reinsdorf had just re @-@ signed Jordan after the 1995 – 96 NBA season . However , Jordan had been underpaid most of his career , and Reinsdorf , who did not feel he could justify the $ 30 million salary from a business standpoint , immediately realized he was going to soon feel buyer 's remorse . Even his most successful baseball team was not highly paid : when the White Sox won the 2005 World Series , Reinsdorf had the 13th highest payroll of the 30 Major League Baseball teams . 
 After Reinsdorf purchased the team in 1981 , the team experienced erosion of fan and media support which led to moving the team . He complained about old Comiskey Park with its foible such as numerous obstructed view seats and threatened to move the White Sox . Among his threats was moving the team to Itasca or Addison , Illinois in DuPage County . Reinsdorf , through his real estate business purchased 100 acres ( 400 @,@ 000 m2 ) in Addison . Chicago Mayor Harold Washington lobbied the Illinois legislature , and subsequently then @-@ Illinois Governor James R. Thompson promoted a package of incentives to retain the team in Chicago . The state floated bonds to build New Comiskey Park and let Reinsdorf keep all parking and concession revenues , as well as the $ 5 million per year from 89 skyboxes . Reinsdorf and Chicago Blackhawks owner , William Wirtz contributed $ 175 million to fund the construction of the largest arena in the United States . When the United Center opened in 1994 all of the skyboxes were leased for up to eight years . As per the collective bargaining agreement , Reinsdorf was allowed to exclude 60 % of luxury suite revenue from " basketball @-@ related income " and thus it is not part of the revenue sharing income . 
 Reinsdorf is a powerful baseball owner who in 1988 stopped the sale of the Texas Rangers and later influenced the sale of the Seattle Mariners . Edward Gaylord and Gaylord Entertainment Company had first attempted to buy the Rangers in 1985 . Reinsdorf was also said to be largely responsible for the ousting of Fay Vincent as the Commissioner of Baseball in 1992 . He had previously undermined Vincent by employing Richard <unk> as the league 's labor negotiator at a salary higher than Vincent 's . By the early 1990s , Reinsdorf and acting Baseball commissioner ( as well as Milwaukee Brewers owner ) Bud Selig had assumed baseball 's mantle of power from Atlanta Braves owner , Ted Turner , and New York Yankees owner , George Steinbrenner , who had in turn taken over the sport from Brooklyn / Los Angeles Dodgers owner , Walter O 'Malley , St. Louis Cardinals owner , Gussie Busch , and Oakland Athletics owner , Charlie O. Finley . 
 In the 1980s , Reinsdorf , Bud Selig and the American League President colluded to dissuade the Philadelphia Phillies from signing Lance Parrish who was a Detroit Tigers free agent . During the strike , Reinsdorf , who was an anti @-@ union hard @-@ liner , was so pessimistic that he did not expect baseball to resume until the 1996 Major League Baseball season . In the early 1990s he was able to get new stadiums ( United Center and U.S. Cellular Field ) for his teams . 
 Some fans and columnists have accused Reinsdorf of breaking up the championship Bulls team after their third straight title and sixth in eight years , claiming the Bulls could have competed for more titles with Michael Jordan , Scottie Pippen and good support from the rest of the team that in the eight @-@ year span included Dennis Rodman , Horace Grant , Toni Kukoč , Ron Harper , BJ Armstrong , and coach Phil Jackson . Some accounts claim that because Jackson feuded with both Reinsdorf and Krause and because both Jordan and Pippen were linked to Jackson , the team was broken up . Forbes describes the scenario as an example of owner greed . Many note that Phil Jackson 's decision not to return as coach and Jordan 's retirement during the 1998 – 99 NBA season lockout impacted the decisions of several players on whether to return to Chicago . Krause and Reinsdorf had held out hope that they could convince Jackson and Jordan to return and thus had introduced Tim Floyd as President of Chicago Bulls Basketball Operations instead of head coach . Reinsdorf had made it clear to Jackson that he was wanted back . 
 Reinsdorf was one of two bidders for the Phoenix Coyotes that would commit to not relocating the team . On July 29 , 2009 Reinsdorf and his group were approved for ownership of the Coyotes for $ 148 million . The official sale is set to occur during bankruptcy auction which will take place September 10 . 
 In August 2009 , it was reported that Jerry Reinsdorf & Ice Edge LLC had dropped its bid for the Coyotes , leaving only Balsillie and the NHL as bidders for the team . The NHL bid ultimately prevailed , however the league has stated it wishes to re @-@ sell the franchise as soon as possible . On March 24 , 2010 , it was reported that Reinsdorf was once again a possible buyer for the Phoenix Coyotes . Reinsdorf had been working out an arrangement to make the deal more feasible with the municipality of Glendale , Arizona . As late as August 2011 , negotiations between Reinsdorf and the City of Glendale were still in process for the purchase of the Coyotes . However , in 2013 , the Coyotes were sold to <unk> , a group of investors that did not include Reinsdorf . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Reinsdorf is largely responsible for the revenue sharing of the internet rights of Major League Baseball in which all teams have shared equally since Major League Baseball Advanced Media ( known as BAM ) was established in 2000 . Reinsdorf also endeavored to sell the naming rights to the New Comiskey Park to U.S. Cellular in a $ 68 million 20 @-@ year deal that funded a 7 @-@ year $ 85 million overhaul of the stadium that ended prior to the 2008 Major League Baseball season . The overhaul included the removal of top rows of the upper deck , replacement of the baby blue seats with traditionally @-@ colored green ones and dozens of other upgrades . Prior to the seven @-@ year overhaul , the 2001 White Sox barely broke even financially with a $ 700 @,@ 000 operating profit on revenues of $ 101 @.@ 33 million . 
 Reinsdorf won a major revenue sharing legal battle with other NBA owners over the Chicago Bulls broadcasts on WGN @-@ TV . The 55 game schedule on the superstation for an audience of 35 million competed with the NBA broadcasts , but Reinsdorf was permitted to maintain the contract . As recently as 2004 , the Bulls continued to be the <unk> most profitable team , earning $ 49 million in operating income and having an estimated valuation of $ 356 million . 
 Reinsdorf feels that if Major League Baseball Players Association chief , Donald Fehr , had not opposed steroid testing , baseball would have taken a stand against steroid use much sooner . He feels that in the end this delayed action will cost some players election into the National Baseball Hall of Fame . 
 = = Accolades and service = = 
 Reinsdorf has been involved ( along with the likes of Playboy Enterprises ' Christie Hefner ) in Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley 's initiative to improve standardized test scores in the 559 Chicago Public Schools . He has been involved in other extensive charitable work including those of <unk> and White Sox Charities . His philanthropy and community development have been notable in the Near West Side community area near the United Center . Twice the White Sox Charities has donated $ 1 million to the Chicago Park District with particular attention to funding baseball and softball fields . 
 Reinsdorf was inducted into the Appleton , Wisconsin Baseball Hall of Fame on August 5 , 2006 in a ceremony at Fox Cities Stadium prior to that evening 's game between the Midwest League Wisconsin Timber Rattlers and Beloit Snappers . He was so recognized because a former Minor League club , the Appleton Foxes , was a Chicago White Sox affiliate and won three consecutive Midwest League Championships in the early years of Reinsdorf 's ownership . 
 In 2011 , Reinsdorf received a Jefferson Award for Public Service . He was recognized for " Greatest Public Service Benefiting the Disadvantaged " based on philanthropic efforts through the Chicago White Sox Charities and <unk> . 
 He has been a member of the board of directors of Shearson Lehman Brothers , Inc . , the Northwestern University Law School Alumni Association , LaSalle Bank , Equity Office Properties and numerous other corporations and charities . He currently serves as a Life Trustee of Northwestern University . Reinsdorf and his wife , <unk> ( née Rifkin ) , have four children and eight grandchildren . 
 Throughout the years Reinsdorf has been active in the affairs of baseball , serving on the Executive Council and Ownership , Long Range Planning , Restructuring , Expansion , Equal Opportunity , Strategic Planning , Legislative and Labor Policy Committees of Major League Baseball , he also serves on the Boards of MLB Advanced Media and MLB Enterprises . 
 = = Other businesses = = 
 In 2013 , Reinsdorf partnered with Mark Sullivan , Noah <unk> , Dennis Burke , David Aguilar , and John <unk> to found Global Security and Innovative Strategies . 
 = Association football = 
 Association football , more commonly known as football or soccer , is a sport played between two teams of eleven players with a spherical ball . It is played by 250 million players in over 200 countries and dependencies , making it the world 's most popular sport . The game is played on a rectangular field with a goal at each end . The object of the game is to score by getting the ball into the opposing goal . 
 The goalkeepers are the only players allowed to touch the ball with their hands or arms while it is in play and only in their penalty area . Outfield players mostly use their feet to strike or pass the ball , but may also use their head or torso to do so instead . The team that scores the most goals by the end of the match wins . If the score is level at the end of the game , either a draw is declared or the game goes into extra time or a penalty shootout depending on the format of the competition . The Laws of the Game were originally codified in England by The Football Association in 1863 . Association football is governed internationally by the International Federation of Association Football ( FIFA ; French : Fédération Internationale de Football Association ) , which organises World Cups for both men and women every four years . 
 = = Name = = 
 The rules of association football were codified in England by the Football Association in 1863 and the name association football was coined to distinguish the game from the other forms of football played at the time , specifically rugby football . The term soccer originated in England , first appearing in the 1880s as an Oxford " -er " abbreviation of the word " association " . 
 Within the English @-@ speaking world , association football is now usually called football in the United Kingdom and mainly soccer in Canada and the United States . People in Australia , Ireland and New Zealand use either or both terms , although national associations in Australia and New Zealand now primarily use " football " for the formal name . 
 = = History = = 
 According to FIFA , the Chinese competitive game cuju ( <unk> , literally " kick ball " ) is the earliest form of football for which there is scientific evidence . <unk> players could use any of the body apart from hands and the intent was kicking a ball through an opening into a net . It was remarkably similar to modern football , though similarities to rugby occurred . During the Han Dynasty ( 206 BC – 220 AD ) , cuju games were standardized and rules were established . 
 <unk> and episkyros were Greek ball games . An image of an episkyros player depicted in low relief on a vase at the National Archaeological Museum of Athens appears on the UEFA European Championship Cup . Athenaeus , writing in 228 AD , referenced the Roman ball game harpastum . <unk> , episkyros and harpastum were played involving hands and violence . They all appear to have resembled rugby football , wrestling and volleyball more than what is recognizable as modern football . As with pre @-@ codified " mob football " , the antecedent of all modern football codes , these three games involved more handling the ball than kicking . Non @-@ competitive games included <unk> in Japan , chuk @-@ guk in Korea and <unk> in Australia . 
 Association football in itself does not have a classical history . Notwithstanding any similarities to other ball games played around the world FIFA have recognised that no historical connection exists with any game played in antiquity outside Europe . The modern rules of association football are based on the mid @-@ 19th century efforts to standardise the widely varying forms of football played in the public schools of England . The history of football in England dates back to at least the eighth century AD . 
 The Cambridge Rules , first drawn up at Cambridge University in 1848 , were particularly influential in the development of subsequent codes , including association football . The Cambridge Rules were written at Trinity College , Cambridge , at a meeting attended by representatives from Eton , Harrow , Rugby , Winchester and Shrewsbury schools . They were not universally adopted . During the 1850s , many clubs unconnected to schools or universities were formed throughout the English @-@ speaking world , to play various forms of football . Some came up with their own distinct codes of rules , most notably the Sheffield Football Club , formed by former public school pupils in 1857 , which led to formation of a Sheffield FA in 1867 . In 1862 , John Charles Thring of Uppingham School also devised an influential set of rules . 
 These ongoing efforts contributed to the formation of The Football Association ( The FA ) in 1863 , which first met on the morning of 26 October 1863 at the Freemasons ' Tavern in Great Queen Street , London . The only school to be represented on this occasion was Charterhouse . The Freemason 's Tavern was the setting for five more meetings between October and December , which eventually produced the first comprehensive set of rules . At the final meeting , the first FA treasurer , the representative from Blackheath , withdrew his club from the FA over the removal of two draft rules at the previous meeting : the first allowed for running with the ball in hand ; the second for obstructing such a run by hacking ( kicking an opponent in the shins ) , tripping and holding . Other English rugby clubs followed this lead and did not join the FA and instead in 1871 formed the Rugby Football Union . The eleven remaining clubs , under the charge of Ebenezer Cobb Morley , went on to ratify the original thirteen laws of the game . These rules included handling of the ball by " marks " and the lack of a crossbar , rules which made it remarkably similar to Victorian rules football being developed at that time in Australia . The Sheffield FA played by its own rules until the 1870s with the FA absorbing some of its rules until there was little difference between the games . 
 The world 's oldest football competition is the FA Cup , which was founded by C. W. Alcock and has been contested by English teams since 1872 . The first official international football match also took place in 1872 , between Scotland and England in Glasgow , again at the instigation of C. W. Alcock . England is also home to the world 's first football league , which was founded in Birmingham in 1888 by Aston Villa director William McGregor . The original format contained 12 clubs from the Midlands and Northern England . 
 The laws of the game are determined by the International Football Association Board ( IFAB ) . The Board was formed in 1886 after a meeting in Manchester of The Football Association , the Scottish Football Association , the Football Association of Wales , and the Irish Football Association . FIFA , the international football body , was formed in Paris in 1904 and declared that they would adhere to Laws of the Game of the Football Association . The growing popularity of the international game led to the admittance of FIFA representatives to the International Football Association Board in 1913 . The board consists of four representatives from FIFA and one representative from each of the four British associations . 
 Today , football is played at a professional level all over the world . Millions of people regularly go to football stadiums to follow their favourite teams , while billions more watch the game on television or on the internet . A very large number of people also play football at an amateur level . According to a survey conducted by FIFA published in 2001 , over 240 million people from more than 200 countries regularly play football . Football has the highest global television audience in sport . 
 In many parts of the world football evokes great passions and plays an important role in the life of individual fans , local communities , and even nations . R. <unk> says that Europeans who are polite , modest , or humble fall easily into rage when playing or watching football games . The Côte d 'Ivoire national football team helped secure a truce to the nation 's civil war in 2006 and it helped further reduce tensions between government and rebel forces in 2007 by playing a match in the rebel capital of <unk> , an occasion that brought both armies together peacefully for the first time . By contrast , football is widely considered to have been the final proximate cause for the Football War in June 1969 between El Salvador and Honduras . The sport also exacerbated tensions at the beginning of the Yugoslav Wars of the 1990s , when a match between Dinamo Zagreb and Red Star Belgrade degenerated into rioting in May 1990 . 
 = = = Women 's association football = = = 
 = = = = Early women 's football = = = = 
 Women may have been playing " football " for as long as the game has existed . Evidence shows that an ancient version of the game ( Tsu Chu ) was played by women during the Han Dynasty ( 25 – 220 CE ) . Two female figures are depicted in Han Dynasty ( 25 – 220 CE ) frescoes , playing Tsu Chu . There are , however , a number of opinions about the accuracy of dates , the earliest estimates at 5000 BCE . Reports of an annual match being played in Scotland are reported as early as the 1790s . The first match recorded by the Scottish Football Association took place in 1892 in Glasgow . In England , the first recorded game of football between women took place in 1895 . 
 Association football , the modern game , also has documented early involvement of women . In Europe , it is possible that 12th @-@ century French women played football as part of that era 's folk games . An annual competition in Mid @-@ Lothian , Scotland during the 1790s is reported , too . In 1863 , football governing bodies introduced standardized rules to prohibit violence on the pitch , making it more socially acceptable for women to play . 
 The most well @-@ documented early European team was founded by activist Nettie Honeyball in England in 1894 . It was named the British Ladies ' Football Club . Nettie Honeyball is quoted , " I founded the association late last year [ 1894 ] , with the fixed resolve of proving to the world that women are not the ' ornamental and useless ' creatures men have pictured . I must confess , my convictions on all matters where the sexes are so widely divided are all on the side of emancipation , and I look forward to the time when ladies may sit in Parliament and have a voice in the direction of affairs , especially those which concern them most . " Honeyball and those like her paved the way for women 's football . However the women 's game was frowned upon by the British football associations , and continued without their support . It has been suggested that this was motivated by a perceived threat to the ' masculinity ' of the game . 
 Women 's football became popular on a large scale at the time of the First World War , when employment in heavy industry spurred the growth of the game , much as it had done for men fifty years earlier . The most successful team of the era was Dick , Kerr 's Ladies of Preston , England . The team played in the first women 's international matches in 1920 , against a team from Paris , France , in April , and also made up most of the England team against a Scottish Ladies XI in 1920 , and winning 22 @-@ 0 . 
 Despite being more popular than some men 's football events ( one match saw a 53 @,@ 000 strong crowd ) , women 's football in England suffered a blow in 1921 when The Football Association outlawed the playing of the game on Association members ' pitches , on the grounds that the game ( as played by women ) was distasteful . Some speculated that this may have also been due to envy of the large crowds that women 's matches attracted . This led to the formation of the English Ladies Football Association and play moved to rugby grounds . 
 Association football has been played by women since at least the time of the first recorded women 's games in the late 19th century . It has traditionally been associated with charity games and physical exercise , particularly in the United Kingdom . In the late 1960s and early 1970s women 's association football was organised in the United Kingdom , eventually becoming the most prominent team sport for British women . 
 = = = = 20th and 21st century = = = = 
 The growth in women 's football has seen major competitions being launched at both national and international level mirroring the male competitions . Women 's football has faced many struggles . It had a " golden age " in the United Kingdom in the early 1920s when crowds reached 50 @,@ 000 at some matches ; this was stopped on 5 December 1921 when England 's Football Association voted to ban the game from grounds used by its member clubs . The FA 's ban was rescinded in December 1969 with UEFA voting to officially recognise women 's football in 1971 . The FIFA Women 's World Cup was inaugurated in 1991 and has been held every four years since , while women 's football has been an Olympic event since 1996 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Association football is played in accordance with a set of rules known as the Laws of the Game . The game is played using a spherical ball of 68 @.@ 5 – 69 @.@ 5 cm ( 27 @.@ 0 – 27 @.@ 4 in ) circumference , known as the football ( or soccer ball ) . Two teams of eleven players each compete to get the ball into the other team 's goal ( between the posts and under the bar ) , thereby scoring a goal . The team that has scored more goals at the end of the game is the winner ; if both teams have scored an equal number of goals then the game is a draw . Each team is led by a captain who has only one official responsibility as mandated by the Laws of the Game : to be involved in the coin toss prior to kick @-@ off or penalty kicks . 
 The primary law is that players other than goalkeepers may not deliberately handle the ball with their hands or arms during play , though they do use their hands during a throw @-@ in restart . Although players usually use their feet to move the ball around , they may use any part of their body ( notably , " heading " with the forehead ) other than their hands or arms . Within normal play , all players are free to play the ball in any direction and move throughout the pitch , though the ball cannot be received in an offside position . 
 In game play , players attempt to create goal @-@ scoring opportunities through individual control of the ball , such as by dribbling , passing the ball to a team @-@ mate , and by taking shots at the goal , which is guarded by the opposing goalkeeper . Opposing players may try to regain control of the ball by intercepting a pass or through tackling the opponent in possession of the ball ; however , physical contact between opponents is restricted . Football is generally a free @-@ flowing game , with play stopping only when the ball has left the field of play or when play is stopped by the referee for an infringement of the rules . After a stoppage , play <unk> with a specified restart . 
 At a professional level , most matches produce only a few goals . For example , the 2005 – 06 season of the English Premier League produced an average of 2 @.@ 48 goals per match . The Laws of the Game do not specify any player positions other than goalkeeper , but a number of specialised roles have evolved . Broadly , these include three main categories : strikers , or forwards , whose main task is to score goals ; defenders , who specialise in preventing their opponents from scoring ; and midfielders , who dispossess the opposition and keep possession of the ball to pass it to the forwards on their team . Players in these positions are referred to as outfield players , to distinguish them from the goalkeeper . These positions are further subdivided according to the area of the field in which the player spends most time . For example , there are central defenders , and left and right midfielders . The ten outfield players may be arranged in any combination . The number of players in each position determines the style of the team 's play ; more forwards and fewer defenders creates a more aggressive and offensive @-@ minded game , while the reverse creates a slower , more defensive style of play . While players typically spend most of the game in a specific position , there are few restrictions on player movement , and players can switch positions at any time . The layout of a team 's players is known as a formation . Defining the team 's formation and tactics is usually the prerogative of the team 's manager . 
 = = Laws = = 
 There are 17 laws in the official Laws of the Game , each containing a collection of stipulation and guidelines . The same laws are designed to apply to all levels of football , although certain modifications for groups such as juniors , seniors , women and people with physical disabilities are permitted . The laws are often framed in broad terms , which allow flexibility in their application depending on the nature of the game . The Laws of the Game are published by FIFA , but are maintained by the International Football Association Board ( IFAB ) . In addition to the seventeen laws , numerous IFAB decisions and other directives contribute to the regulation of football . 
 = = = Players , equipment , and officials = = = 
 Each team consists of a maximum of eleven players ( excluding substitutes ) , one of whom must be the goalkeeper . Competition rules may state a minimum number of players required to constitute a team , which is usually seven . Goalkeepers are the only players allowed to play the ball with their hands or arms , provided they do so within the penalty area in front of their own goal . Though there are a variety of positions in which the outfield ( non @-@ goalkeeper ) players are strategically placed by a coach , these positions are not defined or required by the Laws . 
 The basic equipment or kit players are required to wear includes a shirt , shorts , socks , footwear and adequate shin guards . An athletic supporter and protective cup is highly recommended for male players by medical experts and professionals . Headgear is not a required piece of basic equipment , but players today may choose to wear it to protect themselves from head injury . Players are forbidden to wear or use anything that is dangerous to themselves or another player , such as jewellery or watches . The goalkeeper must wear clothing that is easily distinguishable from that worn by the other players and the match officials . 
 A number of players may be replaced by substitutes during the course of the game . The maximum number of substitutions permitted in most competitive international and domestic league games is three , though the permitted number may vary in other competitions or in friendly matches . Common reasons for a substitution include injury , tiredness , ineffectiveness , a tactical switch , or <unk> at the end of a finely poised game . In standard adult matches , a player who has been substituted may not take further part in a match . IFAB recommends " that a match should not continue if there are fewer than seven players in either team . " Any decision regarding points awarded for abandoned games is left to the individual football associations . 
 A game is officiated by a referee , who has " full authority to enforce the Laws of the Game in connection with the match to which he has been appointed " ( Law 5 ) , and whose decisions are final . The referee is assisted by two assistant referees . In many high @-@ level games there is also a fourth official who assists the referee and may replace another official should the need arise . 
 = = = Ball = = = 
 The ball is spherical with a circumference of between 68 and 70 centimetres ( 27 and 28 in ) , a weight in the range of 410 to 450 grams ( 14 to 16 oz ) , and a pressure of between 0 @.@ 6 and 1 @.@ 1 bars ( 8 @.@ 5 and 15 @.@ 6 psi ) at sea level . In the past the ball was made up of leather panels sewn together , with a latex bladder for pressurisation , but modern balls at all levels of the game are now synthetic . 
 = = = Pitch = = = 
 As the Laws were formulated in England , and were initially administered solely by the four British football associations within IFAB , the standard dimensions of a football pitch were originally expressed in imperial units . The Laws now express dimensions with approximate metric equivalents ( followed by traditional units in brackets ) , though use of imperial units remains popular in English @-@ speaking countries with a relatively recent history of metrication ( or only partial metrication ) , such as Britain . 
 The length of the pitch for international adult matches is in the range of 100 – 110 m ( 110 – 120 yd ) and the width is in the range of 64 – 75 m ( 70 – 80 yd ) . Fields for non @-@ international matches may be 90 – 120 m ( 100 – 130 yd ) length and 45 – 90 m ( 50 – 100 yd ) in width , provided that the pitch does not become square . In 2008 , the IFAB initially approved a fixed size of 105 m ( 344 ft ) long and 68 m ( 223 ft ) wide as a standard pitch dimension for international matches ; however , this decision was later put on hold and was never actually implemented . 
 The longer boundary lines are <unk> , while the shorter boundaries ( on which the goals are placed ) are goal lines . A rectangular goal is positioned at the middle of each goal line . The inner edges of the vertical goal posts must be 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) apart , and the lower edge of the horizontal crossbar supported by the goal posts must be 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) above the ground . Nets are usually placed behind the goal , but are not required by the Laws . 
 In front of the goal is the penalty area . This area is marked by the goal line , two lines starting on the goal line 16 @.@ 5 m ( 18 yd ) from the goalposts and extending 16 @.@ 5 m ( 18 yd ) into the pitch perpendicular to the goal line , and a line joining them . This area has a number of functions , the most prominent being to mark where the goalkeeper may handle the ball and where a penalty foul by a member of the defending team becomes punishable by a penalty kick . Other markings define the position of the ball or players at kick @-@ offs , goal kicks , penalty kicks and corner kicks . 
 = = = Duration and tie @-@ breaking methods = = = 
 A standard adult football match consists of two periods of 45 minutes each , known as halves . Each half runs continuously , meaning that the clock is not stopped when the ball is out of play . There is usually a 15 @-@ minute half @-@ time break between halves . The end of the match is known as full @-@ time . The referee is the official timekeeper for the match , and may make an allowance for time lost through substitutions , injured players requiring attention , or other stoppages . This added time is called additional time in FIFA documents , but is most commonly referred to as stoppage time or injury time , while loss time can also be used as a synonym . The duration of stoppage time is at the sole discretion of the referee . The referee alone signals the end of the match . In matches where a fourth official is appointed , toward the end of the half the referee signals how many minutes of stoppage time he intends to add . The fourth official then informs the players and spectators by holding up a board showing this number . The signalled stoppage time may be further extended by the referee . Added time was introduced because of an incident which happened in 1891 during a match between Stoke and Aston Villa . Trailing 1 – 0 and with just two minutes remaining , Stoke were awarded a penalty . Villa 's goalkeeper kicked the ball out of the ground , and by the time the ball had been recovered , the 90 minutes had elapsed and the game was over . The same law also states that the duration of either half is extended until the penalty kick to be taken or retaken is completed , thus no game shall end with a penalty to be taken . 
 In league competitions , games may end in a draw . In knockout competitions where a winner is required various methods may be employed to break such a deadlock , some competitions may invoke replays . A game tied at the end of regulation time may go into extra time , which consists of two further 15 @-@ minute periods . If the score is still tied after extra time , some competitions allow the use of penalty shootouts ( known officially in the Laws of the Game as " kicks from the penalty mark " ) to determine which team will progress to the next stage of the tournament . Goals scored during extra time periods count toward the final score of the game , but kicks from the penalty mark are only used to decide the team that progresses to the next part of the tournament ( with goals scored in a penalty shootout not making up part of the final score ) . 
 In competitions using two @-@ legged matches , each team competes at home once , with an aggregate score from the two matches deciding which team progresses . Where aggregates are equal , the away goals rule may be used to determine the winners , in which case the winner is the team that scored the most goals in the leg they played away from home . If the result is still equal , extra time and potentially a penalty shootout are required . 
 In the late 1990s and early 2000s , the IFAB experimented with ways of creating a winner without requiring a penalty shootout , which was often seen as an undesirable way to end a match . These involved rules ending a game in extra time early , either when the first goal in extra time was scored ( golden goal ) , or if one team held a lead at the end of the first period of extra time ( silver goal ) . Golden goal was used at the World Cup in 1998 and 2002 . The first World Cup game decided by a golden goal was France 's victory over Paraguay in 1998 . Germany was the first nation to score a golden goal in a major competition , beating Czech Republic in the final of Euro 1996 . Silver goal was used in Euro 2004 . Both these experiments have been discontinued by IFAB . 
 = = = Ball in and out of play = = = 
 Under the Laws , the two basic states of play during a game are ball in play and ball out of play . From the beginning of each playing period with a kick @-@ off until the end of the playing period , the ball is in play at all times , except when either the ball leaves the field of play , or play is stopped by the referee . When the ball becomes out of play , play is restarted by one of eight restart methods depending on how it went out of play : 
 Kick @-@ off : following a goal by the opposing team , or to begin each period of play . 
 Throw @-@ in : when the ball has crossed the touchline ; awarded to the opposing team to that which last touched the ball . 
 Goal kick : when the ball has wholly crossed the goal line without a goal having been scored and having last been touched by a player of the attacking team ; awarded to defending team . 
 Corner kick : when the ball has wholly crossed the goal line without a goal having been scored and having last been touched by a player of the defending team ; awarded to attacking team . 
 Indirect free kick : awarded to the opposing team following " non @-@ penal " fouls , certain technical infringements , or when play is stopped to caution or dismiss an opponent without a specific foul having occurred . A goal may not be scored directly ( without the ball first touching another player ) from an indirect free kick . 
 Direct free kick : awarded to fouled team following certain listed " penal " fouls . A goal may be scored directly from a direct free kick . 
 Penalty kick : awarded to the fouled team following a foul usually punishable by a direct free kick but that has occurred within their opponent 's penalty area . 
 Dropped @-@ ball : occurs when the referee has stopped play for any other reason , such as a serious injury to a player , interference by an external party , or a ball becoming defective . 
 = = = Misconduct = = = 
 = = = = On @-@ field = = = = 
 A foul occurs when a player commits an offence listed in the Laws of the Game while the ball is in play . The offences that constitute a foul are listed in Law 12 . Handling the ball deliberately , tripping an opponent , or pushing an opponent , are examples of " penal fouls " , punishable by a direct free kick or penalty kick depending on where the offence occurred . Other fouls are punishable by an indirect free kick . 
 The referee may punish a player 's or substitute 's misconduct by a caution ( yellow card ) or dismissal ( red card ) . A second yellow card at the same game leads to a red card , and therefore to a dismissal . A player given a yellow card is said to have been " booked " , the referee writing the player 's name in his official notebook . If a player has been dismissed , no substitute can be brought on in their place . Misconduct may occur at any time , and while the offences that constitute misconduct are listed , the definitions are broad . In particular , the offence of " unsporting behaviour " may be used to deal with most events that violate the spirit of the game , even if they are not listed as specific offences . A referee can show a yellow or red card to a player , substitute or substituted player . Non @-@ players such as managers and support staff cannot be shown the yellow or red card , but may be expelled from the technical area if they fail to conduct themselves in a responsible manner . 
 Rather than stopping play , the referee may allow play to continue if doing so will benefit the team against which an offence has been committed . This is known as " playing an advantage " . The referee may " call back " play and penalise the original offence if the anticipated advantage does not ensue within " a few seconds " . Even if an offence is not penalised due to advantage being played , the offender may still be sanctioned for misconduct at the next stoppage of play . 
 The referee 's decision in all on @-@ pitch matters is considered final . The score of a match cannot be altered after the game , even if later evidence shows that decisions ( including awards / non @-@ awards of goals ) were incorrect . 
 = = = = Off @-@ field = = = = 
 Along with the general administration of the sport , football associations and competition organisers also enforce good conduct in wider aspects of the game , dealing with issues such as comments to the press , clubs ' financial management , doping , age fraud and match fixing . Most competitions enforce mandatory suspensions for players who are sent off in a game . Some on @-@ field incidents , if considered very serious ( such as allegations of racial abuse ) , may result in competitions deciding to impose heavier sanctions than those normally associated with a red card . Some associations allow for appeals against player suspensions incurred on @-@ field if clubs feel a referee was incorrect or unduly harsh . 
 Sanctions for such infractions may be levied on individuals or on to clubs as a whole . Penalties may include fines , points deductions ( in league competitions ) or even expulsion from competitions . For example , the English and Scottish leagues will often deduct 10 points from a team that enters financial administration . Among other administrative sanctions are penalties against game forfeiture . Teams that had forfeited a game or had been forfeited against would be awarded a technical loss or win . 
 = = Governing bodies = = 
 The recognised international governing body of football ( and associated games , such as futsal and beach soccer ) is FIFA . The FIFA headquarters are located in Zürich , Switzerland . Six regional confederations are associated with FIFA ; these are : 
 Asia : Asian Football Confederation ( AFC ) 
 Africa : Confederation of African Football ( CAF ) 
 Europe : Union of European Football Associations ( UEFA ) 
 North / Central America & Caribbean : Confederation of North , Central American and Caribbean Association Football ( CONCACAF ) 
 Oceania : Oceania Football Confederation ( OFC ) 
 South America : Confederación Sudamericana de Fútbol / <unk> Sul @-@ americana de Futebol ( South American Football Confederation ; CONMEBOL ) 
 National associations oversee football within individual countries . These are generally synonymous with sovereign states , ( for example : the Fédération <unk> de Football in Cameroon ) but also include a smaller number of associations responsible for sub @-@ national entities or autonomous regions ( for example the Scottish Football Association in Scotland ) . 209 national associations are affiliated both with FIFA and with their respective continental confederations . 
 While FIFA is responsible for arranging competitions and most rules related to international competition , the actual Laws of the Game are set by the International Football Association Board , where each of the UK Associations has one vote , while FIFA collectively has four votes . 
 = = International competitions = = 
 The major international competition in football is the World Cup , organised by FIFA . This competition takes place every four years . Approximately 190 – 200 national teams compete in qualifying tournaments within the scope of continental confederations for a place in the finals . The finals tournament , which is held every four years , involves 32 national teams competing over a four @-@ week period . The most recent edition of the tournament was the 2014 FIFA World Cup in Brazil . 
 There has been a football tournament at every Summer Olympic Games since 1900 , except at the 1932 games in Los Angeles . Before the inception of the World Cup , the Olympics ( especially during the 1920s ) had the same status as the World Cup . Originally , the event was for amateurs only ; however , since the 1984 Summer Olympics , professional players have been permitted , albeit with certain restrictions which prevent countries from fielding their strongest sides . The Olympic men 's tournament is played at Under @-@ 23 level . In the past the Olympics have allowed a restricted number of over @-@ age players per team . A women 's tournament was added in 1996 ; in contrast to the men 's event , full international sides without age restrictions play the women 's Olympic tournament . 
 After the World Cup , the most important international football competitions are the continental championships , which are organised by each continental confederation and contested between national teams . These are the European Championship ( UEFA ) , the Copa América ( CONMEBOL ) , African Cup of Nations ( CAF ) , the Asian Cup ( AFC ) , the CONCACAF Gold Cup ( CONCACAF ) and the OFC Nations Cup ( OFC ) . The FIFA Confederations Cup is contested by the winners of all six continental championships , the current FIFA World Cup champions and the country which is hosting the Confederations Cup . This is generally regarded as a warm @-@ up tournament for the upcoming FIFA World Cup and does not carry the same prestige as the World Cup itself . The most prestigious competitions in club football are the respective continental championships , which are generally contested between national champions , for example the UEFA Champions League in Europe and the Copa Libertadores in South America . The winners of each continental competition contest the FIFA Club World Cup . 
 = = Domestic competitions = = 
 The governing bodies in each country operate league systems in a domestic season , normally comprising several divisions , in which the teams gain points throughout the season depending on results . Teams are placed into tables , placing them in order according to points accrued . Most commonly , each team plays every other team in its league at home and away in each season , in a round @-@ robin tournament . At the end of a season , the top team is declared the champion . The top few teams may be promoted to a higher division , and one or more of the teams finishing at the bottom are relegated to a lower division . 
 The teams finishing at the top of a country 's league may be eligible also to play in international club competitions in the following season . The main exceptions to this system occur in some Latin American leagues , which divide football championships into two sections named Apertura and Clausura ( Spanish for Opening and Closing ) , awarding a champion for each . The majority of countries supplement the league system with one or more " cup " competitions organised on a knock @-@ out basis . 
 Some countries ' top divisions feature highly paid star players ; in smaller countries and lower divisions , players may be part @-@ timers with a second job , or amateurs . The five top European leagues – the Bundesliga ( Germany ) , Premier League ( England ) , La Liga ( Spain ) , Serie A ( Italy ) , and Ligue 1 ( France ) – attract most of the world 's best players and each of the leagues has a total wage cost in excess of £ 600 million / € 763 million / US $ 1 @.@ 185 billion . 
 = = Variants and casual play = = 
 Variants of football have been codified for reduced @-@ sized teams ( i.e. five @-@ a @-@ side football ) play in non @-@ field environments ( i.e. beach soccer , indoor soccer , and futsal ) and for teams with disabilities ( i.e. paralympic association football ) . 
 One of the attractions of association football is that a casual game can be played with only minimal equipment – a basic game can be played on almost any open area of reasonable size with just a ball and items to mark the positions of two sets of goalposts . Such games can often have team sizes that vary considerably from eleven @-@ a @-@ side , use a limited or modified subset of the official rules , and are likely to be self @-@ officiated by the players . 
 = Anne Rice = 
 Anne Rice ( born Howard Allen Frances O 'Brien ; October 4 , 1941 ) is an American author of gothic fiction , Christian literature , and erotica . She is perhaps best known for her popular and influential series of novels , The Vampire Chronicles , revolving around the central character of Lestat . Books from The Vampire Chronicles were the subject of two film adaptations , Interview with the Vampire in 1994 , and Queen of the Damned in 2002 . 
 Born in New Orleans , Rice spent much of her early life there before moving to Texas , and later to San Francisco . She was raised in an observant Catholic family , but became an agnostic as a young adult . She began her professional writing career with the publication of Interview with the Vampire in 1976 , while living in California , and began writing sequels to the novel in the 1980s . In the mid @-@ 2000s , following a publicized return to Catholicism , Rice published the novels Christ the Lord : Out of Egypt and Christ the Lord : The Road to Cana , fictionalized accounts of certain incidents in the life of Jesus . Several years later she distanced herself from organized Christianity , citing disagreement with the Church 's stances on social issues but pledging that faith in God remained " central to [ her ] life . " However , she now considers herself a secular humanist . 
 Rice 's books have sold nearly 100 million copies , placing her among the most popular authors in recent American history . While reaction to her early works was initially mixed , she became more popular with critics and readers in the 1980s . Her writing style and the literary content of her works have been deeply analyzed by literary commentators . She was married to poet and painter Stan Rice for 41 years , from 1961 until his death from brain cancer in 2002 at age 60 . She and Stan had two children , Michele , who died of leukemia at age five , and Christopher , who is also an author . 
 In addition to her vampire novels , Rice has authored books such as The Feast of All Saints ( adapted for television in 2001 ) and Servant of the Bones , which formed the basis of a 2011 comic book miniseries . Several books from The Vampire Chronicles have been adapted as comics by various publishers . Rice has also authored erotic fiction under the pen names Anne Rampling and A. N. Roquelaure , including Exit to Eden , which was later adapted into a 1994 film . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = New Orleans and Texas = = = 
 Born on October 4 , 1941 in New Orleans , Rice is the second of four daughters of parents of Irish Catholic descent , Howard O 'Brien and Katherine " Kay " Allen O 'Brien . Her father , a Naval veteran of World War II and lifelong resident of New Orleans , worked as a Personnel Executive for the U.S. Postal Service , and authored one novel , The Impulsive Imp , which was published posthumously . Her older sister , Alice Borchardt , later became a noted author of fantasy and horror fiction . 
 Rice spent most of her childhood and teenage years in New Orleans , a city that forms the backdrop against which many of her works are set . Her early years were marked by coping with the family 's poverty and her mother 's alcoholism . She and her family lived in the rented home of her maternal grandmother , Alice Allen , known as " Mamma Allen , " at <unk> St. Charles Avenue in the Irish Channel , which Rice says was widely considered a " Catholic Ghetto " . Allen , who began working as a domestic shortly after separating from her alcoholic husband , was an important early influence in Rice 's life , keeping the family and household together as Rice 's mother sank deeper into alcoholism . Allen died in 1949 , but the O <unk> remained in her home until 1956 , when they moved to <unk> St. Charles Avenue , a former rectory , convent , and school owned by the parish , to be closer to both the church and support for Katherine 's addiction . As a young child , Rice studied at St. Alphonsus School , a Catholic institution previously attended by her father . 
 About her unusual given name , Rice said : 
 " Well , my birth name is Howard Allen because apparently my mother thought it was a good idea to name me Howard . My father 's name was Howard , she wanted to name me after Howard , and she thought it was a very interesting thing to do . She was a bit of a Bohemian , a bit of mad woman , a bit of a genius , and a great deal of a great teacher . And she had the idea that naming a woman Howard was going to give that woman an unusual advantage in the world . " 
 However , according to the authorized biography Prism of the Night , by Katherine <unk> , Rice 's father was the source of his daughter 's birth name : " Thinking back to the days when his own name had been associated with girls , and perhaps in an effort to give it away , Howard named the little girl Howard Allen Frances O 'Brien . " Rice became " Anne " on her first day of school , when a nun asked her what her name was . She told the nun " Anne , " which she considered a pretty name . Her mother , who was with her , let it go without correcting her , knowing how self @-@ conscious her daughter was of her real name . From that day on , everyone she knew addressed her as " Anne " , and her name was legally changed in 1947 . Rice was confirmed in the Catholic Church when she was twelve years old and took the full name Howard Allen Frances Alphonsus <unk> O 'Brien , adding the names of a saint and of an aunt , who was a nun . " I was honored to have my aunt 's name , " she said , " but it was my burden and joy as a child to have strange names . " 
 When Rice was fifteen years old , her mother died as a result of alcoholism . Soon afterward , she and her sisters were placed by their father in St. Joseph 's Academy . Rice described St. Joseph 's as " something out of Jane Eyre ... a dilapidated , awful , medieval type of place . I really hated it and wanted to leave . I felt betrayed by my father . " 
 In November 1957 , Rice 's father married Dorothy Van Bever . On the subject of the couple 's first meeting , Rice recalled , " My father wrote her a formal letter inviting her to lunch which I hand @-@ delivered to her house ... I was so nervous . In the note he enclosed a pin which she was to wear if she accepted the invitation . The next day she had the pin on . " In 1958 , when Rice was sixteen , her father moved the family to north Texas , purchasing their first home in Richardson . Rice first met her future husband , Stan Rice , in a journalism class while they were both students at Richardson High School . 
 = = = San Francisco and Berkeley = = = 
 Graduating from Richardson High in 1959 , Rice completed her freshman year at Texas Woman 's University in Denton and transferred to North Texas State College for her sophomore year , but dropped out when she ran out of money and was unable to find employment . She soon decided to move to San Francisco , and received permission from her friend , Dennis Percy , to stay with his family there until she found work as an insurance claims processor . She persuaded her former roommate from Texas Woman 's University , Ginny Mathis , to join her , and they found an apartment in the Haight @-@ Ashbury district . Mathis acquired a job at the same insurance company as Rice . Soon after , they began taking night courses at University of San Francisco , an all @-@ male Jesuit school that allowed women to take night courses . For Easter vacation Anne returned home to Texas , rekindling her relationship with Stan Rice . After her return to San Francisco , Stan Rice came for a week @-@ long visit during summer break . He returned to Texas , Rice moved back in with the Percys , and Mathis left San Francisco in August to enroll in a nursing program in Oklahoma . Some time later , Anne received a special delivery letter from Stan Rice asking her to marry him . They married on October 14 , 1961 , in Denton , Texas , soon after she turned twenty years old , and when he was just weeks from his nineteenth birthday . 
 The Rices moved back to San Francisco in 1962 , experiencing the birth of the Hippie movement firsthand as they lived in the soon @-@ to @-@ be fabled Haight @-@ Ashbury district , Berkeley , and later the Castro District . " I 'm a totally conservative person , " she later told The New York Times , " In the middle of Haight @-@ Ashbury in the 1960s , I was typing away while everybody was dropping acid and smoking grass . I was known as my own square . " Rice attended San Francisco State University and obtained a B.A. in Political Science in 1964 . Their daughter Michele , later nicknamed " Mouse " , was born to the couple on September 21 , 1966 , and Rice later interrupted her graduate studies at <unk> to become a Ph.D. candidate at the University of California , Berkeley . However , she soon became disenchanted with the emphasis on literary criticism and the language requirements . In Rice 's words , " I wanted to be a writer , not a literature student . " 
 Rice returned to San Francisco State in 1970 to finish her studies in Creative Writing , and in 1972 graduated with an M.A. Stan Rice became an instructor at San Francisco State shortly after receiving his own M.A. in Creative Writing from the institution , and later chaired the Creative Writing department before retiring in 1988 . In 1970 , while Rice was still in the graduate program , her daughter was diagnosed with acute <unk> leukemia . Rice later described having a prophetic dream , months before Michele became ill , that her daughter was dying from " something wrong with her blood . " On August 5 , 1972 , Michele died at Stanford Children 's Hospital in Palo Alto . 
 Rice 's son Christopher was born in Berkeley , California , in 1978 ; he would become a best @-@ selling author in his own right , publishing his first novel at the age of 22 . In mid @-@ 1979 , Rice , an admitted alcoholic , and her husband , Stan Rice , quit drinking so their son would not have the life that she had as a child . 
 = = Writing career = = 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Rice has stated that Charles Dickens , Virginia Woolf , John Milton , Ernest Hemingway , William Shakespeare , the Brontë sisters , Jean @-@ Paul Sartre , and Henry James are writers who have influenced her work . 
 = = = Interview with the Vampire = = = 
 In 1973 , while still grieving the loss of her daughter , Rice took a previously written short story and turned it into her first novel , the bestselling Interview with the Vampire . She based her vampires on Gloria Holden 's character in Dracula 's Daughter : " It established to me what vampires were — these elegant , tragic , sensitive people . I was really just going with that feeling when writing Interview With the Vampire . I didn 't do a lot of research . " After completing the novel and following many rejections from publishers , Rice developed obsessive – compulsive disorder ( OCD ) . She became obsessed with germs , thinking that she contaminated everything she touched , engaged in frequent and obsessive hand washing and obsessively checked locks on windows and doors . Of this period , Rice says , " What you see when you 're in that state is every single flaw in our hygiene and you can 't control it and you go crazy . " 
 In August 1974 , after a year of therapy for her OCD , Rice attended the Squaw Valley Writer 's Conference at Squaw Valley , conducted by writer Ray Nelson . While at the conference , Rice met her future literary agent , Phyllis Seidel . In October 1974 , Seidel sold the publishing rights to Interview with the Vampire to Alfred A. Knopf for a $ 12 @,@ 000 advance of the hardcover rights , at a time when most new authors were receiving $ 2 @,@ 000 advances . Interview with the Vampire was published in May 1976 . In 1977 , the Rices traveled to both Europe and Egypt for the first time . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Following the publication of Interview with the Vampire , while living in California , Rice wrote two historical novels , The Feast of All Saints and Cry to Heaven , along with four erotic novels ( The Claiming of Sleeping Beauty , Beauty 's Punishment , Beauty 's Release , and Beauty 's Kingdom ) under the pseudonym A. N. Roquelaure , and two more under the pseudonym Anne Rampling ( Exit to Eden and Belinda ) . Rice then returned to the vampire genre with The Vampire Lestat and The Queen of the Damned , her bestselling sequels to Interview with the Vampire . 
 Shortly after her June 1988 return to New Orleans , Rice penned The Witching Hour as an expression of her joy at coming home . Rice also continued her popular Vampire Chronicles series , which later grew to encompass ten novels , and followed up on The Witching Hour with Lasher and <unk> , completing the Lives of the Mayfair Witches trilogy . She also published Violin , a tale of a ghostly haunting , in 1997 . 
 Rice calls Christ the Lord : Out of Egypt , published in 2005 , the beginning of a series chronicling the life of Jesus . The second volume , Christ the Lord : The Road to Cana , was published in March 2008 . The third book in the series , Christ the Lord : Kingdom of Heaven , has been postponed . 
 After moving to Rancho Mirage , California , in December 2005 , Rice wrote Christ the Lord : The Road to Cana , Angel Time , and Of Love and Evil ( the latter two being the first two books in her Songs of the Seraphim series ) , in addition to her memoir , Called Out of Darkness : A Spiritual Confession . 
 On March 9 , 2014 , Rice announced on her son Christopher 's radio show , " The Dinner Party with Christopher Rice and Eric Shaw Quinn " , that she had completed another book in the Vampire Chronicles , titled , Prince Lestat , a " true sequel " to Queen of the Damned . The book was released on October 28 , 2014 . 
 = = Reception and analysis = = 
 Following its debut in 1976 , Interview with the Vampire received many negative reviews from critics , causing Rice to retreat temporarily from the supernatural genre . When The Vampire Lestat debuted in 1985 , reaction — both from critics and from readers — was more positive , and the first hardcover edition of the book sold 75 @,@ 000 copies . Upon its publication in 1988 , The Queen of the Damned was given an initial hardcover printing of 405 @,@ 000 copies . The novel was a main selection of the Literary Guild of America for 1988 , and reached the # 1 spot on The New York Times Best Seller list , staying on the list for more than four months . 
 Rice 's novels are popular among many members of the LGBT community , some of whom have perceived her vampire characters as allegorical symbols of isolation and social alienation . Similarly , a reviewer writing for The Boston Globe observed that the vampires of her novels represent " the walking alienated , those of us who , by choice or not , dwell on the fringe . " On the subject , Rice herself commented , " From the beginning , I 've had gay fans , and gay readers who felt that my works involved a sustained gay allegory ... I didn 't set out to do that , but that was what they perceived . So even when Christopher was a little baby , I had gay readers and gay friends and knew gay people , and lived in the Castro district of San Francisco , which was a gay neighborhood . " 
 Rice 's writings have also been identified as having had a major impact on later developments within the genre of vampire fiction . " Rice turns vampire conventions inside out , " writes Susan Ferraro of The New York Times . " Because Rice identifies with the vampire instead of the victim ( reversing the usual focus ) , the horror for the reader springs from the realization of the monster within the self . Moreover , Rice 's vampires are loquacious philosophers who spend much of eternity debating the nature of good and evil . " 
 In addition , Rice 's writing style has been heavily analyzed . Ferraro , in a statement typical of many reviewers , describes her prose as " florid , both lurid and lyrical , and full of sensuous detail " . However , others have criticized Rice 's writing style as both verbose and overly philosophical . Author William Patrick Day comments that her writing is often " long , convoluted , and imprecise " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Back to New Orleans and Catholicism = = = 
 In June 1988 , following the success of The Vampire Lestat and with The Queen of the Damned about to be published , the Rices purchased a second home in New Orleans . Stan took a leave of absence from his teaching , and together they moved to New Orleans . Within months , they decided to make it their permanent home . 
 Rice returned to the Catholic Church in 1998 after decades of self @-@ avowed atheism . On December 14 , 1998 , she fell into a coma and nearly died . She was later diagnosed with Diabetes mellitus type 1 , and is now insulin @-@ dependent . In 2003 , following the recommendation of her husband and shortly after his death , Rice underwent gastric bypass surgery and shed 103 pounds . 
 In 2004 , Rice nearly died again from an intestinal blockage or bowel obstruction , a common complication of gastric bypass surgery . In 2005 , Newsweek reported , " [ Rice ] came close to death last year , when she had surgery for an intestinal blockage , and also back in 1998 , when she went into a sudden diabetic coma ; that same year she returned to the Roman Catholic Church , which she 'd left at 18 . " Her return did not come with a full embrace of the Church 's stances on social issues ; Rice remained a vocal supporter of equality for gay men and lesbians ( including marriage rights ) , as well as abortion rights and birth control , writing extensively on such issues . In October 2005 , while promoting her book , Christ the Lord : Out of Egypt , she announced in Newsweek that she would now use her life and talent of writing to glorify her belief in God , but did not renounce her earlier works . 
 In the Author 's Note from Christ the Lord : Out of Egypt , Rice states : 
 I had experienced an old @-@ fashioned , strict Roman Catholic childhood in the 1940s and 1950s ... we attended daily Mass and Communion in an enormous and magnificently decorated church .... Stained @-@ glass windows , the Latin Mass , the detailed answers to complex questions on good and evil — these things were imprinted on my soul forever .... 
 I left this church at age 18 .... I wanted to know what was happening , why so many seemingly good people didn 't believe in any organized religion yet cared passionately about their behavior and value of their lives .... I broke with the church .... I wrote many novels that without my being aware that they reflected my quest for meaning in a world without God . " 
 In her memoir Called Out of Darkness : A Spiritual Confession , Rice also states : 
 In the moment of surrender , I let go of all the theological or social questions which had kept me from [ God ] for countless years . I simply let them go . There was the sense , profound and wordless , that if He knew everything I did not have to know everything , and that , in seeking to know everything , I 'd been , all of my life , missing the entire point . No social paradox , no historic disaster , no hideous record of injustice or misery should keep me from Him . No question of Scriptural integrity , no torment over the fate of this or that atheist or gay friend , no worry for those condemned and ostracized by my church or any other church should stand between me and Him . The reason ? It was magnificently simple : He knew how or why everything happened ; He knew the disposition of every single soul . He wasn 't going to let anything happen by accident ! Nobody was going to go to Hell by mistake . " 
 = = = Leaving New Orleans = = = 
 On January 18 , 2004 , Rice announced on her website that she had made plans to leave New Orleans . She cited living alone since the death of her husband and her son moving to California as the reasons for her move . On January 30 , 2004 , Rice put the largest of her three homes up for sale and moved to a gated community in Kenner , Louisiana . " <unk> my life , not owning so much , that 's the chief goal " , said Rice . " I 'll no longer be a citizen of New Orleans in the true sense . " She sold her New York City condominium on January 20 , 2005 . In 2005 , after completing Christ the Lord : Out of Egypt , Rice left New Orleans , shortly before the events of Hurricane Katrina in August . None of her former New Orleans properties were flooded , and Rice remains a vocal advocate for the city and related relief projects . 
 = = = California = = = 
 After leaving New Orleans , Rice settled first in La Jolla , California . In November 2005 , she described the weather in La Jolla as " like heaven . " However , she left La Jolla less than a year after moving there , stating in January 2006 that the weather was too cold . She purchased a six @-@ bedroom home in Rancho Mirage , California , in December 2005 , allowing her to be closer to her son in Los Angeles . 
 On July 18 , 2010 , Rice auctioned off her large collection of antique dolls at <unk> 's in Chicago . Beginning in mid @-@ 2010 and continuing through early 2011 , Rice also began auctioning off her household possessions , collectibles featured in her many books , jewelry , and wardrobe on eBay . She also sold a large portion of her library collection to Powell 's Books . 
 = = = Distancing from Christianity = = = 
 On July 28 , 2010 , Rice publicly announced her disdain for the current state of Christianity on her Facebook page , stating , " Today I quit being a Christian .... I remain committed to Christ as always but not to being ' Christian ' or to being part of Christianity . It 's simply impossible for me to ' belong ' to this quarrelsome , hostile , <unk> , and deservedly infamous group . For ten years , I 've tried . I 've failed . I 'm an outsider . My conscience will allow nothing else . " Shortly thereafter , she clarified her statement : " My faith in Christ is central to my life . My conversion from a pessimistic atheist lost in a world I didn 't understand , to an optimistic believer in a universe created and sustained by a loving God is crucial to me . But following Christ does not mean following His followers . Christ is infinitely more important than Christianity and always will be , no matter what Christianity is , has been , or might become . " 
 Following her announcement , Rice 's critique of Christianity was commented upon by numerous journalists and pundits . In an interview with the Los Angeles Times , Rice elaborated on her view regarding being a member of a Christian church : " I feel much more morally comfortable walking away from organized religion . I respect that there are all kinds of denominations and all kinds of churches , but it 's the entire controversy , the entire conversation that I need to walk away from right now . " In response to the question , " how do you follow Christ without a church ? " Rice replied : " I think the basic ritual is simply prayer . It 's talking to God , putting things in the hands of God , trusting that you 're living in God 's world and praying for God 's guidance . And being absolutely faithful to the core principles of Jesus ' teachings . " In 2011 , Rice participated in the " I Am Second " project , with a short documentary about her spiritual journey . On April 14 , 2013 , Rice stated in a Facebook post that she was a secular humanist . On July 28 , 2014 Rice stated in a Facebook post that Christ is still central to her life , but not in the way he is presented by organized religion . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 In 1994 , Neil Jordan directed a motion picture adaptation of Interview with the Vampire , based on Rice 's own screenplay . The movie starred Tom Cruise as Lestat , Brad Pitt as the guilt @-@ ridden Louis , and a young Kirsten Dunst in her breakout role as the deceitful child vampire Claudia . 
 A second film adaptation , Queen of the Damned , was released in February 2002 , starring Stuart Townsend as the vampire Lestat and singer Aaliyah as Akasha . The movie combined plot points from both the novel The Queen of the Damned , as well as from The Vampire Lestat . Produced on a budget of $ 35 million , the film recouped only $ 30 million at the U.S. box office . On her Facebook page , Rice distanced herself from the film , and has stated that she feels the filmmakers " mutilated " her work in adapting the novel . 
 The 1994 film Exit to Eden , based loosely on the book Rice published as Anne Rampling , starred Rosie O 'Donnell and Dan Aykroyd . The work was transformed from a BDSM @-@ themed love story into a police comedy , and was widely considered a box @-@ office failure , receiving near @-@ universal negative reviews . 
 A film adaptation of Christ the Lord was reported to be in the early stages of development in February 2012 . It was reported that Chris Columbus had signed on to produce , and that Cyrus <unk> had already completed the script . On November 8 , 2014 , during an interview with her long @-@ time editor , Victoria Wilson , at the Chicago Humanities Festival , Rice revealed that filming had finished on the movie and was going into post @-@ production . The film , titled The Young Messiah , was released in 2016 . 
 In August 2014 , Universal Pictures had acquired the rights to Rice 's Vampire Chronicles . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 In 1997 , Rice wrote the story for a television pilot entitled Rag and Bone , featuring elements of both horror and crime fiction . Screenwriter James D. Parriott penned the screenplay , and the pilot ultimately aired on CBS , starring Dean Cain and Robert Patrick . 
 The Feast of All Saints was made into a Showtime original miniseries in 2001 , directed by Peter Medak and starring James Earl Jones and Gloria Reuben . As of 2002 , NBC had plans to adapt Rice 's Lives of the Mayfair Witches trilogy into a miniseries , but the project never entered production . 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 On April 25 , 2006 , the musical Lestat , based on Rice 's Vampire Chronicles books , opened at the Palace Theatre on Broadway after having its world premiere in San Francisco , California , in December 2005 . With music by Elton John and lyrics by Bernie Taupin , it was the inaugural production of the newly established Warner Brothers Theatre Ventures . Despite Rice 's own overwhelming approval and praise , the show received disappointing attendance and largely negative reviews from critics . Lestat closed a month later on May 28 , 2006 , after just 33 previews and 39 regular performances . The release of the cast recording of the show is reportedly on hold indefinitely . 
 = = = Comics = = = 
 Several of Anne Rice 's novels have been adapted into comic books . Below is a list of adaptations to date , along with their publishers and years of publication . 
 Anne Rice 's The Vampire Lestat # 1 – 12 by Innovation Comics ( 1990 ) , compiled into one volume by Ballantine Books ( 1991 ) 
 Anne Rice 's The Mummy or Ramses the Damned # 1 – 12 by Millennium Publications ( 1990 ) 
 Anne Rice 's The Queen of the Damned # 1 – 11 ( # 12 was never published ) by Innovation Comics ( 1991 ) 
 Anne Rice 's The Master of Rampling Gate ( one @-@ shot ) by Innovation Comics ( 1991 ) 
 Anne Rice 's The Vampire Companion # 1 – 3 by Innovation Comics ( 1991 ) 
 Anne Rice 's Interview with a Vampire # 1 – 12 by Innovation Comics ( 1992 ) 
 Anne Rice 's The Witching Hour # 1 – 5 by Millennium Publications ( 1992 ) , # 1 @-@ 3 compiled into Anne Rice 's The Witching Hour : The Beginning by Millennium Publications ( 1994 ) 
 Anne Rice 's The Tale of the Body Thief # 1 – 4 ( numbers 5 – 12 were never published ) by Sicilian Dragon ( 1999 ) , completed in one volume by Sicilian Dragon ( 2000 ) 
 Anne Rice 's Servant of the Bones # 1 – 6 by IDW Publishing ( 2011 ) , compiled into one volume by IDW ( 2012 ) 
 Interview with the Vampire : Claudia 's Story by Yen Press ( 2012 ) 
 = = = Fan fiction = = = 
 Rice initially expressed an adamant stance against fan fiction based on her works , and particularly in opposition to such fiction based on The Vampire Chronicles , releasing a statement on April 7 , 2000 , that disallowed all such efforts , citing copyright issues . She subsequently requested that <unk> remove stories featuring her characters . In 2012 , Metro reported that Rice developed a milder stance on the issue . " I got upset about 20 years ago because I thought it would block me , " she said . " However , it 's been very easy to avoid reading any , so live and let live . If I were a young writer , I 'd want to own my own ideas . But maybe fan fiction is a transitional phase : whatever gets you there , gets you there . " 
 = = = The Vampire Chronicles = = = 
 Interview with a Vampire ( 1976 ) 
 The Vampire Lestat ( 1985 ) 
 The Queen of the Damned ( 1988 ) 
 The Tale of the Body Thief ( 1992 ) 
 <unk> the Devil ( 1995 ) 
 The Vampire Armand ( 1998 ) 
 Merrick ( 2000 ) 
 Blood and Gold ( 2001 ) 
 Blackwood Farm ( 2002 ) 
 Blood Canticle ( 2003 ) 
 " Claudia 's Story " ( 2012 ) 
 Prince Lestat ( 2014 ) 
 " Prince Lestat and the Realms of Atlantis " ( 2016 ) 
 = = = New Tales of the Vampires = = = 
 Pandora ( 1998 ) 
 Vittorio the Vampire ( 1999 ) 
 = = = Lives of the Mayfair Witches = = = 
 The Witching Hour ( 1990 ) 
 Lasher ( 1993 ) 
 <unk> ( 1994 ) 
 = = = Christ the Lord = = = 
 Christ the Lord : Out of Egypt ( 2005 ) 
 Christ the Lord : The Road to Cana ( 2008 ) 
 Christ the Lord : The Kingdom of Heaven ( currently on hold ) 
 = = = Songs of the Seraphim = = = 
 Angel Time ( 2009 ) 
 Of Love and Evil ( 2010 ) 
 = = = The Wolf Gift Chronicles = = = 
 The Wolf Gift ( 2012 ) 
 The Wolves of Midwinter ( 2013 ) 
 = = = Miscellaneous novels = = = 
 The Feast of All Saints ( 1979 ) 
 Cry to Heaven ( 1982 ) 
 The Mummy , or Ramses the Damned ( 1989 ) 
