 = = = Libraries , Archives and Museums = = = 
 The McGill University Libraries . The McGill University Library includes 13 branches or subject libraries including the Department of Rare Books & Special Collections which holds about 350 @,@ 000 items , including books , manuscripts , maps , prints , and a general rare book collection . The Osler Library of the History of Medicine is the largest medical history library in Canada and one of the most comprehensive in the world . 
 The McGill University <unk> now administered as part of the McGill Library - houses official records of , or relating to , or people / activities connected with McGill University . The collection consists of manuscripts , texts , photographs , audio @-@ visual material , architectural records , cartographic materials , prints and drawings , microforms and artifacts . In 1962 F. Cyril James declared that the newly founded McGill University Archives ( MUA ) , while concentrating on the institutional records of McGill , had the mandate to acquire private papers of former faculty members . In the 1990s drew back their acquisition scope and in 2004 new terms of reference on private acquisitions were introduced that included a wider McGill Community . 
 The Redpath Museum houses collections of interest to ethnology , biology , paleontology , and mineralogy / geology . Built in 1882 , the Redpath is the oldest building in Canada built specifically to be a museum . 
 The McGill Medical Museum catalogues , preserves , conserves and displays collections that documents the study and practice of medicine at McGill University and its associated teaching hospitals . The Medical museum features collections , individual specimens , artifacts , equipment log books / autopsy journals / paper materials and medical instruments and apparati , 25 wax models , 200 mostly skeletal dry specimens ; and 400 lantern slides of anatomic specimens . There is a special emphasis on pathology ; there are 2000 fluid filled @-@ preserved anatomical and pathological specimens . The Osler collection , for example consists of 60 wet specimens while The Abbott collection consists of 80 wet specimens , mostly examples of congenital cardiac disease . 
 = = Student life = = 
 = = = Student body = = = 
 McGill 's student population includes 22 @,@ 778 undergraduate and 7 @,@ 247 graduate students representing diverse geographic and linguistic backgrounds . Of the entire student population , 54 @.@ 7 % are from Quebec and 25 @.@ 4 % are from the rest of Canada , while 20 @.@ 0 % are from outside of Canada ( including the United States ) . International students hail from about 150 different countries , with Americans comprising about half of all international undergraduates and a third of all international postgraduates in the entering class of 2010 . Almost half of McGill students claim a first language other than English . While the university is located in a Francophone province , only 17 @.@ 8 % of the students claim French as their mother tongue , compared to 51 @.@ 8 % who claim English and 30 @.@ 5 % who claim some other language . 
 = = = Student organizations = = = 
 The campus has an active students ' society represented by the undergraduate Students ' Society of McGill University ( <unk> ) and the Post @-@ Graduate Students ' Society of McGill University ( <unk> ) . Due to the large postdoctoral population , the <unk> also contains a semi @-@ autonomous Association of Postdoctoral Fellows ( APF ) . In addition , each faculty and department has its own student governing body , the largest faculty associations being the Arts Undergraduate Society ( AUS ) and the Science Undergraduate Society ( SUS ) . The oldest is the Medical Students Society , founded in 1859 . 
 There are hundreds of clubs and student organizations at the university . Many of them are centred around McGill 's student union building , the University Centre . In 1992 , students held a referendum which called for the University Centre to be named for actor and McGill alumnus William Shatner . The university administration refused to accept the name and did not attend the opening . Traditionally , the administration names buildings in honour of deceased members of the university community or for major benefactors — Shatner is neither . 
 McGill has a number of student @-@ run publications . The McGill Daily , first published in 1911 , was previously published twice weekly , but shifted to a once @-@ a @-@ week publication schedule in September 2013 due to tightened budgets . The <unk> français is the Daily 's French @-@ language counterpart . The combined circulation of both papers is over 28 @,@ 000 . The McGill Tribune currently publishes once a week , circulating approximately 11 @,@ 000 copies across campus . The Bull & Bear , operating under the Management Undergraduate Society , publishes 1 @,@ 000 copies each month . The satirical publication Plumber 's <unk> and its counterpart Plumber 's <unk> ( established in 2012 ) operate under the Engineering Undergraduate Society . Past publications include the Red Herring and the Plumber 's Pot . <unk> ( 90 @.@ 3 FM ) is the campus radio station . <unk> is the University TV station , broadcasting on closed @-@ circuit television and over the internet . 
 The McGill University Faculty of Law is home to three student @-@ run academic journals , including the world @-@ renowned McGill Law Journal , founded in 1952 . Other student @-@ run journals include such publications as the McGill Journal of Law and Health , the McGill Journal of Medicine , and the McGill Journal of Education . 
 While fraternities and sororities are not a large part of student life at McGill , some , including fraternities Zeta Psi , Delta Kappa Epsilon , Sigma Alpha Epsilon , Alpha Delta Phi , Alpha Epsilon Pi , Alpha Sigma Phi , Kappa Alpha Society and Sigma Chi and sororities Gamma Phi Beta , Kappa Kappa Gamma , Kappa Alpha Theta , and Alpha Omicron Pi have been established at the university . Phi Kappa Pi , Canada 's only national fraternity , was founded at McGill and the University of Toronto in 1913 and continues to be active . With just over 2 % of the student body population participating , involvement is below that of most American universities , but on par with most Canadian schools . 
 Queer McGill ( formerly Gay McGill ) has supported lesbian , bisexual , gay , and transgender students since 1972 . 
 Many large organizations , including NGOs , have a local presence on campus . The International Relations Students Association of McGill ( <unk> ) publishes the world 's only all @-@ inclusive international relations research journal , the McGill International Review and currently has consultative status with the UN 's Economic and Social Council ( ECOSOC ) and the United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organization ( UNESCO ) . Since 1990 , <unk> has hosted an annual Model United Nations , <unk> , for university students and since 1993 it has hosted an annual Model United Nations , <unk> , for high school students . Other humanitarian groups represented at McGill include UNICEF , Oxfam , End Poverty Now , Right to Play , and Free the Children . 
 = = = Athletics = = = 
 McGill is represented in Canadian Interuniversity Sport ( CIS ) by the McGill Redmen ( men 's ) and the McGill Martlets ( women 's ) . Following a major restructuring of the varsity programme for the fall semester of 2010 , McGill is currently home to 28 varsity teams . McGill is known for its strong hockey and lacrosse programs . McGill 's unique mascot , Marty the Martlet , was introduced during the 2005 Homecoming game , 
 The downtown McGill campus sport and exercise facilities include : the McGill Sports Centre ( which includes the Tomlinson Fieldhouse and the Windsor Varsity Clinic ) , Molson Stadium , Memorial Pool , Tomlinson Hall , McConnell Arena , Forbes Field , many outdoor tennis courts and other extra @-@ curricular arenas and faculties . The Macdonald Campus facilities , include an arena , a gymnasium , a pool , tennis courts , fitness centres and hundreds of acres of green space for regular use . The university 's largest sporting venue , Molson Stadium , was constructed in 1914 . Following an expansion project completed in 2010 , it now seats just over 25 @,@ 000 , and is the current home field of the Montreal Alouettes . 
 = = = = Athletic history = = = = 
 In 1868 , the first recorded game of rugby in North America occurred in Montreal , between British army officers and McGill students , giving McGill the oldest university @-@ affiliated rugby club in North America . Other McGill @-@ originated sports evolved out of rugby rules : football , hockey , and basketball . The first game of North American football was played between McGill and Harvard on May 14 , 1874 , leading to the spread of American football throughout the Ivy League . 
 On March 3 , 1875 , the first organized indoor hockey game was played at Montreal 's Victoria Skating Rink between two nine @-@ player teams , including James Creighton and several McGill University students . The McGill University Hockey Club , the first organized hockey club , was founded in 1877 and played its first game on January 31 , 1877 . Very soon thereafter , those McGill students wrote the first hockey rule book . McGill alumnus James Naismith invented basketball in early December 1891 . Norwegian Herman " Jackrabbit " Smith @-@ Johannsen ( later the coach of Canada 's 1932 Olympic team ) popularized cross @-@ country skiing in North America from McGill 's Gault Estate in Mont St. Hilaire . 
 There has been a McGill alumnus or alumna competing at every Olympic Games since 1908 . Swimmer George Hodgson won two gold medals at the 1912 Summer Olympics , ice hockey goaltender Kim St @-@ Pierre won gold medals at the 2002 Winter Olympics and at the 2006 Winter Olympics . Other 2006 gold medalists are Jennifer Heil ( women 's freestyle mogul ) and goaltender <unk> <unk> ( women 's ice hockey ) . 
 In 1996 , the McGill Sports Hall of Fame was established to honour its best student athletes . Notable members of the Hall of Fame include James Naismith and Sydney Pierce . 
 A 2005 hazing scandal forced the cancellation of the final two games in the McGill Redmen football season . 
 In 2006 , McGill 's Senate approved a proposed anti @-@ hazing policy to define forbidden initiation practices . 
 = = = = Fight song = = = = 
 The McGill University song book , compiled by a committee of graduates and undergraduates , was published in Montreal by W.F. Brown , circa 1896 . Notable among a number of songs commonly played and sung at various events such as commencement and convocation , and athletic games are : 
 " Alma Mater McGill , " with words by J. McDougall ; 
 " L 'Enfant du McGill , " with words by Louis @-@ Honoré <unk> , and music by Guillaume Couture ; 
 " God Save McGill , " with words by W.M. <unk> , tune ' God Save the Queen ' ; 
 " A Health to Old McGill , " with words by R.W. Huntingdon , and music by Mrs W.C. Baynes ; 
 " McGill , " with words by C.W. Colby , sung to the tune ' The Gay Cavalier ' ; 
 " McGill Revisited , " with words by John Cox , 
 " McGill Students , " with words by <unk> Evans ; 
 " The Student of McGill , " with words by R.D. McGibbon 
 = = = = Rivalries = = = = 
 McGill maintains an academic and athletic rivalry with Queen 's University in Kingston , Ontario . Competition between rowing athletes at the two schools has inspired an annual boat race between the two universities in the spring of each year since 1997 , inspired by the famous Oxford @-@ Cambridge Boat Race . The football rivalry , which started in 1884 , ended after Canadian university athletic divisions were re @-@ organized in 2000 ; the Ontario @-@ Quebec Intercollegiate Football Conference was divided into Ontario University Athletics and Quebec Student Sports Federation . The rivalry returned in 2002 when it transferred to the annual home @-@ and @-@ home hockey games between the two institutions . Queen 's students refer to these matches as " Kill McGill " games , and usually show up in Montreal in atypically large numbers to cheer on the Queen 's Golden Gaels hockey team . In 2007 , McGill students arrived in bus @-@ loads to cheer on the McGill Redmen , occupying a third of Queen 's Jock Harty Arena . 
 The school also competes in the annual " Old Four ( IV ) " soccer tournament , with Queen 's University , the University of Toronto and the University of Western Ontario . 
 McGill and Harvard are also athletic rivals , as demonstrated by the biennial Harvard @-@ McGill rugby games , alternately played in Montreal and Cambridge . 
 = = = Historical links = = = 
 The University of Glasgow , one of four ancient Scottish universities and member of the British Russell Group . Founded in 1451 , the original benefactor of McGill College , James McGill , studied here in the 1750s before his family worked as merchants in the city . The two universities continue this link today as part of Universitas 21 , an international student exchange programme . 
 The University of Edinburgh , one of four ancient Scottish universities and member of the British Russell Group . The University was founded as a civic institution in 1583 and has maintained a strong reputation in the study of medicine , among other disciplines . McGill 's first ( and , for several years , its only ) faculty , Medicine , was founded by four physicians / surgeons who had trained in Edinburgh . In common with Glasgow , Edinburgh shares an international exchange link with McGill through Universitas 21 . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 In the arts , McGill students include three Pulitzer Prize winners , Templeton Prize winner Charles Taylor , essayist and novelist John Ralston Saul , a Companion of the Order of Canada along with Charles Taylor , Juno Award winner Sam Roberts , Singer @-@ Songwriter Prita Chhabra and William Shatner , best known for his portrayal of Captain Kirk on Star Trek and winner of several Emmy Awards . Nine Academy Award winners studied at McGill . Poet and singer @-@ songwriter Leonard Cohen majored in English at McGill and graduated in 1955 . Composer and six @-@ time Grammy award winner Burt Bacharach studied music at McGill , and Win Butler and Régine Chassagne of the Grammy Award winning group Arcade Fire met while studying at McGill . In the sciences , students include doctors , inventors , three astronauts and scientist Dr. Mark J. <unk> , a member of the Order of Canada . On October 16 , 2009 , the 42nd American president , Bill Clinton accepted an Honorary Doctorate from McGill University . 
 Some politicians and government officials both within Canada and abroad are McGill alumni , including three Canadian prime ministers and thirteen justices of the Supreme Court of Canada . Vaira Vīķe @-@ Freiberga completed her Ph.D. at McGill and was elected as president of the Republic of Latvia in 1999 as the first female president in Eastern Europe after Turkey 's Tansu Çiller . Ahmed <unk> also completed a Ph.D. at McGill in 1983 and has served as the youngest prime minister of Egypt since the republic 's founding 1953 . Zbigniew Brzezinski , Former United States National Security Advisor under President Jimmy Carter completed his undergraduate studies at McGill . 
 In the 2015 Canadian election , a total of twenty @-@ five former McGill students were elected as Members of Parliament , including the current Prime Minister of Canada , Justin Trudeau and three cabinet members . In the United States , 2006 McGill graduate Ilya <unk> is a Democratic candidate for the U.S. House of Representatives . 
 Corporate leaders and media personalities have also studied at McGill . Leading Canadian philanthropist and entrepreneur Seymour Schulich donated $ 20 million , the highest donation to any music school in Canada , to the newly named Schulich School of Music . Henry <unk> , a professor at McGill 's Desautels Faculty of Management is an acclaimed management thinker and contributes to The New York Times and The Economist . <unk> is an Officer of the Order of Canada . Co @-@ founder and president of <unk> Electronic Systems Ltd . , which innovates globally in graphics , video editing , and image processing , Lorne Trottier , after whom the new engineering building is named , has donated $ 10 million towards services in information and technology at McGill . Media magnate Conrad Black also studied at McGill . 
 McGill students are also recognized as athletes , including various members of Canadian national teams and twenty @-@ eight Olympic medalists . Since the Olympics began , McGill has produced 112 Olympians who have won a total of eight gold medals , nine silver , and eleven bronze . 
 Jacob Viner , who would later go on to form the beginnings of the modern day Chicago School of Economics , earned his undergraduate degree from McGill . William Osler , one of the founders of the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine , and the originator of the concept of medical residency , received his medical degree from McGill . 
 Professors at McGill have won 26 Prix du Québec , 14 Prix de l 'Association francophone pour le savoir and 21 Killam Prizes . Twelve Nobel Laureates have studied or taught at McGill , among them Otto Hahn , who was awarded the 1944 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his discovery of the nuclear fission of uranium and thorium . 
 Since 1902 , Canadian undergraduate students have been eligible for Rhodes Scholarships to study at the University of Oxford . Since then , McGill students have won 140 Rhodes Scholarships – more than any other Canadian University . These students include parliamentary and cabinet ministers David Lewis ( 1932 ) , Alastair Gillespie ( 1947 ) , and Marcel Massé ( 1963 ) , and political philosopher Charles Taylor ( 1952 ) . 
 = Satisfied ( DecembeRadio album ) = 
 Satisfied is the fourth studio album by American Christian rock band DecembeRadio ; it was released in August 2008 through Slanted Records . Like their previous album , DecembeRadio ( 2006 ) , it was recorded at Southern Tracks Recording in Atlanta , Georgia , and produced by Scotty Wilbanks . The songs were written to ensure they would translate well in a concert setting , and the band strove to write more uplifting lyrics than those on their previous album . Recording sessions began in September 2007 and were not completed until the second quarter of 2008 , as the sessions twice were interrupted for concert tours . 
 The album debuted at its peak positions of number 116 on the Billboard 200 and number three on the Billboard Top Christian Albums charts ; first week sales nearly doubled those of the band 's previous album . DecembeRadio promoted Satisfied by making television and radio appearances ahead of its release , filming two promotional videos and headlining a concert tour of the United States . Satisfied received generally positive reviews ; most critics approved of the band 's continuation of the Southern rock sound evident on DecembeRadio . While critics disagreed on whether Satisfied measured up to DecembeRadio , a frequent complaint was the album 's lack of lyrical depth . Satisfied won the 2009 Gospel Music Association Dove Award for Rock Album of the Year . 
 = = Writing and production = = 
 DecembeRadio felt pressure to meet growing expectations following the accolades received for their previous album , DecembeRadio ( 2006 ) , which won a Gospel Music Association Dove Award and was nominated for a Grammy Award . " We had some great stuff go on with the first record , but I think the biggest thing over the past two years has been trying to make sure Satisfied is not a sophomore slump " said lead guitarist Brian Bunn . While the self @-@ titled album was written and recorded with little thought to how the songs would translate in concert , the experience of opening for Third Day helped DecembeRadio learn what works best live . Thus it was the band 's goal to " make sure every single song on the [ next ] album worked well in a live concert setting " , according to Bunn . 
 Writing for Satisfied began soon after the release of DecembeRadio and occurred in spurts , as the band found more success in letting ideas come to them spontaneously than in meeting for dedicated writing sessions . The chorus melody of " Be Alright " , for example , popped into bassist and lead singer Josh Reedy 's head while showering . On another occasion , Reedy came up with a riff on GarageBand while traveling between gigs . Two of the earliest completed songs , " Satisfy Me " and " Find You Waiting " , were included in the band 's live shows by April 2008 . The former was the first song written for the album , and the latter was first released on the expanded edition of DecembeRadio in November 2007 . 
 For Satisfied , DecembeRadio made a concerted effort to write lyrics that were more uplifting than those featured on their previous album . Said Bunn , " Our first record had a lot of darker songs such as ' Razor ' and ' Greed ' . Even though we liked some of that , we truly realized we 're a bunch of happy guys ! We like to have fun onstage and in our lives , so we didn 't want this album to be as dark as the last one . " To that end , the band wrote and included on Satisfied songs like " Better Man " , which Reedy says imparts that " if we learn from our mistakes and follow Jesus Christ it will make us a better man " , and the " vertical worship song " " For Your Glory " . The band was inspired to write " Find You Waiting " following the death of a friend of producer Scotty Wilbanks . At the funeral , the man 's widow stood over the casket praising God with arms raised amidst her sorrow . " It struck a chord in our hearts to write a song about how , no matter what current problem we might be facing , God 's love and mercy is always waiting there for us " , said Reedy . 
 Recording of Satisfied began in September 2007 at Southern Tracks Recording in Atlanta , Georgia . As with DecembeRadio 's previous album , Scotty Wilbanks was hired as the producer . Said Reedy of Wilbanks , " We just have a <unk> as musicians and as players .... There 's a lot of excitement and passion that comes from his end .... [ A ] big thing for us is having a really good time . If we 're not having a good time making a record , it 's gonna show and you 're gonna hear it . " To capture the excitement of their live shows , DecembeRadio recorded basic tracks live in the studio . Reedy said recording live is particularly useful for capturing energetic performances from drummer Boone Daughdrill . " It 's definitely very critical for him to be on top of his game and feeling like it 's a unit , because you play off of each other . It 's a real push and pull thing that happens in rock and roll music that you really can 't sometimes capture by just doing it track by track by track " , said Reedy . Miker said the band recorded a handful of songs that were " out of the box of where CCM music is " , and Reedy noted that some tracks " stretched what we 're doing ... with production . " " Gasoline " , for example , includes a " Beatlesque " section with a children 's choir , string section and piccolo trumpet , and " Falling for You " begins and ends with some guitar " shred licks " that started as a joke in the writing process . 
 DecembeRadio took a break from recording to headline the Drifter Tour in October and November , which also featured Nevertheless , Superhero and Bread of Stone . Recording resumed in early 2008 , but the sessions were again interrupted for a major tour , this time in support of Third Day in March and April . Soon after the tour ended , DecembeRadio finished recording the album . 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 Satisfied was released through Slanted Records on August 26 , 2008 , and debuted at its peak positions of number 116 on the Billboard 200 and number three on the Billboard Top Christian Albums charts . First week sales nearly doubled those of DecembeRadio . The album cover was the product of a spontaneous suggestion from the band 's manager on the day of a photoshoot . Another photo had been slated for the album cover , but the band found a swamp and acted on their manager 's idea . " We went down there , took off our shoes , rolled up our jeans a little bit and walked right into the water — and stood there for 45 minutes while we got our picture taken . It 's a good thing we did it because when we got the pictures back , those were by far our favorite ! " said Bunn . 
 DecembeRadio promoted Satisfied by making television and radio appearances in Atlanta before their concert at the local Hard Rock Cafe on August 20 . Six days later , the band hosted an album release party at the Jefferson Center in Roanoke , Virginia , which sold out the 938 @-@ seat venue . After returning to the studio in September to record the Comfort & Joy Christmas EP , DecembeRadio filmed promotional videos for " Gasoline " and " Look for Me " in October . The band then headlined a month @-@ long U.S. tour in support of Satisfied with Ruth , <unk> and speaker Billy Wayne . DecembeRadio returned to the road in February 2009 to open for Newsboys on their Join the Tribe Tour . During the tour , the video for " Look for Me " debuted on the Gospel Music Channel . According to Miker , however , some radio stations refused to play the track because the lyrics were written from the perspective of God . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Satisfied was generally regarded by critics as a continuation of the musical style from their previous album . Many reviewers praised DecembeRadio 's " southern flavored rock " , " punchy rhythm section " and " great guitar work " , as well as the " ferocious howls of front man Josh Reedy " . Gospel Music Channel 's Beau Black , however , found that DecembeRadio 's roots are " getting tougher to spot " as they try to be " all things to all people " . Critics varied more widely on whether Satisfied 's tracks measure up to those of DecembeRadio . Russ Breimeier of Christianity Today felt the songs " fail to leave as lasting an impression as those on the debut " . Conversely , Andy Argyrakis , writing for Christian Music Central , detected more " blissfully controlled chaos " on Satisfied than on DecembeRadio , and Billboard 's Deborah Evans Price called the album " even stronger " than the last and the band 's playing " even tighter " . A more moderate view was offered by Allmusic 's Jared Johnson , who noted that while Satisfied contains " few , if any , inconsistencies or weak spots " , it " falls short " due to " the lack of a strong single " . 
 A frequent complaint among critics was the album 's lack of lyrical depth . Black wrote that " Satisfy Me " " delivers a message listeners have likely heard a time or six before " , and Scott <unk> of Jesus Freak Hideout opined that DecembeRadio struggle to " be blatant about [ their ] faith without sounding cheesy " . Breimeier described the lyrics as walking " a fine line between open expressions of faith and CCM clichés " and granted that while " Find You Waiting " " relies heavily on platitudes , it 's still powerfully affecting and relatable testimony " . Argyrakis , though , remarked that the band " has plenty to say " and their " stacked sounds are never at the expense of a meaningful gospel message " . 
 Satisfied won the 2009 Dove Award for Rock Album of the Year and two of its tracks , " Find You Waiting " and " Better Man " , were nominated for Rock / Contemporary Recorded Song of the Year and Rock Recorded Song of the Year , respectively . Reedy said that such recognition " inspires us to be ... better at what we do musically and bolder in what we believe in our faith . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Brian Bunn , Boone Daughdrill , Eric Miker , Josh Reedy and Scotty Wilbanks , except where noted . 
 " Better Man " – 3 : 23 
 " Satisfy Me " – 3 : 22 
 " Believer " – 3 : 40 
 " For Your Glory " ( Bunn , Daughdrill , Miker , Reedy , Wilbanks , Brian White ) – 3 : 56 
 " Gasoline " – 2 : 51 
 " Falling for You " – 2 : 39 
 " Look for Me " ( Bunn , Daughdrill , Miker , Reedy , Wilbanks , White ) – 4 : 01 
 " Love Can " ( Bunn , Daughdrill , Miker , Reedy , Wilbanks , Russ Lee ) – 4 : 14 
 " Peace of Mind " – 3 : 32 
 " Be Alright " – 3 : 16 
 " Powerful Thing " ( Bunn , Daughdrill , Miker , Reedy , Wilbanks , White ) – 3 : 24 
 " Find You Waiting " – 4 : 07 
 1 : 31 of silence brings the track length to 5 : 38 
 ( hidden track ) – 4 : 48 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = Fox Terrier = 
 Fox Terriers are two different breeds of the terrier dog type : the Smooth Fox Terrier and the Wire Fox Terrier . Both of these breeds originated in the 19th century from a handful of dogs who are descended from earlier varieties of British terriers , and are related to other modern white terrier breeds . In addition , a number of breeds have diverged from these two main types of fox terrier and have been recognised separately , including the Jack Russell Terrier , Miniature Fox Terrier and Rat Terrier . The Wire and Smooth Fox Terriers share similar characteristics , the main differences being in the coat and markings . They have been successful in conformation shows , more prominently in America than their homeland . 
 = = History = = 
 Small dogs were observed by the Romans in England in 54 BC being used by hunters to chase quarry into burrows and dens , demonstrating the instinctive terrier behaviour of " going to earth " . English physician John Caius described the English terrier type in his 1577 work English <unk> . By the 18th century , it was recorded that all terriers were wire haired , and black and tan in colour . 
 The earliest record of any white terrier was a dog named Pitch , who was owned by Colonel Thomas Thornton in 1790 . The dog was the subject of a painting by Sawrey Gilpin , who created a portrait of it while it was still alive . An engraving of this painting , made prior to 1810 , was accompanied by the text , " It would be necessary to notice Colonel Thorton 's terriers if they were only on account of his justly celebrated Pitch , from whom are descended most of the white terriers in the kingdom . " Dog writers of the early 20th century suggested that Pitch was a terrier @-@ greyhound cross , which was how the colour was introduced into the breed . 
 Not much is known of early 19th century breeding practices that came to create the modern Fox Terrier . However it is thought that the Beagle , Old English Bulldog , English Toy Terrier , Pointer and even Dalmatian were all used in the creation and stabilisation of the breed . 
 From 1870 onwards , a complete pedigree for Fox Terriers exists . Three dogs , known as Old Jock , Trap and Tartar , are the ancestors of most modern strains of white terrier . Old Jock was bred from a black and tan terrier , while Trap was from the strain out of Reverend John Russell 's dogs . Although definitive history on Tartar is not known , he is also thought to have come from black and tan terrier stock . Of the female dogs from this period , Grove Nettle was the best known . In addition to those dogs , another named Old Tip is thought to be the forefather of the modern Wire Fox Terrier . One Fox Terrier breeder during this period was Parson John " Jack " Russell , who would later have the Jack Russell Terrier series of breeds named after him . 
 The terrier of this period was short of leg , built in a chunky fashion , and had a skull that was broad across the top . Used in hunting packs and kept in kennels along with English Foxhounds , they were bred for their ability to drive the fox out of its den . Gradually the pace of the hunt became faster , and the terriers were bred with longer legs for more speed towards the end of the 18th century . However the increased size meant that the Fox Terrier became too big to be used for its original purpose , and its use in fox hunting began to decline . 
 The Fox Terrier Club of England was founded in 1876 , with the American Fox Terrier Club following nine years later , becoming the first breed speciality club to become a member of the American Kennel Club . A female Smooth Fox Terrier bred by Winthrop Rutherfurd named Warren Remedy was the first winner of Best in Show at the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show in 1907 , 1908 , and 1909 . Following the popularity of conformation dog shows , the Fox Terrier was the result of selective breeding . For instance , by 1949 , 120 of 140 Wire Fox Terrier champions were descended from a single championship @-@ winning dog . 
 = = Modern breeds = = 
 There are two main breeds of Fox Terrier , Smooth and Wire , both of which originate in England . In addition , there are several descendant breeds which have been developed in a variety of countries . For example , the American Toy Fox Terrier was developed from the Smooth Fox Terrier , Italian Greyhound , Manchester Terrier , Miniature Pinscher and Chihuahua breeds . 
 Both major types of Fox Terrier are mostly white with coloured markings and have similar facial characteristics . They are essentially the same except for differences in coats , and slight differences in colouration and markings . Markings on either type can appear black at birth on the head , but may lighten in adult life , the most common colours being tan and black . The markings are a type of piebald spotting . Although the two main breeds were originally commonly interbred , this no longer occurs in pure @-@ bred lines . 
 The Fox Terrier has been more successful than any other breed at the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show , with four Best in Show titles going to the Smooth Fox Terrier and fourteen titles going to the Wire Fox Terrier . They were both shown as one breed with two coat variations ; this changed in 1985 when the American Kennel Club listed the two as separate breeds . In the UK , at Crufts , the Smooth Fox Terrier has not won any Best in Show titles , while the Wire Fox Terrier has won on three occasions . 
 = = = Smooth Fox Terrier = = = 
 The Smooth Fox Terrier has a short , hard coat which is predominantly white . It measures 14 – 15 @.@ 5 inches ( 36 – 39 cm ) at the withers , and weighs between 15 – 19 pounds ( 6 @.@ 8 – 8 @.@ 6 kg ) . The head of this breed is long and wedge shaped , with small , dark eyes and ears that are v @-@ shaped . 
 The breed has been identified as one of several Vulnerable Native Breeds in the UK . This is when there are fewer than 300 annual registrations with The Kennel Club . In 2010 , there were 155 Smooth Fox Terriers registered , compared to 693 for the Wire Fox Terrier and 8 @,@ 663 for the most popular breed in the Terrier Group , the Staffordshire Bull Terrier . 
 The most successful dog at the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show was Ch . Warren Remedy , who won the Best in Show title three times between 1907 and 1909 . These victories were followed by a further Best in Show title for Ch . Sabine Rarebit in 1910 . Despite the Smooth Fox Terrier breed winning the first four Best in Show titles at Westminster , it has not won again since . 
 = = = Wire Fox Terrier = = = 
 The Wire Haired Fox Terrier has a hard and crisp double coat with a coarse texture underneath that provides protection from the cold . It should be so dense that the skin cannot be seen or felt . The individual hairs should twist , but are not curly . An average member of the breed should measure 14 – 15 @.@ 5 inches ( 36 – 39 cm ) at the withers and weigh between 15 – 19 pounds ( 6 @.@ 8 – 8 @.@ 6 kg ) . It has similar features to the Smooth Fox Terrier with small dark eyes and v @-@ shaped ears . Its body is shorter than it is tall . 
 King Edward VII owned a Wire Fox Terrier from the Notts kennel called Caeser of Notts , which did a great deal to popularise the breed at the turn of the 20th century . Another member of the Notts kennel was an early winner of Best Champion at Crufts in 1911 named <unk> of Notts . Other individual dogs which greatly influenced the breed included Ch . Talavera Simon , born in 1924 , and Ch . <unk> Emperor , born in 1960 . 
 = = = Descendant breeds = = = 
 = = Common health issues = = 
 <unk> gravis , a neuromuscular disease , is inheritable in the Smooth Fox Terrier through an autosomal recessive gene . This can also be a symptom of megaesophagus , which is a health issue for the Wire Fox Terrier . Another inheritable condition in the Smooth Fox Terrier is cataracts , which is more prevalent than average in the breed . Both types of Fox Terrier can be susceptible to allergies . 
 In a survey conducted by The Kennel Club , the primary cause of death for Fox Terriers was old age , causing 31 @.@ 8 % of reported deaths . The secondary cause was cancer of an unspecified type , which accounted for 22 @.@ 7 % of reports . The average lifespan of a Fox Terrier is around 15 years ; however , the Kennel Club survey reported a median age at death of 13 years and 2 months . 
 = Release the Stars = 
 Release the Stars is the fifth studio album by Canadian @-@ American singer @-@ songwriter Rufus Wainwright , released through Geffen Records on May 15 , 2007 . Pet Shop Boys ' Neil Tennant was the executive producer and the album was mixed by producers Marius de Vries and Andy Bradfield . Wainwright 's most commercially successful album to date , Release the Stars charted in 13 countries , reaching Top 10 positions in Denmark , Norway , and the United Kingdom , and was certified gold in Canada and the UK . The album generated three singles : " Going to a Town " , which peaked at number 54 on the UK Singles Chart , " Rules and Regulations " , and " Tiergarten " . 
 Wainwright originally planned to create a more simple piano and voice album , but began leaning towards more lush sounds once the recording process started . Guests on Release the Stars include Richard Thompson , longtime friend and fellow singer @-@ songwriter Teddy Thompson , family members Martha Wainwright and Kate McGarrigle , Neil Tennant , Joan Wasser , and actress Siân Phillips . The world tour supporting the album lasted from May 2007 to February 2008 , and included tour stops in North America , Europe , Asia and Australia . For Release the Stars , Wainwright received two nominations for the Juno Awards of 2008 , including Adult Alternative Album of the Year and Songwriter of the Year , and won the Outstanding Music Artist award at the 19th GLAAD Media Awards . 
 = = Conception and development = = 
 " Initially , this was simply going to be an album of piano and voice " , Wainwright stated in a May 2007 interview with The Independent 's Nick Duerden . That was , however , until he visited Berlin , which influenced the album 's lush sound . Wainwright declared , " Basically , a huge wave of German Romanticism descended on the recording process , and almost drowned me . " Wainwright cited two reasons for the change in direction and the heightened dramatic flare : the cancer diagnosis received by his mother ( folk musician Kate McGarrigle ) during the album 's genesis , which he found " fueled his creative intensity in some kind of displaced attempt to get her well " , and the New York Metropolitan Opera 's commissioning Wainwright to write an opera , making Release the Stars a way of training for such a large project . Revealing the overall theme in January 2007 , Wainwright declared the album was about opening up and following impulses . " Whether it 's the environment , politics or religious warfare " , Wainwright stated in an interview with The Japan Times , " it 's time to get out there and be a part of the solution , whatever that is . " 
 For his " incredible take on what popular music means in today 's world " , Wainwright recruited Neil Tennant to advise him , act as executive producer of the album , and assist with the editing process . Parts of the album were recorded at Second Story and Legacy in New York City , Brooklyn Recording in Brooklyn , Saal 4 in Berlin , and Strongroom and Angel Studios in London . Wainwright had his sister Martha Wainwright , half @-@ sister Lucy Wainwright Roche , and mother Kate McGarrigle appear on the album , along with father and son musicians Richard Thompson and Teddy Thompson . Marius de Vries , who produced both of Wainwright 's previous albums ( Want One and Want Two ) , worked on the album , as did longtime band members Jeff Hill , Jack <unk> , and Matt Johnson . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Going to a Town " was released as a single in digital format on April 3 , 2007 , in the United States . The track was later released via digital distribution in the UK on May 7 , including " Low Grade Happiness " as a B @-@ side on iTunes . " Going to a Town " entered the UK Singles Chart on May 19 , 2007 , at number 68 . The following week ( May 26 ) , the track reached its highest position at number 54 . " Going to a Town " lasted on the chart for two weeks in total , and failed to chart in other countries . The music video for the song was directed by Sophie Muller . The video premiered in April 2007 , and Logo aired a 20 @-@ minute feature on the making of the video on April 27 , 2007 ( Making the Video : Going to a Town ) . 
 The album 's second single , " Rules and Regulations " , was released digitally in the UK on July 30 , 2007 . The song failed to chart . Petro <unk> directed the music video for " Rules and Regulations " , which features a group of men performing a choreographed dance around a long john @-@ wearing Wainwright inside a London mansion . 
 Released in October 2007 , " Tiergarten " was the third single from Release the Stars . A limited edition ( 500 copies ) 12 @-@ inch single containing " <unk> Lost in Tiergarten " was released on October 27 . A one @-@ track EP containing the <unk> remix was released in the UK via iTunes and 7digital on October 29 . Both the album version and remix of " Tiergarten " failed to chart . 
 = = Songs and themes = = 
 " Do I Disappoint You " , the album 's opener , " sees [ Wainwright ] present a withering defense of his own human frailties , while one orchestral battalion after another mount their attacks and Martha Wainwright summons ' CHAOS ! ' and ' <unk> ! ' like a marauding Fury " . " Going to a Town " , the album 's lead single , was considered by Uncut 's John Mulvey to be among the angriest lyrics Wainwright has written , an " indictment of the country of his birth that hinges on the refrain , ' I 'm so tired of you America ' " . The political track , which Wainwright claimed that he wrote in just five minutes on the eve of his departure for Berlin , confronts the Bush administration 's perceived damage to the U.S. in the form of a love song . It was his discontent with America at the time that lead Wainwright to spend some time recording the album in Berlin . " Tiergarten " , named after a large park in Berlin of the same name , is a song about Wainwright 's German boyfriend , <unk> <unk> . While recording parts of Release the Stars in Berlin , the couple visited the park often . 
 " Nobody 's Off the Hook " is written about the singer @-@ songwriter Teddy Thompson , a longtime friend of Wainwright 's . Citing Mozart , Beethoven , Schubert and Mahler as influences , Wainwright stated the string arrangements were his first attempt at writing chamber music . " Between My Legs " , which Wainwright wrote about a " boy [ he ] was infatuated with named Tommy <unk> " , is a " fantasy about being able to save your object of desire when the apocalypse comes , and bring him to some sort of hidden paradise " . The last 30 seconds of the song contains the opening notes of the title song from Andrew Lloyd Webber 's musical The Phantom of the Opera , along with a dramatic spoken word part by Siân Phillips . According to Wainwright , " Rules and Regulations " was originally written as a slow ballad for Robert Wilson , and is about the perspective of " someone who looks at athletes , but who is not an athlete " . " Not Ready to Love " is Wainwright 's " surrender to the whole idea of being loved and being able to maintain a relationship " . 
 " <unk> " is about Michael <unk> , a friend that Wainwright took to Australia for a Leonard Cohen tribute concert , who failed to include Wainwright in the computer slide show he put together . Wainwright wrote " Tulsa " after meeting The Killers frontman Brandon Flowers at a bar in Tulsa , Oklahoma . After reuniting with Flowers at the 2007 Glastonbury Festival in England , Wainwright said of their encounter that Flowers was " very flattered " and " somewhat bashful " . 
 " Leaving for Paris N ° 2 " , previously released as " Leaving for Paris " on a bonus CD for Want One in France , differs from the first version with the addition of a second verse along with added instrumental effects . In an April 2007 interview with Scotland on Sunday , Wainwright revealed the inspiration for both " Do I Disappoint You " and " Leaving for Paris N ° 2 " : 
 " [ They were ] actually written for a musical that I was thinking of writing . They 're both about the same person . Essentially it 's about an extremely beautiful individual , man or woman , who 's deathly attractive , who basically lashes out at his oppressors or <unk> or pursuers . And just tells them that , ' you know , the fact that you love me for my physical attributes is kind of a sin , and in fact I 'm a lot like you , and that 's the truth . Looking at me physically you don 't see my soul . ' And that was just [ written ] during the period when I was obsessed with good @-@ looking people and why people liked them . " 
 Wainwright later stated that the musical was Moulin Rouge ! : 
 " [ Leaving for Paris ] is a very old song . I wrote this years ago , and I 've sung it for a long time . Initially , it was a piece I wrote for Moulin Rouge ! , Baz Luhrmann 's movie . I thought it would be great for Nicole Kidman to sing , and kind of walk away from her little village and end up a prostitute in Paris . Slowly , Nicole Kidman morphed into me . Because they didn 't use it in the movie , I kept it for myself . " 
 " Sanssouci " was inspired by 18th century Prussian monarch Frederick the Great 's Rococo summer palace outside Berlin . Wainwright has said the song is about the discrepancy between expectations from success and its reality . " Release the Stars " , the title track and album closer , has a " brassy Broadway swagger " . The song 's lyrical inspiration comes from Lorca Cohen , Leonard 's daughter , " missing the New York show " ( referring to one of the Judy Garland tribute concerts Wainwright performed in June 2006 at Carnegie Hall ) . 
 = = Cover art and liner notes = = 
 The images on the front cover , back cover , and liner notes of the album are from the <unk> frieze at the Pergamon Altar in Berlin . The photos were taken by Wainwright . Insert photographs of Wainwright , the altar , the bushes , and the long path were taken by Sam Taylor Wood , Wainwright , Lucy Roche , and <unk> <unk> . In the liner notes , Wainwright gives " special thanks to all [ his ] family and friends " . 
 = = World tour = = 
 To promote the album , Wainwright embarked on a tour that lasted for nearly eight months , starting in London in May 2007 and ending in New York City in February 2008 . The tour visited the United States and Canada during June – August 2007 , the UK in October , Europe during November – December , and Japan and Australia / New Zealand during January – February 2008 . 
 Throughout much of the tour , fans could audition to join Wainwright on stage and perform their own rendition of Siân Phillips ' spoken word part in " Between My Legs " . Candidates posted their audition videos on YouTube , and a winning act was chosen for each concert . Photos of " Between My Legs " contest winners performing on stage with Wainwright were posted on his official MySpace site . The last stop of the tour was on February 14 ( Valentine 's Day ) , 2008 at Radio City Music Hall in NYC . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Overall , reception of the album was positive . In his review for The Guardian , Alexis Petridis wrote that Release the Stars " is , by anyone 's standards , a wonderful album , packed with stunning melodies and brilliant lyrics " . Billboard magazine 's Susan <unk> described the album as Wainwright 's " most unabashedly flamboyant record yet " , with " larger @-@ than @-@ life melodies wrapped in swelling strings and surging horns and buoyed by the singer 's typical swoon @-@ inducing , caramel @-@ covered tenor " . The Observer 's Stephanie Merritt called the album " complex , melodramatic , ambitious , vain , beautiful and frequently magnificent " . While she wrote that Release the Stars may not yield many chart hits , Merritt claimed " it feels like an album that will endure " . Music journalist Robert Christgau complimented the album , observing , " To prove he can , [ Wainwright ] sets just one of this career @-@ topping aggregation of florid melodies to electric guitars , and damn my heterosexual ears for liking it best " . Caitlin Moran of The Times declared , " The stars will be released , in batches of fours and fives , in every review " . Referring to Sanssouci , the former summer palace of Frederick the Great and inspiration for the song of the same name , Uncut contributor John Mulvey wrote , " If he keeps making albums as good as this , we should wall him up in there forever " . 
 However , the album did receive some criticism , mostly pertaining to its overly lavish and decadent style . Regarding Wainwright 's attempt at creating radio @-@ friendly music , Petridis claimed that Wainwright " doesn 't seem to be trying at all " by employing Neil Tennant ( a musician also known for grandiloquence ) as executive producer of the album and including extravagant orchestrations . He wrote , " every time Wainwright seems on the verge of making a straightforward appeal for the mainstream , he throws a glittery spanner in the works " . He noted the exotic instruments used in " Do I Disappoint You " : " It 's a marvelous song , but it 's lavishly decorated with thundering timpani , fluttering woodwind , pizzicato strings and brass . " Petridis questions , " Is this really the way he proposes to win over the punters who pick up two albums a year ? " In his review for NME , Priya Elan wrote , " Someone needs to tell Wainwright there 's a huge difference between ' epic ' and ' over @-@ egged ' " . Entertainment Weekly 's Gregory Kirschling stated that Release the Stars was " adorned with more strings , horns , choirs , and piccolo flute ( ! ) than ever , his melodies — and what melodies they are — are drowned out by the bombast " , citing " Nobody 's Off the Hook " as an example . " But " , Kirschling stated , " he still yearns more beautifully than anyone " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Wainwright . 
 " Do I Disappoint You " – 4 : 40 
 " Going to a Town " – 4 : 06 
 " Tiergarten " – 3 : 26 
 " Nobody 's Off the Hook " – 4 : 27 
 " Between My Legs " – 4 : 26 
 " Rules and Regulations " – 4 : 05 
 " Not Ready to Love " – 5 : 51 
 " <unk> " – 6 : 21 
 " Tulsa " – 2 : 20 
 " Leaving for Paris N ° 2 " – 4 : 52 
 " Sanssouci " – 5 : 16 
 " Release the Stars " – 5 : 20 
 Track listing adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Allmusic and the album liner notes . 
 = = Chart positions and certifications = = 
 Release the Stars debuted at number 23 on the U.S. Billboard 200 , Wainwright 's highest debut chart position as of 2009 , selling about 24 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The album also achieved Wainwright 's highest chart position on the UK Albums Chart , debuting at number 2 with sales approaching 30 @,@ 000 in the first week . Overall , Release the Stars charted in 13 countries , reaching Top 10 positions in Denmark , Norway , and the United Kingdom . The album was certified gold in both Canada and the UK . 
 = = Awards and recognitions = = 
 For Release the Stars , Wainwright received two nominations for the Juno Awards of 2008 , including Adult Alternative Album of the Year and Songwriter of the Year for " Going to a Town " , " Release the Stars " , and " Do I Disappoint You " . Wainwright won the Outstanding Music Artist award at the 19th GLAAD Media Awards , an awards ceremony created by the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation to recognize and honor LGBT representation in mainstream media . At the same ceremony , Wainwright was presented with the Stephen F. Kolzak Award , an honor given to an openly gay member of the entertainment or media community for his or her work toward eliminating homophobia . 
 The following table displays some of the 2007 " End of Year " list placements by various publications : 
 = Albert Bonass = 
 Albert Edward Bonass ( 29 May 1911 – 9 October 1945 ) was an English footballer who scored 58 goals from 186 appearances in the Football League playing as an outside left for Darlington , York City , Hartlepools United and Chesterfield . 
 Bonass spent the second half of the 1932 – 33 season as an amateur with Darlington in the Third Division North . He then returned to his home town where he turned professional with York City . He played six league matches for each club . In 1934 , he joined another Third Division club , Hartlepools United , where he established himself as the regular selection at outside @-@ left and scored at better than a goal every two games in his first season . Less prolific in his second year , he was sold to Chesterfield , newly promoted to the Second Division for 1936 – 37 . Again , he was first choice on the left wing and productive in front of goal during his first season , less so in the next , in which he helped the team reach the fifth round of the 1937 – 38 FA Cup . In 1938 – 39 , he fell out of favour , and requested a transfer . He joined Queens Park Rangers , but his career was cut short by the outbreak of war . 
 During the Second World War , Bonass served in the Metropolitan Police 's War Reserve and then as a wireless operator in the Royal Air Force . He was killed in October 1945 , together with the rest of the crew and a civilian on the ground , when his Short Stirling bomber crashed on a training flight . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Bonass was born in <unk> , which is now a suburb of York . He was the son of George and Amelia Bonass . 
 He began his football career with local teams including York Wednesday and York & District League club <unk> , and signed for Third Division club Darlington as an amateur in December 1932 . According to the Sunderland Echo , he was " speedy and gives promise of developing into a good player " . He played six league matches and scored once , in a 1 – 1 draw with Chester . He was not retained – after a disappointing season , Darlington named only five players on their retained list . 
 During the 1933 close season , Bonass married Dorothy Parsons in York . He turned professional with York City ahead of the 1933 – 34 season . Again , he made only six league appearances ; in November 1933 , he was injured playing for York 's reserve team when he crashed into railings surrounding the pitch . 
 = = Hartlepools United = = 
 After a trial , Bonass signed on a free transfer for Hartlepools United as replacement for winger Ralph <unk> who had left the club . The 1934 – 35 Football League campaign began with a visit to Walsall . After two minutes of the match , the home goalkeeper " failed to deal with a centre by [ Tommy ] Hird , and Bonass dashed in and headed the ball out of his hands into the net " . He continued as both regular selection and regular scorer , with 23 goals from 43 matches in all competitions in his first season . His opening goal in the FA Cup first @-@ round replay against Halifax Town created such excitement among the spectators that they broke through the barriers separating terraces from pitch . 
 In 1935 – 36 , he continued as a fixture at outside @-@ left , but scored fewer <unk> one of which came as an equaliser against Lincoln City when the referee failed to notice that teammate Johnny Wigham punched the ball to him rather than playing it legitimately . All the same , three months into the season he was the team 's top scorer with six . As in the previous season , Hartlepools played Halifax Town in the FA Cup , and again , they won after a replay ; Bonass was involved in three of their four goals , two of which were scored when his shot was parried to another player . He finished the season with 13 goals , second only to Wigham , as Hartlepools finished eighth in the Third Division . 
 = = Chesterfield = = 
 Bonass signed for Chesterfield , newly promoted to the Second Division , for a £ 250 fee in May 1936 . He went straight into the starting eleven , scored the opening goal in the first home match of the new season , against Norwich City , and the Derby Evening Telegraph 's correspondent was impressed : " Bonass , at outside @-@ left , was the pick of the line , for he generally shot accurately , and he showed a good idea of combination . " At Christmas he scored the only goal of the game against Aston Villa , and contributed two – one a neat back @-@ heel – to a 4 – 0 win against Swansea Town on New Year 's Day . His goal return for the season was 14 from 39 league games as Chesterfield finished in mid @-@ table , and he was part of the team that beat Derby County to win the Derbyshire Senior Cup . 
 Chesterfield listed fourteen forwards on their retained list , but Bonass kept his place in the team , partnered at inside @-@ left by new signing Peter Ramage who , the Derby Evening Telegraph wrote , " brought out the best in Bonass and [ Harry ] Clifton " . He was injured against Nottingham Forest in December , thus ending a sequence of 19 consecutive appearances . He had returned to fitness by mid @-@ January , when his team 's FA Cup third @-@ round victory reportedly " owed much to ... the dash of Bonass and Clifton in the forwards " . They progressed to the fifth round , in which they lost to Tottenham Hotspur only after a replay in front of a 50 @,@ 000 crowd at White Hart Lane . In the second half of the season , Chesterfield slumped from promotion candidate to mid @-@ table , and after contributing six goals from 39 appearances in the league , Bonass was left out of the last few games , appearing instead for the reserves in the Central League . He was again retained for 1938 – 39 . 
 Bonass came into the team at outside @-@ right for the fifth game of the new season , before reverting to outside @-@ left against Sheffield Wednesday on 17 September , which coincided with Chesterfield 's first win . Two weeks later , he scored the only goal of the game at home to West Ham United direct from a corner kick . He kept his place to the end of the year , but then played only three times before the end of February when he submitted a transfer request . The Derbyshire Times reported no disharmony between club and player , who just felt that different surroundings might help a return to form . He moved on to London club Queens Park Rangers ( QPR ) in June , and played in all three of their matches before the 1939 – 40 Football League season was abandoned when war broke out . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 A profile on Chesterfield F.C. historian Stuart Basson 's website describes Bonass as " a sturdy wingman with a keen eye for cutting in and shooting for goal " , who was able to produce a " steady supply of goals and good crosses from the left " . He was left @-@ footed , and had pace . He had a strong shot , and was a good taker of goalscoring chances , although the Northern Daily Mail 's correspondents noted a tendency to miss the easy ones . He rarely scored headed goals . He was also a hard @-@ working and conscientious team player . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Bonass completed the 1939 – 40 season with QPR in the wartime league , which although not regarded as competitive was certainly taken seriously : against Chelsea in December , he was stretchered off with a suspected broken leg , victim of a tough tackle " like many others in this pacy , no @-@ quarter struggle " where the " war of words between rival fan factions on the terrace reminded [ the Daily Express 's Stanley Halsey ] of the Glasgow Rangers – Celtic match " . He played some 30 times for QPR thereafter , and guested for a number of clubs including Aldershot , Brentford , Chesterfield , Fulham , Luton Town , Southampton , Watford and York . Bonass served with the Metropolitan Police as a War Reserve Constable for four years , and apart from his war @-@ related duties , played for their football team , scored as the Police Professionals beat the Police Amateurs 5 – 2 in September 1942 , and also represented the national police team . 
 He went on to join the Royal Air Force , and was promoted to the rank of sergeant . He became a member of the Caterpillar Club after bailing out over Manchester from a Wellington aircraft . In the early hours of 9 October 1945 , he was the wireless operator aboard a Short Stirling bomber on a training flight when it crashed on the village of Tockwith , North Riding of Yorkshire , which was on the edge of the RAF base at Marston Moor . One civilian and all six crew were killed , a number of houses were demolished , by impact or by fire , and many residents made homeless . He was the father of a daughter , and had been expecting to be demobilised " shortly " . 
 Bonass was buried at the <unk> Cemetery near Harrogate . On 11 October 2015 , a memorial was erected at Tockwith to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the crash in which Bonass was killed . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = Bloody Fun Day = 
 Bloody Fun Day is a puzzle Flash game developed by Urban Squall and published by Kongregate on March 12 , 2009 . Players control one of a family of three grim reapers and are tasked with moving around an island of hexagonal tiles , killing creatures called Cuties in order to replenish their own life force . Cuties come in four colors . Only the red ones restore life ; the others charge special abilities that give the player more ways to kill further Cuties . 
 The game was initially developed as a demo by Urban Squall during the group 's annual development meeting , in a San Diego hotel during November 2008 . The demo was further tested after the five @-@ day meeting , resulting in the complete game being released during March . The game 's theme was inspired by the short story Everything Can Be Beaten by <unk> Vasquez , which features a monster that clubs animals to death and is unable to interact with them in any other way . 
 Critics praised the game 's concept , gameplay and addictiveness . The intensity of trying to keep the reaper alive was highlighted by some reviewers , such as saving the reaper 's life by killing a large number of Cuties . Some issues , such as the lack of special effects and enemies , were highlighted ; this did not prevent reviewers from rating the game positively overall . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is turn based , with players selecting one of a family of three grim reapers as their player character and starting the tutorial or selecting a game mode from either " 5 Level Mode " or " Unlimited Mode " . Players are presented with an island consisting of hexagonal tiles , each occupied by a cutie , with their chosen reaper present in the middle of the board armed with a scythe . The objective of the game is to earn the highest score possible , by killing Cuties , before dying . 
 Cuties come in four colors : Red , Black , Blue and Gold . When defeated , a Cutie releases a soul of the same color , which is added to the player 's stock . Red Cuties ' souls replenish the player 's life gauge . The other three colors fill one or more of six special move buttons , allowing the player to use different attacks when the buttons are filled . When a new game is started , the player begins with 15 life points , one of which is expended each time the player moves to an adjoining tile . If the player 's life points are depleted then their reaper dies , the player must slay as many red Cuties as possible to continue playing . In " 5 Level Mode " play ends after the player completes the fifth level , in " Unlimited Mode " play continues until the player runs out of life energy . 
 When a player moves to a tile occupied by a Cutie , that creature is slain along with any other Cuties of the same color directly connected to that tile . Chains of Cuties can be slain in this fashion , producing several souls . Each tile the player moves to is drained of life , causing the grass to wither and preventing the player from moving back to it , any Cuties destroyed in a chain outside of the initial tile become eggs . After a set period of turns the eggs hatch into random Cuties , which can again be harvested for souls . Any tiles drained by the player 's presence return to life and are furnished with an egg when existing eggs hatch . The result of this is that every tile the reaper travels on takes twice as long to spawn a new Cutie compared to tiles that housed a Cutie destroyed by a chain attack . Players move to the next game level after a certain amount of moves , every new level increases the time taken for eggs to hatch by a turn . Moving onto a tile containing an egg destroys the egg and incurs a small point deduction , but destroying a golden egg increases the player 's score . A golden egg is produced whenever 10 or more Cuties are killed in a chain . 
 The left side of the game screen features a turn tracker , which consists of a number of notches that represent turns . Markers are placed beside events such as level waypoints , egg hatching events , and the turn that ends the game if the player can 't harvest more red souls . The 6 special abilities the player can charge with souls include the ability to kill any group of Cuties on the board , convert any adjacent group into red souls , and double the amount of souls obtained from any adjacent Cutie group . 
 = = Development = = 
 Initial development began in November 2008 when Urban Squall met in San Diego for their annual meeting , 2008 's theme was ' a game in a week ' . The team consisted of designer and programmer Andrew Pellerano , programmer <unk> <unk> , graphic designer Tim <unk> and musician Nick Esposito . The developers hired two adjoining hotel rooms and opened the connecting door , allowing them to concentrate solely on creating the game over a period of five days , resulting in a demo . Pellerano spent further weeks updating the game during his spare time after which it was released to the public . During the weeks between the initial demo version and the game 's release , <unk> playtested the game and provided feedback on the number of souls needed to allow special abilities to be activated . The music track was created one night when Pellerano met Esposito in the latter 's studio , during which Pellerano also voiced the sound effects resulting from Cuties being killed . 
 Bloody Fun Day 's theme was inspired by the short story Everything Can Be Beaten by <unk> Vasquez . The story centres on a monster called It , who spends his life in the confines of a single room , waiting in front of a chute that kittens slide down . He crushes the kittens with a hammer . One day It decides to leave the room , and encounters a world full of ' cute ' animals . It responds by crushing the creatures , the only thing he is capable of doing . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Bloody Fun Day received a positive response from video game critics . Psychotronic , reviewer for Jay is Games , called it " an exceptionally well @-@ crafted and deep game " and " refreshingly original " , saying the developer " gets more interesting with every new title " . Kotaku Australia 's David <unk> stated the game is " rather addictive " . Vue Weekly writer Darren Zenko stated that the game is addictive , finding himself playing for more than 8 hours in a day . Psychotronic disliked the lack of variety in levels , due to only one island shape being available and no enemies being present . He also highlighted the lack of special effects when using the reapers ' abilities , since Cuties all die using the same animation regardless of whether they are killed with a reaper 's scythe or a special ability . Despite this , Psychotronic praised the game 's special abilities in terms of balance and interest , stating that the " three different families of powers support each other , making it feel like your efforts in one area can always be redirected to another . " 
 Wired writer Nate Ralph found that " Bloody Fun Day might not feature a deep or even logical narrative , but it 's got style in spades , bolstered by simple , fun game mechanics . " He added that the increased amount of turns needed to hatch eggs " can lead to some delightfully irritating close shaves . " IndieGames.com writer Michael Rose agreed , stating " The game mechanics work really well and it 's a very nice concept . " Anthony Carboni , a former co @-@ host of Attack of the Show ! and current presenter of online video game review show <unk> , was also positive . In his review he said " It 's a lot of fun and easy to pick up , but as levels progress things do get pretty intense . " Zenko stated the game embodied three virtues ; " simple , hot and deep " . These virtues were required in games published by Electronic Arts , which had been outlined to Zenko in a letter from Electronic Arts ' founder Trip Hawkins after Zenko had written to Hawkins as a teenager . During play Zenko 's reaper almost died due to a lack of red souls , but he managed to reverse the situation and fill the life bar ; " even after all these years of gaming , that rush still does its neurochemical work " . 
 = Elizabeth Randles = 
 Elizabeth Randles ( 1 August 1800 – 6 May 1829 ) , also known as " Little Cambrian Prodigy " , was a Welsh harpist and pianist . A child prodigy , she started playing the piano at the age of sixteen months , and performed in public for the first time before she was two years old . Elizabeth was taught by her blind father , who was organist at the Holywell parish church . She performed for local aristocracy , leading to a performance for King George III and his royal family when she was three and a half . Caroline , Princess of Wales , hoped to adopt her but her father did not allow it . She did , however , spend a few days at the Princess of Wales ' summer home , often playing with Princess Charlotte of Wales . Elizabeth went on to tour the country as a child , performing with John Parry . In 1808 , she returned home and learned the harp . She went on to take lessons from Friedrich Kalkbrenner , before moving to Liverpool and becoming a teacher . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Elizabeth Randles , also known as Bessy , was born on 1 August 1800 in Wrexham , north Wales . Her father , Edward Randles , the organist at the Holywell parish church of St. James , lost his sight at the age of three as a result of small pox . Perhaps due to his lack of sight , his parents placed him to be trained under the blind harpist John Parry , whom he excelled under . Elizabeth was the youngest of Randles ' several children including her brother Edward , who would become a subsequent organist at the parish church . 
 At the age of sixteen months , Elizabeth enjoyed pressing keys on the piano and attempting to " pick out a melody " . One day , while Randles was ill , he noticed someone attempting to play Blue Bells of Scotland on the nearby piano . Assuming it was one of his older children , he requested they stopped and was surprised to find it was Elizabeth who was playing . Due to her age , she needed to hit each key with the side of the hand . He discovered that she could play the basic melody for both the Blue Bells of Scotland and Charley over the water . Her father decided to start teaching her some other simple tunes and the musical notes . Before she could talk , she had the ability to recognise notes and press the piano keys which related to them . Randles went on to teach Elizabeth the melody to the Welsh folk song , Ar <unk> y nos . Elizabeth also attempted to play the chords so her father ended up teaching her the full piece . 
 During the summer of 1802 , Wrexham was visited by a troupe of travelling comedians . One of the leaders , who had heard Elizabeth play , requested that she performed with them . Before the age of two , she joined the troupe at Wrexham theatre to play Ar <unk> y nos and The Downfall of Paris . There , she played her pieces with an apple and slice of cake on either side of the piano , receiving both when she finished for playing well . Over the next nine months , Elizabeth played at the houses of Sir Watkin Williams @-@ Wynn , Lady Dungannon and Lady Cunliffe . Williams @-@ Wynn proposed that Elizabeth play in a Wrexham concert during the spring of 1803 , under the direction of the Welsh harpist John Parry . The concert was postponed a number of times due to the illness of Elizabeth 's mother , who insisted they carry on without her . On the night of the concert , Elizabeth 's mother died , after hearing that it was a success . 
 By the time Elizabeth was three and a half , she was invited to play for King George III , Queen Charlotte and other members of the Royal Family . The recital was a success and the king presented Elizabeth with 100 guineas ( worth approximately £ 96 @,@ 000 in 2014 ) . She created such a sensation that Caroline , Princess of Wales , wished to adopt her though her father would not allow it . The publicity of the royal concert led to a subsequent breakfast concert for the public , with tickets costing 1 guinea each ( approximately £ 960 in 2014 ) . The concert was held at Cumberland Gardens , with approximately 500 people " of first rank " attending . All profits of the breakfast , as well as donations by the attendees , were given to Elizabeth in the form of various trusts . 
 Elizabeth spent a few days under the care of the Princess of Wales , at her summer home , the Pagoda in Blackheath . There she spent time playing with a young Princess Charlotte of Wales , To ensure that she had sufficient funds for her education , Elizabeth , her father and Parry toured the rest of the United Kingdom between 1805 until 1808 . In June 1808 , she returned to London to perform at the Hanover Square Rooms , sponsored by the Prince of Wales and the Marchioness of Downshire . Parry remained in London , whilst Elizabeth and her father returned home . There she learned to play the harp and by the age of fourteen she was proficient in both instruments , as well as the organ . She returned to London in 1818 , to take harp lessons from François @-@ Joseph <unk> and piano lessons from Friedrich Kalkbrenner . 
 Elizabeth moved to Liverpool , teaching harp , piano and singing regularly at a school in Ellesmere , and returning each weekend to attend to her father , until his death in 1823 . Elizabeth 's health was described as " delicate " and she died of " decline " on 6 May 1829 in Liverpool . Her musical skill at such a young age left her known as the " Little Cambrian Prodigy " . 
 = Fringe ( season 2 ) = 
 The second season of the American science fiction television series Fringe commenced airing on the Fox network on September 17 , 2009 , and concluded on May 20 , 2010 . The season was produced by Bad Robot Productions in association with Warner Bros. Television , and its showrunners were Jeff Pinkner and J.H. Wyman . Actors Anna Torv , John Noble , and Joshua Jackson reprised their roles as FBI agent Olivia Dunham and father @-@ son duo Peter and Walter Bishop . Previous series regulars Lance Reddick , Jasika Nicole , Blair Brown , and Kirk Acevedo also returned , though with Acevedo in a limited capacity . 
 The season followed the continuation of a war between two universes , the prime and the parallel . It was set in the former , until the last several episodes when Peter Bishop ( Jackson ) journeyed back to the parallel universe after being lured there by his real father , " Walternate " ( Noble ) . While co @-@ creator J.J. Abrams described the first season as " identifying that there is an enemy " , he referred to season two as " getting to know the enemy " as it " build [ s ] to a very specific type of confrontation " between the two universes . The writers focused on their characters ' development , in particular making them more comfortable with each other while solving cases for Fringe Division . By inventing the " mythalone " style of episode , the producers sought to create the perfect episode that mixed standalone episode qualities for casual viewers with the further development of the series ' mythology for regular viewers . 
 In a departure from the previous season , the second season aired in a new competitive timeslot at 9 : 00 pm on Thursdays . It contained 22 episodes , plus an unaired episode that was produced during the first season ; " Unearthed " aired as a special as episode 11 of season two , days prior to " Johari Window " , the first new episode of 2010 . Also part of the season was the series ' only musical episode , " Brown Betty " , which was produced at the request of the network . The season finale , " Over There " , fully introduced the parallel universe and laid the groundwork for the third season . 
 Fringe ended its second season with a per episode average of 6 @.@ 252 million total viewers and a 2 @.@ 3 ratings share in the 18 – 49 demographic . The season was generally well @-@ received by critics , though most agreed that the second half was a considerable improvement over the first . The series was chosen for a number of 2010 " best of television " lists , including The New York Times , the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer , and Entertainment Weekly . Despite its critical acclaim , Fringe failed to earn any major category nominations at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards , but did receive nominations at the Creative Arts Emmy Awards , Golden Reel Awards , and Satellite Awards ; at the Saturn Awards , Torv and guest actor Leonard Nimoy won in their respective categories . The second season was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray in region 1 on September 14 , 2010 , in region 2 on September 27 , and in region 4 on November 10 . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 Olivia , having been taken to William Bell 's office in the parallel universe , is returned to the prime universe but with short term amnesia , unable to recall her experience there . Massive Dynamic 's Nina Sharp directs her to Sam Weiss , a bowling alley manager , who gives her cryptic but helpful advice to overcome her amnesia . Meanwhile , the Fringe division has discovered several shapeshifters - a human / machine hybrid that bleed mercury - have crossed over , but unbeknownst to them , one takes the form of Olivia 's partner , Charlie . When Sam 's advice allows Olivia to recall what Bell told her , she unwittingly gives this information to the shapeshifter , who calls its agents to use the information to recover the body of Thomas Jerome Newton , an agent for some entity operating from the parallel universe . Nina provides Olivia with cautionary advice , alerting her to a " great war " that Bell postulated would occur between the two universes . During this time , Peter has come to forgive Walter for his past , and Walter has grown accustomed to normal life outside of the institution , but is still troubled by a secret . 
 Newton , using old technology from Walter and Bell 's research , is able to pull an entire building from the parallel universe to the prime , and the team races against time to prevent harm when , due to the laws of mass conservation , a building from the prime is pulled to the parallel one . This event forces Walter to try to coax Olivia to recall her Cortexiphan abilities as to identify things affected by the parallel universe . Initially unable to do so , her fear of failure enables her ability , allowing them to save the people within the target building , but also revealing to her that Peter is from the parallel universe . Walter explains to Olivia that in 1985 , he and Bell had devised a way to observe the parallel universe , where he found his doppelgänger , " Walternate " , was also close to losing his son . Though Walter 's Peter had died , Walternate continued to search for a cure , but missed the telltale sign when the Observer September arrived at his lab . Walter resynthesized the cure and aimed to cross over using untested equipment at Reiden Lake , though stalled by Nina and his lab assistant Clara . Nina tackled him on his way over , losing her arm in the process , while Walter , on the other side , found the cure vial broken . Intent on curing the alternate Peter , he posed as his father and crossed back with Peter , intending to administer the cure at the lab and then return Peter . However , on the return , the ice on Reiden Lake broke , threatening to drown both , but they were saved by September , who cautioned Walter " the boy must live " . While Walter successfully administered the cure , his wife Elizabeth saw Peter , and Walter realized he could never return Peter to the parallel universe . After Walter reveals this truth , he considers letting Peter know but struggles with how to do so , hoping to seek repentance from God for his actions . 
 Meanwhile , Newton has continued to use Walter 's technology to bring into temporary existence elements from the parallel universe . This enables Newton and his agents to bring over a figure known as " Mr. Secretary " , despite Fringe 's attempts to stop them . Peter , from this action , deduces that he is from the parallel universe , and furious at Walter for hiding this information , leaves on his own . While hiding in the Pacific Northwest , Peter meets Mr. Secretary - Walternate , his true father , who offers to take him back to the parallel universe , which Peter accepts . Olivia and Walter are alerted by September that Walternate plans to use Peter to initiate the operation of a strange device that threatens to destroy the prime universe , and the two launch a rescue attempt . In the parallel universe , they find that it suffers from singularities caused by Walter 's crossing in 1985 , forcing Walternate 's Fringe team to use an amber @-@ like substance to surround and quarantine such areas , regardless of innocent lives trapped within . They meet with William Bell , and Walter and Bell resolve their past differences . Olivia faces off against her doppelgänger , " Fauxlivia " , who works for Walternate in the Fringe Division under the U.S. Secretary of Defense ; she is able to recover Peter , who has seen the device and recognized that it reacted only to his biology , and wants nothing of it , willing to return with the others . As Olivia , Walter , and Peter attempt to return , they are engaged by Fauxlivia and others in the Fringe Division . Bell sacrifices himself to provide energy into a device to allow the three to cross over , but none of them are aware that Fauxlivia has secretly switched places with Olivia under Walternate 's orders , while Olivia is captured and held in a secured facility by Walternate . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 The season was produced by Bad Robot Productions in association with Warner Bros. Television . Though still set in Boston , the show 's production for the second season moved from New York City to Vancouver out of financial necessity , as it lost access to New York 's TV production tax incentive program . Fringe consequently got a mostly new writing staff and production team , though co @-@ creators J.J. Abrams , Roberto Orci , and Alex Kurtzman , and producer Bryan Burk remained involved with the series . Jeff Pinkner and J.H. Wyman returned as executive producers and showrunners . Jeff Vlaming and previous episode director Akiva Goldsman joined the crew as consulting producers . While Abrams had six episode writing credits for the first season he remained much more hands @-@ off for the second , instead focusing on other commitments like the film Star Trek . He explained , " Sometimes we 'll talk every day . Then there will be a period of a couple weeks where we don 't speak . But we 're emailing a lot . There 's a lot of stuff that happens that way . " Eden FX and Zoic Studios stayed as vendors for the series ' visual effects , effectively giving Fringe a sense of continuity . Jay Worth , the overall visual effects supervisor , commented that having these two companies " helped the show not feel as a big of a bump from one season to the next , particularly with different crews and a different vibe a little bit . " Despite his decreased involvement , Abrams was sent all of the visual effects for the series during production , and responded back with notes and tweaks . 
 = = = Writing and filming = = = 
 Responding to criticism that some first season episodes were too neatly wrapped and solved , Jeff Pinkner commented towards the end of that season , " We found that , absolutely , early on , we were falling into the trap of — the tease would be fantastic . And then we would too quickly answer it and [ reduce ] the tension . And we 've tried to course @-@ correct and have the tease promise " questions that don 't get answered right away . He further elaborated that the goal now is to " have the energy of the show get bigger as [ an episode ] goes along ... We 're learning how to tell this version of a detective story . It 's not really a police procedural . There are elements of that . But it 's an incredible mish @-@ mash of genres . I think we 're getting better at finding our way through these stories . " 
 Pinkner , Abrams , Orci , Burk , Kurtzman , Wyman , and Goldsman developed the second season 's storyline together . Goldsman explained that they " mapped " out the season " in a way that we remained fundamentally faithful to " . Though they changed certain aspects , they knew where Olivia and Peter were going to start and end up but " got there at different paces than what [ they ] originally planned " . While the first season both focused on Olivia and dealt with discovering the existence of an enemy , the second was designed to " [ build ] to a very specific type of confrontation " between the two universes . Explained Pinkner , " Season 2 is about the people from ' over there ' putting the final pieces of the invasion into play , and explaining why " . At the same time , the producers approached the second season as a " journey of self @-@ actualization " and " maturation for our characters . " They wanted to make the three main cast members become more comfortable as a team in Fringe Division ; Peter thus was written to be more heroic and to go from reluctance to a desire to help his father , while Walter became gradually more independent and " grounded as a human being " . They made the secret of Peter 's origins one of the main story focuses of the season . While the audience had been made aware of Walter 's secret in the season one finale , the producers wanted to " acknowledge it to our characters " . All the while Walter was " suffering ... and desperately trying to keep it all quiet " , Olivia and Peter grew closer to the truth . By " giv [ ing ] these things time " to develop , Pinkner strove to avoid focusing just on " event , event , event " , instead concentrating on the real consequences of Peter and Olivia 's eventual discovery . 
 The second season 's mythology was intended to be revealed in small parcels . Throughout the season , Pinkner and Wyman tried to create an episode that best bridged " standalone " traits — needed for casual viewers — with the further advancement of the show 's mythology for those who watched regularly . At the start of the season Pinkner believed they had found a " good rhythm " between the two , as the mythology " really [ started to ] affect the characters , to the point where even the standalone [ episodes ] advance mythology " . After the season ended , Wyman commented at San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , " We learned that the fan fans love mythology but there are needs from the networks . We started experimenting with a thing we called ' <unk> ' , not standalone or myth . " Wyman cited the season 's 18th episode , " White Tulip " as a prime example , noting " You can see that you 're following Walter 's journey , it 's the right mix . " The Fringe producers strove to avoid becoming bogged down in mythology , an issue that they perceived happened in Alias , another J.J. Abrams television series . In a joint statement released midway through the season , Abrams , Pinkner , and Wyman noted that their " only internal rule is that we make every effort to not raise mythological questions merely to string viewers along , but rather to provide answers that generate consequences . " 
 At Fox 's request , the writers developed a musical episode , " Brown Betty " to fit into the network 's " Fox rocks " campaign in the same vein as its series Glee . While the episode already had most of the necessary elements in place before Fox 's request , the producers were able to add the musical theme as a " narrative device " to " explore Walter 's feelings " in the aftermath of Peter 's discovery and flight . To prepare for the season finale , the producers began developing characteristics of the parallel universe relatively early on . Relating to the two universes ' idiosyncrasies , Pinkner and Wyman were both interested in world building and " the concept of choices " , such as the differing events that led to the Other Side possessing a still @-@ standing World Trade Center but destroyed White House . Other historical idiosyncrasies included the oxidation of the Statue of Liberty and the use of zeppelins as transportation . They believed that all of their additions were " the texture that actually makes it a world . The richness of detail is what makes it feel real " . 
 As the series began filming in Vancouver , the University of British Columbia campus served as a substitute for Harvard University . Because of its heritage buildings and antique storefronts , many of the scenes set in the alternate universe were shot in New Westminster , an area outside Vancouver . Consulting producer and previous Fringe director Akiva Goldsman returned to direct several episodes , as did producer Brad Anderson , executive producer Joe Chappelle , and producer Paul Edwards . One time guest directors for the season included Bryan Spicer , Jon Cassar , Dennis Smith , Paul Holahan , Jeannot Szwarc , Frederick E. O. Toye , Deran Sarafian , Adam Davidson , Charles Beeson , David Straiton , Thomas Yatsko , Jeffrey Hunt , and Seith Mann . 
 = = = Cast = = = 
 = = = = Main cast = = = = 
 Anna Torv as Olivia Dunham ( 23 episodes ) 
 Joshua Jackson as Peter Bishop ( 22 episodes ) 
 Lance Reddick as Phillip Broyles ( 22 episodes ) 
 Kirk Acevedo as Charlie Francis ( 6 episodes ) 
 Blair Brown as Nina Sharp ( 10 episodes ) 
 Jasika Nicole as Astrid Farnsworth ( 22 episodes ) 
 John Noble as Dr. Walter Bishop ( 23 episodes ) 
 As with the previous season , the second season featured three main characters all working together to solve various Fringe cases . Anna Torv played determined FBI agent Olivia Dunham , who is able to travel between universes as a result of childhood experiments performed on her with the nootropic drug , Cortexiphan . The man responsible for these experiments , Dr. Walter Bishop , was played by John Noble . Walter 's son Peter Bishop , whom he stole from the parallel universe , was portrayed by Joshua Jackson . Other members of the main cast included Jasika Nicole as Junior FBI Agent and Walter 's lab assistant Astrid Farnsworth , Lance Reddick as Agent Phillip Broyles , Blair Brown as Massive Dynamic executive Nina Sharp , and Kirk Acevedo as Agent Charlie Francis . Acevedo 's character was killed off in the season 's fourth episode , though at the time Pinkner and Wyman hinted of the actor 's possible return later in the season . Acevedo returned to guest star in the season finale as the parallel universe version of Charlie Francis . Acevedo was also featured in " Unearthed " , a special episode that was filmed during the first season , but aired as the eleventh episode of the second season . 
 = = = = Recurring cast = = = = 
 The second season marked a large number of recurring guest appearances . Michael Cerveris played September / The Observer , a mysterious man that observes important events and appeared in every episode of the season , often merely in brief glimpses . Further Observers were revealed , including August ( Peter Woodward ) and December ( Eugene Lipinski ) . Ryan McDonald portrayed Massive Dynamic scientist Brandon Fayette , while its founder , Dr. William Bell was played by Leonard Nimoy , despite the actor 's recent retirement . Thomas Jerome Newton , one of the season 's main villains , was played by Sebastian Roché . Kevin Corrigan portrayed Samuel Weiss , a mysterious man who helps Olivia recover from her injuries . Ari Graynor appeared as Olivia 's sister Rachel Dunham , while Lily Pilblad played Rachel 's daughter and Olivia 's niece Ella Blake . Orla Brady played Walter 's wife Elizabeth Bishop . A new FBI agent , Amy Jessup , was portrayed by Meghan Markle . Roger Cross appeared as a shapeshifter . Former Cortexiphan subjects James Heath and Nick Lane were played by Omar Metwally and David Call , respectively . Karen Holness appeared as Broyles ' ex @-@ wife Diane , and Clark Middleton played rare book seller Edward Markham . Philip Winchester appeared as Fauxlivia 's boyfriend Frank Stanton , while Seth Gabel played Agent Lincoln Lee from the parallel universe , both in the finale . J. R. Bourne played Agent Edwards , and Gerard Plunkett appeared as Senator James Van Horn . 
 Further notable guest stars included Andrew Airlie , Stefan Arngrim , Demore Barnes , Jenni <unk> , Pascale Hutton , Ravil Isyanov , Ravi Kapoor , Alice Kremelberg , Diane Kruger , Quinn Lord , Tzi Ma , Stephen McHattie , Jennifer Missoni , Cameron Monaghan , Michael O 'Neill , Geoff Pierson , Martha Plimpton , Paul Rae , John Savage , Peter Weller , and Craig Robert Young . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings and broadcast = = = 
 Fringe 's first season ended with an average of 9 @.@ 96 million viewers , and among the season 's new series , it was the first rated show for adults 18 – 49 . On May 4 , 2009 , a week before the season one finale , Fox renewed Fringe for a second season , giving it a full season pick @-@ up of 22 episodes . The network 's president of entertainment , Kevin Reilly , explained " Fringe proved to be a notable addition to our schedule all season and it really has fans buzzing as it builds to a fantastic season finale . " 
 Later in May , Fox announced Fringe would be moving from Tuesdays to Thursdays for the second season , to be aired in the competitive 9 : 00 pm timeslot . Kevin Reilly explained the move , " The door is more open on this night than it has been in a long time . Fringe is a real alternative to both [ Grey 's and CSI : Crime Scene Investigation ] . " However , after a perceived " healthy " first season , the second season premiere was watched by an estimated 7 @.@ 817 million viewers . Ratings for the season continued to decline , culminating in 5 @.@ 68 million viewers watching the finale . Fringe 's second season ended with an average of 6 @.@ 252 million viewers per episode and a 2 @.@ 3 ratings share for adults 18 – 49 , causing the series to finish in 79th place out of all the season 's network television shows . However , Fringe and its lead @-@ in , Bones , did help the network increase 52 % among adults aged 18 – 49 and 65 percent among total viewers from the same night the previous year . Despite its middling ratings , Fringe received a full @-@ season renewal on March 6 , 2010 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The second season of Fringe received generally very favorable reviews . At the beginning of the season , the series was featured on the September 18 cover of Entertainment Weekly , which promised to give readers a " deep dive into the gory , witty world of Fox 's Fringe " . Metacritic , a film review aggregate website , gave the second season 75 / 100 based upon ten reviews , indicating a " generally favorable " reception . After viewing the first eight episodes , Entertainment Weekly columnist Ken Tucker gave the series an A- , calling it " one of the fastest , smartest , wittiest shows on television now ... Fringe successfully mixes the crime genre with sci @-@ fi , and cold conspiracies with heartfelt emotion . " Peter Swanson from Slant Magazine gave Fringe two and a half stars after watching the first six episodes . He believed the second season had " floundered a little , stuck in that creative hinterland between the desire to grab new viewers and the need to build on the mythology of the show 's universe . " While Swanson understood the need to attract a larger audience , he thought the standalone episodes to be " less than stellar " , as " they 've yet to get scary , or even vaguely unsettling " . Swanson did however find the war between two universes to be " particularly compelling " , and expressed hope that " Fringe [ would ] find its footing . " 
 In a review of the entire second season , IGN believed that despite the premiere 's " great start " , the first half contained " some rather lackluster episodes " that " made a lot of fans worried and got the rumors of cancellation circulating " ; the second half however " showed that Fringe is still one of the best sci @-@ fi series on TV " . The A.V. Club agreed , and called the first half " entertaining " but " never essential " while noting a great improvement mid @-@ way through the season , as " the show finally grounded its freak @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week weirdness in deep sadness " . The A.V. Club continued , " ... The season @-@ two episode " Peter " finally dramatized the moment that changed [ Peter 's ] life , giving the series ' overarching storyline a devastating emotional core , based in a father 's love instead of in theoretical concepts . It only got better from there , as the series expanded its world by further making those concepts concrete . Fringe is that rare blend of inventive ideas , wild ambition , and unexpected soulfulness . " The Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer believed that by the end of the season " Fringe had truly found its footing , doing daring , experimental episodes like the musical " Brown Betty " ... and heartbreaking stand alone episodes , like " White Tulip " , ( which might be my favorite hour of television this year that wasn 't Lost @-@ related ) . " 
 In particular , critics highlighted the season premiere " A New Day in the Old Town " as well as regular episodes " Peter " and " White Tulip " , and the season finale " Over There " . The main three cast members ' performances were praised , and various critics noted the series continued the sense of humor seen in the first season . Fringe 's second season was chosen for a number of 2010 " best of television " lists , including The New York Times , Entertainment Weekly , Digital Spy , the New York Post , The Daily Beast , the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer , AOL 's TV Squad , as well as IGN , which named Fringe the best sci @-@ fi series of 2010 , beating fellow nominees Lost , Caprica , and Stargate Universe . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 At the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards , actor Joshua Jackson and actress Anna Torv submitted their work in the second season for consideration in the Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series and Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series categories , respectively . Actors John Noble , Lance Reddick , Kirk Acevedo , and actress Blair Brown submitted their work for consideration in the Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series and Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series categories , respectively . The second season of Fringe was submitted for consideration in the Outstanding Drama Series category but failed to garner a nomination . The failure of the series to garner any major category nominations at the Emmys was perceived as a notable snub by many media outlets . 
 The second season received nominations for Sound Editing at the Creative Arts Emmy Awards and at the Golden Reel Awards . The season 's sole musical episode , " Brown Betty " , received a nomination for Short Form Musical In Television at the Golden Reel Awards . Noble , Torv , and guest actor Leonard Nimoy were nominated at the 2010 Saturn Awards , with Torv and Nimoy winning in their respective categories . Noble also received a nomination at the 2010 Satellite Awards , but lost to Dexter 's John Lithgow . 
 = = Home video releases = = 
 The second season of Fringe was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray in region 1 on September 14 , 2010 , in region 2 on September 27 , 2010 and in region 4 on November 10 , 2010 . The sets includes all 22 episodes ( plus an unaired episode ) of season two on a 6 @-@ disc DVD set and a 4 @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray set presented in anamorphic widescreen . Special features on the sets include four commentary tracks — " Momentum Deferred " with Jill Risk , Matthew Pitts , Danielle Dispaltro , Justin Doble and Charles Scott IV ; " Peter " with John Noble , Blair Brown and Damian Holbrook ; " Brown Betty " with Tanya Swerling , Billy Gottlieb , Chris Tilton and Jay Worth ; and " Over There , Part 2 " with Jeff Pinkner , J. H. Wyman and Akiva Goldsman . Episodic behind @-@ the @-@ scene featurettes include " Analyzing the Scene " on six episodes , " Dissected Files : Unaired Scenes " on select episodes and " Unusual Side Effects : Gag Reel " . Other featurettes include " In the Lab with John Noble and Prop Master Rob Smith " and " Beyond the Pattern : The Mythology of Fringe " . The unaired episode from season one , " Unearthed " , is presented as a special feature , separate from the other episodes . 
 = Oyasato @-@ yakata = 
 The oyasato @-@ yakata ( <unk> ) complex is a collection of buildings in Tenri City , Nara , Japan , that form an incomplete square 872 metres ( 2 @,@ 861 ft ) on each side surrounding the Divine Residence ( Oyasato ) , a structure sacred to the Japanese new religion Tenrikyo . The task of revitalizing the area around the Residence was informed by both religious prophecy and city planning , and construction began in 1954 on a project that continues today . The oyasato @-@ yakata is a massive organizational undertaking that is understood by Tenrikyo adherents as a spiritual practice , creating a model city that reflects their belief in a Joyous Life . As such a practice it has involved the entire Tenrikyo community , from the volunteers who assist in construction to professors who plan the scope of future wings . Archaeologists have also excavated ancient artifacts beneath its foundations . 
 The complex includes Tenri University , Tenri Hospital , Tenri Seminary , the <unk> Lecture Hall , the <unk> , dormitories , and Tenri High School . Currently 25 wings of the complex are complete . The complete structure calls for 68 wings . 
 = = Origins = = 
 At the beginning of the 20th century , the teachings of Tenrikyo 's foundress Oyasama became popular throughout Japan . In the following decades , the most devoted followers coalesced around Oyasama 's residence in rural Nara , which she had perceived as the birthplace of the world , or Jiba . The six villages surrounding the Jiba slowly became filled with Tenrikyo ministers , mystics , and evangelists , and the area was urbanized . A popular international school ( now Tenri University ) and Tenri Central Library , built by followers , were also attracting a variety of people to the area . It was around this time that Tenrikyo 's Second <unk> ( community leader ) <unk> Nakayama conceived of creating a grand construction project as a testament to the loyalty of Oyasama 's followers . 
 In 1934 , Nakayama commissioned the famed architect Yoshikazu Uchida to draw up a blueprint for the area . Uchida arranged ten buildings around Oyasama 's Residence . A 50 @-@ meter boulevard would come out of the Residence on a north @-@ south axis , along which six school buildings would be lined up . Classrooms and large auditoriums would be built at the end of this boulevard . The international school and library were to be eventually integrated into this plan . In January 1937 , a middle school ( now Tenri High School ) was built according to Uchida 's plan , but as Japan mobilized for the Pacific War the plan had to be temporarily shelved . 
 In 1952 , after the war and Occupation , Tenrikyo Chief of Architecture <unk> Okumura ( <unk> ) was asked by Nakayama to design a large <unk> Lecture Hall to accommodate 10 @,@ 000 people on the site of an old girls ' school . However , considering the location of the school , several hundred meters to the west of the Residence . Okumura thought back to an old prophecy of Oyasama , as recorded in Tenrikyo 's Anecdotes : 
 One day Oyasama was gazing out of the south window of Her room in the <unk> @-@ Gatehouse and looking at the vast expanse of bamboo thickets and rice fields . Suddenly She said to the attendants : " Someday this neighborhood will be filled with houses . Houses will line the street for seven ri between Nara and Hase . One ri square will be filled with inns . The divine Residence will become eight cho [ 872 meters ] square . " 
 Since Tenrikyo was at the time a tiny cult centered on a house in a farming village , the growth of Tenri into a city full of inns paralleling this prophecy was seen as miraculous . In the <unk> these prophecies are repeated , with the admonition that " it will not do to think of small things . " The original idea was that the planned school buildings and classrooms would be the first part of an enormous central hub that would eventually fill eight cho square . But Okumura began to consider the relationships between the planned buildings and the Residence . If other buildings were placed directly next to the Residence , he reasoned , they would put the Residence in shadow during the sunrise , and metaphorically crowd out the importance of the Jiba itself . Thus , with Nakayama 's permission , he developed a new overarching plan for the school , library , and other Tenrikyo buildings surrounding the Residence . His new plan , which arranged the buildings in a great square with open space on the inside , was dubbed the oyasato @-@ yakata , roughly meaning the " grounds of Oyasama 's Residence " . 
 In 1954 the Japanese government merged the six villages surrounding the Residence into a single city , which was dubbed Tenri City . In the same year , the Tenrikyo central church announced the construction of the first wing of the yakata . The continuing development of the oyasato @-@ yakata is currently overseen by a committee with a small office in Tenri Seminary . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The yakata was designed along the lines of Edo period tenement housing ( <unk> ) , but modernized with reinforced walls , multiple stories , and balconies for emergency access . The result is a fusion between Western and Japanese architecture . Gaps were purposefully left in the ground floors for pedestrians , making the yakata a walkable space . The balconies and rooftops were also designed to please the eye at the ground level . At the same time , the roofs are visible from Oyasama 's gravesite north of the city . 
 As construction began , Tenrikyo followers founded the Oyasato Construction Young Men 's Association <unk> Corps , which volunteered time and labor to help build the yakata . The corps still continues their work today . By 1956 , one corner of the complex had been built at the cost of 23 billion yen , an enormous expense given the economic depression of the time . 
 When part of the foundations for the complex were dug in 1977 , an archaeological investigation uncovered prehistoric artifacts , as is typical during construction in Tenri . Although it was a sparsely inhabited village in Oyasama 's time , Tenri City lies on top of a confirmed cultural center of prehistoric Japan . 
 = = = Timeline of construction = = = 
 = = Influence on the city = = 
 Information theorist Nomura <unk> , noting Tenrikyo 's description of the oyasato @-@ yakata as a realization of the prophecy of Oyasama and the Tenrikyo saying that " in the construction of form lies the construction of hearts " , refers to the ongoing construction as a " medium that combats <unk> " , claiming that it gives renewed relevance to the teachings and introduces a physical context by giving them an active role in shaping the city , and that in time , the thoughts of Tenrikyo believers will come to embody the grand scale of the architecture . 
 One Tenrikyo elder has written the following on the subject : 
 " This vision of the Home of the Parent is not one of a world of concepts and beliefs apart from the actual world . It is a place where living beings can lead their lives , and place where they will have everything that is required for their lives . Yet it is not an ordinary place for living . Centered on the Jiba , it is a place to which the children return out of their longing for their Parent . Here , embraced by the love of God the Parent , they seek and cultivate the mind that is single @-@ hearted with God . Here , they savor the joy of Parent and children living together in peace and harmony . " 
 Taro Igarashi notes first and foremost its massive accomplishment in city planning . The ground @-@ level architecture can be compared somewhat to Karl Marx @-@ Hof , a massive tenement complex in Vienna , and the pilotis evoke Charles Fourier 's <unk> , an architectural form specifically designed to evoke and construct an egalitarian utopia . However , the use of Japanese roofs in a modern city is quite rare , and the sheer size of the yakata makes it perhaps a unique megastructure anywhere in the world . Commenting on Taro 's article , the theologian Akio Inoue adds that the final interpretation , for the Tenrikyo believers who funded and built the structure , cannot be to inspire individual faith alone , but to " bridge the Joyous Life of the individual which determines the inner substance of faith and the world of the Joyous Life as an organized community " . 
 = R v Thomas = 
 R v Thomas was an Australian court case decided in the Victorian Court of Appeal on 18 August 2006 . It concerned the conviction in February 2006 of Joseph Thomas ( nicknamed " Jihad Jack " in the media ) on terrorism @-@ related charges , specifically receiving funds from Al Qaeda . The appeal revolved around the admissibility of a confession Thomas made during an interrogation in Pakistan in 2003 . The court found that the evidence , which was crucial to Thomas ' convictions , was inadmissible because it had not been given voluntarily . The court accordingly quashed his convictions , but after further hearings ordered on 20 December 2006 that he be retried rather than acquitted . 
 = = Background to the case = = 
 Joseph Thomas is an Australian citizen . On 23 March 2001 he left Australia and travelled by air to Pakistan , crossing into Afghanistan by land . For the next three months , he was alleged to have trained at the Al Farouq training camp near the city of Kandahar , before travelling to Kabul in July 2001 . Over the next eighteen months or so , Thomas stayed in various Al Qaeda safe houses , and is alleged to have made contact with several Al Qaeda officials . 
 On 4 January 2003 , Thomas was apprehended by Pakistani immigration officials at an airport in the city of Karachi , and taken into custody . Thomas had with him items including an Australian @-@ issue passport , an airline ticket for travel to Indonesia , and about $ 3 @,@ 800 in cash . The passport , issued on 19 May 1993 , had been tampered with , for the intention of concealing the details of Thomas ' movements after his departure from Australia in 2001 . He was blindfolded , and driven to an unknown location , where he was questioned for about two hours by two Pakistani men and two Americans . 
 He was questioned several times over the next few days , before being taken to another location , which Thomas described as " some sort of mansion house " , where he was kept in a small cell for the next two weeks and questioned on a number of occasions . Initially he maintained a fabricated story , that he was a student who had been travelling in Pakistan , but he later revealed the truth , that he had been in contact with Al Qaeda in Afghanistan . He said that he was motivated to change his story by several incidents , including one in which one of the Pakistani interrogators pulled on the collar of his hood , so as to strangle him , and incidents in which interrogators said that he would be electrocuted and executed . According to Thomas , he was then told that his cooperation was welcome and that he would be returned home . 
 After the two weeks , Thomas was blindfolded and shackled , and flown to Islamabad , where he remained in custody . There he was visited by an Australian consular representative , who later gave evidence that Thomas did not appear to have been maltreated , or denied food or water . However , the representative did testify that while Thomas was on the phone to his parents in Australia , he told them " I 'm not going to Cuba " ( referring to the Guantanamo Bay detainment camp ) , to which a Pakistani official replied , " No , that 's not correct . " 
 Between 25 January and 29 January , Thomas was interviewed four times by members of the Australian Federal Police ( AFP ) and by members of the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation ( ASIO ) , accompanied by Pakistani officials . During one of these interviews , a Pakistani official said to Thomas " we told you that you have to prove it ... that you are not a terrorist ... you have to prove it that you are an innocent man and why you are sitting here . " Thomas was then transferred again , this time to the city of Lahore , where he was kept for another three weeks , and interrogated by Pakistani officials and an American official referred to as " Joe " . This man suggested that Thomas return to Afghanistan with a recording device , to obtain information on Al Qaeda figures , a suggestion Thomas rejected because he feared he would be killed . Joe also threatened Thomas that he would be sent to Afghanistan where he would be tortured by having his testicles twisted , and implied that agents would be sent to Australia to rape Thomas ' wife . Thomas was then returned to Islamabad . 
 On 8 March , Thomas was interviewed again by two members of the AFP , who had made special arrangements with the Pakistani Directorate for Inter @-@ Services Intelligence ( ISI ) to have the interview conducted pursuant to Australian law , particularly the requirements of the federal Evidence Act 1995 and Crimes Act 1914 , so that admissible evidence could be gathered . ISI allowed the interview , but with a very limited timeframe , and did not allow Thomas to have access to legal advice . During this interview , Thomas made several self @-@ <unk> statements , which were key to his later convictions and the admissibility of which was the central issue in the appeal . In the statements , Thomas admitted that he had tampered with his passport to conceal the amount of time he had been in Pakistan , and also admitted that the money and airline ticket had been given to him by Tawfiq bin Attash , a high ranking Al Qaeda lieutenant involved with the 1998 United States embassy bombings and the USS Cole bombing . On 10 March , the AFP wrote again to the ISI , reiterating the requirements of the Australian legislation , and saying that " the admissibility of [ the record of interview ] in Australian Courts has been seriously compromised . " 
 On 6 June 2003 , Thomas was released from Pakistani custody , at which point he was deported to Australia . He spent nearly a year and a half subsequently living with his family in the Melbourne suburb of <unk> , Victoria , before he was arrested by the AFP on 18 November 2004 and charged with several federal offences , including one count of possessing a false passport ( an offence under the <unk> Act 1938 ) , and one count of receiving funds from a terrorist organisation and two counts of providing resources to a terrorist organisation ( offences under the Criminal Code Act 1995 ) . 
 = = = Trial = = = 
 Thomas was tried in the Supreme Court of Victoria . On 26 February , was found guilty of the passport charge and the receiving funds charge ( although he was acquitted of the providing funds charges ) . He was later sentenced on 31 March , to a total of five years ' imprisonment with a two @-@ year non @-@ parole period . 
 With respect to the admissibility of the record of the 8 March interview , the trial judge ( Justice Cummins ) had instructed the jury that : 
 " Normally , failure to avail an interviewee of [ the right to legal access ] would be fatal to the admission of a subsequent interview ... However , the requirement is not absolute , nor can it be ... it is not hollow to say that the suspect had the right to choose whether to proceed without that legal access . He had the right to choose not to answer , and wait for the legal bus which might never arrive , or to answer , in the legitimate aim of ultimate return to Australia . To say such a choice is no choice at all is revisionism . " 
 In his assessment , the judge said that the AFP interviewers had conducted the interview " fairly and properly " , and had not attempted to use Thomas ' lack of legal representation to their favour . 
 The trial judge also concluded that Thomas had been properly informed of his right to silence , and had not been induced by the AFP officers to participate in the interview by offer of repatriation or any other reward . Ultimately he decided that Thomas had participated voluntarily in the interview , and that in the circumstances , Thomas ' lack of legal advice should not make the record of the interview inadmissible . 
 = = Arguments = = 
 Lex Lasry QC , on behalf of Thomas , argued that the trial judge had made several errors of law : 
 the trial judge should have found that the 8 March interview was not voluntary and hence inadmissible , and 
 even if it had been voluntary , the trial judge should have excluded it anyway on grounds of fairness or public policy . 
 Several other matters were also raised , relating to particular parts of the evidence ( specifically , relating to the witness testimony of Yahya Goba , one of the Buffalo Six ) , but these matters had little bearing on the final outcome of the case , and were dealt with only briefly by the court . The central argument raised was that , with regard to all the circumstances , Thomas did not actually have a practical choice whether to speak or not . 
 The other main argument was an alternative argument , that if the court decided that the admissions were in fact voluntary , they should not have been admitted anyway on the basis that to do so would be unfair , because of factors including Thomas ' lack of access to legal advice even where he had a right to obtain it , his vulnerability in the circumstances , and " the contamination of the record of interview by the previous joint team interrogations , and their potential or actual use as levers to remind the applicant of his earlier answers . " 
 Two other parties sought to be involved in the case as amici curiae , Amnesty International ( represented by former Federal Court Justice Ron Merkel ) , and the Victorian human rights advocacy group the Human Rights Law Resource Centre . However both their applications were rejected , because they could not assist the court in a way in which they could not otherwise be assisted , and their submissions were largely subsumed into submissions made by Lasry in any event . 
 = = Judgment = = 
 In a unanimous decision , the three judges decided that the appeal should be allowed ( more specifically , that leave to appeal should be granted and the appeal heard and allowed <unk> – at once ) , on the basis that the 8 March 2003 interview was not voluntary and so was inadmissible , and by admitting it the trial judge had made an error of law resulting in a miscarriage of justice . 
 = = = <unk> of the interview = = = 
 The court quoted from a 1948 judgment of future Chief Justice of Australia Owen Dixon , followed unanimously by the High Court of Australia in later decisions , in which he said that : 
 " At common law a confessional statement made out of court by an accused person may not be admitted in evidence against him upon his trial for the crime to which it relates unless it is shown to have been voluntarily made . This means substantially that it has been made in the exercise of his free choice . If he speaks because he is overborne , his confessional statement cannot be received in evidence and it does not matter by what means he has been overborne . If his statement is the result of duress , intimidation , persistent importunity , or sustained or undue insistence or pressure , it cannot be voluntary . But it is also a definite rule of the common law that a confessional statement cannot be voluntary if it is preceded by an inducement held out by a person in authority and the inducement has not been removed before the statement is made ... " 
 The court also noted a recent decision of its own , in which it had emphasised that the principles of evidence strike a balance between the rights of the individual and the rights of the state , and that : 
 " On the one hand , there is an obvious need to bring to account those who have committed serious offences if the objectives of the criminal justice system are to be achieved and societal values vindicated , but , on the other , it cannot be forgotten that those values incorporate the rights of the individual and , in part define the nature of the relationship between the citizen and the community in which he or she resides . " 
 The court considered that Thomas had been regularly informed by all those who had interrogated him that the degree to which he cooperated would determine what happened to him , and that given their position as authority figures , Thomas would have readily perceived that they had the ability to change his situation ; indeed , none of the interviewers had done anything to dispel the idea that they would be able to help Thomas . The court also pointed out that even if actions such as showing Thomas photographs of his family and letters from them could not be said to be deliberately improper , as the trial judge seemed to indicate would be necessary to characterise them as inducements , there was no way that they could be interpreted by someone in Thomas ' position , other than as indications that if he cooperated he would be reunited with his family . Particularly , after Thomas expressed happiness at seeing the photographs , one of the interviewers took them away , saying " [ we ] might give you another look at that later " , comments which were " calculated , if not intended , to remind the applicant that he was dependent on his captors and interviewers for favours . " 
 The court rejected the opinion of the trial judge that Thomas viewed the 8 March interview differently to the other interviews , which were concerned only with intelligence gathering . Rather , they emphasised how similar the interviews all were : " same place , same AFP personnel , same topics . " They considered that the inducements offered in the previous interviews , and indeed the threats and intimidation in previous interviews by the American " Joe " and others , all " remained operative , their power undiminished " in 8 March interview . 
 Lastly , the court rejected the argument that the admissions were voluntary because Thomas knew he had a right to silence , because he did not have any practical opportunity to exercise the right . The court concluded that the trial judge had made an error by separating the interview from the circumstances , and that in the circumstances Thomas had no real choice whether to answer questions : " Even the threat ' Confess or be tortured ' can be said to involve a choice , and a chance that torture may not be applied . But it could never be regarded as a free choice in the relevant sense . " 
 Ultimately , the court found that the admissions were not given voluntarily , and so were not admissible . 
 = = = Discretion to exclude evidence = = = 
 Although it was unnecessary to decide the alternative argument , the court addressed it briefly anyway . After considering previous cases on the issue , the court considered whether the Australian investigators acted fairly . They concluded that " only one course [ was ] properly open to the investigating officials in the light of the position taken by the Pakistani authorities . It was to acknowledge that no formal record of interview could be conducted so long as the applicant was in Pakistan since , as the investigating officials appreciated , any such interview would be unlawful , that is , would be contrary to Australian law . " 
 The court also referred to a judgment of Justice McHugh of the High Court , in which he said that although there is some discretion as to whether evidence obtained where an interviewee does not have access to legal advice should be admitted or not , judges are not free to make the decision " by reference to general notions of fairness . " 
 The court concluded that the trial judge had erred in not exercising his discretion to bar the evidence from being admitted , although it was not necessary to decide the point . 
 = = Consequences = = 
 Thomas ' original convictions were quashed , however before the final orders were made the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions sought to make a submission as to whether there should be a directed acquittal or whether there should be a retrial . The court heard brief arguments , then set aside the issue for a further hearing , to be held after the parties had made written submissions . The prosecution sought to introduce as evidence statements Thomas made in an interview with the Australian Broadcasting Corporation for the Four Corners television program in February 2006 . 
 The parties made submissions , and there was an oral hearing on 1 December 2006 . All parties accepted that the relevant test to be applied was the test set out in the High Court case of DPP ( Nauru ) v Fowler , which sets out two preconditions for a retrial ; the first requiring that the admissible evidence presented at trial be " sufficiently cogent " to support a conviction , the second requiring consideration of circumstances that would make it unjust to put the accused through a retrial . However this case had an unusual feature , namely that the evidence that the prosecution would seek to use at a retrial had not been available at the original trial , through no fault of the prosecution , since although the interviews had been taken at that time they had not been published . Ultimately all parties agreed that all evidence , not just evidence submitted in the original trial , should be considered when applying the first part of the Fowler test . 
 The court decided that it would be reasonably possible for a jury to convict Thomas based on the available evidence , so it then considered whether there were factors which would make a retrial unjust . Thomas ' lawyer Lex Lasry argued that the delay in Thomas ' prosecution ( he was not arrested until seventeen months after he returned to Australia ) and the extensive media coverage of the case meant it was unlikely Thomas would get a fair trial , and that a retrial would be an undue hardship on Thomas given that he has spent long periods in custody , mostly in solitary confinement , without conviction , which has led to him being diagnosed with depression and post @-@ traumatic stress disorder . The court was of the opinion that a fair trial was not impossible in these circumstances , and although the other factors were considered , the court ultimately decided that the circumstances did not preclude a retrial . 
 As such , the court ordered on 20 December 2006 that Thomas be retried . Thomas was then released on bail , with requirements to report three times a week and not to leave Australia . Thomas and his family were in court to hear the verdict , his mother crying and Thomas looking " more like a startled rabbit [ than a terrorist ] . " Thomas ' retrial is , as of November 2007 , scheduled for 2008 . 
 = = = Commentary = = = 
 The decision was praised by civil libertarians . Former President of the <unk> Council of Civil Liberties , Robert Richter QC , said that the decision was important " because the pressure is to say , ' Well , do anything ' if the case is said to be a terrorist case . That is unacceptable , the Court of Appeal has said it 's unacceptable . " University of Melbourne evidence law professor Andrew Palmer said that " I think that it was a little bit naive to think that they could interview somebody and gather admissible evidence ... when that person was being held in conditions which were possibly oppressive ... I don 't really know what they were thinking . " 
 The decision has also attracted criticism . Conservative columnist Piers Akerman said that the decision " has handed al @-@ Qaeda , Jemaah Islamiyah and all other terrorist organisations a major victory and confirmed the adage the law is an ass . " Akerman emphasised that information about Thomas ( including the Four Corners interview ) was already available in the public domain for the populace to make its own judgment , despite " judicial commands to juries to ignore material [ which ] may have some minor relevance in their petty fiefdoms . " 
 Conservative Melbourne lawyer Peter Faris QC called for an appeal to the High Court or changes to the laws of evidence legislation , saying that " this case is bad law " , alternatively suggesting that Thomas be handed over to Pakistan , since he stated that the evidence from the interview would in his opinion be admissible in a Pakistani court . Faris also argued that there was an issue of apparent bias arising with respect to the presiding judge in the appeal , Maxwell P , which could afford grounds for invalidating the appeal . It should be noted , however , that Pakistani law of evidence does not permit a confession made to a police officer to be admitted into evidence . Faris argued that the apparent bias arose because of Maxwell 's activities before his appointment to the Supreme Court of Victoria , including his membership of organisations including Amnesty International , his past presidency of Liberty Victoria , his past involvement with human rights law and advocacy against counter @-@ terrorism laws . Faris drew a comparison with the House of Lords case which considered the extradition of Augusto Pinochet , which was overturned on appeal because of Lord Hoffman 's failure to disclose his links to Amnesty International . 
 Because of the ongoing proceedings relating to whether Thomas should be acquitted or retried , neither the Government of Australia nor the Opposition commented immediately after the case , although Treasurer Peter Costello later said that anti @-@ terrorism legislation did not need to be strengthened in the wake of the case , and Opposition foreign affairs spokesperson Kevin Rudd said that " What is plain from the events of yesterday is that the Government has bungled – and bungled badly – the prosecution of this case . " 
 Gerard Henderson said that the case " highlights an emerging division within democracies " between civil liberties advocates on the one hand and " a democracy defence lobby , which maintains that radical Islamism poses a real and present danger to Western nations " on the other . 
 = Asplenium bradleyi = 
 Asplenium bradleyi , commonly known as Bradley 's spleenwort or cliff spleenwort , is a rare <unk> fern of east @-@ central North America . Named after Professor Frank Howe Bradley , who first collected it in Tennessee , it may be found infrequently throughout much of the Appalachian Mountains , the Ozarks , and the Ouachita Mountains , growing in small crevices on exposed sandstone cliffs . The species originated as a hybrid between mountain spleenwort ( Asplenium montanum ) and ebony spleenwort ( Asplenium platyneuron ) ; A. bradleyi originated when that sterile diploid hybrid underwent chromosome doubling to become a fertile tetraploid , a phenomenon known as <unk> . Studies indicate that the present population of Bradley 's spleenwort arose from several independent doublings of sterile diploid hybrids . A. bradleyi can also form sterile hybrids with several other spleenworts . 
 While A. bradleyi is easily outcompeted by other plants in more fertile habitats , it is well adapted to the thin , acidic soil and harsh environment of its native cliffs , where it finds few competitors . Its isolated situation on these cliffs protects it from most threats , but quarrying and mining of the cliffs , rock climbing , and other activities that disturb the cliff ecosystem can destroy it . 
 = = Description = = 
 Asplenium bradleyi is a small fern with dark green , pinnate @-@ <unk> to bipinnate fronds . These form evergreen , perennial tufts . Notable characteristics are the dark stem , whose color extends well up the axis of the leaf blade , a deeply cut acroscopic lobe or pinnule at the base of each pinna , and toothed pinna edges . However , some of these characteristics are variable , and may not be observed in all individuals of A. bradleyi . Some specimens have rounded , rather than toothed edges and others lack dark coloration throughout most of the stem . The fronds are monomorphic , the sterile and fertile fronds appearing the same size and shape . 
 Its rhizomes ( underground stems ) are short and parallel to the ground , or sometimes curving upwards , so the fronds spring up in a cluster . The rhizome is about 1 millimeter ( 0 @.@ 04 in ) in diameter , covered with narrowly triangular scales that are dark reddish to brown and strongly clathrate ( bearing a lattice @-@ like pattern ) . The scales are 3 to 5 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 1 to 0 @.@ 2 in ) long and 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 4 millimeters wide , with untoothed or shallowly toothed edges . The stipe ( the part of the stem below the leaf blade ) is upright , 1 to 10 centimeters ( 0 @.@ 4 to 4 in ) long , occasionally as much as 13 centimeters ( 5 in ) . It lacks wings , and is reddish- to purplish @-@ brown and shiny . It is one @-@ third to three @-@ quarter times the length of the blade . Small brown scales at the base of the stipe diminish to hairs as one moves towards the tip of the leaf . 
 The overall shape of the blade ranges from oblong ( tapering at the ends but about the same width throughout ) to lanceolate ( slightly wider a short distance above the base , tapering to a point at the apex ) . It is squared off at the base and tapers at the tip . The blade ranges from 2 to 17 centimeters ( 0 @.@ 8 to 7 in ) long , rarely to 20 centimeters ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) , and 1 to 6 centimeters ( 0 @.@ 4 to 2 in ) in width , and may be thin or somewhat thick . The blade is cut into 5 to 15 pairs of pinnae ( possibly as low as 3 or as high as 20 in unusual specimens ) , which are themselves deeply lobed or further subdivided into pinnules . The lower pinnae are stalked , while the upper pinnae are not . They are variable in shape , tending to have a squared @-@ off or very broadly curved base , and are typically widest at or near the base . The acroscopic lobe or pinnule nearest the rachis ( located on the apical side of each pinna ) tends to be enlarged , and the pinnae are toothed . They vary from 6 to 40 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 2 to 2 in ) in length and 3 to 10 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 1 to 0 @.@ 4 in ) at the middle of the frond . 
 Each pinna on a fertile frond has three or more pairs of sori . These are 1 to 2 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 04 to 0 @.@ 08 in ) long , and rusty or dark brown in color . They are located between the margin and the midvein of the pinnae . The sori are covered by opaque indusia with untoothed edges . The indusia from white to light tan in color and have a membraneous texture . Each sporangium holds 64 spores . The species has a chromosome number of 144 in the sporophyte , indicating an allotetraploid origin . It <unk> from June to December . 
 Variants of A. bradleyi have been reported . Specimens found growing in a very shaded environment , which lacked color in the rachis and were simply pinnate , have been mistaken for green spleenwort ( A. viride ) . But even under such conditions , A. bradleyi has a more leathery leaf texture than A. viride , and their ranges do not overlap . In 1923 , Edgar T. Wherry described what he believed to be a new species of fern , Stotler 's spleenwort ( A. stotleri ) ( after T.C. Stotler , its discoverer ) . Wherry believed it to be the hybrid of lobed spleenwort ( A. pinnatifidum ) and A. platyneuron . However , it was later shown to be simply a form of A. bradleyi with rounded , rather than sharp , teeth . A dwarfed form of A. bradleyi , with fronds about 1 centimeter ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) long , was discovered in Illinois by Wallace R. Weber and Robert H. <unk> . This form lacked dark color in the stipe and rachis except for the very base ; some slightly larger specimens , with a 2 @-@ centimeter ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) frond , retained the normal coloration of these structures . 
 Among fertile species , A. bradleyi most closely resembles its parent species A. montanum . Several characteristics exit to distinguish them : the pinnae of A. bradleyi are toothed and less deeply lobed or cut than A. montanum ( where the pinnae are often fully cut to pinnules ) , the dark color of the stipe extends into the rachis , the upper pinnae lack stems , and the overall shape of the leaf blade is parallel @-@ sided , rather than lance @-@ shaped . A. bradleyi also shows some resemblance to black spleenwort ( A. <unk> @-@ nigrum ) ( although their ranges do not overlap ) . The latter may be identified by its distinctly triangular @-@ shaped leaf blade , more deeply cut leaves ( the pinnules of its basal pinnae are lobed ) , and enlarged <unk> , rather than acroscopic , pinnules . 
 Comparison of the fronds of ' ' Asplenium bradleyi ' ' and its two parent species 
 Asplenium bradleyi is similar to two hybrid species of which it is a parent , Graves ' spleenwort ( A. × gravesii ) , a hybrid with A. pinnatifidum , and Wherry 's spleenwort ( A. × wherryi ) , a backcross with A. montanum . In A. × gravesii , the dark color of the stipe ends at the base of the leaf blade , the pinnae are more shallowly lobed and the enlargement of acroscopic lobes or pinnules is less distinct , and the apical portion of the blade forms a long , tapering tip with slight lobes ( as in A. pinnatifidum ) , rather than being cut into pinnae . In addition to the general reduction of the <unk> of A. bradleyi , A. × gravesii also shows faint winging along the stipe . Likewise , in A. × wherryi , the dark color of the stipe again ends at the base of the leaf blade , the overall shape of the blade tends to be more distinctly lance @-@ shaped , and the fronds are somewhat more deeply cut than A. bradleyi , progressing from bipinnate in the lower half to pinnate @-@ <unk> and finally pinnate at the apex . Finally , the diploid hybrid A. montanum × platyneuron , from which A. bradleyi arose by chromosome doubling , is essentially identical in appearance to A. bradleyi . On close examination , its spores are found to be abortive , and the sori are smaller and not do not become fused with each other as they grow , as they do in fertile A. bradleyi . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The scientific discovery of A. bradleyi occurred in 1871 , when Frank Howe Bradley collected a number of specimens near Coal Creek , on Walden 's Ridge in East Tennessee . Bradley sent some of them to Daniel Cady Eaton , who recognized it as a species distinct from A. montanum and named it for Bradley in an 1873 publication . 
 While both Asa Gray and Eaton identified A. bradleyi as a hybrid intermediate between A. montanum and A. platyneuron , the English botanist R. Morton Middleton proposed in 1892 that it was identical or closely related to A. viride . This conclusion was based on the examination of forms growing in shade on the Cumberland Plateau which lacked color in the rachis , and was endorsed by contemporary Tennessee botanists such as Augustin <unk> and Kirby Smith . This was rebutted in 1893 by Amos A. Heller , who pointed out that most collections of A. bradleyi had a dark stipe and that it possessed an auricle ( the acroscopic pinnule ) which A. viride lacked . Instead , Heller perceived in some of his specimens from the lower Susquehanna River affinities to A. montanum and A. pinnatifidum . Middleton , nevertheless , continued to maintain his theory of an affinity with A. viride , and speculated that A. bradleyi was not a hybrid , but an " intermediate " between A. viride and lanceolate spleenwort ( A. <unk> ssp. <unk> ) . 
 Edgar T. Wherry speculated at length on the hybrid origins of A. bradleyi and other Appalachian spleenworts in 1925 , but the scheme he proposed was later found to be untenable , although he did recognize the contribution of A. platyneuron to its ancestry . Herb Wagner , in 1953 , suggested instead that it was the hybrid of A. montanum and A. platyneuron , noting that Eaton and W. N. Clute had already made tentative suggestions along those lines . His cytological studies the following year showed that A. bradleyi was an allotetraploid , the product of hybridization between A. montanum and A. platyneuron to form a sterile diploid , followed by chromosome doubling that restored fertility . 
 These findings were later supported by chromatographic analysis of flavonoid compounds . <unk> of A. bradleyi showed a combination of all the compounds found in A. montanum and all those in A. platyneuron . A. × wherryi showed the same pattern , as it also contains chromosomes from both of those species . A specimen of A. stotleri was subsequently shown to form the same <unk> as well . This showed that it was not descended to A. pinnatifidum , whose <unk> contain compounds inherited from walking fern ( A. <unk> ) , and verified that A. stotleri was simply a form of A. bradleyi . <unk> analysis in the 1980s also supported these hybrid origins of A. bradleyi . 
 The species was segregated from Asplenium as <unk> bradleyi by Farwell in 1931 . The change was not widely accepted and current authorities do not recognize this segregate genus . 
 = = = Progenitor and hybrids = = = 
 The sterile diploid hybrid of A. montanum and A. platyneuron , which resembles A. bradleyi except for its abortive spores and smaller sori , was not collected until 1972 , at Crowder 's Mountain , Georgia . Even though the diploid hybrid is rarely collected , allozyme studies show that A. bradleyi has multiple origins ; that is , different populations of A. bradleyi have originated from the chromosome doubling of independently formed diploids . Despite their independent origins , these populations are probably <unk> and not reproductively isolated from one another . 
 In addition to its parental species , A. bradleyi hybridizes with several other spleenworts . Its hybrid with A. pinnatifidum was recognized as such by William R. Maxon in 1918 . He named it A. gravesii for its discoverer , Edward W. Graves . It can also backcross with its parental species . Wherry collected specimens of A. bradleyi × montanum from a cliff near Blairstown , New Jersey in 1935 . It is not thought to have been collected again until 1961 , when it was described and named in Wherry 's honor . Specimens believed to be A. bradleyi × platyneuron were collected at an early date at McCall 's Ferry , along the Susquehanna River . The site of collection was submerged by the building of the <unk> Dam . A preliminary report of both diploid A. bradleyi and A. bradleyi × platyneuron from <unk> County , Tennessee was made in 1989 . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 One of the " Appalachian spleenworts " , A. bradleyi can be found along the Appalachian Mountains from northern New Jersey and Pennsylvania southwest to Georgia and Alabama , and occasionally along the Ohio Valley to the Ozarks and Ouachitas , where it is found in Missouri , Arkansas , and eastern Oklahoma . Populations in Maryland and New York are considered historical . Populations are generally scattered in the Appalachians , but more frequent in the Ozarks and Ouachitas . 
 = = Ecology and conservation = = 
 Asplenium bradleyi can be found on steep , acidic rocks from altitudes of 0 to 1 @,@ 000 meters ( 0 to 3 @,@ 281 ft ) . Sandstone is a common substrate , but it can also be found on schist , gneiss , granite , or other acidic rocks . Like A. montanum , the soil formed when these rocks weather must be <unk> ( pH 4 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 0 ) to <unk> ( pH 3 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 0 ) to support A. bradleyi ; it is slightly calcium @-@ tolerant . It usually grows tightly wedged into horizontal or vertical crevices in exposed rock or cliff faces . These <unk> are too small for most other vascular plants to survive , except for a few other spleenworts . Some mosses and lichens may occur in the same habitat . The soil there is typically composed of a mixture of acidic sand weathered from the rock and decomposing organic materials , often including old fronds . <unk> are frequently lost and decompose in summer when the soil is drier , but the crevices are usually moist or wet in winter and spring . Some shade may be present , but dense shade is not tolerated . A. bradleyi specializes in growing in this rather hostile environment , and competes poorly with other plants in even slightly richer environments . 
 The inaccessibility of its habitat affords some protection for A. bradleyi . Quarrying and strip mining may threaten the sandstone cliffs , especially on the Cumberland Plateau . Rock climbers and botanical collectors have also damaged populations of the fern . Toxic runoff from atop cliffs can affect them , and they may also be threatened by both natural and anthropogenic shading of cliffs due to increased tree growth at the cliff base , invasive vines overrunning the cliff face , or the piling of slash against the cliff after logging . 
 Asplenium bradleyi is protected as an endangered species in the states of Illinois , Indiana , New Jersey , and Pennsylvania , and is considered threatened in Ohio . Acadia Cliffs State Nature Preserve in Ohio , acquired in 1994 , contains the state 's only protected population of A. bradleyi . 
 = Washington State Route 401 = 
 State Route 401 ( SR 401 ) is a 12 @.@ 13 @-@ mile ( 19 @.@ 52 km ) long state highway in Pacific County within the U.S. state of Washington . The highway originates at the north end of the Astoria – Megler Bridge west of Megler at an intersection with U.S. Route 101 ( US 101 ) . The roadway travels northeast , paralleling cliffs , the Columbia River and the South Fork of the Naselle River to Naselle , ending at SR 4 . The road was designated Secondary State Highway 12B ( SSH 12 ) between 1937 and 1964 , when SR 401 was created to replace SSH 12B . The Astoria – Megler Bridge , completed in 1966 , replaced a ferry east of the bridge , where the highway originally ended , and is known locally as Kingston Ferry Road . The roadway was extended west to the north end of the bridge , where it currently terminates . The former ferry terminal became the Dismal Nitch rest area , named after the Lewis and Clark Expedition 's description of the place . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 401 originates at an intersection with U.S. Route 101 ( US 101 ) at the north end of the Astoria – Megler Bridge west of Megler and southeast of McGowan . Traveling northeast between cliffs and the Columbia River past the Dismal Nitch Safety rest area to Knappton , the highway turns north along more cliffs and the South Fork of the Naselle River . In Naselle , the South Fork merges with the Naselle River , which the roadway crosses over three times before terminating at SR 4 . The intersection with SR 4 is also the busiest segment of the road with an estimated daily average of 2 @,@ 800 motorists , which has been decreasing from 3 @,@ 100 motorists in 2005 . 
 = = History = = 
 Secondary State Highway 12B ( SSH 12B ) was created during the 1937 establishment of the Primary and secondary state highway system as an auxiliary route of Primary State Highway 12 ( PSH 12 ) , co @-@ signed as both U.S. Route 101 ( US 101 ) and US 830 . The highway ran from PSH 12 / US 101 at the Megler ferry landing on the Columbia River to PSH 12 / US 830 in Naselle , with a gap between Megler and Knappton . SSH 12B , including the Megler – Knappton gap , became SR 401 during the 1964 highway renumbering . After the Astoria – Megler Bridge was completed on August 27 , 1966 , SR 401 was extended west to the new bridge and the gap between Megler and Knappton was completed by 1968 . The Dismal Nitch Safety rest area , formerly the Megler Landing Rest Area , was remodeled twice in 2007 to be accessible year @-@ round . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Pacific County . 
 = Class A Wild Trout Waters = 
 Class A Wild Trout Waters are the highest biomass class given to streams in Pennsylvania by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission . They are considered to contain the highest @-@ quality naturally reproducing trout populations in Pennsylvania . The first streams received their Class A Wild Trout Waters designations in 1983 . There are now hundreds of such waters , comprising nearly 1 @,@ 500 miles ( 2 @,@ 400 km ) of streams . Class A Wild Trout Waters receive certain legal protections . For instance , they are typically classified by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection as High @-@ Quality Coldwater Fisheries . Most Class A Wild Trout Waters are subject to standard statewide angling regulations by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission . 
 The official definition of Class A Wild Trout Waters is " streams that support a population of naturally produced trout of sufficient size and abundance to support a long @-@ term and rewarding sport fishery " . These streams are considered to be the best angling streams in Pennsylvania and most of the state 's 67 counties contain at least one . Class A Wild Trout Waters are virtually never stocked , although many were prior to receiving their designation . There are different total biomass criteria for different species and combinations of species , but for brook trout alone , the minimum is 30 kilograms per hectare ( 27 lb / acre ) , and for brown trout alone , the minimum is 40 kilograms per hectare ( 36 lb / acre ) . 
 = = History = = 
 The modern stream classification system of the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission , including Class A Wild Trout Waters , was developed with Operation Future , which marked a transition from recreation @-@ based management to resource @-@ based management , in 1983 . Following statewide stream surveys in the late 1970s and early 1980s , the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission created a set of biomass standards for trout streams in the state . 
 The first streams were designated as Class A Wild Trout Waters in 1983 . At that time , 138 stream sections , totaling nearly 400 miles ( 640 km ) of streams , were found to meet the criteria . As more streams were assessed , the number of Class A Wild Trout Waters grew rapidly . By 2005 , there were 436 Class A Wild Trout Waters , totaling 1 @,@ 265 miles ( 2 @,@ 036 km ) . By the end of 2008 , there were 487 such stream sections , which together included 1 @,@ 436 miles ( 2 @,@ 311 km ) of streams . By 2014 , there were 510 Class A Wild Trout Waters , comprising 1 @,@ 490 @.@ 6 miles ( 2 @,@ 398 @.@ 9 km ) of streams . 
 In the 2010s , the fact that the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission was considering adding seven urban streams to its list of Class A Wild Trout Waters — thus ending stocking there — caused some criticism by anglers who believed that this would impact the quality of fishing in heavily fished streams such as Monocacy Creek and Little Lehigh Creek . However , the criticism was not universal , with proponents pointing out that a redesignation would provide extra protection for the streams . The Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission eventually decided to classify them as Class A Wild Trout Waters , but continue stocking them in the spring to satisfy angler demand . 
 According to Pennsylvania Outdoor News Person of the Year Bill Anderson , the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission has become hesitant to classify streams as Class A Wild Trout Waters due to " ' social ' concerns " . 
 = = Description and distribution = = 
 The official definition of Class A Wild Trout Waters is " streams that support a population of naturally produced trout of sufficient size and abundance to support a long @-@ term and rewarding sport fishery " . 
 Class A Wild Trout Waters are the " best of the best " streams for trout fishing in Pennsylvania . They are distributed widely across the state . However , most are found in north @-@ central and northeastern Pennsylvania , while very few are in the western third of the state . Some Class A Wild Trout Waters are located in The Poconos or the Lehigh Valley . As of 2009 , 49 of the state 's 67 counties contain at least one Class A Wild Trout stream . However , in that year , only nine counties contained at least 30 miles ( 48 km ) of Class A Wild Trout Waters . 
 Class A Wild Trout Waters are virtually never stocked with trout since they are managed solely for the propagation of wild trout . However , most current Class A Wild Trout streams were historically stocked with trout prior to the introduction of the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission 's classification system . They may also be tributaries of streams that are stocked with trout . 
 In 2014 , there were 274 Class A Wild Trout Waters for brook trout , comprising 743 @.@ 6 miles ( 1 @,@ 196 @.@ 7 km ) of streams . There were 163 such stream segments for brown trout , making up a total of 507 @.@ 3 miles ( 816 @.@ 4 km ) of streams , and 62 Class A Wild Trout Waters for both brook trout and brown trout , totaling 211 @.@ 0 miles ( 339 @.@ 6 km ) . There were only 11 Class A Wild Trout Waters for rainbow trout , making up 28 @.@ 7 miles ( 46 @.@ 2 km ) of streams . 
 = = Criteria = = 
 In order to be listed as Class A Wild Trout Waters , a stream must be surveyed by Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission biologists with " approved protocols " to determine that it meets the relevant standards . The official designation is carried out by the Board of Commissioners . 
 The criteria for Class A Wild Trout Waters vary by species . For brook trout , a biomass of 30 kilograms per hectare ( 27 lb / acre ) , including at least 0 @.@ 1 kilograms per hectare ( 0 @.@ 089 lb / acre ) of brook trout less than 15 centimeters ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) long . Additionally , brook trout may not make up less than 75 percent of the total wild trout biomass . The requirements are the same for brown trout except that the minimum brown trout biomass is 40 kilograms per hectare ( 36 lb / acre ) . 
 For a stream to be Class A Wild Trout Waters for both brook trout and brown trout , the combined biomass of both species must be at least 40 kilograms per hectare ( 36 lb / acre ) and the biomass of each species must include at least 0 @.@ 1 kilograms per hectare ( 0 @.@ 089 lb / acre ) of trout less than 15 centimeters ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) long . Neither species may make up more than 75 percent of the total wild trout biomass . 
 The criteria for rainbow trout are considerably simpler : the only requirement is that the biomass of wild rainbow trout less than 15 centimeters ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) long must be at least 2 kilograms per hectare ( 1 @.@ 8 lb / acre ) . There is only one stream in Pennsylvania that is Class A Wild Trout Waters for brook trout and rainbow trout : Roaring Run . 
 There are several rankings with lower biomass requirements in the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission 's classification system : Class B Wild Trout Waters , Class C Wild Trout Waters , Class D Wild Trout Waters , and Class E Wild Trout Waters . 
 = = Legal significance = = 
 The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection designates Class A Wild Trout Waters as High @-@ Quality Coldwater Fisheries , provided that there has been an adequate period of public comment and participation . This provides such streams with extra legal protections under the federal Clean Water Act . Thus , any activity involving discharges into a Class A Wild Trout Stream is required to comply with more restrictive standards than for other streams . Some streams receive Exceptional Value status due to their classification as Class A Wild Trout Waters . 
 Under Section <unk> of the Pennsylvania Code , the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission is to manage trout populations in Class A Wild Trout Waters as renewable natural resources , and to conserve the populations for anglers . 
 The Susquehanna River Basin Commission bases its water withdrawal policy in part on the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission 's biomass classifications system . The habitat loss criteria for Class A Wild Trout Waters is 5 percent , except in cases of social or economic justification , in which case it is 7 @.@ 5 percent . 
 Class A Wild Trout Waters are subject to several angling regulations . The vast majority ( 92 percent ) of such <unk> are managed with the statewide minimum length of 7 inches ( 18 cm ) and the maximum creel limit of five fish . Of the 40 + Class A Wild Trout Waters under special regulations , about half are managed with a Catch and Release regulation . Trophy Trout and Wild Brook Trout Enhancement regulations apply to the remainder . A total of 31 Class A Wild Trout Waters have been designated as Wilderness Trout Streams . 
 Fishing in Class A Wild Trout Waters is permitted year @-@ round , although the killing of fish is forbidden from Labor Day to the beginning of the following year 's trout season . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Christianisation of Scotland = 
 The Christianisation of Scotland was the process by which Christianity spread in what is now Scotland , which took place principally between the fifth and tenth centuries . 
 Christianity was probably introduced to what is now Lowland Scotland by Roman soldiers stationed in the north of the province of Britannia . After the collapse of Roman authority in the fifth century , Christianity is presumed to have survived among the British enclaves in the south of what is now Scotland , but retreated as the pagan Anglo @-@ Saxons advanced . 
 Traditional narratives depict Scotland as largely converted by Irish missions associated with figures such as St. Columba , from the fifth to the seventh centuries , but many of these figures were later constructs or founded monasteries and collegiate churches in areas to which Christianity had already spread . Scholars have identified a distinctive form of Celtic Christianity , in which abbots were more significant than bishops , attitudes to clerical celibacy were more relaxed , and there were significant differences in practice with Roman Christianity , particularly the form of tonsure and the method of calculating Easter , although most of these issues had been resolved by the mid @-@ seventh century . 
 After the reconversion of Scandinavian Scotland in the tenth century , Christianity under papal authority was the dominant religion of the kingdom . The process of Christianisation was also significant in the development of Scottish national identity , the Hiberno @-@ Scottish mission to Continental Europe , the development of Insular art , and the introduction of Latin and formal education . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Christian religion = = = 
 Very little is known about religion in Scotland before the arrival of Christianity . The lack of native written sources among the Picts means that it can only be judged from parallels elsewhere , occasional surviving archaeological evidence and hostile accounts of later Christian writers . It is generally presumed to have resembled Celtic polytheism . The names of more than two hundred Celtic deities have been noted , some of which , like Lugh , The Dagda and The Morrigan , come from later Irish mythology , whilst others , like <unk> , Taranis and Cernunnos , come from evidence from Gaul . The Celtic pagans constructed temples and shrines to venerate these gods , something they did so through votive offerings and performing sacrifices , possibly including human sacrifice . According to Greek and Roman accounts , in Gaul , Britain and Ireland , there was a priestly caste of " magico @-@ religious specialists " known as the druids , although very little is definitely known about them . Irish legends about the origin of the Picts and stories from the life of St. Ninian , associate the Picts with druids . The Picts are also associated in Christian writing with " demon " worship , which may be a Christian interpretation of their deities , and one story concerning St. Columba has him exorcising a demon from a well in Pictland , suggesting that the worship of well spirits was a feature of Pictish paganism . Roman mentions of the worship of the Goddess Minerva at wells , and a Pictish stone associated with a well near Dunvegan Castle on Skye , have been taken to support this case . 
 = = = Roman influence = = = 
 The roots of Christianity in Scotland were probably among the soldiers and ordinary Roman citizens who lived in the vicinity of Hadrian 's Wall . The archaeology of the Roman period indicates that the northern parts of the Roman province of Britannia were among the most Christianised in the island . Chi @-@ Rho inscriptions and Christian grave @-@ slabs have been found on the wall from the fourth century , and from the same period the <unk> shrines ( known as <unk> ) that existed along Hadrian 's Wall were attacked and destroyed , presumably by Christians . 
 = = = Post @-@ Roman kingdoms = = = 
 After the collapse of Roman authority in the early fifth century , four major circles of influence emerged in Northern Britain . In the east , the kingdoms of the Picts eventually stretched from the River Forth to Shetland . In the west were the Gaelic ( Goidelic ) -speaking people of Dál Riata , who had close links with Ireland , from where they brought with them the name Scots . In the south were the British ( Brythonic @-@ speaking ) descendants of the peoples of the Roman @-@ influenced kingdoms of " The Old North " , the most powerful and longest surviving of which was Alt Clut . Finally , the Anglo @-@ Saxons had overrun much of southern Britain and held the Kingdom of Bernicia ( later the northern part of Northumbria ) , which reached into what are now the Borders of Scotland in the south @-@ east . 
 While the Picts and Scots would have remained pagan , most scholars presume that Christianity would have survived after the departure of the Romans among the Brythonic enclaves and retreated as the Anglo @-@ Saxons advanced north . Their gods included Tiw , Woden , Thor and <unk> , all of whom gave their names to days of the week , and <unk> , whose name was appropriated for the spring festival of Easter . While British Christians continued to practice inhumation without grave goods , the pagan Anglo @-@ Saxons are visible in the archaeological record from their practice of cremation and burial in urns , accompanied by extensive grave goods , perhaps designed to accompany the dead to the afterlife . However , despite growing evidence of Anglian settlement in southern Scotland , only one such grave has been found , at Dalmeny in East Lothian . 
 = = Early spread and missions = = 
 The traditional view of the Christianisation of Scotland has seen it as carried out by Irish @-@ Scots missionaries and to a lesser extent those from Rome and England . Historian Richard Fletcher argued that motivations for these missions may have included the example of St. Patrick , the idea of Peregrinatio and a growing interest in evangelism . Missionaries from Ireland were operating on the British mainland from at least the sixth century . This movement is traditionally associated with the figures of St. Ninian , St. Kentigern and St. Columba . However , historian Gilbert Markus highlights the fact that most of these figures were not church @-@ founders , but were usually were active in areas where Christianity had already become established , probably through gradual diffusion that is almost invisible in the historical record . This would have included trade , conquest and intermarriage . 
 = = = Britons = = = 
 Most scholars agree that the place @-@ name element eccles- , from the Brythonic word for church , represents evidence of the British church of the Roman and immediate post @-@ Roman period . In Scotland most of these are located in the south of the country in the area of the British successor states that would be known as the Hen Ogledd , or the Old North . From the fifth and sixth centuries , inscribed stones indicate Christianity through their dedications and are spread across southern Scotland . The earliest is the so @-@ called Latinus stone of Whithorn , dating to around 450 . A slightly later stone at <unk> commemorates <unk> , which may be bishops . Among the key indicators of Christianisation are cemeteries containing long cists , which are generally east @-@ west in orientation , like Christian graves . These cemeteries are suspected , or known to be Christian , because of their proximity to a church , or because they have Christian inscriptions . They are found from between the end of the Roman era in the early fifth century and the twelfth century . They are concentrated strongly in eastern Scotland south of the River Tay , in the modern East and Borders of Scotland . Writing in the sixth century , St. Patrick also mentioned <unk> , who probably ruled from the fort at Dumbarton rock and who had already accepted Christianity . The poem Y Gododdin , set in the early sixth century and probably written in what is now Scotland , indicates that the warriors of Gododdin , probably a kingdom based the site of modern Edinburgh , were Christian , receiving communion and confessing their sins before battle . 
 The figure of St. Ninian , traditionally credited with introducing Christianity to the region of south @-@ west Scotland , is now widely regarded as a later construct and may have been the result of scribal confusion with the Irish saint Finnian . The church known as Candida Casa was dedicated to him at Whithorn in the sixth century and from there St Kentigern seems to have created a new centre of worship at Govan or Inchinnan , which would extend an influence across the Strathclyde region . However , it is clear that Christianity had already gained a foothold across what is now southern Scotland before the sixth century . 
 = = = Gaels = = = 
 The conversion of the Gaelic kingdom of Dál Riata in the west of modern Scotland is traditionally attributed to the work of St. Columba . However , given the close cultural and linguistic ties , and the short distance across the seas , between the region and Ireland , which had begun to be Christianised from at least the fifth century , it is likely that Christianity had already reached this part of modern Scotland before his arrival in the mid @-@ sixth century . In this view , the role of clergy owing their loyalty to Iona and elsewhere was to consolidate the position of Christianity in the region and beyond and to provide pastoral care for the people there . 
 St Columba was probably a disciple of Finnian . He left Ireland after being exiled , and founded the monastery at Iona off the west coast of Scotland in 563 , probably on land granted from a Christian king . From there missions were carried out to western Argyll and the islands around Mull . Later the influence of Iona would extend to the Hebrides . Iona emerged as the most important religious centre in the north of Britain , partly as a result of the work of Adomnan , who was abbot there from 679 to 704 . Although it is unclear whether the historic Columba did conduct missions outside of a small part of Dál Riata , <unk> 's Life of St. Columba elevated him to become the apostle of North Britain in general . 
 = = = Picts = = = 
 The means and speed by which the Picts converted to Christianity is uncertain . Bede gives the credit for the conversion to Ninian , probably because in the eighth century , when Bede was writing , the Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom of Northumbria was in control of the south @-@ west of Scotland and an English bishop was in possession of the see that theoretically had been <unk> . Bede may have been reminding the Pictish church of its allegiance . Adomnan stresses the role of Columba in Pictland , and although the saint may have visited the region , since Adomnan does not make any claims for conversion , it is unlikely that the saint had any major impact . A separate mission , that may have been an attempt to <unk> the north @-@ east , was undertaken by Columba 's younger contemporary , another Irish priest , <unk> of Eigg , who had a large number of churches dedicated in his name in the region . 
 The process of conversion may have begun earlier than traditional mission @-@ based narratives . It is likely that knowledge of Christianity reached the region from Dál Riata , with which it had close contacts , including war , trade and intermarriage . Traditions place the fifth @-@ century saint Palladius in Pictland after he left Ireland , and link Abernethy with his contemporary , Saint Brigid of Kildare . Evidence for an early date for Christianisation include the fact that St. Patrick , active in the fifth century , referred in a letter to " apostate Picts " , indicating that they had previously been Christian , but had abandoned the faith . In addition the poem Y Gododdin , does not remark on the Picts as pagans . Recent archaeological work at Portmahomack places the foundation of the monastery there , an area once assumed to be among the last converted , in the late sixth century . In the east and north , Class II Pictish stones began to show Christian symbolism from the early eighth century . Conversion of the Pictish élite is assessed to have taken place over a considerable period , beginning in the fifth century and not complete until the seventh . Conversion of the general population may have stretched into the eighth century . The evidence of place names suggests a wide area of <unk> influence in Pictland , where there are large numbers of dedications of churches to Iona abbots of the seventh century . 
 = = = Anglo @-@ Saxons = = = 
 In the seventh century , St. Aidan ( died 651 ) went from Iona to found a church at Lindisfarne off the east coast of Northumbria . The influence of Lindisfarne would spread through the kingdom of Northumbria into what is now south @-@ east Scotland . However , in the second half of the century , the Northumbrian church was increasingly influenced by the Roman form of Christianity . The careers of St. Wilfred ( active from the 660s until his death in 709 ) , abbot of the monastery at Ripon and Bishop of Northumbria , and Benedict Biscop ( c . 628 – 690 ) , founder of the monasteries of Jarrow and Wearmouth , intensified ties with Rome . A bishopric established at Abercorn in the region of West Lothian , is presumed to have adopted Roman forms of Christianity after the Synod of Whitby in 664 , at which King Oswiu of Northumbria accepted the arguments for Roman authority and practices . However , the Pictish victory at the Battle of Dunnichen in 685 ended the Northumbrian dominance of the region and the bishop and his followers were ejected . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = Celtic Christianity = = = 
 The result of different missions and forms of conversion was a series of overlapping and informally organised churches . In the past historians used the term Celtic Church to describe a specific form of Christianity with its origins in the conversion of Ireland , traditionally associated with St. Patrick and which later spread to northern Britain through Iona . It is also used as a general description for the Christian establishment of northern Britain prior to the twelfth century , when new religious institutions and ideologies of primarily French origin began to take root in Scotland . The Celtic form of Christianity has been contrasted with that derived from missions from Rome , which reached southern England in 587 under the leadership of St. Augustine of Canterbury . Subsequent missions from Canterbury then helped convert the Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms , reaching Northumbria in the early eighth century , where Iona had already begun to have a presence . As a result , Christianity in Northumbria became a mix of Celtic and Roman influences . 
 While Roman and Celtic Christianity were very similar in doctrine and both accepted ultimate papal authority , there were differences in practice . The most contentious were the method of calculating Easter , and the form of head shaving for priests known as tonsure . Other differences were in the rites of ordination and baptism , and in the form of service of the liturgy . In addition scholars have identified significant characteristics of the organisation of Irish and Scottish Christianity as relaxed ideas of clerical celibacy , intense secularisation of ecclesiastical institutions , and the lack of a diocesan structure . This made abbots ( or <unk> ) , rather than bishops , the most important element the church hierarchy . 
 = = = Growth of Roman influence = = = 
 Wilfred was the major spokesman for the Roman case at the Synod of Whitby in 664 , which was called by King Oswiu of Northumbria to decide which form of observance would be used in his kingdom , and where he decided in favour of the Roman form of tonsure and of calculating Easter . Although this only affected Anglo @-@ Saxon Northumbria , from this point the distinctiveness of Celtic Christianity declined . Nechtan mac Der @-@ Ilei , king of the Picts from 706 , seems to have attempted to establish links with the church in Northumbria . Before 714 he wrote to Ceolfrith , abbot of Wearmouth , asking for a formal refutation of the Irish position over the calculation of the date of Easter and for help in building a stone church " in the manner of the Romans " . Historian A. A. M. Duncan has suggested that there was a " <unk> group " among Nechtan 's clergy , perhaps led by Bishop <unk> , who took the name Latin name Boniface . This is also suggested by the presence of a church at Rosemarkie in Ross and Cromarty , dedicated to St. Peter , seen as the first Bishop of Rome , by the early eighth century , and subsequent similar dedications in Pictish territory . By the mid @-@ eighth century , Iona and Ireland had accepted Roman practices . 
 = = = Decline of Iona = = = 
 Iona 's place as the centre of Scottish Christianity was disrupted by the arrival of the Vikings , first as raiders , then as conquerors . Iona was sacked by them in 795 and 802 . In 806 , 68 monks were killed and the next year the abbot withdrew to Kells in Ireland , taking the relics of St. Columba with him . There were periodic returns of abbots and relics , often ending in more massacres . Orkney , Shetland , Western Isles and the Hebrides eventually fell to the pagan Norsemen , curtailing the influence of the church in the Highlands and Islands . The threat posed by the Vikings may have forced a union between the kingdoms of Dál Riata and the Picts under Kenneth mac Alpin , traditionally dated to 843 . In 849 , according to the Annals of Ulster , the abbot of Iona once again took Columba 's relics to Ireland , but the earliest version of the Chronicles of the Kings of Scots says that in the same year they were removed by Kenneth mac Alpin , to a church he had built , probably at Dunkeld , perhaps indicating that the relics were divided . The abbot of the new monastery at Dunkeld emerged as the Bishop of the new combined Kingdom of Alba , which would subsequently come to be known as the Kingdom of Scotland . 
 = = Conversion of Scandinavian Scotland = = 
 While the official conversion of Scandinavian Scotland took place at the end of the tenth century , there is evidence that Christianity had already made inroads into the Viking controlled Highland and Islands . There are a large number of isles called Pabbay or Papa in the Western and Northern Isles , which may indicate a " hermit 's " or " priest 's isle " from this period . Changes in patterns of grave goods and Viking place names using -kirk also suggest that Christianity had begun to spread before the official conversion . According to the Orkneyinga Saga , not written down until around 1230 , the Northern Isles were Christianised by Olav Tryggvasson , king of Norway , in 995 when he stopped at South Walls on his way from Ireland to Norway . The King summoned the local jarl Sigurd the Stout and said " I order you and all your subjects to be baptised . If you refuse , I 'll have you killed on the spot and I swear I will ravage every island with fire and steel " . The story may be apocryphal , but the islands became officially Christian , receiving their own bishop in the early eleventh century . The bishopric appears to have been under the authority of the Archbishops of York and of Hamburg @-@ Bremen at different points before the twelfth century and from then until 1472 it was subordinate to the Archbishop of Nidaros ( today 's Trondheim ) . Elsewhere in Scandinavian Scotland the record is less clear . There was a Bishop of Iona until the late tenth century , followed by a gap of more than a century , possibly filled by the Bishops of Orkney , before the appointment of the first Bishop of Mann in 1079 . One of the major effects of the conversion of the Vikings was to bring an end to plundering raids on Christian sites , which may have allowed them to recover some of their status as cultural and intellectual centres . It also probably curbed the excesses of Viking violence and led to a more settled society in northern Scotland . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The Christianisation of Scotland brought the country into the cultural mainstream of Europe . When the Kingdom of Alba emerged in the ninth century it would be an overtly Christian kingdom and , despite its cultural diversity , religion would be a major source of Scottish identity . The Canmore dynasty that would rule Scotland from the eleventh century to the end of the thirteenth identified itself with Christianity and a strong relationship emerged between the crown and church . The acceptance of papal authority meant that in subsequent centuries the Scottish church faced claims for superior jurisdiction from the archbishoprics of both Canterbury and York and the independent status of Scotland in ecclesiastic matters would only be established by the papal bull of Cum universi in 1192 . 
 Scottish monasticism also played a major part in the Hiberno @-@ Scottish mission , by which Scottish and Irish clergy undertook missions to the expanding Frankish Empire . They founded monasteries , often called Schottenklöster ( meaning Gaelic monasteries in German ) , most of which became Benedictine establishments in what is now Germany . Scottish monks , such as St. Cathróe of Metz , became local saints in the region . After the conversion of the Picts and the cultural assimilation of Pictish culture into that of the Scots and Angles a common artistic style emerged in Britain and Ireland known as Insular art . Surviving examples are found in metalwork , carving , but mainly in illuminated manuscripts with highly decorated with intricate patterning , like the Book of Kells , which may have been wholly or partly created in Iona . Insular art became highly influential in continental Europe , contributing to the development of Romanesque and Gothic styles . The establishment of Christianity brought Latin to Scotland as a scholarly and written language . Monasteries served as major repositories of knowledge and education , often running schools and providing a small educated elite , who were essential to create and read documents in a largely illiterate society . 
 = Jim Corbett National Park = 
 Jim Corbett National Park is the oldest national park in India and was established in 1936 as Hailey National Park to protect the endangered Bengal tiger . It is located in Nainital district of Uttarakhand and was named after Jim Corbett who played a key role in its establishment . The park was the first to come under the Project Tiger initiative . 
 The park has sub @-@ Himalayan belt geographical and ecological characteristics . An ecotourism destination , it contains 488 different species of plants and a diverse variety of fauna . The increase in tourist activities , among other problems , continues to present a serious challenge to the park 's ecological balance . 
 Corbett has been a haunt for tourists and wildlife lovers for a long time . Tourism activity is only allowed in selected areas of Corbett Tiger Reserve so that people get an opportunity to see its splendid landscape and the diverse wildlife . In recent years the number of people coming here has increased dramatically . Presently , every season more than 70 @,@ 000 visitors come to the park . 
 Corbett National Park comprises 520 @.@ 8 km2 ( 201 @.@ 1 sq mi ) area of hills , riverine belts , marshy depressions , grasslands and a large lake . The elevation ranges from 1 @,@ 300 to 4 @,@ 000 ft ( 400 to 1 @,@ 220 m ) . Winter nights are cold but the days are bright and sunny . It rains from July to September . 
 Dense moist deciduous forest mainly consists of sal , <unk> , peepal , <unk> and mango trees . Forest covers almost 73 % of the park , 10 % of the area consists of grasslands . It houses around 110 tree species , 50 species of mammals , 580 bird species and 25 reptile species . 
 = = History = = 
 Some areas of the park were formerly part of the princely state of Tehri Garhwal . The forests were cleared to make the area less vulnerable to Rohilla invaders . The Raja of Tehri formally ceded a part of his princely state to the East India Company in return for their assistance in ousting the Gurkhas from his domain . The <unk> — a tribe from the Terai — settled on the land and began growing crops , but in the early 1860s they were evicted with the advent of British rule . 
 Efforts to save the forests of the region began in the 19th century under Major Ramsay , the British Officer who was in @-@ charge of the area during those times . The first step in the protection of the area began in 1868 when the British forest department established control over the land and prohibited cultivation and the operation of cattle stations . In 1879 these forests were constituted into a reserve forest where restricted felling was permitted . 
 In the early 1900s , several Britishers , including E. R. <unk> and E. A. <unk> , suggested the setting up of a national park on this soil . The British administration considered the possibility of creating a game reserve there in 1907 . It was only in the 1930s that the process of demarcation for such an area got underway , assisted by Jim Corbett , who knew the area well . A reserve area known as Hailey National Park covering 323 @.@ 75 km2 ( 125 @.@ 00 sq mi ) was created in 1936 , when Sir Malcolm Hailey was the Governor of United Provinces ; and Asia 's first national park came into existence . Hunting was not allowed in the reserve , only timber cutting for domestic purposes . Soon after the establishment of the reserve , rules prohibiting killing and capturing of mammals , reptiles and birds within its boundaries were passed . 
 The reserve was renamed in 1954 – 55 as Ramganga National Park and was again renamed in 1955 – 56 as Corbett National Park . The new name honors the well @-@ known author and wildlife conservationist , Jim Corbett , who played a key role in creating the reserve by using his influence to persuade the provincial government to establish it . 
 The park fared well during the 1930s under an elected administration . But , during the Second World War , it suffered from excessive poaching and timber cutting . Over time , the area in the reserve was increased — 797 @.@ 72 km2 ( 308 @.@ 00 sq mi ) were added in 1991 as a buffer zone to the Corbett Tiger Reserve . The 1991 addition included the entire Kalagarh forest division , assimilating the 301 @.@ 18 km2 ( 116 @.@ 29 sq mi ) area of <unk> Wildlife Sanctuary as a part of the Kalagarh division . It was chosen in 1974 as the location for launching Project Tiger , an ambitious and well known wildlife conservation project . The reserve is administered from its headquarters in the district of Nainital . 
 Corbett National Park is one of the thirteen protected areas covered by the World Wide Fund For Nature under their Terai Arc Landscape Program . The program aims to protect three of the five terrestrial flagship species , the tiger , the Asian elephant and the great one @-@ horned rhinoceros , by restoring corridors of forest to link 13 protected areas of Nepal and India , to enable wildlife migration . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The park is located between 29 ° 25 ' and 29 ° <unk> latitude and between 78 ° 44 ' and 79 ° <unk> longitude . The altitude of the region ranges between 360 m ( 1 @,@ 181 ft ) and 1 @,@ 040 m ( 3 @,@ 412 ft ) . It has numerous ravines , ridges , minor streams and small plateaus with varying aspects and degrees of slope . The park encompasses the <unk> Dun valley formed by the Ramganga river . It protects parts of the Upper Gangetic Plains moist deciduous forests and Himalayan subtropical pine forests ecoregions . It has a humid subtropical and highland climate . 
 The present area of the reserve is 1 @,@ 318 @.@ 54 square kilometres ( 509 @.@ 09 sq mi ) including 520 square kilometres ( 200 sq mi ) of core area and 797 @.@ 72 square kilometres ( 308 @.@ 00 sq mi ) of buffer area . The core area forms the Jim Corbett National Park while the buffer contains reserve forests ( 496 @.@ 54 square kilometres ( 191 @.@ 72 sq mi ) ) as well as the <unk> Wildlife Sanctuary ( 301 @.@ 18 square kilometres ( 116 @.@ 29 sq mi ) ) . 
 The reserve , located partly along a valley between the Lesser Himalaya in the north and the <unk> in the south , has a sub @-@ Himalayan belt structure . The upper tertiary rocks are exposed towards the base of the Shiwalik range and hard sandstone units form broad ridges . Characteristic longitudinal valleys , geographically termed <unk> , or Duns can be seen formed along the narrow tectonic zones between lineaments . 
 = = Climate = = 
 The weather in the park is temperate compared to most other protected areas of India . The temperature may vary from 5 ° C ( 41 ° F ) to 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) during the winter and some mornings are foggy . Summer temperatures normally do not rise above 40 ° C ( 104 ° F ) . Rainfall ranges from light during the dry season to heavy during the monsoons . 
 = = Flora = = 
 A total of 488 different species of plants have been recorded in the park . Tree density inside the reserve is higher in the areas of Sal forests and lowest in the <unk> @-@ Acacia catechu forests . Total tree basal cover is greater in Sal dominated areas of woody vegetation . Healthy regeneration in sapling and seedling layers is occurring in the Mallotus philippensis , <unk> and Diospyros tomentosa communities , but in the Sal forests the regeneration of sapling and seedling is poor . 
 = = Fauna = = 
 More than 586 species of resident and migratory birds have been categorised , including the crested serpent eagle , blossom @-@ headed parakeet and the red junglefowl — ancestor of all domestic fowl . 33 species of reptiles , seven species of amphibians , seven species of fish and 36 species of dragonflies have also been recorded . 
 Bengal tigers , although plentiful , are not easily spotted due to the abundance of foliage - camouflage - in the reserve . Thick jungle , the Ramganga river and plentiful prey make this reserve an ideal habitat for tigers who are opportunistic feeders and prey upon a range of animals . The tigers in the park have been known to kill much larger animals such as buffalo and even elephant for food . The tigers prey upon the larger animals in rare cases of food shortage . There have been incidents of tigers attacking domestic animals in times of shortage of prey . 
 Leopards are found in hilly areas but may also venture into the low land jungles . Small cats in the park include the jungle cat , fishing cat and leopard cat . Other mammals include barking deer , sambar deer , hog deer and chital , sloth and Himalayan black bears , Indian grey mongoose , otters , yellow @-@ throated martens , Himalayan goral , Indian pangolins , and langur and rhesus macaques . Owls and nightjars can be heard during the night . 
 In the summer , Indian elephants can be seen in herds of several hundred . The Indian python found in the reserve is a dangerous species , capable of killing a chital deer . Local crocodiles and gharials were saved from extinction by captive breeding programs that subsequently released crocodiles into the Ramganga river . 
 = = Ecotourism = = 
 Though the main focus is protection of wildlife , the reserve management has also encouraged ecotourism . In 1993 , a training course covering natural history , visitor management and park interpretation was introduced to train nature guides . A second course followed in 1995 which recruited more guides for the same purpose . This allowed the staff of the reserve , previously preoccupied with guiding the visitors , to carry out management activities uninterrupted . Additionally , the Indian government has organised workshops on ecotourism in Corbett National Park and Garhwal region to ensure that the local citizens profit from tourism while the park remains protected . 
 <unk> & Joshi ( 1997 ) consider summer ( April – June ) to be the best season for Indian tourists to visit the park while recommending the winter months ( November – January ) for foreign tourists . According to Riley & Riley ( 2005 ) : " Best chances of seeing a tiger to come late in the dry <unk> April to mid @-@ June @-@ and go out with <unk> and elephants for several days . " 
 As early as 1991 , the Corbett National Park played host to <unk> tourist vehicles carrying 45 @,@ 215 visitors during the main tourist seasons between 15 November and 15 June . This heavy influx of tourists has led to visible stress signs on the natural ecosystem . Excessive trampling of soil due to tourist pressure has led to reduction in plant species and has also resulted in reduced soil moisture . The tourists have increasingly used fuel wood for cooking . This is a cause of concern as this fuel wood is obtained from the nearby forests , resulting in greater pressure on the forest ecosystem of the park . Additionally , tourists have also caused problems by making noise , littering and causing disturbances in general . 
 In 2007 , young naturalist and photographer – <unk> Ghosh Mehta – took up the challenge of promoting healthy tourism in Corbett National Park and made the first comprehensive travel guide on Corbett . The film titled – Wild Saga of Corbett – showcases how tourists can contribute in their own small way in conservation efforts . 
 = = Other attractions = = 
 Dhikala is a well @-@ known destination in the park and situated at the fringes of <unk> Dun valley . There is a rest house , which was built hundred of years ago . Kanda ridge forms the backdrop , and from Dhikala , one can enjoy the spectacular natural beauty of the valley . 
 Jeep Safari is the most convenient way to travel within the national park ; jeeps can be rented for park trips from Ramnagar . 
 <unk> : tourists are not allowed to walk inside the park , but only to go trekking around the park in the company of a guide . The winter season is cold , so tourists should make proper arrangements for their clothing , if they are traveling in the winter season . 
 Walking <unk> are possible in the buffer zone areas - and very rewarding with Corbett having a very healthy and lush , rich buffer zone around ; look for lodges around with trained staff for the same . 
 Kalagarh Dam is dam located in the south @-@ west of the wildlife sanctuary . This is one of the best places for a bird watching tour . Lots of migratory waterfowl comes here in the winters . 
 Corbett Falls is a 20 m ( 66 ft ) water fall situated 25 km ( 16 mi ) from Ramnagar , and 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) from Kaladhungi , on the Kaladhungi – Ramnagar highway . The water falls is surrounded by dense forests and pin drop silence . 
 Garjiya Devi Temple is sacred to Garjiya Devi and is mostly visited by the traveller during the Kartik Poornima ( November – December ) . It is a prominent temple located on the bank of river Kosi , amidst the hilly terrains of Uttarakhand , nearby Garjiya village , at a distance of 14 <unk> from Ramnagar , Uttarakhand , India . 
 = = Location = = 
 Corbett National Park is situated in <unk> in the district of Nainital , Uttarakhand . 
 Area : 521 km2 
 Route : The town of Ramnagar is the headquarters of Corbett Tiger Reserve . There are overnight trains available from Delhi to Ramnagar . Also , there are trains from Varanasi via Lucknow and Allahabad via Kanpur to Ramnagar . Reaching Ramnagar , one can hire a taxi to reach the park and Dhikala . 
 Ramnagar is also well connected by road with Kanpur , Lucknow , Bareilly , Nainital , Ranikhet , Haridwar , Dehradun and New Delhi . One can also drive from Delhi ( 295 km ) via <unk> , Moradabad , Kashipur to reach Ramnagar . A direct train to Ramnagar runs from New Delhi . Alternatively , one can come up to Haldwani / Kashipur / Kathgodam and come to Ramnagar by road . 
 Best Time to Visit : Mid @-@ November to Mid @-@ June . 
 = = Challenges = = 
 = = = Past = = = 
 A major incident in the history of the reserve followed the construction of a dam at the Kalagarh river and the submerging of 80 km2 ( 31 sq mi ) of prime low lying riverine area . The consequences ranged from local extinction of swamp deer to a massive reduction in hog deer population . The reservoir formed due to the submerging of land has also led to an increase in aquatic fauna and has additionally served as a habitat for winter migrants . 
 Two villages situated on the southern boundary were shifted to the Firozpur – <unk> area situated on Ramnagar – Kashipur highway during 1990 – 93 ; the vacated areas were designated as buffer zones . The families in these villages were mostly dependent on forest products . With the passage of time , these areas began to show signs of ecological recovery . Vines , herbs , grasses and small trees began to appear , followed by herbaceous flora , eventually leading to natural forest type . It was observed that grass began to grow on the vacated agricultural fields and the adjoining forest areas started recuperating . By 1999 – 2002 several plant species emerged in these buffer zones . The newly arisen lush green fields attracted grass eating animals , mainly deer and elephants , who slowly migrated towards these areas and even preferred to stay there throughout the monsoon . 
 There were 109 cases of poaching recorded in 1988 – 89 . This figure dropped to 12 reported cases in 1997 – 98 . 
 In 1985 David Hunt , a British ornithologist and birdwatching tour guide , was killed by a tiger in the park . 
 = = = Present = = = 
 The habitat of the reserve faces threats from invasive species such as the exotic weeds Lantana , <unk> and Cassia . Natural resources like trees and grasses are exploited by the local population while encroachment of at least of 13 @.@ 62 ha ( 0 @.@ 05 sq mi ) by 74 families has been recorded . 
 The villages surrounding the park are at least 15 – 20 years old and no new villages have come up in the recent past . The increasing population growth rate and the density of population within 1 km ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) to 2 km ( 1 @.@ 24 mi ) from the park present a challenge to the management of the reserve . Incidents of killing cattle by tigers and leopards have led to acts of retaliation by the local population in some cases . The Indian government has approved the construction of a 12 km ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) stone masonry wall on the southern boundary of the reserve where it comes in direct contact with agricultural fields . 
 In April 2008 , the National Conservation Tiger Authority ( NCTA ) expressed serious concern that protection systems have weakened , and poachers have infiltrated into this park . Monitoring of wild animals in the prescribed format has not been followed despite advisories and observations made during field visits . Also the monthly monitoring report of field evidence relating to tigers has not been received since 2006 . NCTA said that in the " absence of ongoing monitoring protocol in a standardised manner , it would be impossible to forecast and keep track of untoward happenings in the area targeted by poachers . " A cement road has been built through the park against a Supreme Court order . The road has become a thoroughfare between Kalagarh and Ramnagar . Constantly increasing vehicle traffic on this road is affecting the wildlife of crucial ranges like <unk> , <unk> and Dhara . Additionally , the Kalagarh irrigation colony that takes up about 5 square kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 sq mi ) of the park is yet to be vacated despite a 2007 Supreme Court order . 
 As of 10 February 2014 , nine local villagers are reported to have been killed by tigers originating from Jim Corbett National Park wildlife sanctuary opened a new zone for tourists stretched across 521 km2 
 = Pennsylvania Mutiny of 1783 = 
 The Pennsylvania Mutiny of 1783 ( also known as the Philadelphia Mutiny ) was an anti @-@ government protest by nearly 400 soldiers of the Continental Army in June 1783 . The mutiny , and the refusal of the Executive Council of Pennsylvania to stop it , ultimately resulted in Congress vacating Philadelphia and the creation of a federal district to serve as the national capital . 
 = = Background = = 
 From March 1781 , the Congress of the Confederation and the Supreme Executive Council of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania were situated at the Pennsylvania State House ( now known as Independence Hall ) in Philadelphia . Under the authority of the Articles of Confederation , the national government did not have direct control over the military , except in times of war , and was largely reliant on the use of state militias to enforce laws and keep order . 
 On June 17 , 1783 , Congress received a message from soldiers of the Continental Army stationed in Philadelphia , which demanded payment for their service during the American Revolutionary War . The soldiers threatened to take action that day if their complaints were not addressed . Congress ignored their message , but the soldiers did not act on their threat . Two days later , however , the Congress received word that a group of about 80 soldiers had left their post at Lancaster , Pennsylvania , approximately 60 miles ( 97 km ) west of Philadelphia , and had joined with the soldiers stationed at the city barracks . The group of approximately 500 men had effective control over the weapons stores and munition depot . 
 = = = Protests = = = 
 The next morning on June 20 , the State House was mobbed by as many as 400 soldiers demanding payment . The soldiers blocked the door and initially refused to allow the delegates to leave . Alexander Hamilton , then a delegate from New York , persuaded the soldiers to allow Congress to meet later to address their concerns . The soldiers did allow the members of Congress to peacefully adjourn that afternoon . That evening , a small Congressional committee , headed by Hamilton , met in secret to draft a message to the Pennsylvania Council , asking them to protect Congress from the mutineers . The letter threatened that Congress would be forced to move elsewhere if the Council did not act . 
 On June 21 , the Congressional committee met again at the State House with members of the Pennsylvania Executive Council , including its president , John Dickinson . The members of Congress asked the council to do more to protect the federal government . Dickinson and the council agreed to consult with the militia commanders and reply to Congress the next day . The following morning , the Pennsylvania Council again refused Congress ' request . Lacking sufficient assurances that the state would be willing to protect Congress , the members left Philadelphia that day for Princeton , New Jersey . 
 = = Effect = = 
 There are three reasons put forth as to why Dickinson and the Pennsylvania Council did not act . The Council 's official reasoning was that they were unsure that the local militiamen would actually protect Congress from their fellow soldiers . Further , the council may have thought that the conflict was not as serious as Congress believed and that the mutiny could be resolved peacefully . The second theory put forth is that Dickinson , having been an officer in the militia , was sympathetic to the soldiers ' grievances . The third theory is that the Council refused to allow Pennsylvania , a sovereign state , to be subjugated by the demands of a few members of Congress . 
 After Congress completed its business at Princeton in early November 1783 , the capital was moved later that month to Annapolis , Maryland , then to Trenton , New Jersey in November 1784 , and finally to New York City in January 1785 . It was not until the Constitutional Convention in 1787 that delegates decided to meet again in Philadelphia . Pennsylvania 's failure to protect the institutions of the national government , however , was a primary reason why the framers of the Constitution decided to create a federal district , distinct from the states , where Congress could provide for its own security . The delegates therefore agreed in Article One , Section 8 , of the United States Constitution to give the Congress the power " to exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever , over such District ( not exceeding ten miles square ) as may , by cession of particular states , and the acceptance of Congress , become the seat of the government of the United States " . 
 Following the ratification of the United States Constitution by the state of New York in 1788 , the delegates agreed to keep New York City as the temporary federal capital . In 1790 , Congress passed the Residence Act , which created the District of Columbia , located on the banks of the Potomac River from land belonging until that time to the states of Maryland and Virginia , to serve as the new federal capital . Robert Morris , a representative from Pennsylvania , convinced Congress to return to Philadelphia while the new permanent capital was being built . As a result , the Residence Act also declared Philadelphia to be the temporary capital for a period of 10 years . In a final attempt to convince Congress to keep the capital in Philadelphia , the city began construction on a new Presidential palace and an expansion to Congress Hall . However , their efforts failed , and the national government relocated from Philadelphia for the final time on May 14 , 1800 . 
 = Shreya Ghoshal = 
 Shreya Ghoshal ( born 12 March 1984 ) is an Indian playback singer . She has received four National Film Awards , six Filmfare Awards and nine Filmfare Awards South ( one for Telugu , two for Kannada , two for Tamil and four for Malayalam ) to date . She has recorded songs for film music in various Indian languages , and has established herself as a leading playback singer of Indian cinema . 
 Ghoshal aspired to become a playback singer from a young age . At the age of four , she started learning music . At the age of six , she started with her formal training in classical music . At the age of sixteen , she was noticed by film @-@ maker Sanjay Leela Bhansali when she entered and won the television singing reality show Sa Re Ga Ma Pa . Following that , she made her Bollywood playback singing debut with Bhansali 's romantic drama Devdas ( 2002 ) for which she received a National Film Award , a Filmfare Award for Best Female Playback Singer and Filmfare RD Burman Award for New Music Talent . 
 Apart from playback singing , Ghoshal has appeared as a judge on several television reality shows . She has been honored by the U.S. state of Ohio , where governor Ted Strickland declared 26 June 2010 " Shreya Ghoshal Day " . She was awarded with the highest honour in London by the selected members of House of Commons of the United Kingdom . She has also featured four times in Forbes , list of the top 100 celebrities of India . In February 2015 , Ghoshal married her childhood friend <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ghoshal was born on 12 March 1984 to a Bengali Hindu family in Baharampur , Murshidabad district , West Bengal . She grew up in <unk> , a small town near Kota in Rajasthan . Her father , <unk> Ghoshal is an electrical engineer and works for the Nuclear Power Corporation of India , and her mother , <unk> Ghoshal , is a literature post @-@ graduate . She has a younger brother , <unk> Ghoshal . At the age of four , she started learning music . 
 Ghoshal completed her schooling up to eighth grade at the Atomic Energy Central School in <unk> . In 1995 , she won the All India Light Vocal Music Competition , New Delhi , organised by Sangam Kala Group , in Light Vocal group in sub @-@ junior level . In 1997 , when her father was transferred to the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre , she was relocated to Mumbai , with her family and studied at the Atomic Energy Central School in <unk> Nagar . She joined the Atomic Energy Junior College to study science . She withdrew from the junior college and enrolled at the <unk> College of Arts , Science , and Commerce in Mumbai , where she took up arts with English as her major . 
 Her mother used to help her in her rehearsals and she accompanied her on the harmonium and started practicing mostly Bengali songs . At the age of six , Ghoshal started with her formal training in classical music . She acquired training from <unk> Late <unk> Bhai and Late Mukta <unk> . Her first stage performance was made at a club 's annual function . When she turned six , she started her lessons in Hindustani classical music . In 2000 , at the age of sixteen , she participated and won the television music reality show Sa Re Ga Ma ( now Sa Re Ga Ma Pa ) on the channel Zee TV . 
 = = Music career = = 
 Her first studio album was <unk> Beena , which was released on 1 January 1998 , with 14 tracks . Some of her earlier albums include O Tota <unk> Re , <unk> Katha ( 1999 ) , and <unk> <unk> ( 2000 ) . Ghoshal recorded Bengali studio album <unk> Raate ( 2002 ) . Ghoshal recorded devotional songs in albums like <unk> Re ( 2002 ) , and later , Krishna Bina Ache Ke ( 2007 ) . 
 = = = Bollywood debut ( 2002 – 04 ) = = = 
 Ghoshal caught the attention of director Sanjay Leela Bhansali when she participated in the 75th children 's special episode of Sa Re Ga Ma . Bhansali 's mother was watching the show and during Ghoshal 's performance , she called him to watch her performance , after which he decided to give her a chance in his next film . According to Bhansali , Ghoshal 's voice had the innocence needed for the character of Paro in Devdas ( 2002 ) . 
 In 2000 , Bhansali and music director Ismail Darbar offered her the opportunity to be the voice of Paro , the lead female character of Devdas , who was portrayed by Aishwarya Rai . Ghoshal sang five songs in the film , namely , " <unk> Ye <unk> Ka " , " Bairi Piya " , " <unk> <unk> " , " Morey Piya " , and " Dola Re Dola " , with established singers such as Udit Narayan , Vinod Rathod , Kavita Krishnamurthy , KK , and <unk> Narula . She was sixteen when she recorded the first song for the film , " Bairi Piya " with Udit Narayan . Her Higher Secondary Examinations were nearing that time and she would take her books and notebooks to the studio in order to study during downtime . " Bairi Piya " was an instant success and topped the charts . The film garnered her first Filmfare Award for Best Female Playback Singer for " Dola Re " ( shared with Kavita Krishnamurthy ) and a National Film Award for Best Female Playback Singer for " Bairi Piya " . Her performance also won her the Filmfare RD Burman Award for New Music Talent . 
 She was an immediate success and was called by various regional film industries for recording songs in her voice . Ghoshal was next heard in Darbar @-@ composed Desh Devi , where she performed three tracks for the film . 
 After rendering traditional semi @-@ classical songs for her previous ventures , Ghoshal performed two seductive numbers for M. M. Kreem 's Jism , which prevented her from being stereotyped . According to Ghoshal , " Jaadu Hai Nasha Hai " and " Chalo <unk> <unk> Chale " from the film " made everyone look at [ her ] in a new light " , opening the doors to a " versatile image " . She was awarded with another Filmfare trophy for Best Female Playback Singer for the song " Jaadu Hai Nasha Hai " . She thereupon worked with Anu Malik , where she performed the female version of " Aye Meri Zindagi " , " <unk> Pada " and " <unk> Jo Teri Yaad " , along with the bhajan @-@ styled " Har Taraf " . In spite of providing vocals for " Har Taraf " , Ghoshal also made her first on @-@ screen appearance in Saaya . Apart from <unk> , Ghoshal provided vocals for Malik in two other films , Munna Bhai M.B.B.S. and LOC Kargil , where she recorded the song " <unk> <unk> " for the former and " Pyaar <unk> Geet " for the latter , along with Sonu Nigam . Besides , Ghoshal made her first collaboration with Shankar – Ehsaan – Loy by performing the female version of the song " Tu Hi Bata Zindagi " . Calling her sing " effortless " in the song , The Hindu mentioned that she was " able to impart the required emotions " for the song . 
 In 2004 , Ghoshal contributed to the soundtrack album of Thoda Tum <unk> Thoda Hum by performing four tracks , which were labelled with an " average " tag by Joginder Tuteja from Bollywood Hungama . However , he was " impressed " with Ghoshal 's rendition from her songs in <unk> , where he affirmed that Ghoshal 's voice suits Aishwarya Rai to the " core " and she " lends credibility to the entire song " in " Wada Raha " . Besides , the two duets with Nigam ; " Dil <unk> " and " Youn Hi Tum Mujhse " , were equally favored by music critics . Further complimenting her vocals in the song " Hum <unk> <unk> Mein " and " <unk> " from <unk> , Tuteja asserted that Ghoshal 's " vocals have started to suit the current breed of actresses better and better with each passing day " . Apart from Dil Bechara Pyaar Ka <unk> , Ghoshal worked with Nikhil – Vinay in other projects , by recording " <unk> Dil Hai " from Phir Milenge , and " Woh Ho Tum " from <unk> . 
 During the time , Nadeem – Shravan composed Tumsa Nahin Dekha : A Love Story was considered to be the biggest album for Ghoshal , as she sang all the numbers with an exception of one song . She performed a wide variety of songs — from a jazzy number to soft romantic tunes — in the album . According to Ghoshal , the album allowed her to " experiment with the entire range " of her " singing capabilities " . Besides , Ghoshal lent her voice for Malik , where she sung " <unk> Jo Maine Dekha " and " Gori Gori " for Main Hoon Na apart from the title track — which received the maximum praise from critics . Mid Day affirmed that Ghoshal provided " perfect accompaniment " for the track , while Rediff.com was " impressed with her rendition " . The year marks her first collaboration with Rajesh Roshan and Daboo Malik by singing the melodious track for the former composed " <unk> <unk> Lagi " from <unk> and performing the track " <unk> " from Dhoom , for the latter . 
 = = = 2005 – 07 = = = 
 Ghoshal was bestowed with her second National Film Award for her rendition of " Dheere Jalna " in Paheli . As claimed by Daily News and Analysis , the song " treads the fine balance between the classical and popular genre of Hindi film music " . Barring the song " Dheere Jalna " , Ghoshal was heard in two other tracks " <unk> Re " and " <unk> Kare " , composed by M.M. Kreem . She provided vocals for Kreem in one of his another compositions : " <unk> Na Jaye " from Rog . With the film Parineeta , she made her first collaboration with Shantanu Moitra . She performed four tracks from the film alongside Nigam , which includes " Piyu Bole " , " <unk> Mazza " and " Soona Man Ka Aangan " . Thereupon , the duo worked for the soundtrack album of <unk> , performing a soulful track " Naam <unk> <unk> " , " <unk> <unk> <unk> " and a Punjabi track " Mele <unk> " . Ghoshal 's work in both the films was widely acclaimed , subsequently being nominated for the Filmfare Awards with the song " Piyu Bole " . Reportedly , Ghoshal was selected to sing the female rendition of the track after being auditioned by many other artistes . In an interview , Moitra stated ; " Pradeep wanted a little trill of laughter in the middle of the song and she did it effortlessly " . 
 Along with " Piyu Bole " , Ghoshal received another Filmfare nomination for her rendition of the song " Agar Tum Mil Jao " from <unk> . The song along with " Jaane Ja Jaane Ja " from the same film was acclaimed by music critics . Apart from providing supporting vocals for Himesh Reshammiya 's " <unk> <unk> <unk> " , Ghoshal 's voice had been used in some of his other compositions released during the year . However , while reviewing Malik @-@ composed " Pehle Se " , Bollywood Hungama wrote : " Ghoshal sings in a mature manner and does well once again to prove herself as a dependable playback singer " . Similar sentiments were echoed for the song " Bolo To " from <unk> which was composed by Vishal – Shekhar . 
 2006 marks Ghoshal 's first collaboration with Ravindra Jain in film Vivah , where she performed three duets with Narayan titled " Mujhe Haq Hai " , " Do <unk> <unk> " and " Milan <unk> <unk> <unk> Hai " . For the album , she also recorded " Hamari Shaadi Mein " with <unk> <unk> and two sisters conversation song " O Jiji " with Pamela Jain , along with a bhajan performed with Jain . Ghoshal 's " obsessive " vocals were appraised in <unk> Kumar Rathod 's composition , " So <unk> Main " from Woh Lamhe . Despite the length , the version was particularly acclaimed from the album . During the year , Ghoshal performed her ever duet with Sunidhi Chauhan — though they have contributed in multi @-@ singer songs together — with the Salim – Sulaiman 's composition , " Imaan Ka Asar " from Dor . In spite of providing backing vocals for Lage Raho Munna Bhai 's " Bande Mein Tha Dum " , Ghoshal and Nigam performed a romantic duet titled " Pal Pal " , a composition by Moitra . For the song , she received a Best Female Playback Singer nomination at the 52nd Filmfare Awards . She was next heard with Vishal Bhardwaj in the song " O <unk> Re " , which exudes the feeling of intimacy and deep love . Ghoshal 's low pitch rendition in the song was positively noted by critics . 
 In 2006 , Ghoshal sang " Pyaar Ki Ek Kahani " , " Koi Tumsa Nahin " and " Chori Chori Chupke Chupke " for Rajesh Roshan @-@ composed Krrish which were also favored by the critics . Reviewing the album , Bollywood Hungama wrote : " Ghoshal is extremely competent and justifies her continued presence in the big league " . They also mentioned that Ghoshal has reached to a similar level of Alka Yagnik in terms of " class , quality and style " . 
 In 2007 , Ghoshal recorded a thumri in the <unk> style for <unk> <unk> Chand . Titled " Chale <unk> Saiyan " and composed by Moitra , the song was particularly praised for Ghoshal 's " different " vocal structure . She even lent her voice for two other songs for the album ; " <unk> Piya " and " <unk> <unk> " . She reunited with Moitra for Laaga Chunari Mein Daag , where she performed " Hum To <unk> Hain " along with Chauhan which also had Swanand Kirkire and Pranab Biswas lending supporting vocals . Raja Sen found " <unk> Kaliyaan " song from the film less appealing with its " bad remix background " though praised Ghoshal , Chauhan , KK and Nigam for giving the song " the vim it requires " . Apart from providing background alaap in Monty Sharma 's composition " Masha @-@ Allah " , Ghoshal was heard in the classically oriented numbers " Jaan @-@ E @-@ Jaan " and " <unk> <unk> " , included in the album Saawariya . She also recorded her first track in a Sanjay Leela Bhansali 's composition , " Thode Badmaash " for the same album , providing a " feminine quality " to her " temperate nuances " . 
 During the same year , Ghoshal sang the peppy rain song , " <unk> Re " for Mani Ratnam 's Guru , a composition by A.R. Rahman . A Review from Oneindia praised Ghoshal 's rendition of the song and opined that it was a different incarnation of her in comparison to her previous records . The song won her third Filmfare Award for Best Female Playback Singer . The same year , she came up with the song " Yeh Ishq <unk> " from Jab We Met , composed by Pritam which was successful in earning her a third National Film Award for Best Female Playback Singer . 
 The duo also worked with the classical track " Mere <unk> " for Bhool Bhulaiyaa ( 2007 ) , performed beside M. G. <unk> , which was acclaimed with special mention to the alaap towards the " climax of the song " . Ghoshal also lent her voice for Vishal – Shekhar with few of his compositions and was particularly praised for the theme song of Ta Ra Rum Pum along with the romantic song " Main Agar <unk> " and the dance song " Dhoom Taana " from film Om Shanti Om , where some critics compared her singing style of the latter with S. Janaki . In the year , Ghoshal worked with Ilaiyaraaja for the album Cheeni Kum . 
 = = = 2008 – present = = = 
 After singing for films such as U Me Aur Hum , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Mere <unk> Pehle Aap , De <unk> , <unk> @-@ e @-@ Dil , Thoda Pyaar Thoda Magic and Kismat Konnection , Ghoshal recorded another hit song for Singh Is <unk> ( 2008 ) , titled " Teri Ore " , composed by Pritam Chakraborty . It received mixed reviews from music critics . The song earned her a fourth Filmfare Award for Best Female Playback Singer and overall fifth Filmfare Award . After that , she lent her voice for films like Bachna Ae Haseeno , God <unk> Great Ho , Welcome to <unk> , Kidnap , <unk> , Ek <unk> ... <unk> Bhi , <unk> , Yuvvraaj and others . She won her fourth National award for singing " <unk> Mon " for the Bengali film <unk> ( 2008 ) , and " <unk> <unk> " for the Marathi film <unk> ( 2008 ) . 
 She debuted in the Tamil cinema through the song " Yen <unk> " in <unk> 's film Album ( 2002 ) , and she received success after singing " <unk> Vaa " from <unk> Oru Kaadhal under composer A. R. Rahman . She received her first Tamil Nadu State Film Award . She made her Telugu debut for music director Mani Sharma in Okkadu ( 2003 ) . She made her debut in Kannada cinema with the song " Krishna nee <unk> <unk> " in the movie Paris <unk> ( 2003 ) . Ghoshal debuted in Malayalam cinema through a studio album of composer <unk> Joseph and later gave voice to his song " Vida <unk> " from Big B ( 2007 ) . She became a sensation in Malayalam cinema through her song " Chandu <unk> " , and received her first Kerala State Film Award for Best Singer . She became the first North Indian Singer to receive this award . In 2010 , Ghoshal sang for the English independent film When Harry Tries to Marry . 
 In 2011 , Ghoshal recorded hit duet song " Saibo " in film Shor in the City with Tochi Raina , a composition by Sachin @-@ <unk> . Satyajit from Glamsham reported , " <unk> toned and mesmerized with mellifluous flows of Shreya Ghoshal singing , the first outing " Saibo " is a <unk> surprise that extols the feel of romanticism to perfection " . Later that year , Ghoshal sang the duet " Teri Meri " in film Bodyguard with Rahat Fateh Ali Khan . A Himesh <unk> composition , the song received positive to mixed reviews . NDTV labelled the song as " moderately paced and average " . Ghoshal later collaborated with Bappi Lahiri in the duet " Ooh La La " from film The Dirty Picture . Abid from Glamsham stated that Shreya Ghoshal manage to keep up the fun tempo with an improvised and highly entertaining and excellent renditions . Ghoshal received further two nominations that year at Filmfare Awards for songs " Saibo " and " Teri Meri . 
 In 2012 , Ghoshal rendered her voice for popular item song , " Chikni Chameli " from film Agneepath featuring Katrina Kaif . The song was composed by Ajay @-@ Atul and was a remake of their own Marathi song " <unk> <unk> " from film Jatra . Joginder Tuteja of Bollywood Hungama stated , " A special word for Shreya Ghoshal too who changes her singing style in a big way and comes up trumps . She gets the kind of rustic flavour that was the need of the hour and is superb in her rendition . " Ghoshal received her one of the two Filmfare nominations of the year for the song . Ghoshal 's rendition of the female version of theme song of film Kahaani was well received by critics . Satyajit from Glamsham labelled the song as " mesmerizing , both in rendition and soothing decorum " . Ghoshal then performed in a Four @-@ part harmony song , " Radha " of film Student of the Year alongside Udit Narayan , Vishal Dadlani and Shekhar Ravjiani which garnered critical appreciation . In the same year , she again collaborated with A.R. Rahman for a duet song " Saans " from film Jab Tak Hai Jaan along with Mohit Chauhan . The song received positive to mixed reviews by critics . At the poll conducted by Indiatimes , the song Saans won the title of " Most Romantic Song of the year 2012 " . The song earned Ghoshal second of her two Filmfare nominations of the year . 
 In early 2013 , Ghoshal sang the female version of Sunn Raha Hai in Aashiqui 2 composed by Ankit Tiwari and written by Sandeep Nath . She garnered critical praise over Ankit Tiwari who sang the male version of the song . In the same year , Ghoshal collaborated with singer Kailash Kher for the song " Naina <unk> " , under the initiative ' Project Resound ' by Sony Music India . Apart from rendering vocals for A.R. Rahman composed " <unk> " in Raanjhanaa , Ghoshal lent her voice for duet " God , Allah aur Bhagwan " in Krrish 3 alongside Sonu Nigam . Though the former song was met with largely positive reviews , the latter was poorly received . Ghoshal next performed two tracks in Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram @-@ Leela namely " <unk> " and " <unk> Sang <unk> " both composed by the director of film , Sanjay Leela Bhansali . She earned positive to mixed response for former and mostly positive reviews for the latter . Mohar Basu of Koimoi stated in regards to " <unk> " , " Shreya Ghosal ’ s voice croons hauntingly and this song evokes a range of deep emotions . <unk> sung and flatteringly themed , this song makes evident the reason why Ghosal can be compared to music veterans of the industry . " Ghoshal received two Filmfare nominations for songs " Sunn Raha Hai " and " <unk> Sang <unk> " that year . 
 In 2014 , Ghoshal recorded three songs for film PK namely the solo " Nanga <unk> Dost " and duets " <unk> Kadam " and " Love is a Waste of Time " with Shaan and Sonu Nigam respectively . Later in the same year , she sang the duet " <unk> <unk> " with Arijit Singh for film Happy New Year composed by Vishal @-@ Shekhar duo and written by Irshad Kamil . Surabhi <unk> of Koimoi stated , " While Shreya Ghoshal ’ s voice brings out the mush in you , there is also the soulful voice of Arijit Singh to give you the perfect recipe for a romantic song . " Ghoshal got another nomination at Filmfare Awards for the song . 
 2015 started with Ghoshal 's another collaboration with A.R. Rahman in Tamil film I. Besides rendering vocals for original Tamil duet " <unk> <unk> <unk> " alongside Haricharan , she also dubbed its Hindi version " Tu Chale " alongside Arijit Singh and Telugu version " <unk> <unk> " alongside Haricharan . The original Tamil version song " <unk> <unk> <unk> " was met with positive reviews by critics , with most critics praising the vocals of Haricharan and Ghoshal . <unk> V.P. from International Business Times commented on Tamil version , " Haricharan 's crystal clear voice , Shreya 's Hindustani driven singing lead to a chart @-@ buster , here . With regards to Shreya Ghoshal , we have to dig deep the dictionary to come up with some new adjectives to praise her singing . " Later that year , Ghoshal sang the female version of song " Hasi " from film Hamari <unk> Kahani composed by Ami Mishra which got critical precedence over male version sung by Ami Mishra himself . Devesh Sharma from Filmfare remarked , " The female version of Hasi , sung by Shreya Ghoshal , works better than the male version , sung by guest composer Ami Mishra himself . Ghoshal elevates it with her superb effort and the softer arrangement works better for it overall . " The same year saw Ghoshal again collaborating with Sanjay Leela Bhansali in Bajirao Mastani . She performed three songs in the film , namely " <unk> Rang Do <unk> " , " Deewani Mastani " and " <unk> " , all of which met with widespread critical acclaim . She also dubbed these songs in Tamil and Telugu versions of the film 's soundtrack . The qawwali interlude song " Deewani Mastani " in the film fetched her sixth Filmfare Award , fifth for Best female playback singer . 
 In 2016 , Ghoshal provided vocals for duet " Tere Bin " from film Wazir alongside Sonu Nigam . Composed by Shantanu Moitra and written by Vidhu Vinod Chopra , the song opened to positive reviews by critics . Labelling the song as " a beautiful start for the film " , critics from Bollywood Hungama commented , " Though the sound of song is quite classical for a film which is set in the current times , one can well expect that it would fit in well into the narrative . " Ghoshal was next heard in song " Tum Bin Jiya " in film Sanam Re , composed by Jeet Ganguly . It was a recreation of a song with same title from 2001 film Tum Bin sung by K.S. Chitra and composed by Nikhil @-@ Vinay . The song received positive to negative reviews . 
 = = Concerts and other activities = = 
 Ghoshal performs in musical concerts around the world . In 2013 , she performed at the Sharjah Cricket Association Stadium in United Arab Emirates . The same year , she paid her respects to the casualties of an excessive rainfall in Mauritius with a concert at the The Swami Vivekananda International Convention Centre in <unk> . Along with Hrishikesh Ranade , she also made a stage performance during the 18th annual day celebration of Airports Authority of India . Later in 2013 , Ghoshal made a Europe tour as a celebration of 100 years of Indian cinema . 
 In 2006 , along with Sonu Nigam , Sunidhi Chauhan and Shiamak Davar , Ghoshal performed the theme song of 2010 Commonwealth Games at its closing ceremony , as an invitation to everyone to the following Commonwealth Games in Delhi . The same year , she along with Nigam , recorded the title track " Haath Se Haath <unk> " for the album put together by the BBC World Service Trust as part of an AIDS awareness campaign , where profits garnered through the album , was donated to HIV charities . 
 Ghoshal has also been appearing on television reality shows . In 2007 , Ghoshal served as the judge for the first season for STAR Voice of India <unk> <unk> , with singer Kunal <unk> and composer Pritam Chakraborty . She was one of the three judges in X Factor India with Sonu Nigam and Sanjay Leela Bhansali . Ghoshal was a captain on the singing show Music Ka Maha <unk> along with Shankar Mahadevan , Shaan , Himesh Reshammiya , Mohit Chauhan , and Mika Singh . In 2013 , Ghoshal appeared as a judge for the first season of Indian Idol Junior , along with Vishal Dadlani and Shekhar Ravjiani . 
 In 2011 , Ghoshal became the brand ambassador for <unk> jewellery . 
 In 2016 , Ghoshal performed a charity event to support a 17 years old patient of Acute lymphoblastic leukemia . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 One of Ghoshal 's earliest musical memories is listening to her mother , <unk> Ghoshal , sing classical Bengali songs at clubs . As a very young child , she was introduced to music by her mother , whom she refers as her first " guru " . She states that her mother is her best critic . 
 Ghoshal has acknowledged Lata Mangeshkar , Asha Bhosle , K S Chithra , Geeta Dutt , Mohammed Rafi , Kishore Kumar and Mukesh as her inspirations . Ghoshal has also named Jagjit Singh as her inspiration to perform songs in the genre of Ghazal . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 Ghoshal possesses a soprano vocal range of two octaves to C # 6 . In spite of her frequent high pitched rendition , Ghoshal has performed songs with a lower vocal range . Her voice has been described as " sweet " with " slightly huskiness " . In an interview , Ghoshal noted that her voice has transformed from the " girlish tenor " of the earlier days to a more matured texture . Her voice is characterized in the media for being most suitable for higher @-@ pitched renditions , although some critics have said that her voice tends to screech when she reaches a higher note of scale . Similarly , in the book Confession of a Coward — an Indian Adventure , it was stated that Ghoshal 's high @-@ pitched vocals are interesting and impressive , but " certainly take some time getting used to it " . Ghoshal has voiced against correcting pitch with Auto @-@ Tune . 
 What makes Ghoshal remarkable among her contemporaries , according to The Indian Express is , the " serenity in her voice " and the " enviable range " . Further complimenting her versatile vocal range , they noted : " The honey @-@ dipped inflection of [ her voice ] , which once put in the recording studio , can turn into naughty , sensuous , serious , sad , comic and pure classical , depending on the requirement of the job " . Naming her as the " most versatile singer of this generation " , India West remarked the smoothness of her voice when flowing from " lower registers to higher notes " . According to The Times of India , Ghoshal maintains the " touch of versatility " with her music by singing different style of songs from classical to pure commercial music . In 2003 , Ghoshal admitted that she modulates her voice well , hence " none of the music directors have yet been able to label me " . 
 Ghoshal took vocal lessons and did workshops with <unk> <unk> Shah , where she learnt the technique about " throw of voice , straight notes , <unk> " . She considers classical music training as an asset in playback since it " keeps one 's voice fit and fresh " . 
 = = Personal life and popularity = = 
 On 5 February 2015 , Ghoshal married her childhood friend <unk> <unk> in a traditional Bengali ceremony . 
 Music director Jeet <unk> , singers Javed Ali , <unk> <unk> , Sonu Nigam , Pakistani singers Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan , Syed <unk> Shah , A cappella band Penn Masala , and actress Dia Mirza , have mentioned her as one of their favorites in the industry . In a 2007 interview , Usha Uthup named her among the " voice for the future " . Director Vidhu Vinod Chopra has called her " the best singer in the industry " . Veteran singers Vani Jairam and Manna Dey has praised her musical abilities . 
 Ghoshal was also honored from the U.S. state of Ohio , where governor Ted Strickland declared 26 June as " Shreya Ghoshal Day " . The first Shreya Ghoshal Day ( on 26 June 2010 ) was celebrated among her fans on popular microblogging and social networking sites . In April 2013 , Ghoshal was awarded with the highest honour in London by the members of House of Commons of the United Kingdom . 
 In 2012 , Ghoshal appeared in the Forbes Celebrity 100 , a list based on income and popularity of India 's celebrities . She remained in the top fifty spots for four consecutive years , listed at the forty @-@ second spot in 2012 – 13 , the twenty @-@ eighth spot in 2014 and the thirty @-@ third spot in 2015 . In 2013 , the UK @-@ based newspaper Eastern Eye placed her forty @-@ third in their " 50 Sexiest Asian Women " list . In 2015 , Eastern Eye placed her seventh in their " Greatest 20 Bollywood Playback Singers " list . 
 Ghoshal maintains a Facebook and a Twitter account . She is the sixth most liked Indian personality on Facebook and on Twitter . According to the statistics of <unk> , Ghoshal ranks in seventh place on Facebook and forty @-@ fourth on Twitter in India . Ghoshal is among the top ten most searched Indian singers on Google Search . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Ghoshal has been a recipient of four National Film Awards for Best Female Playback Singing : " Bairi Piya " for Devdas ( 2002 ) , " Dheere Jalna " for Paheli ( 2005 ) , " Yeh Ishq <unk> " for Jab We Met ( 2007 ) , and " <unk> Mon " for the Bengali film <unk> ( 2008 ) and " <unk> <unk> " for the Marathi film <unk> ( 2008 ) . In addition to these , she has won six Filmfare Awards including the RD Burman Award for New Music Talent . 
 = Delhi = 
 Delhi ( / <unk> / , Hindustani pronunciation : [ d ̪ <unk> ] Dilli ; Devanāgarī : <unk> ् <unk> ) , officially the National Capital Territory of Delhi , is the capital territory of the Republic of India . Delhi is historically and culturally connected to both the Upper Doab of the Yamuna @-@ Ganges river system and the Punjab region . It is bordered by Haryana on three sides and by Uttar Pradesh to the east . It is the second most populous city in India — about 1 @,@ 484 square kilometres ( 573 sq mi ) . It has a population of about 25 million , making it the most populous city and second most populous urban agglomeration in India and 3rd largest urban area in the world . Such is the nature of urban expansion in Delhi that its growth has expanded beyond the NCT to incorporate towns in neighbouring states and at its largest extent can count a population of about 25 million residents as of 2014 . After Mumbai , Delhi has the second @-@ highest number of billionaires and millionaires among all cities in India . 
 Delhi has been continuously inhabited since the 6th century BCE . Through most of its history , Delhi has served as a capital of various kingdoms and empires . It has been captured , ransacked and rebuilt several times , particularly during the medieval period , and modern Delhi is a cluster of a number of cities spread across the metropolitan region . 
 Delhi and its urban region have been given the special status of National Capital Region ( NCR ) under the Constitution of India 's 69th Amendment Act of 1991 . The NCR includes the neighbouring cities of Faridabad , Gurgaon , Noida , Ghaziabad , <unk> ( Greater Faridabad ) , Greater Noida , Bahadurgarh , Sonepat , Panipat , Karnal , Rohtak , Bhiwani , <unk> , <unk> , Meerut , Muzaffarnagar , Alwar , Bharatpur and other nearby towns . A union territory , the political administration of the NCT of Delhi today more closely resembles that of a state of India , with its own legislature , high court and an executive council of ministers headed by a Chief Minister . New Delhi is jointly administered by the federal government of India and the local government of Delhi , and is the capital of the NCT of Delhi . 
 = = Toponomy = = 
 There are a number of myths and legends associated with the origin of the name Delhi . One of them is derived from <unk> or <unk> , a king who built a city at this location in 50 BC and named it after himself . Another legend holds that the name of the city is based on the Hindi / Prakrit word <unk> ( loose ) and that it was used by the <unk> to refer to the city because the Iron Pillar of Delhi had a weak foundation and had to be moved . The coins in circulation in the region under the <unk> were called <unk> . According to the Bhavishya Purana , King <unk> of Indraprastha built a new fort in the modern @-@ day Purana Qila area for the convenience of all four castes in his kingdom . He ordered the construction of a gateway to the fort and later named the fort <unk> . Some historians believe that the name is derived from Dilli , a corruption of Urdu words <unk> or <unk> — both terms meaning ' threshold ' or ' gateway ' — and symbolic of the city as a gateway to the Gangetic Plain . Another theory suggests that the city 's original name was <unk> . 
 The people of Delhi are referred to as <unk> or <unk> . The city is referenced in various idioms of the Northern Indo @-@ Aryan languages . Examples include : 
 <unk> Dilli door hai or its Persian version , <unk> <unk> dour ast , literally meaning Delhi is still far away , which is generically said about a task or journey still far from completion . 
 Dilli <unk> ka <unk> or Dilli <unk> ki meaning Delhi belongs to the large @-@ hearted / daring . 
 Aas @-@ <unk> <unk> , Dilli pani <unk> , literally meaning it pours all around , while Delhi lies parched . An allusion to the sometimes semi @-@ arid climate of Delhi , it idiomatically refers to situations of deprivation when one is surrounded by plenty . 
 = = History = = 
 The area around Delhi was probably inhabited before the second millennium BC and there is evidence of continuous inhabitation since at least the 6th century BC . The city is believed to be the site of Indraprastha , the legendary capital of the Pandavas in the Indian epic Mahabharata . According to Mahabharata , this land was initially a huge mass of forests called ' <unk> ' which was burnt down to build the city of Indraprastha . The earliest architectural relics date back to the Maurya period ( c . 300 BC ) ; in 1966 , an inscription of the Mauryan Emperor Ashoka ( 273 – 235 BC ) was discovered near <unk> . Remains of eight major cities have been discovered in Delhi . The first five cities were in the southern part of present @-@ day Delhi . Gurjara @-@ Pratihara King <unk> Pal of the <unk> dynasty founded the city of Lal Kot in AD 736 . The <unk> conquered Lal Kot in 1180 and renamed it Qila Rai Pithora . 
 The king Prithviraj Chauhan was defeated in 1192 by Muhammad Ghori , a Tajik invader from Afghanistan , who made a concerted effort to conquer northern India . By 1200 , native Hindu resistance had begun to crumble , the dominance of foreign Turkic Muslim dynasties in north India was to last for the next five centuries . The slave general of Ghori , Qutb @-@ ud @-@ din <unk> was given the responsibility of governing the conquered territories of India . He began construction of the Qutb Minar and <unk> @-@ al @-@ Islam ( Might of Islam ) mosque , the earliest extant mosque in India . Qutb @-@ ud @-@ din faced widespread Hindu rebellions and it was his successor , <unk> ( 1211 – 36 ) , who consolidated the Turkic conquest of northern India . 
 For the next three hundred years , Delhi was ruled by a succession of Turkic and an Afghan , Lodhi dynasty . They built several forts and townships that are part of the seven cities of Delhi . Delhi was a major centre of Sufism during this period . The Mamluk Sultanate ( Delhi ) was overthrown in 1290 by the Khilji dynasty ( 1290 – 1320 ) . Under the second Khilji ruler , Ala @-@ ud @-@ din Khilji , the Delhi sultanate extended its control south of the Narmada River in the Deccan . The Delhi sultanate reached its greatest extent during the reign of Muhammad bin Tughluq ( 1325 – 1351 ) . In an attempt to bring the whole of the Deccan under control , he moved his capital to Daulatabad , Maharashtra in central India . However , by moving away from Delhi he lost control of the north and was forced to return to Delhi to restore order . The southern provinces then broke away . In the years following the reign of Firoz Shah Tughlaq ( 1351 – 1388 ) , the Delhi sultanate rapidly began to lose its hold over its northern provinces . Delhi was captured and sacked by Timur Lenk in 1398 , who massacred 100 @,@ 000 captives . Delhi 's decline continued under the Sayyid dynasty ( 1414 – 1451 ) , until the sultanate was reduced to Delhi and its hinterland . Under the Afghan Lodhi dynasty ( 1451 – 1526 ) , the Delhi sultanate recovered control of the Punjab and the Gangetic plain to once again achieve domination over Northern India . However , the recovery was short @-@ lived and the sultanate was destroyed in 1526 by Babur , founder of the Mughal dynasty . 
 Babur , was a descendant of Genghis Khan and Timur , from the Fergana Valley in modern @-@ day Uzbekistan . In 1526 , he invaded India , defeated the last Lodhi sultan in the First Battle of Panipat and founded the Mughal Empire that ruled from Delhi and Agra . The Mughal dynasty ruled Delhi for more than three centuries , with a sixteen @-@ year hiatus during the reigns of Sher Shah Suri and Hemu from 1540 to 1556 . In 1553 , the Hindu king , Hemu acceded to the throne of Delhi by defeating forces of Mughal Emperor Humayun at Agra and Delhi . However , the Mughals re @-@ established their rule after Akbar 's army defeated Hemu during the Second Battle of Panipat in 1556 . Shah Jahan built the seventh city of Delhi that bears his name <unk> , which served as the capital of the Mughal Empire from 1638 and is today known as the Old City or Old Delhi . 
 After the death of Aurangzeb in 1707 , the Mughal Empire 's influence declined rapidly as the Hindu Maratha Empire from Deccan Plateau rose to prominence . In 1737 , Maratha forces sacked Delhi following their victory against the Mughals in the First Battle of Delhi . In 1739 , the Mughal Empire lost the huge Battle of Karnal in less than three hours against the numerically outnumbered but militarily superior Persian army led by Nader Shah of Persia . After his invasion , he completely sacked and looted Delhi , carrying away immense wealth including the Peacock Throne , the Daria @-@ i @-@ Noor , and Koh @-@ i @-@ Noor . The Mughals , severely further weakened , could never overcome this crushing defeat and humiliation which also left the way open for more invaders to come , including eventually the British . Nader eventually agreed to leave the city and India after forcing the Mughal emperor Muhammad Shah I to beg him for mercy and granting him the keys of the city and the royal treasury . A treaty signed in 1752 made Marathas the protectors of the Mughal throne in Delhi . 
 In 1757 , the Afghan ruler , Ahmad Shah Durrani , sacked Delhi . He returned to Afghanistan leaving a Mughal puppet ruler in nominal control . The Marathas again occupied Delhi in 1758 , and were in control until their defeat in 1761 at the third battle of Panipat when the city was captured again by Ahmad Shah . However , in 1771 , the Marathas established a protectorate over Delhi when the Maratha ruler , <unk> Shinde , recaptured Delhi and the Mughal Emperor Shah Alam II was installed as a puppet ruler in 1772 . In 1783 , Sikhs under <unk> Singh captured Delhi and Red Fort but due to the treaty signed , Sikhs withdrew from Red Fort and agreed to restore Shah Alam as the <unk> 1803 , during the Second Anglo @-@ Maratha War , the forces of British East India Company defeated the Maratha forces in the Battle of Delhi . During the Indian Rebellion of 1857 , Delhi fell to the forces of East India Company after a bloody fight known as the Siege of Delhi . The city came under the direct control of the British Government in 1858 . It was made a district province of the Punjab . In 1911 , it was announced that the capital of British held territories in India was to be transferred from Calcutta to Delhi . The name " New Delhi " was given in 1927 , and the new capital was inaugurated on 13 February 1931 . New Delhi , also known as Lutyens ' Delhi , was officially declared as the capital of the Union of India after the country gained independence on 15 August 1947 . During the partition of India , thousands of Hindu and Sikh refugees , mainly from West Punjab fled to Delhi , while many Muslim residents of the city migrated to Pakistan . Migration to Delhi from the rest of India continues ( as of 2013 ) , contributing more to the rise of Delhi 's population than the birth rate , which is declining . 
 The Constitution ( Sixty @-@ ninth Amendment ) Act , 1991 declared the Union Territory of Delhi to be formally known as the National Capital Territory of Delhi . 
 The Act gave Delhi its own legislative assembly along Civil lines , though with limited powers . In December 2001 , the Parliament of India building in New Delhi was attacked by armed militants , killing six security personnel . India suspected Pakistan @-@ based militant groups were behind the attack , which caused a major diplomatic crisis between the two countries . There were further terrorist attacks in Delhi in October 2005 and September 2008 , resulting in a total of 103 deaths . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Delhi is located at 28 @.@ 61 ° N 77 @.@ 23 ° E ﻿ / 28 @.@ 61 ; 77 @.@ 23 , and lies in Northern India . It borders the Indian states of Haryana on the north , west and south and Uttar Pradesh ( UP ) to the east . Two prominent features of the geography of Delhi are the Yamuna flood plains and the Delhi ridge . The Yamuna river was the historical boundary between Punjab and UP , and its flood plains provide fertile alluvial soil suitable for agriculture but are prone to recurrent floods . The Yamuna , a sacred river in Hinduism , is the only major river flowing through Delhi . The Hindon River separates Ghaziabad from the eastern part of Delhi . The Delhi ridge originates from the Aravalli Range in the south and encircles the west , north @-@ east and north @-@ west parts of the city . It reaches a height of 318 m ( 1 @,@ 043 ft ) and is a dominant feature of the region . 
 The National Capital Territory of Delhi covers an area of 1 @,@ 484 km2 ( 573 sq mi ) , of which 783 km2 ( 302 sq mi ) is designated rural , and 700 km2 ( 270 sq mi ) urban therefore making it the largest city in terms of area in the country . It has a length of 51 @.@ 9 km ( 32 mi ) and a width of 48 @.@ 48 km ( 30 mi ) . 
 Delhi is included in India 's seismic zone @-@ IV , indicating its vulnerability to major earthquakes . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Delhi features an atypical version of the humid subtropical climate ( Köppen Cwa ) . The warm season lasts from 9 April to 8 July with an average daily high temperature above 36 ° C ( 97 ° F ) . The hottest day of the year is 22 May , with an average high of 38 ° C ( 100 ° F ) and low of 25 ° C ( 77 ° F ) . The cold season lasts from 11 December to 11 February with an average daily high temperature below 18 ° C ( 64 ° F ) . The coldest day of the year is 4 January , with an average low of 2 ° C ( 36 ° F ) and high of 15 ° C ( 59 ° F ) . In early March , the wind direction changes from north @-@ westerly to south @-@ westerly . From April to October the weather is hot . The monsoon arrives at the end of June , along with an increase in humidity . The brief , mild winter starts in late November , peaks in January and heavy fog often occurs . 
 Temperatures in Delhi usually range from 5 to 40 ° C ( 41 @.@ 0 to 104 @.@ 0 ° F ) , with the lowest and highest temperatures ever recorded being − 2 @.@ 2 and 48 @.@ 4 ° C ( 28 @.@ 0 and 119 @.@ 1 ° F ) respectively . The annual mean temperature is 25 ° C ( 77 ° F ) ; monthly mean temperatures range from 13 to 32 ° C ( 55 to 90 ° F ) . The highest temperature recorded in July was 45 ° C ( 113 ° F ) in 1931 . The average annual rainfall is approximately 714 mm ( 28 @.@ 1 in ) , most of which falls during the monsoon in July and August . The average date of the advent of monsoon winds in Delhi is 29 June . 
 = = = Air pollution = = = 
 Delhi is the most polluted city in the world and according to one estimate , air pollution causes the death of about 10 @,@ 500 people in Delhi every year . During 2013 @-@ 14 , peak levels of fine particulate matter ( PM ) in Delhi increased by about 44 % , primarily due to high vehicular and industrial emissions , construction work and crop burning in adjoining states . Delhi has the highest level of the airborne particulate matter , PM2.5 considered most harmful to health , with 153 micrograms . Rising air pollution level has significantly increased lung @-@ related ailments ( especially asthma and lung cancer ) among Delhi 's children and women . The dense smog in Delhi during winter season results in major air and rail traffic disruptions every year . According to Indian meteorologists , the average maximum temperature in Delhi during winters has declined notably since 1998 due to rising air pollution . 
 Environmentalists have criticised the Delhi government for not doing enough to curb air pollution and to inform people about air quality issues . Most of Delhi 's residents are unaware of alarming levels of air pollution in the city and the health risks associated with it ; however , as of 2015 , awareness , particularly among the foreign diplomatic community and high @-@ income Indians , was noticeably increasing . Since the mid @-@ 1990s , Delhi has undertaken some measures to curb air pollution – Delhi has the third highest quantity of trees among Indian cities and the Delhi Transport Corporation operates the world 's largest fleet of environmentally friendly compressed natural gas ( CNG ) buses . In 1996 , the Centre for Science and Environment ( CSE ) started a public interest litigation in the Supreme Court of India that ordered the conversion of Delhi 's fleet of buses and taxis to run on compressed natural gas ( CNG ) and banned the use of leaded petrol in 1998 . In 2003 , Delhi won the United States Department of Energy 's first ' Clean Cities International Partner of the Year ' award for its " bold efforts to curb air pollution and support alternative fuel initiatives " . The Delhi Metro has also been credited for significantly reducing air pollutants in the city . 
 However , according to several authors , most of these gains have been lost , especially due to stubble burning , a rise in the market share of diesel cars and a considerable decline in bus ridership . According to CSE and System of Air Quality Weather Forecasting and Research ( <unk> ) , burning of agricultural waste in nearby Punjab , Haryana and Uttar Pradesh regions results in severe intensification of smog over Delhi . The state government of Uttar Pradesh is considering imposing a ban on crop burning to reduce pollution in Delhi NCR and an environmental panel has appealed to India 's Supreme Court to impose a 30 % cess on diesel cars . 
 The Circles of Sustainability assessment of Delhi gives a marginally more favourable impression of the ecological sustainability of the city only because it is based on a more comprehensive series of measures than only air pollution . Part of the reason that the city remains assessed at basic sustainability is because of the low resource @-@ use and carbon emissions of its poorer neighbourhoods . 
 = = Civic administration = = 
 As of July 2007 , the National Capital Territory of Delhi comprises nine districts , 27 tehsils , 59 census towns , 300 villages , and three statutory towns , the Municipal Corporation of Delhi ( MCD ) – 1 @,@ 397 @.@ 3 km2 or 540 sq mi , the New Delhi Municipal Council ( NDMC ) – 42 @.@ 7 km2 or 16 sq mi and the Delhi Cantonment Board ( DCB ) – 43 km2 or 17 sq mi ) . On 16 July 2012 , the Delhi Government decided to increase the number of districts from nine to 11 . 
 The Delhi metropolitan area lies within the National Capital Territory of Delhi ( NCT ) , which has five local municipal corporations ; North Delhi Municipal Corporation , South Delhi Municipal Corporation , East Delhi Municipal Corporation , NDMC and DCB . The former MCD was divided into three smaller Municipal Corporations – North Delhi , South Delhi and East Delhi . According to the 2011 census , MCD is among the largest municipal bodies in the world , providing civic services to about 11 million people . 
 Delhi ( civic administration ) was ranked 5th out of 21 Cities for best governance & administrative practices in India in 2014 . It scored 3 @.@ 6 on 10 compared to the national average of 3 @.@ 3 . 
 Delhi houses the Supreme Court of India and the regional Delhi High Court along with the Small Causes Court for civil cases ; the Magistrate Court and the Sessions Court for criminal cases has jurisdiction over Delhi . The city is administratively divided into eleven police @-@ zones which are subdivided into 95 local police stations . 
 = = Government and politics = = 
 The National Capital Territory of Delhi has its own Legislative Assembly , Lieutenant Governor , council of ministers and Chief Minister . Members of the legislative assembly are directly elected from territorial constituencies in the NCT . The legislative assembly was abolished in 1956 , after which direct federal control was implemented until it was re @-@ established in 1993 . The Municipal Corporation of Delhi ( MCD ) handles civic administration for the city as part of the Panchayati Raj Act . The Government of India and the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi jointly administer New Delhi , where both bodies are located . The Parliament of India , the Rashtrapati Bhavan ( Presidential Palace ) , Cabinet Secretariat and the Supreme Court of India are located in the municipal district of New Delhi . There are 70 assembly constituencies and seven Lok Sabha ( Indian parliament 's lower house ) constituencies in Delhi . 
 The Indian National Congress ( Congress ) formed all the governments in Delhi until the 1990s , when the Bharatiya Janata Party ( BJP ) , led by Madan Lal Khurana , came to power . In 1998 , the Congress returned to power under the leadership of Sheila Dikshit , who was subsequently re @-@ elected for 3 consecutive terms . But in 2013 , the Congress was ousted from power by the newly formed Aam Aadmi Party ( AAP ) led by Arvind Kejriwal forming the government with outside support from the Congress . However , that government was short @-@ lived , collapsing only after 49 days . Delhi was then under President 's rule till February 2015 . On February 10 , 2015 , the Aam Aadmi Party returned to power after a landslide victory , winning 67 out of the 70 seats in the Delhi Legislative Assembly . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Delhi is the largest commercial centre in northern India ; in financial year 2009 @-@ 10 it had a gross State Domestic Product of ₹ 2 @,@ 176 billion ( US $ 32 billion ) . As of 2013 , the per capita income of Delhi was Rs . <unk> , the second highest in India . The GSDP of Delhi at the current prices for 2012 @-@ 13 is estimated at Rs 3 @.@ 66 trillion ( short scale ) against Rs 3 @.@ 11 trillion ( short scale ) in 2011 @-@ 12 . 
 As per the Economic survey of Delhi ( 2005 – 2006 ) , the tertiary sector contributes 70 @.@ 95 % of Delhi 's gross SDP followed by secondary and primary sectors with 25 @.@ 20 % and 3 @.@ 85 % contributions respectively . Delhi 's workforce constitutes 32 @.@ 82 % of the population , and increased by 52 @.@ 52 % between 1991 and 2001 . Delhi 's unemployment rate decreased from 12 @.@ 57 % in 1999 – 2000 to 4 @.@ 63 % in 2003 . In December 2004 , 636 @,@ 000 people were registered with various employment exchange programs in Delhi . In 2001 the total workforce in national and state governments and the quasi @-@ government sector was 620 @,@ 000 , and the private sector employed 219 @,@ 000 . Key service industries are information technology , telecommunications , hotels , banking , media and tourism . Construction , power , health and community services and real estate are also important to the city 's economy . Delhi has one of India 's largest and fastest growing retail industries . Manufacturing also grew considerably as consumer goods companies established manufacturing units and headquarters in the city . Delhi 's large consumer market and the availability of skilled labour has also attracted foreign investment . In 2001 , the manufacturing sector employed 1 @,@ 440 @,@ 000 workers and the city had 129 @,@ 000 industrial units . 
 = = Utility services = = 
 Delhi 's municipal water supply is managed by the Delhi Jal Board ( DJB ) . As of June 2005 , it supplied 650 million gallons per day ( MGD ) , whereas the estimated consumption requirement is 963 MGD . The shortfall is met by private and public tube wells and hand pumps . At 240 MGD , the <unk> storage is DJB 's largest water source , followed by the Yamuna and Ganges rivers . Delhi 's groundwater level is falling and its population density is increasing , so residents often encounter acute water shortage . 
 In Delhi , daily domestic solid waste production is 8000 tonnes which is dumped at three landfill locations by MCD . The daily domestic waste water production is 470 MGD and industrial waste water is 70 MGD . A large portion of the sewage flows untreated into the Yamuna river . 
 The city 's electricity consumption is about 1 @,@ 265 kWh per capita but the actual demand is higher . In Delhi power distribution is managed by Tata Power Distribution and <unk> Rajdhani since 2002 . The Delhi Fire Service runs 43 fire stations that attend about 15 @,@ 000 fire and rescue calls per year . The state @-@ owned Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited ( MTNL ) and private enterprises such as Vodafone , Airtel , Idea Cellular , Reliance Infocomm , Aircel and Tata Docomo provide telephone and cell phone services to the city . Cellular coverage is available in GSM , CDMA , 3G and 4G . 
 = = Transport = = 
 = = = Air = = = 
 Indira Gandhi International Airport , situated to the southwest of Delhi , is the main gateway for the city 's domestic and international civilian air traffic . In 2012 @-@ 13 , the airport was used by more than 35 million passengers , making it one of the busiest airports in South Asia . Terminal 3 , which cost ₹ 96 @.@ 8 billion ( US $ 1 @.@ 4 billion ) to construct between 2007 and 2010 , handles an additional 37 million passengers annually . 
 The Delhi Flying Club , established in 1928 with two de Havilland Moth aircraft named Delhi and <unk> , was based at Safdarjung Airport which started operations in 1929 , when it was the Delhi 's only airport and the second in India . The airport functioned until 2001 , however in January 2002 the government closed the airport for flying activities because of security concerns following the New York attacks in September 2001 . Since then , the club only carries out aircraft maintenance courses and is used for helicopter rides to Indira Gandhi International Airport for VIP including the president and the prime minister . 
 A second airport open for commercial flights has been suggested either by expansion of Meerut Airport or construction of a new airport in Greater Noida . 
 = = = Road = = = 
 Delhi has the highest road density of <unk> km / 100 km2 in India . 
 Buses are the most popular means of road transport catering to about 60 % of Delhi 's total demand . Delhi has one of India 's largest bus transport systems . Buses are operated by the state @-@ owned Delhi Transport Corporation ( DTC ) , which owns the largest fleet of compressed natural gas ( CNG ) <unk> buses in the world . Personal vehicles especially cars also form a major chunk of vehicles plying on Delhi roads . Delhi has the highest number of registered cars compared to any other metropolitan city in India . Taxis , auto rickshaws and cycle rickshaws also ply on Delhi roads in large numbers . 
 Important Roads in Delhi 
 Some roads and expressways serve as important pillars of Delhi 's road infrastructure : 
 Inner Ring Road is one of the most important " state highways " in Delhi . It is a 51 km long circular road which connects important areas in Delhi . Owing to more than 2 dozen grade @-@ separators / flyovers , the road is almost signal @-@ free . 
 Outer Ring Road is another major artery in Delhi that links far @-@ flung areas of Delhi . 
 The Delhi Noida Direct Flyway ( DND Flyway ) is an eight @-@ laned access controlled tolled expressway which connects Delhi to Noida ( an important satellite city of Uttar Pradesh ) . The acronym DND stands for " Delhi @-@ Noida Direct " . 
 The Delhi Gurgaon Expressway is a 28 km ( 17 mi ) expressway connecting Delhi to Gurgaon , an important satellite city of Haryana . 
 The Delhi Faridabad Skyway is controlled tolled expressway which connects Delhi to Faridabad , an important satellite city of Haryana . 
 National Highways Passing Through Delhi 
 Delhi is connected by Road to various parts of the country through several National Highways : 
 National Highway 1 ( India ) or ( NH 1 ) is a National Highway in Northern India that links the National capital New Delhi to the town of <unk> in Punjab near the Indo @-@ Pakistan border . 
 National Highway 2 ( India ) ( NH 2 ) commonly referred as Delhi @-@ Kolkata Road is a busy Indian National Highway that runs through the states of Delhi , Haryana , Uttar Pradesh , Bihar , Jharkhand and West Bengal . 
 National Highway 8 ( India ) ( NH 8 ) is a National Highway in India that connects the Indian capital city of New Delhi with the Indian Financial capital city of Mumbai . 
 National Highway 10 ( India ) ( NH 10 ) is a National Highway in northern India that originates at Delhi and ends at the town of <unk> in Punjab near the Indo @-@ Pakistan border . 
 National Highway 24 ( India ) ( NH 24 ) is a National Highway in India that connects the National capital Delhi to Uttar Pradesh state capital Lucknow running 438 kilometres ( 272 miles ) in length . 
 = = = Railway = = = 
 Delhi is a major junction in the Indian railway network and is the headquarters of the Northern Railway . The five main railway stations are New Delhi railway station , Old Delhi , Nizamuddin Railway Station , Anand Vihar Railway Terminal and Sarai Rohilla . The Delhi Metro , a mass rapid transit system built and operated by Delhi Metro Rail Corporation ( DMRC ) , serves many parts of Delhi and the neighbouring cities Faridabad , Gurgaon , Noida and Ghaziabad . As of August 2011 , the metro consists of six operational lines with a total length of 189 km ( 117 mi ) and 146 stations , and several other lines are under construction . The Phase @-@ I was built at a cost of US $ 2 @.@ 3 billion and the Phase @-@ II was expected to cost an additional ₹ 216 billion ( US $ 3 @.@ 2 billion ) . Phase @-@ II has a total length of 128 km and was completed by 2010 . Delhi Metro completed 10 years of operation on 25 December 2012 . It carries millions of passengers every day . In addition to the Delhi Metro , a suburban railway , the Delhi Suburban Railway exists . 
 = = = Metro = = = 
 The Delhi Metro is a rapid transit system serving Delhi , Faridabad , Gurgaon , Noida and Ghaziabad in the National Capital Region of India . Delhi Metro is the world 's 10th largest metro system in terms of length . Delhi Metro was India 's first modern public transportation system , which has revolutionised travel by providing a fast , reliable , safe , and comfortable means of transport . The network consists of six lines with a total length of 189 @.@ 63 kilometres ( 117 @.@ 83 miles ) with 142 stations , of which 35 are underground , five are at @-@ grade , and the remainder are elevated . All stations have escalators , elevators , and tactile tiles to guide the visually impaired from station entrances to trains . It has a combination of elevated , at @-@ grade , and underground lines , and uses both broad gauge and standard gauge rolling stock . Four types of rolling stock are used : Mitsubishi @-@ ROTEM Broad gauge , Bombardier <unk> , Mitsubishi @-@ ROTEM Standard gauge , and CAF <unk> Standard gauge . The Phase @-@ I of Delhi Metro was built at a cost of US $ 2 @.@ 3 billion and the Phase @-@ II was expected to cost an additional ₹ 216 billion ( US $ 3 @.@ 2 billion ) . Phase @-@ II has a total length of 128 km and was completed by 2010 . Delhi Metro completed 10 years of operation on 25 December 2012 . It carries millions of passengers every day . In addition to the Delhi Metro , a suburban railway , the Delhi Suburban Railway exists . 
 Delhi Metro is being built and operated by the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited ( DMRC ) , a state @-@ owned company with equal equity participation from Government of India and Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi . However , the organisation is under administrative control of Ministry of Urban Development , Government of India . Besides construction and operation of Delhi Metro , DMRC is also involved in the planning and implementation of metro rail , monorail and high @-@ speed rail projects in India and providing consultancy services to other metro projects in the country as well as abroad . The Delhi Metro project was spearheaded by Padma Vibhushan E. Sreedharan , the Managing Director of DMRC and popularly known as the " Metro Man " of India . He famously resigned from DMRC taking moral responsibility for a metro bridge collapse , which took five lives . Sreedharan was awarded with the prestigious Legion of Honour by the French Government for his contribution to Delhi Metro . 
 Metro services are being extended to important hubs in the cities that are close to offices , colleges , and tourist spots . This will facilitate easy conveyance for the citizens , who otherwise have to rely on public buses that are heavily crowded and are often stuck in traffic jams . 
 = = = Regional Rapid Transit System ( <unk> ) = = = 
 The 08 <unk> Corridors have been proposed by National Capital Region Planning Board ( <unk> ) to facilitate the people travelling from nearby cities in NCR to Delhi . The three main corridors in first phase are as follows which are expected to become operational before 2019 : 
 Delhi - Alwar via Gurgaon 
 Delhi - Panipat via Sonepat 
 Delhi - Meerut via Ghaziabad 
 Remaining five corridors are also approved by National Capital Region Planning Board but are planned in the second phase . 
 To make the project operational <unk> has formed a separate body named as " National Capital Region Transport Corporation on the lines of DMRC to independently formalise and monitor its progress . 
 = = = Roads of 2006 and 2007 = = = 
 As of 2007 , private vehicles account for 30 % of the total demand for transport . Delhi has 1922 @.@ 32 km of road length per 100 km2 , one of the highest road densities in India . It is connected to other parts of India by five National Highways : NH 1 , 2 , 8 , 10 and 24 . The city 's road network is maintained by MCD , NDMC , Delhi Cantonment Board , Public Works Department ( PWD ) and Delhi Development Authority . The Delhi @-@ Gurgaon Expressway connects Delhi with Gurgaon and the international airport . " The Delhi @-@ Faridabad Skyway " . connects Delhi with the neighbouring industrial town of Faridabad . The DND Flyway and Noida @-@ Greater Noida Expressway connect Delhi with the suburbs of Noida and Greater Noida . Delhi 's rapid rate of economic development and population growth has resulted in an increasing demand for transport , creating excessive pressure on the city 's transport infrastructure . As of 2008 , the number of vehicles in the metropolitan region , Delhi NCR , is 11 @.@ 2 million ( 11 @.@ 2 million ) . In 2008 , there were 85 cars in Delhi for every 1 @,@ 000 of its residents . 
 To meet the transport demand , the State and Union government constructed a mass rapid transit system , including the Delhi Metro . In 1998 , the Supreme Court of India ordered that all public transport vehicles in Delhi must be fuelled by compressed natural gas ( CNG ) . Buses are the most popular means of public transport , catering to about 60 % of the total demand . The state @-@ owned Delhi Transport Corporation ( DTC ) is a major bus service provider which operates the world 's largest fleet of CNG @-@ fuelled buses . Delhi Bus Rapid Transit System runs between Ambedkar Nagar and Delhi Gate . 
 = = Slums = = 
 As of the early @-@ 21st century , slums are one of the biggest problems Delhi faces today . More than half of the population of Delhi lives in slums and unauthorised colonies , leaving only 25 per cent people in planned areas . Delhi has the second largest slum population after Mumbai in India . Many of the slums in Delhi are denied even the basic services . The majority of the slums don 't have even basic facilities like running water and electricity . In one report by Indian express almost 22 % of the slum population doesn 't have toilets and are doing open defecation . Almost 55 % uses community toilets which are very dirty and due to this many communicable diseases arise from the area and spread out . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to the 2011 census of India , the population of Delhi is 16 @,@ 753 @,@ 235 . The corresponding population density was 11 @,@ 297 persons per km2 with a sex ratio of 866 women per 1000 men , and a literacy rate of 86 @.@ 34 % . In 2004 , the birth rate , death rate and infant mortality rate per 1000 population were 20 @.@ 03 , 5 @.@ 59 and 13 @.@ 08 respectively . In 2001 , the population of Delhi increased by 285 @,@ 000 as a result of migration and by 215 @,@ 000 as a result of natural population growth , which made Delhi one of the fastest growing cities in the world . By 2015 , Delhi is expected to be the third @-@ largest conurbation in the world after Tokyo and Mumbai . Dwarka Sub City , Asia 's largest planned residential area , is located within the National Capital Territory of Delhi . 
 Hinduism is Delhi 's predominant religious faith , with 81 @.@ 68 % of Delhi 's population , followed by Islam ( 12 @.@ 86 % ) , Sikhism ( 3 @.@ 4 % ) , Jainism ( 0 @.@ 99 % ) , Christianity ( 0 @.@ 87 % ) , and others ( 0 @.@ 12 % ) . Other minority religions include Buddhism , Zoroastrianism , Baha 'ism and Judaism . 
 According to the 50th report of the commissioner for linguistic minorities in India , which was submitted in 2014 , Hindi is the Delhi 's most spoken language , with 80 @.@ 94 % speakers , followed by Punjabi ( 7 @.@ 14 % ) , Urdu ( 6 @.@ 31 % ) , and Bengali ( 1 @.@ 50 % ) . Hindi is also the Official language of Delhi while Urdu and Punjabi have been declared as the additional official languages . 
 According a 1999 – 2000 estimate , the total number of people living below the poverty line , defined as living on US $ 11 or less per month , in Delhi were 1 @,@ 149 @,@ 000 , or 8 @.@ 23 % of the total population , compared to 27 @.@ 5 % of India as a whole . 52 % of Delhi residents live in slums without basic services like water , electricity , sanitation , sewage system or proper housing . In 2005 , Delhi accounted for the highest percentage ( 16 @.@ 2 % ) of the crimes reported in 35 Indian cities with populations of one million or more . The city has the highest rate of kidnapping and abduction cases with 9 @.@ 3 % ; the national rate is 2 @.@ 2 % . Delhi accounts for 15 @.@ 4 % of crime against women in Indian cities . 
 According to the Centre for the Study of Developing Societies , Delhi has an estimated 40 % Forward caste voters . Brahmin voters have the biggest share among them , with 12 % voters , followed by Punjabi <unk> ( 7 % ) , Rajputs ( 7 % ) , Vaishyas ( 6 % ) , and others ( 8 % ) . Jat community , which mostly live in the rural areas of outer Delhi , constitute around 5 % of Delhi 's population while the Other Backward Classes ( <unk> ) & the Dalits constitute 18 % and 17 % respectively . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Delhi 's culture has been influenced by its lengthy history and historic association as the capital of India . This is exemplified by many significant monuments in the city . Delhi is also identified as the location of Indraprastha , the ancient capital of the Pandavas . The Archaeological Survey of India recognises 1200 heritage buildings and 175 monuments as national heritage sites . In the Old City , the Mughals and the Turkic rulers constructed several architecturally significant buildings , such as the Jama Masjid – India 's largest mosque built in 1656 and the Red Fort . Three World Heritage Sites – the Red Fort , Qutab Minar and Humayun 's Tomb – are located in Delhi . Other monuments include the India Gate , the Jantar Mantar – an 18th @-@ century astronomical observatory – and the Purana Qila – a 16th @-@ century fortress . The Laxminarayan temple , Akshardham temple , the Bahá 'í Lotus temple and the ISKCON temple are examples of modern architecture . Raj Ghat and associated memorials houses memorials of Mahatma Gandhi and other notable personalities . New Delhi houses several government buildings and official residences reminiscent of British colonial architecture , including the Rashtrapati Bhavan , the Secretariat , Rajpath , the Parliament of India and Vijay Chowk . Safdarjung 's Tomb is an example of the Mughal gardens style . Some regal <unk> ( palatial residences ) are in the Old City . 
 Lotus Temple , is a Bahá 'í House of Worship completed in 1986 . Notable for its <unk> shape , it serves as the Mother Temple of the Indian subcontinent and has become a prominent attraction in the city . The Lotus Temple has won numerous architectural awards and been featured in hundreds of newspaper and magazine articles . Like all other Bahá 'í Houses of Worship , is open to all regardless of religion , or any other distinction , as emphasised in Bahá 'í texts . The Bahá 'í laws emphasise that the spirit of the House of Worship be that it is a gathering place where people of all religions may worship God without denominational restrictions . The Bahá 'í laws also stipulate that only the holy scriptures of the Bahá 'í Faith and other religions can be read or chanted inside in any language ; while readings and prayers can be set to music by choirs , no musical instruments can be played inside . Furthermore , no sermons can be delivered , and there can be no ritualistic ceremonies practised . 
 Chandni Chowk , a 17th @-@ century market , is one of the most popular shopping areas in Delhi for jewellery and <unk> saris . Delhi 's arts and crafts include , <unk> – an embroidery done with gold thread – and <unk> – the art of enamelling . 
 = = = Festivals = = = 
 Delhi 's association and geographic proximity to the capital , New Delhi , has amplified the importance of national events and holidays like Republic Day , Independence Day ( 15 August ) and Gandhi Jayanti . On Independence Day , the Prime Minister addresses the nation from the Red Fort . Most <unk> celebrate the day by flying kites , which are considered a symbol of freedom . The Republic Day Parade is a large cultural and military parade showcasing India 's cultural diversity and military strength . Over the centuries , Delhi has become known for its composite culture , and a festival that symbolises this is the Phool Walon Ki Sair , which takes place in September . Flowers and <unk> – fans embroidered with flowers – are offered to the shrine of 13th century Sufi saint Khwaja Bakhtiyar Kaki and the <unk> temple , both situated in Mehrauli . 
 Religious festivals include Diwali ( the festival of lights ) , Mahavir Jayanti , Guru Nanak 's Birthday , Raksha Bandhan , Durga Puja , Holi , <unk> , Chauth , Krishna <unk> , Maha Shivratri , Eid ul @-@ Fitr , Moharram and Buddha Jayanti . The Qutub Festival is a cultural event during which performances of musicians and dancers from all over India are showcased at night , with the Qutub Minar as a backdrop . Other events such as Kite Flying Festival , International Mango Festival and Vasant Panchami ( the Spring Festival ) are held every year in Delhi . The Auto Expo , Asia 's largest auto show , is held in Delhi biennially . The New Delhi World Book Fair , held biennially at the Pragati Maidan , is the second largest exhibition of books in the world . Delhi is often regarded as the " Book Capital " of India because of high readership . India International Trade Fair ( <unk> ) , organised by <unk> is the biggest cultural and shopping fair of Delhi which takes place in November each year and is visited by more than 15 lakh people . 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 As India 's national capital and centuries old Mughal capital , Delhi influenced the food habits of its residents and is where Mughlai cuisine originated . Along with Indian cuisine , a variety of international cuisines are popular among the residents . The dearth of food habits among the city 's residents created a unique style of cooking which became popular throughout the world , with dishes such as <unk> , biryani , tandoori . The city 's classic dishes include butter chicken , <unk> chaat , chaat , dahi vada , <unk> , gol <unk> , <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> and lassi . 
 The fast living habits of Delhi 's people has motivated the growth of street food outlets . A trend of dining at local <unk> is popular among the residents . High profile restaurants have gained popularity in recent years , among the popular restaurants are the Karim Hotel , the Punjab Grill and Bukhara . The Gali <unk> Wali ( the street of fried bread ) is a street in Chandni Chowk particularly for food eateries since the 1870s . Almost the entire street is occupied by fast food stalls or street vendors . It has nearly become a tradition that almost every prime minister of India has visited the street to eat <unk> at least once . Other Indian cuisines are also available in this area even though the street specialises in north Indian food . 
 = = Education = = 
 Private schools in Delhi – which use either English or Hindi as the language of instruction – are affiliated to one of three administering bodies , the Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations ( CISCE ) , the Central Board for Secondary Education ( <unk> ( CBSE ) ) or the National Institute of Open Schooling ( NIOS ) . In 2004 – 05 , approximately 15 @.@ 29 lakh ( 1 @.@ 529 million ) students were enrolled in primary schools , 8 @.@ 22 lakh ( 0 @.@ 822 million ) in middle schools and 6 @.@ 69 lakh ( 0 @.@ 669 million ) in secondary schools across Delhi . Female students represented 49 % of the total enrolment . The same year , the Delhi government spent between 1 @.@ 58 % and 1 @.@ 95 % of its gross state domestic product on education . 
 Schools and higher educational institutions in Delhi are administered either by the Directorate of Education , the NCT government or private organisations . In 2006 , Delhi had 165 colleges , five medical colleges and eight engineering colleges , seven major universities and nine deemed universities . 
 Delhi Technological University ( formerly Delhi College of Engineering ) , Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology , Netaji Subhas Institute of Technology , Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University and National Law University , Delhi are the only state universities . University of Delhi , Jawaharlal Nehru University and Jamia Millia Islamia are the central universities , and Indira Gandhi National Open University is for distance education . 
 As of 2008 , about 16 % of all Delhi residents possessed at least a college graduate degree . 
 = = Media = = 
 As the capital of India , Delhi is the focus of political reportage , including regular television broadcasts of Parliament sessions . Many national media agencies , including the state @-@ owned Press Trust of India , Media Trust of India and Doordarshan , is based in the city . Television programming includes two free terrestrial television channels offered by Doordarshan , and several Hindi , English and regional @-@ language cable channels offered by multi system operators . Satellite television has yet to gain a large quantity of subscribers in the city . 
 Print journalism remains a popular news medium in Delhi . The city 's Hindi newspapers include <unk> Times , Hindustan Dainik , Punjab <unk> , Pavitra Bharat , Dainik Jagran , Dainik Bhaskar , Amar Ujala - Delhi and Dainik <unk> . Amongst the English language newspapers , The Hindustan Times , with a daily circulation of over a million copies , is the single largest daily . Other major English newspapers include Times of India , The Hindu , Indian Express , Business Standard , The Pioneer , The Statesman , Italic text and The Asian Age <unk> Story ( Daily ) . Regional language newspapers include the Malayalam daily Malayala Manorama and the Tamil dailies Dinamalar and Dinakaran . 
 Radio is a less popular mass medium in Delhi , although FM radio has gained popularity since the inauguration of several new stations in 2006 . A number of state @-@ owned and private radio stations broadcast from Delhi . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Delhi has hosted many major international sporting events , including the first and also the ninth Asian Games , the 2010 Hockey World Cup , the 2010 Commonwealth Games and the 2011 Cricket World Cup . Delhi lost bidding for the 2014 Asian Games , and considered making a bid for the 2020 Summer Olympics . However , sports minister Manohar Singh Gill later stated that funding infrastructure would come before a 2020 bid . There are indications of a possible 2028 bid . 
