 Parasaurolophus walkeri is known from one specimen which might contain a pathology . The skeleton shows a v @-@ shaped gap or notch in the vertebrae at the base of the neck . Originally thought to be pathologic , Parks published a second interpretation of this , as a ligament attachment to support the head . The crest would attach to the gap via muscles or ligaments , and be used to support the head while bearing a frill , like predicted to exist in some hadrosaurids . One other possibility , is that during preparation , the specimen was damaged , creating the possible pathology . The notch , however , is still considered more likely to be a pathology , even though some illustrations of Parasaurolophus restore the skin flap . 
 Another possible pathology was noticed by Parks , and from around the notch . In the fourth , fifth , and sixth vertebrae , directly anterior to the notch , the neural spines were damaged . The fourth had an obvious fracture , with the other two possessing a swelling at the base of the break . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 = = = Alberta = = = 
 Parasaurolophus walkeri , from the Dinosaur Park Formation , was a member of a diverse and well @-@ documented fauna of prehistoric animals , including well @-@ known dinosaurs such as the horned Centrosaurus , Chasmosaurus , and Styracosaurus ; fellow duckbills Gryposaurus and Corythosaurus ; tyrannosaurid Gorgosaurus ; and armored Edmontonia , Euoplocephalus and Dyoplosaurus . It was a rare constituent of this fauna . The Dinosaur Park Formation is interpreted as a low @-@ relief setting of rivers and floodplains that became more swampy and influenced by marine conditions over time as the Western Interior Seaway transgressed westward . The climate was warmer than present @-@ day Alberta , without frost , but with wetter and drier seasons . Conifers were apparently the dominant canopy plants , with an understory of ferns , tree ferns , and angiosperms . 
 Some of the less common hadrosaurs in the Dinosaur Park Formation of Dinosaur Provincial Park , such as Parasaurolophus , may represent the remains of individuals who died while migrating through the region . They might also have had a more upland habitat where they may have nested or fed . The presence of Parasaurolophus and Kritosaurus in northern latitude fossil sites may represent faunal exchange between otherwise distinct northern and southern biomes in Late Cretaceous North America . Both taxa are uncommon outside of the southern biome , where , along with Pentaceratops , they are predominate members of the fauna . 
 = = = New Mexico = = = 
 In the Fruitland Formation of New Mexico , P. cyrtocristatus shared its habitat with other ornithischians and theropods . Specifically , its contemporaries were the ceratopsian Pentaceratops sternbergii ; the pachycephalosaur Stegoceras novomexicanum ; and some unidentified fossils belonging to Tyrannosauridae , ? Ornithomimus , ? Troodontidae , ? Saurornitholestes langstoni , ? Struthiomimus , Ornithopoda , ? Chasmosaurus , ? Corythosaurus , Hadrosaurinae , Hadrosauridae , and Ceratopsidae . When Parasaurolophus existed , the Fruitland Formation was swampy , positioned in the lowlands , and close to the shore of the Cretaceous Interior Seaway . The lowermost part of the Fruitland Formation is just younger than 75 @.@ 56 ± 0 @.@ 41 mya , with the uppermost <unk> dating to 74 @.@ 55 ± 0 @.@ 22 mya . 
 Existing slightly later than the species from the Fruitland Formation , P. tubicen is also found in New Mexico , in the Kirtland Formation . Numerous vertebrate groups are from this formation , including fishes , crurotarsans , ornithischians , saurischians , pterosaurs , and turtles . The fishes are represented by the two species Melvius <unk> and <unk> <unk> . The crurotarsans include <unk> montana and <unk> <unk> . Ornithischians from the formation are represented by the hadrosaurids Anasazisaurus horneri , Naashoibitosaurus ostromi , Kritosaurus navajovius , and P. tubicen ; the ankylosaurids <unk> minor and Nodocephalosaurus <unk> ; the ceratopsians Pentaceratops sternbergii and Titanoceratops <unk> ; and the pachycephalosaurs Stegoceras novomexicanum and Sphaerotholus goodwini . <unk> include the tyrannosaurid Bistahieversor <unk> ; the ornithomimid Ornithomimus sp . ; and the troodontid " Saurornitholestes " robustus . One pterosaur is known , named <unk> <unk> . Turtles are fairly plentiful , and are known from Denazinemys nodosa , Basilemys nobilis , <unk> baueri , <unk> <unk> and Thescelus <unk> . Unidentified taxa are known , including the <unk> ? Leidyosuchus , and the theropods ? Struthiomimus , Troodontidae and Tyrannosauridae . The beginning of the Kirtland Formation dates to 74 @.@ 55 ± 0 @.@ 22 mya , with the formation ending at around 73 @.@ 05 ± 0 @.@ 25 mya . 
 = = = Utah = = = 
 Argon @-@ argon radiometric dating indicates that the Kaiparowits Formation was deposited between 76 @.@ 6 and 74 @.@ 5 million years ago , during the Campanian stage of the Late Cretaceous period . During the Late Cretaceous period , the site of the Kaiparowits Formation was located near the western shore of the Western Interior Seaway , a large inland sea that split North America into two landmasses , Laramidia to the west and Appalachia to the east . The plateau where dinosaurs lived was an ancient floodplain dominated by large channels and abundant wetland peat swamps , ponds and lakes , and was bordered by highlands . The climate was wet and humid , and supported an abundant and diverse range of organisms . This formation contains one of the best and most continuous records of Late Cretaceous terrestrial life in the world . 
 Parasaurolophus shared its paleoenvironment with other dinosaurs , such as dromaeosaurid theropods , the troodontid Talos <unk> , ornithomimids like Ornithomimus velox , tyrannosaurids like Albertosaurus and Teratophoneus , armored ankylosaurids , the duckbilled hadrosaur Gryposaurus monumentensis , the ceratopsians Utahceratops <unk> , Nasutoceratops <unk> and Kosmoceratops richardsoni and the oviraptorosaurian <unk> giganteus . <unk> present in the Kaiparowits Formation included <unk> ( sharks and rays ) , frogs , salamanders , turtles , lizards and crocodilians . A variety of early mammals were present including multituberculates , marsupials , and <unk> . 
 = Action of 24 June 1801 = 
 The Action of 24 June 1801 was a minor naval engagement during the French Revolutionary Wars . A British ship of the line , HMS Swiftsure under Captain Benjamin Hallowell was passing westwards through the Southern Mediterranean near Cape Derna when it encountered a much larger French squadron under Contre @-@ Amiral Honoré Ganteaume that was also returning westwards after a failed attempt to reinforce the besieged French garrison in Egypt . Although Hallowell immediately recognised the danger his vessel was in and turned to flee , the French ships were much faster and soon closed with his ship . At 14 : 00 , three French vessels were within long gunshot and Hallowell decided that his only hope of escape lay in disabling the three ships before the rest of the French squadron could join the engagement . Turning towards the enemy , Hallowell found that his sluggish ship was unable to respond rapidly to French manoeuvres and within two hours Swiftsure was surrounded . Threatened with complete destruction and unable to escape , the British captain surrendered . 
 The action was a rare victory for the French in the Mediterranean Sea , which had been largely under British control since the French Mediterranean Fleet had been destroyed in 1798 at the Battle of the Nile . This had trapped the French army in Egypt on the African side of the Mediterranean , and all efforts to reinforce and resupply them had ended in failure , including three separate expeditions by Ganteaume 's squadron . Swiftsure was later commissioned into the French Navy and fought at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805 , where the ship was recaptured by the British and rejoined the Royal Navy . Hallowell was subsequently court martialed for the loss of his ship , but was honourably acquitted and returned to naval service . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 1 August 1798 , during the Battle of the Nile , a British fleet under Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Horatio Nelson destroyed the French Mediterranean Fleet at Aboukir Bay on the Egyptian coast . The battle completely reversed the strategic situation in the Mediterranean : British forces had evacuated the region in 1796 after the Treaty of San Ildefonso brought Spain into the war on the French side , but they were now able to return in large numbers . As French maritime lines of communication were cut , the French Armée d 'Orient under General Napoleon Bonaparte became trapped in Egypt . Unable to return to Europe by sea , the army attempted and failed to pass overland through Palestine and was subsequently abandoned by Bonaparte , who returned to France with his closest advisors in the frigates Muiron and Carrère in November 1799 , promising to send reinforcements to the forces that remained in North Africa . 
 By 1801 , the Armée d 'Orient was on the verge of collapse . No supplies or support had arrived from France , their commander Jean Baptiste Kléber had been assassinated , and a British invasion was impending . Frustrated at his failure to assist his men in Egypt , Bonaparte ordered a squadron of ships of the line to sail from Brest in January 1801 under the command of Contre @-@ Amiral Honoré Ganteaume . This force was instructed to sail to the Eastern Mediterranean and land over 5 @,@ 000 troops at Alexandria . In February , Ganteaume 's force reached Toulon , the admiral concerned that his ships would be outnumbered further east where the British expeditionary force was gathering . Bonaparte sent him back to sea to complete the operation but again he returned , driven back by bad weather and a patrolling British squadron off Sicily under Rear @-@ Admiral Sir John Borlase Warren . On 27 April Ganteaume made a third attempt to reach Egypt , and reached Benghazi before pressure from larger British forces under Admiral Lord Keith drove his squadron back westwards . On 24 June , Ganteaume 's ships were retreating along the North African coast , passing close to Cape Derna . 
 Also in the region was the British 74 @-@ gun ship of the line HMS Swiftsure under Captain Benjamin Hallowell , a veteran of the Battle of the Nile three years earlier . Swiftsure was passing slowly along the North African coast after being detached from Keith 's fleet to join Warren 's squadron off Malta , escorting a small convoy en route . Hallowell 's ship was understrength as more than 80 men had been removed from the ship for service in Egyptian waters and illness rendered another 59 unfit for duty , while the vessel itself was in a poor state of repair and leaking badly . Progress had been slow , and a northeasterly wind had also significantly delayed Hallowell 's passage . When he learned from a passing vessel that there was a French squadron in the region , he ordered the convoy to separate and sailed for Malta alone in an effort to join Warren more rapidly and warn him of Ganteaume 's return . At 03 : 30 on 24 June his lookouts sighted sails to the southwest . Hallowell immediately assumed that the distant ships were the enemy and he turned away from the French and tacked into the wind . By 05 : 30 , lookouts on the nearest French ships , the ships of the line Jean Bart and Constitution had spotted the distant British vessel and were ordered to give chase . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The French ships followed Swiftsure by tacking into the wind and a complicated chase developed , with Jean Bart and Constitution maintaining the pressure on the slow moving British vessel , while the rest of Ganteaume 's squadron used the prevailing wind to push far ahead of the ongoing chase before tacking at 08 : 00 across Hallowell 's intended course . Unless Hallowell could escape the trap , his ship would be caught between the two French divisions and overwhelmed . For six hours Hallowell continued his efforts to escape , but the French ships were too fast , Ganteaume 's force passing some distance ahead of the British ship and then turning back towards him so that by 14 : 00 Swiftsure was at serious risk of being surrounded . Hallowell determined that his only option was to attempt to drive though those ships of Ganteaume 's division that blocked his passage to leeward , the ships of the line Indivisible ( under Pierre @-@ Paulin <unk> ) and Dix @-@ <unk> ( under Louis @-@ Marie Le <unk> ) and the frigate Créole . 
 At 15 : 00 , with the detached division rapidly approaching from astern , Hallowell turned his ship towards the ships sailing ahead of Swiftsure and attempted to pass across the stern of the rearmost ship in an effort to rake and disable it , creating enough confusion to mask an escape . The manoeuvere was recognised by the French captains , and all three vessels turned to face the British ship as it approached . By 15 : 30 the ships of the line had opened a mutual fire , during which the faster French warships were able to easily <unk> the lumbering Swiftsure . At 16 : 37 , after more than an hour of fruitless firing at long range , the arrival of Jean Bart and Constitution within gunshot convinced Hallowell that further resistance was hopeless and he struck his flag to signal his surrender . 
 Swiftsure had taken significant damage to its masts , rigging and sails during the exchange of fire , a deliberate ploy by the French captains to limit the ship 's movement and prevent its escape . This had minimised casualties on deck by distracting the gunfire , and as a result only two men were killed and eight wounded , two of whom subsequently also died . French losses were more severe , with four casualties on Indivisible and six killed and 23 wounded on Dix @-@ <unk> , although neither ship was significantly damaged in the action . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Ganteaume 's fleet remained off the Cape Derna for the next six days , performing repairs to the captured vessel to make it seaworthy . Detachments of sailors were taken from all of the ships in the squadron and transferred to the prize , and on 30 June Ganteaume 's force was ready to sail northwest once again , eventually reaching Toulon without further incident on 22 July . Ganteaume used the capture of Swiftsure to excuse the failure of his effort to reinforce Egypt , which was invaded and captured by a British expeditionary force in the spring and summer of 1801 . While in captivity , Hallowell wrote a letter that was published in Britain praising the treatment he and his men had received while prisoners of war under Ganteaume , and he and his officers were released on parole the following month . On 18 August they faced a court martial on board HMS Genereux at Port Mahon in Minorca to investigate the loss of their ship , and were all honourably cleared of any blame . He was also praised for detaching the convoy , which otherwise might have also been lost . Hallowell subsequently returned to naval service in 1803 at the start the Napoleonic Wars , operating in the Caribbean and Mediterranean and eventually becoming a rear @-@ admiral in 1811 . Swiftsure , one of only five British ships of the line to be captured by the French during the entire war , was subsequently commissioned into the French Navy and remained in service for the next four years until recaptured at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805 . 
 = Burton v. United States = 
 Burton v. United States is the name of two appeals to the Supreme Court of the United States by Senator Joseph R. Burton ( R @-@ KS ) following his conviction for compensated representation of a party in a proceeding in which the United States was interested : Burton v. United States , 196 U.S. 283 ( 1905 ) and Burton v. United States , 202 U.S. 344 ( 1906 ) . Burton was convicted of acting as counsel to Rialto Grain and Securities Company in the United States Postmaster General 's investigation of Rialto for mail fraud . 
 On Burton 's first appeal , the Supreme Court reversed his convictions because venue and vicinage could not be proper in the Eastern District of Missouri on the sole ground that Burton 's bank sent the check to St. Louis after he cashed it . Further , the Court cited the prejudicial refusal of jury instructions . After Burton was retried and convicted , the Court affirmed , inter alia , on the ground that the agreement between Burton and Rialto had occurred in St. Louis . 
 Burton was the first defendant convicted under § 1782 of the Revised Statutes , 40 years after its 1864 enactment . Burton and his supporters argued that he was selectively prosecuted , on the orders of President Theodore Roosevelt , for political reasons . Burton also became the first member of the United States Senate to be convicted of public corruption , in fact the first member of the Senate to be convicted of any crime . The next year , Senator John H. Mitchell ( R @-@ OR ) was convicted under the same statute for his role in the Oregon land fraud scandal . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Rialto Co . ' s matter = = = 
 In 1872 , Congress created the crime of mail fraud . Rev. Stat . § <unk> authorized the United States Postmaster General , " upon evidence satisfactory to him " that mail fraud was being committed , to instruct the post master at the fraudster 's local post office to return registered mail addressed to the fraudster to the sender with the word " Fraudulent " written or stamped on the envelope . In 1895 , this authority was extended to all mail . Further , Rev. Stat . § <unk> authorized the Postmaster to also bar suspected fraudsters from cashing postal money orders . 
 The Rialto Grain and Securities Company , whose principal place of business was in St. Louis , Missouri , was under investigation by the Postmaster for mail fraud . The Postmaster had received two complaints and forwarded them for investigation on November 7 , 1902 . State courts were also investigating complaints from investors against Rialto . Hugh C. Dennis , the President of Rialto , and other officers had been criminally indicted , but ( at the time of Burton 's indictment ) none had been convicted . As of Burton 's indictment , Dennis had been once acquitted in federal court and four indictments were pending against him in state courts . For a time , Rialto 's offices had been closed due to a judicial attachment by its creditors . 
 = = = Burton 's representation = = = 
 That same month — while the two were in Illinois , en route from St. Louis to Chicago — former state judge Thomas B. Harlan , the general counsel of Rialto , arranged to hire Senator Joseph R. Burton ( R @-@ KS ) , a lawyer , to appear before the Postmaster as counsel for Rialto in connection with these investigations for a monthly salary of $ 500 . When the general counsel returned to St. Louis on November 18 , he communicated Burton 's offer to Rialto and Rialto accepted . Rialto notified Burton of its acceptance by telegram to him in Washington that same day . 
 Burton informed Rialto by mail that he had learned of the two complaints from the Postmaster , arranged for himself to be notified of any future complaints , and arranged to represent Rialto in a hearing before the Postmaster before any sanctions would issue . Burton continued to represent Rialto before the Postmaster , and draw his monthly salary , for five months . Burton 's intervention was successful , and the Postmaster 's investigation was ceased without the entry of a fraud order . 
 Rialto paid Burton by monthly checks for the first four months . Burton received the first check on November 22 . Burton <unk> and deposited the checks at Riggs National Bank in Washington , D.C. , which in turn sent the checks to Rialto 's bank , the Commonwealth Trust Company in St. Louis , Missouri , for payment . The last $ 500 was paid in cash to Burton in person , at Rialto 's office in St. Louis , on March 26 , 1903 , after which Burton 's representation of Rialto terminated . 
 = = = Indictment = = = 
 A federal grand jury in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri was already investigating the Brooks Brokerage Company , with which Dennis , the President of Rialto , was associated . Witnesses against Burton at the grand jury included Chief Post Office Inspector William E. Cochran , Dennis , and W.B. <unk> , the Vice President of Rialto . About two weeks before Burton 's indictment , the grand jury came into possession of the checks from Rialto to Burton . 
 Burton was indicted on January 24 , 1904 , in the Eastern District of Missouri , on nine counts of violating Rev. Stat . § 1782 . Section 1782 ( enacted 1864 ) provided , in relevant part : 
 No Senator . . . after his election and during his continuance in office . . . shall receive or agree to receive any compensation whatever , directly or indirectly , for any services rendered , or to be rendered , to any person , either by himself or another , in relation to any proceeding . . . controversy . . . or other matter or thing in which the United States is a party , or directly or indirectly interested , before any Department . . . whatever . Every person offending against this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor , and shall be imprisoned not more than two years , and fined not more than ten thousand dollars , and shall , moreover , by conviction therefor , be rendered forever thereafter incapable of holding any office of honor , trust , or profit under the Government of the United States . 
 The first and second counts of the indictment pertained to the receipt of the final cash payment from Rialto with reference to two separate interests of the United States . The third count pertained to receipt of the final cash payment from Mahaney . The sixth , seventh , eighth , and ninth counts of the indictment pertained to the receipt of the four check for the first four months . 
 Burton arguably could not have been arrested at the time of his indictment because Congress was in session . Article One provides that Senators and Representatives " shall in all Cases , except Treason , Felony and Breach of the Peace , be privileged from Arrest during their Attendance at the Session of their respective Houses , and in going to and returning from the same . " But , Burton voluntarily surrendered . On January 24 , Burton and his wife departed for St. Louis . 
 = = = Trial and conviction = = = 
 Judge Elmer Bragg Adams , sitting as the United States Circuit Court for the Eastern District of Missouri , presided over Burton 's trial . Former state judge Chester H. Krum appeared as Burton 's attorney . Assistant U.S. Attorney Horace Dyer acted as prosecutor . 
 In his opening statement , Krum argued that Burton had only agreed to act as general counsel and to allow his name to be placed in Rialto 's literature , and that the agreement explicitly provided that Burton would never represent Rialto before any federal agency . 
 On March 23 , the prosecution began its case in chief . Post Office Department employees identified the letters of complaint received against Rialto . Ernest H. Kastor , of a St. Louis advertising firm , testified that he introduced Burton to Dennis and Harlan in November 1902 . Witnesses said that the agreement was as Krum described and that the pay was agreed as $ 2 @,@ 500 in $ 500 installments . Dyer read into evidence the letter from Burton to Rialto . 
 The prosecution 's case continued on March 24 . Inspector Cochran testified that Burton had attempted to discuss the case with him the day his indictment was made public . Cochran refused to discuss it . Reporter J.H. <unk> testified that he had interviewed Burton that day , and that Burton had denied practicing before the Post Office . Hector <unk> , the Controller of Rialto , testified to a meeting between Mahaney and Burton , where Burton 's representation was ended because the matter before the Post Office had concluded . Inspector Cochran was recalled to state that his conversation with Burton took place before <unk> 's interview . Further , Cochran testified that , on February 5 , 1902 , Burton had told him that he wished to represent Rialto before the Department for a fee , having been assured by other Senators that such conduct was common and legal . Burton also told Cochran that he needed to repay a disputed debt of $ 70 @,@ 000 . Finally , Mahaney testified that , on the day he personally paid Burton $ 500 , Burton advised Rialto to destroy its correspondence with him and that two such letters were destroyed . Thereafter , the prosecution rested . 
 The defense case commenced on March 25 . The third count of the indictment was quashed as duplicative with the first . Burton testified that he had accepted Rialto 's employment due to personal financial reversals . Burton testified that his duties would include acting as a criminal defense attorney for Dennis , but would not include any activity in Washington . Burton testified that he received notice of his appointment from Harlan on November 20 , 1902 , and that he had only contacted the Post Office to notify them of his intent to defend Dennis in a criminal case . He explained that he only asked to be notified of complaints against Rialto so that he could terminate his association with them should any arise . 
 After the jury returned deadlocked 11 @-@ 1 , Judge Adams delivered an Allen charge . Soon afterwards , the jury returned a verdict that failed to address the third count in the indictment , so the Judge Allen ordered the jury to return to deliberations without reading the verdict . On March 28 , 1904 , after forty @-@ one total hours of deliberation , the jury convicted Burton on five counts — counts one , two , six , eight , and nine — but acquitted on count three . Burton 's convictions would have authorized a maximum sentence of 10 years imprisonment and a $ 50 @,@ 000 fine . 
 Burton asked that the jury be polled , and each stated that the verdict was his own . Burton moved for a new trial . Judge Adams indicated that he would accept a <unk> bond of $ 5 @,@ 000 , and Burton was not sentenced . Burton became the first defendant ever convicted under § 1782 , more than 40 years after its enactment . 
 Burton had a right to appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit , but instead opted for a direct appeal to the Supreme Court . On July 2 , Judge Adams certified Burton 's direct appeal on the grounds that Burton was convicted of an " infamous offense . " Burton posted a $ 10 @,@ 000 bond . On July 11 , Justice Brewer allowed the direct appeal . 
 = = Burton I ( 1905 ) = = 
 Before the Supreme Court , on November 30 and December 1 , 1904 , Burton was represented by ( former judge ) John Forrest Dillon and ( future Solicitor General ) Frederick William Lehmann at oral argument , with Harry Hubbard and W.H. Rossington also on the brief . Solicitor General Henry M. Hoyt represented the United States . 
 On January 16 , 1905 , the Court overturned Burton 's convictions . 
 = = = Sufficiency of the indictment and the evidence = = = 
 Without any discussion of the merits , 5 @-@ 4 , the Court held that the indictment stated offenses under § 1782 and that the evidence was sufficient for the jury to have convicted Burton . Justices Harlan , Brown , McKenna , Holmes , and Day were in the majority ; Chief Justice Fuller , and Justices Peckham , Brewer , and White , were in dissent . 
 = = = Venue and vicinage = = = 
 Article III provides that : " The Trial of all Crimes , except in Cases of Impeachment , shall be by Jury ; and such Trial shall be held in the State where the said Crimes shall have been committed . " The Vicinage Clause of the Sixth Amendment provides that : " In all criminal prosecutions , the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial , by an impartial jury of the State and district wherein the crime shall have been committed , which district shall have been previously ascertained by law . . . . " 
 Burton argued that both constitutional provisions were violated because the crime had not occurred in the Eastern District of Missouri . Justice Peckham , writing for the entire Court except for Justice Harlan in dissent , reversed Burton 's convictions on these grounds . The Court held that Burton 's negotiation of the check in Washington , D.C. did not constitute conduct by Burton in St. Louis ( the site of the <unk> bank ) . In other words , whatever the Washington , D.C. bank did with the check afterwards , it did for itself , not as Burton 's agent . " From the time of the delivery of the check by the defendant to the bank it became the owner of the check ; it could have torn it up or thrown it in the fire or made any other use or disposition of it which it chose , and no right of defendant would have been infringed . " Thus , the Court held that it was error for the trial judge to have submitted the question of the " understanding . . . between the defendant and the bank " to the jury . In support of this argument , the Court cited several of its own precedents concerning negotiable instrument law , as well as cases from the House of Lords and the courts of New York and Massachusetts . 
 In a single paragraph , the Court rejected the application of the continuing offense doctrine , which had been codified in Rev. Stat . § 731 . " This is not a case of the commencement of a crime in one district and its completion in another , so that under the statute the court in either district has jurisdiction . There was no beginning of the offense in Missouri . The payment of the money was in Washington , and there was no commencement of that offense when the officer of the Rialto Company sent the checks from St. Louis to defendant . The latter did not thereby begin an offense in Missouri . " 
 Justice Harlan dissented on this ground . " As between the accused and his client , " Harlan argued , " he was not , in any true sense , compensated for the services alleged to have been rendered in violation of the statute , until by payment of the checks by the St. Louis bank he was relieved of all liability to the Riggs National Bank arising from his <unk> the checks to it . " Harlan concluded that the majority had " sacrificed substance to mere form , " illustrating the Latin maxim " Qui <unk> in <unk> <unk> in <unk> . " 
 = = = Refused jury instructions = = = 
 By the same 8 @-@ 1 majority , the Court found a separate and independent ground for the reversal of Burton 's convictions . Burton had requested certain jury instructions , which the trial judge had delivered . But , along with the requested instructions , the trial judge had stated that : " [ These instructions were ] asked by counsel for the defendant to give certain declarations here , and while I think they have , in the main , been covered by the charge , yet I will give them to you . . . . These are abstract propositions of law , which I give in connection with the charge , as perhaps more fully amplifying it . I am willing to give them , inasmuch as they are asked , and they contain general propositions of law . " 
 After the jury returned deadlocked 11 @-@ 1 , the trial judge delivered an Allen charge . At this point , the judge refused Burton 's request to instruct the jury that the earlier requested instructions stood on the same footing as the other instructions . The Court held that this was reversible error . 
 Harlan also dissented from this ground for reversal , arguing that Burton was not substantially prejudiced . 
 Further , the Court disapproved of the judge 's having asked the jury for the proportions of their deadlock ( even though he did not ask how many were for conviction and how many were for acquittal ) . In Brasfield v. United States ( 1926 ) , citing Burton , the Court held that such was reversible error , regardless of whether the defendant objected in the trial court . 
 = = Retrial = = 
 Burton was <unk> , still in the circuit court Eastern District of Missouri , on April 13 , 1905 , and arraigned on June 4 before Judge John Henry Rogers , of the Western District of Arkansas , sitting by designation . The new indictment had eight counts . The first , second , fourth , sixth , and eighth counts charged that Burton had agreed to receive compensation from Rialto . The third , fifth , and seventh counts charged that Burton had actually received compensation from Rialto . The counts different only in the interest of the United States which was alleged to have been involved in the matter . Counts four and five were dismissed before trial . Unlike the first indictment , the second alleged that Burton had received $ 500 in person in St. Louis . The first indictment alleged only compensated representation , the second indictment also alleged an agreement to do so . 
 While the indictment was pending , Burton was robbed in Chicago and his wallet was recovered in a mail box by postal employees . Before Burton 's second trial , the Department of Justice learned that Burton had also collected $ 14 @,@ 000 for representing the Chickasaw before the Interior Department : $ 5 @,@ 000 of which was paid directly to him , and $ 9 @,@ 000 of which was paid to his brother <unk> Burton . 
 The trial date was originally set for October 3 , and subpoenas to witnesses — many of whom resided in Washington , D.C. — issued on September 12 . Judge Willis Van Devanter ( a future Supreme Court justice ) , of the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit presided over Burton 's second trial . On November 20 , Assistant U.S. Attorney Dyer gave the opening statement for the prosecution and Lehmann for the defense . As in the first trial , Lehmann argued that Burton 's intent was to represent Dennis ( now deceased ) in a criminal case . 
 On November 21 , the prosecution introduced the letters , telegrams , and checks into evidence . On November 22 , Harland testified that Burton had stated : " I am not going to do anything inconsistent with my duty as a Senator . " Mahaney testified to the in @-@ person payment and the destruction of the letters at Burton 's request on March 22 , 1902 . Inspector Cochran testified that Burton represented Rialto before him . 
 On November 26 , 1905 , after two hours of deliberation , the jury convicted Burton on the six remaining counts : counts one , two , three , six , seven , and eight . Burton was sentenced on the sixth and seventh counts only ( because some of the counts involved the same transactions ) . Burton was sentenced to six months imprisonment in a county jail and a $ 2 @,@ 000 fine on the sixth count and six months imprisonment and a $ 500 fine on the seventh count . In addition , he was " rendered forever hereafter incapable of holding any office of honor , trust or profit under the Government of the United States . " 
 = = Burton II ( 1906 ) = = 
 The second time before the Court , on April 3 – 4 , 1906 , Burton was again represented by Dillon and Lehmann , plus Bailey P. Waggener , again with Hubbard and Rossington on the brief , plus W. Knox Haynes and W.P. Hackney . All together , Burton was represented by a team of ten lawyers , led by Dillon . Waggener delivered the argument in chief , assisted by Lehmann . Assistant Attorney General ( and future judge ) Charles Henry Robb represented the United States . 
 On May 21 , 1906 , the Supreme Court upheld Burton 's convictions . That same day , another of Burton 's lawyers , former Senator John Mellen Thurston , filed a petition for rehearing , which operated as a 60 day continuance , and in effect stayed the matter much longer because the Court was set to adjourn until October . 
 = = = Separation of powers = = = 
 Article One provides : " Each House shall be the Judge of the Elections , Returns and Qualifications of its own Members . . . . Each House may . . . punish its Members for disorderly Behavior , and , with the Concurrence of two @-@ thirds , expel a Member . " 
 Burton argued that § 1782 was an unconstitutional violation of the separation of powers because the Senate 's power to punish its members was exclusive . Burton 's brief compared the ban on legislators practicing before executive agencies to a ban on the President lobbying legislators for legislation . The New York Times called this " one of the most interesting efforts to get a new meaning out of the Constitution that has appeared for some time . " A later article noted that , " [ t ] he decision is especially interesting because of the large array of legal talent in the case and the ingenious argument made by Bailey Wagner [ sic ] of Topeka that the Senate is the judge of the qualifications of its own members . . . . " 
 The Court unanimously rejected this argument . The Court cited earlier laws prohibiting members of Congress from practicing before the United States Court of Claims and from entering into contracts with the United States . Further , the Court noted that " [ t ] he proper discharge of those duties does not require a Senator to appear before an executive Department in order to enforce his particular views , or the views of others , in respect of matters committed to that Department for determination . " 
 Burton also argued that that the provision rendering those convicted under § 1782 " incapable of holding any office of honor , trust or profit under the Government of the United States " unconstitutionally infringed on the Qualifications Clause . The Court dodged this question by holding that the provision would not bar a convicted defendant from serving in the Senate because Senators ( at the time ) were elected by the state legislatures . 
 = = = Interests of the United States = = = 
 Burton next argued that the indictment was insufficient because the Postmaster 's decision to return mail addressed to suspected fraudsters back to senders and to bar suspected fraudsters from cashing money orders was not a " proceeding . . . controversy . . . or other matter or thing in which the United States is . . . directly or indirectly interested . " The Court rejected this argument , 6 @-@ 3 . Although the Court admitted that the United States had no pecuniary interest in the proceeding , it argued : 
 The United States was the real party in interest on one side , while the Rialto Company was the real party in interest on the other side . If the Postmaster General did not represent the United States , whom did he represent ? . . . [ I ] t is , we think , a mistake to say that the United States was not interested , directly or indirectly , in protecting its property , that is , its mails and postal facilities , against improper and illegal use . . . . " 
 Justice Brewer , joined by Justices White and Peckham dissented on this point . They argued that the statute applied only to the pecuniary interests of the United States . These justices were among the four ( in addition to Chief Justice Fuller ) who would have held the indictment insufficient in Burton I , presumably for this reason . The dissenters argued that the majority 's interpretation would find the United States interested in any administrative proceeding , thus rendering the statutory words " before any Department , court martial , bureau , officer , or any civil , military , or naval commission whatever " to be mere <unk> . Further , the dissent cited the Reconstruction Era legislative history pointing towards a narrower interpretation . 
 = = = Sufficiency of the evidence = = = 
 Burton next argued that the evidence was insufficient to support his conviction . Reviewing the evidence , the Court rejected this argument . 
 = = = Separate offenses of agreeing and receiving = = = 
 Section 1782 provided that " No Senator . . . shall receive or agree to receive any compensation . . . . " Burton argued that he could not simultaneously be charged with separate offenses for agreeing to receive compensation and actually receiving compensation for the same transaction . The Court rejected this argument . The Court stated that Burton 's interpretation " does violence to [ the statute 's ] words , " emphasizing the word " or . " 
 Justice McKenna disagreed with this holding . Thus , he concurred only in the affirmance of the charges alleging receipt , not the charges alleging agreement . 
 = = = Double jeopardy = = = 
 Burton next argued that his prosecution violated the Double Jeopardy Clause . Specifically , Burton argued that his acquittal on the third count in the first trial barred his conviction on the third and seventh counts in the second trial . The Court rejected this argument . The Court held that the earlier and later counts did not describe the same offense because they named the payor as Mahaney and Rialto , respectively . 
 = = = Venue and vicinage = = = 
 Finally , Burton argued that the Eastern District of Missouri was an unconstitutional venue and vicinage ( an argument that the Court had accepted in Burton I ) . This time , the Court rejected the argument . The Court held that the agreement had occurred in St. Louis ( as the jury had been instructed that it was required to find ) based on Rialto 's acceptance in St. Louis , the telegram , and the letter . The Court bolstered this view by citation to its own and other precedents concerning offer and acceptance in contract law . The Court further cited its earlier precedents holding that the venue provision of Article III does not require the physical presence of the defendant in the forum state . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Burton remained a Senator while each of his appeals were pending . Allegedly , his colleagues made it known that they would move to expel him if he appeared in the Senate . However , Burton did appear in the Senate after his conviction . On April 6 , 1904 , Burton appeared to push for appropriations for the acquisition of land in the Adirondacks and Catskills . On January 22 , 1906 , Burton appeared in the Senate chamber again , for 30 seconds , in order to be eligible for $ 1 @,@ 000 in travel reimbursements from the federal government . 
 Burton 's term was due to expire on March 4 , 1907 . After his conviction was finally affirmed , a resolution to expel Burton from the Senate was referred to the United States Senate Committee on Privileges and Elections on May 22 , 1906 . Burton resigned from office on June 4 , 1906 , before the Senate could act . 
 Burton served five months of his six @-@ month sentence in the Iron County Jail in Ironton , Missouri . In March 1907 , he returned to Abilene . 
 = = Role of President Roosevelt = = 
 Contemporary rumor held that Burton 's indictment had been ordered by President Theodore Roosevelt . Although Joseph W. Folk , the Circuit Attorney for the City of St. Louis ( and future Governor of Missouri ) , had recently visited with the President and Attorney General , the New York Times reported that " there was not a word in either of those interviews about the Burton case . " 
 Burton himself alleged that Roosevelt had orchestrated his prosecution in March 23 , 1907 speech in Abilene , Kansas after his release from prison . Burton pointed out that his was the first prosecution under § 1782 and that numerous other public officials before him had potentially violated it , under the interpretation that prevailed in the Supreme Court . 
 Burton and Roosevelt had a complicated history . Burton , as a leader at the 1900 Republican National Convention , was perhaps instrumental in Roosevelt 's securing his party 's nomination . Roosevelt 's last appointment to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit ( whose jurisdiction , at the time , included appeals from Kansas ) had been William Cather Hook , a choice favored by Burton 's political opponents : Senator Chester I. Long ( R @-@ KS ) and Governor Willis J. Bailey ( R @-@ KS ) . When the next vacancy opened on the Eighth Circuit , Burton and his allies favored the appointment of Charles Blood Smith . D.W. Mulvane was unsuccessful in pressing Smith 's candidacy in a June 1903 meeting with Roosevelt . 
 Earlier that year , while accompanying Roosevelt on a visit to Kansas , Burton told Roosevelt about his project to create a reproduction of Jerusalem at the time of Christ 's birth for the St. Louis World 's Fair . Roosevelt gave Burton a letter praising the exhibit , which Burton in turn published by facsimile in a magazine advertisement for the sale of stock in the exhibit . The White House received a letter from the magazine inquiring into the authenticity of the letter on the same day that Mulvane returned for a second meeting to press Smith 's appointment . Roosevelt was enraged , demanded the return of the letter , and declared that " from now on Burton would be considered politically a Democratic Senator , as far as patronage is concerned . " " The President 's indignation knew no bounds . He had never been so grossly and humiliatingly deceived during his incumbency in office . " 
 Burton was also in a " long standing feud " with Fourth Assistant Postmaster ( and future Senator ) Joseph L. Bristow , whom Burton had lobbied Roosevelt ( and his predecessor , William McKinley ) to replace . Roosevelt refused to remove Bristow except for cause , and in any case refused to appoint one of Burton 's friends to replace him . 
 Another issue with which Burton clashed with Roosevelt was reciprocity with Cuba . Burton cited this issue in his Abilene speech . In order to force concessions from Roosevelt , Burton had joined with Senators from beet sugar states . Although Burton publicly spoke against a treaty with Cuba , he repeatedly privately informed Roosevelt that he would support the ratification of the treaty . According to the New York Times , " [ t ] he history of Burton 's manoeuvres at this time will never be fully told . " 
 = ( I 've Just Begun ) Having My Fun = 
 " ( I 've Just Begun ) Having My Fun " is a song by American recording artist Britney Spears , taken from her first greatest hits album Greatest Hits : My Prerogative ( 2004 ) . The song was produced by Bloodshy & Avant and originally recorded for In the Zone . It was released as a digital download on August 17 , 2004 , prior to the album 's release . The track has drawn comparisons to No Doubt 's single " Hella Good " as well as 1970s American funk bands . Lyrically , the songs refers to having a good time at a party . " ( I 've Just Begun ) Having My Fun " received mixed reviews from critics , some naming it one of the best songs in the compilation , while others dismissed its lyrical content . The song was featured on the soundtrack of the 2011 film Bridesmaids . 
 = = Background = = 
 " ( I 've Just Begun ) Having My Fun " was originally recorded for Spears 's fourth studio album , In the Zone ( 2003 ) . The song was written by Spears , Michelle Bell , Christian Karlsson , Pontus Winnberg , Henrik Jonback , and was produced by Bloodshy & Avant . The song was first included as a bonus track in the European version of the In the Zone DVD . In the United States , the track was a free download in the Wal @-@ Mart edition of In the Zone , due to an exclusive deal with Wal @-@ Mart and Sony Connect . When the deal ended in mid @-@ 2004 , Jive Records released the song on the iTunes Store and Rhapsody on August 17 , 2004 . " ( I 've Just Begun ) Having My Fun " peaked at number seven on the iTunes chart while it was speculated to be in the tracklist of Greatest Hits : My Prerogative . The song was featured on the soundtrack of the 2011 film Bridesmaids . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " ( I 've Just Begun ) Having My Fun " is composed in the key of G minor with 108 beats per minute . It has a dance @-@ oriented beat that has been compared by Jennifer Vineyard of MTV and Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic to No Doubt 's 2002 single " Hella Good " . Spears 's vocal range spans from the high @-@ tone of G3 to the low @-@ tone of Eb5 . The track features mainly guitar and bass , along with string arrangements and 1970s synthesizers reminiscent of Zapp and The Gap Band . Its lyrics refer to a make @-@ believe situation in which Spears describes an encounter with a man at a party . During the song , she declares to prefer having a good time rather than settling down . 
 = = Reception and chart performance = = 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic said " the In the Zone outtake [ ... ] betters most of the songs that were featured on the album " . Annabel Leathes of BBC Online commented that along with " Do Somethin ' " , they are " [ two ] robust , unreleased tracks [ that ] suggest , however , that she may still be churning out a few more <unk> before taking time out to sing lullabies to her brood " . Ann Powers of Blender magazine called the song " instantly forgettable and <unk> inaccurate , " while Mike McGuirk of Rhapsody said the song " is on a level with her best work , namely " I 'm a Slave 4 U " . " Louis Pattison of the New Musical Express stated that the lyrics " chime rather oddly with Britney ’ s much @-@ vaunted desire to start a family " . On the week of September 4 , 2004 , " ( I 've Just Begun ) Having My Fun " debuted at number 23 on Billboard Hot Digital Tracks , and fell to number 41 in the following . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Digital download 
 " ( I 've Just Begun ) Having My Fun " – 3 : 23 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for " ( I 've Just Begun ) Having My Fun " are taken from Greatest Hits : My Prerogative 's liner notes . 
 Songwriting – Britney Spears , Michelle Bell , Christian Karlsson , Pontus Winnberg , Henrik Jonback 
 Production – Bloodshy & Avant , Steven Lunt 
 Vocals – Britney Spears 
 = = Charts = = 
 = River Don Navigation = 
 The River Don Navigation was the result of early efforts to make the River Don in South Yorkshire , England , navigable between Fishlake and Sheffield . The Dutch engineer Cornelius Vermuyden had re @-@ routed the mouth of the river in 1626 , to improve drainage , and the new works included provision for navigation , but the scheme did not solve the problem of flooding , and the Dutch River was cut in 1635 to link the new channel to Goole . The first Act of Parliament to improve navigation on the river was obtained in 1726 , by a group of Cutlers based in Sheffield ; the Corporation of Doncaster obtained an Act in the following year for improvements to the lower river . Locks and lock cuts were built , and , by 1751 , the river was navigable to Tinsley . 
 The network was expanded by the opening of the Stainforth and Keadby Canal in 1802 , linking to the River Trent , the Dearne and Dove Canal in 1804 , linking to Barnsley , and the Sheffield Canal in 1819 , which provided better access to Sheffield . All three were bought out by the Don Navigation in the 1840s , after which the canals were owned by a series of railway companies . The Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation Company was created in 1889 and eventually succeeded in buying back the canals and the Don Navigation in 1895 , but plans for expansion were hampered by a lack of capital . One success was the opening of the New Junction Canal in 1905 , jointly funded with the Aire and Calder Navigation . 
 During the 20th century , there were several plans to upgrade the Don , to handle larger craft . It was eventually upgraded to take 700 @-@ tonne barges in 1983 , but the scheme was a little too late , as an anticipated rise in commercial traffic did not occur . Most use of the navigation is now by leisure boaters , whose boats are dwarfed by the huge locks . The navigation and river are crossed by a wide variety of bridges , from a medieval bridge complete with a chapel on it , one of only three to have survived in Britain , to a motorway viaduct that pioneered the use of rubber bearings and a new waterproofing system . In between are a number of railway bridges , including two that were built to carry the internal railway system at the Blackburn Meadows sewage treatment plant . The former railway viaduct at Conisbrough now carries cyclists 113 feet ( 34 m ) above the Don , as part of the National Cycle Network . 
 The final section to Bramwith is known as the River Dun Navigation . 
 = = Early history = = 
 Before 1626 the River Don had two outlets , an eastern branch that meandered across Hatfield Chase to enter the River Trent , and a northern branch , which was a Roman navigation channel , and joined the River Aire at Turnbridge , near East Cowick . Cornelius Vermuyden 's drainage scheme for Hatfield Chase , begun in 1626 and largely completed by 1628 , included the construction of Ashfield Bank , which ran for 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) along the southern bank of the Don from Fishlake to Thorne , cutting off the eastern branch . Navigation to <unk> was made possible by the provision of a navigable sluice in the bank , which had lifting gates and a 50 @-@ by @-@ 15 @-@ foot ( 15 @.@ 2 by 4 @.@ 6 m ) lock chamber . A further bank some distance to the east of the northern channel ran for 5 miles ( 8 km ) from Thorne to Turnbridge to provide washlands , which would flood when high levels in the Aire prevented the Don discharging into it . 
 In the winter of 1628 , there was flooding at Fishlake and Sykehouse , which was followed by rioting . A navigable sluice was built at Turnbridge in 1629 , with a lock 60 by 18 feet ( 18 @.@ 3 by 5 @.@ 5 m ) , and an outfall sluice called the " Great Sluice " was completed in 1630 , probably by Hugo <unk> , who had assisted Vermuyden with the main project . Continued problems with flooding led to the construction of a 5 @-@ mile ( 8 km ) channel from Newbridge near Thorne eastwards to Goole , where water levels in the Ouse were between 5 and 10 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 and 3 @.@ 0 m ) lower than at Turnbridge . The channel , called the Dutch River , ended in another outfall sluice , and was completed in 1635 at a cost of £ 33 @,@ 000 . Boats continued to use the lock at Turnbridge . In about 1688 the Goole sluice was washed away by a flood , and was never replaced . The tidal scour widened the channel , and barges of up to 30 tonnes could normally reach Fishlake , and often Wilsick House , in Barnby Dun . Smaller boats could reach Doncaster for most of the year , and large barges could do so when there was a flood tide . 
 Initial attempts to seek powers to make the River Don navigable were hampered by opposition from local landowners and disunity between the authorities in Sheffield , Rotherham and Doncaster . The first Act of Parliament was presented in 1698 by the MP for Thirsk , Sir Godfrey Copley of Sprotborough , representing the interests of Rotherham . Although there was support from the " gentlemen , traders and inhabitants " of Doncaster , the Corporation opposed the Bill in view of the likely impact on their mills . There was no support from Sheffield either , and the Bill failed at its first reading . In 1704 Doncaster Corporation , with the support of its traders , presented a Bill that received a first reading , but disappeared without a second reading ever happening . By 1722 there was some agreement between Sheffield and Doncaster , with a tacit agreement that Doncaster would be responsible for the river below their town , and Sheffield for the section above Doncaster . There was organised resistance to the scheme from local landowners , and it appears that their influence resulted in the proposed Bill being defeated in committee , so it could not be presented to parliament . 
 However , in 1726 Sheffield 's Company of Cutlers sought parliamentary approval to make the river navigable from <unk> in Doncaster to Tinsley , on the edge of Sheffield . <unk> at Tinsley placated the Duke of Norfolk , who represented the opposition from Sheffield , and a great deal of work had been done to reduce the opposition from landowners . The Act of Parliament was passed on 6 May 1726 giving the Cutlers powers to make cuts and to make the river deeper and wider so that boats of 20 tonnes could reach Tinsley . There were a number of restrictions , intended to protect existing water @-@ powered installations . Lord Frederick Howard 's mills at Rotherham , Kilnhurst forge , Thrybergh dam and Sprotborough mills and water engine were specifically mentioned . 
 The Corporation of Doncaster sought powers in 1727 to improve the river below <unk> , as far as Wilsick House in Barnby Dun . The Bill passed through parliament uneventfully , and again included detailed restrictions on what could and could not be done , designed to protect the landowners . The details were very specific in that they included the permissible heights of dams , the maximum length of cuts , and many other details of the work to be carried out . 
 Both Acts were unusual in that they gave the bodies powers to borrow money , but did not create the companies to do the work . Nor were the financial arrangements clearly laid down , and both groups resorted to issuing shares to fund the improvements , although they were not actually empowered to do so . In October 1730 , the two groups decided to amalgamate , but a 1731 Act to formalise the agreement and legalise the issuing of shares was defeated because it also included powers to make further changes to the river , including the section below Barnby Dun . Finally an Act of 1733 created The Company of the Proprietors of the Navigation of the River Don , with powers to create a new cut from Bromley Sands above Rotherham to Ickles Dam . The problems presented by the river below Wilsick House , including shallows and fords at Bramwith and Stainforth , and bridges on the Dutch River that were difficult to navigate , resulted in the proprietors trying again to obtain powers to improve the lower river in 1737 , but again the petition was defeated in a parliamentary committee . Work continued , and it appears that Aldwarke was the head of navigation for some years , but Rotherham was reached in 1740 . 
 A further Bill in 1740 sought powers to improve the river from Barnby Dun to Fishlake Ferry . Despite serious opposition , which included the merchants and traders of Doncaster as well as Doncaster Corporation , the Bill was passed , giving the company new powers to make the river deeper and create a cut to avoid the shallows at Stainforth and Bramwith . Work on this northern section started almost immediately . The southern section to Tinsley was navigable by 1751 , although the wharf and warehouse had not been completed by that date , and the towpath from Rotherham was not completed until 1822 . 
 In 1737 , the navigation was leased to three of the company shareholders for 14 years , and a new 7 @-@ year lease was made in 1751 . After 1758 , the company managed the navigation itself . Tolls for the next 10 years raised an average of £ 7006 per annum , indicating healthy traffic levels . 
 = = Expansion = = 
 The early 19th century saw the completion of a number of canals which linked to the Don . The first was the Stainforth and Keadby Canal , which had been proposed by the Don Navigation shareholders in 1792 . Construction was started in 1793 and completed in 1802 , with John Thompson , the engineer to the Don Navigation Company , overseeing the work until his death in 1795 . It provided a link from Bramwith Lock to the River Trent , broadly following the old course of the River Don prior to Vermuyden 's improvements . Two years later , the Dearne and Dove Canal opened , connecting with the Barnsley Canal near Barnsley . The canal had also been proposed by Don Navigation shareholders in 1792 , and again John Thompson had overseen the initial construction . The third opening was in 1819 , when the Sheffield Canal connected the Tinsley terminus to the centre of Sheffield . There were several plans to create a link to the Chesterfield Canal , including one in 1793 by Benjamin Outram , and a proposal by Richard Gresley in 1810 for a North East Junction Canal , which would have linked to the Don at Rotherham , broadly following the modern ideas for the Rother Link . Neither of these , nor a revival of the idea in 1832 gained sufficient support to proceed . 
 The Company bought out the Dearne and Dove Canal in 1846 , the Sheffield Canal in 1848 , and the Stainforth and Keadby Canal in 1849 . They then amalgamated with the South Yorkshire , Doncaster and Goole Railway in 1850 , to become the South Yorkshire Railway and River Dun Company . This in turn was leased to the Manchester , Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway in 1864 . In order to allow an extension of the railway from Mexborough to Sheffield to pass under the railway line to Rotherham Westgate railway station , the Holmes cut below Ickles lock was diverted into the river , and the Eastwood cut below Rotherham lock was diverted to the east in 1864 . The original bed was then filled in and the railway built along its course . Despite attempts to divert coal traffic to the railway , the canals maintained their traffic levels , carrying 982 @,@ 000 tonnes in 1878 and 927 @,@ 254 in 1888 . However , there was dissatisfaction among users of the canals that the rates for traffic were higher than on the railways , and the canals were failing to modernise , as steam boats were banned , despite them having been in use for 50 years on the neighbouring Aire and Calder Navigation . 
 A plan to upgrade the waterways to allow the use of 300 to 500 @-@ tonne boats led to the formation of the Sheffield and South Yorkshire Canal Company Limited in November 1888 . The cost of the scheme was estimated to be around £ 1 million , in addition to the cost of acquiring the canals from the railway company . The new company obtained an Act of Parliament on 26 August 1889 , creating the Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation Company , which was authorised to raise £ 1 @.@ 5 million and to purchase the four canals either by negotiation , or by compulsory purchase if negotiations failed . The railway company was unwilling to sell , and it was not until 1895 , after protracted negotiation and legal battles that the transfer was agreed . The Navigation Company had only succeeded in raising £ 625 @,@ 000 , which was less than the purchase price of the canals , and therefore the railway company nominated half of the ten directors , while the Aire and Calder Company declined to buy any shares because of railway influence . Many of the ambitious plans for the modernisation of the system were hindered by a lack of capital , although some further developments took place . 
 One improvement that was completed was the construction of the New Junction Canal . This had been authorised by an Act of Parliament obtained on 28 July 1891 by the Aire and Calder Navigation , which specified that the Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation Company would share the cost of construction and the ownership of the new waterway . No work could start until the company actually owned their canals , and they were required to raise £ 150 @,@ 000 at a time when they had just failed to raise the finance for the takeover of the original canals . However , three @-@ quarters of the cost had been raised by 1903 . The new canal leaves the original navigation at Bramwith Junction , runs over the River Don on an aqueduct , and continues in a straight line for 5 @.@ 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 9 km ) , to join the Aire and Calder Navigation upstream from Goole . It provided a much more direct route from Sheffield to Goole , and was opened on 2 January 1905 . The company had hoped to run compartment boats for the transport of coal along the canal , as the Aire and Calder did , but although straightening of the navigation was completed at Doncaster in April 1905 and at Sprotborough in late 1907 , and Doncaster Town Lock was lengthened in 1909 and 1910 , most of the locks could only hold three compartments at a time , and so there was little advantage to using this type of boat . 
 = = Later developments = = 
 Towards the end of the First World War , Sheffield City Council proposed a major upgrade of the navigation . They expected the government to nationalise the waterway , and pay for the improvements , to which they would contribute , providing that the railway influence was removed . The scheme involved deepening the channel from 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) to 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) , and constructing 18 new locks which would be 270 by 22 feet ( 82 @.@ 3 by 6 @.@ 7 m ) , to replace the existing 62 @-@ by @-@ 16 @-@ foot ( 18 @.@ 9 by 4 @.@ 9 m ) locks . The locks would have multiple gates , and be capable of holding four 110 @-@ tonne barges or one 300 @-@ tonne barge . The estimated cost was £ 1 @,@ 483 @,@ 426 , but the government was unwilling to support the scheme , and Sheffield City Council was not prepared to proceed without government backing . 
 During the inter @-@ war years the navigation struggled to hold its own against competition from the railways and later the roads , and was affected by miners ' strikes in the coal industry . Traffic was spasmodic , rising from 381 @,@ 727 tonnes in 1926 , the year of the general strike , to 815 @,@ 329 tonnes in 1937 , but much of the latter was short @-@ haul traffic , rather than long @-@ haul , and the revenues did not increase correspondingly . In an agreement with Hatfield Main Colliery and the Aire and Calder , Bramwith Lock on the Stainforth and Keadby Canal was lengthened in 1932 , to allow compartment boats to be used for the coal traffic , while straightening of a stretch near Doncaster and the construction of a new warehouse and wharf were largely funded by Doncaster Corporation in 1934 . 
 The major traffic on the navigation had always been coal , but after the Second World War there was a steady increase in oil traffic . By 1946 , all of the mortgages that the company had used to fund expansion were repaid , and the financial position of the canal gradually improved . Control of the navigation , as with most British canals , passed to the British Transport Commission on 1 January 1948 , under the terms of the Transport Act ( 1947 ) . Some improvements continued to be made , with two coal wharfs being built at Mexborough in 1954 , to serve the new Doncaster power station , and Long Sandall Lock being extended to 215 by 22 feet ( 65 @.@ 5 by 6 @.@ 7 m ) . The new lock was opened on 10 July 1959 , and allowed trains of 17 compartment boats to work through to Doncaster and <unk> , as Doncaster Town Lock above it and Sykehouse Lock below it on the New Junction Canal were already of a similar size . 
 In 1961 , the British Transport Commission , together with the British Iron and Steel Federation and Sheffield Chamber of Commerce considered plans to upgrade the navigation to handle 250 @-@ tonne barges , and work started on new wharfs and warehouses at Rotherham . Control of the navigation passed on again in 1963 , this time to the British Waterways Board , who submitted a proposal to the government for a £ 2 @.@ 5 million upgrade , covering the stretch from Bramwith to Rotherham . This would have involved the construction of ten new locks , each 225 by 25 feet ( 68 @.@ 6 by 7 @.@ 6 m ) , to replace the existing 12 locks . The new main line would then have been the same size as the Aire and Calder Navigation , although some of the bridges would have had less clearance . In 1972 , a further proposal for a £ 2 million scheme to upgrade the waterway to handle 700 @-@ tonne barges up to Mexborough , and 400 @-@ tonne barges from there to Rotherham was submitted to the Department of the Environment . 
 Finally , the navigation was the subject of one of the last major attempts in the UK to attract commercial freight to the waterways . In 1983 , it was upgraded to the 700 @-@ tonne <unk> standard by deepening the channels and enlarging the locks as far as Rotherham . Conisbrough lock was removed altogether , and the two Eastwood locks were combined into one . The new lock was initially named the Sir Frank Price Lock , after the chairman of the British Waterways Board who formally opened it on 1 June 1983 . The expected rise in freight traffic did not occur , however . At Kilnhurst and Long Sandall , the new larger locks were built alongside the original locks , and so a comparison of the relative sizes can be made . 
 The new locks are 198 by 20 feet ( 60 @.@ 4 by 6 @.@ 1 m ) , and the navigation accommodates boats with a draught of 8 @.@ 2 feet ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) and needing headroom of 10 @.@ 5 feet ( 3 @.@ 2 m ) . Beyond Rotherham , the locks are 70 by 15 @.@ 1 feet ( 21 @.@ 3 by 4 @.@ 6 m ) , and so can accommodate a 70 feet ( 21 m ) broad boat , but Rotherham lock is smaller , being only 61 @.@ 5 feet ( 18 @.@ 7 m ) long , and so the upper reaches are effectively restricted to 60 @-@ foot ( 18 m ) boats . 
 = = Route = = 
 The River Don Navigation ended at Tinsley Wharf , but it forms a convenient place to start a description of the route . The wharf was on the river , just upstream from the present junction with the canal to Sheffield . It was close to the site of the Meadowhall Shopping Centre and the Tinsley Viaduct , which carries the M1 motorway over the valley of the River Don . From here there is a towpath along the canal to Victoria Quays ( formerly Sheffield Basin ) in Sheffield City Centre , or the Five <unk> Walk follows the course of the River Don to the same destination . The towpath extends to Rotherham in the opposite direction , passing the large Jordans Weir and the three locks on the Holmes Cut . Beside Jordans Weir is the outfall from Blackburn Meadows sewage treatment plant . In dry weather , this discharges 30 million gallons ( 136 @,@ 000 m3 ) of treated water each day , more than doubling the flow in the river . 
 The towpath continues to Rotherham Lock , where the Rotherham cut starts , but from here to Conisbrough , the only way to see the navigation is from a boat or from one of the bridges which cross it . To the north of the cut are the remains of the Greasbrough Canal , now culverted under the embankment of the A633 road . Eastwood lock marks the end of the Rotherham Cut , to be followed by Aldwarke Lock , in the shadow of the <unk> road bridge , and Kilnhurst flood lock , which marks the start of the Kilnhurst Cut . In Swinton , the stub of the Dearne and Dove Canal turns off to the left , and there are three more locks before the cut ends . Immediately following this , the River Dearne flows into the Don , and the towpath resumes , where the Dearne Way footpath ends . 
 The route continues through a wooded valley , past the site of the Sprotborough Flash Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) , with the towpath forming part of the Trans Pennine Trail . Sprotborough lock and weir are situated just before Sprotborough . Just below the lock on the north bank are the remains of an engine house , built in the 1690s for Sir Godfrey Copley of Sprotborough Hall . A water wheel pumped river water some 100 feet ( 30 m ) upwards to supply a fountain in the grounds of the hall , a swimming pool , and also provided a water supply for the village . The pump was powered by a water wheel which was removed in the 1970s . Soon the edge of Doncaster is reached , where amongst the railway marshalling yards , the River Don leaves the navigation for the final time , as does the towpath . The two weir streams flow either side of Doncaster prison , effectively forming an island on which the building sits . Doncaster Town Lock is situated close to Doncaster railway station , and between here and Long Sandall Lock , some of the changes which have occurred over the years can be visualised , with the river on the left and ox @-@ bow lakes on the right , severed by the course of the Wheatley Cut . The final section to Bramwith is usually called the River Dun Navigation . At Bramwith , the waterway splits , with the New Junction Canal heading north @-@ east for the Aire and Calder Navigation and Goole , and the Stainforth and Keadby Canal heading east to the River Trent at Keadby . The River Don heads northwards too , turning to the east where the Dutch River starts at Newbridge . The original course to the River Aire can be traced across the fields , now little more than a drainage ditch crossed by an oversized Grade II listed bridge on the <unk> at East Cowick , and Vermuyden 's embankments are closely followed by the A614 road after it has crossed the M18 motorway . 
 = = Structures = = 
 This section provides details of some of the many bridges crossing the Don Navigation , in west @-@ to @-@ east order , starting from Tinsley . 
 = = = Tinsley and Rotherham area = = = 
 = = = = MS & L railway bridge = = = = 
 This bridge , which is located a little below the junction of the Sheffield Canal and the river , carries the Sheffield to Rotherham freight @-@ only railway line . The railway , which opened in 1868 , was originally part of the Manchester , Sheffield & Lincolnshire Railway , which later became part of the Great Central Railway . Between this railway bridge and Jordan Bridge , there are two bridges carrying pipes . 
 = = = = Jordan Bridge = = = = 
 Called " Jordan Bridge 21 " by British Waterways , this bridge carried a railway that linked Blackburn Meadows Sewage Works to additional filters and contact beds to the east of the navigation . It was constructed by Logan and Hemmingway , who won a contract valued at £ 41 @,@ 046 in April 1907 , which included six settling tanks , 24 contact beds , and the bridge . The eastern approach consists of three brick arches , which allowed a siding to pass through it . Continued expansion of the works required a second bridge to be constructed in 1922 , to carry the railway over the river channel . The steelwork for Holmes bridge was supplied by Charles Ross Ltd , who were based in Sheffield , while piling work was carried out by Yorkshire <unk> <unk> Co Ltd . 
 = = = = Holmes Lock Bridge = = = = 
 This carries Steel Street – a minor road linking the Blackburn Meadows Nature Reserve Car Park with Holmes . The bridge still has railway tracks embedded in part of the cobbled road surface . The tracks were part of a network of sidings which served the Holmes Rolling Mills on the north bank of the navigation , and the bridge provided access to a crushing plant situated on the island formed by the course of the river to the south and the Holmes Cut to the north . 
 = = = = Midland Railway bridges = = = = 
 The western of the two railway bridges was built in 1869 , but the line it carried was truncated by the building of the Holmes Chord in the 1980s , and it is now unused . The eastern of the two bridges was built in 1840 as part of the North Midland Railway . This carried the " main line " from Derby to York until the diversion via Bradway and Sheffield was opened in 1870 . The line is now freight @-@ only . 
 = = = = <unk> Bridge = = = = 
 Just east of Ickles Lock , this is actually two bridges . The western bridge carries the continuation of Millmoor Lane and the eastern the ex @-@ MS & L freight @-@ only line between Tinsley and Rotherham Central . 
 = = = = Centenary Way bridge ( south ) = = = = 
 This carries the Centenary Way dual carriageway over the navigation , which has now been re @-@ joined by the River Don . The road ( <unk> ) is an upgrading of the old <unk> Road and is the main access into Rotherham from the M1 . It also forms part of the Rotherham Ring Road which was begun about 1968 , actually only goes half way around town , was built in sections and completed in 1995 . The towpath of the navigation ( part of the Trans @-@ Pennine Trail ) is carried on a walkway that is cantilevered over the Don from the retaining wall of the factory site to the north . 
 = = = = Corporation Bridge = = = = 
 This single @-@ span metal bridge carries Main Street over the navigation . Slightly upstream of this bridge was a wooden railway bridge with seven arches , built in 1838 , that took the Sheffield and Rotherham Railway into Westgate Station . It was demolished in 1952 . Prior to the re @-@ routing of the canal in 1864 , the Westgate line crossed the Holmes cut a little further to the west by a three @-@ arched bridge , the centre arch of which was 36 feet ( 11 m ) long and was made of iron . 
 = = = = Rotherham Lock footbridge = = = = 
 This footbridge provides pedestrian access to the Court House from Forge Island , which was once the site of an iron works but is now occupied by Tesco 's . The River Don separates from the navigation above Forge Island , and there is a road and pedestrian bridge across the river into Forge Island . 
 = = = = Bridge Street Bridge ( Chantry Bridge ) and Rotherham Bridge = = = = 
 Bridge Street Bridge ( Chantry Bridge ) is a single @-@ span metal bridge that carries Bridge Street over the navigation . The street continues eastwards and originally crossed the river at Rotherham Bridge . As originally constructed in 1483 the bridge had four arches and was 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) wide , but it was widened and a fifth arch added in 1768 . In 1930 a new bridge was built nearby , a little further upstream , and as part of the work , the fifth arch was removed and the bridge was returned to its Medieval width . Because of improvements to the river made in the 18th and 19th centuries , it is wider than it used to be , and the bridge no longer reaches the west bank . The chapel on the bridge is one of only three complete bridge chapels that still exist in Britain , the other two being at Wakefield , West Yorkshire , and St Ives , Huntingdonshire . Dating from about 1483 , it remained in use as a chapel until the reign of King Edward VI ( 1547 – 1553 ) . It was put to use as almshouses during the 17th and 18th centuries , and in 1779 it was used as a prison . Later , it became a private dwelling and finally a tobacconist 's shop , before being returned to its original use as a chapel ; it was formally reconsecrated in 1924 by the Bishop of Sheffield . 
 = = = = Centenary Way bridge ( north ) = = = = 
 This carries the Centenary Way dual carriageway over the navigation . 
 = = = = Greasbrough Road Bridge = = = = 
 The Greasbrough Road is no longer a main road and only serves local businesses . Downstream of this bridge are 3 pipe bridges . 
 = = = = Rawmarsh Road Bridge = = = = 
 Called “ Rotherham Rawmarsh Road Bridge 39 ” by British Waterways , this bridge carries the A633 Rotherham Road ( from Rotherham to Parkgate ) . The A633 crossing of the River Don is called Grafton Bridge . 
 = = = = Eastwood Footbridge = = = = 
 This carries the public footpath from the Eastwood area of Rotherham to the Parkgate Retail Park . When the Rotherham Cut section of the Don Navigation was constructed in 1740 , the crossing was by means of a swing bridge . This was replaced by the current footbridge in the late 1900s . To the south of Eastwood Footbridge is a bailey bridge crossing of the River Don . 
 = = = = Wash Lane Bridge = = = = 
 This bridge is situated immediately downstream of Aldwarke Weir and upstream of Aldwarke Lock . It was rebuilt in 1834 . In more recent times , it has been superseded by the <unk> ( Aldwarke Lane ) road bridge spanning both river and navigation . The bridge is now gated at both ends to prevent access to pedestrians and traffic . 
 = = = = Steelworks access ( road ) bridge = = = = 
 This provides access to the two steelworks from the <unk> road at Dalton . 
 = = = = Don ( rail ) Bridge = = = = 
 This forms part of the internal rail network of the two steelworks . It was constructed in 1901 as part of what was called locally John Brown 's Private Railway . This railway connected the Silverwood and Roundwood Collieries of John Brown & Company with wharves on the Don Navigation . The girder bridge crossing the Don Navigation was the main engineering work on this railway line . It was built by Newton , Chambers & Company . 
 = = = = Thrybergh ( rail ) Bridge = = = = 
 This carried the former Great Central and Midland Railways ' joint line across the River Don . This line was double track . It was essentially a colliery line and never carried a regular passenger service . 
 = = = Kilnhurst and Mexborough area = = = 
 = = = = Kilnhurst Station Road Bridge = = = = 
 This is bridge number 46 and conveys the road to Hooton Roberts . The bridge over the Navigation adjoins the bridge over the railway . The bridge over railway is original , but that over the Navigation is a modern replacement . The " Station " in the name Station Road refers to the Kilnhurst Central ( Great Central ) Station rather than the Kilnhurst West ( Midland Railway ) Station . 
 = = = = Kilnhurst Burton <unk> Bridge = = = = 
 This is bridge number 47 and conveys a service road over the Navigation and railway . At this point on the west side of the Navigation , there was a large tar distillation works and it is probable that this road connected that works with a tip or further chemical plant on the east side . The tar distillation works was built by Ellison & Mitchell in 1886 and became part of the Yorkshire Tar Distillers group in 1927 . 
 = = = = Swinton Talbot Road Bridge = = = = 
 This is bridge number 48 and connects the main road in Swinton ( <unk> Bridge Street and <unk> Lane ) with an industrial estate whose principal unit is the Morphy Richards distribution centre . 
 = = = = Mexborough Double Bridges = = = = 
 This is named " Double Bridges and Footbridge <unk> " by the Canal & River Trust . The bridge carries a footway and double @-@ track railway over the Navigation . This section of the Navigation must have represented quite a challenge for full @-@ size barges to negotiate since the bridges are immediately adjacent to a right @-@ angle bend in the canal . 
 = = = = Mexborough Station Road Bridge = = = = 
 This is bridge number 52 and carries the access road to Mexborough railway station from the <unk> Greens Way ( and the town centre ) . 
 = = = = Mexborough <unk> Flour Mill = = = = 
 This imposing building ( and associated wharf ) stands on the north side of the Navigation close to the Church of St John the Baptist . It started off as the " Don Roller Mills " . It was owned by James White who sold it to the Barnsley British Cooperative Society in 1912 . 
 = = = Conisbrough and Warmsworth area = = = 
 = = = = Conisbrough Earth Centre Bridge = = = = 
 This is named " Cadeby Colliery Bridge 57 " by the Canal & River Trust because it once provided a road access to Cadeby Colliery from the south . From 1999 to 2004 , the bridge provided the main access to the ill @-@ fated Earth Centre visitor attraction . The bridge now forms part of public access from Conisbrough Station to the main ( west @-@ east ) section of the Trans Pennine Trail . There are two pipe bridges just upstream of the road bridge . 
 = = = = Conisbrough Viaduct = = = = 
 Conisbrough Viaduct was built in the first decade of the 20th century as part of the Dearne Valley Railway . This was a line which essentially served a coalfield , although there was a rudimentary passenger service between 1912 and 1951 . The remaining coal traffic on the line ceased in 1966 . The viaduct has 21 arches and was built from 12 million Conisbrough blue bricks . The central metal span is 150 feet ( 46 m ) long and crosses the Don at a height of 113 feet ( 34 m ) . The viaduct remained out of use until 2001 , when ownership was transferred to Railway Paths Ltd , who manage potentially useful railway structures until they can be incorporated into the National Cycle Network . Installation of a new deck surface and safety railings were funded by the Railway Heritage Trust in early 2008 , and the viaduct re @-@ opened as part of the Sustrans network in April 2008 . 
 = = = = Rainbow Bridge = = = = 
 Built in 1849 as part of the South Yorkshire Railway , which later became part of the Great Central Railway , the Rainbow bridge is still in use and carries the Swinton to Doncaster railway line . 
 = = = = Sprotbrough Bridge = = = = 
 Sprotbrough Bridge is actually two bridges that carry Mill Lane , the southern one crossing the weir stream and the northern one crossing the lock cut . Replacing a ferry crossing of the river , the first bridge and associated toll house were built in 1849 for Sir Joseph William Copley of Sprotbrough Hall . The designers of the southern bridge were Benjamin <unk> and William Arnold , and the present structure has three segmental arches on each side , which originally formed the approaches to a central arch . The arch was replaced by an above @-@ deck truss in 1897 . The ironwork was manufactured by Newton Chambers & Co . Ltd . , who were based at <unk> Ironworks in Sheffield , as recorded by plates attached to the bridge . The northern bridge was a single @-@ arched masonry structure , which has been replaced by a plate girder bridge resting on the original piers . The toll house , consisting of a single storey with a half basement , made of dressed sandstone with an asphalt roof , still survives on the northern bank of the lock cut . Tolls collected here for passage over Sprotbrough Bridge were said to have been given by the Copley family to the Doncaster Dispensary . 
 = = = = A1 Don Viaduct = = = = 
 This bridge carries the A1 ( M ) motorway over the river ; it was opened by Ernest Marples , the Minister of Transport , on 31 July 1961 . It consists of two separate structures , one for each carriageway , each having seven spans . The longest span , formed from two 40 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) cantilevers and a suspended central span of 100 feet ( 30 m ) , carries the motorway over the river at a height of 70 feet ( 21 m ) . The total length of the structure is 760 feet ( 230 m ) , and it has a slight horizontal and vertical curve at its southern end . Five riveted steel girders and a 9 @-@ inch ( 23 cm ) composite concrete deck support each carriageway . The bridge was one of the first to use rubber bearings , and the first to use bitumen membranes lined with copper to make the decks waterproof . The design includes jacking points to compensate for mining subsidence . 
 = = = = Warmsworth railway viaducts = = = = 
 There are two railway viaducts at Warmsworth . The western one was completed in 1914 and formed part of the Hull & Barnsley and Great Central Joint Railway . This was essentially a railway to serve the coalfield and was closed in 1958 . For some years after closure , the viaduct was used to carry a conveyor belt over the Don . It became part of the Doncaster spur on the Trans @-@ Pennine Trail , which was officially opened in 2001 . The steel pillars supporting the viaduct are filled with limestone . Its construction , which uses an above @-@ deck truss , contrasts with the below @-@ deck truss of the eastern viaduct , which was completed in 1910 and formed part of the Great Central Railway . It still carries a freight @-@ only line that avoids a crossing on the level of the East Coast Main Line at Doncaster Station . 
 = = = Doncaster Town area = = = 
 = = = = Newtons Farm Footbridge = = = = 
 Two bridges situated side @-@ by side , one made of concrete and the other a wooden bridge , cross one of the two weir channels where the river leaves the navigation before Doncaster Town Lock . 
 = = = = Cheswold Hauling Bridge = = = = 
 Cheswold Hauling Bridge , also known as Cheswold High Bridge , is a footbridge on the navigation towpath , which crosses the second of the two weir streams where the river leaves the navigation upstream of Doncaster Town Lock . The small section of river between the footbridge and where it rejoins that part of the River Don that left the navigation at Newtons Farm footbridge is called the River Cheswold , reputedly the shortest river in Great Britain . 
 = = = = North Bridge and St Marys Bridge = = = = 
 North Bridge Road is carried over the railway and then the navigation at Doncaster Town Lock by North Bridge , and over the Don by St Mary 's Bridge . North Bridge Road was previously part of the Great North Road . Until 1910 , this crossed the railway on the level before crossing the Don Navigation . After 1910 , a lengthy iron bridge took the road over the railway , navigation and river . This bridge was replaced by the current North Bridge in 2003 . Its use has been restricted to buses , taxis , cyclists and pedestrians since the new St George 's Bridge opened . The new bridge was constructed over the top of the old one while it was still in situ . Once the old bridge had been stripped of its surface trimmings the deck was cut up into 25 @-@ tonne sections , which were suspended from the new structure . A pulley system was used to transport these sections along the underside of the new bridge , so that they could be lowered onto the towpath , where they were cut up further before removal from the site . 
 = = = = Railway bridges = = = = 
 Below the North Bridge , the six railway tracks north of Doncaster Station cross the Don Navigation on three separate bridges . This section of tracks is known as Marshgate Junction and is where the lines to Leeds , York and Thorne diverge . 
 = = = = Friars Gate Bridge = = = = 
 This bridge provides access across the navigation from the centre of Doncaster to the small businesses and car parks on the " island " between the river and navigation . 
 = = = = St George 's Bridge = = = = 
 St George 's Bridge is one of the newest bridges over the Don . It carries the dual carriageway New Bridge Road , part of the A19 , which is now the main road north out of Doncaster . It was opened on 22 November 2001 , and was named St George 's Bridge as a result of a public competition . It consists of a 690 @-@ yard ( 630 m ) long steel @-@ composite bridge with spans of 49 yards ( 45 m ) over the River Don , the East Coast Main Line , and the Don Navigation . The ladder beam layout , using two main plate girders , cross @-@ girders at 13 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) centres and precast planks , was chosen both to optimise the deck and to minimise the size and number of the piers . 
 = = = = Chappell Drive Bridge = = = = 
 This bridge provides access across the navigation from the centre of Doncaster to the small businesses situated on the " island " between the river and navigation . It is situated immediately north of the Hub campus of Doncaster College . Going downstream , there is a gap of some 5 miles ( 8 km ) before the next public road crossing of the navigation at Barnby Dun . 
 = = = Barnby Dun area = = = 
 = = = = Kirk Sandall Railway Bridge = = = = 
 This bridge conveys the ( ex @-@ Great Central Railway ) Doncaster @-@ to @-@ Hull railway over the Navigation . The bridge consists of two single @-@ span decks , both with above deck trusses . The older south deck ( pictured here ) is no longer used . The north deck accommodates both tracks of what is now a double @-@ track railway . The quadruple track from Thorne Junction on this line now finishes at Kirk Sandall Junction , a few hundred metres to the east . A further bridge to the west conveys the railway over the River Don . 
 = = = = Kirk Sandall Pipe Bridge = = = = 
 At this point , the Navigation runs parallel to , and a few metres to the south @-@ east of , the River Don . A pipe bridge high above both the Navigation and the River once carry waste from the glass works which adjoined the towpath ( to the south @-@ east ) across to a series of settling ponds ( to the north @-@ west ) . The glass works was a major employer in the Kirk Sandall area . The St Helens @-@ based Pilkington Bros established a plate glass works here in the early 1920s . The site was chosen for its proximity to the canal and railway , and for the sandy terrain which was needed for the production of glass . Pilkingtons also funded the building of 400 new houses in the <unk> Lane area , together with associated school and recreational facilities . The glass works closed in the 1990s and its site is now occupied by various units on an industrial estate . 
 = = = = Barnby Dun Lift Bridge = = = = 
 This was built in 1983 to replace the original ( 1900 ) swing bridge . It is built of steel and powered by electricity . The replacement work cost £ 0.5M and was part of a wider upgrade of the Navigation to conform to the 700 @-@ tonne <unk> standard ( see Later Development section of this article ) . An elevated control house was built for the sole use of operational staff , but in recent years a freestanding low level standard control console has been built for the use of boaters when the bridge is not staffed . Sykehouse Lift Bridge ( downstream of Barnby Dun ) was built to the same technical specification . Although the bridge carries an unclassified road linking Barnby Dun and Bentley , the bridge also provided the only access for heavy loads to the nearby Thorpe Marsh power station , so the bridge was designed to carry abnormal loads of up to 180 tons gross weight . Although Thorpe Marsh Power Station has now been demolished , the bridge is still busy with road traffic . This is because it is one of the few crossings of the Navigation in this area . 
 = = Points of interest = = 
 = The Alliance ( The Office ) = 
 " The Alliance " is the fourth episode of the first season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's fourth episode overall . The episode aired on NBC in the United States on April 12 , 2005 . It was written by Michael Schur and directed by Bryan Gordon , marking their first credits for the show . 
 In this episode , paranoia takes over the members of the office as downsizing rumors swirl . Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) forms a Survivor @-@ esque alliance with Jim ( John Krasinski ) against the other employees — later adding Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) also . Meanwhile , Michael ( Steve Carell ) arranges a morale @-@ boosting birthday party for Meredith ( Kate Flannery ) — although her birthday is more than a month away . Michael agonizes over writing the perfect greeting in her birthday card , and in the end , his joke falls flat , ruining the party . 
 The episode was inspired by popular reality television shows , most notably Survivor . Originally , the first cut of the episode ran 37 minutes long and the producers considered making the episode a two @-@ parter , one focusing on the Alliance and another focusing on Meredith 's birthday party , but later decided against the idea . In addition , several of the lines and scenes from the episode were improved or ad @-@ libbed by the cast . " The Alliance " was viewed by an estimated 5 @.@ 4 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 4 / 6 % rating share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . The episode received positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Although time has dragged on , the downsizing rumors at Dunder Mifflin have not ceased . Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) feels particularly threatened by the impending crisis , and , in an act of desperation , forms an alliance with his office nemesis Jim ( John Krasinski ) . Jim sees the alliance as an opportunity with great potential and agrees as a lark . He immediately enlists Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) ' s help in the situation . The two continue to perform a series of office pranks at the expense of Dwight . 
 Meanwhile , Michael ( Steve Carell ) tries to boost morale in the office by having an office birthday party for Meredith ( Kate Flannery ) , even though her birthday is a month away . Michael agonizes over writing the perfect greeting in her birthday card . In the end , his joke ( and subsequent rejected ones ) falls flat and ruins the party . At the same time Oscar also gets him to donate money to his nephew 's cerebral palsy walk @-@ a @-@ thon , which Michael accidentally <unk> to in an effort to look like a good boss . 
 At the end of the day , after a breakthrough in his pranks on Dwight , Jim giddily grabs Pam 's hand in an attempt to explain what has just happened . However , Pam 's fiancé Roy ( David Denman ) catches this and sees it as an attempt by Jim to make a move on Pam . Jim tries to convince Roy that it was just " office pranks " and asks Dwight to back him up , but he simply denies any involvement leaving Jim awkwardly embarrassed . Dwight reveals that he had no problems betraying Jim , despite the fact that he recently fell into one of Jim 's tricks . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was inspired by popular reality television shows , most notably Survivor . The " Can I trust Jim ... " line was a direct reference to the show and was a " last @-@ second addition " according to Daniels . In addition , Randall Einhorn , the camera man for the episode , was a camera man for Survivor . When the episode was being written , many of the cast and crew feared that it would bear too many stylistic resemblances to Curb Your Enthusiasm . Daniels later defended the show , saying that the show was different because of " the fact that they are on TV and they know they are being filmed . [ They know they 're ] on camera . " During the writing of the episode , Daniels made the writers spend actual time on the set , most notably in Michael 's office . Mindy Kaling later noted that she " hated it . " 
 The first cut of the episode ran 37 minutes long and the producers were tasked with cutting the footage down to 22 minutes . Executive producer Greg Daniels considered making the episode a two @-@ parter , one focusing on the Alliance and another focusing on Meredith 's birthday party , but the appearance of party hats in the Alliance @-@ only scenes caused him to nix this idea . Because the episode had to be cut down due to time , several scenes were drastically cut . The filming crew actually shot about 15 – 20 minutes of Steve Carell coming up with terrible card ideas , which was drastically cut for the episode . During the party , Ryan talks to a different woman in the background of each scene . Although not much footage made it into the final episode , the producers thought this was a nice character touch for the new employee . The penultimate scenes of Michael telling several terrible jokes to Meredith was cut down from the original 15 . The final scene where Roy confronts Jim was shot ten different times , each in a different style , ranging from Roy slamming Jim into the wall to Roy asking Jim , " Hey , what are you doing ? " Although the crew felt that the wall @-@ slamming version was more dramatic , they realized that it caused the episode to go from a comedy to an " angry drama . " 
 Several of the lines and scenes from the episode were improved or ad @-@ libbed by the cast . Jenna Fischer named the party planning scene her favorite scene and called it " longest most horrible meeting of all time " . On the commentary track for the episode , Fischer revealed that the scene was almost entirely ad @-@ libbed . At one point , Phyllis Smith , who portrays Phyllis Margaret Vance ( née Lapin ) , made a joke that made every one on set laugh , forcing production to halt for almost 45 minutes . Dwight 's " gun show " joke was written by Rainn Wilson . Larry Wilmore later called the " gun show " scene his favorite . Wilmore later said of ab @-@ libs , " part of the fun in writing a show like this is trying to write lines that sound like ad @-@ libs . " Daniels also praised the episode 's lines , saying , " when you know the acting is really good , it all sounds like it 's been improvised . " 
 The scenes where Dwight climbs into a box almost did not make the episode . Mike Schur , who wrote the episode , feared that Dwight climbing into the box would not only make the episode " crazy broad , " but also make the rest of the episode look boring by comparison . After shooting the scene , however , he described it as " the most natural thing in the world . " Phil Shaw , the stunt man for The Office , did most of the work in the box . Schur described Dwight 's emergence from the box as his " action hero " moment . Daniels likened the scene to the movie Alien . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on 12 April 2005 , " The Alliance " was viewed by an estimated 5 @.@ 4 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 4 / 6 % rating share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 4 % of all 18 – 49 year @-@ olds , and 6 % of all 18 – 49 year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . The episode , airing after Scrubs , retained 100 % of its lead @-@ in 18 – 49 audience for the second week in a row . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received positive reviews from critics , with many praising the developing relationship between Pam and Jim . Travis Fickett from IGN praised the episode and compared Jim and Pam 's relationship in the first season to that of the fourth , saying , " Jim and Pam simply work better before they were a couple . The fact that Roy can come between them here is fun – and reminds us that it was more interesting when something could still come between them ! " In summary , he concluded that , " [ ' The Alliance ' ] is one of the better early episodes of the show , and going out with Dwight talking to the camera – his hair dyed blonde – is genius and gives us ( up to this point ) the most perfect ' Dwight ' moment of the show so far . " Television critic Robin Pierson noted that in the episode , " The Jim and Pam relationship begins to take real shape here . " He later called the moment when Roy nearly attacks Jim as " a much more ' real ' moment that the rest of the episode . " Furthermore , Pierson criticized the characterization of Dwight , noting that his actions were " stupidly naïve " . Miss Alli from Television Without Pity gave the episode an A. 
 Erik Adams of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B – " . He felt that the episode was " akin to a newborn deer working the wobbles out of its legs " and that " it ’ s a milestone for The Office , in that it represents the first time an episode generated so much material it could ’ ve occupied a full hour of airtime " . He felt that Michael 's plot was funny , but had issues . He argued that the retooling of Michael 's character made him a more likable character even when he was doing something inappropriate ; in this episode , however , his behavior is too cringe @-@ inducing . Adams praised the scene wherein Dwight emerged from the box , calling it one of " The Office 's first great sigh gags " . Furthermore , he felt that the scene was symbolic , as it produced " a stronger , deadlier , better character " . 
 = The Boat Race 1975 = 
 The 121st Boat Race between crews from the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge took place on the River Thames on 29 March 1975 . Cambridge won their seventh race in eight years by three @-@ and @-@ three @-@ quarter lengths in a time of 19 minutes and 27 seconds . The race was umpired by former Oxford rower Christopher Davidge . 
 In the reserve race , Oxford 's Isis beat Cambridge 's Goldie by nine @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths . Cambridge won the 30th Women 's Boat Race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities , followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1974 race by five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , with Cambridge leading overall with 67 victories to Oxford 's 52 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . The umpire for the race was Christopher Davidge , who had rowed for Oxford in the 1949 , 1951 and 1952 races , and was a non @-@ rowing Oxford University Boat Club president for the 1950 race . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Up until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 In the month leading up to the race , Cambridge 's crew saw some significant changes , including the removal of David Sturge ( who had rowed in the 1973 race ) due to glandular fever . However , the Cambridge boat club president Steve Tourek was circumspect : " Cambridge might be slower than planned but still fast enough to beat Oxford . " On 24 March 1975 , Cambridge beat Oxford 's record time ( set five days earlier ) between Hammersmith Bridge and the Mile Post by two seconds . The following day , Oxford 's coach Dan Topolski revealed that the Oxford reserve crew , Isis , had equalled the record time , downplaying Cambridge 's efforts : " Shows how fast conditions really were yesterday . " Cambridge coach Lou Barry remarked of his charges : " this is a fast crew " . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 13 st 9 @.@ 75 lb ( 86 @.@ 8 kg ) , 7 pounds ( 3 @.@ 2 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford 's crew contained two former Blues in boat club president Nick Tee and stroke Graham Innes , while Cambridge saw Nick Bradley , Henry Clay and Tourek return from the 1974 boat . Although the British international rower David Sturge was replaced through illness prior to the race , the Light Blues also saw international @-@ standard rowers Alistair Christie and James Macleod in the crew , both of whom had withdrawn from selection for the 1974 race to represent Great Britain . Only two competitors in the race were registered as " overseas " Blues , Oxford 's number five John Hutchings and his counterpart and Tourek , both from the United States . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge started as pre @-@ race favourite ; according to the author and former rower Dickie Burnell , although Oxford had some " useful new recruits " no @-@ one " outside their immediate camp thought they could win . " Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station . Oxford took an early lead , but by the Mile Post , Cambridge had recovered to lead by two seconds . Extending their lead , the Light Blues gained a clear water advantage by Harrods Furniture Depository and moved in front of the Dark Blue boat . Shooting Hammersmith Bridge five seconds ahead , Cambridge held a length @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lead which they defended against a number of Oxford pushes . Midway round the Surrey bend , Oxford 's bow man Andrew Baird 's oar came out of its gate , allowing Cambridge to increase their lead by another length . A seven @-@ second lead at Chiswick Steps was extended to nine seconds by Barnes Bridge , and along the final bend , Cambridge pushed their lead further out to nearly four lengths , passing the finishing post in 19 minutes 27 seconds , thirteen seconds ahead of their rivals . It was Cambridge 's seventh victory in the previous eight years , having lost to Oxford in 1974 . 
 In the reserve race , Oxford 's Isis beat Cambridge 's Goldie by nine @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , their first win since the 1966 race . In the 30th running of the Women 's Boat Race , Cambridge triumphed , winning their 13th consecutive race . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Oxford 's Baird claimed " I might have caught a crab , but I do not really know what happened . " Cambridge number six MacLeod said of the Dark Blues : " They kept coming at us time and time again . I was only sure of victory in the last mile of the race . " Christopher Dodd , writing in The Guardian was impressed : " The contest had a rare element ... it was a race nearly all the way , and was not all over in the first 20 stokes as has so often been the case in recent years . " Burnell suggested it was a race for the aficionados : " This was surely one of those so common Boat Races , which are hard fought all the way , yet never exciting from the point of view of the average spectator . " 
 = Reginald de Warenne = 
 Reginald de Warenne ( sometimes Rainald de Warenne ; between 1121 and 1126 – 1179 ) was an Anglo @-@ Norman nobleman and royal official . The third son of an earl , Reginald began his career as an administrator of his brother 's estates and married the heiress to the feudal barony of Wormegay in Norfolk . By the reign of King Henry II , Reginald was a royal justice and played a minor role in the Becket controversy in 1170 . He died in 1179 and left a son and heir together with several daughters . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Reginald de Warenne was the third son of William de Warenne , the second Earl of Surrey , who died in 1138 . Reginald 's mother was Isabel de Vermandois . Reginald was likely born between 1121 and 1126 . Reginald 's brothers were William de Warenne , the third Earl of Surrey , and Ralph de Warenne . Reginald 's two sisters were Gundrada de Warenne who married first Roger , Earl of Warwick and then William of Lancaster , and Ada de Warenne who married Henry , Earl of Huntingdon . Ada 's husband was the only son of King David I of Scotland , and she was the mother of two kings of Scotland – Malcolm IV and William I. From their mother 's first marriage to Robert de Beaumont , Reginald and his siblings were half @-@ siblings of the twins Robert de Beaumont the Earl of Leicester and Waleran de Beaumont , the Count of Meulan and Earl of Worcester . There was another Reginald de Warenne alive during Reginald 's lifetime – this may have been an illegitimate half @-@ brother . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Reginald first appears in the historical record around 1138 when he was a witness on some of his father 's charters . Reginald was one of the main administrators of his elder brother 's estates up until 1147 . Reginald also had his own lands that he was granted from his brother 's honour in Norfolk and Sussex . While his brother was on crusade , Reginald granted the right to form a merchant guild to the inhabitants of the town of Lewes , as long as his brother agreed after his return from crusade . William , the third earl , died in early 1148 while on crusade and the earldom and estates passed to William 's daughter Isabel , whom King Stephen of England married to the king 's second son , William . Reginald continued to serve the new earl and also began to serve the king , witnessing a number of royal charters . Reginald eventually became the main advisor to the new earl . 
 Reginald was granted the castles of <unk> and Mortemer in the charter of Westminster in 1153 which settled the rights that William , the surviving son of King Stephen , received for not contesting the crown of England going to Henry of Anjou after Stephen 's death , and was also a witness to the charter . Reginald continued to serve as a royal official , witnessing a number of the new king 's charters . 
 = = Royal service = = 
 In 1157 Reginald was one of the justices present when King Henry II decided a case between Hilary of Chichester , the Bishop of Chichester and Walter de Luci , the Abbot of Battle Abbey . In 1164 he was present at the Council of Clarendon , which was part of the long struggle between King Henry II and the new Archbishop of Canterbury , Thomas Becket , over the control of the English church . Reginald also accompanied the king 's daughter Matilda to Germany for her marriage to Henry the Lion , Duke of Saxony . 
 Reginald was one of the four main justices involved with the general eyre in 1168 through 1170 , along with Richard of Ilchester , Guy the Dean of Waltham Holy Cross , and William Basset . In 1168 , Henry II summoned Reginald as a Serjeant @-@ at @-@ law , one of the first identifiable members of that order in the historical record . Besides these administrative and judicial roles , Reginald was a baron of the exchequer in 1169 and held the office of Sheriff of Sussex from 1170 to 1176 . 
 In 1170 , Reginald was involved with attempts to keep Thomas Becket , who had been in exile , from returning to England . Working with Reginald were Roger de Pont L 'Évêque – the Archbishop of York , Gilbert Foliot – the Bishop of London , Josceline de Bohon – the Bishop of Salisbury , Gervase de Cornhill – the Sheriff of Kent , and Ranulf de Broc . At that time , Reginald was a royal justiciar . Reginald was part of the party that met Becket at Sandwich on 1 December 1070 when the archbishop returned to England . Reginald 's group , led by Gervase of Cornhill , complained that the archbishop was sowing dissension in the land by his excommunication of the three ecclesiastics , but Becket managed to calm the officials by stating he would consider the matter and reply to them the next day . The next day the group was accompanied by some clergy sent by the ecclesiastics who had been excommunicated by Becket . Nothing further was accomplished by this meeting except further offers from Becket to consider other options . Reginald was involved in a further attempt at resolving the differences between the king and Becket later in December 1170 , which again came to nothing . 
 In 1173 Reginald worked for the king , along with Richard fitz Nigel and Nicholas de <unk> , when all three men assessed a land tax on parts of the royal demesne . These three men assessed the tax in the counties of Buckinghamshire , Bedfordshire , Oxfordshire , Kent and Sussex . During the Revolt of 1173 – 74 Reginald served the king as castellan of Hastings Castle . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Reginald married Alice , the daughter and heiress of William de Wormegay , Baron of Wormegay in Norfolk . William de Wormegay died in 1166 and Reginald was fined a bit over 466 pounds by the king for the right to inherit his father @-@ in @-@ law 's lands . With his father @-@ in @-@ law 's death he became Lord of Wormegay , or Baron Wormegay . This lordship was assessed at 14 and a quarter knight 's fees and was located mostly in Norfolk and Suffolk . The centre of the honour was at Lynn , Norfolk . 
 Sometime between Michaelmas 1178 and the start of 1179 , Reginald retired from public life and became a monk at Lewes Priory , which had been founded by his family . When he retired , the Exchequer began to pressure him to repay his debts owed to the king , which for the previous decade or more they had ignored . Reginald died in 1179 , and his heir was his son William de Warenne . Besides his son , Reginald also had several daughters . One was Gundrada who married three times – first to Peter de Valognes , son of Roger de Valognes , second to William de Courcy , son of William de Courcy and <unk> de <unk> the daughter of William Meschin , and third to Geoffrey Hose , the son of Henry Hose . Another daughter was Alice who married Peter , constable of <unk> . A possible third daughter was Muriel , who was a nun at Carrow Abbey . Another possible daughter was Ela , who married Duncan the Earl of Fife . At his death , Reginald still owed a large portion of the fine he 'd been assessed for the inheritance of his father @-@ in @-@ law 's estates . 
 The historian Edmund King has called Reginald " the fixer in that formidable family " . Reginald gave lands and gifts to a number of monasteries . Among these were the Warenne family foundations of Lewes and Castle Acre Priory , with further gifts to Carrow , Clerkenwell Priory , and <unk> Priory . 
 = 1988 Winter Olympics = 
 The 1988 Winter Olympics , officially known as the XV Olympic Winter Games ( French : Les <unk> Jeux olympiques d 'hiver ) , was a Winter Olympics multi @-@ sport event celebrated in and around Calgary , Alberta , Canada between February 13 and 28 , 1988 . The host city was selected in 1981 over Falun , Sweden and Cortina d 'Ampezzo , Italy . Most events took place in Calgary while several skiing events were held in the mountain resorts of Nakiska and Canmore , west of the city . 
 A then @-@ record 57 nations competed and 1 @,@ 423 athletes participated . The Soviet Union won the most medals with 29 , followed by East Germany with 25 . As it had in Montreal in 1976 , Canada again failed to win a gold medal in an official medal event as the host nation . Finnish ski jumper Matti Nykänen and Dutch speed skater Yvonne van Gennip were individual medal leaders , capturing three gold medals apiece . The games are also remembered for the " heroic failure " of British ski jumper Eddie " The Eagle " Edwards and the Winter Olympic début of the Jamaica national bobsled team , both of which would be subjects of major feature films about their participation in the games . 
 The Calgary games were at the time one of the most expensive Olympics ever held , but the organizing committee turned record television and sponsorship revenue into a net surplus that was used to maintain the facilities built for the Olympics and develop the Calgary region into the heart of Canada 's elite winter sports program . The five purpose @-@ built venues continue to be used in their original functions , and have helped the country develop into one of the top nations in Winter Olympic competition ; Canada more than quintupled the five medals it won in Calgary at the 2010 games , the next Winter Olympics hosted on Canadian soil . 
 = = Host city selection = = 
 The bid for the 1988 Winter Olympics was Canada 's seventh attempt at hosting a winter games and Calgary 's fourth . Previous bids representing Montreal ( 1956 ) and Vancouver ( 1976 and 1980 ) bookended failed attempts by the Calgary Olympic Development Association ( CODA ) to host the 1964 , 1968 and 1972 games . The CODA became dormant in 1966 after losing its bid for the 1972 Olympics , but was revived in 1979 under the leadership of Frank King to bid for the 1988 games . Calgary earned the right to bid on behalf of Canada by the Canadian Olympic Association ( COA ) , defeating a rival challenge from a group representing Vancouver . The defeated organizing group lamented that they lost to Calgary 's " big @-@ ticket games " ; the Calgary bid proposed to spend nearly three times what the Vancouver group expected to pay to host the Olympics . 
 The CODA then spent two years building local support for the project , selling memberships to 80 @,@ 000 of the city 's 600 @,@ 000 residents . It secured C $ 270 million in funding from the federal and provincial governments while civic leaders , including Mayor Ralph Klein , crisscrossed the world attempting to woo International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) delegates . Driven by the arrival of the National Hockey League 's Calgary Flames , the city had already begun constructing an Olympic coliseum ( later named the Olympic Saddledome ) prior to the IOC vote , an action that demonstrated Calgary 's determination to host the games and positively influenced delegates . The city was one of three finalists , opposed by the Swedish community of Falun and Cortina d 'Ampezzo , the Italian town that hosted the 1956 Winter Olympics . 
 The vote was held September 30 , 1981 , at Baden @-@ Baden , West Germany , during the 84th IOC Session and 11th Olympic Congress . After Cortina d 'Ampezzo was eliminated in the first round of balloting , Calgary won the right to host the games over Falun by a 48 – 31 vote . The announcement of the CODA 's victory sent delegates in Baden @-@ Baden and residents of Calgary into celebration . It was the first Winter Olympics awarded to Canada , and the second games overall , following the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal . 
 = = Venues = = 
 McMahon Stadium , Calgary 's primary outdoor facility , was the site of both the opening and closing ceremonies , the first time in 28 years that the same venue hosted both events . Three other existing venues served as secondary facilities : The Max Bell Centre hosted the demonstration events of curling and short track speed skating . The Father David Bauer Olympic Arena hosted some ice hockey matches , as did the Stampede Corral , which also played host to some figure skating events . Though the Corral did not support the size of the International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) ' s standard ice surface , the Calgary Organizing Committee ( Olympiques Calgary Olympics ' 88 or OCO ' 88 ) was able to convince the IIHF to sanction the arena in exchange for a $ 1 @.@ 2 million payment . 
 The Games ' five primary venues were all purpose @-@ built however , at significant cost . The Olympic Saddledome was the primary venue for ice hockey and figure skating . Located at Stampede Park , the facility was expected to cost $ 83 million but cost overruns pushed the facility to nearly $ 100 million . The Olympic Oval was built on the campus of the University of Calgary . It was the first fully enclosed 400 @-@ metre speed skating venue in the world as it was necessary to protect against the possibility of either bitter cold temperatures or ice @-@ melting chinook winds . Seven world and three Olympic records were broken during the Games , resulting in the facility earning praise as " the fastest ice on Earth " . Canada Olympic Park was built on the western outskirts of Calgary and hosted bobsled , luge , ski jumping and freestyle skiing . It was the most expensive facility built for the games , costing $ 200 million . 
 Two facilities were built west of Calgary , in the foothills of the Rocky Mountains . The Canmore Nordic Centre was 90 @-@ percent funded by the Province of Alberta at a cost of $ 17 @.@ 3 million . Located near the community of Canmore it was built with the intention that it would become a year @-@ round recreation destination for Albertans . The facility hosted cross @-@ country skiing , biathlon and Nordic combined events . Nakiska ( Cree for " to meet " ) was the most controversial facility built . The province paid the $ 25 million construction cost for the alpine skiing facility on Mount Allan , about an hour west of Calgary . It was initially criticized for the location 's relative lack of snow , requiring artificial snow making machines to be installed , and for an initial lack of technical difficulty . International Ski Federation officials proposed modifications to the courses that ultimately met with praise from competitors . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 The Calgary Olympics were the first to earn a significant television revenue base ; where the 1980 Lake Placid Games generated only US $ 20 @.@ 7 million worldwide , OCO ' 88 generated $ 324 @.@ 9 million in broadcast rights . The overwhelming majority of television revenues came from the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) , which agreed in 1984 to pay $ 309 million for American television rights , over three times the $ 91 @.@ 5 million it paid for the 1984 Winter Olympics in Sarajevo . The deal , at the time the highest amount ever paid for a sporting event , allowed organizers to announce the Games would be debt @-@ free . The CTV Television Network paid C $ 4 @.@ 5 million for Canadian rights and to act as the host broadcaster , while western European nations paid US $ 5 @.@ 7 million combined . 
 OCO ' 88 made several alterations to the Olympic program as part of efforts to ensure value for its broadcast partners . Premier events , including ice hockey and figure skating , were scheduled for prime time and the Games were lengthened to 16 days from the previous 12 to ensure three weekends of coverage . However , a significant downturn in advertising revenue for sporting events resulted in ABC forecasting significant financial losses on the Games . Calgary organizers appreciated their fortunate timing in signing the deal . King described the timing of the contract with ABC as " the passing of the sun and the moon at the right time for Calgary . " ABC lost an estimated $ 60 million , and broadcast rights to the 1992 Winter Olympics were later sold to the CBS network for $ 243 million , a 20 % reduction compared to Calgary . 
 = = = Ticketing controversies = = = 
 A series of ticket @-@ related scandals plagued the organizing committee as the Games approached , resulting in widespread public anger . Demand for tickets was high , particularly for the premier events which had sold out a year in advance . Residents had been promised that only 10 percent of tickets would go to " Olympic insiders " , IOC officials and sponsors , but OCO ' 88 was later forced to admit that up to 50 percent of seats to top events had gone to insiders . The organizing committee , which was subsequently chastised by mayor Klein for running a " closed shop " , admitted that it had failed to properly communicate the obligations it had to supply IOC officials and sponsors with priority tickets . These events were preceded by OCO ' 88 's ticketing manager being charged with theft and fraud after he sent modified ticket request forms to Americans that asked them to pay in United States funds rather than Canadian and to return them to his company 's post office box rather than that of the organizing committee . 
 Organizers attempted to respond to public concern by asking sponsors to consider reducing their orders and by paying $ 1 @.@ 5 million to add 2 @,@ 600 seats to the Saddledome . King also noted that the Calgary Games offered a then @-@ record 1 @.@ 7 million tickets for sale , three times the amount available at Sarajevo or Lake Placid , and that 82 percent of them were going to Calgarians . By their start , a Winter Games ' record of over 1 @.@ 4 million tickets had been sold , a figure that eclipsed the previous three Winter Games combined . 
 = = = Community = = = 
 The city , which already had a strong volunteering tradition with the annual Calgary Stampede , also relied heavily on volunteers to run the Olympics . Over 22 @,@ 000 people signed up to fill 9 @,@ 400 positions , no matter how inglorious : doctors , lawyers and executives offered to clean manure dropped by horses at the opening ceremonies . Many residents participated in a " <unk> " program , opening their homes to visitors from around the world and renting rooms to those who could not stay in a hotel . 
 Klein was among those who felt it necessary that the event be community driven , a decision which allowed the city 's welcoming spirit to manifest . The Games ' mascots , <unk> and Howdy , were designed to evoke images of " western hospitality " . The smiling , cowboy @-@ themed polar bears were popular across Canada . Played by a team of students from Bishop Carroll High School , the sister @-@ brother pair made up to 300 appearances per month in the lead up to the Games . From their introduction at the closing ceremonies of the Sarajevo Games in 1984 until their retirement at the conclusion of the Calgary Games , the pair made about 50 @,@ 000 appearances . The iconic mascots graced signs welcoming travelers to Calgary for nearly two decades until they were replaced in 2007 . 
 = = = Finances = = = 
 Held at a price of C $ 829 million , the Calgary Olympics cost more to stage than any previous Games , summer or winter . The high cost was anticipated , as organizers were aware at the outset of their bid that most facilities would have to be constructed . The venues , constructed primarily with public money , were designed to have lasting use beyond the Games and were planned to become the home of several of Canada 's national winter sports teams . Despite the high costs , OCO ' 88 anticipated a C $ 36 million surplus , though the organizing committee counted only its own expenditures and excluded government spending . 
 The Games were a major economic boon for the city which had fallen into its worst recession in 40 years following the collapse of both oil and grain prices in the mid @-@ 1980s . A report prepared for the city in January 1985 estimated the games would create 11 @,@ 100 man @-@ years of employment and generate C $ 450 @-@ million in salaries and wages . In its post @-@ Games report , OCO ' 88 estimated the Olympics created C $ 1 @.@ 4 billion in economic benefits across Canada during the 1980s , 70 percent within Alberta , as a result of capital spending , increased tourism and new sporting opportunities created by the facilities . 
 = = Torch relay = = 
 The 1988 Olympic torch relay began on November 15 , 1987 , when the torch was lit at Olympia and Greek runner <unk> <unk> began what was called " the longest torch run in history " . The flame arrived in St. John 's , Newfoundland on the Atlantic Ocean two days later and over 88 days traveled west across Canada . It passed through most major cities , north to the Arctic Ocean at <unk> , Northwest Territories , then west to the Pacific Ocean at Victoria , British Columbia before returning east to Alberta , and finally Calgary . The torch covered a distance of 18 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 11 @,@ 000 mi ) , the greatest distance for a torch relay in Olympic history until the 2000 Sydney Games , and a sharp contrast to the 1976 Montreal Games when the relay covered only 775 kilometres ( 482 mi ) . 
 Relay sponsor Petro Canada issued entry forms allowing citizens the chance to become one of 6 @,@ 214 people to carry the torch for 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) . Organizers , who initially expected to receive 250 @,@ 000 entries , were inundated with over 6 @.@ 6 million forms and called the response a sign that the Olympics had " fired the imagination of Canada " . The relay , called " Share the Flame " , also saw the torch travel by boat , snowmobile and <unk> . 
 The relay was subject to peaceful protests by members and supporters of the <unk> Cree First Nation at several stops in Ontario and Alberta in protest of ongoing land claim disputes between the band and the Crown , as well as discontent over an exhibit at Calgary 's Glenbow Museum called " The Spirit Sings " that featured numerous artifacts stolen from native land . 
 The identity of the final torchbearer who would light the Olympic cauldron was one of OCO ' 88 's most closely guarded secrets . The relay began at St. John 's with Barbara Ann Scott and Fred Hayward representing Canada 's past Olympians , and ended with Ken Read and Cathy <unk> carrying the torch into McMahon Stadium representing the nation 's current Olympians . They then handed the torch to 12 @-@ year @-@ old Robyn Perry , an aspiring figure skater who was selected to represent future Olympians , to light the cauldron . The choice of Perry was an unusual departure from most Games as the cauldron has typically been lit by a famous individual or group from the host nation . 
 Constructed of maple and aluminum , the torch was designed to remain lit despite the sometimes adverse conditions of Canadian winters . It was modeled after the Calgary Tower , constructed entirely of Canadian materials and designed to be light enough for the relay runners to carry comfortably . The Calgary Tower itself was retrofitted to install a cauldron at its peak and was lit for the duration of the Games , one of several " replica cauldrons " constructed at Olympic venues throughout Calgary and Canmore . 
 = = Event highlights = = 
 There were 46 events contested in 6 sports ( 10 disciplines ) . 
 The 1988 Winter Games began on February 13 with a $ 10 million opening ceremony that featured 5 @,@ 500 performers , an aerial flyover by the Royal Canadian Air Force 's <unk> , the parade of nations and the release of 1 @,@ 000 homing pigeons . Canadian composer David Foster performed the instrumental theme song ( " Winter Games " ) and its vocal counterpart ( " Can 't You Feel It ? " ) , while internationally recognized Canadian folk / country musicians Gordon Lightfoot and Ian Tyson were among the featured performers . Governor General Jeanne Sauvé opened the Games on behalf of Queen Elizabeth II as an estimated 1 @.@ 5 billion people watched the ceremony . 
 The weather was a dominant story throughout much of the Games , as strong chinook winds that brought daily temperatures as high as 17 ° C ( 63 ° F ) wreaked havoc on the schedules for outdoor events . Events were delayed when winds were deemed unsafe for competitors and organizers used artificial snow making equipment to ensure skiing venues were properly prepared . It was the first time in Olympic history that alpine events were held on artificial snow . The Games were also marred by the death of the Austrian ski team 's doctor , <unk> <unk> , on February 25 after a collision with another skier sent him crashing into a snow grooming machine at Nakiska , crushing and killing him instantly . The incident was ruled an accident . 
 The top individual competitors at the Olympics were Finnish ski jumper Matti Nykänen and Dutch speed skater Yvonne van Gennip as they each won three gold medals . Italy 's Alberto <unk> won gold in two skiing events , his first of five career Olympic medals en route to becoming the first alpine skier to win medals at three Winter Games . East Germany 's Katarina Witt defended her 1984 gold medal in women 's figure skating , capturing a second gold in Calgary . Her compatriot Christa <unk> won the gold medal in the 1000 metre race in speed skating , then went on to win a silver medal in the team sprint cycling event at the 1988 Summer Games to become the only person in Olympic history to win medals at both Olympic Games in the same year . The Soviet Union won gold in hockey as Scandinavian neighbours Finland and Sweden took silver and bronze , respectively . 
 As it had in 1976 , Canada again failed to win an official gold medal as the host of an Olympic Games . Canadians won two gold medals in demonstration events , including by Sylvie Daigle as one of her five medals in short @-@ track speed skating . Canada 's top official performances came in figure skating where Brian Orser and Elizabeth Manley each won silver medals . Promoted by the media as the " Battle of the Brians " , the competition between Orser and American rival Brian Boitano was the marquee event of the Games . Boitano won the gold medal over Orser by only one @-@ tenth of a point . Manley was not viewed as a medal contender , but skated the greatest performance of her career to come within a fraction of Witt 's gold medal winning score . 
 American speed skater Dan Jansen 's personal tragedy was one of the more poignant events of the Games as he skated the 500 metre race mere hours after his sister Jane died of leukemia . A gold medal favourite , Jansen chose to compete as he felt it is what his sister would have wanted . Viewers around the world witnessed his heartbreak as he fell and crashed into the outer wall in the first quarter of his heat . In the 1000 metre race four days later , Jansen was on a world record pace when he again fell . After failing again in Albertville , Jansen finally won a gold medal at the 1994 <unk> Games . 
 One of the most popular athletes from the games was British ski jumper Eddie " The Eagle " Edwards , who gained infamy by placing last in both the 70 and 90 metre events finishing 70 and 53 points behind his next closest competitor , respectively . Edwards ' " heroic failure " made him an instant celebrity ; he went from earning £ 6 @,@ 000 per year as a plasterer before the Games to making £ 10 @,@ 000 per hour per appearance afterward . Left embarrassed by the spectacle he created , the International Ski Federation altered the rules following Calgary to eliminate each nation 's right to send at least one athlete and set minimum competition standards for future events . Regardless , the President of the Organizing Committee , Frank King , playfully saluted Edwards ' unorthodox sporting legacy , which would also be commemorated with a 2016 feature film , Eddie the Eagle . 
 The Jamaican bobsleigh team , making their nation 's Winter Olympic debut , was also popular in Calgary . The team was the brainchild of a pair of Americans who recruited individuals with strong sprinting ability from the Jamaican military to form the team . Dudley Stokes and Michael White finished the two @-@ man event in 30th place out of 41 competitors and launched the Jamaican team into worldwide fame . The pair , along with Devon Harris and Chris Stokes crashed in the four man event , but were met with cheers from the crowd as they pushed their sled across the finish line . Their odyssey was made into the 1993 movie Cool Runnings , a largely fictionalized comedy by Walt Disney Pictures . 
 = = Games = = 
 = = = Participating National Olympic Committees = = = 
 A record 57 National Olympic Committees ( NOCs ) entered athletes at the 1988 Calgary Olympics , 8 more than appeared at any previous Winter Games . 1 @,@ 423 athletes participated in 46 events : 1 @,@ 122 men and 301 women . Fiji , Guam , Guatemala , Jamaica , the Netherlands Antilles and the Virgin Islands had their Winter Olympics debut . 
 = = = Calendar = = = 
 In the following calendar for the 1988 Winter Olympic Games , each blue box indicates that an event competition , such as a qualification round , was held on that day . The yellow boxes represent days during which medal @-@ awarding finals for a sport were held with the number in these boxes representing the number of finals that were contested on that day . 
 = = = Medal table = = = 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Prior to Calgary , the Winter Olympics were viewed as a second @-@ rate event compared to their summer counterpart , so much so that the IOC had at one point considered eliminating them entirely . Few cities bid on the Winter Games due to challenges faced in generating revenue . In its bid for the Games , CODA convinced the IOC that it could not only generate enough revenue to turn a profit , but enough of one to ensure a lasting legacy of winter sport development . Organizers followed the lead of their counterparts in Los Angeles for the 1984 Summer Olympics , attracting a large television contract in the United States and was the first host city to benefit from a change in the IOC 's strategy on corporate sponsorship . The Calgary Games attracted support from over two dozen major Canadian and multinational corporations , generating millions of dollars in revenues . 
 Many program changes were made in Calgary to grow the appeal of the Winter Games for sponsors : the extension to 16 days from 12 added an extra weekend of coverage , while the additional programming time was filled by television friendly demonstration events popular in Canada . The exposure curling , freestyle skiing and short @-@ track speed skating gained in Calgary influenced the growth in their popularity and led to all three becoming full medal sports by 1998 . 
 = = = Impact on Calgary = = = 
 Hosting the Games helped fuel a significant increase in Calgary 's reputation on the world stage . Crosbie Cotton , a reporter for the Calgary Herald who covered the city 's Olympic odyssey from its bid to the closing ceremonies , noted a change in the attitude of the city 's population over time . He believed that the populace began to outgrow its " giant inferiority complex " that is " typically Canadian " , replacing it with a new level of confidence as the Games approached . They helped the city grow from a regional oil and gas centre best known for the Calgary Stampede to a destination for international political , economic and sporting events . A study prepared for the organizing committee of the 2010 Vancouver Olympics claimed that Calgary hosted over 200 national and international sporting competitions between 1987 and 2007 due to the facilities it had constructed for the Olympics . 
 The Games ' enduring popularity within Calgary has been attributed to efforts to make them " everybody 's Games " . Aside from the sense of community fostered by the level of volunteer support , organizers included the public in other ways . People were given opportunity to purchase a brick with their names engraved on it and used to build Olympic Plaza , where medal ceremonies were held in 1988 . It remains a popular public park and event site in the city 's downtown . Members of the community have attempted to bring a second Winter Games to the city . Calgary offered to take over the 2002 Winter Olympics after a bribery scandal resulted in speculation that Salt Lake City would be unable to remain the host . The city also made an effort to bid for the 2010 Games on Canada 's behalf , losing to Vancouver . A 2013 Calgary Sun online poll found that 81 % of respondents would support the city hosting a second Olympics . 
 = = = Canada 's development as a winter sport nation = = = 
 Mindful of the financial disaster the Montreal Olympics became , OCO ' 88 parlayed its ability to generate television and sponsorship revenues and government support into what was ultimately a C $ 170 million surplus . ( The claim of a surplus has frequently been challenged as OCO ' 88 counted only its own revenues and expenses and did not include government funded facilities in its accounting . ) The surplus was turned into endowment funds split between Canada Olympic Park ( $ 110 million ) and CODA , which was reformed following the Games to manage the Olympic facilities with a trust fund that had subsequently grown to be worth over $ 200 million by 2013 . Consequently , all five of the primary facilities built for the 1988 Olympics remained operational in their original intended purpose 25 years after the Games concluded . 
 Calgary and Canmore became the heart of winter sport in Canada as CODA ( now known as <unk> Canada ) established itself as the nation 's leader in developing elite athletes ; in 2006 , one @-@ quarter of Canada 's Olympic athletes were from the Calgary region and three @-@ quarters of its medalists were from or trained in Alberta . Canada was not a winter sport power in 1988 ; the nation 's five medals in Calgary was its second best total at a Winter Olympics behind the seven it won at the 1932 Lake Placid Games . After 1988 , Canada won an increasing number of medals at each successive Olympics , culminating in a 26 @-@ medal performance in 2010 that included a Winter Olympic record of 14 gold medals , one more than the previous record holders Soviet Union ( 1976 ) and Norway ( 2002 ) . 
 = Harry Kim ( Star Trek ) = 
 Ensign Harry S. L. Kim is a fictional character who appeared in each of the seven seasons of the American television series Star Trek : Voyager . Portrayed by Garrett Wang , he is the Operations Officer aboard the Starfleet starship USS Voyager . There was some difficulty in casting the part prior to the start of the series in 1995 , with a reported lack of young Asian actors to choose from . 
 The character first appeared in the pilot episode of the series , " Caretaker " . The character continued to appear throughout the series in a main cast role , with his final appearance in the finale , " Endgame " . In that episode , an alternative future version of the character is seen as a Starfleet Captain . He is typically shown as being naive , especially in romantic situations , but gifted . The character finds the ship 's first possible route home , and in one alternative future , he manages to develop a transwarp drive which allows him and Chakotay to travel home in a matter of hours but kills the rest of the crew . The producers had considered whether or not to kill off Kim during the third season . Wang subsequently reprised the role of Harry Kim for the fan @-@ made Star Trek : Renegades . 
 Reviewers said that Kim represented one of the elements of multiculturalism in the crew of Voyager , which also represented a proxy family for Kim . The storylines featuring Kim frequently had the character captured by aliens , something which was described as a typical Voyager storyline by critics . " Timeless " has been ranked as the best episode to feature Kim , and also the third best of the series , but holodeck episodes featuring Kim have also been listed by Io9 as some of the worst of their type in the franchise . 
 = = Concept and development = = 
 The character went through more than one name prior to casting , with it being called Jay Osaka at one point . The series bible for Star Trek : Voyager described Kim as being a sheltered individual who had sought to repay the love of his parents through fulfilling their expectations for him at Starfleet Academy . Winrich Kolbe , the director of the Voyager pilot " Caretaker " , was involved in the casting process and found Kim difficult as there wasn 't a great number of young Asian actors to choose from . He said that the role was an " inexperienced , naive character " , and that the actor cast as Kim would need to fight to stay in the forefront of episodes . 
 At the time of the casting , Garrett Wang had only been acting for about a year and a half , and after he was cast in the role he was described by Kolbe as a " young , up @-@ and @-@ coming actor , but he needs to learn , and that 's going to take some time . He 's one of the actors who has to really work hard on his craft in order to keep up with the others . " The naivety of the character was emphasized in the media reports , with TV Guide describing the character prior to the launch of the series as " green @-@ around @-@ the @-@ gills " . 
 Wang was enthusiastic about his new role , describing Kim 's background by saying that " I had a stellar Starfleet Academy career and am basically the rookie on the bridge . I 'm an Asian @-@ American . There 's the professional competence , but also the inner fear , ' Oh my God , are these britches too big for me ? ' His heritage is one of focus , of Zen and martial arts " . Of the casting , he said that " My goal now is to do the best job possible playing Harry Kim and to begin repaying my parents for the unaccountable financial support they have given me throughout the years . " The pilot of Voyager was broadcast on January 16 , 1995 . 
 Wang had initially gone along with the writing on the show until towards the end of the second season when he asked the production writers if he could have some actions scenes and perhaps a romance . He had realised at the time that he was the only member of the main cast without a stunt double as he had never had an action scene that required one . This resulted in the Brannon Braga penned " Non Sequitur " , to which Wang said to Rick Berman that there wasn 't a need to give him all his requests in a single episode . Following that , he became more involved in suggestions for character direction , but the writers avoided giving Kim more of a comedic element similar to The Doctor ( Robert Picardo ) and Neelix ( Ethan Phillips ) . Wang described himself as someone who tells jokes and makes impersonations on sets and was disappointed at not being able to utilise this nature . The producers at one point had planned to permanently kill off Harry Kim during season three , but after Wang was included in the People list of sexiest people alive 1997 , the plan was abandoned . 
 By season five of Voyager , certain characters were seen by the production staff as being under @-@ utilised , Kim amongst them . This led to episodes placing Kim , Chakotay and Tuvok in central positions , including the episode " Timeless " for the character of Kim . Wang was pleased with the episode , and felt that being able to act as the two different versions of Kim showed " a great dichotomy " . Following the end of the show in 2001 , Wang had felt that the character should have been promoted during the course of the series , but was told by producers that " someone 's got to be the ensign " . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 Kim was born in <unk> . After graduating from Starfleet Academy in 2370 , his first assignment was as the Operations Officer aboard USS Voyager as seen in " Caretaker " . Kim immediately became friends with Tom Paris ( Robert Duncan McNeill ) after he was assigned to the vessel for the mission which saw Voyager sent to track down a Maquis vessel in the Badlands . During this mission , the ship is sent some 70 @,@ 000 light years into the Delta Quadrant , where Kim and B 'Elanna Torres ( Roxann Dawson ) are abducted to an <unk> medical facility . Both infected by an unknown ailment , they are rescued by and cured on Voyager on their escape from the underground city ; they are cured on board . At the time of the stranding of the ship , Kim was engaged to be married , but Kim was encouraged to date other crew members by Paris . 
 In " Eye of the Needle " , Kim found the ship 's first contact back with the Alpha Quadrant when he discovered a micro @-@ wormhole . It was discovered that it linked through to Romulan space some twenty years in the past . Kim twice travels through long @-@ range transportation systems . In " <unk> " , he is accidentally transported to the <unk> homeworld by the effects of an alien burial system . He escapes the <unk> and manages to go through the funeral system , killing him but returning him to Voyager where he is revived . When the crew meet the <unk> in " Prime Factors " , Kim is the first crewman to be transported through their spatial <unk> over a distance of some 40 @,@ 000 light years . Ultimately the technology proves incompatible with Voyager 's systems . On stardate <unk> @.@ 2 ( the episode " Heroes and Demons " ) , Kim is the first crewmember to be converted into energy by an alien creature appearing in a Beowulf holodeck programme . After the Doctor resolves the situation , Kim and two other crewmembers are restored . 
 Following a transporter accident , Kim awakes in San Francisco next to his fiancée , Libby ( Jennifer Gatti ) in the episode " Non Sequitur " . He finds that he never travelled on board Voyager , and nor did Paris . After being contacted by an alien , he discovers that the transporter interacted with an alien " time @-@ stream " and sent him into an alternative reality . After he receives assistance from Paris and the alien , he manages to restore the timeline and return to Voyager . During the episode " Persistence of Vision " , Kim hallucinates Libby after Voyager attempts to enter <unk> space . On stardate <unk> @.@ 7 , Voyager enters a plasma cloud to avoid <unk> vessels in " Deadlock " . It is damaged , and Kim is sucked out through a hull breach into space and killed , while Naomi Wildman dies shortly after being born . The crew then find a duplicate Voyager in better condition occupying the same space but slightly out of phase . When the <unk> attack the other Voyager , the alternative Kim is sent to the damaged version of the ship carrying the living Naomi Wildman shortly before the alternative Voyager self @-@ destructs . This destroys the two <unk> vessels , and the damaged version of Voyager continues on its way , carrying a different version of Kim and Wildman . 
 Whilst on shore leave on <unk> , Kim and Paris are falsely accused of a terrorist bombing . They are imprisoned on the planet , while the Voyager crew track down the real offenders , who help them rescue their crewmen ( episode " The Chute " . ) Whilst the crew are studying a nebula ( " Alter Ego " ) , Kim and Tuvok both become romantically attached to a holodeck character ; she turns out to be controlled by an alien on a nearby space station . Kim becomes infected with <unk> DNA leading him to suspect that he may be a member of their species in " Favorite Son " . But after discovering that it is all a ploy to extract his genetic material , he is saved by Voyager . In an alternative future seen in " Before and After " , Tom Paris and Kes ( Jennifer Lien ) marry , and give birth to a daughter <unk> ( Jessica Collins ) . <unk> and Kim marry , beget a child , Andrew Kim . 
 Kim becomes infected after being attacked by a member of Species 8472 whilst as a member of an away team aboard a Borg Cube in " Scorpion " . He is cured by the Doctor after the hologram develops a process utilising Borg nano @-@ probes . He is initially apprehensive working with the former Borg Seven of Nine ( Jeri Ryan ) but soon forms a new friendship . Following the events of " Demon " , Kim is one of the first crewmembers to be duplicated by an alien entity on a class @-@ Y planet . The duplicate crew are later killed after they leave the planet , and forget that they are duplicates . The duplicate version of Kim is the last Captain of the ship , before deciding to drop out of warp by ejecting the warp core , destroying it . Kim develops a transwarp drive in " Timeless " , which should allow Voyager to return to the Alpha Quadrant in hours . During the trip home , the ship is destroyed but Kim and Chakotay make it through on a shuttle . Years later , an older Kim and Chakotay find the destroyed Voyager and Kim manages to send a message back in time to Seven of Nine , averting the disaster and resetting the timeline . 
 Kim becomes infected with a bio @-@ chemical bond after having sex with a Varro named Tal ( <unk> Vander ) in " The Disease " , but the effects are removed by the Doctor . Alongside Tom Paris , Kim creates an Irish village holodeck program in " Fair Haven " . This later causes problems when the holodeck characters begin to recognise changes made to the program and that the Starfleet crew are not from their " world " . Kim is once again imprisoned by an alien race in " Body and Soul when he is part of the crew on the Delta Flyer which is captured by the <unk> for transporting a hologram through their space . Whilst on another mission in the Delta Flyer in " Nightingale " , Kim takes command of an <unk> vessel , wanting to show that he can command after spending the past seven years as an Ensign on board Voyager . He manages to return the ship to its homeworld , evading an <unk> fleet en route . In " Prophecy " , Kim is sexually pursued by the Klingon Ch <unk> ( Peggy Jo Jacobs ) ; she later chooses Neelix instead . In the alternative future seen at the start of the series finale , " Endgame " , Kim has been promoted to the rank of Captain aboard the USS Rhode Island . He attempts to convince Admiral Kathryn Janeway ( Kate Mulgrew ) out of her plan to travel back in time to help Voyager return home , but instead helps her when a Klingon vessel attacks her shuttle . 
 = = = Voyager relaunch novels = = = 
 A series of non @-@ canon novels were launched in 2003 by Pocket Books set after the return of Voyager to the Alpha Quadrant . In these novels , Harry Kim is promoted to Lieutenant and assigned as Security Chief onboard Voyager under Captain Chakotay . In the Star Trek : Online spin @-@ off novel The Needs of the Many , published in 2010 , Harry Kim is the commanding officer of Starbase 11 in the year 2400 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The mothering nature of Janeway on Kim has been described by reviewers , with the crew forming a type of family network which has Kim as a surrogate son . His separation from his nuclear family at a young age is described as cruel , and Janeway , Chakotay and Tuvok are highlighted as his de facto parents in the series . This motherly position was described by Michelle Erica Green in her review of the episode " The Disease " for TrekNation , who described certain scenes as Kim needing to request permission from " Mommy " in order to have a relationship with an alien . She felt that the disease itself caused the character to grow a " backbone " as he had rarely asserted himself previously to the Captain . 
 Kim has been used to show the multiculturalism of Star Trek : Voyager . One scene was described in " Faces " by Elisabeth Anne Leonard which featured a sweeping shot around the command table of Janeway , Chakotay , Tuvok and Kim , showing a Caucasian race woman , a Native American , a man of Asian descent and a black Vulcan in a single shot . Kim 's persistent optimism has been highlighted , with him being one of the few characters in the series who by the seventh series still believed that they would return home in their lifetime . Kim seemed to be frequently captured by alien species during the course of the series to the extent that it was described as one of the typical storylines seen in Voyager during an overview by The A.V. Club . 
 The authors of the book Deep Space and Sacred Time : Star Trek in the American Mythos state that the episode " Deadlock , " which featured the death of Kim , was one of several examples in the Star Trek franchise where the death of a major character is reversed by a parallel existence . Other examples included in The Next Generation with the return of Tasha Yar in " Yesterday 's Enterprise " and the death of Miles O 'Brien in the Deep Space Nine episode " Visionary " . They felt that Kim also shared another similarity with " Yesterday 's Enterprise " in that in the episode " Non Sequitur " , he feels that reality has been changed – which was similar to the experience that Guinan felt in The Next Generation episode . 
 Amongst Kim 's relationships included the relationship with a character on the ship 's holodeck in the episode " Alter Ego " , but after building a rivalry for the character 's affections with Tuvok , he becomes disinterested after finding out that the character was being played by a real person . This relationship was highlighted as an example of how Star Trek describes the ideal woman as an " objectified embodiment of male desire with no inner self to complicate the so @-@ called relationship that a man may have with her " . 
 Juliette Harrisson for the website Den of Geek described " Timeless " as the best Harry Kim episode , and was the third best episode of Voyager overall . She said that " Wang ’ s bitter , emotionally scarred performance holds together an hour which also features some lovely imagery " . Episodes centering on Kim were included in io9 's list of the worst holodeck related episodes in Star Trek . These included " The Thaw " , with the worst moment described as " the Harry Kim baby thing " . Other episodes highlighted as bad included " Fair Haven " while it stated that it skipped the first season " Heroes and Demons " . Wang later returned to Star Trek in fan @-@ made productions and to the role of Harry Kim in Star Trek : Renegades , alongside Manu <unk> and Tim Russ from Voyager . 
 = Boyce McDaniel = 
 Boyce Dawkins McDaniel ( June 11 , 1917 - May 8 , 2002 ) was an American nuclear physicist who worked on the Manhattan Project and later directed the Cornell University Laboratory of Nuclear Studies ( LNS ) . McDaniel was skilled in constructing " atom smashing " devices to study the fundamental structure of matter and helped to build the most powerful particle accelerators of his time . Together with his graduate student , he invented the pair spectrometer . 
 During World War II , McDaniel used his electronics expertise to help develop cyclotrons used to separate Uranium isotopes . McDaniel is also noted as having performed the final check on the first atomic bomb prior to its detonation in the Trinity test . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Born in Brevard , North Carolina , McDaniel attended Chesterville High School in Ohio . After graduating in 1933 , he attended Ohio Wesleyan University , from which he graduated in 1938 with a Bachelor of Science . His initial postgraduate studies took place at the Case School of Applied Science , graduating with a Master 's degree in 1940 . McDaniel continued postgraduate studies when he moved to Cornell University , and in 1943 he completed his doctoral thesis , examining the absorption rates of neutrons in indium . The research was not classified , but McDaniel and Robert Bacher , his adviser at Cornell , marked it as " secret " on their own initiative . From Cornell , McDaniel moved to MIT where he held a postdoctoral position , studying " the rapidly evolving field of fast electronics " , which he applied to research in particle physics . 
 After the outbreak of World War II , McDaniel joined Bacher in Los Alamos , New Mexico to work for the Manhattan Project , where he became a part of Robert R. Wilson 's cyclotron research team . McDaniel was to have " a crucial role in helping to identify the amount of uranium @-@ 235 needed to ... detonate the world 's first nuclear bomb " . McDaniel is also noted as having performed the final check on the first atomic bomb prior to its detonation in the Trinity test . 
 McDaniel was one of many <unk> Project researchers to join the Cornell faculty after the war . He became an assistant professor in 1946 and became a full professor in 1955 . With his Ph.D. student Robert Walker , he invented the pair spectrometer , a device that measures gamma ray energies . He was a co @-@ founder of Cornell 's Laboratory for Nuclear Studies ( LNS ) and had a helped create the 300 <unk> ( MeV ) electron synchrotron , one of the first such accelerators in the world . He and Wilson , who was McDaniel 's predecessor as director of LNS , built three more electron synchrotrons of 1 GeV , 2 GeV , and 10 GeV , each of which enabled physicists to study phenomena in a new energy range . McDaniel quickly earned a reputation as a hands @-@ on designer as indicated by this episode in the construction of the 300 MeV synchrotron : 
 The magnet coil was wound incorrectly , a fatal flaw . To get it repaired by the manufacturer could take months . Mac made a toy model of the coil , studied it carefully for an evening , and discovered an ingenious but simple way to repair it , which he did in about a day , and defused the crisis . 
 He was a Fulbright research fellow in 1953 at the Australian National University and a Guggenheim fellow in 1959 at the University of Rome . 
 In 1967 , McDaniel became director of LNS and served until he retired from the Cornell faculty in 1985 . He research included important measurements with each of the series of LNS accelerators , including studies lambda @-@ meson photo production , K @-@ meson production , and measurements of the neutron electromagnetic form factors . 
 Wilson and McDaniel continued to collaborate at Cornell until Wilson left to head Fermilab in Batavia , Illinois in 1967 . In 1972 , Wilson invited McDaniel to serve as acting head of the accelerator section at Fermilab , and <unk> took a one year leave of absence from Cornell . Though the Fermilab accelerator had been placed into operation , it suffered from frequent component failures . When McDaniel left eight months later , he led the effort which increased the power of Fermilab 's accelerator from 20 GeV to 300 GeV and its beam density by a factor of 1000 . Of McDaniel 's contribution to Fermilab , Wilson said , " This bravura performance demonstrated Mac ’ s skill for leadership as well as his celebrated sixth sense for finding sources of trouble and fixing them . ” Upon returning to Cornell in 1974 , McDaniel proposed upgrading the then existing 10 GeV synchrotron with an 8 GeV electron @-@ positron storage ring , which would greatly increase the energy of particle collisions when the particles in the storage ring hit the particles traveling in the opposite direction in the synchrotron . When constructed in 1979 , the Cornell Electron Storage Ring became the world 's primary source of information about one of the fundamental building blocks of matter , the b @-@ quark . After the end of particle physics experiments 20 years later , CESR is now used as a test facility of damping rings for a future international linear collider . In 1981 , McDaniel developed a proposal for a new mile @-@ diameter electron @-@ positron collider called <unk> II , but could not obtain the necessary $ 200 million in funding for it . In 1988 , McDaniel was Visiting Distinguished Professor at Arizona State University . 
 When interviewed in 1973 about his feelings on his work resulting in the dropping of atomic bombs on Japanese cities , McDaniel said : 
 It 's so difficult to assess these things today . I would have preferred to see a demonstration and am rather sad that it didn 't work out that way ... but I don 't know if it would have worked out as a useful venture . I have no idea what the Japanese would have done . 
 = = Honors = = 
 McDaniel was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 1981 . He was a governing board member of Fermilab , a trustee of the Associated Universities , a member of the Department of Energy High Energy Advisory Panel , a trustee of the Universities Research Association and a board member of Brookhaven National Laboratory . 
 In 1993 , the McDaniels donated a farm to the Cornell Plantations , which named the 60 @.@ 6 acre property the Jane McDaniel Preserve . 
 McDaniel died of a heart attack in Ithaca , New York at the age 84 . 
 = What Is ... Cliff Clavin ? = 
 " What Is ... Cliff Clavin ? " is an eighth season episode of the American television series Cheers . It was directed by Andy Ackerman rather than James Burrows — who directed 243 out of 273 episodes of the show — and originally aired on January 18 , 1990 . In this episode , Cliff Clavin ( John Ratzenberger ) appears on the game show Jeopardy ! and game show host Alex Trebek guest stars as himself . Cliff racks up US $ 22 @,@ 000 during the game but loses it all in the final round . The episode received praise from critics for its concept and its guest star . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Cliff Clavin ( John Ratzenberger ) competes on the television game show Jeopardy ! , which has temporarily moved taping to Boston for a special occasion , and amasses $ 22 @,@ 000 by the end of the Double Jeopardy ! round , more than twice the score of the second place contestant , theoretically ensuring a win . For the Final Jeopardy ! clue of " Archibald Leach , Bernard Schwartz and Lucille LeSueur " in the category of " Movies " , Cliff responds incorrectly with " Who are 3 people who 've never been in my kitchen ? " Having wagered his entire score , Cliff loses all of his winnings . Cliff objects and argues , demanding that his answer be accepted . The show 's host , Alex Trebek , later arrives at Cheers , tells Cliff that his response should have been accepted earlier , and announces his resignation as the host of Jeopardy ! . However , Cliff convinces Trebek to remain as host by telling him how much the show and Trebek mean to him . After Cliff shares the news with others , Norm Peterson ( George Wendt ) praises Trebek for doing this just to make Cliff feel better . However , Trebek says that he did not realize that Cliff was at the bar and that meeting him had been a coincidence . Trebek says that Cliff scares him and that the story about quitting the show was a fabrication to placate him . 
 Meanwhile , Sam Malone ( Ted Danson ) receives telephone calls from women whom he previously dated ; they are angry with him for making dates and not arriving . He eventually discovers that his " little black book " has been stolen and enrolls the help of bar patrons to find it . Through their detective work , Sam discovers that the thief has called Sam 's women alphabetically and that Rebecca Howe ( Kirstie Alley ) is the next recipient on the list . The thief turns out to be a teenage boy named Timmy ( Greg E. Davis ) , who wants to become a " babe hound " like Sam . To let Timmy go , Sam tells him to start as a " babe pup " and to call girls who are around his age , and gives him $ 25 for a haircut and a tip for a shampoo girl . 
 = = Reception = = 
 General Norman Schwarzkopf said this was the funniest episode of Cheers . Don Leighton from Superior Telegram called this episode the greatest and said the Final Jeopardy ! moment was hilarious . Jeffrey Robinson from DVD Talk said the category topics – specifically " Civil Servants " , " Stamps from Around the World " , " Mothers and Sons " , " Beer " , " Bar Trivia " , and " Celibacy " from the first round of Jeopardy ! – and the concept of the episode were a riot . Hot Springs Village Voice called Cliff 's Final Jeopardy ! moment a classic example of his mishaps caused by his own " know @-@ it @-@ all nature " . Andrew <unk> , in his book Hope , called this episode " one of the most memorable episodes " of Cheers , found Cliff 's response to the Final Jeopardy ! clue neither right nor wrong and an example of divergent thinking , and called Cliff a poster child of Joy Paul Guilford . Former Jeopardy ! contestant Ken Jennings , in his book Brainiac , considered this episode of all Jeopardy ! -related episodes essential as other episodes that focus on characters who either are trapped in an elevator or have two dates on the same night . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 An early Jeopardy ! reference to the Cheers episode happened during the airing of the final round of the Jeopardy ! College Championship on May 18 , 1990 . Soon @-@ to @-@ be champion Michael Thayer of Rutgers College bet $ 0 and wrote " Who was someone I never met ? " as his response in the Final Jeopardy ! round . When the contestants ' wagers and responses were revealed , Trebek commented , " Michael , looks like you were watching that episode of Cheers . " In 1999 , another Jeopardy ! contestant responded to the Final Jeopardy ! clue with this question , inspired by Cliff Clavin 's incorrect response in the Final Jeopardy ! round : " What is a book that has never been in my kitchen ? " According to Michael <unk> from Westfield , New Jersey , Alex Trebek later recalled Cliff 's losing moment and then " broke into a huge laugh " . 
 Peter <unk> from InfoWorld defined " pulling a Clavin " as a reference to Cliff Clavin 's wagering all his leading score and then losing all to a zero in the Final Jeopardy ! round and as a tactic to avoid in Jeopardy ! In the Jeopardy ! fan community , the episode gave rise to what is known as " Clavin 's Rule " ( or " pulling a Cliff Clavin " ) , a rule of thumb that states that a player should not wager enough to endanger a " lock " or " runaway " game ( one where the first @-@ place player has more than twice the score of the second @-@ place player ) , no matter how tempting the category . 
 In the Double Jeopardy ! round of the Jeopardy ! episode from May 10 , 2005 , the categories were the same as those shown in Cliff Clavin 's game : <unk> <unk> , <unk> FROM <unk> THE WORLD , MOTHERS & <unk> , <unk> , " BAR " <unk> , and <unk> . 
 On the first episode of Jeopardy ! season 31 , which aired on September 15 , 2014 , Jeopardy ! champion Elizabeth Williams echoed Cliff Clavin 's answer in her response to the Final Jeopardy clue . Williams ' $ 600 wager combined with her opponents ' incorrect responses allowed Williams to triumph that day , nonetheless . 
 = Chrono Break = 
 Chrono Break was a trademark for a video game registered by Square ( now Square Enix ) in the United States on December 5 , 2001 . A similar trademark was registered by the company in the European Union on December 14 , 2001 , while the trademark Chrono Brake was registered in Japan . Although no official announcement was made , the trademark 's name coupled with Final Fantasy series video game developer Hironobu Sakaguchi 's comment in regards to Chrono Cross 's development teams interest in creating a sequel , led journalists to suggest that Square was working on a new game in the Chrono series . Since the trademark was registered , however , much of the staff who worked on prior games in the series either left the company , or moved on to other long @-@ term projects . No announcements have been made by Square Enix either supporting or rejecting the idea of making another sequel , and the trademarks all expired as of 2012 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Registration = = = 
 The registration followed a press report of talks about a new Chrono series game . Within this report , Hironobu Sakaguchi stated that the development team of Chrono Cross , especially Masato Kato , was interested in creating a new game in the series , and that script and story ideas were currently being considered , but that the project had not yet been greenlighted . Kato had previously mentioned in the Ultimania guide for Chrono Cross that he wanted to create a direct sequel to Chrono Trigger to wrap up certain story elements and plot threads , but the pitfalls of a direct sequel prompted them to do Chrono Cross instead . The registration , and Sakaguchi 's comments , led video game journalists to believe that a sequel to Chrono Trigger and Chrono Cross was in full development . IGN Editor Douglass Perry went as far as to say " ... we 're almost positive that you can expect to see this awaited monster in 2004 . " On November 13 , 2003 , the trademark was dropped in the U.S. It expired on December 14 , 2011 in the European Union , and on July 26 , 2012 in Japan . A similar trademark was registered in 2001 by Square Enix in Japan as Chrono Brake ( Japanese : クロノ ・ <unk> ) . 
 = = = Official response = = = 
 Inquiry over a new title was subsequently large enough to warrant an entry in Square Enix 's FAQ page , in which the company noted that no new game was in development , though this did not mean the series was dead . In 2006 , the entry was revised to include sequel inquiries for any series . After the release of Chrono Cross , a number of key staff from the title left Square to form a new development studio , Monolith Soft , which was initially owned by Namco and is currently a first @-@ party developer working under Nintendo . Other staff who had worked on the title remained at Square and proceeded to work on Final Fantasy XI , an MMORPG conceived by Hironobu Sakaguchi - one of Chrono Trigger ′ s creators . During an interview at E ³ 2003 , this development team stated that they would love to develop a new Chrono game , but their commitment to Final Fantasy XI would keep them busy for a long time . Richard Honeywood , localization director for Square Enix , explained , 
 Final Fantasy XI is pretty much it for a while . We still have a lot of possible expansion packs we could do , and plenty of support to give . As far as Chrono is concerned , that 's huge ; but we can 't do two or three things at the same time , and it 's tough to do <unk> and another Chrono game at the same time or too close together . We 'd love to do one though , but yeah , not yet . 
 Takashi Tokita , who directed Chrono Trigger , mentioned a " Chrono Trigger 2 " in a 2003 interview which has not been translated to English . Trigger developer Yuji Horii expressed no interest in returning to the Chrono franchise in 2005 . In February 2007 , Square Enix producer Hiromichi Tanaka took part in several interviews while promoting games in Europe . Tanaka reiterated that no new game was in development , but that a return was certainly not out of the question . 
 ... it 's very difficult to be able to reunite the original team , to be able to make a sequel to the Chrono series ... because if we don 't try to reunite these people but take other people instead , we will find ourselves at that point with a game which will feel different , since there would be different persons in charge , and we would possibly lose the Chrono spirit . 
 In January 2008 , composer Yasunori Mitsuda remarked that " there are a lot of politics involved " in creating a new game , and stressed that Masato Kato should participate in development should a new entry in the series materialize . He did say that he was open to working with the company on the series again " if they had a good concept for the game " , and he speculated that Kato " probably would " as well . 
 In August 2014 , at a PAX Prime panel , Sakaguchi stated that he had intended on continuing the Chrono series into another game , but that problems with Square Enix management prevented it from coming to fruition . 
 I think the statute of limitations has passed and expired so I think I 'm okay saying this — but we just didn 't see eye @-@ to @-@ eye with management , and so I went and fought for it , and I officially lost the battle ... Nothing 's confirmed . But again , it would be nice to be able to work on a continuation of my old creations . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The February 2008 issue of Game Informer ranked the Chrono series eighth among the " Top Ten Sequels in Demand " , naming the games " steadfast legacies in the Square Enix catalogue " and asking " what 's the damn holdup ? ! " . In Electronic Gaming Monthly ′ s June 2008 " Retro Issue " , writer Jeremy Parish cited Chrono as the franchise video game fans would be most thrilled to see a sequel to . In the first May Famitsu of 2009 , Chrono Trigger placed 14th out of 50 in a vote of most @-@ wanted sequels by the magazine 's readers . At E3 2009 , SE Senior Vice President Shinji Hashimoto remarked " If people want a sequel , they should buy more ! " In 2012 , a trademark for Chrono Bind by Square Enix lead Siliconera to speculate that the game had switched titles from Chrono Break to Chrono Bind ; however , it was later revealed to merely be the name of a DLC card game in Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 . In the same year , Kotaku expressed disappointment that Square Enix had not acted on the Chrono Break name , citing strong sales of the DS port of Chrono Trigger as a reason as to why the company should release a third game in the series . 
 = Whitefriars , Bristol = 
 Whitefriars was a Carmelite friary on the lower slopes of St Michael 's Hill , Bristol , England . It was established in 1267 ; in subsequent centuries a friary church was built and extensive gardens developed . The establishment was dissolved in 1538 . 
 Much of the site was then redeveloped by Sir John Young , who built a " Great House " there . This later became a boys ' school founded by Edward Colston in the 18th century . The Red Lodge , which survives today as a museum , had its origins as a prospect house for the Prior . The Colston Hall , a venue for concerts , was built on part of the friary site in the 19th century . A 20th @-@ century office block named Whitefriars , built a short distance way , preserves the name . 
 = = History = = 
 Whitefriars was founded in 1267 by the Prince of Wales , the future king Edward I. The friars , also known as Friars of the Blessed Virgin , wore white habits , hence the name Whitefriars . In the fifteenth century William of Worcester , described the church as having dimensions of 45 by 25 yards ( 41 m × 23 m ) , with a tower 200 feet ( 61 m ) high . The friary was described by the antiquary Leyland , writing in the early sixteenth century , as standing on the right bank of the Frome by the quay . He added that it was " the fairest friary in England " . The friary had a large expanse of adjoining land extending up St Michael 's Hill . This was used for horticulture and the Carmelites sold produce to augment their income . 
 Writing to Thomas Cromwell in 1538 , Richard Yngworth , one of the commissioners or visitors charged with inspecting monastic houses , reported that the contents of the friary only just met the debts owed by the friars . He described a chapel with lead roofing , gardens and a " goodly howse in <unk> , mete for a great man " , also a conduit bringing fresh water from Brandon Hill , later taken over by St John 's Church . Four remaining friars surrendered their possessions to the commissioner in the presence of the Mayor . 
 = = Post @-@ dissolution = = 
 Some monastic cells , thought to belong to the friary , survive under the Red Lodge , which had its origins as a prospect house for the prior of Whitefriars . This building became the lodge house of an Elizabethan mansion , the Great House , built in the late 16th century by John Young , who had bought the friary from Bristol Corporation after the Dissolution of the Monasteries . The Great House was where Elizabeth I stayed , as a guest of John Young , in 1574 . In the 18th century , the house was acquired by Edward Colston , who established the original Colston 's School there . After the school moved to Stapleton in 1857 , the Colston Hall Society purchased the premises , and demolished the house to build the Colston Hall , which now occupies the site . Excavations during the building of the adjacent Colston House in the early 20th century found medieval walls , burials and floor tiles . 
 As part of the post @-@ war redevelopment of Bristol city centre , the name Whitefriars was given to a large multi @-@ storey office development located in Lewin 's Mead , a few hundred yards from the site of the original Whitefriars and adjoining the site of the Greyfriars office complex . The building has thirteen floors and stands 49 metres ( 161 ft ) high . It was completed in 1976 . 
 = National Hurricane Center = 
 The National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) , located at Florida International University in University Park , unincorporated Miami @-@ Dade County , Florida , is the division of the United States ' National Weather Service responsible for tracking and predicting weather systems within the tropics between the Prime Meridian and the 140th meridian west poleward to the 30th parallel north in the northeast Pacific ocean and the 31st parallel north in the northern Atlantic ocean . Its Tropical Analysis and Forecast Branch ( TAFB ) routinely issues marine forecasts , in the form of graphics and high seas forecasts , for this area year round , with the Ocean Prediction Center having backup responsibility for this unit . The Technology and Science Branch ( TSB ) provides technical support for the center , which includes new infusions of technology from abroad . The Chief , Aerial Reconnaissance Coordination , All Hurricanes ( CARCAH ) unit tasks planes , for research and operational purposes , to tropical cyclones during the Atlantic hurricane season and significant weather events , including snow storms , during winter and spring . Research conducted to improve operational forecasts is done through the Hurricane Forecast Improvement Project ( <unk> ) and Joint Hurricane Test Bed ( JHT ) initiatives . 
 During the Atlantic and northeast Pacific hurricane seasons , the Hurricane Specialists Unit ( HSU ) issues routine tropical weather outlooks for the northeast Pacific and northern Atlantic oceans . When tropical storm or hurricane conditions are expected within 48 hours , the center issues the appropriate watches and warnings via the news media and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) Weather Radio . Although the NHC is an agency of the United States , the World Meteorological Organization has designated it as Regional Specialized Meteorological Center for the North Atlantic and eastern Pacific , making it the central clearinghouse for all tropical cyclone forecasts and observations occurring in these areas . If the center loses power or becomes incapacitated in some manner , the Central Pacific Hurricane Center backs tropical cyclone advisories and tropical weather outlooks for the northeast Pacific ocean while the Weather Prediction Center backs up tropical cyclone advisories and tropical weather outlooks for the north Atlantic ocean . 
 = = History = = 
 The first hurricane warning service was set up in the 1870s from Cuba with the work of Father Benito Viñes . After his passing , hurricane warning services were assumed by the United States Signal Corp and United States Weather Bureau over the next decade , first based in Jamaica in 1898 and Cuba in 1899 before shifting to Washington , D.C. in 1902 . The central office in Washington , which evolved into the National Meteorological Center and Weather Prediction Center ( formally known as the Hydrometeorological Prediction Center ) , assumed hurricane warning / advisory responsibility at that time . This responsibility passed to regional hurricane offices in 1935 , and the concept of the Atlantic hurricane season was established in order to keep a vigilant lookout for tropical cyclones during certain times of the year . Hurricane advisories issued every six hours by the regional hurricane offices began at this time . The Jacksonville hurricane warning office moved to Miami , Florida in 1943 . Tropical cyclone naming began for Atlantic tropical cyclones using the Joint Army / Navy Phonetic Alphabet by 1947 . Starting in 1950 , the Miami Hurricane Warning Office began to prepare the annual hurricane season summary articles . In the 1953 Atlantic season , the United States Weather Bureau began naming storms which reach tropical storm intensity with human names . 
 The National Hurricane Research Project , begun in the 1950s , used aircraft to study tropical cyclones and carry out experiments on mature hurricanes through its Project Stormfury . On July 1 , 1956 , a National Hurricane Information Center was established in Miami , Florida which became a warehouse for all hurricane @-@ related information from one United States Weather Bureau office . The Miami Hurricane Warning Office ( HWO ) was moved from Lindsey Hopkins Hotel to the Aviation Building 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) to the northwest on July 1 , 1958 . Forecasts within the hurricane advisories were issued one day into the future in 1954 before being extended to two days into the future in 1961 , three days into the future in 1964 , and five days into the future in 2001 . The Miami HWO moved to the campus of the University of Miami in 1964 , and was referred to as the NHC in 1965 . The Miami HWO tropical cyclone reports were done regularly and took on their modern format in 1964 . 
 Beginning in 1973 , the National Meteorological Center duties ( renamed the Hydrometeorological Prediction Center ; renamed for a second time in 2013 ) gained advisory responsibility for tracking and publicizing inland tropical depressions . The World Meteorological Organization assumed control of the Atlantic hurricane naming list in 1977 . In 1978 , the NHC 's offices moved off the campus of the University of Miami across U.S. Highway 1 to the IRE Financial Building . Male names were added into the hurricane list beginning in the 1979 season . The hurricane warning offices remained active past 1983 . In 1984 , the NHC was separated from the Miami Weather Service Forecast Office , which meant the meteorologist in charge at Miami was no longer in a position above the hurricane center director . By 1988 , the NHC gained responsibility for eastern Pacific tropical cyclones as the former Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center in San Francisco was decommissioned . In 1992 , Hurricane Andrew blew the WSR @-@ 57 weather radar and the anemometer off the roof of NHC 's / the Miami State Weather Forecast offices . The radar was replaced with a WSR @-@ 88D NEXRAD system in April 1993 installed near Metro Zoo , near where Hurricane Andrew made landfall . 
 In 1995 , the NHC moved into a new hurricane @-@ resistant facility on the campus of Florida International University , capable of withstanding 130 mph ( 210 km / h ) winds . Its name was changed to the Tropical Prediction Center in 1995 . After the name change to TPC , the Hurricane Specialists were grouped as a separate NHC unit under the Tropical Prediction Center , separating themselves from the Tropical Analysis and Forecast Branch . On October 1 , 2010 , the Tropical Prediction Center was renamed the NHC , and the group formerly known as the NHC became known as the Hurricane Specialists Unit ( HSU ) . 
 Tropical cyclone forecasting is done nowadays using statistical methods based on tropical cyclone climatology , as well as methods of numerical weather prediction where computers use mathematical equations of motion to determine their movement . The World Meteorological Organization continues to create and maintain the annual hurricane naming lists . Naming lists continue to use a six @-@ year rotation , with the deadliest or most notable storms having their names retired from the rotation . The current director of the National Hurricane Center is Richard <unk> . 
 = = = List of directors = = = 
 = = Organization = = 
 For the fiscal year of 2008 , the budget for the NHC was $ 6 @.@ 8 million . A total of 66 people work for the NHC , with 12 of the staff composing their management . The NHC has been one of the nine national centers which compose the National Centers for Environmental Prediction ( NCEP ) . 
 = = = Hurricane Specialists Unit = = = 
 Known as the NHC from 1995 through 2010 , the hurricane specialists within the hurricane specialists unit ( HSU ) are the chief meteorologists that predict the actions of tropical storms . The specialists work rotating eight @-@ hour shifts from May through November , monitoring weather patterns in the Atlantic and Eastern Pacific oceans . Whenever a tropical or subtropical cyclone forms , they begin to issue advisories every six hours until the storm runs its course . Public advisories are issued more often when the storm expected to be of tropical storm or hurricane intensity threatens land . The specialists coordinate with officials in each country likely to be affected . They forecast and recommend watches and warnings . 
 During the hurricane season , the HSU routinely issues their Tropical Weather Outlook product , which identifies areas of concern within the tropics which could develop into tropical cyclones . If systems occur outside the defined hurricane season , special Tropical Weather Outlooks will be issued . Backup responsibility for their northeast Pacific area resides at the Central Pacific Hurricane Center ( CPHC ) , and vice versa if CPHC were to have communication issues . North Atlantic responsibilities are backed up by the Weather Prediction Center ( WPC ) . Routine coordination occurs at 1700 UTC each day between the Weather Prediction Center and National Hurricane Center to identify systems for the pressure maps three to seven days into the future within the tropics , and points for existing tropical cyclones six to seven days into the future . Outside of the hurricane season , the specialists concentrate on public education efforts . 
 = = = Tropical Analysis and Forecast Branch = = = 
 The Tropical Analysis and Forecast Branch ( TAFB , formerly the Tropical Satellite Analysis and Forecast unit and the Tropical Analysis Center ) is a part of the National Hurricane Center and was created in 1967 . The TAFB is responsible for high seas analyses and forecasts for tropical portions of the Atlantic and Pacific between the Prime Meridian and the 140th meridian west poleward to the 30th parallel north in the northeast Pacific ocean and the 31st parallel north in the northern Atlantic ocean . Unlike the Hurricane Specialists Unit ( HSU ) , TAFB is staffed full @-@ time around the year . Other responsibilities of the TAFB include satellite @-@ derived tropical cyclone position and intensity estimates , WSR @-@ 88D radar fixes for tropical cyclones , tropical cyclone forecast support , media support , and general operational support . The Ocean Prediction Center backs up TAFB in the event of a communications outage , and vice versa . 
 = = = Technology and Science Branch = = = 
 The Technology & Science Branch ( TSB ) develops and transitions new tools and techniques into operations for tropical weather prediction in conjunction with other government and academic entities . TSB created and continues development of the Automated Tropical Cyclone Forecasting ( ATCF ) system , used to incorporate various data and model outputs , create and update HURDAT , and to generate tropical cyclone forecasts . The TSB provides support for NHC computer and communications systems including its website . TSB maintains a number of statistical and dynamical models used in predicting both tropical cyclone behavior and associated weather conditions . The Storm Surge Unit , which develops and maintains software to forecast the storm surge of tropical cyclones , is part of this branch . The Techniques Development and Applications Unit ( <unk> ) is part of TSB . 
 = = = CARCAH = = = 
 The Chief , Aerial Reconnaissance Coordination , All Hurricanes ( CARCAH ) is a subunit of the 53d Weather Reconnaissance Squadron ( Hurricane Hunters ) . CARCAH 's mission is to provide a point @-@ of @-@ contact and to coordinate all tropical cyclone operational reconnaissance requirements at NHC and the Central Pacific Hurricane Center for the North Atlantic , Caribbean , Gulf of Mexico , and the North Pacific basin east of the International Date Line in accordance with the National Hurricane Operations Plan ( <unk> ) . During the winter , CARCAH coordinates the Atlantic and Pacific winter storm requirements in support of the National Winter Storms Operations Plan ( <unk> ) . Missions are flown in advance of the high @-@ impact weather events forecast to affect the U.S. , such as heavy snowfall , and at times when there is significant uncertainty within / between numerical weather prediction output . 
 = = = HLT = = = 
 The Hurricane Liaison Team ( HLT ) supports hurricane response through information exchange between the NHC , the National Weather Service ( NOAA / NWS ) , and the emergency management community . The HLT is composed of federal , state , and local emergency managers , as well as NWS meteorologists and hydrologists , who maintain open lines of communication about the progress and threat level of the storm with appropriate Federal , state , and local officials . The team establishes and facilitates video and / or teleconferences with the NHC , FEMA and other Federal agencies , state Emergency Operations Centers ( <unk> ) , Weather Prediction Center ( HPC ) , Storm Prediction Center ( SPC ) , and River Forecast Centers ( RFCs ) . During significant landfalling hurricanes , the President of the United States as well as affected city mayors and state governors join the daily briefing call , which occurs at noon Eastern Daylight Time . 
 = = Research = = 
 As part of their annual tropical cyclone activity , the agency issues a report on every tropical cyclone in the Atlantic and Eastern Pacific Ocean basins , which are available since 1958 and 1988 , respectively . The report summarizes the synoptic history , meteorological statistics , casualties and damages , and the post @-@ analysis best track of a storm . The reports were formally known as Preliminary Reports up until 1999 . The agency maintains archives and climatological statistics on Atlantic and Pacific hurricane history , including annual reports on every tropical cyclone , a complete set of tropical cyclone advisories , digitized copies of related materials on older storms , season summaries published as the Monthly Weather Review , and HURDAT , which is the official tropical cyclone database . 
 Programs are dedicated to improving the accuracy of tropical cyclone forecasts from the center . The Joint Hurricane Testbed ( JHT ) is a joint operation between the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) and United States Weather Research Program to speed up the transfer of tropical cyclone @-@ related research into forecast operations . Since 2001 , with its annual budget of between $ 1 @.@ 0 and $ 1 @.@ 5 million , the JHT has funded 62 initiatives , with most of them being implemented operationally . The projects have had varied success , ranging from minor to significant advances in the way the NHC operates . The Hurricane Forecast Improvement Program 's ( <unk> ) five @-@ year goal is to lead to a 20 percent improvement within the numerical weather prediction models provided by the National Centers for Environmental Prediction to NHC by 2015 and a 50 percent improvement within tropical cyclone track forecasting and intensity guidance by 2020 . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Summer Fury ( 2014 ) , novel by former South Florida TV weatherman Gary Travers 
 = Ranavalona III = 
 Ranavalona III ( November 22 , 1861 – May 23 , 1917 ) was the last sovereign of the Kingdom of Madagascar . She ruled from July 30 , 1883 to February 28 , 1897 in a reign marked by ongoing and ultimately futile efforts to resist the colonial designs of the government of France . As a young woman , she was selected from among several Andriana qualified to succeed Queen Ranavalona II upon her death . Like both preceding queens , Ranavalona entered a political marriage with a member of the Hova elite named Rainilaiarivony , who in his role as Prime Minister of Madagascar , largely oversaw the day @-@ to @-@ day governance of the kingdom and managed its foreign affairs . Ranavalona tried to stave off colonization by strengthening trade and diplomatic relations with the United States and Great Britain throughout her reign . French attacks on coastal port towns and an assault on the capital city of Antananarivo ultimately led to the capture of the royal palace in 1895 , ending the sovereignty and political autonomy of the century @-@ old kingdom . 
 The newly installed French colonial government promptly exiled Rainilaiarivony to Algiers . Ranavalona and her court were initially permitted to remain as symbolic figureheads , but the outbreak of a popular resistance movement – the <unk> rebellion – and discovery of anti @-@ French political intrigues at court led the French to exile the queen to the island of Réunion in 1897 . Rainilaiarivony died that same year and shortly thereafter Ranavalona was relocated to a villa in Algiers , along with several members of her family . The queen , her family and the servants accompanying her were provided an allowance and enjoyed a comfortable standard of living including occasional trips to Paris for shopping and sightseeing . Despite Ranavalona 's repeated requests , she was never permitted to return home to Madagascar . She died of an embolism at her villa in Algiers in 1917 at the age of 55 . Her remains were buried in Algiers but were disinterred 21 years later and shipped to Madagascar , where they were placed within the tomb of Queen Rasoherina on the grounds of the Rova of Antananarivo . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Ranavalona III , daughter of <unk> and his wife Princess <unk> , was born Princess Razafindrahety on November 22 , 1861 , at <unk> , a rural village in the district of <unk> outside Antananarivo . Razafindrahety 's lineage , as niece to Queen Ranavalona II and great @-@ granddaughter of King Andrianampoinimerina , qualified her to potentially inherit the throne of the Kingdom of Madagascar . Her parents assigned the care of the infant Razafindrahety to a slave who served the family . 
 When she was old enough to attend school , Razafindrahety was taken into the custody of her aunt , Queen Ranavalona II , who ensured she began receiving a private education from a London Missionary Society ( LMS ) teacher . She was described as an industrious and inquisitive child with a strong love of studying the Bible , learning and reading , and she developed affectionate relationships with her teachers . She continued her education throughout her adolescence at the Congregational School of <unk> , the Friends High School for Girls , and the LMS Girls ' Central School . She was baptized as a Protestant at Ambohimanga on April 5 , 1874 . Her teachers consistently described her as ranking among their strongest students . 
 As a young woman , Razafindrahety married an Andriana ( nobleman ) named Ratrimo ( <unk> ) . Her husband died several years later on May 8 , 1883 , aged 22 , leaving Razafindrahety a premature widow . According to rumor , Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony may have arranged to have Ratrimo poisoned for political reasons . The Aristocratic Revolution of 1863 , which had been orchestrated by Rainilaiarivony 's older brother , Prime Minister Rainivoninahitriniony , had replaced the absolute rule of the Andriana with a constitutional monarchy in which power was shared between an Andriana monarch and a Hova ( freeman ) prime minister . This arrangement was to be cemented by a political marriage between the prime minister and a ruling queen effectively selected by him . As Queen Ranavalona II neared death and the search for her successor began , Rainilaiarivony may have had Ratrimo deliberately poisoned so that Razafindrahety , the most eligible successor , would be free to marry the prime minister and succeed to the throne . 
 = = Reign = = 
 Ranavalona III was proclaimed queen upon the death of her predecessor , Queen Ranavalona II , on July 13 , 1883 , and moved into <unk> , a wooden house on the grounds of the royal Rova complex in Antananarivo . Her coronation took place in the Mahamasina neighborhood of Antananarivo on November 22 , 1883 , her 22nd birthday , where she was given the title " Her Majesty Ranavalona III by the grace of God and the will of the people , Queen of Madagascar , and <unk> of the laws of the Nation " . She chose to break with tradition by supplementing the customary retinue of soldiers at her ceremony with a group of 500 male and 400 female pupils from the capital 's best schools . The girls were dressed in white while the boys wore soldiers ' uniforms and performed traditional military drills with spears . Ranavalona was crowned wearing a white silk gown with a red train featuring embroidery and gold embellishments . The queen was described in the American press in the following terms : " She is a little above the ordinary height and has delicate features , her complexion is a little darker than that of most of her subjects . She appears quite timid and she presides well at the solemn functions of her court . " 
 Like her two predecessors , Ranavalona concluded a political marriage with Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony . The young queen 's role was largely ceremonial as nearly all important political decisions continued to be made by the much older and more experienced prime minister . Ranavalona was frequently called upon to deliver formal speeches ( kabary ) to the public on behalf of Rainilaiarivony and would make appearances to inaugurate new public buildings , such as a hospital at <unk> and a girls ' school at <unk> <unk> . Throughout her reign , Ranavalona 's aunt , Ramisindrazana , acted as an adviser and exercised considerable influence at court . Ranavalona 's older sister , <unk> , whose son <unk> and daughter Razafinandriamanitra lived with their mother at the Rova , was also a close companion . An American journalist who visited her palace reported that Ranavalona spent much of her leisure time flying kites or playing lotto , a parlor game , with her relatives and other ladies at court . She also enjoyed knitting , needlework and crocheting and would frequently bring her latest craft project to work on at cabinet meetings . She had a great love of fine garments and was the only Malagasy sovereign to import the majority of her clothing from Paris rather than London . 
 = = = Franco @-@ Hova War = = = 
 As sovereign of Madagascar , Ranavalona III became a pawn in the endgame of the maneuvering that had been taking place between the British and French since the beginning of the century . The tension between France and Madagascar had grown especially acute in the three years prior to Ranavalona 's succession , with an intensification of attacks in the months prior to her coronation . In February 1883 the northwestern coast was bombarded , followed by the occupation of Mahajanga by the French in May , and bombardment and capture of Toamasina in June . Attacks along the northern coast were ongoing at the time Ranavalona III was crowned in the summer of 1883 . Shortly after the French initiated this latest round of hostilities , Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony decided to engage Lieutenant Colonel Willoughby , a Briton who had gained combat experience in the Anglo @-@ Zulu War ( but without having been a member of the British armed forces ) , to oversee the nation 's military affairs and train the queen 's army to defend the island against the seemingly inevitable French invasion . 
 Throughout this period Madagascar continued to engage the French in negotiations , but these were to prove unsuccessful with both sides unwilling to capitulate on key points of contention . After two years of stalemate , a column brought an ultimatum to Antananarivo in December 1885 , asking for recognition of French rights in northeastern Madagascar , a French protectorate over the Sakalava , recognition of French property principles and an indemnity of 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 francs . This peace treaty was ratified by Ranavalona and Rainilaiarivony in January 1886 and French government representatives two months later . 
 Prior to ratification , the queen and her prime minister sought clarification about several articles in the main treaty that stated " foreign relations " would be controlled by a French resident and referenced " establishments " at Diego @-@ Suarez Bay . Two key French negotiators , Minister Patrimonio and Admiral Miot , provided an explanation affixed to the treaty as an annex , which led the rulers of Madagascar to deem the treaty an adequate enough safeguard of their nation 's sovereignty to warrant their approval and signature . However , the official treaty was published in Paris without the annex or any reference to it . When the annex was later published in London , the French denied it had any legal validity . France declared a protectorate over the island despite the opposition of the Malagasy government and the omission of this term from the treaty . 
 The international reaction to this latest turn of events was varied and greatly colored by national interests . The British were unwilling to defend Madagascar 's sovereignty for fear that the French might retaliate and fail to recognize the British claim to certain protectorates of its own . All official British engagement with Madagascar was henceforth transacted through the French resident , but these communiques were not officially recognized by Ranavalona and her court . The United States and Germany , on the other hand , continued to deal directly with the queen 's government as the rightful authority in Madagascar . This discrepancy forced a reinterpretation of one aspect of the treaty , resulting in the queen 's authority over internal affairs being maintained . 
 In 1886 the queen attempted to solicit the support of the United States in preserving Madagascar 's sovereignty by sending gifts to then @-@ President Grover Cleveland , including silk <unk> cloths , an ivory pin and a woven basket . However , the United States was neither able nor inclined to assert itself militarily or diplomatically in favor of preserving Madagascar 's independence . Ranavalona signed a treaty granting further concessions to the French on December 12 , 1887 . 
 France 's claim to Madagascar as its protectorate was officially recognized by Britain in the Anglo @-@ French agreement of 1890 . Between 1890 and 1894 , the French sought to aggressively claim what they believed to be the territorial rights established by the treaty . However , these French land claims and settlements were perceived by Ranavalona and Rainilaiarivony as an unjustifiable encroachment upon Malagasy sovereignty . Ultimately Charles Le Myre de Vilers was sent to persuade the queen and her prime minister to submit to the French interpretation of the treaty with the intent to launch a war and take the island by force if an agreement was not reached . The French offer was flatly refused and diplomatic relations between France and Madagascar were broken off in November 1894 . 
 Upon terminating diplomatic relations , the French bombarded and occupied the harbor of Toamasina on the east coast in December 1894 , then captured Mahajanga on the west coast the following month and immediately began their gradual advance , constructing roads through the malarial swamps that hindered passage to the island 's interior . The main expeditionary troops arrived in May . Over 6 @,@ 000 of the original 15 @,@ 000 French soldiers lost their lives to disease as they gradually moved inland , necessitating several thousand reinforcements drawn from French colonies in Algeria and Sub @-@ Saharan Africa . The column reached the capital in September 1895 . For three days the Malagasy army managed to hold the French troops at the periphery of the city , but upon French bombardment of the Rova palace compound with heavy artillery , Ranavalona agreed to surrender control of her kingdom to the French . 
 = = = French colonization = = = 
 France officially annexed Madagascar on January 1 , 1896 . That August , the French officially declared Madagascar to be their colony and exiled Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony to Algiers ( in French Algeria ) where he died the following year . The queen and much of her administration remained but were afforded no real political power . Shortly after Rainilaiarivony 's exile , Ranavalona was approached by a French official who informed her that a new prime minister would need to be selected . The queen hastily concluded that General Jacques Duchesne , the French general who had successfully led the military campaign against the Merina monarchy , would be a probable choice . Assuming that Malagasy political tradition would be preserved , Ranavalona believed she would be forced to marry whichever man was chosen for the job and worriedly asked if Duchesne was to be her next husband . Surprised , the French official reassured her that France had no intention of imposing a husband on the queen and would never again require her to marry a prime minister . The queen 's minister of foreign affairs , <unk> , was nominated to the post of prime minister by mutual consent . 
 In December 1895 , two months after the French capture of Antananarivo , popular resistance to French rule emerged in the form of the <unk> ( " red shawl " ) rebellion . This guerrilla war against foreigners , Christianity and political corruption quickly spread throughout the island and was principally conducted by peasants who wore shawls smeared with the red laterite soil of the highlands . The resistance movement gained ground until it was effectively put down by the French military at the end of 1897 . Members of Ranavalona 's court were accused of encouraging the rebels and many leading figures were executed , including the queen 's uncle <unk> ( brother of her favored adviser , Ramisindrazana ) and her minister of war , <unk> . Ramisindrazana , the queen 's aunt , was exiled to Réunion , as the French were reluctant to execute a woman . 
 The resistance led the government of France to replace the island 's civil governor , Hippolyte Laroche , with a military governor , Joseph Gallieni . The day before Gallieni arrived in Antananarivo , he had a message sent to the queen requiring her to present herself and her entourage at the military headquarters , preceded by a standard bearer carrying a French flag . The queen was obliged to sign documents handing over all royal property to France before being placed under arrest and imprisoned in her own palace . She was only allowed to receive visitors who had obtained prior authorization from Gallieni himself . While imprisoned , Ranavalona offered to convert to Roman Catholicism in an attempt to curry French favor but was informed that such a gesture was no longer necessary . 
 = = Exile = = 
 Gallieni exiled Ranavalona from Madagascar on February 27 , 1897 , and officially abolished the monarchy the next day . French officials ordered the queen to leave her palace at 1 : 30 in the morning . She was carried from Antananarivo by palanquin as the city slept , accompanied by 700 – 800 escorts and porters . Throughout the days spent traveling to the eastern port of Toamasina where she would board a ship to Réunion , Ranavalona reportedly drank heavily , <unk> rum directly from the bottle in an <unk> coarse fashion . At Toamasina on March 6 , Ranavalona was notified that her sister <unk> and aunt <unk> would be arriving shortly , as would the queen 's fourteen @-@ year @-@ old niece , Razafinandriamanitra , who was nine months pregnant with the illegitimate child of a French soldier . 
 = = = Réunion Island = = = 
 Together , the family sailed on La <unk> to the port of Pointe des Galets , a site twenty kilometers ( 12 @.@ 5 miles ) from the capital of St. Denis , to secure a discreet arrival . Despite this effort , a crowd of French onlookers jeered and shouted as the boat docked , angry at the queen for the loss of French lives incurred during France 's campaign to occupy Madagascar . After waiting for the crowd to disperse , the captain escorted the queen and her party into a horse @-@ drawn buggy , the first Ranavalona had ever seen , and drove to the Hotel de l 'Europe in St. Denis . Young Razafinandriamanitra , suffering from the emotional and physical strains of the journey into exile , went into labor shortly after reaching the hotel . She gave birth to a little girl on her second day in Réunion , but could not recover her strength and died five days later . The infant was named Marie @-@ Louise and was baptised a Catholic to avoid antagonizing the French . Marie @-@ Louise , who could have become heir @-@ apparent according to the traditional rules of succession , was adopted by Ranavalona as her own daughter . 
 Within a month the party had been moved to a house owned by a Madame de <unk> , located at the corner of rue de l 'Arsenal and rue du <unk> near the French government offices in St. Denis . Ranavalona was reportedly pleased with the two @-@ story house , which had a large walled garden and featured a peaked roof and wrap @-@ around veranda reminiscent of the traditional highland homes of Madagascar . In addition to the queen and her aunt , sister , and grand @-@ niece , the royal household included two secretaries , a cook , a maid , three servants for Ranavalona , and several more servants for her aunt and sister . The queen 's private pastor was authorized to make visits freely to the royal household . 
 The queen 's party occupied the house in Réunion for just under two years . As tensions between England and France began to mount once again , this time over the conflict in Sudan , the French authorities became concerned that elements of the population in Madagascar might seize the opportunity to launch a new rebellion against French rule . The queen 's proximity to Madagascar was seen as a possible source of encouragement for would @-@ be Malagasy rebels . French authorities made an abrupt decision to remove Ranavalona and her party to Algeria , a more distant location . On February 1 , 1899 , with very little forewarning , Ranavalona and her family were ordered aboard the Yang @-@ Tse accompanied by a secretary @-@ interpreter and several maids . During the 28 @-@ day journey to the French port of Marseilles , the passengers stopped over at such ports as Mayotte , Zanzibar , Aden and Djibouti . Throughout the trip , the various captains responsible for the journey were under orders to prevent Ranavalona from speaking with anyone who was not French . The party was held for several months at Marseilles before being transferred to a villa in the Mustapha Superieur area in Algiers . Ranavalona had hoped to continue on to Paris and was greatly disappointed to learn she was instead being sent to Algeria , reportedly bursting into tears and remarking , " Who is certain of tomorrow ? Only yesterday I was a queen ; today I am simply an unhappy , broken @-@ hearted woman . " 
 = = = Algeria = = = 
 At the queen 's villa in Algiers , Ranavalona was provided with servants and a French female attendant who kept her under observation and remained present whenever the queen entertained guests in her home . In addition , the government of France initially provided Ranavalona with an annual allowance of 25 @,@ 000 francs paid from the budget for the colony of Madagascar and authorized by the colony 's Governor General . Nearly all the queen 's property had been seized by the colonial authority , although she had been permitted to keep certain personal belongings , including some of her jewelry . Her initial pension allowed such a humble lifestyle that the colonial government of Algeria lobbied unsuccessfully several times on her behalf to obtain an increase for her . Ranavalona also tasked a servant with selling some of her jewelry for cash , but the plan was discovered by the French colonial authorities and the servant was discharged and sent back to Madagascar . 
 During the first years of her exile in Algeria , Ranavalona soon discovered the excitement of the socialite lifestyle among the elite of Algiers . She was regularly invited to parties , outings and cultural events and often hosted events of her own . However , homesickness was ever @-@ present and the impossibility of visiting Madagascar contributed to melancholy and boredom . She would frequently take long walks alone in the countryside , along the beach , or through the town to clear her mind and lift her spirits . The queen was eager to see mainland France and especially Paris and repeatedly submitted formal requests for permission to travel . These were routinely denied until May 1901 when Ranavalona received the first of many authorizations to visit France . That very month , the queen moved into a small apartment in the 16th arrondissement of Paris near the Avenue Champs @-@ Élysées and what is now the Place Charles de Gaulle , from which she visited the major sights of the city and was invited to numerous receptions , balls , shows and other events . She was widely received by high society with courtesy and admiration and was offered many gifts including a costly gown . During this first trip , Ranavalona visited the Palace of Versailles , was formally received at the Paris City Hall , and spent three weeks on vacation in Bordeaux . Finally , Ranavalona visited the beaches of <unk> before exhausting her budget and boarding an Algeria @-@ bound ship at Marseilles in early August . The details of her visit attracted much attention from the Parisian press , which expressed sympathy for the queen 's fate and recrimination toward the French government for failing to provide a larger pension or accord her the consideration she deserved as a recipient of the Legion of Honor . 
 Ranavalona would return to France six more times over the course of the next twelve years . Her frequent visits and excellent reputation made her the cause célèbre of many French citizens who pitied the queen 's fate and admired her gracious acceptance of her new life . Ranavalona 's visits were generally accompanied by much media fanfare and the queen 's popularity among the French public grew to the extent that she was featured on the box of Petit Beurre cookies in 1916 . The queen 's second visit to France occurred in September 1903 , when she visited Vic @-@ sur @-@ <unk> and <unk> . Pressure by citizens during this visit succeeded in raising her pension to 37 @,@ 000 francs . Two years later she would visit Marseilles and Saint @-@ Germain and inhabit a large five @-@ bedroom Parisian apartment in the sixteenth arrondissement from which she would attend the Paris Opera , observe a session of the French House of Representatives and be formally received at the Ministry of the Colonies . Again due to pressure from sympathetic French citizens , Ranavalona 's pension was further raised to 50 @,@ 000 francs per annum . On her next visit in 1907 , the queen would use Dives @-@ sur @-@ Mer as a home base to visit the Calvados region , where she was photographed for the French press . From August to September 1910 , Ranavalona would visit Paris , Nantes , La Baule and Saint @-@ Nazaire and was repeatedly the target of undesired attention from press photographers . Her 1912 trip to the tiny , remote village of <unk> would coincide with the increase of her annual pension to 75 @,@ 000 francs . The queen 's final voyage in 1913 would take her to Marseilles , Aix @-@ les @-@ Bains and <unk> . 
 The advent of World War I in 1914 put an end to Ranavalona 's visits to France . Throughout her time in Algeria , she and her family regularly attended the weekly Protestant service at the Reformed Church building in central Algiers . After the war began she sought to contribute by vigorously participating in the activities of the Algerian Red Cross . 
 = = Death and aftermath = = 
 Ranavalona died without ever having returned to Madagascar , after two formal requests in 1910 and 1912 were refused on the pretext of insufficient funds in the colonial coffers . The exiled queen died suddenly at her villa in Algeria on May 23 , 1917 , the victim of a severe embolism . Ranavalona was buried at the Saint @-@ Eugene cemetery in Algiers at 10 : 00 a.m. on May 25 . Her funeral was attended by dozens of personal friends , admirers , Red Cross colleagues , members of her church congregation and prominent figures of the political and cultural elite of Algiers . By nine in the morning , a long line of cars had already formed at the entrance to the memorial site . 
 This effusive display of respect and remembrance on the part of Ranavalona 's friends was not mirrored by subsequent actions of the French colonial administration in Madagascar . In June 1925 , eight years after the queen 's death , the Governor @-@ General of Algeria informed the Governor @-@ General of Madagascar by letter that payments for the maintenance of Ranavalona 's tomb were in default . He urged the colonial government in Madagascar to provide funds for the upkeep of the dilapidated tomb , emphasizing that such neglect was unworthy of the queen 's memory and the government of France alike . The request was twice refused and the tomb was never refurbished . In November 1938 , Ranavalona 's remains were exhumed and re @-@ interred in the tomb of Queen Rasoherina at the Rova of Antananarivo in Madagascar . A fire on the night of 6 November 1995 severely damaged the royal tombs and destroyed most of the other buildings at the site . The lamba @-@ wrapped remains of Ranavalona III were the only ones that could be saved from the flames . These have since been re @-@ interred in the royal tombs at Ambohimanga . 
 Following Ranavalona 's death , her aunt <unk> left Algeria and moved to Alpes @-@ Maritimes where she lived out the few remaining years of her life . The heir @-@ apparent , Marie @-@ Louise , had left Ranavalona 's villa several years earlier to study at a French high school and would go on to marry a French agricultural engineer named Andre <unk> on June 24 , 1921 . Although she continued to receive a small pension from the French government throughout her lifetime , Marie @-@ Louise chose to pursue a career as a nurse and was awarded the Legion of Honor for her medical services during World War II . After <unk> and the childless Marie @-@ Louise divorced , the young woman reportedly made the most of her new @-@ found freedom as a flamboyant and vivacious socialite . Marie @-@ Louise died in <unk> @-@ sur @-@ le @-@ Betz on January 18 , 1948 , without leaving any descendants , and was buried in Montreuil , France . 
 = = Honors = = 
 = = = National honors = = = 
 Sovereign Grand Master of the Order of the Royal Hawk ( 30 / 07 / 1883 ) . 
 Sovereign Grand Master of the Order of Radama II ( 30 / 07 / 1883 ) . 
 Sovereign Grand Master of the Order of Merit ( 30 / 07 / 1883 ) . 
 Sovereign Grand Master of the Order of Military Merit ( 30 / 07 / 1883 ) . 
 Sovereign Grand Master of the Order of the Kingdom ( 30 / 07 / 1883 ) . 
 Sovereign Grand Master of the Order of Ranavalona ( 1896 ) . 
 = = = Foreign honors = = = 
 Dame Grand Cross of the Order of the Legion of Honor ( 18 / 01 / 1887 ) . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Flight Unlimited = 
 Flight Unlimited is a 1995 aerobatic flight simulator video game developed and published by Looking Glass Technologies . It allows players to pilot reproductions of real @-@ world aircraft and to perform aerobatic maneuvers . They may fly freely , race through floating rings against a timer or take lessons from a virtual flight instructor . The instructor teaches basic and advanced techniques , ranging from rudder turns to maneuvers such as the tailslide , <unk> and Immelmann turn . 
 Flight Unlimited was the first self @-@ published game released by Looking Glass Technologies . It was intended to establish the company as a video game publisher and to compete with flight simulator franchises such as Microsoft Flight Simulator . Project leader Seamus Blackley , a particle physicist and amateur pilot , conceived the game in 1992 . He felt that other flight simulators failed to convey the experience of real flight , and he reacted by coding a simulated atmosphere for Flight Unlimited based on real @-@ time computational fluid dynamics . Aerobatic pilot Michael Goulian endorsed the game and assisted the team in making it more true to life . 
 Flight Unlimited received positive reviews from critics and was a commercial success ; its sales exceeded 780 @,@ 000 copies by 2002 . Reviewers lauded its realism , flight instruction , graphics and sense of flight , but some criticized its high system requirements . The game was followed by two sequels : Flight Unlimited II ( 1997 ) and Flight Unlimited III ( 1999 ) . A combat @-@ oriented successor , Flight Combat , was released in 2002 as Jane 's Attack Squadron after a series of setbacks . Soon after Flight Unlimited 's completion , Blackley was fired from Looking Glass . He went on to design Jurassic Park : Trespasser at Dreamworks Interactive and later spearhead the Xbox project at Microsoft . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Flight Unlimited is a three @-@ dimensional ( 3D ) flight simulator video game : its gameplay is a simulation of piloting real @-@ world airplanes . Players may control the <unk> Decathlon , Extra 300S , Pitts Special S @-@ 2B , Sukhoi Su @-@ 31 and Grob G103a Twin II sailplane . The game begins at the fixed @-@ base operator ( FBO ) interface — a traversable 3D room whose contents represent menu options . For example , the player interacts with a row of scale airplane models to select an aircraft , and with a world globe to change airfield locations . Six settings are available , including Sedona , Arizona and Springfield , Vermont . 
 The player may choose to begin flight on a runway or taxiway , or in the air . Aircraft are controlled via keyboard , joystick , head @-@ mounted display or specialized input devices such as pedals . During flight , several third- and first @-@ person camera angles may be selected . For example , the third @-@ person Flyby View places the camera in front of the plane as it flies past , while the first @-@ person Three @-@ Way View displays more information about the plane 's position and speed than other angles . Certain camera angles , including the Three @-@ Way View and 3 @-@ D Cockpit view , provide the player with simulated flight instruments such as an altimeter , airspeed indicator , accelerometer , variometer and tachometer . The game is designed to allow players to perform aerobatic maneuvers such as the Immelmann turn , tailslide , <unk> and Cuban Eight . Performances may be recorded and played back , with controls that allow the player to pause , rewind and fast forward . At any time , the player may stop a recording and resume flight from that point . 
 The game contains lessons that cover basic and advanced flight techniques , ranging from rudder turns to challenging aerobatic maneuvers . A simulated flight instructor offers real @-@ time advice based on the player 's performance . Certificates are earned by performing well during lessons . In Hoops courses , the player undertakes a time trial through rings that float in the sky , with the option to enable a " ghost plane " of the highest score . Four types of Hoops courses are available : Basic , Challenge , Distance and Trick . The last is intended as a highly demanding test of the player 's aerobatic ability . The game 's sole non @-@ powered aircraft , the Grob G103a Twin II sailplane , features its own game mode focused on energy management . The player attempts to use the direction of the wind , thermals — which realistically occur above areas that absorb more heat , such as plains and parking lots — and the orographic lift caused by slopes to stay airborne for as long as possible . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 The concept of Flight Unlimited originated from Looking Glass Technologies ' discontent with contemporary flight simulators . Company co @-@ founders Paul Neurath and Ned Lerner wanted to develop an exceptional game in the genre , and Neurath considered the idea during the production of Ultima Underworld : The Stygian Abyss and Ultima Underworld II : Labyrinth of Worlds . In 1992 , Seamus Blackley , who had been undertaking graduate studies in particle physics at the Fermilab research facility , was hired through a want advertisement that Lerner had placed on a bulletin board . At the company , Blackley programmed the physics modeling system for a racing game and designed a large number of standalone physics demonstrations . He became fascinated by physics programming . An amateur pilot and flight devotee , Blackley asked Lerner extensive questions about his earlier game Chuck Yeager 's Advanced Flight Trainer , which Blackley held in high regard . In reaction to Blackley 's enthusiasm , Neurath suggested that the company develop a " traditional Cessna sim " . 
 However , Blackley instead proposed an aerobatics training simulation , which he had conceived while reading an aerobatics magazine on a Lexington , Massachusetts bus . Collaborating with Ultima Underworld II programmer Greg Travis , he created a thirty page concept document that outlined the game . His core idea was to recreate the " yummy , visceral , fluid feeling that you get when flying a real airplane " . He wanted the project to bear more resemblance to a playground than to a video game , and he sought to give it simple controls and realistic terrain to decrease the learning curve for beginners . Blackley assumed the role of project leader and then engaged the team in " flaming sessions " to generate ideas . According to programmer Doug Church , Blackley 's concept of the game was not fully developed , but he clearly expressed his thoughts and motivated the team . The first months of the project produced disparate prototypes that demonstrated prospective features . The company committed to full development of the game in early 1993 , and production commenced in March . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Blackley 's first objective was to code the game 's simulated physics . He began by deciding on a programming method — in particular , he sought one that would allow aircraft to perform the " knife @-@ edge spin " maneuver that he had witnessed at air shows . In 1995 , he said that he had never played a flight simulator with an accurate sense of flight . He later described his belief that the genre had stagnated , and that flight games were evaluated " by [ their ] implementation of the standard feature set " , rather than by their enjoyability . Blackley researched physics programming in contemporary flight simulators , and he discovered that many used large databases of wind tunnel and plane sensory equipment information to dictate how aircraft would operate in prerecorded scenarios . Higher @-@ end simulators used a " Newtonian " system , in which algebra @-@ based measurements of force vectors determine a plane 's position in real @-@ time . However , Blackley believed that neither system correctly simulated the experience of flight . 
 In reaction , he used his knowledge of particle physics to create a real @-@ time computational fluid dynamics ( CFDs ) model for Flight Unlimited . The result is a simulated atmosphere : air acts as a fluid that automatically reacts to the shape of any object placed within it . Blackley gave the example that a lawn chair , if placed within the game 's real @-@ time CFDs model , would fall merely because of its shape . The game 's planes fly because the interaction of their architecture with the atmosphere creates lift , as with real @-@ world aircraft . Changes in the plane 's direction are caused by the interaction of their flight control surfaces ( ailerons , elevators and rudders ) with the simulated atmosphere . Because it simulates the dynamics of flight in real @-@ time , the system allows for aerobatic maneuvers that were impossible in previous flight simulators . In 1994 , Blackley said that it was possibly the first flight code designed for aerobatics . In constructing the CFDs model , Blackley and the team built from the Navier – Stokes equations of fluid motion , which Blackley described as " horrible , complicated partial differential equations " . According to Computer Gaming World , Blackley did not seek to represent the equations with perfect accuracy , and he was satisfied when the results were consistent and the sensation that they generated was correct . 
 After programming a basic version of the CFDs model , Blackley used several programs to examine the simulated currents of air that flowed across a model of a flat plate . He adjusted the code until the plate fell realistically , and then constructed test models for a plane wing and fuselage . He eventually built a complete but dysfunctional plane by using data from " pinhead books " . By reading aircraft design manuals , he discovered that the problems were caused by his plane 's incorrect tail and center of gravity . Following this , he created an exact three @-@ dimensional model of the Extra 300S over roughly three days . As he had not yet simulated the physical attributes of its propeller , Blackley programmed the plane to be propelled from the rear . However , the accurate model performed properly in the simulated atmosphere . 
 Artists Mike Marsicano and Kurt <unk> played critical roles in the creation of the game 's aircraft models , which were built in 3D Studio . As reference material , the team photographed real planes at several airfields , and they received blueprints and <unk> from aircraft manufacturers . The game 's Grob G103a Twin II sailplane was based directly on the one that Blackley owned at the time . The sophistication of the real @-@ time CFDs complicated the 3D modeling process , as the planes required accurate geometry to fly properly . While attempting to meet this goal , however , <unk> said that the models he created were overly detailed , which caused the team to struggle with performance issues related to the high number of polygons . Reducing the number altered the plane 's shape , which in turn reduced its flight realism ; this necessitated a balance between performance and accuracy . To obtain audio for the planes , Greg LoPiccolo and Tom Streit — former bassist and road manager , respectively , of the band Tribe — visited a Florida importer of Russian aerobatic aircraft . The two placed microphones inside the cockpits and next to the engines , and they flew each plane at multiple speeds while recording with a digital audio tape machine . Combining this material with digital recordings of wind sounds , the team fashioned a physics @-@ based sound system : sounds of the wind and engine are altered in real @-@ time based on wind speed in the game . 
 The flight instructor was created by programmer Andrew Grant and voiced by Tom Streit . It monitors the player 's controller input during " each frame of animation " . If a maneuver is attempted , the instructor " interpolates the initial control movements " and predicts which maneuver is being performed . The instructor then gives advice on how to complete the maneuver and offers guidance if a mistake is made . Grant believed that the code is sometimes " too picky " , and he stated that it expects players to perform maneuvers more precisely than is humanly possible . The team initially planned to include an online multiplayer component , which would have allowed 64 planes to fly in the same area — thereby giving players the ability to compete with one another . However , the feature was not implemented into the final game . The staff members also sought to include aerobatic competitions in which the player could participate , but the idea was dropped because of difficulties with realism . Problems with artificially intelligent judges were also a factor in the feature 's removal . 
 Flight Unlimited 's terrain graphics were created with <unk> . The team gathered aerial photographs from locations in France and the United States . They combined two to three images of each area to create digital reproductions roughly 11 square miles ( 28 km2 ) in size . Each location in the game was based on two stereoscopic sets of photographs , which were processed for more than 72 hours by a " dedicated Pentium tucked away in a dark corner " . From the contrasting images , the computer generated a terrain " data blanket " with 3D height variations . While the team had considered using satellite or surveillance aircraft images to create the game 's terrain graphics , they found that the resolution was inadequate . Material from geographic information systems was also studied , but associate producer Paul Schaffer said that it would have been " astronomically expensive " to obtain data with the necessary resolution . 
 After assembling a playable demo of Flight Unlimited , the team requested assistance from then @-@ US Aerobatic Team member Michael Goulian , who worked as a flight instructor at the nearby Hanscom Field . Because of the game 's flight code , Goulian was able to execute aerobatic maneuvers within less than three minutes of playing the game ; and he later performed his " entire basic aerobatic routine " . Blackley told PC Gamer US that , while Goulian disliked flight simulators , " When he flew Flight Unlimited , he just said ' pretty cool . ' I was so psyched " . Goulian assisted the team during the next year of development : he co @-@ designed the game 's flight lessons and advised the team on adjustments to the plane models . Aerobatic pilot Patty Wagstaff was also consulted . At one point , the team encountered problems while testing a maneuver in the game 's Sukhoi Su @-@ 31 , and Blackley was concerned that he would need to rework the game 's physics code . However , Goulian phoned a colleague — a Russian pilot — who told them to compensate for the plane 's abnormally large ailerons . Using his advice on flying the real @-@ world plane , the team found that the maneuver worked correctly . Goulian endorsed Flight Unlimited and wrote the foreword to its official strategy guide . 
 The graphics and physics code increased the game 's system requirements , and the team worked to optimize performance during development . They struggled to improve the game 's memory usage : the process consumed nearly as much time as the creation of the physics model , according to Church . Programmer Eric Twietmeyer ran weekly tests of the game 's performance by disabling certain parts of the code — such as the physics calculations — to isolate which parts used the most memory . By 1994 , Blackley 's physics code took up only 1 % of CPU time , with the rest allocated to the terrain renderer . Blackley optimized his code by converting the mathematical calculations of air from the 3D game world into a " math @-@ friendly space " , during which time the Navier @-@ Stokes equations are applied . Afterwards , the data is returned to 3D space . According to Computer Gaming World , this method increased speed by " a factor of 100 , with almost no loss in precision . " The team had trouble with complex memory @-@ related glitches during development . Church called them " crazy " , and programmer Greg Travis noted that debugging the terrain cache system was a " nightmare " . 
 While leading the team , Blackley adopted a loose style of supervision . According to Opening the Xbox author Dean Takahashi , " Blackley [ was not ] ultra @-@ organized . His idea of good management was to invite someone over for a gourmet dinner and have a casual conversation about work " . However , Takahashi wrote that " Blackley worked hard to inspire his team " , and he described artist James Dollar 's belief that , " in contrast to other Looking Glass managers , he didn 't take over tasks and make others feel stupid " . During the first two years of production , the team was divided into small groups that worked on the game 's elements separately . For example , Blackley programmed the game 's physics , while Eric Twietmeyer and Tim Day created the terrain renderer . However , Doug Church later said that , while " the team [ did ] a bunch of very cool stuff , the FBO , the flight model , the instructor , the renderer , so on " , the result " was almost like four separate programs , with no connection " . Following the completion of the concurrently @-@ developed System Shock , a significant part of that game 's team — including Church , Marc LeBlanc and Rob Fermier — moved to Flight Unlimited to add connective material . At the time , Church said that it was difficult to meld the game 's elements , but he later stated that they largely coalesced by the end . 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 Flight Unlimited was self @-@ published by Looking Glass Technologies . Their previous games had been developed for other video game publishers , and had generated $ 90 million total earnings for those companies . However , Ronald Rosenberg of The Boston Globe reported that Looking Glass was " no longer satisfied as a backroom player surviving on royalties " . Doug Church later explained that the company wanted to self @-@ publish in order to escape the " treadmill of waiting for advances " , which would allow them to make long @-@ term plans without needing to satisfy the immediate demands of a publisher . In late 1994 , Looking Glass announced that venture capital investors , including Matrix Partners and Institutional Venture Partners , had provided the company with $ 3 @.@ 8 million . The sum was intended to fund the development and self @-@ publication of Flight Unlimited . According to Michael Humphreys of Matrix Partners and <unk> Quindlen of Institutional Venture Partners , the decision was partly influenced by the past success of the company 's co @-@ founders , Paul Neurath and Ned Lerner . 
 Looking Glass intended Flight Unlimited as a gateway into the video game publishing industry . According to Lerner , the idea of self @-@ publishing had been considered when the company was founded . In 1995 , Looking Glass projected that sales of Flight Unlimited would increase royalty revenues to $ 10 million that year , up from $ 1 @.@ 5 million in 1994 . Jeffrey A. <unk> , the company 's vice president of finance and administration , expected that the game would recoup its development costs and make a return before the end of the year . He predicted that , over the following 12 to 18 months , the company 's number of employees would increase from 52 to 82 . The company 's executive vice president and general manager , Jerry <unk> , told The Boston Globe that the company hoped to publish six games each year . According to Doug Church , the pressure for Flight Unlimited to succeed meant that the concurrently @-@ developed System Shock , which was not self @-@ published , received little attention from the company 's management . 
 Flight Unlimited was placed in direct competition with several major flight simulator franchises . Before the game 's release , Shelby Bateman of Next Generation Magazine wrote , " 1995 is going to be a real dogfight in the flight @-@ sim and aerial @-@ combat categories , and <unk> [ sic ] is betting its bankroll ... that it can capture significant market share from the likes of Microsoft Flight Simulator and the debut of Spectrum <unk> 's Falcon 4 @.@ 0 , among others . " Describing the situation , Johnny L. Wilson of Computer Gaming World wrote , " The games that sell big are the ones that allow you to blow stuff up , so , if anything , that could be a problem for Flight Unlimited . " Doug Church explained that , because the game did not feature combat and bore little resemblance to Microsoft Flight Simulator , the team spent " many late nights " on marketing strategies . However , he noted that the game had a wide appeal among those who tested it during development , which he called " a really good sign " . Talking to Bernie Yee of PC Gamer US , Paul Neurath said that he thought the game would sell well . Yee noted that Neurath " fully [ expected ] it to prove more popular than Microsoft Flight Simulator " . 
 In January 1995 , Looking Glass showed Flight Unlimited alongside Terra Nova : Strike Force Centauri at the Winter Consumer Electronics Show , under their " Immersive Reality " marketing label . In March 1995 , the Boston Globe reported that the team was performing " 11th hour checks " of the game to prepare it for shipment to a Midwestern United States Compact Disc manufacturer . According to the newspaper , Looking Glass planned to begin by shipping 100 @,@ 000 units to retailers in Canada and the United States . Another 100 @,@ 000 copies were to be sent to France , Germany and the United Kingdom at a later date . However , upon the game 's June 7 , 1995 release for DOS , 200 @,@ 000 units were distributed simultaneously in the United States and Europe . The game 's European releases were localized with German , French and English text and voice acting , which was made possible by " close coordination with international partners " . Versions for Macintosh and Windows 95 were later released ; the former was shown at the Macworld Expo in April 1996 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Flight Unlimited was a commercial success . It debuted in twelfth place on a June 1995 sales chart compiled by NPD Group , while Microsoft Flight Simulator 5 @.@ 1 took first place . The game went on to sell more than 300 @,@ 000 copies by 1997 , and more than 780 @,@ 000 by 2002 . According to Constantine von Hoffman of the Boston Herald , Flight Unlimited successfully competed with Microsoft Flight Simulator . PC Gamer 's Lee Buchanan wrote that it " soars above the pack of flight simulations " , and he considered it to be " the most fun [ he had ] had in a computerized cockpit " . Frank Vizard of Popular Mechanics hailed it as " the new top gun of flight simulators " , and Doug Bailey of The Boston Globe considered it to be the " first real serious challenge to Microsoft 's dominance of the genre " . The Record 's David Noack believed that the game 's physics and stereoscopic terrain set " a new standard in flight simulation " . Writing for Computer Gaming World , Bob and John Nolan stated , " If anything , you should at least take a look at this product , because you 'll be looking at the future of simulations . " The game was a finalist in the 12th Annual Awards for Technical Excellence held by PC Magazine , whose staff called it " the simulator by which all others will be judged . " 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Vizard stated that Flight Unlimited 's " very advanced computational fluid dynamics make [ each ] plane react according to spec " . Buchanan lauded the fluid model for creating a " sensation of actual flight [ that ] is nothing short of magnificent " , while PC Magazine 's staff commented that it makes " planes behave more like real aircraft than any simulator we have seen " . Bob and John Nolan called the game 's physics programming " groundbreaking " , and Chris Ware of the Lexington Herald @-@ Leader found the game to be the most accurate simulation of flight beyond " those multimillion @-@ dollar flight simulators [ used by ] fighter pilots and astronauts " . Noack agreed : he wrote that the game " is about as close to flying within going to the airport " . In 1996 , Computer Gaming World presented Flight Unlimited with a Special Artistic Achievement Award For Physical Model . The magazine 's staff praised Seamus Blackley 's programming for pushing the genre " higher into the realm of simulation " . 
 Ware found Flight Unlimited approachable and noted its " simplicity of use and depth of instruction " . Buchanan hailed the lesson mode as " a dream come true for any budding pilot " . A writer for The Washington Post called the game " [ the ] world 's first truly easy @-@ to @-@ use flight simulator " and " a good entry product " , in which " rank amateurs can just launch the program and start cruising immediately " . The Washington Post 's John Gaudiosi wrote that , while many games in the genre are overly complex , Flight Unlimited lets " those who aren 't rocket scientists ... experience the thrills of stunt flying . " He found its control scheme simple to understand . By contrast , Bailey found the game difficult and initially " frustrating " : he complained that he had to play the lesson mode before even taking off . Denny Atkin of Computer Gaming World characterized the game 's learning curve as steep , thanks to the accuracy of the physics programming , but he noted the scalable difficulty options . Bailey later recommended the game in a holiday shopping guide . He wrote that " it can be difficult to master . But once you 're up , it 's worth the trouble . " 
 A writer for The Washington Post commented that " serious flight freaks will like the racing and advanced maneuvers " . According to Gaudiosi , dedicated players will learn " all about aerodynamics and stunt flying " ; he considered the latter to be " hard stuff , even with green hoops guiding you " . Similarly , Buchanan characterized the Hoops courses as " incredibly demanding " , and Atkin cited that mode 's Trick difficulty level as " amazingly tough " . Bob and John Nolan wrote that people who " love to loop around the skies of Flight Simulator 5 will go bananas for " the aerobatics ; but the pair commented that combat flight simulator players " might get a little edgy once the wow @-@ power wears off . " However , Atkin believed that only those " never happy without something to shoot at " could be disappointed by the lack of combat : other players will " be too busy choreographing aerial ballets , pulling off death @-@ defying aerobatic stunts , or just enjoying a quiet soar down the ridge line to miss that stuff " . Likewise , Ware called the non @-@ violent gameplay " refreshing " , and Buchanan wrote , " If [ you are ] a battle @-@ weary veteran of air combat sims , Flight Unlimited might be just the sort of [ rest and relaxation ] you need . " 
 = = = Presentation = = = 
 Atkin found the cockpit and terrain graphics to look " almost real " . He commented , " Every few years a sim comes along that lets reviewers use the ' sets new standards for graphics ' cliché , and Flight Unlimited is the 1995 entry in this club . " Bob and John Nolan called Flight Unlimited " the ultimate show off piece for your new Pentium " , thanks to " unbelievable " graphics superior to those of any other computer game . Gaudiosi concurred : he characterized the visuals as " photo @-@ sharp " and " better than any I have seen " . PC Magazine 's staff found the graphics " impressive " and " even more stunning than those in Microsoft Flight Simulator " . Ware noted the " stunning 3 @-@ D photo @-@ realistic scenery " , while Bailey stated that the " graphics are brilliantly rendered and whiz by smoothly " . Buchanan called Flight Unlimited 's terrain " just superb " and Vizard described it as " amazingly real " . Buchanan believed that " what you hear in Flight Unlimited is every bit as good as what you see " , thanks to " utterly convincing " sound effects . Atkin praised the instructor as " one of the best uses of voice ever in a multimedia title " . 
 Bailey wrote that the game needs " a real beefy machine " to run properly ; Atkin stated that the " massive horsepower requirement will restrict many gamers to lower resolutions and detail levels " . Bob and John Nolan similarly found that the game " hogs computing power " . Buchanan wrote that the system requirements listed on the back of the game 's box " must be a joke " , and that a high @-@ performance computer is necessary to run the game . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Flight Unlimited was the first of three self @-@ published titles released by Looking Glass Technologies . However , the next two products , Terra Nova : Strike Force Centauri ( 1996 ) and British Open Championship Golf ( 1997 ) , were commercial failures . As a result , the company ceased self @-@ publishing and was left in dire financial circumstances . Doug Church later explained that Looking Glass ' attempt to publish came at a difficult time for the video game industry : " the other mid @-@ sized publishers were mostly going out of business or getting bought " . He believed that the company had been " overreaching itself " with the venture , and that it was " being a little overambitious and a little cocky " . 
 = = = Sequels = = = 
 Flight Unlimited was intended to be followed by a combat @-@ oriented sequel , which was developed under the working title Flight Combat . In 1995 , Seamus Blackley told PC Gamer US that he wanted the game to " feel so real that pilots will be afraid . They 'll feel the gun hits . " Talking to Computer Gaming World , he stated that the game would teach players the " same curriculum [ as ] the Air Force " , and that it would feature competitive online play . However , a company manager , newly instated by venture capital investors who disliked Looking Glass ' management style , instead demanded that Blackley create a direct sequel to Flight Unlimited . The two argued regularly , and Blackley later accused the manager of " <unk> [ ing ] the guts out of Looking Glass " . In response to Blackley 's refusal to create Flight Unlimited II , the manager fired him . Blackley left the company in late 1995 with designer Austin Grossman , and both were hired by Dreamworks Interactive to create Jurassic Park : Trespasser . He later spearheaded development of the Xbox at Microsoft . 
 Constantine Hantzopoulos directed Flight Unlimited II , which was published by Eidos Interactive in 1997 . The team could not continue using the real @-@ time computational fluid dynamics of Flight Unlimited because , according to Hantzopoulos , it was " all black box spaghetti code from Seamus " . The aerobatics focus of its predecessor was dropped in favor of general civilian aviation . The development of Flight Combat was hinted at during the production of Flight Unlimited II . A third game , Flight Unlimited III , was published by Electronic Arts in 1999 ; and it continued the focus on general aviation . That year , Flight Combat was officially announced as the World War II @-@ themed , Electronic Arts @-@ published Flight Combat : Thunder Over Europe , but its name was eventually changed to Jane 's Attack Squadron . The game was canceled as a consequence of Looking Glass Studios ' closure in 2000 . However , it was later finished by developer Mad Doc Software and released in 2002 by publisher Xicat Interactive . 
 = Octavarium ( album ) = 
 Octavarium is the eighth studio album by American progressive metal / rock band Dream Theater . Released on June 7 , 2005 , it was the band 's final release with Atlantic Records . Recorded between September 2004 and February 2005 , the album holds the distinction of being the last album ever recorded at The Hit Factory in New York City . With Octavarium , the band decided to create " a classic Dream Theater album " , drawing upon their various stylistic influences while trying to make the music less complex . The album takes as its creative concept the musical octave . 
 Octavarium peaked in the top five in the Finnish , Italian , and Swedish charts , and in the top ten in the Dutch , Japanese , and Norwegian charts . Critical reception of the album was generally positive ; the diversity of the music was praised , although critics found some of the songwriting to be inconsistent . Dream Theater promoted the album on a year @-@ long world tour , with the majority of concerts lasting almost three hours and featuring a different setlist each night . The tour finished at Radio City Music Hall accompanied by an orchestra ; this performance was recorded and released as a live album and concert video entitled Score . They co @-@ headlined the 2005 North American Gigantour with Megadeth . 
 = = Background = = 
 After completing a North American tour supporting one of their main influences , Yes , in summer 2004 , Dream Theater took a two @-@ month break . The band reconvened at The Hit Factory in New York City in November 2004 to begin work on their eighth studio album . The Hit Factory , a studio in which artists such as Michael Jackson , Madonna , Stevie Wonder , U2 and John Lennon had recorded , was earmarked for closure . Dream Theater was the last band to record there before it was permanently closed . 
 After writing the concept album Metropolis Pt . 2 : Scenes from a Memory , the double album Six Degrees of Inner Turbulence and the metal @-@ focused Train of Thought , the band decided to create " a classic Dream Theater album " . Keyboardist Jordan Rudess described it as " really going back to creating a real band effort , as well as drawing upon all our various stylistic influences . " On Octavarium , the band wanted to make the music less complex , featuring songs which Rudess regards as " quicker to appreciate " , although noted that the twenty @-@ four @-@ minute " Octavarium " was not as accessible . Guitarist John Petrucci noted that they wanted to focus on writing strong songs . To achieve this , the band stripped the sound down to piano , guitar and vocals when writing , focusing on the melodies and song structures . 
 Drummer Mike Portnoy dismissed claims that Octavarium was an attempt to write a more commercial album , stating that the band simply " [ has ] that side to [ them ] . We love bands like U2 or Coldplay , as well as liking shorter songs as well . " Portnoy noted that , after writing Six Degrees of Inner Turbulence and Train of Thought , they had not written an album of shorter songs for some time . He said that the band had found writing longer songs easier than writing shorter ones , and that the band was not trying to write a radio hit as " the label wouldn 't have done crap with it anyway . " 
 The band had previously written an orchestral @-@ style piece in the form of " Overture " on Six Degrees of Inner Turbulence , but recorded it using keyboards . The tracks " The Answer Lies Within " , " Sacrificed Sons " and " Octavarium " marked the first time Dream Theater worked with an orchestra , conducted by <unk> Sharifi ( who studied at Berklee College of Music at the same time as Portnoy , Petrucci and bassist John Myung ) . The orchestra was selected based on their sight reading ability , allowing all their parts to be recorded in a maximum of two takes , even though they had never seen or played the music before . 
 Sharifi would later go on to conduct the Octavarium Orchestra on Dream Theater 's Score album . 
 = = Concept = = 
 When starting to work on what would become Octavarium , Portnoy noted that it would be their eighth studio album and that they had recently released their fifth live album , Live at Budokan . This sequence mirrored the octave on a musical keyboard : each octave contains eight naturals and five accidentals . Portnoy suggested that they use that concept for the entire album . When writing , the band delegated each song a different key . Sound effects were placed between songs to connect them : for example , " The Root of All Evil " , written in F , and the following track , " The Answer Lies Within " , written in G , were connected by a sound effect in the key of F # . The album 's lyrics and song titles featured references to this concept . Portnoy cited the titles " The Root of all Evil " ( referring to the musical term " root " ) and " Octavarium " ( " the octave of the octave " ) as two examples of this . 
 Octavarium begins " The Root of All Evil " with the final note of the band 's previous album , Train of Thought with " In the Name of God " . Train of Thought started " As I Am " with the last note from Six Degrees of Inner Turbulence with the title track , which in turn started with the noise that ended Scenes from a Memory at the end of " Finally Free " . Portnoy was inspired to do this thanks to the Van Halen album Women and Children First ; the outro of the album 's final song ended with a new riff being played which faded out . Portnoy recalled that he expected Van Halen 's next album to start with that ending riff , but was disappointed when it did not . He later realized he had " dug a hole where we 're expected to do it every time " . He solved this problem on Octavarium , where the final track ends with the beginning of the first one . This made the album a cycle in itself , allowing the band to have a clean start with their next album . At 04 : 52 – 5 : 17 , there is a lyrical and musical reference to the chorus of " This Dying Soul " from Train of Thought . 
 = = = Content = = = 
 " The Root of All Evil " is the third part of Portnoy 's Twelve @-@ step Suite , a set of songs from various Dream Theater albums which describe his journey through Alcoholics Anonymous . The song contains parts six and seven of the suite : " Ready " and " Remove " . " The Answer Lies Within " and " I Walk Beside You " are the two shortest tracks on the album . Rudess regards them as radio @-@ friendly songs which still maintain Dream Theater 's style . 
 Portnoy wrote the lyrics to " Never Enough " as a response to fans who Portnoy perceived to complain about every thing that Dream Theater did . Portnoy stated that while he appreciated the devotion of Dream Theater 's fans , he was frustrated because he was " constantly tearing [ himself ] away from [ his ] family " to give more to the fans . He found it discouraging that , even though he spent " countless nights " writing special setlists and the band spent days rehearsing , some fans would still complain that they went to a show and did not hear " Pull Me Under " . " It 's discouraging and makes me crazy sometimes , " he said . 
 " Sacrificed Sons " , at just over ten minutes long , is the second @-@ longest song on the album . Its lyrics , written by vocalist James LaBrie , deal with the September 11 attacks . Rudess noted that the band enjoyed writing about more serious topics instead of love songs . When working on the lyrics , LaBrie said that there was " a lot of discussion " about the song 's wording and how direct it should be . 
 The title track " Octavarium " is the longest track on the album , at 24 : 00 . Petrucci stated that the band wanted to write an epic song that thematically developed and would use an orchestra . The band was heavily influenced by the progressive rock sound of Genesis , Yes and Pink Floyd . The instrumental introduction , heavily influenced by Pink Floyd 's " Shine On You Crazy Diamond " , was performed by Rudess using a lap steel guitar and Continuum . Additionally , there are many references to other progressive rock songs in the lyrics . 
 = = = Artwork = = = 
 Hugh Syme provided the artwork for Octavarium . The idea of depicting a giant Newton 's cradle was born out of discussions between Syme and Portnoy . The two talked about how " for everything you do in music you create either a cluster or triad " , according to Syme . " And then it became evident that for every action there is an opposite reaction . So I thought we could do something based on the Newton 's cradle . " There are numerous references to the numbers five and eight throughout the artwork , alluding to the album 's concept . For example , the Newton 's cradle has eight suspended balls , and there are five birds on the cover . The album booklet features an octagonal maze , spider and octopus , among other references . The landscape on the cover is made up of a sky and grass from Indiana , and a background from the Lake District . 
 = = Release = = 
 A week before the scheduled release of Octavarium , Portnoy shut down the official Dream Theater and Mike Portnoy forums . Blabbermouth.net reported that this was in response to the album being leaked . Portnoy stated that " [ he ] chose to do this mainly [ emphasis removed ] to build anticipation for the big ' official ' unveiling next week " , although noted that " the repeated requests to refrain from spoilers and links for the new album against the band 's wishes were frustrating " . 
 Octavarium was released on June 7 , 2005 . It was their final album with Atlantic Records , ending a contract which had lasted fourteen years . Although in recent years the band had been allowed creative freedom , they were dissatisfied by the lack of promotion the label offered them . Portnoy released a DVD entitled <unk> in 2005 , containing footage of his drum performance from the Octavarium recording sessions . Rudess released a solo piano version of " The Answer Lies Within " on his 2009 album Notes on a Dream . " Panic Attack " is featured as a playable song in Rock Band 2 , where it is listed as the hardest song for both bass and drums . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Octavarium reached the top five in the Finnish , Italian , and Swedish charts , as well as the top ten in the Dutch , Japanese , and Norwegian charts . Critical reception of the album was generally positive . Writing for Blistering , Justin Donnelly praised the album as " diverse , melodic and hard hitting all at the same time " , ranking it as one of Dream Theater 's best releases . He particularly praised the title track , considering it to be " another Dream Theater classic " . Billboard considered the results of the band 's attempt to write shorter songs and use warmer instrumental textures to be " excellent " , particularly praising " The Root of All Evil " , " These Walls " and " I Walk Beside You " . 
 Harley Carlson of MetalReview.com regarded Octavarium as " successfully [ showcasing ] the band 's ability to craft emotive music , " although noted that it is " unquestionably Dream Theater , yet there is something missing . " Vik Bansal of musicOMH praised " Never Enough " , " Panic Attack " and " Sacrificed Sons " , but dismissed " The Root of All Evil " as " Dream Theater by the numbers " . He criticized " Octavarium " as " bloated " , although noted that fans of the band 's A Change of Seasons would enjoy it . He said that " there 's enough on the remainder of Octavarium to keep the rest of us interested and the prog rock haters whining dismissively " . Writing for Exclaim ! , Greg Pratt praised the album 's artwork and production , but said that " there ’ s nothing that blows any minds here , or even gives a mild bend ; hell , a good chunk of this disc feels like basic radio rock from the local old @-@ guy bar band " . He noted that although there were some longer songs on the album , " this just feels like 76 minutes of <unk> rock , too heavy on the light and weak , and not enough time spent on just showing off " . 
 Donnelly considered Octavarium to be " somewhere between Images and Words , Six Degrees of Inner Turbulence and Train of Thought " . Carlson stated that the album " draws closest comparison to Falling into Infinity and Metropolis II : Scenes from a Memory , but with far less complexity and edge . " Tammy La Gorce of AllMusic noted that " a post @-@ hardcore edge - call it a leap into 2005 - has invaded [ the band 's ] pledge of allegiance to theatrical heavy rock ... What 's changed is Dream Theater 's commitment to carrying on their reputation as underground progressive rock 's classicists , and it seems well @-@ timed . " Critics noted a strong Muse influence on some tracks , on some cases generating negative reviews . 
 = = Touring = = 
 Dream Theater began the Octavarium Tour in support of Octavarium in Europe on June 10 , 2005 , beginning at the Sweden Rock Festival in Sölvesborg . The band co @-@ headlined the Gigantour with Megadeth across North America from July 21 to September 3 . The Montreal concert was recorded and released as a live album and concert video on August 22 , 2006 and September 5 , 2006 respectively , titled Gigantour . The main Octavarium world tour began in September in Finland , and saw the band continue with their " An Evening With Dream Theater " concert format . This meant the band would play for almost three hours , with a different setlist each evening . Many of the shows would center around a tour of the band 's history to that point , featuring a song ( or part of a longer song ) for each album before wrapping up the regular set with several from Octavarium Combined with interviews , rehearsals during soundcheck and meet @-@ and @-@ greet sessions with fans , the band became physically and mentally drained . 
 Dream Theater performed two shows on consecutive nights both in Amsterdam and London . On the second night in both cities , the band covered the entirety of Pink Floyd 's The Dark Side of the Moon album . Theresa Thomason , who had previously performed on Scenes From a Memory , was flown in to perform vocals on " The Great Gig in the Sky " . The London performance was released as a live album and concert video in 2006 by Portnoy 's YtseJam Records . The band covered all of Deep Purple 's Made in Japan at concerts in Tokyo and Osaka ; a recording of which was also released as a live album by YtseJam Records in 2007 . 
 To celebrate the band 's twentieth anniversary , the final concert on the tour was performed at Radio City Music Hall in New York on April 1 , 2006 . For the second half of the concert , the band was accompanied by a thirty @-@ piece orchestra conducted by <unk> Sharifi . The concert was filmed and released as a live album and concert video named Score on August 29 , 2006 by Rhino Records . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All music composed by Dream Theater . 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Additional personnel 
 = Peniophora quercina = 
 Peniophora quercina is a species of wood @-@ decay fungus in the family <unk> . The species produces fruit bodies which vary in appearance depending on whether they are wet or dry . The wet fruit bodies are waxy and lilac , and attached strongly to the wood . When dry , the edges curl up and reveal the dark underside , while the surface becomes crusty and pink . P. quercina is the type species of Peniophora , and was moved to the genus upon its creation by Mordecai Cubitt Cooke . The species is found primarily in Europe , where it can be encountered all year . Though primarily growing upon dead wood , especially oak , it is also capable of growing upon still @-@ living wood . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Early descriptions of the species came from Carl Ludwig Willdenow , who named it Lichen carneus in 1787 , and Jean Baptiste François Pierre Bulliard , who , in 1790 , named it Auricularia <unk> . However , the sanctioned name is Thelephora quercina , given by Christiaan Hendrik Persoon in 1801 , and sanctioned by Elias Magnus Fries in the first volume of his Systema Mycologicum . The specific name quercina is in reference to Quercus , the generic name for oak . A number of authors ( including Jean @-@ Baptiste Lamarck , Lucien Quélet and Giacomo Bresadola ) reclassified Bulliard 's Auricularia <unk> throughout the 19th century , while Persoon 's Thelephora quercina was reclassified by Samuel Frederick Gray in 1821 , who placed it in <unk> as <unk> <unk> . However , in 1879 , Mordecai Cubitt Cooke transferred the species to his newly described genus Peniophora , declaring it the type species . Despite subsequent attempts at reclassification , Cooke 's name is the one currently used . 
 = = Description = = 
 Peniophora quercina produces resupinate fruit bodies which vary in appearance depending on whether they are wet or dry . They are up to 0 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 020 in ) thick , and form irregular patches that sometimes measure several centimetres across . Initially , the species forms small , disc @-@ shaped fruit bodies through holes in bark , but these expand and merge to form the irregular patches . When fresh , the surface is reminiscent of jelly or wax , and can be smooth or warty , varying in colour from a dull blue to lilac . Initially , they are firmly attached to the wood on which they are growing , but as they dry , the edges roll inwards and reveal the dark brown or black underside . The dry specimens have a crusty and slightly fissured surface , and , in colour , are a bright pink or grey , tinted with lilac . There is a relatively thick layer of gelatinous flesh . Apart from a brown layer close to the wood , the flesh is hyaline . The species has no distinctive odour or taste , and is inedible . 
 = = = Microscopic features = = = 
 Peniophora quercina produces spores which take the shape of a curved cylinder ( sausage shaped ) , and have been variously reported as light red , pink and white . They measure from 8 to 12 by 3 to 4 micrometres ( μm ) . The spores are borne on basidia , with four spores per basidium , which measure 50 to 70 by 5 to 12 μm . The species has hyaline cystidia with thick cell walls , which are " heavily encrusted with crystalline material " . The cystidia are often buried within the fruit body as it grows , but can be found in large numbers . They have been variously described as spindle @-@ shaped or conical , and measure 25 to 35 by 10 to 15 μm . The hyphae have clamp connections , and the base of the fruit body is made up of brown hyphae with moderately thick cell walls , measuring 3 to 4 μm in width . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Peniophora <unk> is similar in appearance to P. quercina . However , the edges of the fruit body are highlighted in a dark black , and the species favours ash , as opposed to oak . 
 = = Ecology and distribution = = 
 Peniophora quercina typically grows upon dead wood , which can be attached to the tree or fallen , where it causes white rot . It favours oak , but can also be found on other deciduous trees , such as beech . P. quercina is known to be a pioneer species on dead wood , which means it can be the first species to grow . It is found in Europe , where it is very common . Though it can be encountered all year , it produces spores in late summer and autumn . It has also been recorded in Amur , in eastern Asia . 
 The species has also been identified in living sapwood , though it is latent at this time , and it is probable that it waits until the wood begins to die ( when it is drier , but contains more oxygen ) before the mycelia begin to grow . When the species was inoculated into living wood , it did grow , but only around the inoculation wound ; the species did not spread as it would have done on dead wood . Another study found that the species actively colonised partially living branches , causing white rot . However , the species had little effect on the cambium , and was mostly limited to the ends of branches . 
 = Paper War of 1752 – 1753 = 
 In 1752 , Henry Fielding started a " paper war " , a long term dispute with constant publication of pamphlets attacking other writers , between the various authors on London 's Grub Street . Although it began as a dispute between Fielding and John Hill , other authors , such as Christopher Smart , Bonnell Thornton , William Kenrick , Arthur Murphy , and Tobias Smollett were soon dedicating their works to aid various sides of the conflict . 
 The dispute lasted until 1753 and involved many of London 's periodicals . It eventually resulted in countless essays , poems , and even a series of mock epic poems starting with Smart 's The Hilliad . Although it is unknown what actually started the dispute , it resulted in a divide of authors who either supported Fielding or supported Hill , and few in between . 
 = = Background = = 
 Fielding started a " paper war " in the first issue of The Covent @-@ Garden Journal ( 4 January 1752 ) by declaring war against " hack writers " . In response , John Hill claimed in the London Daily Advertiser ( 9 January 1752 ) Fielding had met with him prior to January and proposed what would be a fake paper war that would involve London writers " giving Blows that would not hurt , and sharing the Advantage in Silence . " Such a meeting between Fielding and Hill to discuss the proposed war is believed to have occurred ( if it occurred ) on 28 December 1751 . It is known that Hill met Fielding for legal business between 26 and 28 December 1751 after Hill was robbed . 
 Before Hill had revealed this information , he attacked Fielding 's Amelia in the London Daily Advertiser on 8 January 1752 . The book 's title character , Amelia , was involved in an accident that damaged her face , and Hill , mocking the way Fielding described the scene , claimed that she " could charm the World without the Help of a Nose . " In response to both the revelation and personal attacks , Fielding wrote on 11 January 1752 : " If the Betrayer of a private Treaty could ever deserve the least Credit , yet his <unk> here must proclaim himself either a Liar , or a Fool . None can doubt that he is the former , if he hath feigned this Treaty , and I think few would scruple to call him the latter , if he had rejected it . " Regardless of the merits of Hill 's claim , a war was soon started : by the third issue of The Covent @-@ Garden Journal , Fielding narrowed his satire upon John Hill . 
 Although Hill , Fielding , Smart , Thornton , Kenrick , Murphy , and Smollett were all involved in the dispute , not all of them used their actual names ; instead , many preferred to use pseudonyms along with attacks under their own name : Fielding wrote as " Sir Alexander Drawcansir " ; Hill wrote as " The Inspector " ; Thornton wrote as " Madam <unk> " ; and Smart wrote as " Mrs. Mary Midnight " . It was under these pseudonyms that various authors soon responded to Fielding 's attacks and to Fielding 's plan for a " Universal Register Office " , a planned center of advertisement of jobs , goods for sale , and other items . If this was not enough , Fielding started a dispute , just a few months before , with Philip D <unk> , a former employee who established the competing " Public Register Office " in King Street , Covent Garden , who hired Bonnell Thorton , a friend of Smart , to attack Fielding and Hill . However , Hill had previously aided Fielding in this matter . 
 Later , Hill attacked both Fielding and Smart , 13 August 1752 , in the only issue of the The <unk> to be produced . Although the work was published anonymously , it was commonly known that it was produced by Hill , and he soon followed up the pamphlet with his 25 August 1752 The Inspector column in the London Daily Advertiser . With the column , he harshly criticized Smart 's Poems on Several Occasions . Fielding eventually left the dispute after the sixth issue of The Covent @-@ Garden Journal was published . 
 = = Event = = 
