 = = = 2008 – 09 : The Beijing Olympics and AIBA top rank = = = 
 After the wins in Germany , Vijender 's training for the Olympics continued in Patiala where Indian boxers going to the Olympics held a camp . Vijender was accompanied by boxers Dinesh Kumar , Akhil Kumar , <unk> Kumar and <unk> <unk> . The Indian Amateur Boxing Federation ( <unk> ) sent a videographer to shoot extensively the bouts involving the likely opponents of the five Indian boxers . A team of coaches went through the video footage shot by videographer <unk> of the National Institute of Sports , Patiala , and studied the technique of the boxers from various countries in detail , so as to prepare Vijender and the others regarding the opponent 's manoeuvres and fighting techniques . 
 At the 2008 Summer Olympics , he defeated <unk> Jack of Gambia 13 – 2 in the round of 32 . In the round of 16 , he defeated <unk> <unk> of Thailand 13 – 3 to reach the Middleweight Boxing Quarterfinals . He beat southpaw Carlos Góngora of Ecuador 9 – 4 in the quarterfinals on 20 August 2008 which guaranteed him a medal , the first ever Olympic medal for an Indian boxer . He lost 5 – 8 to Cuba 's Emilio Correa in the semi @-@ finals on 22 August 2008 and shared a bronze medal . Vijender , and Indian wrestler Sushil Kumar — who won a bronze at the men 's wrestling competitions — were welcomed grandly to India after their victory . 
 In July 2009 , Vijender accompanied by Sushil and boxer Mary Kom were garlanded with the Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna award — India 's highest sporting honour . It was the first time that three sportspeople were picked for the award ; the award selection committee decided to grant the award to all of them , taking into consideration their performance for the cycle of 2008 – 09 . Kom and Vijender were the first boxers to get the award which carried prize money of Rs 750 @,@ 000 and a citation . Both Sushil and Vijender were recommended to the Padma Shri awards committee , by the Indian Sports and Home Ministries ; however , they were denied the awards after recommendations were not fruitful by the Padma Awards Committee for 2009 winners . The denial of Padma Shri for them created a furore among masses with allegations of promoting only a few sports . Vijender later took up a job with the Haryana Police department which paid him Rs 14 @,@ 000 per month . 
 Vijender participated at the 2009 World Amateur Boxing Championships . He was beaten by Abbos Atoev of Uzbekistan in the semi @-@ final of the 75 kg Middleweight category , by 7 points to 3 and was thus awarded the bronze medal . Vijender won the first round of the bout 1 – 0 , only for Atoev to run rampant in the second , landing five unanswered blows . The third round was evenly contested with both fighters scoring on a couple of occasions , but Vijender had already lost the match . In September 2009 , the International Boxing Association ( AIBA ) announced Vijender as the top @-@ ranked boxer in its annual middle @-@ weight ( 75 kg ) category list . He topped the list with 2800 points . 
 = = = 2010 – 14 : Padma Shri , Commonwealth Games and Asian Games = = = 
 In January 2010 , Vijender was awarded the Padma Shri for outstanding contribution to Indian sports . Later , he participated in the invitational Champions of Champions boxing tournament in China , and won a silver medal , losing 0 – 6 to Zhang Jin Ting in the 75 kg middleweight final . At the 2010 Commonwealth Boxing Championship held in New Delhi 18 March 2010 , he along with five other fellow Indians won gold medal . Vijender defeated England 's Frank <unk> 13 – 3 . 
 At the 2010 Commonwealth Games , Vijender Singh was beaten by England 's Anthony Ogogo in the semi @-@ finals . Leading 3 – 0 on points going into the final round , Singh was twice given a two @-@ point penalty by Canadian referee Michael Summers , the second for coming just 20 seconds before the end of the bout , leading Ogogo to win by 4 points to 3 . The Indian Boxing Federation ( IBF ) launched an unsuccessful appeal , leaving Singh with a bronze medal . IBF Secretary General P K <unk> Raja said , " The jury reviewed the bout and came to the conclusion that Vijender was holding his opponent and the referee was right in warning him . When the Indian team pointed out that even Ogogo was holding Vijender , the jury felt it was not the case . " Singh lashed out saying that the penalties were " harsh and unfair . The warnings were unfair and harsh . If the referee thought I was holding Ogogo then he should have penalised this guy as well . He was also holding me . It 's a joke that somebody has won by scoring points just out of warnings . " One month later , in November , he won the 2010 Asian Games shutting out Uzbek two time world champion Abbos Atoev 7 : 0 in the final . 
 Although previously denied by him , Hindustan Times reported that the boxer took up a role in the part real part fictional Bollywood thriller tentatively titled One , to be directed by South Indian director Anand . The film was later <unk> to be named Patiala Express , which is produced by Percept Limited . Shooting for the film was supposed to begin in early 2011 . However , on 17 May 2011 , Vijender got married to Archana Singh , a software engineer with an MBA degree , from Delhi . The wedding was solemnised in Delhi in a simple ceremony , and reception was organised at his native place Bhiwani . However , the wedding prompted the filmmakers to drop him from the project , as they felt that Vijender would not enjoy the same popularity among female fans . The film ’ s launch was widely reported in March 2011 , and actor Govinda had confirmed Vijender ’ s debut with his daughter . Vijender refused to confirm if he has indeed been dropped from the film , saying that " I have to concentrate on my boxing . Wait before you see me in films . " 
 At the 2012 Summer Olympics , he beat <unk> <unk> of Kazakhstan 14 – 10 in the first round of men 's middle @-@ weight 75 kg category Boxing event , to advance to the round of 16 of the games . He then edged out American Terrell <unk> 16 – 15 to win the pre @-@ quarter finals bout . He lost to Abbos Atoev of Uzbekistan in quarter final with a score of 13 – 17 . 
 In the 2014 Commonwealth Games , Singh claimed the silver medal after being defeated by England 's Antony Fowler by unanimous decision . 
 = = = Drug controversy = = = 
 On 6 March 2012 , during a raid conducted on an NRI residence near Chandigarh , Punjab Police seized 26 kilograms of heroin and other drugs , valued at ₹ 1 @.@ 3 billion ( US $ 19 million ) . They also recovered a car registered in the name of Vijender 's wife from outside the home of alleged drug dealer Anoop Singh <unk> . Later in March , a Punjab Police statement said , " As per investigation conducted so far , Vijender Singh consumed the drug about 12 times and Ram Singh ( his sparring partner ) about five times . " Singh denied the allegations and refused to give his hair and blood samples for testing . <unk> ( National Anti @-@ Doping Agency ) refused to test Vijender claiming protocol did not allow it to test an athlete for that drug when he was out of competition . However , on 3 April the Sports Ministry of India directed <unk> to conduct a test on the boxer since these reports were " disturbing and may have a debilitating influence on other sportspersons in the country " . 
 By mid @-@ May 2013 , the Olympic bronze @-@ medalist was given an “ all @-@ clean ” certificate by the National Anti @-@ Doping Agency . 
 = = In media = = 
 After his 2008 Olympic win , Vijender emerged into mainstream media prominence in India and became the latest pin @-@ up boy . Apart from boxing , Vijender took part in ramp shows also . However he commented that with partaking modelling , he wished to " bring the game [ boxing ] in the limelight , make it as popular as possible and catapult it to its deserving place at the top . " He has regularly spoken against the bias that Indian media has promoted only cricket as the sole game in India . In an interview with The Kolkata Telegraph , he commented : 
 Thanks to the media , people have started taking boxing seriously over the past two years . Everyone knows my name now because my achievements have been highlighted . Lekin boxing ka toh <unk> promotion hi <unk> hota India mein . ( But boxing is still not promoted in India ! ) We don ’ t have boxing academies , we don ’ t even have proper boxing rings . I have lost count of the times I have approached the government and the sporting authorities for support , but nothing has happened . [ ... ] In this country , everyone is hung up on cricket . Forget about boxing , India is doing so well in other sports too . Saina Nehwal is a great badminton player , the Indian tennis team has just won a Davis Cup tie , <unk> <unk> <unk> support <unk> hai ? ( but where is the support for all of us ? ) 
 Before the 2012 London Olympics , Vijender spoke to The Wall Street Journal about the increasing government bias to boost cricket . " I still fail to understand why only cricketers are given perks like free land , and so on . Come on , we boxers aren ’ t that bad either : We ’ re smart , intelligent and decent looking too ! I ’ m working really hard to make my country proud . I hope someday my turn comes , too " he clarified . Vijender was approached by Percept Picture Company to act as a guide and counsellor to participants taking part in the Indian version of the boxing reality show The Contender , which follows a group of boxers competing with each other in a single elimination style @-@ competition . He agreed despite being still contractually obligated with Infinity Optimal Solutions ( IOS ) , a celebrity management firm who dealt with his media appearances and ramp walks as a male model . IOS successfully petitioned the Delhi High Court to bar him from entering into any deal with Percept . 
 Vijender appeared on Bollywood actor Salman Khan 's game show 10 Ka Dum . He was accompanied by Bollywood actress Mallika Sherawat . Other appearances includes the fourth season of the Indian dance reality show Nach Baliye with actress Bipasha Basu . Vijender is credited by the critics and the media for bringing the sport of boxing back into the limelight in India . His rise to the top rank of the boxing world has been an inspiration for the younger generation and has brought more aspirants and followers , to the sport . 
 Vijender was one of the judges on the MTV Reality TV show Roadies X2 . 
 = = = Bollywood debut = = = 
 Vijender made his Bollywood debut as an actor in film Fugly , released on 13 June 2014 . The film is produced by Grazing Goat Productions , owned by Akshay Kumar and Ashvini Yardi . The film got above average review . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Singh turned professional as he signed a multi @-@ year agreement with Frank Warren 's Queensberry Promotions through IOS Sports and Entertainment . On 10 October 2015 Singh fought his first professional boxing match . He defeated his opponent Sonny Whiting by TKO . On November 7 , Singh knocked British boxer Dean Gillen in round 1 at the National Stadium in Dublin . In his third pro fight , Singh fought on the undercard of Lee @-@ Saunders on December 19 . Singh defeated Bulgarian <unk> <unk> via technical knockout . On March 21 , 2016 Singh knocked out Hungary 's Alexander Horvath in round 3 on the Flanagan @-@ Matthews undercard . Singh defeated French boxer <unk> Royer at the Copper Box Arena on April 30 via 5th round TKO . The fight was halted due to Royer suffering a cut above his left eye . On May 13 , Singh fought at Bolton 's Macron Stadium against Polish Andrej <unk> . Singh won via 3rd round TKO , knocking down <unk> in round 5 to mark his 6th professional win in a row , all coming by way of knockout . Singh defeated Australian Kerry Hope for the vacant WBO Asia Pacific Super Middleweight title on his home soil in India , marking his seventh consecutive win by unanimous decision , thus ending his 6 fight knockout streak . Two judges scored it 98 @-@ 92 , while the third judge had it 100 @-@ 90 . 
 = = Professional boxing record = = 
 = = Titles in boxing = = 
 = Hurricane Debbie ( 1969 ) = 
 Hurricane Debbie was an intense and long @-@ lived hurricane that formed during August 1969 . The fifth tropical cyclone , fourth named storm , third hurricane and second major hurricane of the 1969 Atlantic hurricane season , Debbie formed on August 14 in the southern Atlantic Ocean and took a general northwesterly path until turning northward into the central Atlantic . The storm was characterized by numerous fluctuations in intensity , and it reached winds corresponding to Category 3 status on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale on four separate occasions . The hurricane bypassed the island of Bermuda to the southeast on August 22 , before ultimately brushing southeastern Newfoundland with strong winds . It dissipated over the cold waters east of Greenland . Although Debbie had little effect on land , it was extensively researched and was subject to a weather modification experiment by Project Stormfury , in which it was seeded with silver iodide . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A disturbance associated with a tropical wave strengthened into a tropical depression on August 14 . The system had significantly organized by August 15 , and it intensified into a tropical storm at 1200 UTC that day . Upon its designation , Debbie was moving west @-@ northwestward at approximately 15 mph ( 24 km / h ) and it was predicted to gradually gain power . It attained Category 1 hurricane strength on August 16 as it turned toward the northwest . It continued to mature , and at around 1200 UTC the next day , it achieved winds corresponding to Category 2 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . On August 18 , Debbie further intensified to Category 3 status , making it a major hurricane . 
 However , the storm quickly downgraded , and by August 19 it was once again at minimal hurricane force . At roughly the same time , it turned more to the west , although it maintained a general northwesterly path . The abrupt weakening may have been the result of a seeding experiment carried out on the storm in an attempt to deteriorate it . By later in the day , Debbie had begun to restrengthen . It resumed Category 3 intensity on August 20 , despite a minor oscillation in magnitude during the day . At this point , the cyclone acquired peak winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) ; shortly thereafter , its lowest recorded barometric pressure fell to 951 millibars . 
 The storm turned northward on August 21 , and eventually curved northeastward . Debbie weakened to Category 2 strength but , for the fourth time , restrengthened to major hurricane intensity . The hurricane then passed well to the southeast of Bermuda , although it is believed that if not for the presence of nearby Hurricane Camille which emerged into the Atlantic from the United States on August 20 , Debbie would have likely ended up further west , closer to the island . It maintained its severity through August 22 as it continued generally toward the northeast . 
 On August 23 , the storm began a weakening trend and it turned towards the north . The next day , the storm — having weakened to Category 1 status — skirted the southeastern tip of Newfoundland . Debbie began to lose its tropical characteristics as it accelerated towards the northeast , and it weakened into a tropical storm early on August 25 . As it moved over increasingly cold waters , it dissipated east of Greenland . 
 = = Impact and Project Stormfury = = 
 Debbie was subject to an experiment called Project Stormfury , which attempted to weaken tropical cyclones by seeding them with silver iodide . The storm provided an excellent opportunity to test the underpinnings of Project Stormfury . In many ways it was the perfect storm for seeding : it did not threaten any land ; it passed within range of seeding aircraft ; and was intense with a distinct eye . On August 18 and again on August 20 , thirteen planes flew out to the storm to monitor and seed it . On the first day , windspeeds fell by 31 % . On the second day , windspeeds fell by 18 % . Both changes were consistent with Stormfury 's working hypothesis . The results were so encouraging that " a greatly expanded research program was planned . " Among other conclusions was the need for frequent seeding at close to hourly intervals . 
 Debbie remained predominately at sea throughout its 3 @,@ 000 mi ( 4 @,@ 800 km ) path , and as a result , it caused little damage . The storm had little or no impact on the island of Bermuda as it passed to the south . Later , winds of 50 to 65 mph ( 80 to 105 km / h ) were recorded over eastern Newfoundland . 
 = Freelancer ( video game ) = 
 Freelancer is a space trading and combat simulation video game developed by Digital Anvil and published by Microsoft Game Studios . It is a chronological sequel to Digital Anvil 's <unk> , a combat flight simulator released in 2000 . The game was initially announced by Chris Roberts in 1999 , and following many production schedule mishaps and a buyout of Digital Anvil by Microsoft , it was eventually released in March 2003 . 
 In the game , players take on the roles of spacecraft pilots . These characters fly single @-@ seater ships , exploring the planets and space stations of 48 known star systems . They also engage in dogfights with other pilots ( <unk> and computer @-@ controlled ) to protect traders or engage in piracy themselves . Other player activities include bounty @-@ hunting and commodity trading . The single @-@ player mode puts the player in the role of Edison Trent , who goes through a series of missions to save the Sirius sector from a mysterious alien force . In multiplayer mode , players are free to take on any role and to explore anywhere from the start . 
 Originally , Roberts promised features such as automated flight maneuvers , dynamic economies , and a multiplayer mode that could host thousands of players , but diminished versions of these features were implemented in the final release . The game 's initial technical demos impressed reviewers , but after the Microsoft buyout and Roberts ' departure from Digital Anvil , critics had doubts about the game . Reviewers judged the final product technically good but failing to fulfill their initial expectations . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Players take up the roles of pilots who fly single @-@ seat spacecraft , trading with merchants on space stations and planets , and engaging in combat against other vessels . Starting with a small spacecraft in a star system , the player 's character explores the region , opening up new systems for further adventures . Each system provides opportunities to increase the pilot 's wealth ; aside from taking on jobs to ferry goods and hunting for bounties , the player character can engage in trade . The player character 's primary goal in the game is to accumulate money , so as to buy more advanced weaponry and equipment to upgrade his ship . 
 The game is played primarily through " pointing and clicking " with the mouse and a few keyboard commands . This system is also used to control the spacecraft , a breakaway from the traditional use of joysticks for space flight simulators . Observing their spacecraft from the rear , players fly their ships by moving the mouse in the direction they want the vessels to go . Freelancer 's spacecraft follow simplistic flight dynamics ; however , a dash of realism is implemented by allowing the vessels to cut power to their engines and turn to face any direction while drifting along their original path — conservation of momentum . Clicking the mouse button shoots the ship 's weapons at the location of the cursor . The interface has no radar display ; the location of objects not shown on the screen are indicated by pointers at the screen 's edges . Targeting , communications , and navigation data are displayed in information boxes that can be minimized . 
 After the pilot docks with a space station or lands on a planet , the screen and its interface change to a rendition of the area he is visiting . The player moves the pilot to different locations and interacts with certain objects , such as reading a bulletin board and talking to other characters , by clicking on their graphical representations . Freelancer 's economy consists of buying and selling spacecraft , their armaments and components , and commodities . Certain goods are considered contraband in some systems , and they have to be smuggled past police patrols to their buyers . Computer @-@ controlled characters ( non @-@ player characters or NPCs ) in certain locations on the planets or stations offer quests and jobs . 
 Freelancer features a multiplayer mode , allowing up to 128 players to play together in a game . Multiplayer games are hosted on game servers ; personal computers that meet the requirements for the game can act as a server . Gameplay is similar to the single @-@ player mode , but is absent of story @-@ driven quests . Because the server keeps individual records of the players ' progress , they can resume their game when they next log on to it . A persistent virtual galaxy is thus maintained for them . 
 = = Plot and setting = = 
 The events in Freelancer take place 800 years after those in the video game <unk> ( 2000 ) . The solar system was engulfed in a civil war , fought between the Alliance and the Coalition . Facing defeat , the Alliance placed its people in stasis and sent them to the Sirius system , where they settled and transformed the surrounding space ( the Sirius sector ) into a region of political intrigue and opportunity . The rule of the sector is mostly split among four houses , each named after the sleeper ship that brought them to the system . Each house exhibits the culture of its terrestrial ancestor : Liberty of 1920s United States , <unk> of Victorian era United Kingdom , <unk> of Shogunate era Japan , and Rheinland of Second Industrial Revolution Germany . The fifth sleeper ship , Hispania , suffered a malfunction en route and was abandoned in deep space ( in the Omicron Alpha system ) . The descendants of its crew became pirates . 
 Freelancer 's planetary bodies and space stations lie close to a single plane in each system , although some are above or below this plane and ships can travel out of the plane . There are 48 known star systems , and spacecraft can travel from one system to another by passing through jump gates . These systems are shown a 2D map , however the jump gate mechanism actually provides no clear idea of how close each system is to others or spatial directions between them , so this map is just a simplified convention . Within a system , spacecraft can travel in the trade lanes — a series of gates that connect to form a " space highway " — to quickly reach places of interest , such as planets , space stations , and mining operations . Asteroid and debris fields populate some of the systems , and secret hideouts and <unk> with valuable items exist in deep space . Merchant ships ply the trade lanes , carrying cargo from system to system and occasionally coming under attack by pirates . Patrolling the systems are police and large naval warships . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The player takes on the role of Edison Trent , a " mercenary freebooter " , in single @-@ player mode . Regardless of Trent 's background , the player can play him in different roles , such as being a trader , pirate , or bounty hunter . Throughout the story , Trent meets several NPCs , such as Liberty Security Force ( LSF ) commander Jun <unk> Zane , <unk> Professor Roland Quintaine , and head of a secret organization , Casper <unk> . Trent 's relationships with these NPCs are pre @-@ determined and illustrated by cutscenes ; the player has no choice of import in Trent 's interactions with these NPCs . 
 Most NPCs are aligned with a certain faction , such as the police , pirates , a company , or government . Each faction has its own agenda , and the relationships among them are interlinked in a web of alliances and hostilities . Player characters anger a faction and its allies by destroying its ships . Likewise , they gain the favor of a faction — and , to a smaller extent , its allies — by attacking its enemies . Player characters who have a bad relationship with a faction are attacked on sight by its forces and denied from docking with its stations . Paying bribes to a faction improves its attitude to the player character . Several NPCs with major roles are voiced by professional voice actors , such as Ian Ziering ( Beverly Hills , 90210 ) , Jennifer Hale ( Metroid games ) , George Takei ( Star Trek ) , and John Rhys @-@ Davies ( Indiana Jones films and Sliders ) . These NPCs are excluded from the multiplayer mode because of its lack of a campaign story ( scripted missions ) . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The plot of Freelancer 's single @-@ player campaign is illustrated with two hours worth of in @-@ game cutscenes . The story is linear in structure — the player is unable to effect a different storyline — and broken down into stages . Cutscenes inform players of background events and the goals in a stage . Most stages have no time limits for their completion , and players can put the main story on hold while taking on missions ( jobs ) not crucial to it . However , players can only proceed to other regions of the Sirius sector , where more advanced ships , weaponry , and equipment are obtained , after completing missions that advance the story . Some stages are not introduced until the character has achieved a certain level ( based on total worth accumulated ) , and it is not possible to gain sufficient levels just through the story itself , so players must spend at least some time on side missions to gain money to advance to the level required for the next stage of the story . This is also necessary as some stages would be too tough with only the money and items collected in the story . 
 On starting single @-@ player mode , a cutscene shows the destruction of space station Freeport 7 by unknown forces , leaving Trent without money or ship on the planet Manhattan . While waiting for his debtor , Lonnigan , to regain consciousness , Trent takes up employment with the LSF under Jun <unk> Zane , who provides him with a small ship . Lonnigan refuses to pay Trent when he awakes and is mysteriously taken away by the LSF . His death is later announced , and Trent is contacted by a thief who reveals that a mystery party destroyed Freeport 7 to get an artifact in the thief 's possession . An LSF officer kills the thief , and he is shot by Zane in self @-@ defense as she arrives at the scene . Zane and Trent flee Liberty space , traveling across approximately half of the Freelancer world in their flight . Trent locates <unk> expert Dr. Quintaine to learn more about the artifact . While finding additional materials for their research , they discover the existence of the Nomad alien race , who are the caretakers of an empire that belonged to the previous inhabitants of the Sirius sector , the Dom <unk> . The Nomads can possess humans and have slowly infiltrated the four Houses in this manner , planning to ignite a civil war to weaken the humans for elimination . 
 Trent joins the Order , a secret organization formed to combat the Nomads , and helps to rescue the Liberty president from the aliens . Quintaine 's research reveals the artifact to be a map and the key to the Dom <unk> 's hyper gate — super jump gate — network , which currently acts as the Nomads ' source of power . The Order launches an attack on what they believe to be the Nomads ' homeworld , aiming to activate the hyper gates and cut off the Nomads from their power supply . The activated gates suck the Nomads to an unknown location , and the Order watches over the gates for their return . With the Nomads ' defeat , events return to normal in the Freelancer world . Trent and Zane are granted full pardons by the governments , and Trent is asked by the Order to be their eyes and ears in Liberty space , allowing the player to continue the game without any story elements . 
 = = Development = = 
 In 1997 , Chris Roberts began work on a vision he had since he first conceived Wing Commander . He wanted to realize a virtual galaxy , whose systems execute their own programs regardless of the players ' presence ; cities would be bustling with transports and each world 's weather changes on its own time . Commodity prices in each star system would fluctuate , according to the activities of the computer controlled traders , who import and export goods . Roberts envisioned thousands of players simultaneously interacting with and influencing this world through a unique and intuitive user interface never seen before in other games . Each player could pursue a quest set up for their character , and join other players to attempt other missions together without needing to exit the game and start a new mode of play . Artificial intelligence would fly the players ' spacecraft , letting them concentrate on combat or other tasks . Roberts intended the cutscenes and gameplay visuals to be of equal quality so players would be unable to distinguish between the two . 
 Two years later , the project was officially announced as Freelancer at <unk> , an annual showcase to the mass media of Microsoft 's games . The media covered the event , focusing on the features promised for this game . There were concerns about the state of the graphics and uncertainties over the promise of a dynamic economy , but gaming site GameSpot gave Roberts and his company , Digital Anvil , the benefit of their doubts . Initially in 1999 , Roberts announced the game would be available on the market by fall 2000 . However , the project suffered delays and by Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) 2000 , Roberts said the earliest release for the game was at the end of 2001 . 
 In June 2000 , Microsoft started talks to buy Digital Anvil . Roberts admitted that his team required large sums of money , which only a huge company could provide , to continue developing Freelancer with its " wildly ambitious " features and unpredictable schedule ; the project had overshot its original development projection of three years by 18 months . Roberts trusted that Microsoft would not compromise his vision for Freelancer , and was convinced the software giant would not attempt the takeover if it did not believe Freelancer could sell at least 500 @,@ 000 copies when released . Roberts left the company on completion of the deal , but assumed a creative consultant role on Freelancer until its release . Microsoft instructed Digital Anvil to scale down the ambitions of the project and focus on finishing the game based on what was possible and the team 's strengths . Features such as the automated flight control , conversations that had different choices of responses , and sub @-@ quests were abandoned . Despite the reductions , several reviewers believed the resultant product was still true to Robert 's vision . 
 The Freelancer team kept a low profile throughout 2001 before displaying a demo of their latest work at International Games Festival 2002 , drawing large crowds . Microsoft announced the project was on schedule , and Digital Anvil added all the planned content for the game by October 2002 . A beta test with approximately 500 testers was conducted , and the only main activities left were to refine the game 's features and to fix errors uncovered in the testing . The game shipped to retailers on March 4 , 2003 , and was later available online through Yahoo 's Game on Demand service . Digital Anvil 's role on Freelancer ended on June 6 , 2003 , with their delivery of a software patch to resolve issues on the server and cheating ; the staff were redeployed to other departments in Microsoft . In accordance with their 5 @-@ year support policy for software , Microsoft stopped supporting the game on April 8 , 2008 , and shutdown their global server , which managed the list of multiplayer servers and the connection of players to them . 
 Freelancer 's soundtrack was released by Sumthing Else Music Works on November 18 , 2003 . Composed by award winning composer James Hannigan , music group Visual Music Incorporated , and Digital Anvil 's musician and programmer Andrew Sega , it includes a bonus DVD that contains the game 's alternative introduction movies , concept art , scripts , and deleted content . Communities of Freelancer players banded together to produce modified versions of the game . Their software modifications included new ships — including big capital ships — for players to fly and new factions for them to join . Certain modifications allowed the players to fly ships of one franchise against another , for example , Star Wars versus Wing Commander . The communities also worked around the loss of the global server , allowing players to host the modified games on their servers and continuing the Freelancer multiple @-@ player online gaming world . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Chris Roberts is highly regarded in the field of spaceflight combat simulators due to his successful Wing Commander franchise . When the industry learned that he was creating a new spaceflight combat simulator , they paid close attention to it . In its first public showing at E3 1999 , Roberts 's Freelancer won four Game Critics Awards , including Best Game of the Show . Journalists at one of the game 's later showings queued up to 90 minutes to catch a glimpse of a half @-@ hour demonstration . Computer Gaming World , trusting Roberts 's vision , named Freelancer as a game that would revolutionize the gaming industry . Shortly after the game was released , IGN called it the Game of the Month . Early in the game 's development , the industry was enthusiastic about the prospect of playing in a world that changes without player interaction ( a dynamic world ) , although there was caution over the possibility of such implementation with contemporary technology . Delays in the schedule and Microsoft 's take over of Digital Anvil gave rise to speculation that Roberts 's most promised feature — the dynamic world — would be cut . 
 The concerns were partially realized ; the features , although not cut , were reduced , leaving Freelancer with a virtual world that did not live up to the industry 's expectations . It presented a static galaxy , where territories of various factions never change despite the groups ' frequent raids and attacks on each other , and commodity prices remain fixed . Nonetheless , reviewers from video game sites , such as Eurogamer and GameSpy , accepted the limitations and focused on other areas of the game . They found the lack of variety a greater detraction from the game than the compromised dynamic world . Excluding the single @-@ player campaign , players never meet any memorable NPC because almost everyone sounds American . According to Game Nation TV , after playing for a while , every character and place looked similar to the extent that the game makes " Star Trek look like a <unk> zoo " . Furthermore , instead of serving as entertainment , the missions , which entail the pilot to fly to a particular location and destroy the enemies there , are so repetitive that they become chores to the reviewers instead . 
 Freelancer 's graphics software was of older technology , but it did not detract from FiringSquad 's praise of the game 's artistic quality . The beautiful and realistic depictions of the universe impressed other reviewers , such as GameCritics.com and the Stratos Group . IGN , in particular , was enamored with the game 's graphics , describing them as " simply gorgeous " with the best explosions and enormous ships . The mouse @-@ and @-@ keyboard flight control was praised by the industry . Several reviewers found it easy to shoot down enemy ships with the intuitive controls , but others pointed out that aerobatic maneuvers , such as jinking or barrel rolls , cannot be performed , reducing dogfights to overly simplistic and repetitive " chase or be chased " sequences that pale in comparison to the action in other spaceflight simulators . 
 On the story side , reviewers agreed the professional actors , such as Ian Ziering , did a good job in bringing their respective characters to life . However , criticism was placed on the lone voice who voiced all the generic male encounters for his monotonous delivery and making all his characters sound alike . The long cutscenes , which cannot be skipped , frustrated game journalist Tom Chick ; he wanted to skip the scenes and continue playing instead of being forced to watch a clichéd story . Other reviewers expressed their own frustrations with the story , such as being forced to move to another star system at undesired times , or leaving them without an objective after the campaign abruptly ended . 
 FiringSquad said Freelancer 's multiplayer mode encapsulated the " best and worst of [ the game ] in a nutshell " : although players can move their characters anywhere , group with others for missions , and trade ships and equipment , they have very little else to do in the unchanging virtual galaxy . Despite these limitations , Stratos Group said the joy of playing with real @-@ life counterparts is a positive factor ; the NPC pilots are so inept that human @-@ controlled pilots outperform them most of the time . However , as the missions are practically the same , IGN and GameCritics.com questioned the point of playing them repeatedly with friends . Furthermore , IGN thought it was meaningless to amass wealth and higher @-@ grade equipment when they cannot be transferred to other servers . The lack of substance and repetitiveness led the gaming site to wonder how long Freelancer can be viable as a commercial multiplayer product . Whereas massively multiplayer online games such as EverQuest have thousands of players in a vast playing area , Freelancer can accommodate only up to 128 ; the loneliness of playing in such a sparsely populated virtual world gave UGO concern as well over the longevity of Freelancer 's multiplayer mode . 
 Overall , reviewers acknowledged Freelancer fell short of the promises initially made by Roberts ; however , it demonstrated a high quality of work in its implemented features . The various concepts were well meshed together to form an entertaining product . It never broke or raised the bar of its genre , but boasted a high production value , and has been said to be well worth the money . The game , however , was an anti @-@ climax for those who were hooked by the touted and promised initial concepts , many of which were never realized . Freelancer was a " hugely ambitious game " , as admitted by Chris Roberts , for a company to develop without the necessary capital and resources . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 = = = Freelancer 2 : Project Lonestar = = = 
 There were reports that Digital Anvil and Microsoft Game Studios worked on a Freelancer sequel called Project Lonestar for the Xbox 360 until Digital Anvil dissolved in 2006 . 
 = = = Star Citizen = = = 
 Star Citizen is an upcoming space trading and combat simulator video game for the PC and is considered a spiritual successor to Freelancer as the game designer is Chris Roberts . Star Citizen is currently being developed by Chris Roberts ' Cloud Imperium Games Corporation , founded in 2011 . Roberts ' previous works include games such as Wing Commander , Wing Commander : Privateer and Freelancer . It is announced that it will have a persistent world massively multiplayer , single @-@ player campaign , and customizable private server components . Players take the role of spacefaring humans in a 30th @-@ century Milky Way centred around the fictional United Empire of Earth ( <unk> ) , an analogue to the Roman Empire . A central theme of the game is citizenship ( or lack thereof ) in the <unk> . Players are not automatically granted citizenship , rather must earn it if they desire , and in @-@ game opportunities are influenced by it . Strong focus is placed on player interaction . The game has entered alpha phase in Q4 2015 . 
 = Murder of Celine Figard = 
 Celine Figard ( 1976 – 19 December 1995 ) was a French woman who went missing and was murdered during a visit to the United Kingdom in December 1995 , after accepting a lift from a lorry driver at the Chieveley services on the M4 in Chieveley , Berkshire . Following an appeal for information on her whereabouts and police enquiries , her body was discovered on 29 December , ten days after her disappearance , at a lay @-@ by on the A449 in Hawford , Worcestershire . A post @-@ mortem examination determined she had been strangled and bludgeoned to death . 
 The case received extensive news coverage in the UK around the Christmas and New Year period , amid fears that it could be linked to a series of killings around the English Midlands which police called the work of a " Midlands Ripper " . The murder investigation included the UK 's first national DNA screening programme in the hunt for a murder suspect , covering over 5 @,@ 000 people . 
 Stuart William Morgan , a 36 @-@ year @-@ old lorry driver from Poole , Dorset was arrested in February 1996 after a colleague recognised his image from a photofit . Morgan was later charged with Figard 's murder , and convicted in October . Detectives concluded that after raping , strangling and bludgeoning her , he carried her body in his vehicle for ten days over the Christmas period before dumping it . Morgan was given a life sentence , with a recommendation to serve at least twenty years . An appeal in February 1998 was rejected by the Court of Appeal , and in 2009 the High Court turned down his application for a review of the length of his sentence . He became eligible for parole in February 2016 , but has continued to maintain his innocence . 
 Figard was buried in the French village of Scey @-@ sur @-@ Saône @-@ et @-@ Saint @-@ Albin , Haute @-@ Saône , at a service attended by her family , friends and politicians in January 1996 . In the UK she is remembered in a memorial garden established at a church in the Worcestershire village of <unk> , close to where her body was discovered . 
 = = Background and disappearance = = 
 Figard was born in 1976 to Martine and Bernard Figard . She had two brothers , Stephane and Nicolas , and a sister , Karine . At the time of her death she was studying accountancy at the Lycée le Grand <unk> in Montbéliard . She developed a fondness for the UK following a 1990 visit and traveled there repeatedly . 
 Figard spent the summer of 1995 working at a hotel in Fordingbridge , Hampshire , where her cousin Jean @-@ Marc was head waiter , using the opportunity to improve her English . She returned to the UK in December to spend another two weeks with Jean @-@ Marc . After leaving on 18 December , she travelled with a family friend employed by a local haulage firm to the French coast , as arranged by her parents , and crossed the channel the following day . She arrived in Ashford , Kent . She had intended to travel to Fordingbridge by train , but her escort found another French lorry driver who was willing to take her to Chieveley Services near Newbury , Berkshire . He then helped her to find another trucker for the final leg after she tried to phone her cousin to ask him to pick her up , but <unk> . She was last seen alive at Chieveley Services at Junction 13 of the M4 at around 5 pm entering a white Mercedes lorry . 
 Police appealed for information about her disappearance , and issued a photofit of the lorry driver , but he was not identified . By 25 December investigators were working on the theory that he had abducted her . The following day , investigators were working on the assumption she had been murdered . Figard 's father travelled to the UK to help detectives in their search for her and to appeal to the public for information as to her whereabouts . 
 = = Discovery of body and autopsy = = 
 On the morning of Friday 29 December , the naked body of a young woman was found dumped at a lay @-@ by on the A449 near the Worcestershire village of Hawford by a motorist who had stopped to change a windscreen wiper . Police sought to establish her identity , but were sure it was not Louise Smith , an 18 @-@ year @-@ old clerical assistant who had vanished early on Christmas Day after attending a nightclub at Yate , Gloucestershire . Smith 's body was discovered in February 1996 in Chipping Sodbury , South Gloucestershire . 
 The body was positively identified as that of Figard the following day . The post mortem determined she had been strangled and bludgeoned with a heavy implement , but did not establish which was fatal . The autopsy revealed " no obvious signs " of sexual assault . However , it determined that sexual intercourse had taken place shortly before her death . Detectives believed it had occurred against her will . 
 Police said that the body had been there for about twenty @-@ four hours and were working on the theory that she had been held captive before being killed . Detective Chief Superintendent Roger Hoddinott of Hampshire Police said at the time of discovery Figard had been dead for at least four to five days , but did not announce a time of death . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 The investigation was led by Detective Chief Superintendent John <unk> of West Mercia Police , and involved more than 100 detectives from three police forces . Officers examined similar unsolved murders amid concerns that they could all be the work of the same individual . Of particular interest were the recent murders of Tracey Turner and Samo Paull , both of whom were found strangled near motorways . <unk> ruled out a link at a press conference on 4 January : " I would stress that at this stage there is no firm evidence whatsoever to link Celine 's murder with any other investigations . " He appealed for information concerning a bottle of Pascal Chretien champagne , a gift to Figard before coming to England : " This particular type of champagne is not exported to anywhere in the world outside France and is not sold in this country . It is a 1993 vintage and only 60 @,@ 000 bottles have been produced . " 
 On 12 January , investigators announced that they would perform DNA testing on the drivers of all vehicles similar to the Mercedes . This was the first time the method was used nationally to identify a murder suspect . Detectives traced more than 1 @,@ 000 vehicles and tested 5 @,@ 000 drivers . On 19 February , West Mercia Police confirmed that a man had been arrested and was helping them with their inquiries . The following day , authorities announced that the suspect was English and had been arrested in Poole , Dorset in a joint operation between West Mercia and Dorset Police . He was subsequently identified as Stuart Morgan , a 36 @-@ year @-@ old , self @-@ employed lorry driver , who on 21 February was remanded following an appearance at Redditch magistrates . 
 = = Stuart Morgan = = 
 Stuart William Morgan is an English lorry driver and former heating engineer from Poole . The son of John and Julianne Morgan , one of five siblings , he was raised in Tunbridge Wells , Kent , where his father was employed as a council foreman and his mother – a refugee from the former East Germany – worked as a school cleaner . Morgan left school with three <unk> , and in 1974 served a custodial sentence in borstal following a conviction for burglary . After attending Croydon Polytechnic to train as a plumber and heating engineer , he established a plumbing business in the Tunbridge Wells area . He moved to Dorset following the failure of that business in 1983 and worked as a heating engineer for Bournemouth Borough Council . He became a lorry driver in 1991 . 
 Morgan met his first wife in Kent in the early 1980s . They married in 1982 , but he left her when she became pregnant with twins . He met the woman who would become his second wife after moving to Dorset . She also became pregnant , giving birth to a son . They did not marry until 1994 , after living together for several years . Morgan had a reputation as a womaniser , seducing customers while working as an engineer . He continued this activity after becoming a lorry driver . Following Morgan 's conviction , brother Ray Morgan said , " He has had so many affairs over the years I have lost count . " He also had a violent temper . One friend , Dave <unk> , described him as being " on a short fuse " . 
 He was driving from Leeds to Southampton Docks when he picked up Figard on 19 December 1995 . Detectives concluded that after raping and killing her , Morgan left her body in the bottom bunk of his cab for up to ten days while he continued to drive the lorry , driving and sleeping in it for at least some of that time . Apparently Morgan left the body in the vehicle after parking it opposite his house to spend Christmas with his family . Police believe he dumped the body on 29 December . 
 He was arrested after another trucker recognised him from a photofit . Morgan initially denied meeting her . After he was picked out at an identity parade , he claimed he and Figard had engaged in consensual sex . 
 = = Trial = = 
 The trial began at Worcester Crown Court on 2 October 1996 , before Mr Justice Latham and a jury . Morgan 's trial counsel was Nigel Jones QC , and the case was prosecuted by David Farrer QC . Morgan denied the charge . 
 The prosecution account was that Morgan raped and killed Figard on the afternoon or evening of 19 December 1995 , then kept her body in his cab for ten days . Farrer told the court that she had been strangled and battered around the head with a heavy object , and injuries to her face were " consistent with kicking and stamping " . There was also evidence to suggest her hands had been taped together , and that sexual intercourse had taken place , with the prosecution of the opinion she had been " intimidated " into having sex . 
 Evidence was presented by the prosecution to suggest that Morgan continued to use the vehicle while Figard lay dead in the cab , and that the lorry was parked outside his house over the Christmas period . Farrer said Morgan bought a spade , axe and hacksaw with the intention of dismembering the body , but changed his mind , instead making an overnight delivery run to dispose of her remains . After removing a fuse from his lorry 's <unk> to conceal the journey , he drove to Worcestershire . Discrepancies were subsequently found in his travel records for 29 December 1995 because he forgot to replace the fuse following the trip . DNA tests on spots of blood found in the cab matched Figard , while a blood @-@ soaked mattress was found in Morgan 's garage . Several items belonging to Figard , including photographs and a toilet bag , were recovered from his house . Some of her clothing was found close to a warehouse he had visited the night the body was dumped . Morgan gave two bottles of Pascal Chretien that Figard had brought to England as Christmas presents to two garage attendants who worked at a Shell station opposite his house . 
 Morgan admitted giving Figard a lift on the afternoon of 19 December 1995 . He claimed that the pair had consensual sex after chatting and flirting , developing a rapport and halting at a lay @-@ by where he made her a cup of tea and asked her for what he described as a Christmas kiss . He said afterwards he drove her to Southampton , where they exchanged contact details before he left her , and that she was " smiling and happy " . He did not come forward after police appealed for details of the driver who had given her a lift because he did not want his wife to learn of his infidelity . He claimed her photographs and other belongings were in his possession because she had left them in his truck , and the mattress had become stained with blood because a man had lain on it after gashing his leg while the vehicle was on loan to another driver in 1994 . 
 On 16 October a jury took three and a half hours to convict Morgan of Figard 's murder , and he was sentenced to life imprisonment with a recommendation that the Home Secretary should decide his parole eligibility . Passing sentence , Mr Justice Latham said , " What you did to Celine has caused revulsion in the minds of all right @-@ thinking people . You are a dangerous man and I will so report to the Home Secretary . " Latham subsequently set a minimum term of twenty years , which was later endorsed by the Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales , Lord Bingham , and on 4 November 1998 the Home Secretary informed Morgan of the length of the sentence he must serve . 
 = = Appeals = = 
 Morgan appealed his conviction on the grounds that it was unfair due to the level of publicity the case had received . His application was rejected by the Court of Appeal of England and Wales on 5 February 1998 after the three sitting judges ruled there were insufficient grounds to justify an appeal . 
 In January 2009 Morgan appealed again under paragraph 3 of Schedule 22 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 to the High Court of England and Wales requesting a review of the minimum term recommendation . This too was rejected , in July of that year , with the presiding judge , Mr Justice Openshaw recommending , " The sentence is – and remains – a sentence of imprisonment for life . The defendant may not even be considered for release until he has served at least 20 years ( less the time served before sentence ) . That is not to say that he will then be released ; indeed he will be detained unless and until the Parole Board is satisfied that he no longer presents a risk to the public . Even if the Parole Board decides then or at some time in the future to authorise his release , he will be upon licence which will extend for the rest of his life . " 
 In January 2016 Morgan appealed against the Ministry of Justice after it decided not to downgrade his prisoner status from that of a Category A prisoner , as well as challenging the Parole Board for refusing to allow him an oral hearing . A hearing at the High Court on 26 January was told that under the terms of his sentence , Morgan would be eligible for parole from February , but had continued to maintain his innocence throughout his time in prison , claiming to be in a " Catch 22 " situation where he could not qualify for release without admitting his guilt . Rejecting Morgan 's case , Justice William Davis suggested that Morgan had not " addressed his offending behaviour " and was " in effect in the same position as in December 1995 , when he murdered his victim " . 
 = = Aftermath and memorials = = 
 Figard 's body was flown home to France on 17 January 1996 , where her funeral was held on 20 January . She was buried in Scey @-@ sur @-@ Saône @-@ et @-@ Saint @-@ Albin . The Mail on Sunday reported that the ceremony was attended by 3 @,@ 000 mourners , including family , friends and French politicians . 
 A memorial garden dedicated to Figard was planted at St Andrew 's Church in the village of <unk> , Worcestershire , close to where her body was found , and opened at a ceremony in June 1997 . Local residents raised more than £ 1 @,@ 000 to help with its construction . The garden also remembers other victims of violent crime , including Joanna Parrish and Caroline Dickinson , two English students who were murdered while in France . On 29 December 2000 , the fifth anniversary of the date Figard 's body was recovered , the local newspaper , the Worcester News reported that an annual service of remembrance was held for her at the church during the autumn , attended by her parents . Flowers were also regularly placed at the lay @-@ by at Hawford where she was found , and the location named Le Jardin de Céline ( Celine 's Garden ) in her memory . 
 = Bone Wars = 
 The Bone Wars , also known as the " Great Dinosaur Rush " , refers to a period of intense fossil speculation and discovery during the Gilded Age of American history , marked by a heated rivalry between Edward Drinker Cope ( of the Academy of Natural Sciences in Philadelphia ) and Othniel Charles Marsh ( of the Peabody Museum of Natural History at Yale ) . Each of the two paleontologists used underhanded methods to try to out @-@ compete the other in the field , resorting to bribery , theft , and destruction of bones . Each scientist also attacked the other in scientific publications , seeking to ruin his credibility and have his funding cut off . 
 Their search for fossils led them west to rich bone beds in Colorado , Nebraska , and Wyoming . From 1877 to 1892 , both paleontologists used their wealth and influence to finance their own expeditions and to procure services and dinosaur bones from fossil hunters . By the end of the Bone Wars , both men had exhausted their funds in the pursuit of paleontological supremacy . 
 Cope and Marsh were financially and socially ruined by their attempts to disgrace each other , but their contributions to science and the field of paleontology were massive , and provided substantial material for further work — both scientists left behind many unopened boxes of fossils after their deaths . The efforts of the two men led to over 142 new species of dinosaurs being discovered and described , though today only 32 are valid . The products of the Bone Wars resulted in an increase in knowledge of prehistoric life , and sparked the public 's interest in dinosaurs , leading to continued fossil excavation in North America in the decades to follow . Several historical books and fictional adaptations have been published about this period of intense fossil @-@ hunting activity . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 At one time , Cope and Marsh were amicable . They met in Berlin in 1864 and spent several days together . They even named species after each other . Over time their relations soured due in part to their strong personalities . Cope was known to be pugnacious and possessed a quick temper ; Marsh was slower , more methodical , and introverted . Both were quarrelsome and distrustful . Their differences also extended into the scientific realm as Cope was a firm supporter of Neo @-@ Lamarckism while Marsh supported Charles Darwin 's theory of evolution by natural selection . Even at the best of times both men were inclined to look down on each other subtly . As one observer put it , " The patrician Edward may have considered Marsh not quite a gentleman . The academic Othniel probably regarded Cope as not quite a professional . " 
 Cope and Marsh came from very different backgrounds . Cope was born into a wealthy and influential Quaker family based in Philadelphia . Although his father wanted his son to work as a farmer , Cope distinguished himself as a naturalist . In 1864 , already a member of the Academy of Natural Sciences , Cope became a professor of zoology at Haverford College and joined Ferdinand Hayden on his expeditions west . In contrast , Marsh would have grown up poor , the son of a struggling family in Lockport , New York , had it not been for the benefaction of his uncle , philanthropist George Peabody . Marsh persuaded his uncle to build the Peabody Museum of Natural History , placing Marsh as head of the museum . Combined with the inheritance he received from Peabody upon his death in 1869 , Marsh was financially comfortable ( although , partly because of Peabody 's stern views on marriage , Marsh would remain a lifelong bachelor ) . 
 On one occasion , the two scientists had gone on a fossil @-@ collecting expedition to Cope 's marl pits in New Jersey , where William Parker Foulke had discovered the holotype specimen of Hadrosaurus <unk> , described by the paleontologist Joseph Leidy ; this was one of the first American dinosaur finds , and the pits were still rich with fossils . Though the two parted amicably , Marsh secretly bribed the pit operators to divert future fossil finds to him , instead of Cope . The two began attacking each other in papers and publications , and their personal relations deteriorated . Marsh humiliated Cope by pointing out his reconstruction of the plesiosaur Elasmosaurus was flawed , with the head placed where the tail should have been ( or so he claimed , 20 years later ; it was Leidy who published the correction shortly afterwards ) . Cope , in turn , began collecting in what Marsh considered his private bone @-@ hunting turf in Kansas and in Wyoming , further damaging their relationship . 
 = = = 1872 – 1877 : Early expeditions = = = 
 In the 1870s , Cope 's and Marsh 's professional attentions were directed to the American West by word of large fossil finds . Using his influence in Washington , Cope was granted a position on the US Geological Survey under Ferdinand Hayden . While the position offered no salary , it afforded Cope a great opportunity to collect fossils in the West and publish his finds . Cope 's flair for dramatic writing suited Hayden , who needed to make a popular impression with the official survey reports . In June 1872 Cope set off on his first trip , intending on observing the Eocene bone beds of Wyoming for himself . This caused a rift between Cope , Hayden , and Leidy . It was Leidy who had enjoyed receiving many of the fossils from Hayden 's collection until Cope joined the survey , and now Cope was hunting for fossils in Leidy 's staked territory — at the same time Leidy was to be collecting . Hayden attempted to smooth things over with Leidy in a letter : 
 I asked him not to go into that field , that you were going there . He laughed at the idea of being restricted to any locality and said he intended to go whether I aided him or not . I was anxious to secure the cooperation of such a worker as an honor to my corps . I could not be responsible for the field he selected in as much as I pay him no salary and a portion of his expenses . You will see therefore that while it is not a pleasant thing to work in competition with others it seems almost a necessity . You can sympathize . 
 Cope took his family with him as far as Denver , while Hayden tried to keep Cope and Leidy from prospecting in the same area . Following a tip from geologist Fielding Bradford Meek , Cope also intended to investigate reports of bones Meek had found near Black Buttes Station and the railroad . Cope found the site and some skeletal remains of a dinosaur he dubbed Agathaumas sylvestris . Believing he had the full support of Hayden and the survey , Cope then traveled to Fort Bridger in June , only to find that the men , wagons , horses , and equipment he expected were not there . Cope cobbled together an outfit at his own expense , consisting of two teamsters , a cook , and a guide , along with three men from Chicago who were interested in studying with him . As it turned out , two of Cope 's men were in fact in the employ of Marsh . When the rival paleontologist found out his own men were taking Cope 's money , he was furious . While the men tried to assure Marsh they were still his men ( one suggested he took the job in order to lead Cope away from good fossils ) , Marsh 's laziness in soliciting firm agreements and payments may have caused them to seek other work . Cope 's journey took the expedition through rugged country only Hayden had surveyed , and he discovered dozens of new species . Meanwhile , one of Marsh 's men accidentally forwarded some of his material to Cope instead . On receiving the fossils , Cope sent them back to Marsh , but further damage had been done to their relationship . 
 Any pretense of cordiality between Cope and Marsh ended in 1872 , and by spring 1873 open hostility ensued . At the same time , Leidy , Cope and Marsh were making great discoveries of ancient reptiles and mammals in the Western bone beds . The paleontologists had a habit of making hasty telegrams eastward describing their finds , only publishing fuller accounts after returning from trips . Among the new specimens described by the men were <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . The problem was that many of these finds were not uniquely different from each other ; in fact , Cope and Marsh knew that some of the fossils they were collecting had already been found by the others . As it turned out many of Marsh 's names were valid , while none of Cope 's were . Marsh also placed the new species into a new order of mammals , <unk> . Cope was humiliated and powerless to stop his rival 's changes . Instead , he published a broad analytical study where he proposed a new plan of classification for the Eocene mammals , in which he discarded Marsh 's genera in favor of his own . Marsh stuck to his guns and continued to claim that all of Cope 's names for <unk> were incorrect . 
 While the scientists bickered over classifications and nomenclature , they also returned west for more fossils . Marsh made his last trip furnished by Yale in 1873 , with a large group of thirteen students accompanying him , protected by a group of soldiers who wanted to make a show of force to the Sioux tribe . Due to concerns over his more lavish and expensive expeditions in years past , Marsh had the students pay their own way , and the trip cost Yale only $ 1857 @.@ 50 , far less than the $ 15 @,@ 000 ( over $ 200 @,@ 000 in modern currency ) that Marsh had claimed for the previous expedition . This excursion would prove to be Marsh 's last : for the rest of the Bone Wars , Marsh preferred to enlist the services of local collectors . Though he had enough bones to study for years , the scientist 's appetite for more would grow . Cope was even more prolific in his collecting that season than he was in 1872 , although Marsh 's penchant for cultivating collectors of his own meant that at Bridger his rival was persona non grata . Tired of working under Hayden , Cope found a paying job with the Army Corps of Engineers , but was limited by this federal association ; while Cope had to tag along on surveys , Marsh could collect wherever he wanted . 
 The two scientists ' attention turned to South Dakota in the mid @-@ 1870s , where the discovery of gold in the Black Hills increased Native American tensions with the United States . Marsh , desiring the fossils found in that region , became embroiled in Army @-@ Indian politics . In order to gain the support of Chief Red Cloud of the Sioux to prospect , Marsh promised Red Cloud payment for fossils collected and that he would return to Washington DC and lobby on their behalf about their improper treatment . In the end , Marsh slipped out of camp and according to his own ( possibly romanticized ) accounts , amassed cartloads of fossils and retreated just before a hostile <unk> party arrived . Marsh , for his part , did take on the Interior Department and the administration on behalf of Red Cloud , but his motives might have been to make a name for himself against the unpopular Ulysses S. Grant administration . By 1875 , both Cope and Marsh paused in their collecting , feeling financial strain and needing to catalogue their backlogged finds , but new discoveries would return them to the West before decade 's end . 
 = = = 1877 – 1892 : Como Bluff finds = = = 
 In 1877 , Marsh received a letter from Arthur Lakes , a schoolteacher in Golden , Colorado . Lakes reported that he had been hiking in the mountains near the town of Morrison when he and his friend , H. C. Beckwith , discovered massive bones embedded in the rock . Lakes further advised that the bones were " apparently a vertebra and a humerus bone of some gigantic saurian . " While awaiting Marsh 's reply , Lakes dug up more " colossal " bones and sent them to New Haven . As Marsh was slow to respond , Lakes also sent a shipment of bones to Cope . 
 When Marsh responded to Lakes , he paid the prospector $ 100 , urging him to keep the finds a secret . Learning that Lakes had corresponded with Cope , Marsh sent his field collector Benjamin Mudge to Morrison to secure Lakes ' services . Marsh published a description of Lakes ' discoveries in the American Journal of Science on July 1 , and before Cope could publish his own interpretation of the finds , Lakes wrote to him that the bones should be shipped to Marsh , a severe insult to Cope . 
 A second letter arrived from the west , this time addressed to Cope . O.W. Lucas was a naturalist who had been collecting plants near Cañon City , Colorado , when he came upon an assortment of fossil bones . After receiving more samples from Lucas , Cope concluded the dinosaurs were large herbivores , gleefully noting that the specimen was larger than any other previously described , including Lakes ' discovery . Hearing of Lucas ' finds , Marsh instructed Mudge and a former student , Samuel Wendell Williston , to set up a quarry on his behalf near Cañon . Unfortunately for Marsh , he learned from Williston that Lucas was finding the best bones and refused to quit Cope to come work for Marsh . Marsh ordered Williston back to Morrison , where Marsh 's small quarry collapsed and nearly killed his assistants . This setback would have dried up Marsh 's bone supply from the west if not for receipt of a third letter . 
 At the time of Lakes ' discoveries , the Transcontinental Railroad was being built through a remote area of Wyoming . Marsh 's letter was from two men identifying themselves as Harlow and Edwards ( their real names were Carlin and Reed ) , workers on the Union Pacific Railroad . The two men claimed they had found large numbers of fossils in Como Bluff , and warned that there were others in the area " looking for such things " , which Marsh took to mean Cope . Williston , who had just wearily arrived in Kansas after the collapse of the Morrison mine , was quickly dispatched to Como Bluff by Marsh . His former student sent back a message , confirming the large quantities of bones and that it was Cope 's men snooping around the area . Wary of repeating the same mistakes he had made with Lakes , Marsh quickly sent money to the two new bone hunters and urged them to send additional fossils . Williston struck a preliminary bargain with Carlin and Reed ( who had been unable to cash Marsh 's check due to it being made out to their pseudonyms ) , but Carlin decided he would head to New Haven to deal with Marsh directly . Marsh drew up a contract calling for a set monthly fee , with additional cash bonuses to Carlin and Reed possible , depending on the importance of the finds . Marsh also reserved the right to send his own " superintendents " to supervise the digging if needed , and advised the men to try to keep Cope out of the region . Despite a face @-@ to @-@ face meeting , Carlin failed to negotiate better terms from Marsh . The paleontologist procured Carlin 's and Reed 's work for the stated terms , but seeds of discord and resentment were sown in the bone hunters as they felt Marsh had bullied them into the deal . Marsh 's investment in the Como Bluff region soon produced rich results . While Marsh 's own collectors headed east for the winter , Reed sent carloads of bones by rail to Marsh throughout 1877 . Marsh described and named dinosaurs such as Stegosaurus , Allosaurus , and Apatosaurus in the December 1877 issue of the American Journal of Science . 
 Despite Marsh 's precautions against alerting his rival to Como Bluff 's rich bone beds , word of the discoveries rapidly spread . This was at least partly due to Carlin and Reed helping spread the rumors . They leaked information to the Laramie Daily Sentinel which published an article about the finds in April 1878 that exaggerated the price Marsh had paid for the bones , possibly to raise prices and demand for more bones . Marsh , attempting to cover the leak , learned from Williston that Carlin and Reed had been visited by a man ostensibly working for Cope by the name of " Haines " . After learning of the Como Bluff discoveries , Cope sent " dinosaur rustlers " to the area in an attempt to quietly steal fossils from under Marsh 's nose . During the winter of 1878 Carlin 's dissatisfaction with Marsh 's sporadic sending of payment reached a head , and he began working for Cope instead . 
 Cope and Marsh used their personal wealth to fund expeditions each summer , then spent the winter publishing their discoveries . Small armies of fossil hunters in mule @-@ drawn wagons or on trains were soon sending literally tons of fossils back east . The paleontological digs lasted fifteen years , from 1877 to 1892 . The workers for both Cope and Marsh suffered hardships related to the weather , as well as sabotage and obstruction by the other scientist 's workers . Reed was locked out of the Como train station by Carlin and was forced to haul the bones down the bluff and crate the specimens on the train platform in the bitter cold . Cope directed Carlin to set up his own quarry in Como Bluff , while Marsh sent Reed to spy on his former friend . As Reed 's Quarry # 4 dried up , Marsh ordered Reed to clear out the bone fragments from the other quarries . Reed reported he had destroyed all the remaining bones to keep them away from Cope . Concerned that strangers were encroaching on Reed 's quarries , Marsh sent Lakes to Como to assist in excavations , and in June 1879 visited Como himself . Cope likewise toured his own quarries in August . Although Marsh 's men continued to open new quarries and discover more fossils , relations between Lakes and Reed soured , with each offering his resignation in August . Marsh attempted to placate the two by sending each to opposite ends of the quarries , but after being forced to abandon one bone quarry in a freezing blizzard , Lakes submitted his resignation and returned to teaching in 1880 . The departure of Lakes did not ease tensions among Marsh 's men ; Lake 's replacement , a railroad man named Kennedy , felt he didn 't have to report to Reed , and the fighting between the two caused Marsh 's other workers to quit . Marsh tried separating Kennedy and Reed , and sent Williston 's brother Frank to Como in an effort to keep the peace . Frank Williston ended up leaving Marsh 's employ and taking up residence with Carlin . Cope 's own digging in Como began faltering , and Carlin 's replacements soon quit work altogether . 
 As the 1880s progressed , Cope 's and Marsh 's men faced stiff competition from each other and third parties interested in bones . Professor Alexander Emanuel Agassiz of Harvard sent his own representatives west , while Carlin and Frank Williston formed a bone company to sell fossils to the highest bidder . Reed left and became a sheep herder in 1884 , and Marsh 's Como quarries yielded little after his departure . Despite these setbacks , Marsh had more operational quarries than Cope at this point of time ; Cope , who at the early 1880s had more bones than he could fit in a single house , had fallen behind in the race for dinosaurs . 
 Cope 's and Marsh 's discoveries were accompanied by sensational accusations of spying , stealing workers and fossils , and bribery . The two men were so protective of their digging sites that they would destroy smaller or damaged fossils to prevent them from falling into their rival 's hands , or fill in their excavations with dirt and rock ; while surveying his Como quarries in 1879 , Marsh examined recent finds and marked several for destruction . On one occasion the scientists ' rival teams fought each other by throwing stones . 
 = = = Personal disputes and later years = = = 
 While Cope and Marsh dueled for fossils in the American West , they also tried their best to ruin each other 's professional credibility . Humiliated by his error in reconstructing the plesiosaur Elasmosaurus , Cope tried to cover up his mistake by purchasing every copy he could find of the journal it was published in . Marsh , who pointed out the error in the first place , made sure to publicize the story . Cope 's own rapid and prodigious output of scientific papers meant that Marsh had no difficulty in finding occasional errors to <unk> Cope with . Neither was Marsh infallible ; he put the wrong skull on a skeleton of Apatosaurus and declared it a new genus , Brontosaurus . 
 By the late 1880s , public attention to the fighting between Cope and Marsh faded , drawn to international stories rather than the " Wild West " . Thanks to John Wesley Powell , head of the U.S. Geological Survey , and Marsh 's contacts with the rich and powerful in Washington , Marsh was placed at the head of the consolidated government survey and was happy to be out of the sensationalist spotlight . Cope was much less well @-@ off , having spent most of his money purchasing The American Naturalist , and had a hard time finding employment thanks to Marsh 's allies in higher education and Cope 's own temperament . Cope began investing in gold and silver prospects in the West , and braved malarial mosquitos and harsh weather to search for fossils himself . Due to setbacks in mining and a lack of support from the federal government , Cope 's financial situation steadily deteriorated , to the point that his fossil collection was his only significant asset . Marsh , meanwhile , alienated even his loyal assistants , including Williston , with his refusal to share his conclusions drawn from their findings , and his continually lax and infrequent payment schedule . 
 Cope 's chance to exploit Marsh 's vulnerabilities came in 1884 , when Congress began to investigate the proceedings of the consolidated geological survey . Cope had become friends with Henry Fairfield Osborn , then a professor of anatomy at Princeton University . Osborn was like Marsh in many ways , slow and methodical , but would prove a damaging influence on Marsh . Cope searched for disgruntled workers who would speak out against Powell and the Survey . For the moment , Powell and Marsh were able to successfully refute Cope 's charges , and his allegations did not reach the mainstream press . Osborn seemed reluctant to step up his campaign against Marsh , so Cope turned to another ally he had mentioned to Osborn — a " newspaper man from New York " named William Hosea Ballou . Despite setbacks in trying to oust Marsh from his presidency of the National Academy of Sciences , Cope received a tremendous financial boost after the University of Pennsylvania offered him a teaching job . Soon after , Cope 's chance to strike a critical blow at Marsh appeared . 
 Over the years , Cope kept an elaborate journal of mistakes and misdeeds that Marsh and Powell had committed ; the mistakes and errors of the men were put in writing and ensconced in the bottom drawer of Cope 's desk . Ballou planned the first set of articles , in what would become a series of newspaper debates between Marsh , Powell and Cope . While the scientific community had long known of Marsh and Cope 's rivalry , the public became aware of the shameful conduct of the two men when the New York Herald published a story with the headline " Scientists Wage Bitter Warfare . " According to author Elizabeth Noble Shor , the scientific community was galvanized : 
 Most scientists of the day recoiled to find that Cope 's feud with Marsh had become front @-@ page news . Those closest to the scientific fields under discussion , geology and vertebrate paleontology , certainly <unk> , particularly as they found themselves quoted , mentioned , or misspelled . The feud was not news to them , for it had lurked at their scientific meetings for two decades . Most of them had already taken sides . 
 In the newspaper articles , Cope attacked Marsh for plagiarism and financial mismanagement and attacked Powell for his geological classification errors and misspending of government allocated funds . Marsh and Powell were each able to publish their own side of the story , filing their own charges against Cope . Ballou 's articles were poorly researched , written , and read , and Cope himself was smarting from a Philadelphia Inquirer piece which suggested the University of Pennsylvania trustees would ask Cope to step down unless he provided proof for his charges against Marsh and Powell . Marsh himself kept the Herald story alive with a fiery rebuttal , but by the end of January the story had faded from all the newspapers , and little changed between the bitter rivals . 
 No congressional hearing was convened to investigate the misallocation of funds by Powell and neither Cope nor Marsh was held responsible for any of their mistakes , but some of Ballou 's slander against Marsh came to be associated with the Survey . Facing anti @-@ Survey sentiment inflamed by western drought and concerns about takeovers of abandoned western homesteads , Powell found himself the subject of larger scrutiny before the House Appropriations Committee . <unk> to action by Marsh 's perceived extravagance with Survey funds , the Appropriations Committee demanded the Survey 's budget be itemized . When his appropriation was cut off in 1892 , Powell sent a terse telegram to Marsh demanding his resignation , a personal slight as well as a financial one . At the same time , many of Marsh 's allies were retiring or had died , lessening his scientific credence . Just as Marsh 's extravagant lifestyle was catching up with him , Cope received a position on the Texas Geological survey . Cope , still reeling from the personal attacks levied at him during the Herald affair , did not take advantage of the change in fortunes to press his personal attacks . Cope 's fortunes continued to look up throughout the early 1890s , as he was promoted to Leidy 's position as Professor of Zoology and was elected President of the National Association for the Advancement of Science the same year that Marsh stepped down as head of the Academy of Sciences . Towards the latter part of the decade , however , Cope 's fortunes began to sour once more as Marsh regained some of his recognition , earning the Cuvier Medal , the highest paleontological award . 
 Cope and Marsh 's rivalry lasted until Cope 's death in 1897 , by which time both men were financially ruined . Cope suffered from a debilitating illness in his later years and had to sell part of his fossil collection and rent out one of his houses to make ends meet . Marsh in turn had to mortgage his residence and ask Yale for a salary to live on . The rivalry between the two , however , remained strong if weary . Cope issued a final challenge before his death . He had his skull donated to science so that his brain could be measured , hoping that his brain would be larger than that of his adversary ; at the time , it was thought brain size was the true measure of intelligence . Marsh never accepted the challenge , and Cope 's skull is reportedly still preserved at the University of Pennsylvania . ( Whether the skull stored at the University is Cope 's is disputed ; the University stated that it believes the real skull was lost in the 1970s , although Robert Bakker has said that hairline fractures on the skull and coroner 's reports verify the skull 's authenticity . ) 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Judging by pure numbers , Marsh " won " the Bone Wars . Both scientists made finds of incredible scientific value , but while Cope discovered a total of 56 new dinosaur species , Marsh discovered 80 . In the later stages of the Bone Wars , Marsh simply had more men and money at his disposal than Cope . Cope also had a much broader set of paleontological interests , while Marsh almost exclusively pursued fossilized reptiles and mammals . 
 Several of Cope 's and Marsh 's discoveries are the most well @-@ known of dinosaurs , encompassing species of Triceratops , Allosaurus , Diplodocus , Stegosaurus , Camarasaurus and Coelophysis . Their cumulative discoveries defined the then @-@ nascent field of paleontology ; before Cope 's and Marsh 's discoveries , there were only nine named species of dinosaur in North America . Some of their ideas — such as Marsh 's argument that birds are descended from dinosaurs — have been upheld ; while others are viewed as having little to no scientific merit . The Bone Wars also led to the discovery of the first complete skeletons , and the rise in popularity of dinosaurs with the public . As paleontologist Robert Bakker stated , " The dinosaurs that came from [ Como Bluff ] not only filled museums , they filled magazine articles , textbooks , they filled people 's minds . " 
 Despite their advances , the Bone Wars also had a negative impact not only on the two scientists but their peers and the entire field . The public animosity between Cope and Marsh harmed the reputation of American paleontology in Europe for decades . Furthermore , the reported use of dynamite and sabotage by employees of both men may have destroyed or buried hundreds of potentially critical fossil remains . Joseph Leidy abandoned his more methodical excavations in the West , finding he could not keep up with Cope 's and Marsh 's reckless searching for bones . Leidy also grew tired of the constant squabbling between the two men , with the result that his withdrawal from the field marginalized his own legacy ; after his death , Osborn found not a single mention of the man in either of the rivals ' works . In their haste to outdo each other , Cope and Marsh haphazardly assembled the bones of their own discoveries . Their descriptions of new species , based on their reconstructions , led to confusion and misconceptions that lasted for decades after their deaths . 
 A 2007 – 2008 excavation of several of Cope 's and Marsh 's sites suggest that the damage perpetrated by the two paleontologists was less than what has been reported . Using Lakes ' field paintings , researchers from the Morrison Natural History Museum discovered that Lakes had not actually dynamited the most productive quarries in Colorado ; rather , Lakes had just filled in the site . Museum director Matthew <unk> theorized that Lakes propagated the lie " because he didn 't want the competition up at the quarry — playing mind games with Cope 's gang . " 
 = = = Adaptations = = = 
 Besides being the focus of historical and paleontological books , the Bone Wars has been the subject of a graphic novel , Bone Sharps , Cowboys , and Thunder Lizards , by Jim Ottaviani . Bone Sharps is a work of historical fiction , as Ottaviani introduces the character of Charles R. Knight to Cope for plot purposes , and other events have been restructured . 
 In 2011 , the PBS history series American Experience ran the documentary Dinosaur Wars . 
 In 2015 , a comedic story of the Bone Wars was on the show Drunk History . 
 = On the Floor = 
 " On the Floor " is a song recorded by American recording artist Jennifer Lopez for her seventh studio album , Love ? ( 2011 ) . Featuring American rapper Pitbull , it was released by Island Records on February 8 , 2011 as the lead single from the album . " On the Floor " was written by Kinda " Kee " Hamid , AJ Junior , Teddy Sky , Bilal " The Chef " Hajji , Pitbull , Gonzalo Hermosa , Ulises Hermosa , along with the song 's producer RedOne . It is an up @-@ tempo electro @-@ house dance song with a common time tempo of 130 beats per minute . " On the Floor " incorporates elements of electro house and draws further musical influences from eurodance , Latin music and techno music . Lopez recorded a Spanish @-@ language version of the song titled " Ven a Bailar " ( English : " Come to Dance " ) , which includes additional lyrical contributions from Julio Reyes <unk> and Jimena Romero . 
 Its development was motivated by Lopez 's Latin heritage and pays homage to her career @-@ beginnings as a dancer . <unk> within the song are recurrent elements of the 1982 Bolivian composition " Llorando se fue " written by Gonzalo and Ulises Hermosa , a composition that gained notoriety when it was sampled by Kaoma in their 1989 single " Lambada " . Lopez described " On the Floor " as an evolution of her classic sound and as something which sounded very current . The debut and release of " On the Floor " coincided with Lopez 's appointment as a judge on the tenth season of US reality TV show American Idol , as well as several other product endorsement deals . American Idol also provided a platform to debut the single 's music video , as well as the stage for Lopez 's first live performance of the song . 
 " On the Floor " was met with a generally positive reception from music critics , with editors from BBC Music and Los Angeles Times drawing comparisons to Lopez 's debut single , " If You Had My Love " ( 1999 ) and follow @-@ up single " Waiting for Tonight " ( 1999 ) . Commercially , " On the Floor " is Lopez 's most successful single to date , topping more than thirty national single charts . In the United States , it was Lopez 's first single in four years to garner airplay , and to date has sold over four million copies , earning a triple platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in the USA . It resulted in being the eleventh @-@ biggest hit of the year on the year @-@ end charts ; " On the Floor " finished in first in Austria , Finland , Germany , Spain , Switzerland , and other countries . 
 A music video was directed by TAJ Stansberry and choreographed by Frank Gatson , Jr , with fans being given the chance to vote for their preferred ending for the video . The completed clip premiered simultaneously on Vevo and during the March 3 , 2011 episode of American Idol . It depicts a Los Angeles underground club culture where Lopez portrays a " queen of the nightclub " , among other characters . The video received critical acclaim for its lavish production , the styling and choreography , that critics felt best highlighted Lopez 's abilities as a dancer . As of July 2016 , the video has received over 950 million views . 
 = = Background = = 
 Lopez 's seventh studio album Love ? ( 2011 ) was conceived in late 2007 and early 2008 . During that time frame , under contract to Epic Records , Lopez released " Louboutins " , a song written and produced by The @-@ Dream and Tricky Stewart , as the project 's lead single . However upon release , the song failed to garner enough airplay to chart , despite topping the US Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart . Lopez subsequently left Epic Records , citing that she had fulfilled her contractual obligations and now wished to release Love ? under a new label . Upon signing with The Island Def Jam Music Group , Lopez continued working with The @-@ Dream and Tricky Stewart , in addition to collaborating with new producers such as RedOne . It wasn 't until January 2011 that Lopez teased the media about the new lead single for Love ? . In a tweet on her Twitter account , Lopez posted : " I see u @ RedOne _ Official ! We 're making BIG things happen ' On the Floor ' this new year ! ! ! " . Subsequently on January 16 , 2011 , an unfinished snippet of " On the Floor " leaked online , labelled as a RedOne production and featuring rap vocals from Pitbull . It is the second time that Lopez and Pitbull have collaborated on a song , the first being " Fresh Out the Oven " , the 2009 buzz single which reached number one on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart . 
 According to the Los Angeles Times 's Gerrick D. Kennedy , a full length unfinished version of " On the Floor " leaked online over the same weekend in time for Lopez 's new L 'Oreal commercial , which premiered during the telecast of the 68th Golden Globe Awards ceremony in Los Angeles . The timing of the leak also coincided with Lopez 's debut on judges panel for season ten of American Idol . Lopez confirmed the single 's title as " On the Floor " during the red carpet ceremony at The Golden Globes , before appearing the following day on the radio show On Air with Ryan Seacrest for the song 's US premiere . The final version of the song was uploaded to <unk> , where the site 's editor , Sadao Turner , revealed that the final master of the song was different from the previously leaked and unfinished version . " On the Floor " made its debut in the United Kingdom , on January 28 , 2011 when it was played by DJ Scott Mills on his radio show , Ready for the Weekend . Benji Eisen from AOL Music stated that Lopez had used " genius marketing and branding " by synchronising the digital release of " On the Floor " with the premiere of its music video on American Idol . It was added to the B @-@ playlist on the UK 's biggest mainstream radio station , BBC Radio 1 , on March 16 , 2011 . 
 When talking about " On the Floor " , during an interview with MTV , Lopez said that she wanted a song that would evolve her sound , " it feels like me today , which I like . It 's not something that you hear and you 're like , ' That 's not her , ' but you also go , ' Is that her ? I like that . It 's new , ' and that 's what I wanted . I wanted it to be very me , but I wanted it to be me not from my first album or my second album , but for today . " Additionally , Lopez felt a strong connection to " On the Floor " because it captured both sides of her career , singing and dancing , " The minute RedOne played it for me , I made him play it 20 times in a row , and I just sat there at the board and I kept listening to it and listening to it ... Because I really feel like , emotionally , I connected to it , but also because of how much I love to dance and how much that 's always been such a big part of who I am since I started . Since I was a little girl , I just totally connected with the idea of getting out there . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " On the Floor " is an up @-@ tempo dance and dance @-@ pop song produced by RedOne that incorporates elements of electropop and electro house . It also contains heavy synths and was influenced by Eurodance , Latin and techno music . American artist Pitbull starts the song with a rap introduction while the melody interpolates elements of the Los <unk> composition , " Llorando se fue " , popularized by Kaoma 's 1989 hit single " Lambada " . " On the Floor " was written by Bilal Hajji , Kinda Hamid , Gonzalo Hermosa , Ulises Hermosa , <unk> <unk> , RedOne , Pitbull and Geraldo <unk> in the key of E ♭ minor . It is written in the time signature of common time , set at a tempo of 130 beats per minute . Lopez 's vocal range spans from A ♭ 3 to B ♭ 4 while the melody uses a simple chord progression of E ♭ minor – B major – F ♯ major – C ♯ major . The song was adapted in Spanish as " Ven a Bailar " which featured additional lyrics by Julio Reyes <unk> and Jimena Romero . 
 According to Idolator and Gerrick Kennedy from the Los Angeles Times , " On the Floor " is reminiscent of Lopez 's single , " Waiting for Tonight " ( 1999 ) . Kennedy elaborated on the comparisons , stating that " listeners haven 't heard this dance @-@ electro @-@ pop side of Lopez since 1999 ... much of her back catalog flirts with more gritty urban @-@ pop sounds . " Editors for the New York Daily News made some comparisons between " On the Floor " and another RedOne production , Kat DeLuna 's 2010 single , " Party O 'Clock " . DeLuna 's song contains the lyrics " Party in Ibiza , Party in New York / All the way to Africa / Love in the Caribbean / On my way to Vegas " whereas Lopez sings the nearly identical line , " Brazil , Morocco / London to Ibiza / Straight to L.A. New York / Vegas to Africa . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " On the Floor " was met with generally positive reception from music critics . Rolling Stone called the song " music worth getting lost in " . Mikael Wood from the Los Angeles Times agreed , calling " On the Floor " the standout track from Love ? Wood said , " On the Floor " " returned Lopez to the upper reaches of the Billboard Hot 100 " but added that the rest of the album was unlikely to match its success . The Houston Chronicle 's Joey Guerra concurred with his <unk> critics , nothing that " On the Floor " was one of the four standout moments on the album , <unk> the " aggressively sexual anthems that are likely to soundtrack the summer . " Comments echoed by The Observer 's Hermione Hoby read , " the song [ ' On the Floor ' ] was a particular triumph . " 
 In his article for the Los Angeles Times , Gerrick Kennedy said the song is a " sweat @-@ inducing , sticky dance floor track " which was " vintage J.Lo " and catchier than either of her previous releases , " Louboutins " or " Fresh Out the Oven " . Although Kennedy praised the song 's overall appeal , he commented that RedOne had produced more inventive " pop gems " with the likes of Lady Gaga and that Pitbull 's appearance was a " throwaway verse . " In her review for AOL Music 's Radio Blog , Nadine Cheung commented that Lopez " reinforces her renaissance woman status . " Nick Levine from Digital Spy called " On the Floor " a song that The Black Eyed Peas would have been " proud to have released " . Levine 's review agreed with others that the song was a " welcome comeback for Lopez , " and praised the use of a " not so @-@ subtle " sample with the " Latin @-@ tinged electro @-@ <unk> " production . Overall , he said that the production was " the antithesis of classy " , and although not original " there 's no denying that this gets the job done . " 
 Not all of the reviews were positive , with some critics citing a lack of originality . In his review of Love ? , BBC Music 's Alex Macpherson said that " On the Floor " was a predictable recording from Lopez as it was " not too <unk> to the supreme millennial house of ' Waiting for Tonight ' ( 1999 ) " . He went on to describe " On the Floor , " and album track " Papi , " as " apparent distillations of the trashy Miami house aesthetic that dominates pop these days . " Ken Capobianco from The Boston Globe described " On the Floor " as quite generic . 
 The single also drew comparisons to " Party O 'Clock , " a 2010 single by American singer Kat DeLuna , also produced by RedOne . In a statement issued to the New York Daily News , DeLuna said " It 's cool that artists like J.Lo are inspired by my musical sound and style . ... Jennifer helped pave the way for Latinas like myself . I love her " , and insisted that there wasn 't an issue . DeLuna also noted Lopez as someone who inspired her , and paved the way for someone like her to perform . Following previews of the music video for " On the Floor , " DeLuna changed her mind about how she felt with the claims of copying . In another interview with the New York Daily News , several days after the first , she said " I 've seen this before , where the more established artist tries to take the vision and artistic ideas away from an emerging artist , and assumes no one will notice because of their bigger shadow , ... Luckily , my loyal fans and the power of the Internet have let the ' Kat ' out of the bag . " Lopez was interviewed about the issue on Hispanic @-@ American entertainment program ¡ <unk> America ! . Lopez replied " What ? Really ? I 'm not aware of that ... " , and when pressed by the presenter a second time , insisted she had not heard rumors of the comparisons . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 " On the Floor " received two International Dance Music nominations for Best Latin / Reggaeton Track and Best Commercial / Pop Track . The song was nominated at the 2012 Swiss Music Awards for Best International Hit . The Spanish version " Ven a Bailar " received two nominations at the 2012 Billboard Latin Music Awards for Vocal Duet Song of the Year and Latin Pop Song of the Year . " On the Floor " was recognized by the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) in their Most Performed Songs list for the year . " Ven a Bailar " was also recognized at the 20th ASCAP Latin Music Awards at the Pop Category . It received a Broadcast Music Award at the Pop Awards and the London Awards . At the 2011 Premios Juventud ceremony , the duo received a nomination for La <unk> Perfecta ( The Perfect Combination ) for the song . 
 She got nominated for the MTV Europe Music Award for Best Song ( " On the Floor " ) , the MTV Europe Music Award for Best Female ( " On the Floor " ) , MuchMusic Video Award for International Video of the Year - Artist ( " On the Floor " ) with Pitbull . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 = = = North America = = = 
 " On the Floor " made its chart debut in Canada , during the week beginning February 12 , 2011 . It debuted at number eighty @-@ six on the Canadian Hot 100 , despite not being released until February 22 , 2011 , thus becoming the first release from Love ? to receive airplay recognition . Neither the album 's Epic Records buzz single ( " Fresh Out the Oven " , which also features Pitbull ) , nor the previous lead single " Louboutins " charted on US Billboard Charts . In the chart week dated April 16 , 2011 , " On the Floor " became Lopez 's fourth Canadian chart @-@ topper , and highest charting single in nine years following " If You Had My Love " ( 1999 ) , " Love Don 't Cost a Thing " ( 2001 ) and " Jenny from the Block " ( 2002 ) . In the United States , " On the Floor " made its chart debut on the Hot Dance Club Songs , at number twenty @-@ six . Additionally it debuted on the US Pop Songs chart at number forty , marking Lopez 's first appearance on pop airplay charts since 2007 . The single went on to make its Billboard Hot 100 debut at number nine , becoming the highest debuting Hot 100 single of Lopez 's career . " On the Floor " became Lopez 's tenth top @-@ ten hit on the Hot 100 , of which , six have featured other artists . Billboard 's Gary Trust reported that it was Lopez 's highest peaking chart position since her 2006 feature on LL Cool J 's " Control Myself , " although it was actually in 2003 when Lopez last released a top @-@ ten peaking single as a lead artist ( " All I Have " with LL Cool J ) . The full single was not released until February 22 , almost one month after it was uploaded to YouTube and serviced to radio , despite a remix EP being available before hand . Keith Caulfield from Billboard noted that Island Def Jam Music 's strategy of delaying the release was unusual as fellow pop contemporaries , such as Lady Gaga and Britney Spears , " released their singles to digital retailers at about the same time they were serviced to radio and streaming sites . " The single 's release was synchronized with the debut of the music video on season ten of American Idol , resulting in first week sales of 170 @,@ 000 copies and a Hot Digital Songs chart position of number three . The Spanish version of the song also became a success on Latin radio stations where it peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart . 
 As a direct result , Kaoma 's 1989 single " Lambada " re @-@ entered the charts after more than two decades , making its digital chart debut at number three on the Billboard World Digital Chart . In the week following the music video 's debut , " On the Floor " experienced a 31 % increase in sales , which totaled 232 @,@ 000 copies , and landed the song at number two on the Hot Digital Songs chart , as well as number five on the Hot 100 . " On the Floor " thus became Lopez 's seventh top @-@ five hit in the United States . It is the first single since " So What " ( 2008 ) by Pink to debut in the top @-@ ten of the Hot 100 , and then climb up the chart in its second week . Just over a month after release " On the Floor " had sold over 600 @,@ 000 copies in the United States , according to USA Today 's Bill Keveney . Keveney , attributed Lopez 's commercial comeback to product endorsement deals with L 'Oreal and Gillette , also noting her appointment as a judge on American Idol a contributing factor in the growth of her popularity . During the week ending May 8 , 2011 , " On the Floor " rose from number seven to a new peak of number three on the Hot 100 . By March 28 , 2011 , " On the Floor " reached number one on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart , becoming her fifth consecutive US dance chart topper , with three coming from her album Love ? , including " Fresh Out the Oven " ( with Pitbull ) and " Louboutins " ( 2009 ) . " On the Floor " brings Lopez 's US dance number ones total to nine singles since she launched her career in 1999 . Since then , it has been certified 3 × Multi @-@ Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting shipments of three million copies . As a result of Lopez 's first televised performance of the song on May 5 , 2011 , " On the Floor " logged 175 @,@ 000 digital sales that week ( up 25 % on the previous week ) , earning Lopez the " Digital Gainer " title that week . Consequently , " On the Floor " reached a new peak of number three on the Hot 100 and number five on the US Pop Songs chart , becoming her highest charting single commercial single as a lead artist , as well as her most successful airplay hit on contemporary hit radio , since 2002 's " Jenny from the Block " . By April 2012 , the song has sold 3 @,@ 486 @,@ 000 downloads in the US alone . A year later in April 2013 , it was reported that " On the Floor " had sold 3 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 downloads in the United States . It also became the 60th best selling digital single of all time . 
 = = = Europe and Oceania = = = 
 Internationally , " On the Floor " topped nineteen national single charts ( see charts section ) . On the Slovakia Airplay chart , the single debuted at number sixteen , before peaking at number one where it remained for two weeks beginning on March 7 , 2011 . It returned to the top of the chart in the first week of April 2011 , after dipping to number two at the end of March , and made a third return to number one in the third week of April . In total , " On the Floor " spent a total of seven weeks at number one . It also topped both the Flemish and Wallonian single charts in Belgium . On the Flanders Ultratop 50 , " On the Floor " peaked at number one , remaining there for four weeks . Meanwhile , on the Wallonia Ultratop 50 , the single remained at number one for four weeks , before dropping to number four and then returning to number one for a fifth week . In both territories , it is Lopez 's first number one single in Belgium . The Belgian Entertainment Association ( BEA ) certified the single gold , for selling 15 @,@ 000 copies . In Finland , " On the Floor " debuted at number one , giving Lopez her third number one in the country , behind " Love Don 't Cost a Thing " ( 2001 ) and her debut single " If You Had My Love " ( 1999 ) . Selling platinum with over 12 @,@ 000 copies , " On the Floor " was the second @-@ best @-@ selling single of 2011 in Finland and in total it spent nine weeks at number one , making it Lopez 's longest @-@ serving number @-@ one , as well as her longest @-@ charting single in the country . 
 " On the Floor " also reached number one in Spain ( fifteen weeks ) , Germany ( six weeks ) and France ( one week ) . In Spain , " On the Floor " reached number one on March 13 , 2011 , where it remained for fifteen weeks . Consequently , the single was certified Triple Platinum , by the Productores de Música de España ( PROMUSICAE ) , for shipments of 120 @,@ 000 copies . It was also certified 2x Platinum by the Bundesverband Musikindustrie ( BVMI ) , in Germany , for shipping 600 @,@ 000 copies . In Italy , " On the Floor " entered the Italian Singles Chart at number four before ascending to the summit , where it would remain for four weeks . It is Lopez 's fourth Italian number @-@ one , and first English @-@ language single to reach number one since " Get Right " ( 2005 ) , though Spanish single " Qué Hiciste " reached number one in 2007 . The Federation of the Italian Music Industry ( FIMI ) certified " On the Floor " Multi @-@ Platinum for shipping 60 @,@ 000 copies . The single experienced similar success in Sweden and Switzerland , where it respectively spent three and five weeks at the top of the countries ' singles charts . In Sweden it is Lopez 's first number one single , whereas in Switzerland it is her second , following 2007 's " Qué Hiciste " . In both countries the single was certified Double Platinum , shipping 40 @,@ 000 copies in Sweden and 60 @,@ 000 copies in Switzerland . As of July 26 , 2011 " On the Floor " had official sales of 1 @.@ 41 million copies . 
 In Australia , " On the Floor " debuted at number ten , becoming Lopez 's first top @-@ ten single in the country since 2005 's " Get Right " . It has since reached number one , becoming her second Australian chart topper , and first in nearly twelve years since 1999 's " If You Had My Love " . It was certified 4 × platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipments of 280 @,@ 000 copies . It reached number two in New Zealand , and was certified double @-@ Platinum for sales of 30 @,@ 000 copies . In Ireland , " On the Floor " debuted at number twelve on the Irish Singles Chart on March 10 , 2011 . It continued a steady climb to the top spot , spending two weeks at number two before finally reaching number one on April 14 , 2011 . In the United Kingdom , " On the Floor " was added to playlists on mainstream radio in March 2010 . On April 3 , 2011 , " On the Floor " made its UK Single Chart debut at number one , becoming Lopez 's third chart @-@ topper in that country . Overall it is Lopez 's twelfth UK top @-@ five hit , and topped the UK Digital Songs chart after logging first week sales of 130 @,@ 000 copies – the highest first week sales for Lopez in the UK . " On the Floor " also debuted at the top of the R & B Singles Chart . It remained at number one for two weeks , becoming the only single by Lopez to do so . The song was the biggest selling R & B / hip hop single of 2011 in the UK . As of May 2012 , " On the Floor " had sold 822 @,@ 056 copies , becoming Lopez ' biggest @-@ selling single in the UK . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and development = = = 
 The music video for " On the Floor " was filmed over the weekend dated January 22 – 23 , 2011 , with TAJ Stansberry serving as the director and Frank Gatson as the choreographer . Lopez told MTV News that for the video she was holding an open casting call to find club kids , " [ We want ] those kids who go to the club and they dance all night and that 's all they care about ? It 's just about having a good time , getting all sweaty , and it 's all about the music and leaving it on the dance floor . I don 't want to say what the video is , but that 's the type of dancers . We 're doing a big casting call ... " Meanwhile , Gatson said that Lopez wanted a post @-@ 2AM Los Angeles club vibe for the video . He said , 
 " [ We 're trying to create a vibe ] that 's so amazing . [ It 's like ] everybody had some watermelon and the watermelon made them high , it gave them a little buzz — but a good buzz , a real magical buzz , a dance buzz , a buzz that makes you feel like fried chicken , so she just wants everybody to have a good old time .... The club must have this vibe , where you get on the floor and everybody 's bringing it " , he added . " We 've seen so many club videos , but we want to see a club video with a vibe unique to Jennifer Lopez . " 
 Just prior of the casting call and video shoot , Stansberry expressed his views to MTV News on the concept for the video – originality . " Originality , being you . This song is about being who you want . It 's about letting loose . There 's no explanation . This is this underground video , this underground party . " During the video shoot , MTV interviewed Lopez about the concepts for the video . Lopez described some of the characters she played , telling MTV that in one scene " I play one character where she kind of runs this party , acts like she 's kind of over it , but at the same time loves it and loves this kind of underground kind of party dance culture , ... So I got to be wild and crazy , and at the same time I got to be sexy and sweet too . " The video makes use of product placement , including BMW , Swarovski and Crown Royal , according to Tanner Stransky from Entertainment Weekly . Stransky also noted the " unintentional placement " of fake eyelashes and wigs , weaves , and other hair @-@ extending products . 
 Lopez later confirmed in an interview On Air with Ryan Seacrest , that the completed music video would premiere jointly on season ten of American Idol and on Vevo on March 3 , 2011 . Fans could vote between three alternative endings through Idol 's official website . Lopez said the idea behind giving fans the choice was to give them a chance to see what she experienced . " You get to do what I do , ... Like , I go in there with my videos and I start editing and picking all the shots I like and the things that I like and what I feel the best kind of feeling for the record is . You guys get to do that . We picked two different ones and we weren 't sure . " The alternative endings included three varying scenes : in the first , the video ends with a close @-@ up of Lopez 's face in the silver lace catsuit ; the second ends with a shot of dancers defying gravity on the walls and ceiling , while the final ending ends with a shot of Lopez on the dance floor in her harem pants . The first ending was the one used in the final video . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The clip begins with Lopez 's arrival at a club in a black BMW , one example of the product placement used throughout the video . As the music begins , she puts on a pair Swarovski crystal earrings before the camera switches to inside the <unk> where it descends from the ceiling amongst the Las Vegas @-@ style crystal chandeliers . Choreographer Frank Gatson Jr. called the club , " the best dance party in town , " where Lopez played several different characters . Both the scenery and artist were styled to pay homage to her background as a professional dancer , she said she wanted the video to " introduce people to a new J.Lo @-@ ration of party people " . In one scene , she plays a dominant queen of the party who watches from above , on a balcony surrounded by servants . When portraying this character , Lopez was styled with " a big beehive bun , gold gladiator heels and a glittery gold gown with Gaga @-@ esque detailing in its high collar and leaves . " The ' queen ' character " dangles lazily on a couch " and " regally oversees a crowd of people getting down on the dancefloor . " In another scene , Lopez wears a silver crystal and lace skin @-@ tight catsuit , designed by Lebanese fashion designer <unk> Murad , as she dances against a " gold cardio barre " before proceeding to shake her " money maker , " according to the Los Angeles Times . <unk> in between these scenes , she is seen dressed in black harem pants and a bikini top , as she walks through the crowd to mount a circular stage on the Las Vegas @-@ style dancefloor . MTV 's Kelly Carter and AOL 's <unk> <unk> described the final scenes as Lopez " tearing up the floor , " and " breaking it down ' fly @-@ girl ' style . " 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The music video was welcomed with critical acclaim from music critics , praising the expensive finish , arrangement , Lopez 's sense of fashion and the overall execution . Based on a preview of the video , Entertainment Weekly 's Tanner Stransky said the clip brought together a flawless realness with an expensive set @-@ up , things that are " very important elements in the pop music world and to the old Lopez that everyone knew and loved . " Following its full premiere , Stransky added that the video was " sexy and sultry . " Kyle Anderson from MTV 's Newsroom agreed , noting the " gorgeous and exquisite execution , " particularly praising Lopez 's " incredible hairstyles " and the " gorgeous club interiors [ set design ] . " Anderson ended his review by stating that the premiere of the song 's music video almost overshadowed the episode of American Idol in which it was shown . 
 AOL 's Benji Eisen called " On the Floor " a " comeback of sorts " for Lopez , particularly noting its clever cross @-@ promotion with Idol and Lopez 's multiple product endorsement deals . He applauded Lopez for moving on from her previous lack of commercial success in recent years . Kim Dawson , an editor for the UK daily newspaper Daily Star , also praised the video for returning Lopez to her " day job " ( as a performer ) despite being everyone 's " new favourite Idol judge . " The sex appeal in the video for " On the Floor " was likened to that last displayed by Lopez in the video for 2002 's " I 'm Gonna Be Alright " . A reviewer from the Daily Express said " Jennifer Lopez once told us in song that ' I 'm Gonna Be Alright ' and now she 's proved it ... The curves she displayed when she recorded the hit video nine years ago have been replaced by a leaner , fitter look [ in ' On the Floor ' ] . " Matthew Perpetua from Rolling Stone agreed with comparisons to Lopez 's earlier work : " Basically , this is classic Lopez tweaked for 2011 ... visuals that update late @-@ Nineties bling with a high fashion wardrobe nearly as eccentric as that of Rihanna and Lady Gaga . " As a result of the video 's premiere , the online traffic at Lopez 's official Vevo account increased by 1000 % . In the space of two weeks , the video was viewed over thirty million times on Lopez 's official Vevo page , according to USA Today . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On May 5 , 2011 , Lopez and Pitbull took the stage of American Idol to perform " On the Floor " for the first time . The performance consisted of her breaking two dancers out of glass boxes , an elaborate dance routine and two appearances from Pitbull . Initially he appeared from the crowd , but for his second appearance , he arrived at the back of the stage via a moving staircase . Lopez was dressed in a " glimmering ensemble " while the set included lasers and pyrotechnics . According to Adam Graham from MTV , the performance was taped prior to the episode of Idol , made apparent by what Graham called " sloppy editing . " According to The Hollywood Reporter , Lopez <unk> the performance due to a perceived danger of flying shards of glass from the earlier part of the routine . The performance was praised by Caryn Ganz from Yahoo ! Music , who compliment all of the element of the performance . Ganz said " [ everything from the ] lush production values to her own high energy dancing and live vocals ... This performance maxed out what an artist can do in such a medium – awesome lighting , high @-@ impact video footage , a strong feature from Pitbull , excellent staging , solid choreography , a bit of pyro , and a ton of warmth and personality . " An editor from Rap @-@ Up magazine agreed , saying that " Lopez showed the contestants how its done , commanding the stage during her smashing performance . " 
 The duo reprised their performance at KIIS @-@ FM 's Wango Tango music festival in Los Angeles , on May 14 , 2011 . Lopez wore a shiny gold <unk> for the performance , which did not go as planned when halfway through the performance her microphone failed . She continued performing for 20 seconds , before realising that she had lost sound . According to lifestyle website Female First , Lopez proceeded to dance , and urged the audience to sing along . At the end of the performance , Lopez addressed the crowd straight after the performance , saying " We ain 't gonna let that get us down , right ? Nobody keeps mama down . " After Pitbull informed her of the malfunction , she turned to the band asking them to start from the beginning so that she could perform the song again . 
 On June 11 , 2011 , Lopez flew to the United Kingdom to promote " On the Floor , " first appearing at Capital FM 's Summertime Ball . Later that day , she appeared at the finale of the second series of So You Think You Can Dance to reprise the performance . Wearing a skin tight catsuit , Lopez descended from the ceiling in an illuminated heart before preceding to perform the song , which included her dropping to her knees during the chorus . Lopez reprise the performance on X Factor ( France ) on June 14 , 2011 and German game @-@ show Wetten , dass .. ? on June 18 . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at : Cove Studios , New York and Henson Recording , Los Angeles . 
 Contains interpolations of the composition : " Llorando Se Fue " , written by Gonzales Hermosa and Ulises Hermosa . 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Cyclone Inigo = 
 Cyclone Inigo was the most intense recorded cyclone in the Australian region . It developed from a tropical low that crossed eastern Indonesia in late March 2003 . Becoming a named tropical cyclone on 1 April , Inigo rapidly intensified as it tracked southwestward , reaching a minimum central pressure of 900 hPa on 4 April . An approaching trough weakened the cyclone and turned it to the southeast , and on 8 April Inigo dissipated after making landfall on Western Australia as a minimal tropical storm . 
 The precursor disturbance dropped heavy rainfall across eastern Indonesia , causing widespread flooding and mudslides . The worst of the damage was on Flores island , though damage was also reported on West Timor and Sumba . The flooding and mudslides damage or destroyed thousands of houses , forcing many to leave their homes . A total of 58 casualties were reported in association with the disturbance . In Australia , Inigo produced locally heavy rainfall , but little damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 By 26 March , an area of disturbed weather was located within the near @-@ equatorial trough near Papua New Guinea . Initially located within an area of easterly wind shear , it tracked westward due to the presence of a ridge to its south , and on 27 March a low pressure area formed over Western New Guinea . Thunderstorm activity increased around a mid @-@ level circulation as it crossed into the Arafura Sea , and its overall organization continued to increase . On 29 March , a low @-@ level circulation was visible , though significant tropical development was prevented due to wind shear and land interaction with islands in the Indonesian archipelago . It developed into a tropical low on 30 March , and after turning to the southwest , it crossed the island of Flores on 31 March ; upon doing so its convection greatly increased due to increased upper @-@ level divergence , which produced heavy rainfall on Flores and Timor . On 1 April , wind shear decreased as it crossed into the Savu Sea , and by early on 1 April it developed into a tropical cyclone to the northeast of Sumba . 
 At 1200 UTC on 1 April , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued its first advisory on the system , classifying it as Tropical Cyclone 26S . At 0000 UTC on 2 April , the Bureau of Meteorology ( BOM ) warning center in Perth classified the low as Tropical Cyclone Inigo . The storm quickly intensified as it tracked southwestward , aided by low wind shear and strong divergence . An eye featured gradually organized , and early on 3 April the BOM classified Inigo as a severe tropical cyclone with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Later that day , the cyclone underwent rapid intensification as the eye became increasingly better defined . On 4 April , Inigo attained Category 5 status on the Australian cyclone scale , and at 0600 UTC it reached peak winds of 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) and an estimated minimum pressure of 900 hPa ( mbar ) while located about 950 km ( 590 mi ) north of Onslow , Western Australia . Around the same time , the JTWC assessed Inigo as a powerful cyclone with 1 @-@ min winds of 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) . With a minimum pressure of 900 hPa , Inigo tied Cyclone Gwenda of the 1998 @-@ 99 season as the most intense tropical cyclone on record in the Australian cyclone region . 
 Upon reaching peak intensity , Inigo maintained an eyewall 32 km ( 20 mi ) in diameter . Late on 4 April , an approaching upper @-@ level trough increased wind shear over the system , which caused a steady weakening trend . On 5 April , the eye became cloud @-@ filled , and later that day the cyclone reached its westernmost point before the approaching trough turned it to the southeast . By 7 April , its winds decreased to below severe tropical cyclone status , or below 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . The convection continued to decrease , leaving the center exposed from the convection as it made landfall early on 8 April in the Pilbara region of Western Australia . Upon moving ashore , Inigo had winds of around 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) , and the circulation dissipated within 12 hours after moving ashore . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The precursor tropical disturbance dropped heavy rainfall in eastern Indonesia ; on the island of Flores , <unk> recorded 223 mm ( 8 @.@ 78 in ) in a 24 ‑ hour period . The rainfall caused flash flooding and mudslides , primarily in Flores but also on West Timor and Sumba . In some locations , the depth of the floodwaters reached 5 meters ( 16 ft ) . The <unk> River in West Timor exceeded its banks , which flooded seven villages . In Kupang in West Timor , the system destroyed hundreds of homes and large fields of corn , bean , and rice crop . Heavy damage was reported near Ende , where flooding and mudslides destroyed 20 houses and destroyed the roads connecting to East Flores . In Ende , a total of 294 animals were killed . The city 's airport was flooded with one meter ( 3 ft ) of water , preventing aerial transportation and leaving the city temporarily isolated . In East Flores Regency in eastern Flores Island , the system left 75 destroyed houses , along with 77 severely damaged and a further 56 receiving light damage . Damage in Indonesia totaled less than $ 6 million ( 2003 USD , $ 6 @.@ 8 million 2007 USD ) , and 102 injuries were reported . The Indonesian representative to the Tropical Cyclone Committee of the World Meteorological Organization in 2004 reported the death toll related to the disaster in Indonesia as 58 fatalities . 
 Additionally , the precursor disturbance produced rough seas along the coastlines , which resulting in the sinking of 12 sailing vessels . Two ships , each with a crew of five to eight people , were reported missing to the southwest of Sumba after Cyclone Inigo passed over their location on 3 April . 
 Inigo moved ashore on Australia as a weak tropical cyclone , though several locations reported winds of near gale force . The storm dropped light to moderate precipitation near where it made landfall which peaked at 226 mm ( 8 @.@ 90 inches ) , of which 128 mm ( 5 @.@ 04 in ) of rain fell in 80 minutes . No casualties or significant damage was reported in the country . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Shortly after the storm passed through Indonesia , local government and Red Cross officials distributed assistance to the storm victims , including food , medicine , clean water , and mattresses ; additionally , the government sent about $ 400 million ( 2003 IDR , $ 50 @,@ 000 2003 USD ) . The affected citizens resided in temporary shelters , including schools , police offices , and shelters built by local governments . Officials deployed machines to remove debris from the roads affected by the landslides . 
 As a result of its damage , the name Inigo was retired subsequent to its usage ; its name was replaced with Iggy . 
 = Angry Andy = 
 " Angry Andy " is the twenty @-@ first episode of the eighth season of the American comedy television series The Office . It was written by Justin Spitzer and directed by Claire Scanlon . The episode aired on NBC in the United States on April 19 , 2012 . " Angry Andy " guest stars Sendhil Ramamurthy as Ravi : Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) and Jim Halpert 's ( John Krasinski ) pediatrician and a potential love interest for Kelly Kapoor ( Mindy Kaling ) . 
 The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) returns to the office to find Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) in the manager 's chair . After throwing an extreme tantrum and punching a hole in the wall , Andy is fired . Meanwhile , Kelly is forced to choose between Ryan Howard ( B.J. Novak ) and a new man , Ravi . 
 The episode received a lukewarm response from critics . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Angry Andy " was viewed by an estimated 4 @.@ 35 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 2 rating / 6 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 , making it , at the time , the lowest @-@ rated episode of The Office to air . The episode ranked second in its timeslot and was also the highest @-@ rated NBC series of the night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) returns to Dunder Mifflin to find Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) in the manager 's chair . Andy enlists Robert California ( James Spader ) to give Andy his job back , which fails . Nellie further asserts her authority when she orders Angela Lipton ( Angela Kinsey ) to dock Andy 's paycheck twice , and she complies . This causes Andy to have performance difficulties with Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) . Erin asks Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) if he had similar problems after his loss of the manager position , which he denies . When he tells Nellie that she affected Andy 's performance abilities , she feels guilty about taking his manhood . She holds a meeting where the office workers share advice on how to perform sexually . After the meeting , when Nellie makes another innuendo about Andy 's problems , Erin loses her temper by yelling at Nellie to shut up , throwing her office phone to the ground , followed by Nellie 's memo forms , pens , and her caramel . This gives Andy , filled with anger , the freedom to vent by throwing his desk chair at Robert , throwing Nellie 's picture frame to the ground , and finally punching his hand through the wall . When Robert then chooses Nellie as regional manager , Andy refuses to accept a demotion by saying " no " too many times in a calm way , and a surprised Robert fires him . As a result , Andy regains his sense of self @-@ confidence and is once again able to perform . 
 Meanwhile , Kelly Kapoor ( Mindy Kaling ) is forced to choose between Ryan Howard ( B. J. Novak ) and a new man , Ravi ( Sendhil Ramamurthy ) . Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) set up Kelly and Ravi , Cece 's pediatrician , in hopes of Kelly finally moving on from Ryan . Ryan makes several attempts to get back with Kelly , though everyone finds the attempts pathetic because he can 't even say he truly loves her and wants to be with her always ( he keeps qualifying all of his feelings for her ) and even admits he would prefer she not be with anyone else if she 's not going to be with him . Pam eventually says that he 's not a nice person , and Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) says he is not boyfriend material . Ryan tells the office he has a love poem for her , which Kelly has no interest in reading . As the staff are heading outside the building to go home , they see Ryan sitting on a steed professing his love ( again , in insultingly hedging terms ) to Kelly . She responds by saying she is in love with Ravi and hopes to stay friends with Ryan . They hug goodbye , which turns into a make @-@ out session . The episode closes with Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) and Pam finding and reading Ryan 's love poem . Initially scoffing , they are both noticeably moved by it . Tearing up , Jim informs the camera crew that Ryan can never know of the incident . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Angry Andy " was written by Justin Spitzer , his second writing credit for the season after " Garden Party " . The episode was directed by Claire Scanlon , her first credit for the series . The episode marks the eighth appearance of Catherine Tate as Nellie Bertram and her seventh consecutive appearance . She first appeared in the seventh season finale , " Search Committee " as a guest star , but starting with " Tallahassee " she was added to the cast as a recurring character . 
 The episode guest stars Sendhil Ramamurthy as Ravi , Pam and Jim 's pediatrician . Before the premiere of the episode , it was revealed that Ramamurthy would be introduced as a new romantic interest for Mindy Kaling 's character Kelly Kapoor . Writer B.J. Novak explained that Ryan and Kelly " go through a heart @-@ wrenching break @-@ up [ and the two ] end up becoming bitter enemies in the office when she falls in love with an Indian doctor . He 's very handsome and a much , much better match for Kelly than Ryan is . " TV Fanatic predicted that Ramamurthy 's appearance in the show was done so that Kaling could exit the program , due to her commitment to her Fox series The Mindy Project . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Angry Andy " originally aired on NBC in the United States on April 26 , 2012 . The episode was viewed by an estimated 4 @.@ 35 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 2 rating / 6 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 2 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 6 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . In addition , the episode was , at the time , the lowest @-@ rated episode of the series to air , beating the previous episode , " Welcome Party " , which gathered 4 @.@ 39 million viewers . The episode finished second in its time slot , being beaten by Grey 's Anatomy which received a 3 @.@ 3 rating / 9 % . The episode beat the Fox series Touch and The CW drama series The Secret Circle , as well as a re @-@ run of the CBS drama Person of Interest . Despite this , " Angry Andy " was the highest @-@ rated NBC television episode of the night . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Critical reception to the episode was largely mixed . Myles McNutt of The A.V. Club awarded the entry a " C " and thoroughly criticized Nellie 's " hostile takeover " of the Scranton branch , calling it " utterly ridiculous " . McNutt also called most of the humorous moments in the episode " too familiar " , noting that Andy 's punching of a wall had already been performed in the third season episode " The Return " . Cindy White of IGN gave the episode a 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 , denoting a " good " episode , but noted that the show 's need to feature a direct flash back to " The Return " only " highlights the lack of [ Andy 's ] character continuity " and concluded that the scene came out " a bit contrived . " 
 M. Giant from Television Without Pity awarded the episode a " C + " . Joseph Kratzer of WhatCulture ! gave the episode a largely negative review and awarded it two stars out of five . He criticized the plot invoking Nellie taking the manager position away , as well as Erin 's outburst , saying " it was warranted but disingenuous " . Dan Forcella of TV Fanatic awarded the episode three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ stars out of five and noted that the return of Andy 's anger issues was a " pleasant change of pace " . He concluded that it include several scenes of physical comedy and was " certainly an improvement on last week 's episode [ ' Welcome Party ' ] " . Screencrave reviewer Jeffrey Hyatt awarded the episode a seven out ten but noted that Andy 's return and his meltdown " didn 't wow me " , but that his increased ego was impressive . 
 Critical reception to the episode 's subplot involving Kelly and Ryan was largely positive . McNutt called Novak 's acting " some of [ his ] best work in a long time " . He called the plots conclusion " the sort of screwed up situation that The Office does well " . White wrote that " If it weren 't for [ Kelly and Ravi 's ] story [ … ] I might have written this clumsy episode off entirely . " Forcella enjoyed the plot , praising the ending due to the fact that it concluded with " boos and hisses " . However , he was confused with the casting , noting that " why bring Sendhil Ramamurthy in for one scene ? [ … ] He seems more like someone you bring in for a multi @-@ episode arc . " Hyatt lauded the scenes , and wrote " the Ryan @-@ Kelly stuff I give a 10 / 10 . " 
 = Hawker Siddeley P.1154 = 
 The Hawker Siddeley P.1154 was a planned supersonic vertical / short take @-@ off and landing ( V / STOL ) fighter aircraft designed by Hawker Siddeley Aviation ( HSA ) . 
 Developed alongside the subsonic and smaller Hawker Siddeley P.1127 / Kestrel , the P.1154 was derived from the <unk> The P.1150 proposal did not meet NATO Basic Military Requirement 3 and , consequently , the P.1154 was born . This Mach 2 @-@ capable aircraft retained plenum chamber burning previously designed for the <unk> Although the technical winner of eleven submissions , follow @-@ on testing and production for the P.1154 did not proceed as a result of political strife . 
 Meanwhile , Hawker Siddeley considered modifying the airframe for a joint specification for an aircraft by the RAF and Royal Navy . Between 1961 and 1965 the two services harmonised their specifications to preserve design commonality . However , the RAF 's desired configuration was to take precedence over that of the Royal Navy 's . A number of proposals were submitted – at one stage , a twin @-@ Spey design was considered , then rejected . Following the Labour government 's coming to power the project was cancelled in 1965 . The Royal Navy would acquire the McDonnell Douglas F @-@ 4 Phantom II , while the RAF continued to foster development of the P.1127 ( RAF ) , leading to the successful Harrier Jump Jet family . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = NATO requirements = = = 
 In 1961 , during the development of the V / STOL P.1127 and Kestrel , HSA considered the feasibility of a supersonic V / STOL aircraft . This was influenced by a general perception at the time that supersonic aircraft held significantly more value than subsonic aircraft . Consequently , on 13 April 1961 , HSA decided to conduct preliminary work on a supersonic P.1127 under the guidance of Ralph Hooper . The aircraft , designated P.1150 and 50 % larger than the P.1127 , would employ plenum chamber burning ( PCB ) – essentially an afterburner in the previously cold forward nozzles – in the engine . The engine was a Pegasus development named the BS.100 , and had four swivelling exhaust nozzles . The front nozzles were equipped with PCB , which uses the same principle as an afterburner , allowing the aircraft to theoretically reach speeds of Mach 1 @.@ 7 – 2 . 
 The design effort was initially undertaken to cater for NATO Basic Military Requirement 3 ( NBMR @-@ 3 ) , which was issued in August 1961 . Specifications called for a supersonic V / STOL strike fighter with a combat radius of 460 kilometres ( 250 nmi ) . Cruise speed was to be Mach 0 @.@ 92 , with a dash speed of Mach 1 @.@ 5 . The aircraft , with a 910 @-@ kilogram ( 2 @,@ 000 lb ) payload , had to be able to clear a 15 @-@ metre ( 50 ft ) obstacle following a 150 @-@ metre ( 500 ft ) takeoff roll . However , as requirement specifications changed , the aircraft was considered undersized ; subsequent studies confirmed these fears , and so Bristol enlarged the original PCB engine and raised the exhaust heat to increase thrust to 146 @.@ 8 kN ( 30 @,@ 000 lbf ) . A new larger design emerged , initially named P.1150 / 3 before being redesignated the P.1154. 
 <unk> also attracted ten other contenders , among which was P.1154 's principal competitor , the Dassault Mirage IIIV . This design employed a separate lift / thrust engine concept whereby eight Rolls @-@ Royce engines would provide lift , with a single <unk> Atar for thrust . The Mirage IIIV was supported by British Aircraft Corporation . HSA submitted its design to NATO through the Ministry of Aviation ( MoA ) on 8 January 1962 and , in May that year , the P.1154 emerged as the winner in the competition for the <unk> over the Mirage IIIV . The P.1154 was judged to be technically superior , however the Mirage was politically palatable due to the co @-@ operative development and production across member nations . The project was terminated in 1965 after the French government subsequently withdrew following the selection of the P.1154 over the Dassault design . 
 = = = RAF and Royal Navy requirements = = = 
 On 6 December 1961 , before the design was submitted to NATO , it was decided that the P.1154 would be developed with the requirements for use by both the RAF and the Royal Navy . In February 1962 , the Royal Navy 's Admiralty received the aircraft concept with great interest as the Royal Navy was seeking a new interceptor aircraft for their aircraft carriers . As a single aircraft , the P.1154 would replace Hawker Hunters of the RAF and the de Havilland Sea Vixens of the Fleet Air Arm ( FAA ) . However , the services sought different characteristics in their aircraft – the RAF desired a single @-@ seat fighter with secondary intercept capability , while the Royal Navy wanted a two @-@ seat interceptor capable of secondary low @-@ level strike capability . 
 Although financially and politically committed to a joint requirement with the Royal Navy , the RAF 's single @-@ seat design took precedence over the two @-@ seat version of the Royal Navy . However , RAF <unk> would have to accommodate the Navy 's large airborne intercept ( AI ) radar . When HSA submitted the design on 8 August , the Royal Navy criticised the proposal , which had a tandem undercarriage layout incompatible with catapult operations ; consequently , a tricycle undercarriage design was investigated and accepted as practical . In December that year , Rolls @-@ Royce offered a PCB @-@ equipped vectored thrust twin @-@ Spey design as an alternative . This was seen as inferior , however , and was not considered in great detail . The aircraft required PCB for vertical takeoff , but this caused significant ground erosion . The aircraft would have been armed with the Red Top missile . 
 With the RAF and Royal Navy requirements diverging , the aircraft 's development started to stumble . While modifications towards naval requirements had been made , by July 1963 weight gain had become a considerable issue , and the Navy was openly criticising the choice of V / STOL . However , despite a stated Navy preference for a swing @-@ wing fighter , on the 16 July 1963 the services agreed that the aircraft would be completely common , with the exception of different radar systems . By August 1963 Hawker Siddeley was expressing the view that range of changes made were damaging the aircraft 's potential for export . At the same time , the Navy stated that it regarded the P.1154 as a second @-@ rate interceptor , and the RAF openly decried the loss of strike performance . By October 1963 , the MoA was concerned with the project 's progress , and noted that the effort to combine a strike aircraft and a fighter in a single aircraft , and trying to fit that same airframe to both of the services , was " unsound " . 
 = = = <unk> and cancellation = = = 
 In November 1963 , the RAF still found the P.1154 to be a suitable platform , while the Royal Navy appeared to consider the McDonnell Douglas F @-@ 4 Phantom II a better fit for its needs . In response , Hawker Siddeley focused its efforts on the RAF version . On 26 February 1964 , it was announced in the House of Commons by the Conservative government that a development contract had been placed for the P.1154 , equipped with the BS.100 engine , as an RAF strike aircraft . At the same time it was announced that the Naval requirement would be met by Spey @-@ engined Phantoms . More positive news emerged in 1964 ; on 30 October the BS.100 engine ran for the first time and Hawker Siddeley received favourable reports that the P.1154 was competitive with the performance of other aircraft , including the F @-@ 4 Phantom II . 
 However , on 2 February 1965 , the incoming Labour government , led by Harold Wilson , cancelled the P.1154 on the grounds of cost , along with several other aircraft such as the BAC TSR @-@ 2 strike aircraft and Hawker Siddeley <unk> <unk> transport . At the time of cancellation , at least three prototypes were under construction . Following the cancellation , the RAF and Royal Navy adopted the F @-@ 4 Phantom II instead , but the government also gave a contract for continued work on the P.1127 ( RAF ) , which led to the Harrier ; this name had originally been reserved for the P.1154 should it enter service . In retrospect , aviation author Tony Buttler considered the cancellation of the aircraft to be justified , noting the time consuming and expensive failures of attempts by other nations ( such as Soviet / Russia 's Yak @-@ 41 and West Germany 's <unk> VJ 101 ) at a supersonic VTOL aircraft . These aircraft all used a multiple engines configuration like the Mirage IIIV , and not the single vectored thrust turbofan of the likes of the BS.100 and Pegasus which went on to great success in the Harrier . 
 = = Specifications ( P.1154 – RAF version ) = = 
 Data from The British Fighter since 1912 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 
 Length : 49 ft 5 in ( 15 @.@ 07 m ) 
 Wingspan : 24 ft 0 in ( 7 @.@ 32 m ) 
 Height : ( ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 30 @,@ 970 lb ( 14 @,@ 050 kg ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × Bristol Siddeley BS.100 / 9 vectored @-@ thrust turbofan engine with PCB , 33 @,@ 000 lbf ( 147 kN ) ( with afterburning ) 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : Mach 1 @.@ 3 at sea level ( Mach 2 @.@ 0 at altitude ) 
 Service ceiling : 49 @,@ 000 ft ( 15 @,@ 000 m ) 
 Armament 
 2 x 1000 lb bombs 
 = Ellis Coleman = 
 Ellis Coleman ( born August 16 , 1991 ) is an American wrestler from Chicago who won the 2012 U.S. Olympic Trials to compete for the United States team in the Greco @-@ Roman 60 kg competition of Wrestling at the 2012 Summer Olympics at the 2012 Olympics . Coleman overcame challenging life conditions after being enrolled in youth wrestling classes . As a high school senior for Oak Park and River Forest High School finished third in the state wrestling championships . On several occasions , Coleman executed a takedown by jumping over his opponent and grabbing him as he flew over his back . Coleman is sometimes referred to as the Flying Squirrel for this takedown move that he has made famous . 
 = = Background = = 
 Coleman was raised by his single mother , Yolanda Barral , in Chicago , Illinois . Coleman describes his biological father , <unk> Coleman , as a person who was " in and out of jail [ his ] whole life . " Apart from visiting him in jail , the only memory he has of his father is the time his father sold all the family 's televisions and the PlayStation for drugs . Federal records describe his biological father as a " career offender " with 19 aliases . 
 His mother raised the family , including Coleman 's brother ( <unk> ) and sister , in the Humboldt Park community area , then the West Side and finally Oak Park . Coleman describes his stepfather as a long @-@ time gang member with an extensive criminal record . After enduring formative years with gunfights outside elementary school , home loss due to an apartment fire , and expulsion hearings , his stepfather , Mose Oliver , introduced him to wrestling to keep him out of trouble . Federal records confirm that Oliver is an alleged 1990s gang enforcer who served time from 2004 to 2011 for participation in Operation Day Trader . The wrestling started in about 2001 . By sixth grade both his father and stepfather were incarcerated and his father figure was his wrestling coach , Mike Powell . Coleman attended Ella Flagg Young elementary school . Barral raised her family with little assistance away from the gang influences of the West Side . She applied for section 8 assistance . Coleman , who was nearly expelled as a sophomore , graduated from Oak Park and River Forest High School in Oak Park , IL in 2009 . He has studied at Northern Michigan University . 
 = = Wrestling career = = 
 As a high school senior at the 2009 Illinois High School Association Class 3A tournament , Coleman endured his only loss of the season to <unk> Schneider of Lane Technical College Prep High School to finish third and end the season with a 49 – 1 record . Following the loss , his heart rate reached 225 , necessitating treatment by paramedics . 
 In 2011 , a video of Coleman was posted to YouTube . Subsequently , Coleman gained a cult @-@ following for the recording of him performing a move at the 2011 World Junior Championships that he calls " The Flying Squirrel " , which involves somersaulting over his opponent just before his takedown . He has performed the move at the 2009 Sunkist Open against Joe Betterman . He also performed the move against Iran 's Mehdi <unk> at the 2011 World Junior Championships . Coleman claims he has used the " Flying Squirrel " move over a dozen times in competition . The move was ranked third on the ESPN 2011 Best of the Best Highlights . He appeared on ESPN 's morning shows , such as ESPN First Take . The move made him so famous that he received lucrative offers to begin a professional wrestling career , but he declined in favor of continuing his Olympic dream . Coleman credits his brother for the move . 
 Ellis defeated Betterman 2 to 0 at the finals of the 2012 U.S. Olympic Trials . Coleman had attended Betterman 's wrestling clinics when he was younger . Coleman is the youngest member of the American wrestling delegation going to the Olympics . After Coleman qualified for the Olympics , he realized that his mother , who works in customer service for the Illinois State Toll Highway Authority , could not afford to attend due to financial hardship . Coleman was living at the United States Olympic Training Center in Colorado Springs on a limited monthly stipend from the United States Olympic Committee and could not assist her . Powell rented Coleman 's family a one @-@ bedroom flat in London out of personal funds and the Oak Park High School wrestling program subsequently raised $ 14 @,@ 000 to ensure that his mother , aunt and siblings could attend . Coleman dropped from the 66 kg division to the 60 kg division for the Olympics . Coleman lost in the first round of Olympic competition to Ivo <unk> of Bulgaria by a 3 – 1 score . 
 2012 Olympic American gymnast Gabby Douglas also became known for the nickname " Flying Squirrel " . In an attempt to solidify his nickname while training in Colorado Springs , Coleman purchased a pet flying squirrel that he keeps in a cage and feeds apples . His Twitter handle is @ <unk> . 
 = Allah jang Palsoe = 
 Allah jang Palsoe ( [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; Perfected Spelling : Allah yang <unk> ; Indonesian for The False God ) is a 1919 stage drama in six acts written by the ethnic @-@ Chinese author Kwee Tek Hoay . Based on E. Phillips Oppenheim 's short story " The False Gods " , the Malay @-@ language play follows two brothers , one a devout son who holds firmly to his morals and personal honour , the other who worships money and prioritises personal gain . Over more than a decade , the two learn that money ( the titular false god ) is not the path to happiness . 
 Kwee Tek Hoay 's first stage play , Allah jang Palsoe was written as a realist response to whimsical contemporary theatres . Though the published stageplay sold poorly and the play was deemed difficult to perform , Allah jang Palsoe found success on the stage . By 1930 it had been performed by various ethnic Chinese troupes to popular acclaim and pioneered a body of work by authors such as Lauw Giok Lan , Tio Ie Soei , and Tjoa Tjien Mo . In 2006 the script for the play , which continues to be performed , was republished with updated spelling by the Lontar Foundation . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Brothers Tan Kioe Lie and Tan Kioe Gie are preparing to leave their Cicuruk home to find work : Kioe Lie will go to Bandung , while Kioe Gie will go to Batavia ( now Jakarta ) and become a letter @-@ setter . As they are packing , Kioe Lie 's fiancée Gouw Hap Nio visits . She leaves some snacks with their father , the poor farmer Tan Lauw Pe , before going home , promising to take care of Pe while his sons are away . The brothers finish packing , say goodbye to their father , and head for the train station . 
 Three years later , Kioe Lie visits his brother in the latter 's Batavia home . Kioe Gie has become an editor of the newspaper Kamadjoean and is known as a generous philanthropist . Kioe Lie , meanwhile , has become the manager of a tapioca factory , but is planning to leave for competing business run by Tjio Tam Bing , who has offered him twice the salary . Kioe Gie asks him to reconsider , or at least not take any customers , but Kioe Lie is set on his goals . Before Kioe Lie leaves , the brothers discuss marriage : since Lie has no intent to marry Hap Nio soon , Kioe Gie asks permission to marry first . Though Kioe Lie disapproves of Kioe Gie 's sweetheart , a poor orphan girl named Oeij Ijan Nio , he agrees . 
 Another four years pass , and Kioe Gie has become editor @-@ in @-@ chief of <unk> and married Ijan Nio . He is concerned , however , over the newspaper 's new political orientation : the owner , Oeij Tjoan Siat , is aiming to make the paper pro @-@ Dutch East Indies , a stance that Kioe Gie considers a betrayal to the ethnic Chinese . When Tjoan Siat comes to Kioe Gie 's home to ask him to follow the former 's new political leanings , heavily influenced by a monthly payment of 2 @,@ 000 gulden offered by an unnamed political party , Kioe Gie refuses and resigns . 
 During the following week Kioe Gie and his wife sell their belongings and prepare to move back to Cicuruk . This departure is delayed by a visit from Kioe Lie , who reveals that he will be marrying Tam Bing 's widow Tan Houw Nio – Tam Bing having died the year before . Kioe Gie is horrified , both because the widow has the same surname and because Kioe Lie had promised their father on his deathbed to marry Hap Nio . After an extensive argument , Kioe Lie disowns his brother and leaves . 
 Five years later , Kioe Lie and Houw Nio 's marriage is failing . Owing to poor investments ( some made with embezzled money ) , Houw Nio 's gambling , and Kioe Lie 's keeping of a mistress , they have lost their fortune . Kioe Lie tries to convince his wife to sell her jewellery , thus allowing him to return the stolen money . Houw Nio , however , refuses , tells him to sell the house and his mistress ' jewellery , and then leaves . Soon afterwards , Kioe Lie 's friend Tan Tiang An warns him that he will be arrested by the police unless he flees the colony . Together they rent a car and Kioe Lie heads for the port at Batavia . 
 Passing through Cicuruk , the car breaks down and , while the chauffeur attempts to fix it , Kioe Lie takes shelter in a nearby home . He learns that it belongs to Kioe Gie and Hap Nio , who have built up a vast farm , garden , and orchard that provides them with ample income . The two philanthropists are friends with the area 's elite , and Hap Nio is happily married to a rich plantation administrator . When Kioe Gie and his companions return from playing tennis , they discover Kioe Lie hiding shamefully under a piano . Kioe Lie admits that he was wrong to be greedy . When a police officer arrives , Kioe Lie confesses to poisoning Tam Bing , then runs outside and shoots himself . 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = Writing = = 
 Allah jang Palsoe was the first stage play by the journalist Kwee Tek Hoay . Born to an ethnic Chinese textile merchant and his wife , Kwee was raised in Chinese culture and schools that focused on modernity . By the time he wrote the drama , Kwee Tek Hoay was an active proponent of Buddhist theology . However , he also wrote extensively on themes relating to native Indonesians and was a keen social observer . He read extensively in Dutch , English , and Malay , and drew on these readings after becoming a writer . 
 According to the historian Nio Joe Lan , Allah jang Palsoe was the first stage drama in Malay by a Chinese writer . The six @-@ act work was written in vernacular Malay , the lingua franca of the Indies , and was based on E. Phillips Oppenheim 's short story " The False Gods " . Though in his foreword Kwee Tek Hoay apologised for the quality of the stage play , writing that " the content and arrangement of this book are far from what you could call neat " , Sumardjo praises his language , feeling that the story flowed well . 
 At the time Allah jang Palsoe was written , stage performances were heavily influenced by orality . Contemporary theatres , such as bangsawan and <unk> , were unscripted and generally used fantastic settings and plotlines . Kwee Tek Hoay heavily disapproved of such whimsy , considering it " better to say things as they are , than to create events out of nothing , which although perhaps more entertaining and satisfying to viewers or readers , are falsehoods and lies , going against the truth " . After condemning contemporary playwrights who merely wrote down existing stories , Kwee Tek Hoay expressed the hope that ultimately a unique form of Chinese Malay theatre — inspired by European theatrical traditions but dealing with Chinese themes — could be developed . Allah jang Palsoe was intended to be the first published stage play in this new tradition . 
 Kwee Tek Hoay made numerous recommendations for the play 's casting , costuming , setting , and music . He wrote that if sufficiently talented actors to portray Kioe Lie and Kioe Gie could not be found , " it would be better to not perform this show " , and that Ijan Nio needed to show " a perfect woman or wife " , as opposed to the " fierce and rough " Houw Nio . He provided four set designs , to be used at appropriate points in the plot , and gave suggestions for setting up the needed backgrounds and props . Kwee recommended that the play include only one song , John Payne and Henry Bishop 's " Home ! Sweet Home ! " , which was to be performed in the sixth act with either English or Malay vocals and a trio of piano , viola , and guitar or mandolin . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 The title Allah jang Palsoe is a reference to money , with an underlying didactic message that money is not everything in the world , and that an unquenchable thirst for it would turn one into " a money animal " . Throughout the dialogue , money is referred to as the false God , with Lie as a character who deifies money to the point of ignoring his other duties and only realising his error after it is too late . Gie , although he does become rich , does not consider money a god , but is a philanthropist and holds to his morals . The Indonesian literary critic <unk> <unk> Damono writes that such a message would have been popular among ethnic Chinese of the contemporary Indies , and as such the play would have been a favourite of social organisations . 
 The Indonesian literary critic Jakob Sumardjo likewise notes money as the central issue of Allah jang Palsoe , writing that the play shows individuals doing anything to earn it — even sacrificing their values . He writes that the corrupting nature of money remains present in the best of times , and considers Kwee Tek Hoay 's message to have been too heavily based in morality rather than considerations of social and human factors . As a result , he writes , readers are brought to understand the lust for money as a " human illness " which must be overcome : they should follow the example of Tan Kioe Gie , not Tan Kioe Lie . John Kwee of the University of Auckland , citing Gie 's departure from Kamadjoean , suggests that this was a challenge directed at the Chinese Malay press , then becoming increasingly commercial . 
 Allah jang Palsoe also contains themes unrelated to money . The sinologist Thomas Rieger notes the presence of a Chinese national identity , pointing to Gie as a young man " excelling in all Confucianist values " , leaving his comfortable job rather than becoming an apologist for the Dutch colonial government to the detriment of his ethnic Chinese peers . Another sinologist , Myra Sidharta , looks at Kwee Tek Hoay 's view of women . She writes that his depiction of an ideal woman was not yet fully developed in Allah jang Palsoe , though she finds Houw Nio to be a depiction of how a woman should not act : selfish and addicted to gambling . 
 In a preface to his 1926 drama Korbannja Kong @-@ Ek ( The Victim of Kong @-@ Ek ) , Kwee Tek Hoay wrote that he had drawn inspiration from the realist Norwegian playwright Henrik Ibsen in that work , having read and reread the author 's plays . Damono finds signs of Ibsen 's influence already present in Allah jang Palsoe . He compares the stage directions in Allah jang Palsoe to those in Ibsen 's Hedda Gabler and finds them to be similar in their level of detail . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The script for Allah jang Palsoe was released by the Batavia @-@ based publisher <unk> Koen Bie in mid @-@ 1919 . This edition included a foreword from the author , four illustrations of recommended stage decor , a number of performance guidelines , and a brief outline of the state of the theatre among the ethnic Chinese . Kwee Tek Hoay paid for this printing , a run of 1 @,@ 000 copies , out of his own pocket and saw large financial losses . The stage play was republished in 2006 , using the Perfected Spelling System , as part of the first volume of the Lontar Foundation 's anthology of Indonesian stage dramas . 
 Allah jang Palsoe was well received and broadly adopted . Troupes were allowed to perform the play as a charity opera , though proceeds were to go to the Tiong Hoa Hwe Koan branch in Bogor . One performance is recorded as garnering 10 @,@ 000 gulden . According to an advertisement , by 1930 the play had been performed " tens of times " and was popular with ethnic Chinese theatre troupes . 
 Kwee Tek Hoay received numerous letters from fans of Allah jang Palsoe , spurring him to continue writing . Considering the play too difficult for native troupes to stage , when one such troupe , the Union Dalia Opera , requested permission to perform it , Kwee Tek Hoay instead wrote a new story for them . This later became his best @-@ selling novel Boenga Roos dari Tjikembang ( The Rose of Cikembang ) . Another of Kwee Tek Hoay 's stage dramas , Korbannja Kong @-@ Ek , was inspired by a friend , who wrote him a letter asking for another comforting and educational play after reading Allah jang Palsoe . 
 In 1926 Kwee Tek Hoay wrote that , after Allah jang Palsoe , the quality of stage performances in the Indies had increased noticeably . Nio notes that the quantity of stage plays by ethnic Chinese authors likewise increased . Though not many were ultimately published , the body of work pioneered by Allah jang Palsoe included plays by Kwee Tek Hoay ( Korbannja Kong @-@ Ek , Mait <unk> , <unk> Hari <unk> ) , Lauw Giok Lan ( Pendidikan jang <unk> ) , Tio Ie Soei ( Jan Tio ) , and Tjoa Tjien Mo ( Beng Lee Koen , Hsi Shih ) . 
 Sumardjo writes that , though Allah jang Palsoe was published seven years before the Rustam Effendi 's <unk> ( generally considered the first canonic Indonesian stage drama ) , Kwee Tek Hoay 's writing shows all the hallmarks of a literary work . Though the drama is not considered part of the Indonesian literary canon , performances have continued into the 21st century . In May 2003 , the Jakarta @-@ based <unk> put on an abridged performance directed by E. <unk> . Another Jakarta @-@ based troupe , Teater <unk> , has included it in their repertoire . 
 = Hurricane Carmen = 
 Hurricane Carmen was the most intense tropical cyclone of the 1974 Atlantic hurricane season . A destructive and widespread storm , Carmen originated as a tropical disturbance that emerged from Africa toward the end of August . The disturbance traveled westward , spawning a tropical depression east of the Lesser Antilles on August 29 . The storm moved through the Caribbean Sea , and in an environment conducive to intensification , it quickly strengthened to its initial peak intensity as a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . Carmen moved ashore on the Yucatán Peninsula , where , despite striking a sparsely populated region , it caused significant crop damage and killed several people . Before the storm 's arrival , officials had set up several evacuation centers , and many residents had moved to higher ground . 
 Upon entering the Gulf of Mexico , Carmen turned northward and re @-@ intensified as it approached the United States . Initially threatening the major city of New Orleans , it veered westward and made landfall on the marshland of southern Louisiana , eventually dissipating over eastern Texas on September 10 . Tropical cyclone watches and warnings had been issued for the storm , and approximately 100 @,@ 000 residents left their homes and sought shelter . Damage was lighter than first feared , but the sugar industry suffered substantial losses . Throughout its course , the hurricane killed 8 people and caused $ 162 million in damage . Due to the severity of the storm , the name Carmen was retired from the list of Atlantic tropical cyclone names . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Hurricane Carmen can be traced to a weather disturbance over Africa during the middle of August 1974 . The disturbance moved slowly westward with little convective activity initially , although upon entering the Atlantic Ocean , it spawned a tropical wave within the Intertropical Convergence Zone . The wave had intensified and broadened by August 25 , and it eventually split into two components , the northernmost of which consolidated into an organized storm system . Moving westward , the system developed into a tropical depression on August 29 , more than 200 mi ( 320 km ) east of Guadeloupe . Due to favorable outflow from an anticyclone nearby , the depression gradually strengthened as it moved through the Lesser Antilles . It attained tropical storm status on August 30 , south of Puerto Rico , and was named Carmen by the National Hurricane Center . At first , the storm 's proximity to Hispaniola prevented further strengthening , but by August 31 , it had managed to intensify into a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . As Carmen passed south of Jamaica , an eye feature briefly appeared . 
 On September 1 , the hurricane began to rapidly deepen over warm waters of the Caribbean Sea ; by 1800 Coordinated Universal Time ( UTC ) , it had strengthened to Category 4 intensity . Continuing westward , the storm passed north of Swan Island later that day . Early on September 2 , a double eyewall appeared on satellite imagery . Carmen 's forward movement gradually slowed as the storm took a west by north direction , and it reached its initial peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) , accompanied by a central barometric pressure of 928 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 4 inHg ) . Atmospheric steering currents became increasingly weaker , and Carmen slowed to a drift . Later on September 2 , the hurricane made landfall on the Yucatán Peninsula ; its northern jog spared Belize City from a direct hit . The storm 's center passed a few miles north of Chetumal , Quintana Roo . 
 The cyclone drifted inland , deteriorating to a tropical storm on September 3 . About a day later , Carmen emerged into the Gulf of Mexico , where it nearly stalled . Turning northward , the storm regained hurricane strength on September 5 . Carmen continued to strengthen and accelerated northward towards the United States Gulf Coast , reaching a forward speed of 12 mph ( 19 km / h ) ; at 0000 UTC on September 7 , it once again became a Category 3 major hurricane . The storm reached its second peak intensity while located south of Louisiana ; although the wind speeds were identical to that of its initial peak , the barometric pressure was slightly higher . Carmen weakened and veered westward before landfall , ultimately striking south @-@ central Louisiana . After moving ashore , the hurricane quickly lost strength and late on September 9 degenerated into a tropical depression . The depression moved westward and soon dissipated over eastern Texas . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Initial reactions to the approaching hurricane in the Yucatán Peninsula were regarded as calm by the United States media . Mexican officials declared an emergency alert by September 2 , although they did not advise any evacuations . Meteorologists in the United States urged those living near the coast to move inland immediately . Fearing significant loss of life and property , the Red Cross began preparations for the approaching hurricane in Belize . The following day , the Mexican Army rushed to set up emergency operation centers and shelters in five cities . Mobile communication units and relief teams were prepared for deployment following the storm 's passage . Many of the nearly 35 @,@ 000 residents in and around the city of Chetumal evacuated to higher ground . 
 Although it initially threatened the United States city of New Orleans , the hurricane turned west prior to making landfall and spared the area from severe damage . Contrary to its actual path , forecasters predicted the hurricane to execute an eastward swerve toward Florida . Had the cyclone instead continued northward and traveled over Lake Pontchartrain , low @-@ lying areas could have suffered " catastrophic " flooding . Over 100 @,@ 000 residents of the Gulf Coast , mostly in Louisiana and Mississippi , evacuated in advance of the hurricane , causing heavy congestion on highways . About 60 @,@ 000 people sought shelter in facilities across the New Orleans region , according to Red Cross officials . 
 Hurricane warnings were issued along the coast , while Coast Guard personnel went door @-@ to @-@ door on Grand Isle urging residents to leave the area . From there through the coast of southwestern Florida , small craft were advised to remain near shore due to rough seas . Offshore , workers were removed from oil rigs . Many Mississippi citizens , having experienced the destruction of Hurricane Camille just five years earlier , quickly left their coastal homes . 
 = = Impact = = 
 As a tropical depression and storm , Carmen produced moderate rainfall across Puerto Rico and the northern Lesser Antilles , peaking at 5 @.@ 91 in ( 150 mm ) in <unk> Alto , Puerto Rico . The storm spawned a tornado on Puerto Rico and triggered flash flooding , which collectively left over $ 2 million in damage . Winds approaching gale force affected several islands . Heavy rain fell on Hispaniola as the storm progressed westward , and on Jamaica , the storm caused three drownings . High winds and heavy rainfall were reported there and in Cuba . The hurricane damaged local reefs on the north shore of Jamaica during its passage . 
 Following the storm , the name Carmen was retired from the annually rotating list of hurricane names . However , due to a change in the naming scheme in 1979 , it was not replaced by any particular name . 
 = = = Yucatán Peninsula = = = 
 Although Carmen made landfall as a powerful Category 4 hurricane , it caused significantly less damage than anticipated because it struck a sparsely populated region . However , torrential rainfall from the storm inundated farmland across the region , ruining rice crops . The fishing industry also sustained major losses . Communication with the hardest hit regions was lost following Carmen 's passage ; however , early reports stated that at least five people were injured . Several days later , officials in Mexico confirmed that three people had been killed by the storm . The city of Chetumal was described as a " disaster " , and hundreds of people were left homeless . More than 5 @,@ 000 people in the city lost their belongings as a result of the storm . Officials in the area estimated that damage in Chetumal alone reached $ 8 million ( 1974 USD ) . Throughout the Yucatán Peninsula , Hurricane Carmen claimed four lives and wrought $ 10 million ( 1974 USD ) in damage . 
 Following Carmen 's passage , officials feared the worst for an area of 1 @,@ 000 mi2 ( 2 @,@ 590 km2 ) where communication was lost in Belize . A reconnaissance task force was sent out from Belize City the day after Carmen made landfall to assist any residents stranded by the storm . One person was killed off the coast of Belize after being washed off his boat by large swells produced by Carmen . Three other fishermen were listed as missing following similar incidents . Thousands of people moved from coastal areas inland to escape the storm . Crop damage in the country was reportedly severe . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 Carmen dropped moderate rainfall along its path , though the heaviest rainfall occurred well to the east of the storm 's center , in southern Alabama and the northern Florida Panhandle . Precipitation peaked at over 13 in ( 330 mm ) in <unk> , Alabama . Winds gusted up to 86 mph ( 138 km / h ) , and along the coast tides ran as high as 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) above normal . Over northwestern Louisiana , winds ranged from 40 to 45 mph ( 64 to 72 km / h ) and brought down several trees . In New Orleans , despite wind gusts to 72 mph ( 116 km / h ) , minimal damage was reported . The hurricane 's effects in Baton Rouge were confined to strewn debris and a few downed trees . Because Carmen moved ashore over uninhabited marshland , it caused far less damage than initially feared . Nonetheless , tidal flooding from the Gulf of Mexico and coastal bodies of water was severe . Freshwater flooding was less extreme . In total , the storm inundated 2 @,@ 380 @,@ 500 acres ( 963 @,@ 400 ha ) of land in Louisiana , including 742 @,@ 300 acres ( 300 @,@ 400 ha ) in Terrebonne Parish and 590 @,@ 000 acres ( 240 @,@ 000 ha ) in Plaquemines Parish . 
 The storm 's greatest impact was the loss of sugar cane crops in Louisiana . An estimated 308 @,@ 000 acres ( 125 @,@ 000 ha ) of sugar cane in 16 parishes was damaged , and about 20 percent was completely ruined . After a tour of the affected area , then @-@ Governor Edwin Edwards estimated crop damage alone at $ 400 million , although a more recent estimate placed total agricultural damage from the hurricane at $ 74 million . The sugar cane crop was crucial to the country 's sugar supplies , rendering the losses " doubly bad " , and sugar futures rose drastically after the storm . Other crops damaged by Carmen included soybeans , rice , and cotton . 
 Tidal action along the coast affected the balance of salinity in coastal marshes and water bodies . The sudden intrusion of saltwater stressed delicate plants . Fish , shrimp and oysters also suffered the ecological effects of Hurricane Carmen . Flooding on land caused some wildlife to drown . Several parks in Louisiana sustained damage , either from flooding or high winds ; losses to Grand Island State Park in particular totaled $ 114 @,@ 600 . The oil and gas industry was also affected , and its estimated $ 24 @.@ 7 million in losses resulted mainly from damage to equipment and offshore facilities . The storm diminished oil production by 1 @.@ 4 million barrels when it shut down operations for 24 to 48 hours at various locations . Over 60 @,@ 000 electric cooperative customers lost power . 
 The hurricane caused two fatalities in Louisiana : a utility repairman who was electrocuted while working on power lines damaged by strong winds , and a motorist who was involved in a storm @-@ related traffic accident . Total monetary losses in the state was estimated $ 150 million . Overall , the hurricane spawned four confirmed tornadoes . One touched down near Brandon , Mississippi , destroying a barn and causing other damage . Another struck Kaplan , Louisiana , injuring one person . The storm 's effects in Mississippi were described as minimal and were mainly confined to minor traffic accidents during bouts of heavy precipitation . Light to moderate rainfall from the storm extended as far east as Florida and Georgia and as far west as Oklahoma and Texas . 
 = Michael Francis Egan = 
 Michael Francis Egan , <unk> ( September 29 , 1761 – July 22 , 1814 ) was an Irish , later American prelate of the Roman Catholic Church . Born in Ireland in 1761 , he joined the Franciscan Order at a young age . He served as a priest in Rome , Ireland , and Pennsylvania and became known as a gifted preacher . In 1808 , Egan was appointed the first Bishop of Philadelphia , holding that position until his death in 1814 . Egan 's tenure as bishop saw the construction of new churches and the expansion of the Catholic Church membership in his diocese , but much of his time was consumed by disputes with the lay trustees of his pro @-@ cathedral , St. Mary 's Church in Philadelphia . He died in Philadelphia , probably of tuberculosis , in 1814 . 
 = = Early life and priesthood = = 
 Michael Francis Egan was born in Ireland on September 29 , 1761 . The exact location of his birth is uncertain . Early biographers believed Egan was possibly born in Galway , though more recent scholarship suggests it was actually Limerick . He joined the Order of Friars Minor ( commonly known as the Franciscans ) and studied at the Old University of Leuven and Charles University in Prague . Egan received minor orders , <unk> , and diaconate at Mechelen , in modern @-@ day Belgium . He was ordained a priest , probably in Prague , in 1785 or 1786 . While studying on the continent , Egan became fluent in German . 
 Egan advanced rapidly to positions of responsibility in the Franciscan order . He was appointed custos ( " guardian " ) of the province of Munster in Ireland in March 1787 . Later that year , he was also appointed custos of the Pontifical College at Sant ’ Isidoro a Capo le Case , the home of Irish Franciscans in Rome . Egan remained there until 1790 , when he returned to his native Ireland and was appointed custos of Ennis . He remained in Ireland until 1787 or 1788 , when he may have made a visit to the United States . After several more years as a missionary in Ireland , Egan came ( or returned ) to the United States in 1802 . 
 = = Priest in Pennsylvania = = 
 Accepting an invitation from the Catholics near Lancaster , Pennsylvania , Egan arrived in the United States in January 1802 to serve as assistant pastor to Louis de Barth at Conewago Chapel in Adams County . When the state legislature sat in Lancaster that year , word of Egan 's preaching abilities traveled back to Philadelphia , and soon the parishioners of that city 's St. Mary 's Church petitioned Bishop John Carroll of Baltimore to send Egan to them . ( At that time , the Bishop of Baltimore had jurisdiction over the entire Catholic Church in the United States . ) 
 The following year , 1803 , Egan became one of the pastors of St. Mary 's Church at Philadelphia . The move coincided with a yellow fever outbreak in Philadelphia . Though less virulent than Philadelphia 's famous 1793 outbreak of the disease , there were nonetheless many deaths , and Egan presided over many funerals that year — St Mary 's had 77 interments between June and November 1803 . In 1804 , Egan received permission to establish a province of Franciscans in the United States for the first time , independent of the Irish Franciscans who were then supervising the American mission . Two years later , a parishioner willed Egan some land along the Yellow Creek in Indiana County , for the establishment of a Franciscan church . Because of the Order 's vows of poverty , Egan asked Carroll to hold the land in his name . Egan 's dream was never realized , as he was unable to attract Franciscans from Europe to establish the planned church . 
 Egan and the trustees of St. Mary 's established a singing school in 1804 , with the goal of improving the quality of the choir there . The following year was consumed by another yellow fever outbreak , and Egan joined John Rossiter , the pastor of another of Philadelphia 's four Catholic churches , St. Joseph 's , in ministering to the sick . In 1806 , they worked with the parishioners of a third church , Holy Trinity , to found an orphanage , as the problem of orphaned children had been made worse by the yellow fever deaths . 
 = = Bishop of Philadelphia = = 
 = = = Ordination = = = 
 The Catholic population in the United States was growing , and Bishop Carroll had for some time wished for his vast diocese to be divided into more manageable territories . On April 8 , 1808 , Pope Pius VII granted Carroll 's request , erecting four new sees in the United States and elevating Baltimore to an archdiocese . Among the new sees was the Diocese of Philadelphia , which included the states of Pennsylvania and Delaware as well as the western and southern parts of New Jersey . Even before the diocese was created , Carroll had determined to recommend Egan for the post , writing to Rome that Egan " was truly pious , learned , religious , remarkable for his great humility , but deficient , perhaps , in firmness and without great experience in the direction of affairs " . 
 Because of disruptions caused by the Napoleonic Wars , the papal bull nominating Egan did not reach the United States until 1810 . When it arrived , Egan traveled to St. Peter 's Pro @-@ cathedral in Baltimore , where he was ordained bishop by Archbishop Carroll , assisted by Benedict Joseph <unk> and Jean @-@ Louis de <unk> , who had been appointed to bishoprics but had not yet been consecrated . Egan chose St. Mary 's to serve as his pro @-@ cathedral in Philadelphia . Even before Egan 's installation , Philadelphia Catholics began to raise funds to expand the church in accordance with its new prominence in the diocese . After their ordinations , the new bishops planned a council of the American church leadership for the near future ; in fact , they did not meet until 1829 , long after Egan 's death . 
 = = = <unk> dispute = = = 
 Egan 's elevation to the episcopate worsened an existing conflict in the American church : the dispute over <unk> . In Europe , the Church owned property and directly controlled its parishes through the clergy . In the United States , however , early Catholic churches were typically founded by laymen who purchased the property , erected the church buildings . The laypeople accordingly demanded some control over the administration of the parish , even after the arrival of clergy from Europe who , like Egan , held the traditional view of parish organization . The dispute also had nationalist elements to it , as the heavily German parish of Holy Trinity resented the imposition of an Irish bishop instead of one of their own . When Holy Trinity 's pastor left for a new assignment in Maryland in 1811 , the trustees there were perturbed at Egan 's temporary appointment of an Irish priest , Patrick Kenny , to lead the parish , until a German priest could be found ( a German priest , Francis <unk> , was assigned the following year ) . 
 Egan 's own research into the issue showed that the trustees had conveyed St. Mary 's Church to the previous pastor , Father Robert Harding , and then to his heirs , but the trustees did not consider that property transfer to have extinguished their role in the church 's leadership . By 1811 , Egan 's worsening health caused him to accept the assistance of two priests at St. Mary 's , James Harold and his nephew , William Vincent Harold . Egan and the trustees became further embroiled in a dispute about clerical salaries , a situation possibly made worse by the decline in shipping income in the port city caused by the outbreak of the War of 1812 . Egan also came to believe the <unk> were making the situation worse by taking pro @-@ clergy positions that were more extreme than Egan 's own and by the younger Harold 's scheming to be named Egan 's coadjutor bishop . He appealed to the trustees for compromise , and offered to bring his cousin ( also a priest ) over from Ireland to replace the elder Harold . By 1813 , Egan and the trustees had reconciled and together resolved to remove the <unk> , who agreed to resign later that year and relocate to England . 
 = = = Death and burial = = = 
 Although the main complaints between bishop and trustees were resolved , some salary disputes lingered into 1813 . The conditions at St. Mary 's worsened in 1814 with the election of new trustees who were more in conflict with Egan than the previous ones . Elsewhere in the diocese , Egan was more successful . In about 1811 , he made his most extensive visitation of his diocese , travelling as far west as Pittsburgh after stopping in Lancaster and Conewago . He continued to raise funds for the Catholic orphanage and opened a new parish , Sacred Heart , in Trenton , New Jersey , in 1813 , bringing the total number of churches in the diocese to sixteen . 
 Egan 's health continued to decline , and he died on July 22 , 1814 . While 19th @-@ century chroniclers suggest that it " may be said in all truth that Bishop Egan died of a broken heart " , modern biographers believe his health troubles more closely resembled tuberculosis . Egan was buried in St. Mary 's churchyard . In 1869 , after the construction of the Cathedral Basilica of Saints Peter and Paul on Logan Square , his remains were removed there and reburied in a crypt along with those of his successor , Bishop Henry Conwell . 
 = New York State Route 309 = 
 New York State Route 309 ( NY 309 ) is a state highway located entirely in Fulton County , New York , in the United States . The southern terminus of the route is at an intersection with NY 29A in Gloversville . The northern terminus of the route is at a junction with Lily Lake Road in the hamlet of Bleecker , where the highway continues north and west as County Route 112 ( CR 112 ) to London Bridge Road ( CR 111 , near NY 10 and NY 29A ) at West Caroga Lake in the town of Caroga . Part of NY 309 and all of CR 112 is located within Adirondack Park . NY 309 was assigned to its current alignment as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = NY 309 = = = 
 NY 309 begins at an intersection with NY 29A in downtown Gloversville . The route heads northward as Bleecker Street , passing large commercial buildings as it heads north through the city . At Spring Street — two blocks north of NY 29A — the surroundings become more residential as the commercial structures are replaced by homes . The route continues on , crossing Cayadutta Creek between 8th Avenue and McLaren Street before leaving Bleecker Street at 11th Avenue to follow an unnamed western extension of 11th Avenue . At this point , the amount of development along NY 309 drops substantially as it parallels Cayadutta Creek and heads northwestward out of the city limits . At this point , maintenance of the route shifts from the city of Gloversville to the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) . 
 Now in the town of Johnstown , the route winds its way northwestward as it follows Cayadutta Creek through an area of hilly terrain south of Adirondack Park . Development along the route largely ends at the intersection with West State Street ; however , a pair of isolated homes are situated on NY 309 about 0 @.@ 25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) to the northeast ahead of an intersection with CR 122 , an east – west highway that serves the Fulton County Infirmary a short distance to the west . The route continues to wind its way through the mountains to the hamlet of West Bush , where Cayadutta Creek ends amidst a small cluster of houses . The route turns north at this point , passing a handful of homes before leaving the community upon passing through a narrow pass between two hills . 
 North of West Bush , the route rapidly ascends in elevation as it climbs up the side of a large mountain . Along this stretch , the route veers to the northwest and southeast as it heads through an area of wilderness . NY 309 crosses the Blue Line into Adirondack Park near the mountain 's summit . Upon reaching the top of the mountain , the highway straightens out and heads northward for roughly 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) across the hill 's plateau . Upon reaching the other side , the road gradually descends in elevation as it passes by Mountain Lake and enters the town of Bleecker . The highway continues its northeastward descent into the small lakeside hamlet of Bleecker , where NY 309 ends at an intersection with Lily Lake Road . At this point , the roadway becomes CR 112 . 
 = = = CR 112 = = = 
 CR 112 heads northwest from Bleecker , passing Peck Lake to the northeast and Lily Lake to the southwest as it winds its way around several small hills . After 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) , the route curves to the north and serves Bleecker Center , an isolated hamlet centered at the junction of CR 112 and CR 145 . The former continues northwest across relatively low @-@ lying areas to Peters Corners , an equally isolated hamlet located at the intersection of CR 112 and CR 125 . CR 112 turns southwest here and begins to climb up the side of a small mountain overlooking Peters Corners . 
 As the route heads west , it runs along the base of Hogback , a large mountain with two peaks that reach over 2 @,@ 400 feet ( 730 m ) in elevation . Past Hogback , CR 112 enters the town of Caroga , where the route heads west across nearly flat terrain to the hamlet of Caroga Lake . CR 112 bypasses most of the hamlet to the north ; as a result , it passes through only lightly developed areas as the route nears its end . CR 112 intersects NY 10 and NY 29A just 70 feet ( 21 m ) from where it officially ends at an intersection with CR 111 , which itself begins at NY 10 and NY 29A just 80 yards ( 73 m ) to the south . 
 = = History = = 
 Part of CR 112 was originally part of an old Indian trail that went from Johnstown to Hamilton County via Bleecker . At some point , part of the trail in the vicinity of Bleecker was converted into a plank road that served several locations and churches north of Bleecker . Meanwhile , NY 309 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York to a connector highway between the city of Gloversville and the hamlet of Bleecker . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Fulton County . 
 = Irreplaceable = 
 " Irreplaceable " is a song recorded by American singer Beyoncé for her second studio album , B 'Day ( 2006 ) . The song was written by Shaffer " Ne @-@ Yo " Smith , Tor Erik Hermansen , Mikkel , S. Eriksen , Espen Lind , Amund <unk> , Beyoncé and produced by Stargate and Beyoncé . " Irreplaceable " was originally a country record ; it was re @-@ arranged as a mid @-@ tempo ballad with pop and R & B influences by modifying the vocal arrangements and instrumentation . During the production and recording sessions , Beyoncé and Ne @-@ Yo wanted to create a record which people of either gender could relate to . The song 's lyrics are about the breakdown of a relationship with an unfaithful man and the song contains a message about female empowerment . 
 Following the moderate chart performances of " Déjà Vu " and " Ring the Alarm " , " Irreplaceable " was released internationally on October 23 , 2006 as the album 's second single , and the third in the United States on December 5 , 2006 . The single was released through Columbia Records . " Irreplaceable " was well received by contemporary music critics , who cited its distinct production compared with most songs featured on the album , and complimented its hook , " To the left , to the left " . Pitchfork Media and Rolling Stone placed it on their lists of Best Songs of the 2000s . " Irreplaceable " won several awards , including Best R & B / Soul Single at the 2007 Soul Train Music Awards . It was nominated for the Record of the Year award at the 50th Grammy Awards . 
 The single was commercially successful worldwide . It became Beyoncé 's fourth number @-@ one in the U.S. , was B 'Day 's most successful release , and remained at the top of the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart for ten consecutive weeks . " Irreplaceable " was the best @-@ selling U.S. single of 2007 , the twenty @-@ fifth most successful song of the 2000s ( decade ) in the U.S. , and was certified double @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . It became Beyoncé 's second single to achieve 200 million audience impressions in 2006 . She is the second singer to achieve this feat in the U.S. , the first having been Mariah Carey in 2005 . " Irreplaceable " peaked at number one in Australia , at number four in the United Kingdom , and reached the top twenty in several European countries . " Irreplaceable " was 2007 's tenth best @-@ selling digital single with over 4 @.@ 6 million copies sold worldwide . 
 The single 's accompanying music video was directed by Anthony Mandler and served as the debut performance of Beyoncé 's all @-@ female band , Suga Mama . The video was included on the 2007 B 'Day Anthology Video Album , and a video edit was produced for " Irreemplazable " , the Spanish version of the song . It won the Video of the Year award at the 2007 Black Entertainment Television ( BET ) Awards , and was nominated for the MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year at the 2007 Awards . " Irreplaceable " has regularly featured in Beyoncé 's tours and live performances since 2006 . The American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) recognized the song as one of the most performed of 2007 at the ASCAP Pop Music Awards . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Irreplaceable " was written for Chrisette Michele . Production team Stargate and singer @-@ songwriter Ne @-@ Yo had written for Beyoncé 's second album B 'Day , but Tor Erik Hermansen of Stargate said that they might not have gone in the direction they did on the song . The tune did not suit Beyoncé 's voice , and Ne @-@ Yo wrote the lyrics from a male perspective , although it was not based upon his personal experiences . Ne @-@ Yo wrote the song in the country style , thinking of country singers Shania Twain and Faith Hill during the sessions . When Ne @-@ Yo heard them playing the song with a guitar , he thought it sounded like country music . But when the drums were incorporated into the music , it was brought to an R & B vibe , and Ne @-@ Yo considered making an R & B @-@ country western music song instead . 
 When the team worked with Ne @-@ Yo , they recorded the song with a male vocalist . However , they thought a female vocalist would be more suitable , and Ne @-@ Yo also thought that it was empowering for a woman to sing it . Eriksen of Stargate said it was an A & R person who suggested that the song would work better when sung by a woman . Two labels wanted the song . While Beyoncé worked on material for B 'Day , she was pleased with the demo of the " Irreplaceable " that was presented to her . However , " Irreplaceable " did not seem to fit on B 'Day , which was supposed to be " a hard @-@ hitting club album " . Swizz Beatz , who was working on the album , declared that Beyoncé would be crazy not to include the song on the record . Beyoncé asked for changes to the song , including the addition of drums , vocal arrangements , and singing in a higher register than the demo . Espen Lind and Amund <unk> , from the Norwegian production team Espionage , wrote the chord structure and the guitar part . In an interview with MTV , Ne @-@ Yo said , " Beyoncé had some stuff that she wanted to get off her chest " , while aiming to make a record that women could relate to , in keeping with the theme of the album . 
 The recording was engineered by Jim Caruana and mixed by Jason Goldstein at Sony Music Studios in New York City . Goldstein was hired to mix B 'Day . He said : " This song was really simple to mix . It was produced by Stargate and the sounds are really good and they all made sense , and there was lots of room for all the instruments . " Goldstein used a board equalizer for the drums ' treatment . For the acoustic guitars , he used the analogue flanger of a TC 1210 spatial expander " to sweeten the sound " and to give them " a little bit more spread " . Goldstein thought " Irreplaceable " sounded " a bit old @-@ school " ; an eighth note delay echo was placed on the song 's lead vocal at <unk> , using the Echo Farm plug @-@ in software . For the backing vocals , Goldstein used Echo Farm with a quarter note delay at <unk> and Sony 's Oxford Dynamics compressor / limiter in dual @-@ mono mode . 
 The compressor was placed in Classic setting , to emulate the LA @-@ 2A leveling amplifier , and the <unk> button used to add harmonics . Oxford Dynamics was used for the bass in a different setting . Goldstein passed the final mix through the Oxford EQ and <unk> plug @-@ ins . Pro Tools software was used to print the aux track into a <unk> / 24 @-@ bit CD and then into a 24 @-@ bit CD master . After the sessions for " Irreplaceable " ended , Hermansen said that " everyone felt they had captured something special and that Beyoncé had done the track justice " , but there were still concerns that urban radio might not play the song as it featured acoustic guitars and had more of a pop appeal . " But then it became the biggest urban record ... ever , " [ Hermansen ] said . 
 = = = Songwriting controversy = = = 
 A controversy arose over the writing credits on " Irreplaceable " . Ne @-@ Yo told MTV : " Apparently Beyoncé was at a show somewhere and right before the song came on she said , ' I wrote this for all my ladies ' and then the song came on ... The song is a co @-@ write . I wrote the lyrics , I wrote all the lyrics . Beyoncé helped me with the melodies and the harmonies and the vocal arrangement and that makes it a co @-@ write . Meaning my contribution and her contribution made that song what it is . " In 2011 , Ne @-@ Yo said that he wrote the song for himself , but thought that it would be better suited for Beyoncé , and later regretted giving the song to her . Some of Beyoncé 's fans read Ne @-@ Yo 's remark as disrespectful towards her . However , he clarified his comment later through Twitter , writing , " I said I originally wrote the song for me . ... Once I realized how the song comes across if sung by a guy , that 's when I decided to give it away . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Irreplaceable " is a mid @-@ tempo ballad with pop and R & B influences . Written in the key of B ♭ major , the beat is set in common time and moves at a moderate 88 beats per minute . Beyoncé 's vocal range in the song spans nearly two and a half octaves , from B ♭ 2 to E ♭ 5 . While most of the songs on the album are aggressive and uptempo , her voice on " Irreplaceable " is toned down . " Irreplaceable " uses a gently strummed acoustic guitar , following the B ♭ 5 – F5 – Cm7 – E ♭ 6 / 9 chord series . Hermansen and Eriksen combined the classic chord progression on an acoustic guitar , a modern @-@ sounding 808 drum beat and cellos . Al Shipley of Stylus Magazine noted that the guitar strum can be found in Rihanna 's 2007 single " Hate That I Love You " , a song co @-@ produced by Stargate and Ne @-@ Yo . Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone wrote that Chris Brown 's 2007 single " With You " , another Stargate @-@ produced song , also features the same element . He wrote , " ' With You ' is the <unk> , even if you can instantly tell that producer Stargate was just trying to roll out ' Irreplaceable ' one more time . " while Billboard magazine wrote that it " leans a bit too heavily " to the song . 
 Jim DeRogatis of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times wrote that " Irreplaceable " resembles ballads sung by Whitney Houston . Spence D. of IGN wrote that the song was inspired by Aretha Franklin 's work since " Irreplaceable " consists of several variations in gutturals and octave range . The lyrics of " Irreplaceable " concern the breakdown of a woman 's relationship with her boyfriend after she discovers his infidelity , and the song " sounds a lot like a statement of independence " . Sarah Rodman of The Boston Globe wrote , " With a heretofore unknown grasp of nuance , Beyonce combines heartache , bravado , and anger as she tells a cad he 's far from irreplaceable — and that , in fact , her new man will be arriving momentarily . " Hermansen said that " Irreplaceable " is a song that " people from all walks of life can enjoy " . Beyoncé said that the song is " a little honest " , and , " ... basically we can 't forget our power and our worth . And sometimes you 're so in love , you forget that . And sometimes you feel like you 're not being appreciated . And sometimes they forget that they can be replaced . " 
 The song 's lyrics are constructed in the verse @-@ pre @-@ chorus @-@ chorus form . It begins with guitar strumming , and Beyoncé sings the hook @-@ intro , " To the left , to the left : everything you own in a box to the left " . In bar seven , she sings the first verse , arguing with her boyfriend about the indifference of their relationship , and tells him to walk away . The pre @-@ chorus and chorus follow , " You must not know ' bout me ... I can have another you by tomorrow / I could have another you in a minute ... Don 't you ever for a second get to thinking / You 're irreplaceable " . In the second verse , Beyoncé recollects the moment she discovered her boyfriend 's infidelity . The same pattern leads to the second chorus . Towards the end , Beyoncé sings the bridge , where she tells her lover , " Replacing you is so easy " . The song closes with an ad @-@ libbed chorus . The Boston Globe noted that Beyoncé sings some parts of it in a higher register " that complements the lyrics ' wounded sensibility " . 
 = = Release = = 
 During the production of " Irreplaceable " , Hermansen thought that the track would not receive radio play because of the acoustic guitars , and deemed the song too pop @-@ oriented . Hermansen did not expect " Irreplaceable " to conform to any genre . Despite his prediction , the song became successful on urban charts . It was played in New York and on country radio stations . Shortly after the release of " Irreplaceable " , Beyoncé told MTV : " I love ' Irreplaceable ' . I think it 's important to have those songs . I 've had so many people come up to me in tears , saying , ' I experienced my first breakup . If it wasn 't for the song , I wouldn 't be strong enough to not call . I wouldn 't know how much I 'm worth . ' I 'm happy to be a part of that . " 
 " Irreplaceable " was released in the United Kingdom on October 23 , 2006 , as the second single there . In the US , " Irreplaceable " was the third single from B 'Day ' , and followed " Ring the Alarm " . The single was released on December 5 , 2006 , and featured the album and instrumental versions of the track . " Irreplaceable " was the second single released from B 'Day in international markets on Columbia Records . Two versions of the single were released in the UK on October 26 , 2006 . A CD single , which featured the album version of " Irreplaceable " , and the Freemasons club mix radio edit of " Ring the Alarm " , was released . An enhanced CD , which included the album version , three remixes of " Ring the Alarm " , and the " Ring the Alarm " music video , was also released . A 12 " single was released in the UK the following week . In Australia , a maxi single , which featured the album version and two remixes of " Déjà Vu " , was released on December 5 , 2006 . A Maurice Joshua remix edit of the song was released in Australia two weeks later . 
 Beyoncé recorded a Spanish version of the song , called " Irreemplazable " , with additional lyrical contributions from Rudy Pérez and was included on the second disc of the deluxe edition of B 'Day released on June 12 , 2007 . An Irreemplazable EP was released in the US on August 28 , 2007 , and on September 10 , 2007 , in the UK . The EP includes " Irreemplazable " , the <unk> Remix of " Irreplaceable " , " Amor Gitano " , three versions of " Beautiful Liar " , the Timbaland remix of " Get Me Bodied " featuring Voltio , and " Oye " , the Spanish version of " Listen " . As a fundraiser for the 2011 earthquake in the Tōhoku region of Japan , a compilation album that included " Irreplaceable " , called Songs for Japan , was released on March 25 , 2011 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Irreplaceable " earned highly positive reviews from music critics for its guitar @-@ driven melody and its hook , " To the left , to the left " . Jody Rosen of Entertainment Weekly noted " Irreplaceable " to be " a lilting tune unlike anything Beyoncé has ever performed " . Sarah Rodman of The Boston Globe wrote that the song is " gentle but maddeningly hook @-@ y " . Spence Abbott of IGN wrote that " Irreplaceable " and " Resentment " go for " a much more traditional contemporary R & B vibe " than any of the previous tracks on B 'Day , making them stand out as if they were recorded separately from the rest of the album . 
 Roger Friedman of Fox News Channel wrote that " Irreplaceable " is a " clever ballad " and the most memorable track on B 'Day . He added that it has the most potential of catching on with fans quickly , and that it is the only song on the album that " you might actually want to sing along to " . Mike Joseph of PopMatters commented that " ' Irreplaceable ' tellingly , was co @-@ written by Ne @-@ Yo , who may not be the powerhouse vocalist Beyonce is , but has significantly stronger songwriting skills . It 's the best song on the album — perhaps Ms. Knowles should take a hint . " Tim Finney of Pitchfork Media , called " Irreplaceable " the best song on B 'Day and praised its overall production , writing : 
 Before , Beyoncé 's approach to heartbreak was always literal , her voice and her words declaiming her feelings with a studied earnestness that at times was difficult to believe , let alone connect with . ' Irreplaceable ' is the first song in which Beyoncé lies to herself , and the way her voice perfectly betrays that lie ( revealing a giveaway tremble in the stiff upper lip of the lyrics ) simultaneously renders it her most sophisticated and her most honest performance to date . 
 = = = Recognition and accolades = = = 
 Mark Edward Nero ranked it as the ninth best R & B song of 2006 , and wrote , " This song has modern @-@ day classic written all over it . " Staff members of Pitchfork Media ranked the song on their list of The Top 100 Tracks of 2006 at number 45 . Shaheem Reid , Jayson Rodriguez and Rahman Dukes of MTV News placed the song at number 3 on their year @-@ end list of 27 Essential R & B Songs of 2007 . 
 In 2009 , Ryan Schreiber ranked " Irreplaceable " at number 183 on his list of Top 500 Tracks of the 2000s ( decade ) . Barry Schwartz of Stylus Magazine wrote that " Irreplaceable " recaptured Beyoncé 's 2003 debut single " Crazy in Love " ' s near @-@ perfection , describing it as " gentle but defiant " , and further wrote , " Through some breezy strums and a sweet plaintive melody Beyonce delivers her most genuinely emotional vocal to date , equal parts vulnerable , upset , pissed off , vindictive , resigned , and apathetic . " Rolling Stone ranked the song at number 60 on its list of 100 Best Songs of the 2000s . 
 " Irreplaceable " won the award for Best R & B / Soul Single , Female , at the 2007 Soul Train Music Award , and the ' Favorite Song ' award at the 2007 Nickelodeon Kids ' Choice Awards . It was nominated for the Grammy Award for Record of the Year in the 2008 Grammy Awards , and Song of the Year at the VH1 Soul Vibe awards . " Irreplaceable " was recognized as one of the five most @-@ performed songs of 2007 by the ASCAP Pop Music Awards . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Irreplaceable " entered various charts worldwide , and became the most successful single released from B 'Day . The single debuted on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart on November 4 , 2006 , at number eighty @-@ seven . It climbed the charts rapidly because of its radio airplay , and it was Greatest Airplay Gainer certification for six consecutive weeks by early December 2006 . Three weeks after the release of " Irreplaceable " , B 'Day re @-@ entered the top ten on the US Billboard 200 chart . The single reached number one on December 16 , becoming Beyoncé 's fourth number one single as a solo artist , and her second in 2006 , following " Check on It " ( 2005 ) . The single spent ten consecutive weeks at number one and was replaced by Nelly Furtado 's " Say It Right " ( 2006 ) on February 24 , 2007 . The feat was achieved after Kanye West 's 2005 single , " Gold Digger " featuring Jamie Foxx , spent ten weeks at the top spot . " Irreplaceable " outperformed " Baby Boy " ' s nine @-@ weeks at number one . Beyoncé 's former group Destiny 's Child 's 2000 single " Independent Women Part I " remained at number one for eleven weeks late in 2000 and early in 2001 . " Irreplaceable " remained on the chart for thirty weeks , has sold over 3 @,@ 139 @,@ 000 paid digital downloads in the US as of October 2012 according to Nielsen SoundScan , and was certified double @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . It was additionally certified triple @-@ platinum , denoting sales of three million master ringtones . 
 According to Mediabase " Irreplaceable " passed the 200 million audience impressions mark on December 11 , 2006 . Another single of Beyoncé , " Check on It " previously passed this mark on January 31 , 2006 . Consequently , Beyoncé became the second singer to achieve this in the United States , the first having been Mariah Carey whose two singles , " We Belong Together " ( 2005 ) and " Shake It Off " ( 2005 ) , passed the same audience impressions mark in 2005 . " Irreplaceable " stayed at number one on the US Hot 100 Airplay for eleven consecutive weeks , and was the best @-@ performing US single of 2007 , topping the Billboard Top Hot 100 Hits . " Irreplaceable " installed Beyoncé at third place for the most number one singles by a female songwriter , overtaking Janet Jackson and Carole King and tying Diane Warren for nine number @-@ one singles . Beyoncé received three song @-@ writing credits in one year , the only woman to achieve this since King in 1971 and Carey in 1991 . In February 2010 , the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) listed " Irreplaceable " as the highest certified master ringtone of the 2000s decade by a female solo artist . By August 2011 , the single had sold over three million digital downloads in the United States . " Irreemplazable " charted equally well , peaking at number four on the Hot Latin Songs . The EP appeared on the Latin Pop Albums at number two , Top Latin Albums at number three , Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums at number forty @-@ one and on the Billboard 200 at number 105 . 
 " Irreplaceable " debuted at number eight on the Australian ARIA Singles Chart , and peaked at number one for three consecutive weeks , becoming Beyoncé 's first and only number one single in Australia . It was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipment of 70 @,@ 000 copies . " Irreplaceable " appeared twice on the ARIA year @-@ end charts , reaching number twenty @-@ three in 2006 , and number forty @-@ two in 2007 . " Irreplaceable " debuted at number three on November 6 , 2006 , on the New Zealand Singles Chart , the song 's highest entry on any chart . It peaked at number one , and remained on the chart for eighteen weeks . It was later certified Platinum by the RIANZ . " Irreplaceable " peaked within the top fifteen in several European singles charts . It peaked at number four on the UK Singles Chart , spending 12 weeks in the top 20 and 25 weeks on the chart . It was Beyoncé 's fifth longest @-@ charting single , and spent more weeks on the chart than her number @-@ one singles " Crazy in Love " and " Déjà Vu " but slightly less than her recent hits " If I Were a Boy " , " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " , " Halo " and " Sweet Dreams " . On the UK iTunes chart , " Irreplaceable " is currently Beyoncé 's most downloaded on I Am ... Sasha Fierce single and still ranks in the top 30 of R & B / Soul songs . Due to a performance of " Irreplaceable " at the 2011 Glastonbury Festival by Beyoncé on June 26 , 2011 , the song made a re @-@ entry in the top 40 of the UK Singles Chart , entering at number thirty @-@ three . " Irreplaceable " was 2007 's tenth best @-@ selling digital single with over 4 @.@ 6 million copies sold worldwide . 
 = = Music video = = 
 " Irreplaceable " was directed by Anthony Mandler , who co @-@ directed the video of " Get Me Bodied " . The video features the debut performance of Beyoncé 's all @-@ female band , Suga Mama , who also appeared in the " Green Light " music video . Her acting @-@ then @-@ ex @-@ boyfriend in the video is model Bobby Roache , who played police officer for the " Ring the Alarm " music video and warrior during Jay @-@ Z and Beyoncé 's live performance at the 2006 Fashion Rocks show . The video was included on the 2007 B 'Day Anthology Video Album , and a video edit was produced for " Irreemplazable " . Part of the video which shows Beyoncé dancing in silhouette in front of a glass door is inspired by a James Bond movie . Late in January 2008 , " Irreemplazable " premiered on the <unk> , a video countdown show on the bilingual channel MTV Tr3s . 
 The music video follows the storyline of the song 's lyrics . " She told me to pack up all my stuff , I 'm getting kicked out — the video starts off like that " , said Roache . It opens with Beyoncé filing her nails in silence , as her ex @-@ partner packs up his property , as Beyoncé orders him to leave . Mid @-@ way in the video , Beyoncé follows her then @-@ ex @-@ boyfriend outside the house and leans on a 2007 Jaguar XK . She appears to be pretentiously caressing him ; only for the audience to find out that she is repossessing things she bought for him . He leaves her and the car , about to ride off in a taxi . Between cuts , Beyoncé manages herself in front of a mirror ; putting on a lipstick , wearing huge curlers and a high @-@ waisted skirt . There are additional beats mixed to the arrangement for the video version that can be heard , when Beyoncé sings with her all @-@ female band , Suga Mama , towards the end . It ends with Beyoncé greeting her new boyfriend at the front door . 
 At the 2007 Black Entertainment Television ( BET ) Awards , Beyoncé won Video of the Year Award for " Irreplaceable " , an award for which " Beautiful Liar " was also nominated . It was nominated for Video of the Year during the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards , but it lost to Rihanna 's single , " Umbrella " ( 2007 ) . At the 2007 Soul Train Music Awards , the video was nominated for the Michael Jackson Award for Best R & B / Soul or Rap Music Video , but lost to rapper ( and husband ) Jay @-@ Z 's " Show Me What You Got " video . The video received two nominations for Best Female Artist and Video of the Year at the 2007 MTV Australia Video Music Awards . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Beyoncé performed " Irreplaceable " during various public appearances , including the 2006 American Music Awards , The Ellen DeGeneres Show , the Today Show . 
 The song was a part of Beyoncé 's set list for her tour The Beyoncé Experience and I Am ... World Tour . " Irreplaceable " was the closing song during her 2007 The Beyoncé Experience world tour . It was performed late in the set on earlier tour dates , but when Beyoncé embarked on the US leg , it was performed earlier in the show . Beyoncé performed " Irreplaceable " during her Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live revue . 
 Beyoncé has performed " Irreplaceable " without backup dancers or live instrumentation , or in another case , Beyoncé was accompanied by two drummers , two keyboardists , a percussionist , a horn section , three backup vocalists called the Mamas , and the lead guitarist , Bibi McGill . Footage of Beyoncé 's performance at the Staples Center , Los Angeles was included on The Beyoncé Experience Live ! DVD ( 2007 ) , and the deluxe edition of I Am ... World Tour ( 2010 ) . According to NME , " ' Irreplaceable ' [ at the Glastonbury Festival ] sparked a mass singalong , with the crowd taking the lead on the entire first verse . " Following the performance of " Irreplaceable " at the Glastonbury Festival , the song was digitally released in the UK and the US on June 27 , 2011 , as charity single to raise funds for Oxfam , WaterAid and Greenpeace . This version charted at number twenty @-@ six on the UK Singles Chart and seven on the UK Indie Chart for the week ending July 9 , 2011 . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 = = = Sleigh Bells version = = = 
 American band Sleigh Bells recorded an acoustic cover of the song during their Maida Vale sessions and released it Zane Lowe 's BBC Radio 1 show on March 6 , 2012 . A writer of Billboard magazine commented that their cover was " ethereal " . Ray Rahman of Entertainment Weekly described the cover as " really good ! ... Krauss also has a teen @-@ pop background thanks to her <unk> days , so it 's actually not that surprising that she can find her away around a Top 40 single so well . " However , Maura Johnston of The Village Voice gave a negative review for the cover , saying : " Krauss sighs her way through the song , turning her voice into a mew that sounds like she was trying to sing along with the radio while not being heard by her roommates or anyone else outside of a six @-@ inch radius ... Also , some of the guitar chords are a bit off .... it 's sorta disappointing . " 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from B 'Day liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Ludachristmas = 
 " Ludachristmas " is the ninth episode of the second season of the television series 30 Rock and was first broadcast on December 13 , 2007 , on the NBC network in the United States . The episode was written by Tami Sagher and directed by Don Scardino . Guest stars in this episode include Kevin Brown , Kay Cannon , Grizz Chapman , Anita Gillette , Selena Gonzalez , Buck Henry , John Lutz , John F Mooney , Maulik Pancholy , Andy Richter and Elaine Stritch . 
 In this episode , Liz Lemon 's ( Tina Fey ) family ( Anita Gillette , Buck Henry , and Andy Richter ) visit her for the holidays and Jack Donaghy 's ( Alec Baldwin ) mother , Colleen Donaghy ( Elaine Stritch ) , also visits him for the holidays . The cast and writers of TGS with Tracy Jordan , a fictional sketch comedy series , prepare to attend their annual Ludachristmas party . Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) is ordered by a court to wear an alcohol monitoring device . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jack is delighted when he thinks his mother , Colleen , is unable to visit him for the holidays due to her flight from Florida being grounded by Hurricane <unk> . Unexpectedly , Colleen arrives because she was able to travel by bus to Atlanta and get a flight from there . Also arriving at 30 Rockefeller Plaza is Liz 's family , including her brother Mitch who has " Trauma Induced Nivea Aphasia " which means that his memory is stuck on December 7 , 1985 , and he believes that he is still 17 years old , when he is actually 40 . Jack 's mother immediately dislikes the Lemons due to their constant optimism and happiness . Colleen sets out to show Jack that they 're just as screwed up as their relationship is . Jack , Colleen and the Lemons spend the day together and eventually end up going to dinner with each other . At the dinner , Colleen comments that it appears that Liz is the " favorite " child leading Mitch to reveal that his parents , Dick and Margaret , took him to see The Goonies in 1985 when they should have been watching Liz at her football game . Liz then gets into in argument with her parents , culminating in her accidentally revealing to Mitch that he is in fact 40 years old . The Lemons then spiral into a drunken fight , achieving Colleen 's plan . 
 Meanwhile , the cast and writers of TGS are preparing their annual Ludachristmas party in the writer 's room . Tracy is annoyed because he is unable to attend due to a recent order from a courtroom judge which requires him to wear an alcohol monitoring ankle bracelet . Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) is also annoyed because he believes that none of the staff know what the true meaning of Christmas is . He cancels Ludachristmas and makes the staff sit through a talk , led by himself and Reverend Gary ( John F Mooney ) , about the meaning of Christmas . This inspires the cast and writers to run outside of 30 Rock and tear down the big Christmas tree which is outside the building . Kenneth eventually stops their efforts and Tracy reveals that he has been drinking alcohol when he should not have been . 
 The episode ends with the TGS cast and crew celebrating Christmas with each other and while at the dinner with the Lemons who are still arguing Jack says to Colleen " Merry Christmas Mother " revealing that he 's happy to see the Lemons aren 't so perfect after all . 
 = = Production = = 
 The storyline in this episode , which features Tracy having to wear an ankle bracelet to monitor alcohol levels in his sweat due to a driving under the influence arrest , is based on events which actually happened to actor Tracy Morgan , who portrays Tracy Jordan . Morgan has twice been arrested for drunk driving : once in December 2005 and once in November 2006 . He was sentenced to 36 months probation , fined US $ 390 , and mandated to attend an alcohol education program at the 2005 arrest . As a result of the 2006 arrest , Morgan was fined US $ 1000 and had his drivers license suspended for six months . Morgan was also ordered to wear a Secure Continuous Remote Alcohol Monitoring ( <unk> ) , " an ankle bracelet worn to test for alcohol vapors that come out of the skin " . 
 NBC billed this episode on its press releases as " Episode 209 " . The episode had been unofficially titled " Ludachristmas " , until it was confirmed by the second season DVD . Similarly , the following episode also remains unnamed and is officially known as " Episode 210 " . 
 Kay Cannon , a writer for 30 Rock , appears in this episode as a Human Table at the Ludachristmas party . Cannon previously appeared as an unnamed wife character in " Fireworks " , an episode of the first season . Cannon co @-@ wrote " The Head and the Hair " , an episode of the first season , and " Somebody to Love " , an episode of the second season . Both episodes were co @-@ written with the series creator , Tina Fey . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode brought in an average 5 @.@ 6 million American viewers upon its original broadcast in the United States , achieving a 2 @.@ 8 / 7 in the key 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic . The 2 @.@ 8 refers to 2 @.@ 8 % of all people of ages 18 – 49 years old , and the 7 refers to 7 % of all people of ages 18 – 49 years old watching television at the time of the broadcast . It ranked second place in the 18 – 49 demographic and tied with CBS 's CSI : Crime Scene Investigation episode " Lying Down With Dogs " for first place among men aged 18 – 49 . 
 Matt Webb Mitovich of TV Guide wrote that " it 's hard to make a ' true meaning of Christmas ' story seem fresh . That 's why this week 's Kenneth / No <unk> bit was a bit lame , in my opinion " , although he did say " the A story [ featuring Jack and Liz 's respective families ] fared a bit better " . Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad thought that this episode was " a modern , irreverent look at [ Christmas ] " . Jeff Labrecque of Entertainment Weekly thought that Buck Henry and Andy Richter were both " destined to play " their roles . He also wrote that " [ Elaine ] Stritch wasn 't as brilliant as she 's been in previous appearances , but she 's always welcome , simply because her character riles Jack . " Robert Canning of IGN wrote that this episode " had all the trimmings for a holiday classic , though it fell just shy of that pantheon . " He added that " this may not have been the 30 Rock holiday classic people were hoping for , but it was a solid , funny episode nonetheless . " Canning rated this episode 8 out of 10 . 
 Elaine Stritch was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series for this episode . 
 = Aldimir = 
 Aldimir ( Bulgarian : <unk> ) or <unk> ( <unk> ) ( fl . 1280 – 1305 ) was a Bulgarian noble of the 13th – 14th century . A member of the Terter dynasty and a younger brother of Tsar George I Terter , Aldimir was an influential local ruler as the despot of Kran . Aldimir rose to that position under his brother George , though as Smilets assumed the throne he was forced into exile . At the turn of the 14th century , Aldimir returned to Bulgaria as an ally of the regent widowed consort Smiltsena . He did not oppose the accession of his nephew Theodore Svetoslav and even assisted him in ousting his contenders . However , he was promptly eliminated by Theodore Svetoslav when he betrayed him to ally with the Byzantines . 
 = = Under George I and Smiltsena = = 
 Just like his brother George , Aldimir was of Cuman origin . Bulgarian historian Plamen Pavlov is of the opinion that Aldimir and George 's ancestors had sought refuge in Bulgaria after 1241 , when they left the Kingdom of Hungary amidst sedition . The brothers must have originated from the Cuman royal dynasty <unk> , and the ruler Köten was probably their relative or even direct ancestor . Pavlov also interprets Aldimir 's name as originating from the Cuman @-@ language expression for " heated iron " . 
 Aldimir rose in importance with the accession of his older brother George ( r . 1280 – 1292 ) to the Bulgarian throne in 1280 . He must have been conferred the high noble title of despot during George 's reign , and American historian John Fine believes Aldimir was granted his appanage at that time . Pavlov , however , conjectures that Aldimir 's domain dates to 1298 , long after George 's reign . 
 Unlike the neighbouring principality of Smilets at Kopsis , Aldimir remained loyal to the Bulgarian government and ensured that his domain retained its ties to the capital Tarnovo . Fine describes Aldimir 's lands as spanning the region from modern Sliven in the east to Kazanlak or Karlovo in the west , just south of the Balkan Mountains . His capital was the fortress of Kran in the Rose Valley . 
 After George 's abdication in 1292 , Aldimir had to flee into exile . He may have followed his brother as a refugee in the Byzantine Empire , though he certainly settled in the Golden Horde not long thereafter . Perhaps with Tatar approval , Aldimir returned to Bulgaria in 1298 , after the reign of Smilets ( r . 1292 – 1298 ) was over and the empire was in the hands of the child Tsar Ivan II and his mother , the widow of Smilets tentatively known as Smiltsena . Aldimir pledged his loyalty to Smiltsena , who either granted him the domain south of the Balkan Mountains or restored him to his former appanage . To consolidate that union , Aldimir married Smiltsena 's daughter , the princess Maria , possibly in late 1298 . 
 With Aldimir 's appointment as despot of Kran , Smiltsena ensured that his lands were better protected from Smilets ' brothers Radoslav and Voysil who , as émigrés in Byzantium , held aspirations for the Bulgarian throne or at least their former domains . During Smiltsena 's regency , Aldimir was one of the most influential people in Bulgaria ; indeed , Byzantine statesman Theodore <unk> refers to the " Scythian [ i.e. Cuman ] <unk> " , as he calls Aldimir , as the queen 's right @-@ hand man . Aldimir 's leading position leaves little doubt that he was involved in the fruitless anti @-@ Byzantine negotiations between Bulgaria and Serbia in 1299 . Pavlov even goes as far as to suggest that the proposed anti @-@ Byzantine union was the brainchild of Aldimir . 
 = = Under Theodore Svetoslav = = 
 In 1299 , George 's son and Aldimir 's nephew Theodore Svetoslav ( r . 1300 – 1322 ) , the legitimate successor to the Bulgarian throne , invaded Bulgaria along with Tatar troops . The news of that invasion was enough to force Smiltsena and Ivan to flee to the despotate of Kran even before Theodore Svetoslav 's troops had reached the capital . Aldimir gave refuge to Smiltsena and Ivan , though he was clearly not opposed to his newly crowned nephew . In 1300 , Smilets ' brother sebastokrator Radoslav headed a Byzantine @-@ supported campaign against Aldimir en route to the capital . However , the attack had disastrous consequences to Radoslav . He was captured by Aldimir , blinded and forced back to Thessaloniki , while his Byzantine generals were sent as captives to Theodore Svetoslav . With this act , Aldimir pledged his allegiance to Theodore Svetoslav , who rewarded him with an extension to his appanage . The despotate of Kran was enlarged to the east to include the fortresses of Yambol and <unk> near today 's <unk> . 
 While Aldimir was nominally loyal to Theodore Svetoslav , the presence of Smiltsena and Ivan at his court would have been seen by the Bulgarian emperor as a threat . In addition , Aldimir perhaps harboured a desire to accede to the throne himself . After Theodore Svetoslav 's victory over Byzantium at <unk> in 1304 , the Byzantines approached Aldimir with a proposal for an anti @-@ Bulgarian alliance . Aldimir initially remained adamant and was hostile to the Byzantine forces which entered his domain in 1305 . However , by the end of that year Aldimir had switched sides to the Byzantines , as Theodore Svetoslav took back the fortresses that he had granted to Aldimir . Shortly thereafter , Theodore Svetoslav restored his direct power over Kran by reconquering and annexing the appanage . 
 Aldimir may have been murdered during this campaign , as no activity of his is mentioned in later sources . His widow Maria and his son Ivan Dragushin managed to escape to Serbia , where Maria 's sister , Theodora , was married to the prince Stephen Dečanski . Having become a Serbian subject , Ivan Dragushin was installed by his first cousin King Stephen Dušan as a local ruler in the region of Macedonia . Donor 's portraits of Maria and Ivan Dragushin exist in the <unk> Monastery near <unk> , where Ivan Dragushin was buried before 1340 . 
 = 2015 Critérium du Dauphiné = 
 The 2015 Critérium du Dauphiné was the 67th edition of the Critérium du Dauphiné cycling stage race . The eight @-@ stage race in France began in Ugine on 7 June and concluded in Modane Valfréjus on 14 June , and was sixteenth of the twenty @-@ eight races in the 2015 UCI World Tour season . The Dauphiné was viewed as a preview for July 's Tour de France and a number of the contenders for the general classification of the Tour participated in the race . 
 The first leader of the general classification was Team Sky 's Peter Kennaugh , who won the opening stage . He lost the race lead to BMC Racing Team rider Rohan Dennis , whose team won stage three 's team time trial . His teammate Tejay van Garderen then took over after the race 's first mountain stage , stage five . Vincenzo Nibali of the Astana team took the lead after the stage six , before Van Garderen regained it following stage . Chris Froome ( Team Sky ) , who was second to Van Garderen after the penultimate stage , claimed the race victory with his win on the final stage . Van Garderen finished second overall , ten seconds in arrears , with Lampre – Merida 's Rui Costa third , a further one minute and six seconds down . 
 In the race 's other classifications , Nacer Bouhanni ( Cofidis ) won the sprinter 's points classification . The mountains classification was won by MTN – Qhubeka 's Daniel Teklehaimanot , who achieved it by getting in the early breakaways and placing highly over categorised climbs . Simon Yates of Orica – GreenEDGE won the young rider classification as the best rider born after 1 January 1990 . The team classification was won by Movistar Team . 
 = = Teams = = 
 As the Critérium du Dauphiné was a UCI World Tour event , all seventeen UCI WorldTeams were invited automatically and obligated to send a squad . Four second @-@ tier UCI Professional Continental teams were given wildcard invitations , forming the race 's 21 @-@ team peloton . The number of riders allowed per squad was eight , therefore the start list contained a total of 168 riders . 
 The teams entering the race were : 
 = = Pre @-@ race favourites = = 
 Former winners of the general classification named in the start list were both the 2008 and 2009 edition 's Alejandro Valverde ( Movistar Team ) , 2013 's Chris Froome ( Team Sky ) and the 2014 's Andrew Talansky ( Cannondale – Garmin ) . The leading contenders for general classification were two of the four Tour de France favourites , Froome and Vincenzo Nibali ( Astana ) . Both winners of the previous two Tours , they were thought to have planned to use the Dauphiné 's likeness to Tour 's mountainous route as preparation . The riders considered outsiders included Talansky , Valverde , Joaquim Rodríguez ( Team Katusha ) , Tejay van Garderen ( BMC Racing Team ) , Rui Costa ( Lampre – Merida ) , Romain Bardet ( AG2R La Mondiale ) , Bauke Mollema ( Trek Factory Racing ) and 2014 's winner of the young rider classification , Wilco Kelderman ( LottoNL – Jumbo ) . 
 = = Route = = 
 On 2 April 2015 , the organiser of the race , Amaury Sport Organisation ( ASO ) , announced the route of 2015 Critérium du Dauphiné at a presentation in Lyon , France . The eight @-@ stage race in the Dauphiné region of France was held from 7 – 14 June , and was seen as a preview for the Alpine stages in the Tour de France , which took place the following month . The race opened with a 132 km ( 82 @.@ 0 mi ) hilly circuit stage in around Albertville . Stage two crossed the flat Dombes area west from Le Bourget @-@ du @-@ Lac to Villars @-@ les @-@ Dombes and covered a distance of 173 km ( 107 @.@ 5 mi ) . The third stage was a team time trial , the first since the 1980 edition . The 24 @.@ 5 km ( 15 @.@ 2 mi ) route from Roanne to Montagny was described by Stephen Farrand of Cyclingnews.com as rolling and could " seriously influence " the general classification . Stage four , the longest at 228 km ( 141 @.@ 7 mi ) , moved the race south to Sisteron and to the Alps . The fifth stage covered the same distance and course of stage seventeen in the Tour de France . It featured the Col d 'Allos mountain pass and ended with a summit finish at the Pra Loup ski resort . Stage six took the race north , with the 183 km ( 113 @.@ 7 mi ) route from Saint @-@ Bonnet @-@ en @-@ Champsaur to Villard @-@ de @-@ Lans including six climbs . The penultimate stage was another mountainous stage that featured the Col de la Croix Fry and Col des Aravis climbs before a final accent to Saint @-@ Gervais @-@ les @-@ Bains . The final stage took in the Lacets de Montvernier before moving through the Maurienne valley to the finish at Modane Valfréjus . 
 = = Stages = = 
 = = = Stage 1 = = = 
 7 June 2015 — Ugine to Albertville , 132 km ( 82 @.@ 0 mi ) 
 The race opened with its shortest race stage , at 132 km ( 82 @.@ 0 mi ) . The route left Ugine and passed the finishing city of Albertville , before a loop that featured the category 4 Côte d ’ <unk> @-@ Blay , 17 km ( 10 @.@ 6 mi ) in . On the return to Albertville the riders crossed the finish line for the first time for a 19 @.@ 5 km ( 12 @.@ 1 mi ) lap . In this lap were two climbs , the third @-@ category Côte du Villard ( 442 m ( 1 @,@ 450 ft ) ) and the fourth @-@ category Côte du <unk> , the highest of the stage at 551 m ( 1 @,@ 808 ft ) . As the race crossed the finish line for the second time , a shorter 15 @.@ 5 km ( 9 @.@ 6 mi ) circuit was undertaken five times , with primary difference the exclusion of the Côte du <unk> . 
 In the opening 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) , Gert <unk> of Lotto – Soudal was involved in a crash and was forced to abandon the race due to his injuries . After 11 km ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) , a breakaway was formed by Romain <unk> ( Team Europcar ) , Björn Thurau ( Bora – Argon 18 ) , Daniel Teklehaimanot ( MTN – Qhubeka ) and Maarten <unk> ( LottoNL – Jumbo ) . Their advantage over the peloton increased to over four minutes at the 33 km ( 20 @.@ 5 mi ) mark , which moved up to a maximum of around seven minutes twenty seconds . Teklehaimanot accrued enough mountains classification points to secure the polka dot jersey with two climbs of the Côte du Villard to go . 
 <unk> and <unk> were dropped from the quartet on the penultimate ascent of the Villard , with 28 km ( 17 @.@ 4 mi ) to go . Thurau attacked Teklehaimanot on the last passing of the Villard , which led to an attack by Daniel Oss ( BMC Racing Team ) from the chasing peloton . With 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) remaining , four more riders joined Oss and the group caught Thurau in the final 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) , with the six @-@ rider group holding a margin of twelve seconds . Peter Kennaugh of Team Sky attacked from the group with 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) and took the stage victory two seconds ahead of the bunch sprint . Kennaugh 's first place gave him a ten @-@ second time bonus in the general classification ; he also took the lead of the points classification and Sky topped the team classification . Tiesj Benoot of Lotto – Soudal became the first lead of the young rider classification . 
 = = = Stage 2 = = = 
 8 June 2015 — Le Bourget @-@ du @-@ Lac to Villars @-@ les @-@ Dombes , 173 km ( 107 @.@ 5 mi ) 
 Stage two 's 173 km ( 107 @.@ 5 mi ) course was the flattest of the race . The stage left the start at Le Bourget @-@ du @-@ Lac and within 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) crossed the second @-@ category Col du Chat . After five smaller climbs , 74 km ( 46 @.@ 0 mi ) in , the riders then came to the day 's highest climb at 1 @,@ 156 m ( 3 @,@ 793 ft ) , the first @-@ category Col de <unk> . The route then followed a 52 km ( 32 @.@ 3 mi ) descent that included three uncategorised climbs . The final 44 km ( 27 @.@ 3 mi ) to the finish in Villars @-@ les @-@ Dombes were flat . 
 The early breakaway was formed by three riders , Perrig Quéméneur ( Team Europcar ) , Arnaud Courteille ( FDJ ) and , for the second day running , Daniel Teklehaimanot . Teklehaimanot took the maximum points over the Col du Chat . The trio were under seven minutes ahead of the peloton at the foot of the Col de <unk> . Teklehaimanot again took the points at the top , where the lead had dropped to over a minute . 
 A crash in the peloton with 21 km ( 13 @.@ 0 mi ) remaining left a group of riders chasing to the back of the main group , including pre @-@ race favourite Joaquim Rodríguez . The breakaway was caught with 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) . In the final kilometre , the MTN – Qhubeka team controlled the front before leading out their sprinter , Edvald Boasson Hagen . His move was made too early and he was overtaken by three other riders , with Nacer Bouhanni ( Cofidis ) crossing the finish line first . Third @-@ placed Sacha Modolo ( Lampre – Merida ) took the lead of the points classification , with Bouhanni becoming the best young rider . 
 = = = Stage 3 = = = 
 9 June 2015 — Roanne to Montagny , 24 @.@ 5 km ( 15 @.@ 2 mi ) ( TTT ) 
 The route for the team time trial of stage three from Roanne to Montagny was 24 @.@ 5 km ( 15 @.@ 2 mi ) in length . At the 8 km ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) in mark , a small climb preceded a descent to the intermediate time check at 14 km ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) . A gradual incline took the stage to its finish . 
 FDJ were the first team to set a time , with 31 ' 31 " . They were soon displaced by the third team to start BMC Racing Team , the team time trial world champions , who set a time of 29 ' 58 " . Astana then came in with a four @-@ second deficit to BMC and placed second . Movistar Team were next recording a time of 30 ' 16 " , which put them third . Etixx – Quick @-@ Step 's time of 30 ' 16 " placed them fourth , with fifth taken by Orica – GreenEDGE , a further five seconds in arrears . 
 Team Sky , who placed sixth , lost their lead of the team classification to stage winners BMC . Although BMC 's highest placed rider in the general classification was Manuel Quinziato , he was not one of the five riders required to finish ; the highest of the five was Rohan Dennis , who became the new leader in both the general and young rider classifications . Second placed overall Tejay van Garderen , who was BMC 's general classification leader and a pre @-@ race favourite praised his team 's effort and was confident about his chances in the race , saying " I feel good . This was the first big test of the Dauphiné , and going into the mountains I feel ready to put up a good challenge . " Nacer Bouhanni moved into the lead of the points classification . 
 = = = Stage 4 = = = 
 10 June 2015 — <unk> to Sisteron , 228 km ( 141 @.@ 7 mi ) 
 The fourth stage was the longest of the race at 228 km ( 141 @.@ 7 mi ) . Starting in <unk> , the route covered rolling terrain until the passing of the third @-@ category Col de <unk> at 93 @.@ 5 km ( 58 @.@ 1 mi ) . A short descent led to the foot of the fourth @-@ category Col de Pre @-@ <unk> , the stage 's highest point . A similarly sized uncategorised climb followed . The long descent featured a number of small rises before the Côte de la Marquise with 12 @.@ 5 km ( 7 @.@ 8 mi ) to go . A series of small climbs then took the stage to the flat finish at Sisteron . 
 A breakaway duo consisting of Martijn Keizer ( LottoNL – Jumbo ) and Tosh Van der Sande ( Lotto – Soudal ) escaped 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) into the stage . Their lead had six minutes and thirty seconds after they had passed the <unk> and Pre @-@ <unk> climbs . At the foot of the Côte de la Marquise , the pair had a one @-@ minute advantage . Van der Sande was dropped on the climb and Keizer led over the summit with margin of twenty seconds . Attacks from the peloton on the descent saw the formation of a group consisting of Cyril Gautier ( Team Europcar ) , Tim Wellens ( Lotto – Soudal ) , Lawson Craddock ( Giant – Alpecin ) and Wilco Kelderman . Wellens attacked and then passed Keizer . 
 Wellens was caught by the peloton in the final 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) , before a failed move by a trio consisting of Daniel Oss , Tony Martin ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) and Bram <unk> ( LottoNL – Jumbo ) . Tony Gallopin ( Lotto – Soudal ) launch a late attack , but was caught by the bunch sprint that was won by Nacer Bouhanni , his second stage victory of the race . There were no changes to the classifications . 
 = = = Stage 5 = = = 
 11 June 2015 — <unk> @-@ les @-@ Bains to Pra Loup , 161 km ( 100 @.@ 0 mi ) 
 Stage five from <unk> @-@ les @-@ Bains to Pra Loup was the first classified as mountainous and was 161 km ( 100 @.@ 0 mi ) in length . The first section of the stage was flat , until the passing of the third @-@ category Col des <unk> at 40 km ( 24 @.@ 9 mi ) . After a descent and small rise a came another third @-@ category climb , the Col de <unk> Aures . The route then dropped down before a further rising up to the second @-@ category Col de la Colle @-@ Saint @-@ Michel which came 161 km ( 100 @.@ 0 mi ) in . The descent was followed by the first @-@ category Col d 'Allos . The resulting descent , which began with 22 km ( 13 @.@ 7 mi ) to go , was long and technical . The final climb to the finish at Pra Loup was 6 @.@ 2 km ( 3 @.@ 9 mi ) -long and had an average gradient of 6 @.@ 5 % . 
 Mountains classification leader Daniel Teklehaimanot was the first to initiate the early seven @-@ rider breakaway ; the other riders were Christophe Riblon ( AG2R La Mondiale ) , Tim Wellens , Pieter <unk> ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) , Romain Sicard ( Team Europcar ) , Arnaud Courteille , and Albert Timmer ( both Giant – Alpecin ) . Courteille claimed the points at the Col des <unk> , with Teklehaimanot second , with the aforementioned first over the Col de <unk> Aures and Col de la Colle @-@ Saint @-@ Michel . Team Sky set a high pace at the head of the peloton throughout the Col d 'Allos , leading to a large number of riders being dropped , including the race leader Rohan Dennis . In the breakaway , an attack by <unk> dropped Riblon , Teklehaimanot , and Courteille . Before the summit of the climb , with 24 km ( 14 @.@ 9 mi ) remaining , the break was caught . 
 As the race reached the summit , Romain Bardet attacked , and the bottom had gained a twenty @-@ second advantage over the front group of around thirty riders , increasing it to one minute at the foot of the Pra Loup climb . Sky again controlled the head of the chase , with Vincenzo Nibali , Alejandro Valverde and Wilco Kelderman the notable riders distanced . Chris Froome launched an attack in the final 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) , with Tejay van Garderen and <unk> Intxausti following . Van Garderen dropped Intxausti and passed Froome to take second place , thirty @-@ six seconds behind stage winner Bardet . The new leaders in the classifications were Van Garderen in the general , Bardet in the young riders ' and Sky in the team standings . 
 = = = Stage 6 = = = 
 12 June 2015 — Saint @-@ Bonnet @-@ en @-@ Champsaur to Villard @-@ de @-@ Lans , 183 km ( 113 @.@ 7 mi ) 
 The sixth stage from Saint @-@ Bonnet @-@ en @-@ Champsaur to Villard @-@ de @-@ Lans moved the race into the high mountains with six categorised climbs . It was the second longest stage at 183 km ( 113 @.@ 7 mi ) . The opening third of the route crossed hilly terrain that featured two third @-@ category climbs , the <unk> du <unk> and the Côte du Barrage de Sautet . The riders traversed the second @-@ category Col de la Croix Haute at the 67 @.@ 5 km ( 41 @.@ 9 mi ) mark , before a short descent and a further rise to the third @-@ category Col de <unk> . After a long descent and short rise , the race came to the foot of the first @-@ category Col du Rousset . At the summit with 51 km ( 31 @.@ 7 mi ) remaining , the day 's highest point ( 1 @,@ 254 m ( 4 @,@ 114 ft ) ) , the riders dropped down to the final hills before the summit finish at the third @-@ category climb to Villard @-@ de @-@ Lans . 
 Early in the wet stage , a group of nine riders broke away , only to be pulled back the peloton , with a second group of nineteen also failing . An unsuccessful move from Tony Martin was followed by an attack by Vincenzo Nibali over the Col de <unk> and the formation of an elite five @-@ strong group on descent with Rui Costa , Alejandro Valverde , and Tony Gallopin . This attack reduced the main group of chasers and caused the abandonment of several riders . The advantage of the break was over three minutes as they climbed the Col de Rousset , with Nibali briefly escaping on the subsequent descent . 
 Martin was dropped with 22 km ( 13 @.@ 7 mi ) remaining , with the advantage at over two minutes . In the chasing main group , Simon Yates ( Orica – GreenEDGE ) and Dan Martin ( Cannondale – Garmin ) moved clear . Gallopin launched an attack from the breakaway with 4 @.@ 5 km ( 2 @.@ 8 mi ) to go , with Nibali following at 1 @.@ 5 km ( 0 @.@ 9 mi ) . Costa was able to pull both back ahead and passed them to take the stage win . Nibali took over the lead of the general classification , with a margin of twenty @-@ nine seconds over Costa . Movistar Team moved into the lead of the team classification . 
 = = = Stage 7 = = = 
 13 June 2015 — <unk> to Saint @-@ Gervais @-@ les @-@ Bains , 155 km ( 96 @.@ 3 mi ) 
 Stage seven was the queen stage of the race , with five first @-@ category climbs and the third @-@ category Col des Aravis . It was the shortest in length of the three mountain stages . The initial 27 @.@ 5 km ( 17 @.@ 1 mi ) were flat apart from one small climb . The riders then began the climb of the Col de <unk> , which was followed by the ascent of Col de la Forclaz . After a decent and a number of small hills , the Col de la Croix Fry was climbed . At the top a small drop and climb over the Col des Aravis took the riders to a descent and a long gradual incline . A further descent and flat section placed the race at the foot of the Côte des <unk> . After a small drop the stage concluded with the climb to Saint @-@ Gervais @-@ les @-@ Bains . 
 Another wet stage saw a breakaway of thirty @-@ five riders move away 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) in , which decreased to twenty @-@ five on the Col de la Croix Fry . On the <unk> climb , Team Sky reduced the size peloton and the advantage of the breakaway . Daniel Teklehaimanot took maximum points over the opening four climbs to secure the mountains classification . The Col des Aravis split the breakaway , and on the descent , an attack out of the eighteen @-@ strong leading group by Daniel Navarro ( Cofidis ) and Riccardo <unk> ( Trek Factory Racing ) gained a lead of three minutes . The peloton fractured on the Côte des <unk> , with race leader Vincenzo Nibali being dropped . 
 At the start of the final climb , the leading duo were joined by Jonathan Castroviejo ( Movistar Team ) and <unk> <unk> ( Bora – Argon 18 ) . Sky set a high pace in pursuit of the leading group , and with 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) to go , Chris Froome attacked , followed by Tejay van Garderen , and they soon passed the leaders . With 1 @.@ 5 km ( 0 @.@ 9 mi ) remaining , Froome attacked to win the stage by a margin of seventeen seconds . Van Garderen moved into the lead of the general classification , and although placing second in the stage , he was content , saying " My tactic was just to mark Froome and when he went there was no way I could follow him , but I 'm very happy with the yellow jersey . " 
 = = = Stage 8 = = = 
 14 June 2015 — Saint @-@ Gervais @-@ les @-@ Bains to Modane Valfréjus , 156 @.@ 5 km ( 97 @.@ 2 mi ) 
 The final stage of the race left from the location of the previous stage 's finish , Saint @-@ Gervais @-@ les @-@ Bains , for a 156 @.@ 5 km ( 97 @.@ 2 mi ) route . After the riders climbed a 7 @.@ 5 km ( 4 @.@ 7 mi ) rise from the start , they went down a long descent with the second @-@ category Côte d <unk> @-@ sur @-@ Ugine in the middle . The terrain remained flat until the fourth @-@ category Côte d ’ Aiton , 65 @.@ 5 km ( 40 @.@ 7 mi ) in . This was followed by the third @-@ category Côte de Saint @-@ Georges @-@ d <unk> . A further flat section placed the riders at the foot of the first @-@ category Lacets de Montvernier . After the subsequent descent began a long gradual incline to the climb of the third @-@ category Côte de Saint @-@ André . A small descent took the race to Modane and the ascent to the summit finish at the Valfréjus ski resort ; the length of the climb was 8 @.@ 4 km ( 5 @.@ 2 mi ) with an average gradient of 5 @.@ 7 % . 
 Wilco Kelderman 's move in the opening 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) initiated a breakaway of thirteen riders . Tony Martin attacked from the break on the Côte de Saint @-@ Georges @-@ d <unk> and at the foot of the Lacets de Montvernier he had an advantage of one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minutes over them and around four over the peloton . The last of the riders from the break caught Martin on the Côte de Saint @-@ André , where Steve Cummings of MTN – Qhubeka attacked this front group . 
 Cummings 's lead over the peloton at the foot of the final climb was one minute and twenty seconds . With 5 @.@ 5 km ( 3 @.@ 4 mi ) remaining , Vincenzo Nibali moved to the front in support of Astana teammate Michele Scarponi , whose failed attack led to the formation of an elite group of chasers including the general classification leaders . Chris Froome was the only rider to have the support of a teammate , Wouter Poels , who rode on the front until Froome attacked as they caught Cummings . At first Tejay van Garderen could follow this move , but he was eventually unable to keep up with Froome and was caught by Simon Yates and Rui Costa . Froome took the stage victory , eighteen seconds ahead of the three behind , and finished the race as the winner of the general classification . 
 = = Classification leadership = = 
 In the Critérium du Dauphiné , four different jerseys were awarded . The most important was the general classification , which was calculated by adding each rider 's finishing times on each stage . The rider with the least accumulated time is the race leader , identified by a yellow jersey with a blue bar ; the winner of this classification was considered the winner of the race . 
 Additionally , there was a points classification , which awarded a green jersey . In the classification , cyclists received points for finishing in the top 10 in a stage . For stages , 1 , 2 and 4 the win earned 25 points , second place 22 , third 20 , fourth 18 , fifth 16 , sixth 14 , seventh 12 , eighth 10 , ninth 8 and tenth 6 . For stages 5 , 6 , 7 and 8 the win earned 15 points , second place 12 , third 10 , fourth 8 , fifth 6 , and 1 point fewer per place down to a single point for 10th . Points towards the classification could also be achieved at each of the intermediate sprints ; these points were given to the top three riders through the line with 5 points for first , 3 for second , and 1 point for third . 
 There was also a mountains classification , the leadership of which was marked by a red jersey with white polka dots . In the mountains classification , points towards the classification were won by reaching the top of a climb before other cyclists . Each climb was categorised as either first , second , third , or fourth @-@ category , with more points available for the higher @-@ categorised climbs . First @-@ category climbs awarded the most points ; the first six riders were able to accrue points , compared with the first four on second @-@ category climbs , the first two on third @-@ category and only the first for fourth @-@ category . 
 The fourth jersey represented the young rider classification , marked by a white jersey . This was decided the same way as the general classification , but only riders born on or after 1 January 1990 were eligible to be ranked in the classification . There was also a team classification , in which the times of the best three cyclists per team on each stage were added together ; the leading team at the end of the race was the team with the lowest total time . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 = = = Team classification = = = 
 = The Camel ( Parks and Recreation ) = 
 " The Camel " is the ninth episode of the second season of Parks and Recreation , and the fifteenth overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on November 12 , 2009 . In the episode , Leslie and the parks department bicker as they work on a proposal for a new town hall mural , while Ron and Andy share an awkward moment at Andy 's new shoe @-@ shine job . 
 The episode was written by Rachel Axler and was directed by Millicent Shelton . The title refers to the figure of speech that a camel is a " horse made by a committee " , and refers to the final mural proposed by the parks department . " The Camel " included references to several Indiana celebrities , including Greg Kinnear , John Mellencamp , Larry Bird , Michael Jackson and David Letterman , all of whom have a place in the mural representing Leonardo da Vinci 's The Last Supper . 
 Stand @-@ up comedian Kirk Fox made a guest appearance as Joe , from the Pawnee sewage department . According to Nielsen Media Research , " The Camel " was seen by 4 @.@ 67 million viewers , a drop from the previous week . The episode received generally positive reviews , with particular praise for the Ron and Andy subplot , and the jokes involving Jerry 's " murinal " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Pawnee council decides it will replace the town hall 's " Spirit of Pawnee " mural , which has been repeatedly vandalized because of its racist overtones . When each Pawnee department is asked to propose a new mural , Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) becomes determined for the parks department to win , especially after she is taunted by " Sewage " Joe ( Kirk Fox ) in the sewer department . Everyone in the parks department is told to come up with a possible mural . Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) pays a local artist ( Doug Anthony Jones ) to make a painting for him , and he is initially unsatisfied with the result , a colorful abstract painting . When presenting it to the staff , however , he suddenly experiences his first emotional reaction to a work of art . Ann ( Rashida Jones ) , who acknowledges a lack of creative talent , presents a rendering of a park that is widely panned by the others . April ( Aubrey Plaza ) presents a dark and bizarre piece made of garbage she found in a dumpster . Donna ( Retta ) presents a version of The Last Supper with famous people from Indiana . Jerry ( Jim O 'Heir ) presents a beautiful pointillist photomosaic of city hall , but everyone laughs at him when he accidentally calls his mural a " murinal " . Leslie proposes a picture of a historic Pawnee bakery fire , which she thinks will win because it is dark and depressing . 
 When the parks department casts votes for the best mural , they each vote for their own artwork . As a compromise , Leslie creates a mural using pieces of everybody 's artwork , but the result is an ugly and confusing mess . Leslie enlists the help of Mark ( Paul Schneider ) , who draws a bland but skillful sketch of an old man feeding pigeons in the park . Mark himself admits the sketch is dull , but claims it will win because it has mass appeal . Nobody in the parks department likes it except Ron ( Nick Offerman ) , but Leslie insists on entering it so they will win , much to everybody 's disappointment . While waiting to present the sketch , Leslie sees how much fun other departments had in making their mural , and she decides to enter the parks department 's original mural after all . The town council committee are confused by the proposal , but the parks department have fun presenting it and break into laughter . In the end , the town decides not to spend any money on a new mural and simply renames the old one " The Diversity Express " . The parks department is nevertheless proud of their work , which they hang in their conference room ; Ron also hangs Mark 's sketch in his office . 
 In a B plot , Andy ( Chris Pratt ) is doing well in his new job as the Pawnee shoeshiner , and Ron pays for a shine . Ron is impressed when Andy actually eases the pain from his <unk> , and he later purposely scuffs his shoe so he can get a second shine . Andy is initially flattered , but starts to grow uncomfortable when Ron returns for a third shoeshine . This time , Ron makes an involuntary noise that sounds like a sexual moan , seriously embarrassing both men . After a day of avoiding each other , Ron and Andy discuss the noise and decide it would be best to simply pretend it never happened . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Camel " was written by Rachel Axler and directed by Millicent Shelton . It derives its title from the figure of speech that a camel is " a horse made by a committee " . When the parks department puts together a mural proposal using elements of six different pieces of art , which Mark refers to in the episode as a camel . The episode features a guest appearance by stand @-@ up comedian Kirk Fox as Joe , Leslie 's nemesis from the Pawnee sewer department . Within a week of the episode 's original broadcast , a deleted scene from " The Camel " were made available on the official Parks and Recreation website . In the 90 @-@ second clip , Ann tries to get out of helping with the mural , April looks through a dumpster for inspiration and Ron defends " cookie cutter art " by saying , " There 's nothing wrong with a cookie cutter . You know what you get with a cookie cutter ? Perfectly shaped cookies ! " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Leslie indicates she had a dream involving American actress Gina Gershon . For her mural , Donna proposes a recreation of Leonardo da Vinci 's painting The Last Supper with Indiana natives in place of the apostles . Actor Greg Kinnear was chosen to replace Jesus , with the Apostles replaced by John Mellencamp , Larry Bird , Michael Jackson , David Letterman and a NASCAR race car , among others . Jerry presents for his mural a work of pointillism , a style of painting in which small distinct dots of color create the impression of a wider image . When proposing her somber mural , Leslie claims tragedy often succeeds in awards , and specifically cites the Academy Awards which honor the film industry . As an example , Leslie uses The English Patient , the 1996 Best Picture winner during the 69th Academy Awards . Upon first receiving his painting , Tom says , " It looks like a lizard puking up Skittles " , a reference to the multi @-@ colored candies . Leslie , upon the idea of putting the best parts of each design into a new mural , says it is like having Michelangelo , Andy Warhol , Jackson Pollock and Jim Davis do one painting . When Mark tries to get out of helping with the mural , he uses the excuse , " I was gonna go to Arby 's and watch Frontline " , a reference to a fast food restaurant chain and a Public Broadcasting Service public affairs program . Ron names his <unk> Paul , after the mythological lumberjack Paul Bunyan . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on November 12 , 2009 , " The Camel " was seen by 4 @.@ 67 million viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research . It drew a 2 @.@ 1 rating / 6 share among viewers aged between 18 and 49 , about a five percent drop from the previous week 's episode , " Ron and Tammy " . The episode received generally positive reviews . Matt Fowler of IGN said " The Camel " was a particularly funny episode , and that the parks department 's collaboration on the mural allowed " each character being able to instill their own level of brand @-@ specific insanity into the mix " . Fowler also praised the sewer department jokes , the " murinal " scene involving Jerry and the fact that no department ended up winning the mural contest , which Fowler called a commentary on " the futility of local government in their attempts to accomplish anything " . The Star @-@ Ledger television columnist Alan Sepinwall declared " The Camel " one of the episodes he would suggest to newcomers seeking to become familiar with Parks and Recreation . Sepinwall said the Ron and Andy subplot " made me laugh as hard as I have in a very long time " , and said the episode had a good mix of funny , sweet and ridiculous moments , and said the ensemble cast was starting to work extremely well together . 
 The A.V. Club writer Leonard Pierce said the episode included great lines , strong personality @-@ driven comedy and good character moments , specially Tom 's emotional reaction to his painting . Pierce said the Andy and Ron subplot was " so well played that it threatens to usurp the mural storyline " . Sandra Gonzalez particularly praised the " murinal " jokes about Jerry 's mural , as well as Ron 's claim that he ran a sheet metal factory when he was nine , and that " Child labor laws are ruining this country . " Time magazine television critic James Poniewozik said make jokes connected in " The Camel " , including the Andy shoeshine plot and the " unexpectedly glamorous " sewage department . But he particularly praised the character development in the main plot , in which " each in their own way sticks to the purity of their uniquely screwy ideas " . Brad Sanders of the Indiana Daily Student praised the entire cast , particularly Offerman and Pratt , who he said provide the show 's two best characters . Sanders said the fact that the episode included a " hilarious subplot " involving both of them " was more evidence that the writers have been listening to the fans " . 
 GQ writer Dan Fierman said Parks and Recreation appeared to be " approaching early Simpsons @-@ levels in its absurdity and comic pacing " . He suggested this could be due to the use of Mike Scully , a veteran comic writer with the animated series , as a consulting producer on Parks and Recreation . In an article reflecting on the Parks and Recreation second season , which became critically acclaimed following poor season one reviews , Slate magazine writer Jonah Weiner said the plot of " The Camel " " can be read as something of a Season 2 mission statement " . Weiner compared Leslie 's decision to submit the quirky collage rather than the safer bet as reflective of the Parks and Recreation writing staff 's apparent decision " to ride their zaniest whims rather than tamp them down for something more readily recognizable as a hit sitcom " . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " The Camel " , along with the other 23 second season episodes of Parks and Recreation , was released on a four @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on November 30 , 2010 . The DVD included deleted scenes for each episode . 
 = Spies Reminiscent of Us = 
 " Spies Reminiscent of Us " is the third episode of the eighth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on October 11 , 2009 . The episode pays homage to the 1985 comedy film Spies Like Us , featuring baby Stewie and anthropomorphic dog Brian as they discover that American spies Chevy Chase and Dan Aykroyd have moved into their neighbor Cleveland Brown 's old house ; they eventually follow them on a secret mission to Russia . Meanwhile , Peter , Joe , and Quagmire attempt to start an improv comedy group with very little success . 
 The episode was written by Alec Sulkin and was directed by Cyndi Tang @-@ Loveland . It received positive reviews from critics . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 8 @.@ 88 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Dan Aykroyd , Chevy Chase , Gary Cole , Dimitri Diatchenko , James Lipton , Henriette Mantel , Chris Parson , Nicole Sullivan , and Mae Whitman , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . " Spies Reminiscent of Us " was released on DVD along with seven other episodes from the season on June 15 , 2010 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Peter loses to Lois in a race for the bathroom and finds their other bathroom is occupied by a transfer student from Africa . Angered , Peter begins frequenting the toilet at Cleveland 's old house , which he has vacated after moving to Virginia . The house is eventually rented to actors Chevy Chase and Dan Aykroyd , and Peter invites the two actors to his house for dinner . Peter shows them some of his comedy bits , including a crude impersonation of John Wayne , which Chase , Aykroyd and Lois find painfully unfunny . 
 Suspicious as to why Chevy Chase and Dan Aykroyd are living in their neighborhood , Stewie and Brian investigate the house and discover a secret underground military facility , eventually learning that the two actors were made real spies by Ronald Reagan after he saw their film Spies Like Us . Chase and Aykroyd explain that during the Cold War , the Soviet Union turned dozens of American citizens into sleeper agents who would fall into a trance and do the bidding of the KGB upon hearing the phrase , " Gosh , that Italian family at the next table sure is quiet " – a phrase no one would normally use . They later explain that one of the sleeper agents resides in Quahog , and they are looking for him / her . Chase and Aykroyd ask Brian and Stewie to help them in their mission , noting that they know several people acting very strangely in Quahog . Brian and Stewie accept the offer . 
 The four spies head to City Hall to warn Mayor West about the sleeper agent , but they discover that the mayor is the sleeper agent when Aykroyd inadvertently uses the trigger phrase . During the ensuing fight , Aykroyd plants a homing beacon on Mayor West 's leg . West escapes to Russia and the four follow him . They are quickly captured under orders of Prime Minister Vladimir Putin , who explains that the sleeper agent plan would be an embarrassment to their government if revealed to the public . He offers to help them stop West from fulfilling his pre @-@ programmed mission . When the four find West , they see him launch a nuclear missile aimed at the United States before he snaps out of his trance . Mayor West holds himself responsible for America 's fate , though Brian comforts him with the knowledge that West was not in control of his actions , having been brainwashed by the Soviets . Aykroyd realizes that he can hack into the missile 's guidance system . This allows him to aim the missile 's warhead high above the Earth 's atmosphere and harmlessly explode , saving the US . The fuselage , though , crashes into Cleveland 's house in Stoolbend , VA , while Cleveland was taking a bath , eliciting confusion from his neighbor , Tim the Bear . The episode ends with Brian and Stewie in the family living room as they recount their adventure and repeat the activation phrase , which reveals Meg to be another sleeper agent . 
 Meanwhile , Peter spends the rest of the episode working in an improv comedy group with Quagmire and Joe . Quagmire attempts to educate the others on the fine art of improv comedy but when they try to do a live show , Peter 's lack of conscious comedic knowledge completely gives way to his John Wayne impersonations , which the audience finds hilarious . This , along with Joe 's fecal incontinence , forces Quagmire to end the show early and conclude that this is something that should never have been attempted . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 The episode was written by series regular Alec Sulkin and directed by Cyndi Tang @-@ Loveland in her first episode for the eighth production season . The episode was originally intended to be a " Road to " episode , entitled " Road to ' 85 " , but was switched with " Road to the Multiverse " instead . Series creator Seth MacFarlane was convinced by " Road to the Multiverse " director Greg Colton to make the change , due to the subplot that involved Peter , which caused it to " not feel like a Road show " . Series regulars Peter Shin and James Purdum served as supervising directors , and series creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane and David Zuckerman served as the episode 's staff writers . 
 " Spies Reminiscent of Us " , along with the seven other episodes from Family Guy 's eighth season , were released on a three @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on June 15 , 2010 . The sets included brief audio commentaries by Seth MacFarlane and various crew and cast members for several episodes , a collection of deleted scenes , a special mini @-@ feature which discussed the process behind animating " Road to the Multiverse " , and a mini @-@ feature entitled Family Guy Karaoke . 
 The episode saw the second re @-@ appearance , the first being a brief appearance in " Road to the Multiverse " , by former main cast member and writer Mike Henry as the voice of Cleveland Brown . The actor had previously left the role on Family Guy to star as the character in his own spin @-@ off The Cleveland Show , co @-@ created by Seth MacFarlane , Mike Henry , and Richard Appel . In addition to the regular cast , actors Dan Aykroyd , Chevy Chase , and Gary Cole ; voice actors Dimitri Diatchenko and Chris Parson ; writer , actor , and television host James Lipton ; actresses Henriette Mantel and Mae Whitman ; and voice actress Nicole Sullivan guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Johnny Brennan , actor Ralph Garman , writer and showrunner Mark Hentemann , writer Alec Sulkin and writer John Viener also made minor appearances . Actors Adam West and Patrick Warburton made appearances as well . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode was largely based upon the 1985 film Spies Like Us , which starred Chevy Chase and Dan Aykroyd , and the movie is referred in the episode itself . The episode was also based on the 1977 spy film <unk> about brainwashed Russian spies in the U.S. who can be activated by a special code phrase . When Peter has to go to the bathroom , he runs to Cleveland 's empty home , which has been put up for sale since he left to live in Virginia with his new family . A montage of Peter going to the bathroom is shown , while Jennifer Lopez 's " Let 's Get Loud " plays . When Peter becomes aware that Cleveland 's house is being rented by actors Chevy Chase and Dan Aykroyd , he mentions that he is honored to have dinner with " two of the Ghostbusters " . Chase then replies that he was not in that movie ; Peter also notes that he is honored to meet " two of the Three Amigos " , a movie starring Chase but not Aykroyd . After dinner , Stewie is seen drawing and coloring Sebastian the crab , a character from the Disney film The Little Mermaid . When Aykroyd and Chase ask Stewie and Brian if they want to be " spies like us " , Stewie asks if they can be " spies like them " and points to Black Spy and White Spy from Spy vs. Spy , one of the head comic strip features of MAD magazine . When Aykroyd and Chase explain to Stewie and Brian how they were recruited as official spies by Reagan , a cutaway is shown of an event in which 1985 is awarded the " Awesomest year of the 80 's " prize and all characters spontaneously start dancing to the song ( Keep Feeling ) Fascination . Later , Brian and Stewie agree to become agents , and Stewie asks if " Ron Howard 's weird @-@ looking brother , Clint Howard is here " . 
 Back in Quahog , when Peter , Joe , and Quagmire discuss how to prove to Chase and Aykroyd that they know what is funny , Quagmire asks what the most consistent form of comedy is , to which Joe responds " improv . " This causes Peter , Joe , and Quagmire to yell " improv " repeatedly , until live @-@ action footage of James Lipton saying the word " improv " is shown . When Stewie , Brian , Chevy , and Dan land in Russia , the device Dan uses to track the beacon in Adam West 's ankle looks like a <unk> meter from " Ghostbusters . " Vladimir Putin makes an appearance in the episode , and asks if Brian and Stewie would like to see a Russian <unk> Gag . They agree and the viewers are presented with a hedgehog in a foggy forest . The hedgehog then goes on to say , " What kind of idiots would make a porcupine sandwich without bread ? These no @-@ good bastards ! " and laughs . This is a nod to the Russian @-@ made animated film Hedgehog in the Fog . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its initial broadcast , this episode received a Nielsen rating of 5 @.@ 1 / 8 , totaling 8 @.@ 88 million viewers in the 18 – 19 demographic . The episode ranked one of the lowest in the 9 : 00PM timeslot , behind The Amazing Race on CBS , Sunday Night Football on NBC , and Desperate Housewives ; however , it was ahead of fellow Fox animated sitcom American Dad ! , which was shown immediately after Family Guy . 
 Reviews of the episode were mostly positive . The AV Club 's Todd VanDerWerff noted his enjoyment of the storyline , but he mostly enjoyed the episode 's inclusion and voice work of Chevy Chase and Dan Aykroyd . He also commented favorably on the gags that describe Russia as filled with bears on unicycles and that Adam West turns out to be the Russian sleeper agent . He criticized the improv comedy storyline but commented that improv troupes and 1980s comedies are lazy targets . He graded the episode a B , tying with The Simpsons and American Dad ! , and beating its spin @-@ off The Cleveland Show . IGN Television critic Ahsan Haque gave the episode a mixed review , stating that he did not like the improv storyline , and he was not amused with Peter 's usage of Joe 's American flag as toilet paper . However , he praised the scene that involved Stewie 's , Brian 's , Chevy Chase 's , and Dan Aykroyd 's travel to Russia , and he ultimately gave the episode 7 @.@ 7 out of 10 . 
 = Explorers on the Moon = 
 Explorers on the Moon ( French : On a <unk> sur la Lune ) is the seventeenth volume of The Adventures of Tintin , the comics series by Belgian cartoonist Hergé . The story was serialised weekly in Belgium 's Tintin magazine from October 1952 to December 1953 before being published in a collected volume by Casterman in 1954 . Completing a story arc begun in the preceding volume , Destination Moon ( 1953 ) , the narrative tells of the young reporter Tintin , his dog Snowy , and friends Captain Haddock , Professor Calculus , and Thomson and Thompson who are aboard humanity 's first manned rocket mission to the Moon . 
 Developed in part through the suggestions of Hergé 's friends Bernard Heuvelmans and Jacques Van Melkebeke , Explorers on the Moon was produced following Hergé 's extensive research into the possibility of human space travel – a feat that had yet to be achieved – with the cartoonist seeking for the work to be as realistic as possible . Hergé continued The Adventures of Tintin with The Calculus Affair , while the series itself became a defining part of the Franco @-@ Belgian comics tradition . Critics have praised the illustrative detail of the book , but have expressed mixed views of the story . The volume was adapted for both the 1957 Belvision animated series , Hergé 's Adventures of Tintin , and for the 1991 animated series The Adventures of Tintin by Ellipse and Nelvana . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The synopsis continues a plot begun in Destination Moon . 
 Professor Calculus , Tintin , Snowy , Captain Haddock , and Calculus ' assistant Frank Wolff are aboard an atomic rocket @-@ powered spacecraft leaving the Earth bound for the Moon . Soon after takeoff they discover that the detectives Thomson and Thompson have accidentally stowed away onboard , putting a strain on the oxygen supply . The detectives accidentally turn off the nuclear motor , disrupting the artificial gravity and sending everyone floating until Tintin corrects the problem . They then suffered a relapse of the Formula 14 drug ( seen in Land of Black Gold ( 1950 ) ) , resulting in their hair growing rapidly in multiple colours . Calculus subsequently administers a cure . Haddock , who has smuggled whisky aboard the rocket , gets drunk and takes an impromptu spacewalk , during which he briefly becoming a satellite of the asteroid Adonis ( at which point , Professor Calculus humorously says he will tell Earth that Adonis has a new satellite by the name of Haddock ) but Tintin is able to rescue him . 
 The rocket lands in the Hipparchus Crater , with Tintin being the first human to step on the Moon . Three days later , Haddock , Wolff and Tintin take the battery @-@ powered tank to explore some stalactite caves in the direction of the Ptolemaeus Crater ; inside a cave Snowy slips into an ice @-@ covered chasm , but Tintin rescues him . Later aboard the ship , Tintin is overwhelmed by a third stowaway , Colonel Jorgen , a spy who had been smuggled aboard by Wolff , who has been blackmailed by a foreign power for which Jorgen works . With Wolff 's help , Jorgen seeks to hijack the ship and return it to Earth , but through emergency sabotage that cuts power to the engine , is foiled by Tintin . 
 Due to the strain on the oxygen supplies , the crew decides to abandon most of the equipment and to cut short the lunar stay . The repair work is completed slightly ahead of schedule , and the rocket cleared for lift @-@ off . Halfway to Earth , Jorgen escapes his bonds thanks to the detectives ' bungling and tries to kill Tintin ; Wolff seeks to prevent him , and in their struggle over a gun Jorgen is killed . When it is revealed that there will not be enough oxygen aboard for the crew to survive the journey , Wolff sacrifices himself by opening the airlock and floating out into space to his death . The crew fall unconscious but Tintin wakes long enough to set the rocket to auto @-@ pilot and it arrives back in Syldavia safely . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Hergé first devised the idea of sending Tintin on a mission to the Moon while he was working on Prisoners of the Sun ( 1949 ) . His decision to move into the field of science fiction might have been influenced by his friendly rivalry with his colleague Edgar P. Jacobs , who had recently had success with his own science fiction comic , The Secret of the Swordfish ( 1950 – 53 ) . He decided that it would be a two @-@ volume story arc , as had proved successful with his earlier arcs , The Secret of the Unicorn ( 1943 ) and Red Rackham 's Treasure ( 1944 ) , and The Seven Crystal Balls ( 1948 ) and Prisoners of the Sun . He had initially intended on beginning this story after the culmination of Prisoners of the Sun , but both his wife Germaine Remi and his close friend Marcel Dehaye convinced him to proceed with Land of Black Gold ( 1950 ) , a story that he had previously left unfinished , instead . 
 Seeking advice on the story , Hergé consulted his friend Bernard Heuvelmans , who had authored the non @-@ fiction book L 'Homme parmi les étoiles ( " Man Among the Stars " ) ( 1944 ) . In autumn 1947 , Heuvelmans and Jacques Van Melkebeke developed a script for the story , which they gave to Hergé . This version based Calculus ' lunar expedition in a fictional location , Radio City , in the United States . It featured a return of Professor Decimus Phostle , a character who had previously appeared in The Shooting Star ( 1942 ) , but this time as an antagonist ; Phostle had sold the secrets of the mission in order to attain funds to buy a diamond for the actress Rita Hayworth . In early 1948 , Hergé produced two black @-@ and @-@ white pages of this version of the story before abandoning it . Hergé retained some elements of this original script in his finished version , namely the scenes in which Haddock drinks whiskey in a gravity @-@ free environment and that in which Haddock goes for a space walk and nearly becomes a satellite of Adonis , which appear on pages 5 and 8 of Explorers on the Moon . Nevertheless , Heuvelmans thought his influence on the story to be more significant , stating that " In going through the two books we [ he and Van Melkebeke ] really had the impression that it was what we had originally done at the beginning . In broad outline , that was it . " 
 Hergé hoped for the story to be as realistic as possible , and sought to eschew fantastical elements . In his own words , it contained " no <unk> , no monsters , no incredible surprises " . To ensure this realism , he collected a wide range of documents about rockets and space travel with which to conduct research . In this he was aided by Heuvelmans , who collected pictures of rockets and atomic research facilities for him . Hergé 's research archive included an article from the American magazine Collier 's which discussed how humanity could reach the moon , as well as books by Pierre Rousseau and Auguste Piccard . A further work that he used was L <unk> ( 1950 ) , a book on putative space travel by the physicist Alexander Ananoff , with whom Hergé began a correspondence in April 1950 . He also visited the Ateliers de Constructions Electriques de Charleroi 's Center for Atomic Research , striking up a subsequent correspondence with its director , Max <unk> . Hergé incorporated much of this technical information into the story , but juxtaposed it with moments of humour to make it more accessible to his young readership . 
 According to literary critics Jean @-@ Marc Lofficier and Randy Lofficier , possible fictional influences on Hergé 's story include Jules Verne 's 1870 novel Around the Moon and the 1950 American film Destination Moon . Hergé was certainly inspired by a number of photographic stills from the Destination Moon film which had been published . The computer system at the Sprodj space centre was visually based upon the UNIVAC I , the first computer to be created for non @-@ military purposes . Hergé based his moon rocket on the designs of the V @-@ 2 rocket which had been developed by German scientists during World War II . The red @-@ and @-@ white checker pattern on Hergé 's rocket was based upon an illustration of a V @-@ 2 which Hergé had come upon in Leslie Simon 's 1947 book German Research in World War II . He commissioned the construction of a model rocket with detachable parts from his assistant Arthur Van <unk> . He took the model to Paris where he showed it to Ananoff , asking him if it was a realistic representation of what a moon rocket might look like . He and his assistants then used the model from which to accurately sketch when producing the comic . Hergé introduced into the story the character of Boris Jorgen , who had previously appeared as an antagonist in King Ottokar 's Sceptre ( 1939 ) . He added evidence for water on the moon at the advice of Heuvelmans . 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 On 7 September 1950 , Hergé broke off the story with the statement " end of part one " . He felt the need for a break from work , having fallen back into clinical depression . He and his wife Germaine went on holiday to Gland in Switzerland , before returning to Brussels in late September . Many readers sent letters to Tintin magazine asking why Explorers on the Moon was no longer being serialised , with a rumour emerging that Hergé had died . On 18 April 1951 , he published an open letter in the magazine explaining his absence as a result of illness caused by exhaustion and included an illustration of himself sprawled out on an armchair . As Hergé planned his return to work , covers of Tintin magazine announced the imminent return of the story . Explorers on the Moon would resume after an eighteen @-@ month hiatus , returning in the 9 April 1951 issue , accompanied with a summary of the story so far . Its final installment appeared on 31 December 1953 . 
 = = = Republication = = = 
 Upon the serial 's publication , Hergé faced criticism for including Wolff 's suicide in the story ; suicide was widely viewed as a sin in Catholic @-@ dominated Belgium . In deference to these critics , for the published book version he added Wolff 's line of " perhaps by some miracle I shall escape too " , to make the scene seem a less obvious suicide . Years later , Hergé expressed regret that he had capitulated on this issue . The story was collected together and published by Editions Casterman as On a Marché Sur La Lune in 1954 . Casterman were unhappy with this title , which translates as " They Walked on the Moon " , but Hergé resolutely refused to make a change . 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 Jean @-@ Marc Lofficier and Randy Lofficier believed that the two @-@ part story " belongs " to Calculus as his " cosmic vision moves the story forward " . They further expressed the opinion that Wolff was a unique character in the Adventures of Tintin , suggesting that he is akin to a character from a John le Carré novel . Referring specifically to Explorers on the Moon , they opined that it was " a true epic of the human imagination " , believing that its depiction of the moon has " withstood the test of time " more than other " proto @-@ space exploration novels " . They felt that the moon adventure was " Hergé at his best ... a triumphant achievement on every level " , awarding both halves of the story five stars out of five . 
 Hergé biographer Pierre Assouline felt that the two moon adventures " mark a stage in the development of Hergé 's work " . Hergé biographer Benoît Peeters praised the " gradual introduction into the story of a real dimension of evil " as being something particularly effective . He also expressed the view that Wolff brings " a tragic note " to the story , comparing him to the characters in the stories of Graham Greene . He was critical of the two @-@ part story arc , stating that they had " neither the liveliness and dynamism " of The Secret of the Unicorn and Red Rackham 's Treasure , " nor the supernatural quality " of The Seven Crystal Balls @-@ Prisoners of the Sun . 
 Harry Thompson noted that Explorers on the Moon was widely regarded as Hergé 's " greatest artistic achievement " , describing the entire moon adventure as " a technical masterpiece " as a result of its " uncannily accurate " depiction of the moon . Thompson expressed his opinion that Explorers could be compared to the work of science @-@ fiction writers Jules Verne and H. G. Wells . Focusing on the scene in which the Thom ( p ) sons hair grows rapidly in bright colours , he stated that it provides an abrupt contrast with " the almost scholastic nature of the rest of the story " , and that it " injects a few bright splashes " into an otherwise " carefully restrained colour scheme " . Philippe Goddin praised the depiction of the rocket 's landing as " a magnificent spectacle , well worth the double space spread given by Hergé " , also highlighting what he perceived as the ending 's " unprecedented dramatic tension " . 
 In his psychoanalytical study of the Adventures of Tintin , the literary critic Jean @-@ Marie Apostolidès praised the Destination Moon @-@ Explorers on the Moon story arc for its " meticulous attention to scientific facts " , but added that this had also resulted in the story 's " rather pedagogical tone " . He added that in these stories , the main division was " no longer Good and Evil " as it had been in previous Adventures , but " Truth and Error " . Apostolidès opined that despite being a " fussy and somewhat ridiculous character " , through his scientific achievements Calculus grows to the " stature of a giant " in this arc , eclipsing Sir Francis Haddock ( from The Secret of the Unicorn ) as the series ' " founding ancestor " . He goes on to claim that in becoming the " sacred ancestor " , the voyage to the moon becomes " a mystical quest " with science as its guiding religion . Drawing comparisons between this arc and the Prisoners of the Sun story , he drew symbolic links between the scientific centre and the Inca Temple of the Sun , but noted that here Calculus was the " high priest " rather than the sacrificial victim as he had been in the previous story . Moving on to discuss the moon rocket in these stories , Apostolidès described it as a phallic object which penetrated the " virgin territory " of the moon . At the same time , he described the rocket as a " maternal belly " in which the space explorers slept . Commenting specifically on Explorers on the Moon he commented that the protagonists of the story reverted to childhood when exploring the moon , believing that they had treated it like a theme park . 
 Literary critic Tom McCarthy stated that in the Destination Moon @-@ Explorers of the Moon story arc , Calculus " embodies Hergé 's ... own wartime position , spun out into a post @-@ war environment " , representing a genius driven by his work whose activities are coincidental to national and political causes . He suggested that Explorers on the Moon was " perhaps both the most wildly adventurous and the most contemplative " installment in the series . He felt that the inclusion of Jorgen being smuggled aboard the rocket as a stowaway reflected the idea of the " stranger " penetrating the " home " , something which he thought was present in other Adventures . Commenting on the scene in which Haddock smuggles a whisky bottle inside the Guide to Astrology , he states " the text , in this case , is hollow , smuggling something else " , which he believed was a reversal of the appearance of a parchment hidden within a model ship in The Secret of the Unicorn . 
 = = Adaptation = = 
 In 1957 , the animation company Belvision Studios produced a string of colour adaptations based on Hergé 's original comics , adapting eight of the Adventures into a series of daily five @-@ minute episodes . Explorers on the Moon was the second to be adapted in the second animated series ; it was directed by Ray Goossens and written by Greg , a well @-@ known cartoonist who was to become editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Tintin magazine . 
 In 1991 , a second animated series based upon The Adventures of Tintin was produced , this time as a collaboration between the French studio Ellipse and the Canadian animation company Nelvana . Explorers on the Moon was the fifteenth story to be adapted and was divided into two twenty @-@ minute episodes . Directed by Stéphane Bernasconi , the series has been praised for being " generally faithful " to the original comics , to the extent that the animation was directly adopted from Hergé 's original panels . 
 = Two Weeks ( The Office ) = 
 " Two Weeks " is the twenty @-@ first episode of the fifth season of the television series The Office , and the 93rd overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on March 26 , 2009 . In this episode , Michael , who has given his two weeks ' notice to Dunder Mifflin , tries to convince others in the office to quit and join him in starting a new paper company . Meanwhile , Pam spends her day trying to put together the new photocopier and becomes frustrated with her job . 
 The episode was written by Aaron Shure and directed by Paul Lieberstein . Executive story editor Charlie Grundy conceived the idea of Michael leaving Dunder Mifflin , and the writers collectively decided the Pam character should leave and try to find out what she wants from life . The episode included a guest appearance by Idris Elba , who played new Dunder Mifflin vice president Charles Miner . " Two Weeks " received generally positive reviews and , according to Nielsen ratings , was watched by 8 @.@ 7 million overall viewers and was the top @-@ rated show on NBC the week it aired . " Two Weeks " received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Single @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Having submitted his two weeks ' notice to Dunder Mifflin , Michael ( Steve Carell ) begins goofing off and drinking around the office , while new company vice president Charles Miner ( Idris Elba ) plans to hire the new regional manager from the outside , for " obvious reasons . " The employees suggest that Michael start looking for another job . Michael is unworried at first , until he learns how poorly the economy is performing . He first tries Prince Paper , but they had been run out of business by Dunder Mifflin . After finding no available work , Michael decides to start his own paper company and unsuccessfully tries to convince others around the office to join him . When Charles catches Michael labeling Dunder Mifflin customer lists with his new company 's name , he orders security guard Hank ( Hugh Dane ) to escort Michael from the building . Michael drives out of the parking lot , but is later spotted sneaking back into the building . 
 Meanwhile , the office has received a new copy machine , but it is not assembled , so Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) spends the day putting it together as the rest of the employees hassle and tease her . She finally completes assembling it , but feels no satisfaction about it afterward . Meanwhile , Angela ( Angela Kinsey ) and Kelly ( Mindy Kaling ) continue to flirt with Charles . 
 Michael sneaks back into the office , crawling on the floor below the desks so Charles , who is sitting in the conference room , will not notice him . Michael grabs his customer list and makes a final desperate offer for the other employees to join him . Charles notices Michael and physically threatens him , prompting Michael to leave without the customer list . After Charles angrily closes the conference room door , Pam follows Michael out of the building , announcing that she 's leaving with him . However , she tells Michael she wants to be a salesperson at his new company , not a receptionist . Michael agrees , and the two leave together , feeling both exhilarated and apprehensive . 
 At the end of the episode , Charles , who still knows very little about the employees at the Scranton branch , decides to make Kevin ( Brian Baumgartner ) the temporary receptionist and make Stanley ( Leslie David Baker ) the office 's " Productivity Czar , " much to the surprise of both men . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Two Weeks " was written by Aaron Shure and directed by Paul Lieberstein . Executive story editor Charlie Grandy conceived the idea of Michael leaving Dunder Mifflin . Shure said there was a great deal of debate among the writers about Pam 's decision to leave Dunder Mifflin with Michael , but they decided to move in that direction to demonstrate Pam was trying to figure out what she wants in life . Lieberstein thought of the idea of the final scene in which Michael and Pam 's faces go from optimism to concern , because he felt it would anchor the episode . The decision to have Charles choose Stanley as productivity czar and Kevin as receptionist was made by Shure the day before the episode 's draft was handed in because he wanted to have Charles make " rookie mistakes , despite all his poise . " " Two Weeks " was the second of six episodes guest starring Idris Elba , best known as Stringer Bell from The Wire . Elba said he did not watch the episode after it aired because " I 'm hypercritical about my work , so I try not to torture myself . " 
 The official The Office website included three cut scenes from " Two Weeks " within a week of the episode 's original release . In one minute @-@ long clip , Michael asks Darryl for warehousing advice for his new paper company ; Darryl gives Michael encouraging words about the new business venture before admitting , " I 'm messing with you . This doesn 't sound like a good idea . " In a second one @-@ minute clip , Michael tries stealing office supplies from the Dunder Mifflin office for his new company , until he is caught by Charles , who literally chases him out of the office ; Charles then tries to describe what Michael 's like to the camera but finds himself shocked into silence . In a final 38 @-@ second clip , Kelly visits Michael 's office to ask what he will do with his life , then starts talking about her own fantasy of running off to Mexico with Charles . B. J. Novak wrote a talking @-@ head segment for Toby , where he compares Michael to a movie on a plane because " it 's not great , but it 's something to watch , and when it 's over you 're like , how much longer is this flight ? Now what ? " 
 An original draft for the episode included more dialogue between Pam and Jim about the decision , in which Pam brought up Jim 's impulsive decision to buy his parents ' house without consulting her in the episode " Frame Toby , " but it was ultimately cut because they felt it added too much time to get to the resolution . A number of documentary @-@ style interviews with Dwight about Michael 's defection and his thoughts about Charles Miner were cut for length issues . 
 Immediately after " Two Weeks " was first broadcast , NBC Universal 's The Office website <unk> sent mass e @-@ mail messages said to be from " Michael Gary Scott " encouraging people to join his new company , " The Michael Scott Paper Company . " The message , which included a link to the website , said " As the manager of Dunder Mifflin , Scranton I learned two things : everything about the paper business and that Dunder Mifflin is a <unk> company . I ’ m taking that expertness and creating The Michael Scott Paper Company . … I cannot promise success , but I will promise you the best <unk> time of your life ! ! ! " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Michael accidentally visits a website about actual monsters when trying to visit <unk> , a popular employment site . During work , Michael drinks a combination of scotch and Splenda , an artificial sweetener ; Michael had the same drink in the third season episode " Cocktails " . Michael tries to get a job with Prince Family Paper Company only to find they have gone out of business ; this is a reference to " Prince Family Paper " , an episode from earlier in the fifth season , in which Michael and Dwight go undercover at Prince Paper to learn their company secrets and steal their clients . While flirting with Charles , Kelly said her family was so close they were like the Kardashians , a reference to the E ! reality series , Keeping Up with the Kardashians . 
 Several reviewers compared Pam 's decision to quit with Michael to that of Renée Zellweger 's character in the 1996 film Jerry Maguire , and the final scene in which Michael and Pam go from excitement over their new company to concern about the future to the final moments of The Graduate . Shure , who said he a fan of the movie scene , said it was not directly inspired by the film , but he was " painfully aware of the inevitable comparison " ; he said the writers considered having Michael refer to the movie in the episode , but dropped it due to time constraints . The line spoken by Oscar , " Just like that , as mysteriously as he arrived , he was gone " was written by Office writer Mindy Kaling and was inspired by the Keyser Söze character in the 1995 film , The Usual Suspects . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on March 26 , 2009 , " Two Weeks " was watched by 8 @.@ 7 million overall viewers , and 5 @.@ 8 million viewers among ages 18 to 49 . The episode had a 4 @.@ 5 rating and 11 share in the 18 to 49 demographic , making it NBC 's top @-@ rated show the week it aired . 
 " Two Weeks " received generally positive reviews . Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger praised the episode and specific elements of it , like Michael wandering around the office drunk and many of the documentary @-@ style interviews , like Charles talking about his effect on women , Toby comparing Michael to a movie on a plane and Kevin being too lazy to compliment Michael in person . But he said the episode was " elevated " by Michael and Pam forming a partnership at the end : " Steve Carell and Jenna Fischer are always brilliant in those moments when they have to show multiple emotions at once , so it was nice to finally see them get to do it side @-@ by @-@ side . " Entertainment Weekly writer Margaret Lyons said " Two Weeks " offered a change that would keep the series fresh and , although he said it was " not a nonstop laugh riot " , he said it " highlights what The Office does that few other shows ever even attempt : incredibly humane , subtle moments that contrast with the kind of chaos only ever borne of monotony . " 
 Brian Howard of The Journal News said the episode flowed well and he liked the payoff at the end when Pam joined Michael 's new paper company , but he said the moments with Michael crawling on the floor felt like " unnecessary padding " . Nevertheless , he said , " I ’ m looking forward to rewatching this episode , probably the first time I ’ ve done that since ' Lecture Circuit : Part I. ' " Andy Shaw of TV Fodder said Michael was much more likable in " Two Weeks " than in other recent episodes , and said , " Steve Carell was at his best , with great throwaway lines and getting to the heart of Michael 's love for Dunder @-@ Mifflin and paper . " Will Leitch of New York magazine said the episode marked a " major step " for the series and had some particularly sweet moments between Michael and Pam . He also particularly liked the moment when Charles Miner , who is played by the same actor who played drug dealer Stringer Bell on the HBO series The Wire , threatened to attack Michael : " Michael Scott being beaten up by Stringer Bell . That 's one for the TV annals . " 
 Rick Porter of Zap2it said the episode was " pretty good " and that Jenna Fischer was " fantastic " , but he felt the episode was less outright funny than recent episodes . But Porter also said he had mixed feelings about Pam 's decision to work for Michael and about the Charles Miner character , who he said might be too humorless and uncomfortable for the show . Travis Fickett of IGN felt it was disappointing and slow @-@ paced compared to last week 's episode " New Boss " : " Things slow down a bit as we sort of repeat the awkwardness between Michael and new regional manager Charles Miner . It feels a bit like the episode is marking time - which is exactly what Michael is doing with his final two weeks on the job . " " Two Weeks " was voted the eighteenth highest @-@ rated episode out of 26 from the fifth season , according to an episode poll at the fansite OfficeTally ; the episode was rated 7 @.@ 74 out of 10 . 
 Stuart Bass received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Single @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series . " Two Weeks " accounted for one of the ten Primetime Emmy Award nominations The Office received for the show 's fifth season at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards , which were held on September 20 , 2009 . 
 = Enzyme inhibitor = 
 An enzyme inhibitor is a molecule that binds to an enzyme and decreases its activity . Since blocking an enzyme 's activity can kill a pathogen or correct a metabolic imbalance , many drugs are enzyme inhibitors . They are also used in pesticides . Not all molecules that bind to enzymes are inhibitors ; enzyme activators bind to enzymes and increase their enzymatic activity , while enzyme substrates bind and are converted to products in the normal catalytic cycle of the enzyme . 
 The binding of an inhibitor can stop a substrate from entering the enzyme 's active site and / or hinder the enzyme from catalyzing its reaction . Inhibitor binding is either reversible or irreversible . Irreversible inhibitors usually react with the enzyme and change it chemically ( e.g. via covalent bond formation ) . These inhibitors modify key amino acid residues needed for enzymatic activity . In contrast , reversible inhibitors bind non @-@ covalently and different types of inhibition are produced depending on whether these inhibitors bind to the enzyme , the enzyme @-@ substrate complex , or both . 
 Many drug molecules are enzyme inhibitors , so their discovery and improvement is an active area of research in biochemistry and pharmacology . A medicinal enzyme inhibitor is often judged by its specificity ( its lack of binding to other proteins ) and its potency ( its dissociation constant , which indicates the concentration needed to inhibit the enzyme ) . A high specificity and potency ensure that a drug will have few side effects and thus low toxicity . 
 Enzyme inhibitors also occur naturally and are involved in the regulation of metabolism . For example , enzymes in a metabolic pathway can be inhibited by downstream products . This type of negative feedback slows the production line when products begin to build up and is an important way to maintain homeostasis in a cell . Other cellular enzyme inhibitors are proteins that specifically bind to and inhibit an enzyme target . This can help control enzymes that may be damaging to a cell , like proteases or nucleases . A well @-@ characterised example of this is the ribonuclease inhibitor , which binds to ribonucleases in one of the tightest known protein – protein interactions . Natural enzyme inhibitors can also be poisons and are used as defences against predators or as ways of killing prey . 
 = = Reversible inhibitors = = 
 = = = Types of reversible inhibitors = = = 
 Reversible inhibitors attach to enzymes with non @-@ covalent interactions such as hydrogen bonds , hydrophobic interactions and ionic bonds . Multiple weak bonds between the inhibitor and the active site combine to produce strong and specific binding . In contrast to substrates and irreversible inhibitors , reversible inhibitors generally do not undergo chemical reactions when bound to the enzyme and can be easily removed by dilution or dialysis . 
 There are four kinds of reversible enzyme inhibitors . They are classified according to the effect of varying the concentration of the enzyme 's substrate on the inhibitor . 
 In competitive inhibition , the substrate and inhibitor cannot bind to the enzyme at the same time , as shown in the figure on the right . This usually results from the inhibitor having an affinity for the active site of an enzyme where the substrate also binds ; the substrate and inhibitor compete for access to the enzyme 's active site . This type of inhibition can be overcome by sufficiently high concentrations of substrate ( Vmax remains constant ) , i.e. , by out @-@ competing the inhibitor . However , the apparent Km will increase as it takes a higher concentration of the substrate to reach the Km point , or half the Vmax . Competitive inhibitors are often similar in structure to the real substrate ( see examples below ) . 
 In uncompetitive inhibition , the inhibitor binds only to the substrate @-@ enzyme complex , it should not be confused with non @-@ competitive inhibitors . This type of inhibition causes Vmax to decrease ( maximum velocity decreases as a result of removing activated complex ) and Km to decrease ( due to better binding efficiency as a result of Le Chatelier 's principle and the effective elimination of the ES complex thus decreasing the Km which indicates a higher binding affinity ) . 
 In non @-@ competitive inhibition , the binding of the inhibitor to the enzyme reduces its activity but does not affect the binding of substrate . As a result , the extent of inhibition depends only on the concentration of the inhibitor . Vmax will decrease due to the inability for the reaction to proceed as efficiently , but Km will remain the same as the actual binding of the substrate , by definition , will still function properly . 
 In mixed inhibition , the inhibitor can bind to the enzyme at the same time as the enzyme 's substrate . However , the binding of the inhibitor affects the binding of the substrate , and vice versa . This type of inhibition can be reduced , but not overcome by increasing concentrations of substrate . Although it is possible for mixed @-@ type inhibitors to bind in the active site , this type of inhibition generally results from an allosteric effect where the inhibitor binds to a different site on an enzyme . Inhibitor binding to this allosteric site changes the conformation ( i.e. , tertiary structure or three @-@ dimensional shape ) of the enzyme so that the affinity of the substrate for the active site is reduced . 
 = = = Quantitative description of reversible inhibition = = = 
 Reversible inhibition can be described quantitatively in terms of the inhibitor 's binding to the enzyme and to the enzyme @-@ substrate complex , and its effects on the kinetic constants of the enzyme . In the classic Michaelis @-@ Menten scheme below , an enzyme ( E ) binds to its substrate ( S ) to form the enzyme – substrate complex ES . Upon catalysis , this complex breaks down to release product P and free enzyme . The inhibitor ( I ) can bind to either E or ES with the dissociation constants Ki or Ki ' , respectively . 
 When an enzyme has multiple substrates , inhibitors can show different types of inhibition depending on which substrate is considered . This results from the active site containing two different binding sites within the active site , one for each substrate . For example , an inhibitor might compete with substrate A for the first binding site , but be a non @-@ competitive inhibitor with respect to substrate B in the second binding site . 
 = = = Measuring the dissociation constants of a reversible inhibitor = = = 
 As noted above , an enzyme inhibitor is characterised by its two dissociation constants , Ki and Ki ' , to the enzyme and to the enzyme @-@ substrate complex , respectively . The enzyme @-@ inhibitor constant Ki can be measured directly by various methods ; one extremely accurate method is isothermal titration calorimetry , in which the inhibitor is titrated into a solution of enzyme and the heat released or absorbed is measured . However , the other dissociation constant Ki ' is difficult to measure directly , since the enzyme @-@ substrate complex is short @-@ lived and undergoing a chemical reaction to form the product . Hence , Ki ' is usually measured indirectly , by observing the enzyme activity under various substrate and inhibitor concentrations , and fitting the data to a modified Michaelis – Menten equation 
 <formula> 
 where the modifying factors α and α ' are defined by the inhibitor concentration and its two dissociation constants 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 Thus , in the presence of the inhibitor , the enzyme 's effective Km and Vmax become ( α / α ' ) Km and ( 1 / α ' ) Vmax , respectively . However , the modified Michaelis @-@ Menten equation assumes that binding of the inhibitor to the enzyme has reached equilibrium , which may be a very slow process for inhibitors with sub @-@ <unk> dissociation constants . In these cases , it is usually more practical to treat the tight @-@ binding inhibitor as an irreversible inhibitor ( see below ) ; however , it can still be possible to estimate Ki ' kinetically if Ki is measured independently . 
 The effects of different types of reversible enzyme inhibitors on enzymatic activity can be visualized using graphical representations of the Michaelis – Menten equation , such as Lineweaver – Burk and Eadie @-@ Hofstee plots . For example , in the Lineweaver – Burk plots at the right , the competitive inhibition lines intersect on the y @-@ axis , illustrating that such inhibitors do not affect Vmax . Similarly , the non @-@ competitive inhibition lines intersect on the x @-@ axis , showing these inhibitors do not affect Km . However , it can be difficult to estimate Ki and Ki ' accurately from such plots , so it is advisable to estimate these constants using more reliable nonlinear regression methods , as described above . 
 = = = Reversible inhibitors = = = 
 Traditionally reversible enzyme inhibitors have been classified as competitive , uncompetitive , or non @-@ competitive , according to their effects on Km and Vmax . These different effects result from the inhibitor binding to the enzyme E , to the enzyme – substrate complex ES , or to both , respectively . The division of these classes arises from a problem in their derivation and results in the need to use two different binding constants for one binding event . The binding of an inhibitor and its effect on the enzymatic activity are two distinctly different things , another problem the traditional equations fail to acknowledge . In noncompetitive inhibition the binding of the inhibitor results in 100 % inhibition of the enzyme only , and fails to consider the possibility of anything in between . The common form of the inhibitory term also obscures the relationship between the inhibitor binding to the enzyme and its relationship to any other binding term be it the Michaelis – Menten equation or a dose response curve associated with ligand receptor binding . To demonstrate the relationship the following rearrangement can be made : 
 <formula> 
 Adding zero to the bottom ( [ I ] - [ I ] ) 
 <formula> 
 Dividing by [ I ] + Ki 
 <formula> 
 This notation demonstrates that similar to the Michaelis – Menten equation , where the rate of reaction depends on the percent of the enzyme population interacting with substrate . 
 fraction of the enzyme population bound by substrate 
 <formula> 
 fraction of the enzyme population bound by inhibitor 
 <formula> 
 the effect of the inhibitor is a result of the percent of the enzyme population interacting with inhibitor . The only problem with this equation in its present form is that it assumes absolute inhibition of the enzyme with inhibitor binding , when in fact there can be a wide range of effects anywhere from 100 % inhibition of substrate turn over to just > 0 % . To account for this the equation can be easily modified to allow for different degrees of inhibition by including a delta Vmax term . 
 <formula> 
 or 
 <formula> 
 This term can then define the residual enzymatic activity present when the inhibitor is interacting with individual enzymes in the population . However the inclusion of this term has the added value of allowing for the possibility of activation if the secondary Vmax term turns out to be higher than the initial term . To account for the possibly of activation as well the notation can then be rewritten replacing the inhibitor " I " with a modifier term denoted here as " X " . 
 <formula> 
 While this terminology results in a simplified way of dealing with kinetic effects relating to the maximum velocity of the Michaelis – Menten equation , it highlights potential problems with the term used to describe effects relating to the Km . The Km relating to the affinity of the enzyme for the substrate should in most cases relate to potential changes in the binding site of the enzyme which would directly result from enzyme inhibitor interactions . As such a term similar to the one proposed above to modulate Vmax should be appropriate in most situations : 
 <formula> 
 = = = Special cases = = = 
 The mechanism of partially competitive inhibition is similar to that of non @-@ competitive , except that the EIS complex has catalytic activity , which may be lower or even higher ( partially competitive activation ) than that of the enzyme – substrate ( ES ) complex . This inhibition typically displays a lower Vmax , but an unaffected Km value . 
 Uncompetitive inhibition occurs when the inhibitor binds only to the enzyme – substrate complex , not to the free enzyme ; the EIS complex is catalytically inactive . This mode of inhibition is rare and causes a decrease in both Vmax and the Km value . 
 Substrate and product inhibition is where either the substrate or product of an enzyme reaction inhibit the enzyme 's activity . This inhibition may follow the competitive , uncompetitive or mixed patterns . In substrate inhibition there is a progressive decrease in activity at high substrate concentrations . This may indicate the existence of two substrate @-@ binding sites in the enzyme . At low substrate , the high @-@ affinity site is occupied and normal kinetics are followed . However , at higher concentrations , the second inhibitory site becomes occupied , inhibiting the enzyme . Product inhibition is often a regulatory feature in metabolism and can be a form of negative feedback . 
 Slow @-@ tight inhibition occurs when the initial enzyme – inhibitor complex EI undergoes <unk> to a second more tightly held complex , EI * , but the overall inhibition process is reversible . This manifests itself as slowly increasing enzyme inhibition . Under these conditions , traditional Michaelis – Menten kinetics give a false value for Ki , which is time – dependent . The true value of Ki can be obtained through more complex analysis of the on ( kon ) and off ( <unk> ) rate constants for inhibitor association . See irreversible inhibition below for more information . 
 = = = Examples of reversible inhibitors = = = 
 As enzymes have evolved to bind their substrates tightly , and most reversible inhibitors bind in the active site of enzymes , it is unsurprising that some of these inhibitors are strikingly similar in structure to the substrates of their targets . An example of these substrate mimics are the protease inhibitors , a very successful class of antiretroviral drugs used to treat HIV . The structure of ritonavir , a protease inhibitor based on a peptide and containing three peptide bonds , is shown on the right . As this drug resembles the protein that is the substrate of the HIV protease , it competes with this substrate in the enzyme 's active site . 
 Enzyme inhibitors are often designed to mimic the transition state or intermediate of an enzyme @-@ catalyzed reaction . This ensures that the inhibitor exploits the transition state stabilising effect of the enzyme , resulting in a better binding affinity ( lower Ki ) than substrate @-@ based designs . An example of such a transition state inhibitor is the antiviral drug oseltamivir ; this drug mimics the planar nature of the ring <unk> ion in the reaction of the viral enzyme neuraminidase . 
 However , not all inhibitors are based on the structures of substrates . For example , the structure of another HIV protease inhibitor <unk> is shown on the left . This molecule is not based on a peptide and has no obvious structural similarity to a protein substrate . These non @-@ peptide inhibitors can be more stable than inhibitors containing peptide bonds , because they will not be substrates for peptidases and are less likely to be degraded . 
 In drug design it is important to consider the concentrations of substrates to which the target enzymes are exposed . For example , some protein kinase inhibitors have chemical structures that are similar to adenosine triphosphate , one of the substrates of these enzymes . However , drugs that are simple competitive inhibitors will have to compete with the high concentrations of ATP in the cell . Protein kinases can also be inhibited by competition at the binding sites where the kinases interact with their substrate proteins , and most proteins are present inside cells at concentrations much lower than the concentration of ATP . As a consequence , if two protein kinase inhibitors both bind in the active site with similar affinity , but only one has to compete with ATP , then the competitive inhibitor at the protein @-@ binding site will inhibit the enzyme more effectively . 
 = = Irreversible inhibitors = = 
 = = = Types of irreversible inhibition = = = 
 Irreversible inhibitors usually covalently modify an enzyme , and inhibition can therefore not be reversed . Irreversible inhibitors often contain reactive functional groups such as nitrogen <unk> , aldehydes , haloalkanes , alkenes , Michael acceptors , phenyl <unk> , or <unk> . These electrophilic groups react with amino acid side chains to form covalent adducts . The residues modified are those with side chains containing nucleophiles such as hydroxyl or sulfhydryl groups ; these include the amino acids serine ( as in DFP , right ) , cysteine , threonine , or tyrosine . 
 Irreversible inhibition is different from irreversible enzyme inactivation . Irreversible inhibitors are generally specific for one class of enzyme and do not inactivate all proteins ; they do not function by destroying protein structure but by specifically altering the active site of their target . For example , extremes of pH or temperature usually cause denaturation of all protein structure , but this is a non @-@ specific effect . Similarly , some non @-@ specific chemical treatments destroy protein structure : for example , heating in concentrated hydrochloric acid will hydrolyse the peptide bonds holding proteins together , releasing free amino acids . 
 Irreversible inhibitors display time @-@ dependent inhibition and their potency therefore cannot be characterised by an <unk> value . This is because the amount of active enzyme at a given concentration of irreversible inhibitor will be different depending on how long the inhibitor is pre @-@ incubated with the enzyme . Instead , kobs / [ I ] values are used , <unk> is the observed pseudo @-@ first order rate of inactivation ( obtained by plotting the log of % activity vs. time ) and [ I ] is the concentration of inhibitor . The kobs / [ I ] parameter is valid as long as the inhibitor does not saturate binding with the enzyme ( in which case kobs = kinact ) . 
