 = = = Analysis of irreversible inhibition = = = 
 As shown in the figure to the left , irreversible inhibitors form a reversible non @-@ covalent complex with the enzyme ( EI or <unk> ) and this then reacts to produce the covalently modified " dead @-@ end complex " EI * . The rate at which EI * is formed is called the inactivation rate or kinact . Since formation of EI may compete with ES , binding of irreversible inhibitors can be prevented by competition either with substrate or with a second , reversible inhibitor . This protection effect is good evidence of a specific reaction of the irreversible inhibitor with the active site . 
 The binding and inactivation steps of this reaction are investigated by incubating the enzyme with inhibitor and assaying the amount of activity remaining over time . The activity will be decreased in a time @-@ dependent manner , usually following exponential decay . Fitting these data to a rate equation gives the rate of inactivation at this concentration of inhibitor . This is done at several different concentrations of inhibitor . If a reversible EI complex is involved the inactivation rate will be saturable and fitting this curve will give kinact and Ki . 
 Another method that is widely used in these analyses is mass spectrometry . Here , accurate measurement of the mass of the unmodified native enzyme and the inactivated enzyme gives the increase in mass caused by reaction with the inhibitor and shows the stoichiometry of the reaction . This is usually done using a <unk> @-@ TOF mass spectrometer . In a complementary technique , peptide mass fingerprinting involves digestion of the native and modified protein with a protease such as trypsin . This will produce a set of peptides that can be analysed using a mass spectrometer . The peptide that changes in mass after reaction with the inhibitor will be the one that contains the site of modification . 
 = = = Special cases = = = 
 Not all irreversible inhibitors form covalent adducts with their enzyme targets . Some reversible inhibitors bind so tightly to their target enzyme that they are essentially irreversible . These tight @-@ binding inhibitors may show kinetics similar to covalent irreversible inhibitors . In these cases , some of these inhibitors rapidly bind to the enzyme in a low @-@ affinity EI complex and this then undergoes a slower rearrangement to a very tightly bound EI * complex ( see figure above ) . This kinetic behaviour is called slow @-@ binding . This slow rearrangement after binding often involves a conformational change as the enzyme " clamps down " around the inhibitor molecule . Examples of slow @-@ binding inhibitors include some important drugs , such methotrexate , allopurinol , and the activated form of acyclovir . 
 = = = Examples of irreversible inhibitors = = = 
 <unk> ( DFP ) is shown as an example of an irreversible protease inhibitor in the figure above right . The enzyme hydrolyses the phosphorus – fluorine bond , but the phosphate residue remains bound to the serine in the active site , deactivating it . Similarly , DFP also reacts with the active site of acetylcholine esterase in the synapses of neurons , and consequently is a potent neurotoxin , with a lethal dose of less than 100 mg . 
 Suicide inhibition is an unusual type of irreversible inhibition where the enzyme converts the inhibitor into a reactive form in its active site . An example is the inhibitor of <unk> biosynthesis , α @-@ <unk> or DFMO , which is an analogue of the amino acid ornithine , and is used to treat African trypanosomiasis ( sleeping sickness ) . Ornithine decarboxylase can catalyse the decarboxylation of DFMO instead of ornithine , as shown above . However , this decarboxylation reaction is followed by the elimination of a fluorine atom , which converts this catalytic intermediate into a conjugated imine , a highly electrophilic species . This reactive form of DFMO then reacts with either a cysteine or lysine residue in the active site to irreversibly inactivate the enzyme . 
 Since irreversible inhibition often involves the initial formation of a non @-@ covalent EI complex , it is sometimes possible for an inhibitor to bind to an enzyme in more than one way . For example , in the figure showing trypanothione reductase from the human protozoan parasite Trypanosoma cruzi , two molecules of an inhibitor called <unk> mustard are bound in its active site . The top molecule is bound reversibly , but the lower one is bound covalently as it has reacted with an amino acid residue through its nitrogen mustard group . 
 = = Discovery and design of inhibitors = = 
 New drugs are the products of a long drug development process , the first step of which is often the discovery of a new enzyme inhibitor . In the past the only way to discover these new inhibitors was by trial and error : screening huge libraries of compounds against a target enzyme and hoping that some useful leads would emerge . This brute force approach is still successful and has even been extended by combinatorial chemistry approaches that quickly produce large numbers of novel compounds and high @-@ throughput screening technology to rapidly screen these huge chemical libraries for useful inhibitors . 
 More recently , an alternative approach has been applied : rational drug design uses the three @-@ dimensional structure of an enzyme 's active site to predict which molecules might be inhibitors . These predictions are then tested and one of these tested compounds may be a novel inhibitor . This new inhibitor is then used to try to obtain a structure of the enzyme in an inhibitor / enzyme complex to show how the molecule is binding to the active site , allowing changes to be made to the inhibitor to try to optimise binding . This test and improve cycle is then repeated until a sufficiently potent inhibitor is produced . Computer @-@ based methods of predicting the affinity of an inhibitor for an enzyme are also being developed , such as molecular docking and molecular mechanics . 
 = = Uses of inhibitors = = 
 Enzyme inhibitors are found in nature and are also designed and produced as part of pharmacology and biochemistry . Natural poisons are often enzyme inhibitors that have evolved to defend a plant or animal against predators . These natural toxins include some of the most poisonous compounds known . Artificial inhibitors are often used as drugs , but can also be insecticides such as malathion , herbicides such as glyphosate , or disinfectants such as <unk> . Other artificial enzyme inhibitors block acetylcholinesterase , an enzyme which breaks down acetylcholine , and are used as nerve agents in chemical warfare . 
 = = = Chemotherapy = = = 
 The most common uses for enzyme inhibitors are as drugs to treat disease . Many of these inhibitors target a human enzyme and aim to correct a pathological condition . However , not all drugs are enzyme inhibitors . Some , such as anti @-@ epileptic drugs , alter enzyme activity by causing more or less of the enzyme to be produced . These effects are called enzyme induction and inhibition and are alterations in gene expression , which is unrelated to the type of enzyme inhibition discussed here . Other drugs interact with cellular targets that are not enzymes , such as ion channels or membrane receptors . 
 An example of a medicinal enzyme inhibitor is sildenafil ( Viagra ) , a common treatment for male erectile dysfunction . This compound is a potent inhibitor of <unk> specific phosphodiesterase type 5 , the enzyme that degrades the signalling molecule cyclic guanosine monophosphate . This signalling molecule triggers smooth muscle relaxation and allows blood flow into the corpus <unk> , which causes an erection . Since the drug decreases the activity of the enzyme that halts the signal , it makes this signal last for a longer period of time . 
 Another example of the structural similarity of some inhibitors to the substrates of the enzymes they target is seen in the figure comparing the drug methotrexate to folic acid . <unk> acid is a substrate of dihydrofolate reductase , an enzyme involved in making nucleotides that is potently inhibited by methotrexate . Methotrexate blocks the action of dihydrofolate reductase and thereby halts the production of nucleotides . This block of nucleotide biosynthesis is more toxic to rapidly growing cells than non @-@ dividing cells , since a rapidly growing cell has to carry out DNA replication , therefore methotrexate is often used in cancer chemotherapy . 
 = = = Antibiotics = = = 
 Drugs also are used to inhibit enzymes needed for the survival of pathogens . For example , bacteria are surrounded by a thick cell wall made of a net @-@ like polymer called peptidoglycan . Many antibiotics such as penicillin and vancomycin inhibit the enzymes that produce and then cross @-@ link the strands of this polymer together . This causes the cell wall to lose strength and the bacteria to burst . In the figure , a molecule of penicillin ( shown in a ball @-@ and @-@ stick form ) is shown bound to its target , the transpeptidase from the bacteria Streptomyces <unk> ( the protein is shown as a ribbon @-@ diagram ) . 
 Antibiotic drug design is facilitated when an enzyme that is essential to the pathogen 's survival is absent or very different in humans . In the example above , humans do not make peptidoglycan , therefore inhibitors of this process are selectively toxic to bacteria . Selective toxicity is also produced in antibiotics by exploiting differences in the structure of the ribosomes in bacteria , or how they make fatty acids . 
 = = = Metabolic control = = = 
 Enzyme inhibitors are also important in metabolic control . Many metabolic pathways in the cell are inhibited by metabolites that control enzyme activity through allosteric regulation or substrate inhibition . A good example is the allosteric regulation of the glycolytic pathway . This catabolic pathway consumes glucose and produces ATP , NADH and pyruvate . A key step for the regulation of glycolysis is an early reaction in the pathway catalysed by phosphofructokinase @-@ 1 ( PFK1 ) . When ATP levels rise , ATP binds an allosteric site in PFK1 to decrease the rate of the enzyme reaction ; glycolysis is inhibited and ATP production falls . This negative feedback control helps maintain a steady concentration of ATP in the cell . However , metabolic pathways are not just regulated through inhibition since enzyme activation is equally important . With respect to PFK1 , fructose 2 @,@ 6 @-@ <unk> and ADP are examples of metabolites that are allosteric activators . 
 Physiological enzyme inhibition can also be produced by specific protein inhibitors . This mechanism occurs in the pancreas , which synthesises many digestive precursor enzymes known as <unk> . Many of these are activated by the trypsin protease , so it is important to inhibit the activity of trypsin in the pancreas to prevent the organ from digesting itself . One way in which the activity of trypsin is controlled is the production of a specific and potent trypsin inhibitor protein in the pancreas . This inhibitor binds tightly to trypsin , preventing the trypsin activity that would otherwise be detrimental to the organ . Although the trypsin inhibitor is a protein , it avoids being hydrolysed as a substrate by the protease by excluding water from trypsin 's active site and destabilising the transition state . Other examples of physiological enzyme inhibitor proteins include the <unk> inhibitor of the bacterial ribonuclease <unk> and the inhibitors of protein phosphatases . 
 = = = Pesticides = = = 
 Many pesticides are enzyme inhibitors . <unk> ( AChE ) is an enzyme found in animals from insects to humans . It is essential to nerve cell function through its mechanism of breaking down the neurotransmitter acetylcholine into its constituents , acetate and choline . This is somewhat unique among neurotransmitters as most , including serotonin , dopamine , and norepinephrine , are absorbed from the synaptic cleft rather than cleaved . A large number of AChE inhibitors are used in both medicine and agriculture . Reversible competitive inhibitors , such as <unk> , physostigmine , and <unk> , are used in the treatment of myasthenia gravis and in anaesthesia . The carbamate pesticides are also examples of reversible AChE inhibitors . The organophosphate pesticides such as malathion , <unk> , and chlorpyrifos irreversibly inhibit acetylcholinesterase . 
 The herbicide glyphosate is an inhibitor of 3 @-@ <unk> 1 @-@ <unk> , other herbicides , such as the sulfonylureas inhibit the enzyme <unk> synthase . Both these enzymes are needed for plants to make branched @-@ chain amino acids . Many other enzymes are inhibited by herbicides , including enzymes needed for the biosynthesis of lipids and carotenoids and the processes of photosynthesis and oxidative phosphorylation . 
 = = = Natural poisons = = = 
 Animals and plants have evolved to synthesise a vast array of poisonous products including secondary metabolites , peptides and proteins that can act as inhibitors . Natural toxins are usually small organic molecules and are so diverse that there are probably natural inhibitors for most metabolic processes . The metabolic processes targeted by natural poisons encompass more than enzymes in metabolic pathways and can also include the inhibition of receptor , channel and structural protein functions in a cell . For example , paclitaxel ( taxol ) , an organic molecule found in the Pacific yew tree , binds tightly to tubulin dimers and inhibits their assembly into microtubules in the cytoskeleton . 
 Many natural poisons act as neurotoxins that can cause paralysis leading to death and have functions for defence against predators or in hunting and capturing prey . Some of these natural inhibitors , despite their toxic attributes , are valuable for therapeutic uses at lower doses . An example of a neurotoxin are the <unk> , from the plant species in the Solanaceae family ( includes potato , tomato and eggplant ) , that are acetylcholinesterase inhibitors . Inhibition of this enzyme causes an uncontrolled increase in the acetylcholine neurotransmitter , muscular paralysis and then death . Neurotoxicity can also result from the inhibition of receptors ; for example , atropine from deadly nightshade ( Atropa belladonna ) that functions as a competitive antagonist of the muscarinic acetylcholine receptors . 
 Although many natural toxins are secondary metabolites , these poisons also include peptides and proteins . An example of a toxic peptide is alpha @-@ amanitin , which is found in relatives of the death cap mushroom . This is a potent enzyme inhibitor , in this case preventing the RNA polymerase II enzyme from transcribing DNA . The algal toxin <unk> is also a peptide and is an inhibitor of protein phosphatases . This toxin can contaminate water supplies after algal blooms and is a known carcinogen that can also cause acute liver hemorrhage and death at higher doses . 
 Proteins can also be natural poisons or <unk> , such as the trypsin inhibitors ( discussed above ) that are found in some legumes , as shown in the figure above . A less common class of toxins are toxic enzymes : these act as irreversible inhibitors of their target enzymes and work by chemically modifying their substrate enzymes . An example is ricin , an extremely potent protein toxin found in castor oil beans . This enzyme is a <unk> that inactivates ribosomes . Since ricin is a catalytic irreversible inhibitor , this allows just a single molecule of ricin to kill a cell . 
 = Battle of Yanshi = 
 The Battle of Yanshi ( <unk> ) was fought on 5 – 6 October 618 between the armies of Wang Shichong and Li Mi , rival contenders for the succession of the Sui Dynasty . Wang , who was still ostensibly a Sui loyalist and had been blockaded in Luoyang for months by Li Mi , gambled on a decisive battle and led his troops out to attack the besieging army . Li assembled his forces on a naturally defensible position north of Yanshi town , but Wang managed to surprise Li 's forces and approach their camp before they could react . Aided by a secondary cavalry attack from the rear , Wang secured a decisive victory over Li 's forces . Although Li managed to escape with part of his army , his authority was shattered , and his followers joined Wang . While Li Mi sought refuge in the rival Tang court , Wang consolidated his control over Henan and eventually deposed the Sui puppet ruler Yang Tong and declared himself as Emperor of the new Zheng dynasty . Wang 's power lasted until his surrender to the Tang prince Li Shimin in 621 . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the later reign of the second emperor of the Sui Dynasty , Yang ( reigned 604 – 618 ) , the dynasty 's authority began to wane : the immense material and human cost of the protracted and fruitless attempts to conquer the Korean kingdom of Goguryeo , coupled with natural disasters , caused unrest in the provinces , while the successive military failures eroded the emperor 's prestige and legitimacy ( " Mandate of Heaven " ) among the provincial governors . Yang nevertheless continued to be fixated on the Korean campaigns , and by the time he realized the gravity of the situation , it was too late : as revolts spread , in 616 , he abandoned the north and withdrew to Jiangdu , where he remained until his assassination in 618 . Local governors and magnates rose to claim power in the wake of Yang 's withdrawal . By the summer of 618 , nine major contenders emerged , some claiming the imperial title , others <unk> themselves , for the time being , with more modest titles . The three most powerful were Li Yuan , who seized the Sui capital of Daxingcheng ( Chang 'an ) and on 16 June 618 proclaimed himself the first emperor of the Tang Dynasty ; Dou Jiande , a one @-@ time bandit leader who had risen in revolt against the Sui already in 611 , and came to control most of Hebei as the " King of Changle " and then as the " King of Xia " ; and Li Mi in Henan , who led a mixture of rebelled peasants and Sui soldiers . 
 Li Mi 's main antagonist was the Sui general Wang Shichong , who controlled the eastern capital , Luoyang , and the remnants of the Sui administration there . Emperor Yang had sent him to the city in mid @-@ 617 . In May 618 , following Yang 's murder by the general Yuwen Huaji , the Sui officials in Luoyang elevated Yang 's grandson Yang Tong to the throne . In the meantime , Li Mi had managed to gain control over most of the surrounding area . When Yuwen Huaji moved north against Li Mi , Wang seized the opportunity to play both rebels against each other : Li Mi was offered an amnesty and a high court position if he would march against Emperor Yang 's assassin . Li Mi , whose own base , the great granary at <unk> , was threatened , agreed , hoping in turn to profit from his legitimization and gain control of Luoyang . In the event , Li Mi heavily defeated Yuwen in a series of battles and forced him to withdraw to northern Hubei . Feeling threatened by Li Mi 's growing power , and facing plots against him in Luoyang , Wang launched a coup d 'état on 11 August 618 and seized power for himself , removing his opponents and barring the city to Li Mi . The two men now moved to a confrontation that , as the historian David Graff comments , could prove decisive for the outcome of the civil war . Wang " was fighting for survival " , while Li had to capture Luoyang to " cement his hold over Henan " . More importantly , however , " the victor would be left in possession of the most populous region of the Sui empire and could expect to receive the allegiance of many of the smaller armed factions " . 
 = = Battle of Yanshi = = 
 Facing starvation and surrender , Wang Shichong decided to risk an open confrontation with Li Mi , in an attempt to push him back and break the siege . Wang selected 20 @,@ 000 " elite " troops — of which only 1 @,@ 000 were cavalry — from Luoyang 's garrison , apparently troops who had already participated in several expeditions against rebels and bandits under his command and were especially trustworthy . In order to embolden his men Wang — who according to Graff " had a keen interest in divination and was fond of invoking unseen powers " — now invoked the semi @-@ mythical figure of the founder of Luoyang , the Duke of Zhou : he had a shrine erected in the Duke of Zhou 's honour , and shamans declared that the Duke promised that if they marched to confront Li Mi , they would win , whereas if they remained in Luoyang , they were doomed to die of pestilence . Apparently this had the desired effect , for on 4 October 618 Wang led his army out of Luoyang and , following the course of the Luo River , marched eastward , bypassing Li Mi 's forward positions . On the afternoon of the next day , Wang 's army had reached the walled town of Yanshi , some 20 miles from Luoyang and located between the Luo River to the south and an irrigation canal to the north . There , deep inside enemy territory , Wang made camp . Li Mi had been at <unk> Fortress some 6 miles east of Luoyang when he learned of Wang 's sortie . He too selected the best men among his own troops , numbering around 40 @,@ 000 , left one of his generals in charge of <unk> , and followed Wang eastward . Li Mi encamped on the Mang hills north of Yanshi . 
 Once there , Li Mi convened a council of war to determine his army 's course of action . Li Mi himself advocated a passive and cautious stance , arguing that Wang 's troops were not only experienced veterans , but that , as they were virtually cut off from retreat due to the Luo river , the canals , and the presence of his own army , they would fight with desperate courage — a situation already described and recommended as a strategy to galvanize one 's troops by no lesser authority than Sun Tzu , and doubtlessly familiar to both opposing commanders . In addition , while lack of supplies constrained Wang to seek an early and decisive engagement , Li Mi 's own forces had time on their side and could afford to sit out and wait until Wang 's provisions were utterly exhausted . Most of Li 's generals , however , vehemently disagreed , regarding Wang 's army as an exhausted and demoralized force , and pointing to their own considerable numerical superiority . At this juncture , the heterogeneous nature of Li 's army , cobbled together from bandit chieftains and Sui defectors , came into play : Li was well aware that his commanders were " potentially autonomous warlords who commanded the personal loyalty of their own subordinates " , and that he could not afford to antagonize them . Therefore , against his better judgement , he was forced to agree to an immediate confrontation . Nevertheless , Li Mi decided to await Wang 's attack instead of attacking himself . The main host , under Li Mi , remained on the Mang hills , while a detachment under Shan <unk> moved down to the plain just north of Yanshi and established a camp there . The two camps , in the description of David Graff , formed " an inverted letter ' L ' running east along the mountain and then turning sharply south across the plain to Yanshi " . Li Mi felt confident in his superior position , which gave him ample time to descend the hills and move against Wang , should he try to cross the canal for an attack . If Wang attacked either of his camps , the troops of the other would come to aid , flanking Wang 's forces . Confident in the naturally defensive layout of his hilltop camp , however , he neglected fortifying it . 
 The first clash between the two armies occurred on the same evening of 5 October , when Wang sent several hundred of his cavalry to attack Shan <unk> 's camp on the plain . Li sent forces from the hills to his general 's aid , but the battle ended quickly with the arrival of night . This attack was nothing more than a diversion , drawing Li 's attention to the east while , under cover of night , Wang sent 200 of his cavalry around and behind Li 's forces . Concealing themselves in a ravine behind Li 's camp , they waited . During the night Wang laid bridges across the canal , and before dawn his army crossed over and deployed in battle formation close to Li Mi 's camps . At daybreak , Li Mi 's troops were caught entirely by surprise at the sight of the battle @-@ ready enemy advancing onto them . As the camps were unfortified , the rebel troops tried to hastily form a battle line themselves , but they were unable to prevent Wang 's forces from entering their encampments . At the same time , Wang signalled his hidden cavalry to attack . Charging down from the north into Li Mi 's camp , the 200 horsemen began setting fire to it . At the sight of the camp to their rear going up in flames , Li Mi 's army broke and fled . While Li Mi was able to escape with some 10 @,@ 000 of his men , many of the rest surrendered to Wang . According to one account , Wang 's victory was secured by a stratagem : one of his soldiers , who greatly resembled Li Mi , was bound and displayed to the rebel troops at the height of the battle , whereupon the latter collapsed . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 While Li Mi survived , his authority suffered a devastating blow from which it could not recover . His followers started flocking to Wang Shichong , who quickly became the master of all territories " east to the sea and south as far as the River Yangzi " . With the remnants of his army , Li Mi was forced to seek refuge with the Tang court in Chang 'an . Wang Shichong , on the other hand , now stood at the apex of his power . He appointed new senior officials and finally , in May 619 he deposed the puppet Sui emperor Yang Tong and declared himself as the first emperor of the Zheng dynasty . Soon , however , Wang 's rule became cruel and repressive , costing him support . He was also unable to effectively confront the advancing Tang armies under Li Shimin , who in early 621 laid siege to Luoyang . Wang allied himself with Dou Jiande , who came to his aid ; but Li Shimin scored a decisive victory at the Battle of Hulao on 28 May 621 , taking Dou Jiande captive . Without hope of succour , Wang finally surrendered four days after the battle , and was killed on the way to his exile . 
 = Dareka no Manazashi = 
 Dareka no Manazashi ( Japanese : <unk> , lit . Someone 's Gaze ) , is a Japanese anime short film written and directed by Makoto Shinkai . It was initially screened at the Tokyo International Forum on February 10 , 2013 , though it was also shown alongside Shinkai 's film The Garden of Words during its Japanese premier on May 31 , 2013 . It was later posted on YouTube from September 2013 to January 2014 . Dareka no Manazashi is a slightly futuristic story about the maturation of a recently independent young woman and her changing relationship with her father . The story develops through reminiscent scenes of their family life and the connection the girl and her father share with the family 's cat . 
 The film was produced by CoMix Wave Films , NEST , and TYO M1 Production in collaboration with The Answer Studio Co . , Ltd . The voice cast includes Fumi Hirano , Satomi Hanamura , and Shinji Ogawa . Hirano 's narration was crucial in helping Shinkai structure the film . Other leading staff included Makoto Taiga , Miho Suzuki , and Takumi <unk> . Akihisa Matsuura directed the music , and Kazusa wrote and sang the theme song , " Sore de Ii yo " ( <unk> , lit . It 's all fine ) , which was aimed at matching the tastes of a younger generation . Online reviews and comments universally praised the film as heartfelt and artistically vibrant , while it was solely criticized for its brevity . It was described as " deeply emotional " , particularly for older viewers due to its emphasis on family bonds as a family changes over time . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Set in the near future , the story focuses on a recently independent daughter Aya Okamura ( <unk> , Okamura Aya ) , her parents , and their pet cat Mii ( <unk> ) . Aya had recently taken a job that allowed her to move away from home , and her father , Kōji ( <unk> ) , lives at home alone with their cat while Aya 's mother , Minako ( <unk> ) , is working overseas . Mii is an old cat , originally obtained as a kitten by Aya 's father to help his young daughter cope with her mother 's absence , and is now in poor health . The story is narrated from the cat 's perspective . 
 The story begins with Aya returning home from a rough day at work . After relaxing on her bed , she receives a phone call from her father , who wants to have dinner with her ; however , she declines by lying about still being at work . The narrator then reminisces about Aya 's childhood and family life , particularly dwelling upon how her maturity and independence had created distance between her and her father , who is increasingly lonely yet happy for her . Later that night , Aya awakes to another phone call from her father . Having learned of Mii 's death , she visits her father and has lunch with him , an experience that brings the two closer together . Aya later visits her father to see the new kitten he buys . At the same time , her mother rings the doorbell and the family is reunited , their happiness renewed . 
 = = Production = = 
 Dareka no Manazashi was written and directed by Makoto Shinkai , who directed Voices of a Distant Star and 5 Centimeters Per Second . It was produced by CoMix Wave Films , NEST , and TYO M1 Production in collaboration with The Answer Studio Co . , Ltd . The assistant director was Makoto Taiga , the animation director and character designer was Miho Suzuki , and the art director was Takumi <unk> . The music was directed by Akihisa Matsuura , and the theme song , " Sore de Ii yo " ( <unk> , lit . It 's all fine ) , was performed by the singer @-@ songwriter Kazusa . Shinkai said he chose Kazusa to perform the theme song because she could provide " the sort of music that the young encounter " , fitting with the film 's theme . The voice cast includes Fumi Hirano as Mii , Satomi Hanamura as Aya Okamura , and Shinji Ogawa as Kōji Okamura . The short film is 6 minutes 40 seconds in length . 
 The short film was made with the support of Nomura Real Estate Group for its " Proud Box Appreciation Festival " ( <unk> ) , a home living exposition at the Tokyo International Forum . According to Shinkai , the greatest challenge in the project was to keep the animation both short and entertaining while also covering the two main themes : family bonds and the future . Hirano 's narration , which provided character background and insight into their personalities , helped Shinkai structure the film . 
 = = Release = = 
 Dareka no Manazashi was announced on Shinkai 's official website on January 10 , 2013 . On January 23 , Nomura Real Estate Group streamed the trailer , and announced plans to screen the short film on February 10 , during the " Proud Box Appreciation Festival " . On May 22 , 2013 , Shinkai tweeted that he would also include the short with the Japanese premiere of The Garden of Words on May 31 , 2013 . The two films were also screened together for the Italian cinematic release on May 21 , 2014 . 
 The entire film was uploaded to YouTube through Nomura Real Estate Group 's <unk> on September 5 , 2013 , and was streamed starting September 9 . English subtitles were added on September 11 . It was originally scheduled to be taken down on January 12 , 2014 , but remained available until January 21 . During the four months it was available , it was viewed more than 745 @,@ 000 times . On March 28 , 2014 , Dareka no Manazashi was included with the " Extras " on the limited edition The Garden of Words DVD distributed by Kazé in Germany ( subtitled in German ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Dareka no Manazashi was positively received in Japan , and attracted particular interest once available on YouTube . Megumi Sawai of <unk> quoted what she called typical online comments on the film , all of which described the emotional impact it had : " It was very good , and deeply emotional . " " Hopelessly , I was reduced to tears . " Sawai herself credited the film for the high quality of the art , and its message , saying it reminded her of the " bonds between family members , which remain unchanged even as the form of a family changes " . <unk> said that " even young viewers can be moved by sympathy " after watching it , but that its greatest emotional impact might be for older audiences . 
 According to Curtis Stone at <unk> , the artwork was " vibrant and meticulous " and story was " exceptional " , and along with its execution and character development , he felt that Dareka no <unk> was " utterly <unk> " despite its shortness . Stone was most impressed by how people could so easily relate to the characters emotionally , despite the film 's brevity . His only minor criticism was that the ending left open tantalizing questions about the family 's future , though he noted that this did not detract from the film 's message . <unk> called the short film " <unk> " and characterized it as one of those hard @-@ to @-@ find " little gems " . 
 = Washington State Route 174 = 
 State Route 174 ( SR 174 ) is a 40 @.@ 66 @-@ mile ( 65 @.@ 44 km ) long state highway that traverses Douglas , Grant and Lincoln counties in Washington . SR 174 begins at a junction with SR 17 in Leahy and travels eastward to Grand Coulee , near the Grand Coulee Dam , to intersect SR 155 . From Grand Coulee , the roadway travels southeast to end at SR 21 northwest of Wilbur . 
 Prior to the establishment of SR 174 in a 1964 renumbering , it had been county roads and two highways , Secondary State Highway 10B ( SSH 10B ) and Secondary State Highway 4C ( SSH 4C ) from 1937 until 1964 . The two highways merged to form SR 174 in 1964 and a branch of SSH 10B became the Crown Point spur of SR 174 . A second spur route , located in Leahy , was added in 2009 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 174 begins at an intersection with SR 17 in Leahy , a small community in Douglas County . The western terminus is only accessible from SR 17 southbound , access from SR 17 northbound is provided by the Leahy spur of SR 174 . From Leahy , the highway travels northeastward through grasslands with few farms before turning southeast to intersect its Crown Point spur near the Grand Coulee Dam . The roadway then enters Grant County and the city of Grand Coulee and becomes the Bridgeport Highway . SR 174 continues to the Grand Coulee Dam federal reservation and state maintenance ends through the area . After the gap in maintenance in Grand Coulee , SR 174 travels over the Columbia Basin Canal and intersects with SR 155 , which is named Midway Avenue through Grand Coulee . After the intersection , the highway is named Grand Coulee Avenue and passes Grand Coulee Middle School and <unk> High School before leaving the city and the county . The roadway enters Lincoln County and continues southeast to its eastern terminus , an intersection with SR 21 , northwest of Wilbur ; SR 21 continues south to intersect with U.S. Route 2 ( US 2 ) . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 174 had previously been parts of various county roads until 1937 , when Washington established a system of primary and secondary highways throughout the state . One of the secondary highways , Secondary State Highway 10B ( SSH 10B ) ran from Primary State Highway 10 ( PSH 10 ) in Bridgeport to Coulee Dam , near the Grand Coulee Dam that was built in 1942 . Another secondary highway , Secondary State Highway 4C ( SSH 4C ) ran from Grand Coulee to PSH 4 near Wilbur . In 1951 , the western terminus SSH 10B was moved from Bridgeport to PSH 10 in Leahy and a western portion from PSH 2 in Farmer to PSH 10 in Mansfield . A branch of SSH 10B from its main route to the Crown Point viewing area of the Grand Coulee Dam was added in 1955 . SR 174 was formed after a 1964 renumbering of Washington state highways , eliminating the previous Primary and secondary highway system . SSH 10B and SSH 4C were connected to become the new highway and the renumbering went into effect in 1970 . In 2009 , a second spur in Leahy was established and added to the state highway system . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Spur routes = = 
 State Route 174 ( SR 174 ) has two spur routes , a type of special route . 
 = = = Leahy spur = = = 
 The Leahy spur of SR 174 is a 0 @.@ 09 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 14 km ) long two @-@ lane spur route that was added to the state highway system in 2009 . The roadway is named Leahy Road and serves as a connector from northbound SR 17 to SR 174 . 
 = = = Crown Point spur = = = 
 The older spur route is located near the Grand Coulee Dam and connects SR 174 to Crown Point State Park , part of the Lake Roosevelt National Recreation Area , within the community of Coulee Dam . The highway , named Crown Point Road , is 1 @.@ 37 miles ( 2 @.@ 20 km ) long and was added in 1964 . The Crown Point Spur was a spur route of SSH 10B , established in 1955 , prior to 1964 . The roadway itself is within federal property and is not numbered or maintained by the state . 
 = Lynemouth power station = 
 Lynemouth Power Station is a coal and biomass fired power station which provides electricity for the UK National Grid . Until March 2012 , it was the main source of electricity for the nearby Alcan Lynemouth Aluminium Smelter . It is located on the coast of Northumberland , north east of the town of Ashington in north east England . The station has stood as a landmark on the Northumberland coast since it opened in 1972 , and has been privately owned by aluminium company Rio Tinto Alcan throughout its operation until December 2013 , when RWE npower took over . In January 2016 it has been acquired by <unk> a <unk> holding . 
 The station is one of the most recently built coal @-@ fired power stations in the United Kingdom , but with a generating capacity of only 420 megawatts ( MW ) , is now one of the smallest operating . Two separate wind farm plans currently have permission to be built near the station , one for a 13 turbine wind farm near the smelter and another three turbine wind farm to the north of the station . In 2009 , Alcan announced that they hope to fit the station with carbon capture and storage technology . In 2011 , it was announced that the power station may be converted to burn biomass only , in a bid to avoid government legislation . RWE npower have confirmed they are committed to conversion to biomass . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1968 , Alcan had applied for planning permission for the construction of a new aluminium smelter in Northumberland at Lynemouth . Later that year , Alcan was granted the permission and site preparation would soon begin . However , to meet the electric demand of the new smelter , a power station would also be needed to be built . Therefore , Lynemouth Power Station was constructed only 800 m ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) from the aluminium smelter . 
 The two establishments were constructed in South East Northumberland as part of an incentive to lower the high unemployment numbers . The site was also chosen because of the Ellington and Lynemouth collieries . Ellington Colliery sunk in 1909 , with Lynemouth Colliery sinking 18 years later . However , in 1968 , the two collieries were connected underground by the Bewick Drift , from which coal was brought to the surface . The Drift had no rail connection , and so coal was sent to the washery at Lynemouth by conveyor belt . The power station was constructed nearby the end of the conveyor belt . 
 Both buildings were designed by architects Yorke Rosenberg <unk> , with engineering consultation from Engineering & Power Consultants Ltd . The power station was constructed by Tarmac Construction and the smelter by M.J. Gleeson Company . Both the power station and smelter were brought into operation in March 1972 . 
 = = Design and specifications = = 
 The power station is divided into structures , which mainly include a boiler house and a turbine hall . Both of these structures have a steel frame foundation in the walls with aluminium cladding . Other structures include a single 114 m ( 374 ft ) tall chimney made out of solid reinforced concrete , and coal delivery and sorting plant . 
 The station 's boiler house houses three 380 <unk> International Combustion boilers , which are fuelled by pulverised bituminous coal . Each of these provide steam for one of three 140 megawatt ( MW ) Parsons turbo @-@ alternators , situated in the station 's turbine hall . These give the station a total generating capacity of 420 MW . The electricity generated was fed at 24 kilovolt ( kV ) to a substation to power the smelter during operation . The substation also has a 132 kV connection to the National Grid , where electricity is distributed to homes and other industries by Northern Electric Distribution Limited . The smelter 's two pot lines required 310 MW of the 420 MW that the power station produces , so the excess 110 MW which was fed into the national grid . Since the mothballing of the smelter , all exports now go to the grid . 
 Between 1999 and 2000 , the power station was given a turbine upgrade . In 2000 , the station 's condensers were also refurbished . The condenser refurbishment was carried out by Alstom . These improvements saw an increase in the station 's generating capacity , thermal efficiency and MWh production . 
 = = Operations = = 
 = = = Coal supply and transport = = = 
 The power station is the leading coal customer in Northumberland , burning 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 tonnes of coal a year , with a weekly coal consumption between 25 @,@ 000 and 27 @,@ 000 tonnes . The station has relatively limited coal storage facilities , and is only able to hold three to four weeks worth of its fuel . 
 The station was designed specifically to burn coal from the Northumberland coalfields . The neighbouring Ellington Colliery originally fed coal directly to the power station using a conveyor belt from its Bewick Drift Mine , situated 970 metres ( 3 @,@ 180 ft ) from the station . Within a year of the power station opening , 3 @,@ 000 men were employed between the Ellington and Lynemouth collieries , producing over two million tons of coal a year , the majority of it being sold to the power station . In 1994 , Ellington Colliery connected underground with Lynemouth Colliery , but coal continued to be taken straight to the power station 's coal sorting area using conveyor belts . This supply was supplemented by coal from local opencast mines . However , Ellington Colliery was forced to close when it flooded in January 2005 . The station burned the colliery 's remaining coal stock after it closed , and since then coal has been sourced from opencast mines in Northumberland and Scotland , but now a small amount of import is necessary . 
 Coal is now delivered to the station mainly using rail transport and is unloaded at the station using a merry @-@ go @-@ round system . Trains supplying the station use the Newbiggin and Lynemouth branch line of the Blyth and Tyne Railway , which also serves the smelter . This line was originally used to export coal from the local coalfield , and also had passenger services . These passenger services ceased in 1964 , and now the line is only used to serve the power station and smelter . Coal from the local opencast mines is brought to the station by road using heavy goods vehicles . Coal is graded and washed at the station prior to being burned . 
 With only one significant opencast in the local area mining past 2008 , along with another smaller opencast at Stony Heap , there is a need for more local supplies of coal for the station because of the risks in depending upon overseas sources of coal . Long distance supplies of coal can see sharp fluctuations in price , as well as the flexibility and security of the supply , whereas local sources aren 't as vulnerable to interruptions and have fixed , contracted prices . The station is not an established importer of coal , having only imported since 2005 . It is situated a long way from the major coal unloading ports of Teesside , Hull and Immingham , which have been booked by power stations closer to them . This means that coal for the power station needs to be imported via Blyth or the Port of Tyne . However , because of the small sizes of these docks , they can only receive ships from Poland and Russia . Due to high production costs and industry restructuring in Poland though , the only realistic source of imported coal for the station is Russia . The environmental impact of shipping 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 tonnes of coal from Russia to Lynemouth is the production of 12 @,@ 812 tonnes of CO2 , whereas hauling coal from local mines to the station would produce only 703 tonnes of CO2 . There are currently two local opencast mines for which planning approval have been granted , one at Shotton near Cramlington approved in 2007 , the other at <unk> Burn near Ashington approved in October 2008 . However , the coal mined from <unk> Burn would have too high a sulphur content to meet the station 's environmental requirements , meaning it wouldn 't be an immediate choice of coal for the station . Coal had been provided by the Delhi surface mine at Blagdon , owned by Banks Developments , since 2002 . It finished extracting coal in March 2009 , following the permission of extension proposals to its original plans in May 2007 . 
 = = = Water use = = = 
 For creating the steam to turn steam turbines and generate electricity , and for cooling the steam coming away from the turbines , water is needed , and is thus beneficial to have near any thermal power station . The cooling water that is used in the Lynemouth power station is taken from a body of water located close to the plant , the North Sea . The water is transferred from the sea to the plant by a series of shafts and tunnels . There are three condensers ( one per each generating set ) in the interior of the power station , which are used to cool the heated water before it is reused in the steam cycle . The cooling water is then transferred back to the North Sea . 
 Water used in the steam cycle is taken from the local mains water , supplied by Northumbrian Water . Up to 300 @,@ 000 tons of mains water per year is used in the station , however it has to be cleaned of impurities before use . This is done at an on site water treatment plant that uses a process of ion exchange to remove impurities such as silica and control PH levels so as to avoid boiler tube corrosion . This treated water is used to make superheated steam in the coal @-@ fired boilers , that will turn the turbines before being recovered in the condenser and reused . 
 Operating close to the power station is a fishing bait company , <unk> . <unk> uses some of the excess hot water that the plant generates to grow worms four times as fast as in the wild . The worms are used for several purposes , primarily for providing worms as bait while fishing . However , the worms are also frozen , packaged and exported to seafood farms . This is seen as environmentally beneficial as it reduces the need for bait digging in natural habitats . 
 = = = Ash removal = = = 
 Fly ash and bottom ash are two byproducts made through the burning of coal in power stations . Ash is normally dumped in the station 's Ash Lagoons landfill site , which is located on site . Since 2006 , ash produced at Lynemouth Power Station has been recycled and used as a sub @-@ fill material in the construction industry and in the production of grout . In 2007 , 63 @,@ 000 tonnes of ash from the station , along with 100 @,@ 000 tonnes of ash from the Ash Lagoons , was taken and recycled . In September 2007 , Pulverised Fuel Ash was utilised as a filling material in the capping of <unk> Landfill , which had been used for the disposal of spent <unk> from the smelter . 
 = = = Biomass usage = = = 
 In December 2003 the Environment Agency granted permission for the plant to co @-@ fire biomass fuels in the station . Since 2004 three different types of biomass fuel been in use at Lynemouth ; Sawdust and Wood pellets from FSC certified forests and Olive residues . These fuels are mixed with the coal on the conveyor belt into the power station . In 2004 11 @,@ 000 tonnes of biomass fuel were used in the station . Biomass conversion ambitions have increased , with the site currently aiming to be 100 % biomass fired from 2015 . 
 The station earned the world class <unk> <unk> health and safety certificate in 2003 , ahead of Alcan 's global targets . All of the station 's staff were required to take place in safety audits to improve working practice at the station . The certificate was presented to the station 's manager by Wansbeck MP Denis Murphy on 15 March 2003 . The station 's attention to health and safety was further recognised on 6 June 2007 when they were honoured by the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents ( RoSPA ) with a RoSPA Occupational Health and Safety Award at the Hilton Birmingham Metropole Hotel . Workers at the station had been audited by RoSPA for 10 years before receiving the award . 
 = = = Coastal defence = = = 
 In late 1994 , the power station was flooded to a foot deep of sea water , after a freak high tide and strong winds . This led to a sea defence system being constructed to protect the building . The problems came about because of the temporary closure of Ellington Colliery . Tipped waste from the colliery had been used as a coastal defence measure , but as the colliery had closed , waste was no longer being tipped . The colliery was reopened by <unk> Mining , and in July 1999 the station ensured the future of the colliery by signing a contract with <unk> Mining to be provided with 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 tonnes of coal from Ellington Colliery and opencast mines in Northumberland , over the course of three years . The colliery closed for good in 2005 , leading to problems with coastal defence again , threatening the station 's coal stocking area . This required to a £ 2 @.@ 5 million new coastal defence scheme be put in place , involving the use of large rocks as a defence wall . 
 = = Environmental impact = = 
 The power station 's use of biomass since 2004 has been part of an attempt to reduce its carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) output . In 2002 and 2004 the station met its targets for reduction in greenhouse gas emissions . Despite this , in 2006 the power station was revealed as having the fourth highest CO2 emissions in the north of England , for producing 2 @,@ 685 @,@ 512 tonnes of CO2 per year . However , generally the station reduced it CO2 emissions by 65 % between 1990 and 2010 , and the local air quality meets UK and European standards . 
 = = Windfarms = = 
 In 2006 a proposal was made by Hawthorn Power , an offshoot of UK Coal , to construct three 110 m ( 360 ft ) tall wind turbines on an unused part of the station 's coal sorting area , north of the power station . Permission was granted for the turbines in February 2008 . In July 2010 , it was revealed that the project 's new developer , Clipper <unk> , would be using the site to erect the country 's first super @-@ efficient wind turbines , called Liberty Wind Turbine . However , this meant the height of the turbines would increase from 110 m ( 360 ft ) to 130 m ( 430 ft ) . Each turbine would have a rating of 2 @.@ 5 MW , but only three turbines would be built . The wind farm would produce enough electricity to provide power for 1 @,@ 690 houses . One turbine is expected to be erected initially , while environmental issues are assessed . 
 <unk> Renewables also have permission to build 13 wind turbines near the aluminium smelter . They were initially refused planning permission , which they submitted in November 2006 . This was because their site is spread over two council boundaries and Wansbeck Council approved the scheme , but Castle Morpeth refused . An appeal hearing was given in April 2008 , and permission was eventually granted in January 2009 for the construction of up to 13 turbines , producing 30 MW of electricity . 
 = = Future of the station = = 
 Following a visit to the station by Prime Minister Gordon Brown on 3 July 2009 , it became apparent that Rio Tinto Alcan were hoping to be able to demonstrate Carbon Capture and Storage ( CCS ) technology at the station in the future , using " pre @-@ combustion " CCS technology . This would have involved treating the coal prior to burning so that less CO2 was produced , with any remaining CO2 being pumped under the North Sea into an aquifer . However , due to the economic climate , Rio Tinto did not commit the funding for the project themselves , and did not secure any of the required £ 1 billion European Union funding available for demonstration of CCS technology . In November 2009 it was announced that a variety of energy experts were preparing for the £ 1 billion bid to the Government for investment . The plans included a pipeline into the North Sea , and the upgrading of one of the station 's generating sets from 140 MW to around 375 MW , to safeguard the supply of electricity to the aluminium smelter . 
 The European Commission ( EC ) claimed that Alcan is in breach of their operating licence as the station has failed to " significantly reduce its emissions " . The UK Government contested the allegations , as the power station and smelter combined then provided 650 jobs and a contribution of £ 100 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to the local economy , in an area heavily affected by the loss of traditional heavy industry . They lost the court case over it and on 22 April 2010 , the European Court of Justice ruled that the plant was subject to the emission limit values of the European directive on Large Combustion Plants . As a consequence , the station has to have at least £ 200 million worth of adaptations made to it so that it conforms to the directive , or be shut down . A date has not yet been given for it to conform , but two options for saving the station are the CCS project , or a switch from coal to biomass as a fuel . 
 Lynemouth 's future came further under threat in March 2011 , following carbon cutting measures announced in the 2011 United Kingdom budget . The government 's plans meant that the station would cost an extra £ 40 million a year , erasing Rio Tinto Alcan 's profits on the station . This has made the station 's operators consider the option of converting the power station to operate on biomass only to avoid the penalties . However , this conversion itself would cost £ 50 million and then using biomass instead of coal would cost an additional £ 170 million a year . 
 = = Cultural use and visual impact = = 
 Since its construction , the station has made appearances in a small number of films shot locally . These include : 
 <unk> – a film made by Amber Films in 1985 . The station is features heavily as a backdrop in the beach scenes , where the characters are working , collecting <unk> . Photographer Mik Critchlow ( who would later become involved with Amber Films ' sister company Side Gallery ) also documented the <unk> at Lynemouth , between 1981 and 1983 . He also used the power station as an industrial backdrop to some of his images . 
 Billy Elliot – a 2000 film directed by Stephen Daldry . The power station and the smelter both feature as an industrial backdrop in the film 's cemetery scenes . The power station 's coal sorting area is used to represent a colliery . 
 The chimneys of both the power station and the smelter are strong landmarks on the local coastline , and can be seen over a 25 @-@ kilometre ( 16 mi ) stretch of coast , from Cresswell down to South Shields pier . 
 = Sam & Max = 
 Sam & Max is a media franchise focusing on the fictional characters of Sam and Max , the Freelance Police . The characters , who occupy a universe that parodies American popular culture , were created by Steve Purcell in his youth , and later debuted in a 1987 comic book series . The characters have since been the subject of a graphic adventure video game developed by LucasArts , a television series produced for Fox in cooperation with Nelvana Limited , and a series of episodic adventure games developed by Telltale Games . In addition , a variety of machinima and a webcomic have been produced for the series . 
 The characters are a pair of anthropomorphic , vigilante private investigators based in a dilapidated office block in New York City . Sam is a six @-@ foot dog wearing a suit and a fedora , while Max is a short and aggressive " hyperkinetic rabbity thing " . Both enjoy solving problems and cases as maniacally as possible , often with complete disregard for the law . Driving a seemingly indestructible black @-@ and @-@ white 1960 DeSoto Adventurer , the pair travel to many contemporary and historical locations to fight crime , including the Moon , Ancient Egypt , the White House and the Philippines , as well as several fictitious locations . 
 The series has been very successful despite its relatively limited amount of media , and has gathered a significant fan base . However , the franchise did not gain more widespread recognition until after the 1993 release of LucasArts ' Sam & Max Hit the Road , which cultivated interest in Purcell 's original comics . Sam & Max Hit the Road is regarded as an exceptional adventure game and an iconic classic of computer gaming in the 1990s . Subsequent video games and the television series have also fared well with both critics and fans ; critics consider the episodic video games to be the first successful application of the episodic distribution model . 
 = = Overview = = 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 The idea of Sam & Max originated with Steve Purcell 's younger brother , Dave , who invented the concept of a comic about a detective team consisting of a dog and a rabbit in his youth . Dave would often leave the comics around the house , so Steve , in a case of sibling rivalry , often finished the incomplete stories in parodies of their original form , deliberately making the characters mix up each other 's names , over @-@ explain things , shoot at each other and mock the way in which they had been drawn , as " kind of a parody of the way a kid talks when he 's writing comics " . Over time , this developed from Steve merely mocking his brother 's work to him creating his own full stories with the characters . Ultimately , in the late 1970s , Dave Purcell gave Steve the rights to the characters , signing them over in a contract on Steve 's birthday and allowing him to develop the characters in his own way . In 1980 , Purcell began to produce Sam & Max comic strips for the weekly newsletter of the California College of Arts and Crafts . Whilst the visual appearance of the characters had not yet been fully developed , the stories were similar in style to those that would follow when Purcell was offered by Fish Police author Steven Moncuse the chance to publish his work properly in 1987 . 
 Many aspects of the Sam & Max comics were influenced by Purcell 's own experiences . Rats and cockroaches are common throughout the franchise , the former inspired by Purcell 's pet rat . In another example , Sam and Max are occasionally shown playing a game called " <unk> " , in which the object of the exercise is to hit a can of beer in mid @-@ air with a solid axe handle . Purcell had previously invented the game with his friends , including fellow comic book writers Art Adams and Mike Mignola . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Sam is a laid @-@ back but enthusiastic , brown @-@ coated anthropomorphic " canine <unk> " . He wears either a gray or blue suit with a matching fedora , to make people more cooperative when conversing with a six @-@ foot talking dog . A warped sense of justice makes Sam the more passionate of the pair for their police work , only held back from taking his job seriously by Max . Nevertheless , he enjoys the mannerisms and dress that come with their line of work . Sam possesses near encyclopedic amounts of knowledge , particularly on obscure topics , and is prone to long @-@ winded sentences filled with elaborate terminology . Although he is always keen to display this information — regardless of its accuracy — Sam can be capable of total ignorance towards more practical matters ; for instance , despite his regard for his DeSoto Adventurer , he is severely negligent with the car 's maintenance . Sam still retains various doglike qualities : he is excitable , enthusiastic but also susceptible to emotions of embarrassment and guilt . Nevertheless , Sam is " not above sticking his head out the car window and letting his tongue flap in the breeze " . Sam rarely loses his temper , and is able to react to panic @-@ inducing situations with extreme calm . When he does get angry , Sam tends to react in a violent , uncharacteristically savage manner , in which case it is usually Max that calms him down and prevents him from acting upon his anger . Sam usually is armed with an oversized .44 revolver . 
 Max is an anthropomorphic " hyperkinetic , three @-@ foot rabbity thing " with white fur , but prefers being called a <unk> . Max retains few characteristics consistent with a rabbit , with permanently rigid ears set in an excited posture and a huge jaw normally stuck in a crazed grin . <unk> , uninhibited and near psychotic , Max enjoys violence and tends to prefer the aggressive way of solving problems , seeing the world as little more than a vessel for his " pinball @-@ like stream of consciousness " . This creates a seeming disregard for self @-@ preservation ; Max will revel in dangerous situations with little impression that he understands the risks he faces . As a result , Max is usually enthusiastic to engage in any activity , including being used by Sam as a cable cutter or an impromptu bludgeon . Despite this , Max possesses a sharp mind and an observational nature , and enjoys interpreting new experiences in as unpredictable manner as possible . However , Max has a distaste for long stories and occasionally loses focus during lengthy scenes of plot exposition ; by his own admission , Max possesses a particularly short attention span . Despite his seemingly heartless personality , he believes strongly in protecting Sam . However , Max can still act violently towards his friend , stating that when he dies he will take Sam with him . Moreover , Max is extremely possessive of Sam and their status as partners and best friends . Max traditionally carries a Luger pistol , but as he wears no clothes , other characters often make comments as to where Max keeps it on his person . Purcell considers Max to be representative of pure id , the uncoordinated instinctual trends of the human psyche . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Comic books = = = 
 Sam and Max debuted in the 1987 comic book series Sam & Max : Freelance Police , published by Fishwrap Productions , also the publisher of Fish Police . The first comic , " Monkeys Violating the Heavenly Temple " , was Steve Purcell 's first full story . The comic came about after Purcell agreed to create a full Sam & Max story for publication alongside Steve Moncuse 's Fish Police series . " Monkeys Violating the Heavenly Temple " established many of the key features in the series ; the main story of the comic saw the Freelance Police journey to the Philippines to stop a volcano god cult . " Night of the Gilded Heron @-@ Shark " and " Night of the <unk> Wildebeest " accompanied the main story , focusing on a stand @-@ off with a group of gangsters in Sam and Max 's office and an investigation into a carnival refreshment booth respectively . 
 Over the subsequent years , several other comics were published , often by different publishers , including Comico Comics and Epic Comics . " Fair Wind to Java " was originally published in 1988 as a Munden 's Bar story in the pages of First Comics ' <unk> , featuring the Freelance Police fighting pyramid @-@ building aliens in Ancient Egypt , and was followed in 1989 by " On the Road " , a three chapter story showing what Sam and Max do on vacation . In 1990 , a Christmas themed story , " The Damned Don 't Dance " was released . 1992 saw the release of a further two comics ; " Bad Day On The Moon " took the Freelance Police to deal with a roach infestation bothering giant rats on the Moon , and was later adapted as a story for the animated TV series , whilst " Beast From The Cereal Aisle " focused on the duo conducting an exorcism at the local supermarket . Two more comics were produced in 1997 , " The Kids Take Over " and " Belly Of The Beast " . The former has Sam and Max wake up from cryogenic sleep to discover that the entire world is now ruled by children while the latter sees the Freelance Police confronting a vampire abducting children at Halloween . 
 Purcell joined LucasArts in 1988 as an artist and game designer , where he was approached about contributing to LucasArts ' new quarterly newsletter , The Adventurer , a publication designed to inform customers about upcoming LucasArts games and company news . From its debut issue in 1990 to 1996 , Purcell created twelve comic strips for the newsletter . The strips portrayed a variety of stories , from similar plots as in the comic books to parodies of LucasArts games such as Monkey Island and Full Throttle and the Lucasfilm franchises Star Wars and Indiana Jones . 
 In 1995 , all of the comics and The Adventurer strips published to that date were released in a compilation , Sam & Max : Surfin ' the Highway . Published by Marlowe & Company , the 154 page book was updated and republished in 1996 . This original version of Surfin ' the Highway went out of print in 1997 , becoming a high priced collectors item sold through services such as eBay . In 2007 , a 197 @-@ page twenty @-@ year anniversary edition , containing all printed comics and strips as well as a variety of other artwork , was co @-@ designed by Steve Purcell and Jake <unk> and published by Telltale Games . This second publication received an Eisner Award nomination for " Best Graphic Album – Reprint " in 2009 . 
 In December 2005 , Purcell started a Sam & Max webcomic , hosted on the website of Telltale Games . Entitled " The Big Sleep " , the webcomic began with Sam and Max bursting out of their graves at <unk> Church in England , symbolizing the Freelance Police 's return after nearly a decade . In the twelve page story , Max has to save Sam after earwigs start a colony in Sam 's brain . The webcomic concluded in April 2007 , and was later awarded the Eisner Award for " Best Digital Comic " of 2007 . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Following LucasArts ' employment of Purcell in 1988 , the characters of Sam and Max appeared in internal testing material for new SCUMM engine programmers ; Purcell created animated versions of the characters and an office backdrop for the programmers to practice on . In 1992 , LucasArts offered Purcell the chance to create a video game out of the characters , out of a wish to use new characters after the success of its two other main adventure titles , Monkey Island and Maniac Mansion , and after a positive reaction from fans to the Sam & Max comic strips featured in LucasArts ' The Adventurer newsletter . Consequently , development on a graphic adventure game , Sam & Max Hit the Road , began shortly after . Based on the SCUMM engine and designed by Sean Clark , Michael Stemmle , Steve Purcell and his future wife Collette Michaud , the game was partially based on the 1989 comic " On The Road " , and featured the Freelance Police travelling across America in search of an escaped bigfoot . Sam was voiced in the game by comedian Bill Farmer , while actor Nick Jameson voiced Max . Sam & Max Hit the Road was originally released for DOS in November 1993 . Soon after Sam & Max Hit the Road , another Sam & Max game using SCUMM entered planning under Purcell and Dave Grossman , but was abandoned . In a later interview Grossman described this sequel 's highlight as " a giant spaceship shaped like Max 's head " . 
 In September 2001 development began on a new project , Sam & Max Plunge Through Space . The game was to be an Xbox exclusive title , developed by Infinite Machine , a small company consisting of a number of former LucasArts employees . The story of the game was developed by Purcell and fellow designer Chuck Jordan and involved the Freelance Police travelling the galaxy to find a stolen Statue of Liberty . However , Infinite Machine went bankrupt within a year , partially due to the failure of their first game , New Legends , and the project was abandoned . 
 At the 2002 Electronic Entertainment Expo convention , nearly a decade after the release of Sam & Max Hit the Road , LucasArts announced the production of a PC sequel , entitled Sam & Max : Freelance Police . Freelance Police , like Hit the Road , was to be a point @-@ and @-@ click graphic adventure game , utilising a new 3D game engine . Development of Freelance Police was led by Michael Stemmle . Steve Purcell contributed to the project by writing the story and producing concept art . Farmer and Jameson were also set to reprise their voice acting roles . In March 2004 , however , quite far into the game 's development , Sam & Max : Freelance Police was abruptly cancelled by LucasArts , citing " current market place realities and underlying economic considerations " in a short press release . The fan reaction to the cancellation was strong ; a petition of 32 @,@ 000 signatures stating the disappointment of fans was later presented to LucasArts . 
 After LucasArts ' license with Steve Purcell expired in 2005 , the Sam & Max franchise moved to Telltale Games , a company of former LucasArts employees who had worked on a number of LucasArts adventure games , including on the development of Freelance Police . Under Telltale Games , a new episodic series of Sam & Max video games was announced . Like both Sam & Max Hit the Road and Freelance Police , Sam & Max Save the World was in a point @-@ and @-@ click graphic adventure game format . The game utilized a new 3D game engine , different from the one used in Freelance Police . The first season ran for six episodes , each with a self @-@ contained storyline but with an overall story arc involving hypnotism running through the series . The first episode was released on GameTap in October 2006 , with episodes following regularly until April 2007 . Sam is voiced by David Nowlin , while Max is voiced by William Kasten in all episodes except the first one , where Andrew Chaikin voices the character . In addition , Telltale Games produced fifteen machinima shorts to accompany the main episodes . These shorts were released in groups of three in between the release of each episode , showing the activities of the Freelance Police in between each story . 
 A second season of episodic video games developed by Telltale Games was announced in July 2007 . Sam & Max Beyond Time and Space followed the same overall format as Save the World , with each episode having a contained storyline with an overarching storyline involving laundering of the souls of the dead . As with Save the World , episodes were originally published on GameTap before being made available for general release . The season consisted of five episodes and ran from November 2007 to April 2008 . Nowlin and Kasten both returned to reprise their voice roles . In addition to the main games , a twenty @-@ minute machinima video was produced , taking the form of a Sam & Max Christmas special . 
 A third game entitled Sam & Max : The Devil 's Playhouse was confirmed in May 2008 for release in 2009 ; the title was later pushed back to 2010 , with concept art emerging after Telltale 's completion of Tales of Monkey Island . The season again ran for five episodes , released monthly from April to August 2010 . The Devil 's Playhouse followed a structure similar to ' Tales of Monkey Island , with each episode forming a part of an on @-@ going narrative , involving psychic powers and forces that would use them for world domination . A two @-@ minute Flash cartoon also accompanied the game , dealing with the origin story of General <unk> @-@ ka <unk> , one of the game 's antagonists . Max also appears in Telltale 's 2010 casual game Poker Night at the Inventory alongside Tycho Brahe from Penny Arcade , the Heavy from Team Fortress 2 and Strong Bad from Homestar Runner . Sam and Max ( now voiced by Dave Boat ) also appear in the game 's sequel alongside <unk> from Borderlands , Brock Samson from The Venture Bros. , Ash Williams from Evil Dead and GLaDOS from Portal . 
 = = = Television series = = = 
 Sam & Max were adapted into a cartoon series for Fox in 1997 . Produced by Canadian studio Nelvana , the series ran for 24 episodes . Each episode was approximately ten minutes , and were often aired in pairs . Broadcast on Fox Kids in the United States , YTV in Canada , and Channel 4 in the United Kingdom , the first episode was aired on October 4 , 1997 ; the series concluded on April 25 , 1998 . As opposed to the more adult humor in the rest of the series , The Adventures of Sam & Max : Freelance Police was aimed more at children , even though some humor in it was often directed at adults . As such , the violence inherent in the franchise is toned down , including removing Sam and Max 's guns , and the characters do not use the moderate profanity that they use in their other appearances . As in most Sam & Max stories , the series revolves around the Freelance Police accepting missions from their mysterious superior , the commissioner , and embarking on cases to a large variety of implausible locations . Sam is voiced by Harvey Atkin , while Max is voiced by Robert Tinkler . The series performed well and was considered a success , and in 1998 received the Gemini Award for " Best Animated Program or Series " . Despite the series ' success , a second series was never commissioned . In June 2007 , it was reported that Shout ! Factory were preparing a DVD release of the series . In October 2007 , as part of their marketing for Sam & Max Save the World , GameTap hosted the series on their website . The DVD release of the series was later published in March 2008 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The Sam & Max franchise features a variety of soundtracks that accompany its video game products . This music is mostly grounded in film noir jazz , incorporating various other styles at certain points , such as Dixieland , waltz and mariachi , usually to support the cartoon nature of the series . The first Sam & Max game , Sam & Max Hit the Road , was one of the first games to feature a fully scored music soundtrack , written by LucasArts ' composers Clint Bajakian , Michael Land and Peter McConnell . The music was incorporated into the game using Land and McConnell 's iMUSE engine , which allowed for audio to be synchronized with the visuals . Although the full soundtrack was never released , audio renders of four of the game 's MIDI tracks were included on the CD version of the game . 
 For Sam & Max Save the World , Beyond Time and Space , and The Devil 's Playhouse , Telltale Games contracted composer Jared Emerson @-@ Johnson , a musician whose previous work included composition and sound editing for LucasArts , to write the scores . The soundtracks for the first two games were released in two disc sets after the release of the games themselves ; the Season One Soundtrack was published in July 2007 , whilst the Season Two Soundtrack was released in September 2008 . Emerson @-@ Johnson 's scores use live performances as opposed to synthesized music often used elsewhere in the video games industry . Critics reacted positively to Emerson @-@ Johnson 's scores , IGN described Emerson @-@ Johnson 's work as a " breath of fresh air " , while 1UP.com praised his work as " top @-@ caliber " and Music4Games stated that the " whimsical nature of [ the classical jazz approach ] is well suited to the Sam & Max universe , which approaches American popular culture with a level of irreverence " . Purcell later commented that Emerson @-@ Johnson had seamlessly blended a " huge palette of genres and styles " , whilst in September 2008 , Brendan Q. Ferguson , one of the lead designers on Save the World and Beyond Time and Space , stated that he believed that it was Emerson @-@ Johnson 's scores that created the vital atmosphere in the games , noting that prior to the implementation of the soundtracks , playing the games was an " unrelenting horror " . 
 = = Cultural impact and reception = = 
 The Sam & Max franchise has been highly successful critically , and is considered an iconic and influential aspect of the video game industry in the 1990s and the adventure game genre . In 2007 , Steve Purcell wrote that he was somewhat surprised at the success of his creation , noting that the series had gained a large fan gathering despite the small size of the franchise . As the series contains only a small amount of comics , video games and a short TV series , Purcell commented that there was " certainly not enough material to build that relentless traction of an endlessly renewed sitcom or a syndicated comic that has existed since the Korean Conflict " . The comics were well received by critics , many praising the humor and style of the stories and characters . However , later commentators have noted that the comic book series did not gain much popularity or recognition until after the release of Sam & Max Hit the Road in 1993 ; the later episodic video games are seen to have revived interest in the comics again , resulting in the creation of the webcomic " The Big Sleep " and publication of an anniversary edition of Surfin ' The Highway . 
 Upon its release in 1993 , Sam & Max Hit the Road was met with near universal acclaim . Critics praised the title for its humor , voice acting , graphics , music and gameplay . It has since come to be regarded as a classic graphic adventure game , one of the most critically successful projects by LucasArts to date . Sam & Max Hit the Road is regularly featured in lists of top games , and was nominated for the 1994 Annie Award for " Best Animated CD @-@ ROM " , although the award instead went to LucasArts ' Star Wars : Rebel Assault . The abrupt cancellation of the sequel to Sam & Max Hit the Road in 2004 garnered substantial criticism of LucasArts . In addition to a petition of 32 @,@ 000 signatures objecting to the termination of development on Sam & Max : Freelance Police , both Steve Purcell and the media were critical of LucasArts ' decision . Purcell stated that he failed to understand quite why the game was cancelled , as he believed the development of the game was proceeding without hindrance , while the media put forward the view that LucasArts was moving to consolidate its position with low business risk Star Wars video games instead of pursuing the adventure games that had brought them success in earlier years . The cancellation of Freelance Police is often cited as the culmination in a perceived decline in the overall adventure game genre , and LucasArts later dismissed many of the designers involved with developing their adventure games , effectively ending their adventure game era . 
 Although Sam & Max Save the World did not receive the critical acclaim that Sam & Max Hit the Road acquired , it still received a favorable response from critics across its release in 2006 and 2007 . Critics praised the game 's humor , graphics and gameplay , although concerns were voiced over the low difficulty of the puzzles and the effectiveness of the story . Save the World is considered by journalists in the video game industry to be the first successful application of episodic gaming , as Telltale Games had managed to release a steady stream content with only small time gaps . Previous attempts by Valve Software with the Half @-@ Life series , Ritual Entertainment with SiN Episodes and Telltale Games themselves with Bone were for a variety of reasons not considered successful implementations of the distribution model . Beyond Time and Space was considered similar to Save the World and reviewers equally praised and faulted the game on this , although overall Beyond Time and Space received a good reception from critics . 
 The success of the franchise has spawned a selection of merchandise , including posters and prints , items of clothing and sketchbooks of Purcell 's work during various stages of the series ' development . Collectable statues of the characters have also been created . However , despite references in Purcell 's sketchbooks and demand from both fans and journalists alike , plush toys of the characters have not been produced . 
 = Matthew Cradock = 
 Matthew Cradock ( also spelled Craddock and <unk> ) ( died 27 May 1641 ) was a London merchant , politician , and the first governor of the Massachusetts Bay Company . Founded in 1628 , it was an organization of Puritan businessmen that organized and established the Massachusetts Bay Colony . Although he never even visited the colony , he owned property and businesses there , and he acted on its behalf in London . His business and trading empire encompassed at least 18 ships , and extended from the West Indies and North America to Europe and the Near East . He was a dominant figure in the tobacco trade . 
 Cradock was a strong supporter of the Parliamentary cause in the years leading up to the English Civil War . He opposed royalist conservatism in the East India Company and , as a member of the Long Parliament , supported the Root and Branch attempts to radically reform the Church of England . He played a leading role in the Protestation of 1641 , and died not long after . 
 = = Early life and business = = 
 Nothing is known of Matthew Cradock 's early life . He was from a Staffordshire family ; a cousin , also named Matthew Cradock , was mayor of Stafford , and built a mansion on the site of <unk> Castle , Staffordshire . Although his father was a cleric , his grandfather was a merchant , and other family members were involved in trade . Cradock was twice married . By his first wife Damaris he had a daughter , also named Damaris ; by his second wife , Rebeccah , he had three children that apparently did not survive . Rebeccah survived him , but the children are not mentioned in his will . 
 In 1606 he was an apprentice to William Cockayne at the Skinners ' Company , then a major London shipping firm . He probably began trading with northwestern Europe , but eventually expanded his business to the Near East . Cradock joined the Levant Company in 1627 , and in 1628 he purchased £ 2 @,@ 000 of stock in the East India Company . Cradock served as a director of the East India Company in 1629 – 1630 and again from 1634 until his death in 1641 . Cradock used his business and personal connections to establish a lucrative trade , shipping New World tobacco to the Near East and sending provisions to the colonies in North America and the West Indies that produced it . He is known to have been owner or part owner of 18 ships between 1627 and 1640 , and he was one of a relatively small number of businessmen whose trade encompassed both eastern trade ( to India and the Levant ) and trade in European waters . By the end of the 1630s he stood at the center of one of the largest trading business involved in the Americas . In 1640 Cradock was a member of a group of business men who opposed the conservative royalist leadership of the East India Company , engaging in an unsuccessful attempt to reform the company 's directorate . 
 = = Massachusetts Bay Company = = 
 Interest by London merchants in establishing and managing colonial settlements in North America waned after the 1624 failure of the London Company and the subsequent conversion of the Colony of Virginia into a Crown colony . Cradock was a notable exception ; a Puritan , in 1628 he made a major investment in the New England Company , formed by a group of Puritan religious and business leaders to take over the assets of the failed Dorchester Company and make new ventures in the colonisation of North America . Cradock was elected the company 's first governor on 13 May 1628 . Not long after , the company acquired a grant of land on Massachusetts Bay from the Plymouth Council for New England , and sent John Endecott with a small group of settlers to begin the process of establishing a colony at a place now called Salem , Massachusetts . 
 The company 's land grant was not without problems , because it overlapped a grant that had previously been acquired by John Oldham . Cradock wrote to Endecott in early 1629 , warning him about the issue , suggesting that he settle colonists in the claimed area and also that he treat well the Old Planters ( the surviving colonists from the failed Dorchester Company settlement ) . Cradock also recommended the colonists work on building ships and other profit @-@ making activities . Later in 1629 another small fleet sailed for the colony ; on board , in addition to Puritan settlers , were skilled craftsmen of all types who were engaged in Cradock 's businesses . 
 The company , in order to protect its claims , acquired a royal charter in 1629 , under which Cradock was named the colony 's governor in London , while Endecott governed in the colony . In that same year , financial instability in the government caused by King Charles I 's desire to prosecute a war with Scotland led the company 's investors to fear their investment might be at risk . Cradock , at a shareholder meeting in July 1629 , suggested that the company transfer its governance to the colony itself , something that was only possible because the charter did not specify where the company 's shareholder meetings were to be held . However , some investors ( Cradock among them ) did not want to emigrate to the colony , so a means to buy out those investors needed to be devised . After negotiating through the summer , an agreement was reached on 29 August 1629 . It called for those shareholders who were emigrating to buy out those that remained in England after seven years ; the latter would also receive a share of some of the colony 's business activities , including the fur trade . John Winthrop , one of the shareholders who was emigrating , was elected the company 's governor in October . 
 Winthrop sailed to Massachusetts in 1630 , and the fleet carrying the colonists included two of Cradock 's ships , and agents and servants of his who were to see to his commercial interests . Cradock , who took leave of the emigrants at the Isle of Wight , remained behind in England . Cradock 's representatives secured for him a plantation at Medford , which became a base for business operations funded by Cradock , including the colony 's first shipyard . As the colony developed , Cradock 's land holdings expanded to include properties in Ipswich and Marblehead . 
 Even though he did not travel to the colony , he continued to operate in London on its behalf . In 1629 he worked to recruit sympathetic Puritan ministers to emigrate . He sought permission from the king 's Privy Council to freely export provisions to the colony , claiming the colonists were in dire straits due to a shortage of provisions and threats from Native Americans . He and Governor Winthrop exchanged letters ; in one written in 1636 Cradock promised £ 50 toward the establishment of an institute of higher learning now known as Harvard University . 
 Actions by the Massachusetts Bay Colony rulers came into question at the Privy Council in 1633 . Several opponents of the Puritans levelled charges that the colony 's administrators sought independence from the crown and laws of England ; Cradock and other company representatives were called before the council to answer these charges . They successfully defended the actions of the colonists , but the Puritans ' opponents succeeded in having ships full of colonists detained from sailing in February 1633 / 4 until the colonial charter was presented to the council for inspection . Cradock was called upon to provide it ; he informed the council that the charter was in the colony , and secured the release of the ships with a promise to have the charter delivered . The colonial council in Boston , not wanting to send the document for fear the charter would be revoked , temporized , claiming in their July 1634 meeting that the document could only be released by a vote of the colony 's General Court . It was not scheduled to meet until September , at which time the matter would be taken up . The General Court refused to consider the issue , and began fortifying Boston Harbour , expecting a military confrontation over the issue . The 1634 launch of a ship intended to carry a force to the colony was unsuccessful , ending the military threat to the colony . The political threats continued , and the charter of the Plymouth Council of New England , issuer of the colony 's land grant , was revoked . Furthermore , criminal charges , some of them clearly trumped up , were laid against Cradock and others associated with the Massachusetts Bay Company in 1635 . Cradock was acquitted of most of these charges , but was convicted of usurpation of authority and deprived of his ability to act on behalf of the company . 
 = = Politics = = 
 In 1640 Cradock was an auditor of the City of London Corporation . In April 1640 , he was elected Member of Parliament for the City of London in the Short Parliament , and he was again elected to the Long Parliament in November 1640 . He was and other London MPs were politically allied to the Parliamentarian faction of Sir Henry Vane the Younger , and he supported the Root and Branch petition calling for radical reforms of the Church of England . In the opening session of the Long Parliament he denounced the king 's plan of fortifying the Tower of London , and declared that the city would not contribute its share of taxes until the garrison was removed . In early May 1641 Cradock brought word to the Parliament reports that the king was planning to send armed troops to seize the Tower of London ; this news sparked the Protestation of 1641 , in which Cradock played a leading role . He continued to be active in the Parliament , serving on a committee for recusants , until his death , which was apparently quite sudden , on 27 May 1641 . 
 = Noh = 
 Noh ( <unk> , <unk> ) , or <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) — derived from the Sino @-@ Japanese word for " skill " or " talent " — is a major form of classical Japanese musical drama that has been performed since the 14th century . Developed by Kan 'ami and his son Zeami , it is the oldest major theatre art still regularly performed today . Traditionally , a Noh program includes five Noh plays with comedic kyōgen plays in between ; an abbreviated program of two Noh plays and one kyōgen piece has become common in Noh presentations today . An <unk> ( <unk> ) play may be presented in the very beginning especially during New Years , holidays , and other special occasions . 
 Noh is often based on tales from traditional literature with a supernatural being transformed into human form as a hero narrating a story . Noh integrates masks , costumes and various props in a dance @-@ based performance , requiring highly trained actors and musicians . Emotions are primarily conveyed by stylized conventional gestures while the iconic masks represent the roles such as ghosts , women , children , and old people . Written in ancient Japanese language , the text " vividly describes the ordinary people of the twelfth to sixteenth centuries " . Having a strong emphasis on tradition rather than innovation , Noh is extremely codified and regulated by the iemoto system . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The word Noh means skill , craft , or the talent particularly in the field of performing arts in this context . The word Noh may be used alone or with <unk> ( fun , music ) to form the word nōgaku . Noh is a classical tradition that is highly valued by many today . When used alone , Noh refers to the historical genre of theatre originated from <unk> in the mid 14th century and continues to be performed today . 
 Noh and kyōgen " originated in the 8th century when the sangaku ( ja : <unk> ) was transmitted from China to Japan . At the time , the term sangaku referred to various types of performance featuring acrobats , song and dance as well as comic sketches . Its subsequent adaption to Japanese society led to its assimilation of other traditional art forms . " l 
 Various performing art elements in sangaku as well as elements of <unk> ( rural celebrations performed in connection with rice planting ) , <unk> ( popular entertainment including acrobatics , juggling , and pantomime ) , <unk> ( traditional dances performed by female dancers in the Imperial Court in 12th century ) , and gagaku ( ancient music and dance performed in the Imperial Court beginning in 7th century ) evolved into Noh and kyōgen . 
 Studies on genealogy of the Noh actors in 14th century indicate they were members of families specialized in performing arts ; they had performed various traditional performance arts for many generations . Sociological research by Yukio Hattori reveals that the Konparu School ( ja : 金春流 ) , arguably the oldest school of Noh , is a descendant of <unk> ( <unk> ) , the performer who introduced gigaku , now @-@ extinct masked drama @-@ dance performance , into Japan from <unk> Kingdom in 612 . 
 Another theory by <unk> Matsumoto suggests Noh originated from <unk> struggling to claim higher social status by catering to those in power , namely the new ruling samurai class of the time . The transferral of the shogunate from Kamakura to Kyoto at the beginning of Muromachi period marked the increasing power of the samurai class and strengthened the relationship between the shogunate and the court . As Noh became the shogun 's favorite art form , Noh was able to become a courtly art form through this newly formed relationship . In 14th century , with strong support and patronage from <unk> Ashikaga Yoshimitsu , Zeami was able to establish Noh as the most prominent theatre art form of the time . 
 = = = Kan 'ami and Zeami = = = 
 Kan 'ami Kiyotsugu and his son Zeami <unk> brought Noh to what is essentially its present @-@ day form during the Muromachi period ( 1336 to 1573 ) . Kan 'ami was a renowned actor with great versatility fulfilling roles from graceful women and 12 @-@ year @-@ old boys to strong adult males . When Kan 'ami first presented his work to 17 @-@ year @-@ old Ashikaga Yoshimitsu , Zeami was a child actor in his play , around age 12 . Yoshimitsu fell in love with Zeami and his position of favor at court caused Noh to be performed frequently for Yoshimitsu thereafter . 
 = = = The Tokugawa era = = = 
 During the Tokugawa era Noh continued to be aristocratic art form supported by the shogun , the feudal lords ( daimyo ) , as well as wealthy and sophisticated commoners . While kabuki and <unk> popular to the middle class focused on new and experimental entertainment , Noh strived to preserve its established high standards and historic authenticity and remained mostly unchanged throughout the era . To capture the essence of performances given by great masters , every detail in movements and positions was reproduced by others , generally resulting in an increasingly slow , ceremonial tempo over time . 
 = = = Modern Noh after Meiji era = = = 
 The fall of the Tokugawa shogunate in 1868 and the formation of a new modernized government resulted in the end of financial support by the government , and the entire field of Noh experienced major financial crisis . Shortly after the Meiji Restoration both the number of Noh performers and Noh stages greatly diminished . The support from the imperial government was eventually regained partly due to Noh 's appeal to foreign diplomats . The companies that remained active throughout the Meiji era also significantly broadened Noh 's reach by catering to the general public , performing at theatres in major cities such as Tokyo and Osaka . 
 In 1957 the Japanese Government designated nōgaku as an Important Intangible Cultural Property , which affords a degree of legal protection to the tradition as well as its most accomplished practitioners . The National Noh Theatre founded by the government in 1983 stages regular performances and organizes courses to train actors in the leading roles of nōgaku . Noh was inscribed in 2008 on the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO as <unk> theatre . 
 Although the terms nōgaku and Noh are sometimes used interchangeably , nōgaku encompasses both Noh and kyōgen . Kyōgen is performed in between Noh plays in the same space . Compared to Noh , " kyōgen relies less on the use of masks and is derived from the humorous plays of the sangaku , as reflected in its comic dialogue . " 
 = = Jo @-@ Ha @-@ Kyū = = 
 The concept of jo @-@ ha @-@ kyū dictates virtually every element of Noh including compiling of a program of plays , structuring of each play , songs and dances within plays , and the basic rhythms within each Noh performance . Jo means beginning , ha means breaking , and kyū means rapid or urgent . The term originated in gagaku , ancient courtly music , to indicate gradually increasing tempo and was adopted in various Japanese traditions including Noh , tea ceremony , poetry , and flower arrangement . 
 Jo @-@ ha @-@ kyū is incorporated in traditional five @-@ play program of Noh . The first play is jo , the second , third , and fourth plays are ha , and the fifth play is kyu . In fact , the five categories discussed below were created so that the program would represent jo @-@ ha @-@ kyu when one play from each category is selected and performed in order . Each play can be broken into three parts , the introduction , the development , and the conclusion . A play starts out in a slow tempo at jo , gets slightly faster at ha , then culminates in kyū . 
 = = Performers and roles = = 
 Actors begin their training as young children , traditionally at the age of three . Historically , Noh performers had been exclusively male , but daughters of established Noh actors have begun to perform professionally since 1940s . In 2009 , there were about 1200 male and 200 female professional Noh performers . 
 = = = Training = = = 
 Zeami isolated nine levels or types of Noh acting from lower degrees which put emphasis on movement and violence to higher degrees which represent the opening of a flower and spiritual prowess . 
 In 2012 , there are five extant schools of Noh acting called Kanze ( <unk> ) , Hōshō ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , Kongō ( 金剛 ) , and Kita ( <unk> ) schools that train shite actors . Each school has its own iemoto family that carries the name of the school and is considered the most important . The iemoto holds the power to create new plays or modify lyrics and performance modes . Waki actors are trained in the schools <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , and Hōshō ( <unk> ) . There are two schools that train kyōgen , Ōkura ( <unk> ) and Izumi ( <unk> ) . 11 schools train instrumentalists , each school specializing in one to three instruments . 
 The <unk> Performers ' Association ( <unk> Kyōkai ) , to which all professionals are registered , strictly protects the traditions passed down from their ancestors ( see iemoto ) . However , several secret documents of the Kanze school written by Zeami , as well as materials by Konparu <unk> , have been diffused throughout the community of scholars of Japanese theatre . 
 = = = Roles = = = 
 There are four major categories of Noh performers : shite , waki , kyōgen , and hayashi . 
 Shite ( <unk> , <unk> ) . Shite is the main protagonist , or the leading role in plays . In plays where the shite appears first as a human and then as a ghost , the first role is known as the mae @-@ shite and the later as the <unk> @-@ shite . 
 <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) . The shite 's companion . Sometimes <unk> is abbreviated to tsure ( <unk> , <unk> ) , although this term refers to both the <unk> and the <unk> . 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) are stage hands , usually one to three people . 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) is the chorus , usually comprising six to eight people . 
 Waki ( <unk> , <unk> ) performs the role that is the counterpart or foil of the shite . 
 <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) or Waki @-@ tsure is the companion of the waki . 
 Kyōgen ( <unk> ) perform the <unk> ( <unk> ) , which are interludes during plays . Kyōgen actors also perform in separate plays between individual Noh plays . 
 Hayashi ( <unk> ) or hayashi @-@ kata ( <unk> ) are the instrumentalists who play the four instruments used in Noh theatre : the transverse flute ( <unk> , fue ) , hip drum ( <unk> , <unk> ) or <unk> ( <unk> ) , the shoulder @-@ drum ( <unk> , kotsuzumi ) , and the stick @-@ drum ( 太鼓 , taiko ) . The flute used for noh is specifically called nōkan or <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 A typical Noh play always involves the chorus , the orchestra , and at least one shite and one waki actor . 
 = = Performance elements = = 
 Noh performance combines a variety of elements into a stylistic whole , with each particular element the product of generations of refinement according to the central Buddhist , Shinto , and minimalist aspects of Noh 's aesthetic principles . 
 = = = Masks = = = 
 Noh masks ( <unk> nō @-@ men or <unk> omote ) are carved from blocks of Japanese cypress ( <unk> " <unk> " ) , and painted with natural pigments on a neutral base of glue and crunched seashell . There are approximately 450 different masks mostly based on sixty types , all of which have distinctive names . Some masks are representative and frequently used in many different plays , while some are very specific and may only be used in one or two plays . Noh masks signify the characters ' gender , age , and social ranking , and by wearing masks the actors may portray youngsters , old men , female , or nonhuman ( divine , demonic , or animal ) characters . Only the shite , the main actor , wears a mask in most plays , even though the tsure may also wear a mask in some plays to represent female characters . 
 Even though the mask covers an actor 's facial expressions , the use of the mask in Noh is not an abandonment of facial expressions altogether . Rather , its intent is to stylize and codify the facial expressions through the use of the mask and to stimulate the imagination of the audience . By using masks , actors are able to convey emotions in a more controlled manner through movements and body language . Some masks utilize lighting effect to convey different emotions through slight tilting of the head . Facing slightly upward , or " brightening " the mask , will let the mask to capture more light , revealing more features that appear laughing or smiling . Facing downward , or " clouding " it , will cause the mask to appear sad or mad . 
 Noh masks are treasured by Noh families and institution , and the powerful Noh schools hold the oldest and most valuable Noh masks in their private collections , rarely seen by the public . The most ancient mask is supposedly kept as a hidden treasure by the oldest school , the Konparu . According to the current head of the Konparu school , the mask was carved by the legendary regent Prince Shōtoku ( 572 @-@ 622 ) over a thousand years ago . While the historical accuracy of the legend of Prince Shōtoku 's mask may be contested , the legend itself is ancient as it is first recorded in Zeami 's Style and the Flower written in the 14th century . 
 = = = Stage = = = 
 The traditional Noh stage has complete openness that provides a shared experience between the performers and the audience throughout the performance . Without any proscenium or curtains to obstruct the view , the audience sees each actor even during the moments before they enter ( and after they exit ) the central " stage " . The theatre itself is considered symbolic and treated with reverence both by the performers and the audience . 
 One of the most recognizable characteristic of Noh stage is its independent roof that hangs over the stage even in indoor theatres . Supported by four columns , the roof symbolizes the sanctity of the stage , with its architectural design derived from the worship pavilion ( <unk> ) or sacred dance pavilion ( kagura @-@ den ) of Shinto shrines . The roof also unifies the theatre space and defines the stage as an architectural entity . 
 The pillars supporting the roof are named <unk> ( principal character 's pillar ) , <unk> ( gazing pillar ) , <unk> ( secondary character 's pillar ) , and <unk> ( flute pillar ) , clockwise from upstage right respectively . Each pillar is associated with the performers and their actions . 
 The stage is made entirely of unfinished <unk> , Japanese cypress , with almost no decorative elements . The poet and novelist Tōson Shimazaki writes that " on the stage of the Noh theatre there are no sets that change with each piece . Neither is there a curtain . There is only a simple panel ( <unk> @-@ ita ) with a painting of a green pine tree . This creates the impression that anything that could provide any shading has been banished . To break such monotony and make something happen is no easy thing . " 
 Another unique feature of the stage is the <unk> , a narrow bridge at upstage right used by actors to enter the stage . <unk> means " suspension bridge " , signifying something aerial that connects two separate worlds on a same level . The bridge symbolizes the mythic nature of Noh plays in which otherworldly ghosts and spirits frequently appear . In contrast , <unk> in Kabuki theatres is literally a path ( michi ) that connects two spaces in a single world , thus has a completely different significance . 
 = = = Costumes = = = 
 Noh actors wear silk costumes called <unk> ( robes ) along with wigs , hats , and props such as the fan . With striking colors , elaborate texture , and intricate weave and embroidery , Noh robes are truly works of art in their own right . Costumes for the shite in particular are extravagant , shimmering silk brocades , but are progressively less sumptuous for the tsure , the <unk> , and the <unk> . 
 For centuries , in accordance with the vision of Zeami , Noh costumes emulated the clothing that the characters would genuinely wear , such as the formal robes for a courtier and the street clothing for a peasant or commoner . But in the late sixteenth century , the costumes became stylized with certain symbolic and stylistic conventions . During the Edo ( Tokugawa ) period , the elaborate robes given to actors by noblemen and samurai in the Muromachi period were developed as costumes . 
 The musicians and chorus typically wear formal <unk> kimono ( black and adorned with five family crests ) accompanied by either hakama ( a skirt @-@ like garment ) or kami @-@ <unk> , a combination of hakama and a waist @-@ coat with exaggerated shoulders . Finally , the stage attendants are garbed in virtually unadorned black garments , much in the same way as stagehands in contemporary Western theatre . 
 = = = Props = = = 
 The use of props in Noh is minimalistic and stylized . The most commonly used prop in Noh is the fan , as it is carried by all performers regardless of role . Chorus singers and musicians may carry their fan in hand when entering the stage , or carry it tucked into the obi ( the sash ) . The fan is usually placed at the performer 's side when he or she takes position , and is often not taken up again until leaving the stage . During dance sequences , the fan is typically used to represent any and all hand @-@ held props , such as a sword , wine jug , flute , or writing brush . The fan may represent various objects over the course of a single play . 
 When hand props other than fans are used , they are usually introduced or retrieved by <unk> who fulfill a similar role to stage crew in contemporary theatre . Like their Western counterparts , stage attendants for Noh traditionally dress in black , but unlike in Western theatre they may appear on stage during a scene , or may remain on stage during an entire performance , in both cases in plain view of the audience . The all @-@ black costume of <unk> implies they are not part of the action on stage and are effectively invisible . 
 Set pieces in Noh such as the boats , wells , altars , and bells , are typically carried onto the stage before the beginning of the act in which they are needed . These props normally are only outlines to suggest actual objects , although the great bell , a perennial exception to most Noh rules for props , is designed to conceal the actor and to allow a costume change during the kyōgen interlude . 
 = = = Chant and music = = = 
 Noh theatre is accompanied by a chorus and a hayashi ensemble ( Noh @-@ bayashi <unk> ) . Noh is a chanted drama , and a few commentators have dubbed it " Japanese opera " . However , the singing in Noh involves a limited tonal range , with lengthy , repetitive passages in a narrow dynamic range . Clearly , melody is not at the center of Noh singing . Still , texts are poetic , relying heavily on the Japanese seven @-@ five rhythm common to nearly all forms of Japanese poetry , with an economy of expression , and an abundance of allusion . The singing parts of Noh are called " <unk> " and the speaking parts " <unk> " . The music has many blank spaces ( ma ) in between the actual sounds , and these negative blank spaces are in fact considered the heart of the music . In addition to <unk> , Noh hayashi ensemble consists of four musicians , also known as the " hayashi @-@ kata " , including three drummers , which play the shime @-@ daiko , <unk> ( hip drum ) , and kotsuzumi ( shoulder drum ) respectively , and a <unk> flutist . 
 The chant is not always performed " in character " ; that is , sometimes the actor will speak lines or describe events from the perspective of another character or even a disinterested narrator . Far from breaking the rhythm of the performance , this is actually in keeping with the other @-@ worldly feel of many Noh plays , especially in those characterized as <unk> . 
 = = Plays = = 
 Of the roughly 2000 plays created for Noh that are known today , the current repertoire performed by the five existing Noh schools consist of approximately 240 plays . The current repertoire is heavily influenced by the taste of aristocratic class in Tokugawa period and does not necessarily reflect popularity among the commoners . There are several different ways to classify Noh plays . 
 = = = Subject = = = 
 All Noh plays can be classified into three broad categories . 
 Genzai Noh ( <unk> , ' present ' Noh ) features human characters and events unfold according to a linear timeline within the play . 
 Mugen Noh ( <unk> , ' supernatural ' Noh ) involves supernatural worlds , featuring gods , spirits , ghosts , or phantasms in the shite role . Time is often depicted as passing in a non @-@ linear fashion , and action may switch between two or more timeframes from moment to moment , including flashbacks . 
 <unk> Noh ( <unk> , ' mixed ' Noh ) , though somewhat uncommon , is a hybrid of the above with the first act being Genzai Noh and the second act Mugen Noh . 
 While Genzai Noh utilizes internal and external conflicts to drive storylines and bring out emotions , Mugen Noh focuses on utilizing flashbacks of the past and the deceased to invoke emotions . 
 = = = Performance style = = = 
 Additionally , all Noh plays may be categorized by their style . 
 Geki Noh ( <unk> ) is a drama piece based around the advancement of plot and the narration of action . 
 <unk> Noh ( <unk> ) is little more than a dance piece characterized by elaborate stage action , often involving acrobatics , stage properties , and multiple characters . 
 = = = Theme = = = 
 All Noh plays are divided by their themes into the following five categories . This classification is considered the most practical , and is still used today in formal programming choices today . Traditionally , a formal 5 @-@ play program is composed of a selection from each of the groups . 
 Kami mono ( <unk> , god plays ) or waki Noh ( <unk> ) typically feature the shite in the role of a deity to tell the mythic story of a shrine or praise a particular god . Many of them structured in two acts , the deity takes a human form in disguise in the first act and reveals the real self in the second act . ( e.g. Takasago , <unk> ) 
 Shura mono ( <unk> , warrior plays ) or <unk> Noh ( <unk> ) takes its name from the Buddhist underworld . The protagonist appearing as a ghost of a famous samurai pleads to a monk for salvation and the drama culminates in a glorious re @-@ enactment of the scene of his death in a full war costume . ( e.g. Tamura , <unk> ) 
 Katsura mono ( <unk> , wig plays ) or onna mono ( <unk> , woman plays ) depict the shite in a female role and feature some of the most refined songs and dances in all of Noh , reflecting the smooth and flowing movements representing female characters . ( e.g. Basho , <unk> ) 
 There are about 94 " miscellaneous " plays traditionally performed in the fourth place in a five @-@ play program . These plays include subcategories <unk> mono ( <unk> , madness plays ) , <unk> mono ( <unk> , vengeful ghost plays ) , <unk> mono ( <unk> , present plays ) , as well as others . ( e.g. Aya no tsuzumi , <unk> ) 
 Kiri Noh ( <unk> , final plays ) or oni mono ( <unk> , demon plays ) usually feature the shite in the role of monsters , goblins , or demons , and are often selected for their bright colors and fast @-@ paced , tense finale movements . Kiri Noh is performed the last in a five @-@ play program . There are roughly 30 plays in this category , most of which are shorter than the plays in the other categories . 
 In addition to the above five , <unk> ( or <unk> ) is frequently performed at the very beginning of the program . Combining dance with Shinto ritual , it is considered the oldest type of Noh play . 
 = = = Some famous plays = = = 
 For a more comprehensive list , see List of Noh plays ( A – M ) ( N – Z ) . 
 Plays with individual articles are listed here . 
 The following categorization is that of the Kanze school . 
 = = Influence in the West = = 
 Many Western artists have been influenced by Noh . 
 = = = Theatre practitioners = = = 
 Eugenio Barba – Between 1966 and 1972 , Japanese Noh Masters Hideo Kanze and Hisao Kanze gave seminars on Noh at Barba ’ s Theater Laboratory of <unk> . Barba primarily studied the physical aspects of Noh . 
 Samuel Beckett – Yoshihiko Ikegami considers Beckett 's Waiting for Godot a parody of Noh , particularly Kami Noh , in which a god or a spirit appears before a secondary character as the protagonist . Ikegami argues that " the dramatic conflict which was much in evidence in Yeats is so completely discarded that Beckett 's theatre ( where ' nothing happens ' ) comes to look even closer to Noh than Yeats 's did . " 
 Bertolt Brecht – According to Maria P. Alter , Brecht began reading Japanese plays during the middle twenties and have read at least 20 Noh plays translated into German by 1929 . Brecht 's Der <unk> is an adaptation of a Noh play <unk> . Brecht himself identified Die <unk> as an adaptation of Noh play . 
 Peter Brook – Yoshi <unk> , a Japanese actor with training in Noh , began working with Brook in their production of The Tempest in 1968 . <unk> later joined Brook 's company . 
 Paul Claudel – According to John Willet , Paul Claudel learned about Noh during the time he served as French Ambassador to Japan . Claudel 's opera Christophe Colomb shows an unmistakable influence of the Noh . 
 Jacques Copeau – In 1923 , Copeau worked on a Noh play , <unk> , along with Suzanne Bing at Théâtre du Vieux @-@ Colombier without ever having seen a Noh play . Thomas <unk> states that " Jacques Copeau was drawn instinctively by taste and tendency to a restrained theatre which was based in spirituality . " Copeau praised Noh theatre in writing when he finally saw a production in 1930 . 
 Jacques Lecoq – Physical theatre taught at L 'École Internationale de Théâtre Jacques Lecoq founded by Lecoq is influenced by Noh . 
 Eugene O 'Neill – O 'Neill 's plays The Iceman Cometh , Long Day 's Journey Into Night , and Hughie have various similarities to Noh plays . 
 Thornton Wilder – Wilder himself expressed his interest in Noh in his " Preface ” to Three Plays and his sister Isabel Wilder also confirmed his interests . Wilder 's work Our Town incorporates various elements of Noh such as lack of plot , representative characters , and use of ghosts . 
 = = = Composers = = = 
 William Henry Bell – An English composer Bell wrote music for modern presentation of several Noh plays , including Komachi ( 1925 ) , <unk> of the Three Trees ( 1926 ) , Hatsuyuki ( 1934 ) , The Pillow of <unk> ( 1935 ) , and <unk> ( 1936 ) . 
 Benjamin Britten – Britten visited Japan in 1956 and saw for the first time Japanese Noh plays , which he called " some of the most wonderful drama I have ever seen . " The influences were seen and heard in his ballet The Prince of the Pagodas ( 1957 ) and later in two of the three semi @-@ operatic " Parables for Church Performance " : Curlew River ( 1964 ) and The Prodigal Son ( 1968 ) . 
 David Byrne – Byrne encountered Noh when he was on tour in Japan with Talking Heads and he was inspired by the highly stylized practices of Noh , completely different from its Western counterparts that focus on naturalism . According to Josh Kun , " Japanese Noh theatre inspired him to design the oversize business suit that became a visual staple of Talking Heads live shows . " 
 Alan Watts – 20th century philosopher , the liner notes from his third song off the 1962 album ' This is IT ' state " Watts in a Japanese no @-@ noh . " 
 Harry Partch – Partch called his work Delusion of the Fury “ a ritualistic web ” . Kate <unk> wrote for the Guardian that " the narrative is a bleary mix of Japanese Noh theatre , Ethiopian folk mythology , Greek drama and his own wacky imagination . " Will Salmon cites Partch himself writing , " Noh has been for centuries a fine art , one of the most sophisticated the world has known . " Delusion of the Fury incorporates two Noh plays , <unk> by Zeami and Ikuta by <unk> <unk> , into its story . 
 Karlheinz Stockhausen – Having essentially plotless libretto , Stockhausen 's grand operatic cycle Licht ( " Light " ) is based on " a mythology drawing on multiple cultural traditions , from Japanese Noh theatre to German folklore . " 
 Iannis Xenakis – Xenakis " admired Noh , the venerable theatrical form known for its ritualistic formality and gestural complexity . " Electronic Music Foundation presented Xenakis & Japan in March 2010 , " a dance / music event highlighting Xenakis ' lifelong interest in Japanese music and theatre " . The event featured a female Noh performer Ryoko Aoki . 
 = = = Poets = = = 
 William Butler Yeats – Yeats wrote an essay on Noh titled " Certain Noble Plays of Japan " in 1916 . As much as he tried to learn Noh , there were limited resources available in England at the time . The lack of complete understanding of Noh led him to create innovative works guided by his own imagination and what he fantasized Noh to be . Yeats wrote four plays heavily influenced by Noh , using ghosts or supernatural beings as the central dramatis personæ for the first time . The plays are At the Hawk 's Well , The Dreaming of the Bones , The Words upon the Window @-@ Fane , and Purgatory . 
 = = Aesthetic terminology = = 
 Zeami and <unk> describe a number of distinct qualities that are thought to be essential to the proper understanding of Noh as an art form . 
 Hana ( 花 , flower ) : In the <unk> ( Instructions on the Posture of the Flower ) , Zeami describes hana saying " after you master the secrets of all things and exhaust the possibilities of every device , the hana that never vanishes still remains . " The true Noh performer seeks to cultivate a rarefied relationship with his audience similar to the way that one cultivates flowers . What is notable about hana is that , like a flower , it is meant to be appreciated by any audience , no matter how lofty or how coarse his upbringing . Hana comes in two forms . Individual hana is the beauty of the flower of youth , which passes with time , while " true hana " is the flower of creating and sharing perfect beauty through performance . 
 <unk> ( <unk> , profound sublimity ) : <unk> is a concept valued in various forms of art throughout Japanese culture . Originally used to mean elegance or grace representing the perfect beauty in waka , <unk> is invisible beauty that is felt rather than seen in a work of art . The term is used specifically in relation to Noh to mean the profound beauty of the transcendental world , including mournful beauty involved in sadness and loss . 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) : <unk> means old , and <unk> means tranquil and quiet . <unk> is the final stage of performance development of the Noh actor , in which he eliminates all unnecessary action or sound in the performance , leaving only the true essence of the scene or action being imitated . 
 Kokoro or shin ( both 心 ) : Defined as " heart , " " mind , " or both . The kokoro of noh is that which Zeami speaks of in his teachings , and is more easily defined as " mind . " To develop hana the actor must enter a state of no @-@ mind , or <unk> . 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) : the " charm " of an actor who performs flawlessly and without any sense of imitation ; he effectively becomes his role . 
 <unk> ( <unk> , imitation or mimesis ) : the intent of a Noh actor to accurately depict the motions of his role , as opposed to purely aesthetic reasons for abstraction or embellishment . <unk> is sometimes contrasted with <unk> , although the two represent endpoints of a continuum rather than being completely separate . 
 Kabu @-@ <unk> ( <unk> , " song @-@ dance @-@ one heart " ) : the theory that the song ( including poetry ) and dance are two halves of the same whole , and that the Noh actor strives to perform both with total unity of heart and mind . 
 = = Existing Noh theatres = = 
 Noh is still regularly performed today in public theatres as well as private theatres mostly located in major cities . There are more than 70 Noh theatres throughout Japan , presenting both professional and amateur productions . 
 Public theatres include National Noh Theatre ( Tokyo ) , Nagoya Noh Theater , and Osaka Noh Theater . Each Noh school has its own permanent theatre , such as Kanze Noh Theater ( Tokyo ) , Hosho Noh Theater ( Tokyo ) , Kongo Noh Theater ( Kyoto ) , and Nara <unk> Noh Theater ( Nara ) . Additionally , there are various prefectural and municipal theatres located throughout Japan that present touring professional companies and local amateur companies . In some regions , unique regional Noh such as <unk> Kurokawa Noh have developed to form schools independent from five traditional schools . 
 = = Audience etiquette = = 
 Audience etiquette is generally similar to formal western theatre — the audience quietly watches . <unk> are not used , but some audience members follow along in the libretto . Because there are no curtains on the stage , the performance begins with the actors entering the stage and ends with their leaving the stage . The house lights are usually kept on during the performances , creating an intimate feel that provides a shared experience between the performers and the audience . 
 At the end of the play , the actors file out slowly ( most important first , with gaps between actors ) , and while they are on the bridge ( <unk> ) , the audience claps <unk> . Between actors , clapping ceases , then begins again as the next actor leaves . Unlike in western theatre , there is no bowing , nor do the actors return to the stage after having left . A play may end with the shite character leaving the stage as part of the story ( as in <unk> , for instance ) — rather than ending with all characters on stage — in which case one claps as the character exits . 
 During the interval , tea , coffee , and <unk> ( Japanese sweets ) may be served in the lobby . In the Edo period , when Noh was a day @-@ long affair , more substantial <unk> ' <unk> ( <unk> , " between @-@ acts lunchbox " ) were served . On special occasions , when the performance is over , <unk> ( o @-@ <unk> , ceremonial sake ) may be served in the lobby on the way out , as it happens in Shinto rituals . 
 The audience is seated in front of the stage , to the left side of the stage , and in the corner front @-@ left of stage ; these are in order of decreasing desirability . While the <unk> @-@ <unk> pillar obstructs the view of the stage , the actors are primarily at the corners , not the center , and thus the two aisles are located where the views of the two main actors would be obscured , ensuring a generally clear view regardless of seating . 
 = M @-@ 239 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 239 is a north – south state trunkline highway in Berrien County in the extreme southwestern corner of the US state of Michigan connecting State Road 39 ( SR 39 ) in Indiana to Interstate 94 ( I @-@ 94 ) . The highway was designated in 1963 , and it provided the only connection from the southern end of I @-@ 94 into Indiana until 1972 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 As SR 39 crosses into Michigan it becomes M @-@ 239 . As soon as it crosses the border , the road curves around to the northwest where it continues through a generally rural area . The trunkline intersects Wilson Road and passes next to a commercial development . After a little over a mile ( 1 @.@ 8 km ) , the road comes to its northern terminus at an interchange with I @-@ 94 at exit 1 . While M @-@ 239 officially ends at the interchange , the roadway , known as Harbor Country Drive , continues on to the northwest where it heads into New Buffalo . Like other state highways in Michigan , M @-@ 239 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) . In 2011 , the department 's traffic surveys showed that on average , 6 @,@ 231 vehicles used the highway daily . No section of M @-@ 239 is listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 239 always ended at I @-@ 94 , even though Harbor Country Drive continues into New Buffalo . Before completion of the Indiana portion of I @-@ 94 , the freeway ended at the present exit 1 . A 1 @.@ 1 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 1 @.@ 8 km ) stretch of LaPorte Road was designated as M @-@ 239 in 1963 to carry traffic to SR 39 , which connects to the Indiana Toll Road . Until 1972 , when Indiana constructed their section of I @-@ 94 , M @-@ 239 and SR 39 were the only connection from the southern end of I @-@ 94 in Michigan across the state line . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in New Buffalo Township , Berrien County . 
 = Enzyme = 
 Enzymes / <unk> / are macromolecular biological catalysts . Enzymes accelerate , or catalyze , chemical reactions . The molecules at the beginning of the process are called substrates and the enzyme converts these into different molecules , called products . Almost all metabolic processes in the cell need enzymes in order to occur at rates fast enough to sustain life . The set of enzymes made in a cell determines which metabolic pathways occur in that cell . The study of enzymes is called enzymology . 
 Enzymes are known to catalyze more than 5 @,@ 000 biochemical reaction types . Most enzymes are proteins , although a few are catalytic RNA molecules . Enzymes ' specificity comes from their unique three @-@ dimensional structures . 
 Like all catalysts , enzymes increase the rate of a reaction by lowering its activation energy . Some enzymes can make their conversion of substrate to product occur many millions of times faster . An extreme example is <unk> 5 ' <unk> decarboxylase , which allows a reaction that would otherwise take millions of years to occur in milliseconds . Chemically , enzymes are like any catalyst and are not consumed in chemical reactions , nor do they alter the equilibrium of a reaction . Enzymes differ from most other catalysts by being much more specific . Enzyme activity can be affected by other molecules : inhibitors are molecules that decrease enzyme activity , and activators are molecules that increase activity . Many drugs and poisons are enzyme inhibitors . An enzyme 's activity decreases markedly outside its optimal temperature and pH . 
 Some enzymes are used commercially , for example , in the synthesis of antibiotics . Some household products use enzymes to speed up chemical reactions : enzymes in biological washing powders break down protein , starch or fat stains on clothes , and enzymes in meat <unk> break down proteins into smaller molecules , making the meat easier to chew . 
 = = Etymology and history = = 
 By the late 17th and early 18th centuries , the digestion of meat by stomach secretions and the conversion of starch to sugars by plant extracts and saliva were known but the mechanisms by which these occurred had not been identified . 
 French chemist Anselme <unk> was the first to discover an enzyme , <unk> , in 1833 . A few decades later , when studying the fermentation of sugar to alcohol by yeast , Louis Pasteur concluded that this fermentation was caused by a vital force contained within the yeast cells called " ferments " , which were thought to function only within living organisms . He wrote that " alcoholic fermentation is an act correlated with the life and organization of the yeast cells , not with the death or putrefaction of the cells . " 
 In 1877 , German physiologist Wilhelm Kühne ( 1837 – 1900 ) first used the term enzyme , which comes from Greek <unk> , " leavened " , to describe this process . The word enzyme was used later to refer to nonliving substances such as pepsin , and the word ferment was used to refer to chemical activity produced by living organisms . 
 Eduard Buchner submitted his first paper on the study of yeast extracts in 1897 . In a series of experiments at the University of Berlin , he found that sugar was fermented by yeast extracts even when there were no living yeast cells in the mixture . He named the enzyme that brought about the fermentation of sucrose " <unk> " . In 1907 , he received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for " his discovery of cell @-@ free fermentation " . Following Buchner 's example , enzymes are usually named according to the reaction they carry out : the suffix <unk> is combined with the name of the substrate ( e.g. , lactase is the enzyme that cleaves lactose ) or to the type of reaction ( e.g. , DNA polymerase forms DNA polymers ) . 
 The biochemical identity of enzymes was still unknown in the early 1900s . Many scientists observed that enzymatic activity was associated with proteins , but others ( such as Nobel laureate Richard <unk> ) argued that proteins were merely carriers for the true enzymes and that proteins per se were incapable of catalysis . In 1926 , James B. Sumner showed that the enzyme urease was a pure protein and crystallized it ; he did likewise for the enzyme catalase in 1937 . The conclusion that pure proteins can be enzymes was definitively demonstrated by John Howard Northrop and Wendell Meredith Stanley , who worked on the digestive enzymes pepsin ( 1930 ) , trypsin and chymotrypsin . These three scientists were awarded the 1946 Nobel Prize in Chemistry . 
 The discovery that enzymes could be crystallized eventually allowed their structures to be solved by x @-@ ray crystallography . This was first done for lysozyme , an enzyme found in tears , saliva and egg whites that digests the coating of some bacteria ; the structure was solved by a group led by David Chilton Phillips and published in 1965 . This high @-@ resolution structure of lysozyme marked the beginning of the field of structural biology and the effort to understand how enzymes work at an atomic level of detail . 
 = = Structure = = 
 Enzymes are generally globular proteins , acting alone or in larger complexes . Like all proteins , enzymes are linear chains of amino acids that fold to produce a three @-@ dimensional structure . The sequence of the amino acids specifies the structure which in turn determines the catalytic activity of the enzyme . Although structure determines function , a novel enzyme 's activity cannot yet be predicted from its structure alone . Enzyme structures unfold ( denature ) when heated or exposed to chemical <unk> and this disruption to the structure typically causes a loss of activity . Enzyme denaturation is normally linked to temperatures above a species ' normal level ; as a result , enzymes from bacteria living in volcanic environments such as hot springs are prized by industrial users for their ability to function at high temperatures , allowing enzyme @-@ catalysed reactions to be operated at a very high rate . 
 Enzymes are usually much larger than their substrates . Sizes range from just 62 amino acid residues , for the monomer of 4 @-@ <unk> <unk> , to over 2 @,@ 500 residues in the animal fatty acid synthase . Only a small portion of their structure ( around 2 – 4 amino acids ) is directly involved in catalysis : the catalytic site . This catalytic site is located next to one or more binding sites where residues orient the substrates . The catalytic site and binding site together comprise the enzyme 's active site . The remaining majority of the enzyme structure serves to maintain the precise orientation and dynamics of the active site . 
 In some enzymes , no amino acids are directly involved in catalysis ; instead , the enzyme contains sites to bind and orient catalytic cofactors . Enzyme structures may also contain allosteric sites where the binding of a small molecule causes a conformational change that increases or decreases activity . 
 A small number of RNA @-@ based biological catalysts called ribozymes exist , which again can act alone or in complex with proteins . The most common of these is the ribosome which is a complex of protein and catalytic RNA components . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 = = = Substrate binding = = = 
 Enzymes must bind their substrates before they can catalyse any chemical reaction . Enzymes are usually very specific as to what substrates they bind and then the chemical reaction catalysed . Specificity is achieved by binding pockets with complementary shape , charge and hydrophilic / hydrophobic characteristics to the substrates . Enzymes can therefore distinguish between very similar substrate molecules to be <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . 
 Some of the enzymes showing the highest specificity and accuracy are involved in the copying and expression of the genome . Some of these enzymes have " proof @-@ reading " mechanisms . Here , an enzyme such as DNA polymerase catalyzes a reaction in a first step and then checks that the product is correct in a second step . This two @-@ step process results in average error rates of less than 1 error in 100 million reactions in high @-@ fidelity mammalian polymerases . Similar proofreading mechanisms are also found in RNA polymerase , aminoacyl tRNA synthetases and ribosomes . 
 Conversely , some enzymes display enzyme promiscuity , having broad specificity and acting on a range of different physiologically relevant substrates . Many enzymes possess small side activities which arose fortuitously ( i.e. neutrally ) , which may be the starting point for the evolutionary selection of a new function . 
 = = = = " Lock and key " model = = = = 
 To explain the observed specificity of enzymes , in 1894 Emil Fischer proposed that both the enzyme and the substrate possess specific complementary geometric shapes that fit exactly into one another . This is often referred to as " the lock and key " model . This early model explains enzyme specificity , but fails to explain the stabilization of the transition state that enzymes achieve . 
 = = = = Induced fit model = = = = 
 In 1958 , Daniel <unk> suggested a modification to the lock and key model : since enzymes are rather flexible structures , the active site is continuously reshaped by interactions with the substrate as the substrate interacts with the enzyme . As a result , the substrate does not simply bind to a rigid active site ; the amino acid side @-@ chains that make up the active site are molded into the precise positions that enable the enzyme to perform its catalytic function . In some cases , such as <unk> , the substrate molecule also changes shape slightly as it enters the active site . The active site continues to change until the substrate is completely bound , at which point the final shape and charge distribution is determined . Induced fit may enhance the fidelity of molecular recognition in the presence of competition and noise via the conformational proofreading mechanism . 
 = = = Catalysis = = = 
 Enzymes can accelerate reactions in several ways , all of which lower the activation energy ( ΔG ‡ , Gibbs free energy ) 
 By stabilizing the transition state : 
 Creating an environment with a charge distribution complementary to that of the transition state to lower its energy . 
 By providing an alternative reaction pathway : 
 Temporarily reacting with the substrate , forming a covalent intermediate to provide a lower energy transition state . 
 By destabilising the substrate ground state : 
 Distorting bound substrate ( s ) into their transition state form to reduce the energy required to reach the transition state . 
 By orienting the substrates into a productive arrangement to reduce the reaction entropy change . The contribution of this mechanism to catalysis is relatively small . 
 Enzymes may use several of these mechanisms simultaneously . For example , proteases such as trypsin perform covalent catalysis using a catalytic triad , stabilise charge build @-@ up on the transition states using an oxyanion hole , complete hydrolysis using an oriented water substrate . 
 = = = Dynamics = = = 
 Enzymes are not rigid , static structures ; instead they have complex internal dynamic motions – that is , movements of parts of the enzyme 's structure such as individual amino acid residues , groups of residues forming a protein loop or unit of secondary structure , or even an entire protein domain . These motions give rise to a conformational ensemble of slightly different structures that <unk> with one another at equilibrium . Different states within this ensemble may be associated with different aspects of an enzyme 's function . For example , different conformations of the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase are associated with the substrate binding , catalysis , cofactor release , and product release steps of the catalytic cycle . 
 = = = Allosteric modulation = = = 
 Allosteric sites are pockets on the enzyme , distinct from the active site , that bind to molecules in the cellular environment . These molecules then cause a change in the conformation or dynamics of the enzyme that is transduced to the active site and thus affects the reaction rate of the enzyme . In this way , allosteric interactions can either inhibit or activate enzymes . Allosteric interactions with metabolites upstream or downstream in an enzyme 's metabolic pathway cause feedback regulation , altering the activity of the enzyme according to the flux through the rest of the pathway . 
 = = Cofactors = = 
 Some enzymes do not need additional components to show full activity . Others require non @-@ protein molecules called cofactors to be bound for activity . Cofactors can be either inorganic ( e.g. , metal ions and iron @-@ sulfur clusters ) or organic compounds ( e.g. , flavin and heme ) . Organic cofactors can be either coenzymes , which are released from the enzyme 's active site during the reaction , or prosthetic groups , which are tightly bound to an enzyme . Organic prosthetic groups can be covalently bound ( e.g. , biotin in enzymes such as pyruvate carboxylase ) . 
 An example of an enzyme that contains a cofactor is carbonic anhydrase , which is shown in the ribbon diagram above with a zinc cofactor bound as part of its active site . These tightly bound ions or molecules are usually found in the active site and are involved in catalysis . For example , flavin and heme cofactors are often involved in redox reactions . 
 Enzymes that require a cofactor but do not have one bound are called <unk> or <unk> . An enzyme together with the cofactor ( s ) required for activity is called a holoenzyme ( or <unk> ) . The term holoenzyme can also be applied to enzymes that contain multiple protein subunits , such as the DNA polymerases ; here the holoenzyme is the complete complex containing all the subunits needed for activity . 
 = = = Coenzymes = = = 
 Coenzymes are small organic molecules that can be loosely or tightly bound to an enzyme . Coenzymes transport chemical groups from one enzyme to another . Examples include NADH , NADPH and adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) . Some coenzymes , such as riboflavin , thiamine and folic acid , are vitamins , or compounds that cannot be synthesized by the body and must be acquired from the diet . The chemical groups carried include the hydride ion ( H − ) carried by NAD or NADP + , the phosphate group carried by adenosine triphosphate , the acetyl group carried by coenzyme A , formyl , <unk> or methyl groups carried by folic acid and the methyl group carried by S @-@ adenosylmethionine . 
 Since coenzymes are chemically changed as a consequence of enzyme action , it is useful to consider coenzymes to be a special class of substrates , or second substrates , which are common to many different enzymes . For example , about 1000 enzymes are known to use the coenzyme NADH . 
 Coenzymes are usually continuously regenerated and their concentrations maintained at a steady level inside the cell . For example , NADPH is regenerated through the pentose phosphate pathway and S @-@ adenosylmethionine by methionine <unk> . This continuous regeneration means that small amounts of coenzymes can be used very intensively . For example , the human body turns over its own weight in ATP each day . 
 = = Thermodynamics = = 
 As with all catalysts , enzymes do not alter the position of the chemical equilibrium of the reaction . In the presence of an enzyme , the reaction runs in the same direction as it would without the enzyme , just more quickly . For example , carbonic anhydrase catalyzes its reaction in either direction depending on the concentration of its reactants : 
 The rate of a reaction is dependent on the activation energy needed to form the transition state which then decays into products . Enzymes increase reaction rates by lowering the energy of the transition state . First , binding forms a low energy enzyme @-@ substrate complex ( ES ) . Secondly the enzyme stabilises the transition state such that it requires less energy to achieve compared to the uncatalyzed reaction ( ES ‡ ) . Finally the enzyme @-@ product complex ( EP ) dissociates to release the products . 
 Enzymes can couple two or more reactions , so that a thermodynamically favorable reaction can be used to " drive " a thermodynamically unfavourable one so that the combined energy of the products is lower than the substrates . For example , the hydrolysis of ATP is often used to drive other chemical reactions . 
 = = Kinetics = = 
 Enzyme kinetics is the investigation of how enzymes bind substrates and turn them into products . The rate data used in kinetic analyses are commonly obtained from enzyme assays . In 1913 Leonor Michaelis and Maud Leonora Menten proposed a quantitative theory of enzyme kinetics , which is referred to as Michaelis – Menten kinetics . The major contribution of Michaelis and Menten was to think of enzyme reactions in two stages . In the first , the substrate binds reversibly to the enzyme , forming the enzyme @-@ substrate complex . This is sometimes called the Michaelis @-@ Menten complex in their honor . The enzyme then catalyzes the chemical step in the reaction and releases the product . This work was further developed by G. E. Briggs and J. B. S. Haldane , who derived kinetic equations that are still widely used today . 
 Enzyme rates depend on solution conditions and substrate concentration . To find the maximum speed of an enzymatic reaction , the substrate concentration is increased until a constant rate of product formation is seen . This is shown in the saturation curve on the right . Saturation happens because , as substrate concentration increases , more and more of the free enzyme is converted into the substrate @-@ bound ES complex . At the maximum reaction rate ( Vmax ) of the enzyme , all the enzyme active sites are bound to substrate , and the amount of ES complex is the same as the total amount of enzyme . 
 Vmax is only one of several important kinetic parameters . The amount of substrate needed to achieve a given rate of reaction is also important . This is given by the Michaelis @-@ Menten constant ( Km ) , which is the substrate concentration required for an enzyme to reach one @-@ half its maximum reaction rate ; generally , each enzyme has a characteristic Km for a given substrate . Another useful constant is kcat , also called the turnover number , which is the number of substrate molecules handled by one active site per second . 
 The efficiency of an enzyme can be expressed in terms of kcat / Km . This is also called the specificity constant and incorporates the rate constants for all steps in the reaction up to and including the first irreversible step . Because the specificity constant reflects both affinity and catalytic ability , it is useful for comparing different enzymes against each other , or the same enzyme with different substrates . The theoretical maximum for the specificity constant is called the diffusion limit and is about 108 to 109 ( M − 1 s − 1 ) . At this point every collision of the enzyme with its substrate will result in catalysis , and the rate of product formation is not limited by the reaction rate but by the diffusion rate . Enzymes with this property are called catalytically perfect or kinetically perfect . Example of such enzymes are triose @-@ phosphate isomerase , carbonic anhydrase , acetylcholinesterase , catalase , <unk> , β @-@ lactamase , and superoxide dismutase . The turnover of such enzymes can reach several million reactions per second . 
 Michaelis – Menten kinetics relies on the law of mass action , which is derived from the assumptions of free diffusion and thermodynamically driven random collision . Many biochemical or cellular processes deviate significantly from these conditions , because of macromolecular crowding and constrained molecular movement . More recent , complex extensions of the model attempt to correct for these effects . 
 = = Inhibition = = 
 Enzyme reaction rates can be decreased by various types of enzyme inhibitors . 
 = = = Types of inhibition = = = 
 Competitive 
 A competitive inhibitor and substrate cannot bind to the enzyme at the same time . Often competitive inhibitors strongly resemble the real substrate of the enzyme . For example , the drug methotrexate is a competitive inhibitor of the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase , which catalyzes the reduction of dihydrofolate to <unk> . The similarity between the structures of dihydrofolate and this drug are shown in the accompanying figure . This type of inhibition can be overcome with high substrate concentration . In some cases , the inhibitor can bind to a site other than the binding @-@ site of the usual substrate and exert an allosteric effect to change the shape of the usual binding @-@ site . 
 Non @-@ competitive 
 A non @-@ competitive inhibitor binds to a site other than where the substrate binds . The substrate still binds with its usual affinity and hence Km remains the same . However the inhibitor reduces the catalytic efficiency of the enzyme so that Vmax is reduced . In contrast to competitive inhibition , non @-@ competitive inhibition cannot be overcome with high substrate concentration . 
 Uncompetitive 
 An uncompetitive inhibitor cannot bind to the free enzyme , only to the enzyme @-@ substrate complex ; hence , these types of inhibitors are most effective at high substrate concentration . In the presence of the inhibitor , the enzyme @-@ substrate complex is inactive . This type of inhibition is rare . 
 Mixed 
 A mixed inhibitor binds to an allosteric site and the binding of the substrate and the inhibitor affect each other . The enzyme 's function is reduced but not eliminated when bound to the inhibitor . This type of inhibitor does not follow the Michaelis @-@ Menten equation . 
 Irreversible 
 An irreversible inhibitor permanently inactivates the enzyme , usually by forming a covalent bond to the protein . Penicillin and aspirin are common drugs that act in this manner . 
 = = = Functions of inhibitors = = = 
 In many organisms , inhibitors may act as part of a feedback mechanism . If an enzyme produces too much of one substance in the organism , that substance may act as an inhibitor for the enzyme at the beginning of the pathway that produces it , causing production of the substance to slow down or stop when there is sufficient amount . This is a form of negative feedback . Major metabolic pathways such as the citric acid cycle make use of this mechanism . 
 Since inhibitors modulate the function of enzymes they are often used as drugs . Many such drugs are reversible competitive inhibitors that resemble the enzyme 's native substrate , similar to methotrexate above ; other well @-@ known examples include statins used to treat high cholesterol , and protease inhibitors used to treat retroviral infections such as HIV . A common example of an irreversible inhibitor that is used as a drug is aspirin , which inhibits the COX @-@ 1 and COX @-@ 2 enzymes that produce the inflammation messenger prostaglandin . Other enzyme inhibitors are poisons . For example , the poison cyanide is an irreversible enzyme inhibitor that combines with the copper and iron in the active site of the enzyme cytochrome c oxidase and blocks cellular respiration . 
 = = Biological function = = 
 Enzymes serve a wide variety of functions inside living organisms . They are indispensable for signal transduction and cell regulation , often via kinases and phosphatases . They also generate movement , with myosin hydrolyzing ATP to generate muscle contraction , and also transport cargo around the cell as part of the cytoskeleton . Other ATPases in the cell membrane are ion pumps involved in active transport . Enzymes are also involved in more exotic functions , such as luciferase generating light in fireflies . Viruses can also contain enzymes for infecting cells , such as the HIV integrase and reverse transcriptase , or for viral release from cells , like the influenza virus neuraminidase . 
 An important function of enzymes is in the digestive systems of animals . Enzymes such as amylases and proteases break down large molecules ( starch or proteins , respectively ) into smaller ones , so they can be absorbed by the intestines . Starch molecules , for example , are too large to be absorbed from the intestine , but enzymes hydrolyze the starch chains into smaller molecules such as maltose and eventually glucose , which can then be absorbed . Different enzymes digest different food substances . In ruminants , which have herbivorous diets , microorganisms in the gut produce another enzyme , cellulase , to break down the cellulose cell walls of plant fiber . 
 = = = Metabolism = = = 
 Several enzymes can work together in a specific order , creating metabolic pathways . In a metabolic pathway , one enzyme takes the product of another enzyme as a substrate . After the catalytic reaction , the product is then passed on to another enzyme . Sometimes more than one enzyme can catalyze the same reaction in parallel ; this can allow more complex regulation : with , for example , a low constant activity provided by one enzyme but an inducible high activity from a second enzyme . 
 Enzymes determine what steps occur in these pathways . Without enzymes , metabolism would neither progress through the same steps and could not be regulated to serve the needs of the cell . Most central metabolic pathways are regulated at a few key steps , typically through enzymes whose activity involves the hydrolysis of ATP . Because this reaction releases so much energy , other reactions that are thermodynamically unfavorable can be coupled to ATP hydrolysis , driving the overall series of linked metabolic reactions . 
 = = = Control of activity = = = 
 There are five main ways that enzyme activity is controlled in the cell . 
 Regulation 
 Enzymes can be either activated or inhibited by other molecules . For example , the end product ( s ) of a metabolic pathway are often inhibitors for one of the first enzymes of the pathway ( usually the first irreversible step , called committed step ) , thus regulating the amount of end product made by the pathways . Such a regulatory mechanism is called a negative feedback mechanism , because the amount of the end product produced is regulated by its own concentration . Negative feedback mechanism can effectively adjust the rate of synthesis of intermediate metabolites according to the demands of the cells . This helps with effective allocations of materials and energy economy , and it prevents the excess manufacture of end products . Like other homeostatic devices , the control of enzymatic action helps to maintain a stable internal environment in living organisms . 
 Post @-@ translational modification 
 Examples of post @-@ translational modification include phosphorylation , <unk> and glycosylation . For example , in the response to insulin , the phosphorylation of multiple enzymes , including glycogen synthase , helps control the synthesis or degradation of glycogen and allows the cell to respond to changes in blood sugar . Another example of post @-@ translational modification is the cleavage of the polypeptide chain . <unk> , a digestive protease , is produced in inactive form as <unk> in the pancreas and transported in this form to the stomach where it is activated . This stops the enzyme from digesting the pancreas or other tissues before it enters the gut . This type of inactive precursor to an enzyme is known as a zymogen or <unk> . 
 Quantity 
 Enzyme production ( transcription and translation of enzyme genes ) can be enhanced or diminished by a cell in response to changes in the cell 's environment . This form of gene regulation is called enzyme induction . For example , bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics such as penicillin because enzymes called beta @-@ lactamases are induced that hydrolyse the crucial beta @-@ lactam ring within the penicillin molecule . Another example comes from enzymes in the liver called cytochrome P450 oxidases , which are important in drug metabolism . Induction or inhibition of these enzymes can cause drug interactions . Enzyme levels can also be regulated by changing the rate of enzyme degradation . 
 <unk> distribution 
 Enzymes can be compartmentalized , with different metabolic pathways occurring in different cellular compartments . For example , fatty acids are synthesized by one set of enzymes in the cytosol , endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi and used by a different set of enzymes as a source of energy in the mitochondrion , through β @-@ oxidation . In addition , trafficking of the enzyme to different compartments may change the degree of protonation ( cytoplasm neutral and lysosome acidic ) or oxidative state [ e.g. , oxidized ( periplasm ) or reduced ( cytoplasm ) ] which in turn affects enzyme activity . 
 Organ specialization 
 In multicellular eukaryotes , cells in different organs and tissues have different patterns of gene expression and therefore have different sets of enzymes ( known as isozymes ) available for metabolic reactions . This provides a mechanism for regulating the overall metabolism of the organism . For example , hexokinase , the first enzyme in the glycolysis pathway , has a specialized form called <unk> expressed in the liver and pancreas that has a lower affinity for glucose yet is more sensitive to glucose concentration . This enzyme is involved in sensing blood sugar and regulating insulin production . 
 = = = Involvement in disease = = = 
 Since the tight control of enzyme activity is essential for homeostasis , any malfunction ( mutation , overproduction , <unk> or deletion ) of a single critical enzyme can lead to a genetic disease . The malfunction of just one type of enzyme out of the thousands of types present in the human body can be fatal . An example of a fatal genetic disease due to enzyme insufficiency is Tay @-@ Sachs disease , in which patients lack the enzyme <unk> . 
 One example of enzyme deficiency is the most common type of phenylketonuria . Many different single amino acid mutations in the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase , which catalyzes the first step in the degradation of phenylalanine , result in build @-@ up of phenylalanine and related products . Some mutations are in the active site , directly disrupting binding and catalysis , but many are far from the active site and reduce activity by destabilising the protein structure , or affecting correct <unk> . This can lead to intellectual disability if the disease is untreated . Another example is <unk> deficiency , in which the body 's ability to break down choline ester drugs is impaired . Oral administration of enzymes can be used to treat some functional enzyme deficiencies , such as pancreatic insufficiency and lactose intolerance . 
 Another way enzyme malfunctions can cause disease comes from germline mutations in genes coding for DNA repair enzymes . Defects in these enzymes cause cancer because cells are less able to repair mutations in their genomes . This causes a slow accumulation of mutations and results in the development of cancers . An example of such a hereditary cancer syndrome is <unk> <unk> , which causes the development of skin cancers in response to even minimal exposure to ultraviolet light . 
 = = Naming conventions = = 
 An enzyme 's name is often derived from its substrate or the chemical reaction it catalyzes , with the word ending in <unk> . Examples are lactase , alcohol dehydrogenase and DNA polymerase . Different enzymes that catalyze the same chemical reaction are called isozymes . 
 The International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology have developed a nomenclature for enzymes , the EC numbers ; each enzyme is described by a sequence of four numbers preceded by " EC " . The first number broadly classifies the enzyme based on its mechanism . 
 The top @-@ level classification is : 
 EC 1 , <unk> : catalyze oxidation / reduction reactions 
 EC 2 , <unk> : transfer a functional group ( e.g. a methyl or phosphate group ) 
 EC 3 , <unk> : catalyze the hydrolysis of various bonds 
 EC 4 , <unk> : cleave various bonds by means other than hydrolysis and oxidation 
 EC 5 , <unk> : catalyze isomerization changes within a single molecule 
 EC 6 , <unk> : join two molecules with covalent bonds . 
 These sections are subdivided by other features such as the substrate , products , and chemical mechanism . An enzyme is fully specified by four numerical designations . For example , hexokinase ( EC 2 @.@ 7 @.@ 1 @.@ 1 ) is a transferase ( EC 2 ) that adds a phosphate group ( EC 2 @.@ 7 ) to a <unk> sugar , a molecule containing an alcohol group ( EC 2 @.@ 7 @.@ 1 ) . 
 = = Industrial applications = = 
 Enzymes are used in the chemical industry and other industrial applications when extremely specific catalysts are required . Enzymes in general are limited in the number of reactions they have evolved to catalyze and also by their lack of stability in organic solvents and at high temperatures . As a consequence , protein engineering is an active area of research and involves attempts to create new enzymes with novel properties , either through rational design or in vitro evolution . These efforts have begun to be successful , and a few enzymes have now been designed " from scratch " to catalyze reactions that do not occur in nature . 
 = Wally Pipp = 
 Walter Clement Pipp ( February 17 , 1893 – January 11 , 1965 ) was an American professional baseball player . A first baseman , Pipp played in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) for the Detroit Tigers , New York Yankees , and Cincinnati Reds between 1913 and 1928 . 
 After appearing in 12 games for the Tigers in 1913 and playing in the minor leagues in 1914 , he was purchased by the Yankees before the 1915 season . They made him their starting first baseman . He and Home Run Baker led an improved Yankee lineup that led the league in home runs . He led the American League in home runs in 1916 and 1917 . With Babe Ruth , Bob Meusel , Joe Dugan , and Waite Hoyt , the Yankees won three consecutive American League pennants from 1921 through 1923 , and won the 1923 World Series . In 1925 , he lost his starting role to Lou Gehrig , after which he finished his major league career with Cincinnati . 
 Pipp is considered to be one of the best power hitters of the dead ball era . Pipp is now best remembered as the man who lost his starting role to Lou Gehrig at the beginning of Gehrig 's streak of 2 @,@ 130 consecutive games . According to a popular legend , Pipp asked to sit due to a headache . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Walter Clement Pipp was born on February 17 , 1893 , in Chicago , Illinois , to Pauline ( née <unk> ) and William H. Pipp . He was raised as a Roman Catholic , and different sources describe him as being of Irish or German ancestry . He was raised in Grand Rapids , Michigan . As a child , Pipp said that he was hit in the head with a hockey puck , which resulted in headaches throughout his life . 
 Pipp enrolled at the Catholic University of America in Washington , D.C. , where he studied architecture and played baseball for the Catholic University Cardinals . Pipp graduated in 1913 . 
 = = Baseball career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 In 1912 , Pipp made his debut in professional baseball with the Kalamazoo Celery Champs of the Class D Southern Michigan League . In 68 games played , he had a .270 batting average . The Detroit Tigers of the American League purchased his contract late in the 1912 season . Pipp attempted to hold out from the Tigers , demanding a portion of the purchase price , and threatened to return to college . 
 After graduating from college , Pipp ended his holdout without receiving a share of the purchase price . Pipp made his major league debut with the Tigers on June 29 , 1913 . After playing 12 games for Detroit , batting <unk> , the Tigers reassigned Pipp to the Providence Grays of the Class AA International League . He committed seven errors in 14 games for Providence , and was demoted to the Scranton Miners of the Class B New York State League , where he only batted .220 . 
 In 1914 , Pipp played for the Rochester Hustlers of the International League . Pipp had a .314 batting average and 27 triples . He led all batters in the league with 15 home runs , a .526 slugging percentage , and 290 total bases . 
 = = = New York Yankees = = = 
 In January 1915 , Jacob Ruppert and Tillinghast L 'Hommedieu Huston agreed to purchase the New York Yankees of the American League . As part of the agreement , the other team owners in the American League agreed to help the Yankees restock their system with prospects . One of the deals Ruppert and Huston negotiated was their purchase of Pipp . After the purchase was completed , all owners , with the exception of Frank Navin , the owner of the Tigers , broke their word . On February 4 , 1915 , the Tigers sold Pipp and outfielder Hugh High to the Yankees , receiving $ 5 @,@ 000 for each player ( $ 116 @,@ 957 in current dollar terms ) . 
 The Yankees had struggled prior to Ruppert and Huston 's purchase , having only one winning record in their previous eight seasons . They made Pipp their starting first baseman in time for Opening Day of the 1915 season . The Yankees added Home Run Baker in 1916 , and they formed the center of the Yankees ' batting order . Pipp led the American League in home runs with 12 in 1916 ; Baker finished second with 10 . Pipp hit nine home runs in 1917 , again leading the league . 
 In 1918 , Pipp hit only two home runs , but batted .304 . He missed playing time under the nation 's " work or fight " rule during World War I ; he worked as a naval aviation cadet at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . He batted .275 with seven home runs in 1919 , as Babe Ruth surpassed him as the best power hitter in the American League . The Yankees moved to strengthen their team after the 1919 season , adding Ruth and fellow outfielder Bob Meusel and third baseman Joe Dugan . Between 1920 and 1924 , Pipp had a .301 average , with season averages of 29 doubles , 94 runs scored , and 97 runs batted in ( RBI ) per season . Led by their strong lineup and additions to the pitching staff , such as Waite Hoyt , the Yankees finished in second place in 1920 . Pipp became the cleanup hitter , behind Ruth in the batting order . Pipp hit .296 in 1921 , and the Yankees won the American League pennant . However , they lost the 1921 World Series to the crosstown rival New York Giants of the National League . 
 On July 26 , 1922 , Pipp bobbled a ball during the fifth inning of a game against the St. Louis Browns . When the Yankees returned to the dugout , Ruth criticized Pipp 's fielding . Pipp attacked Ruth , and the two were separated by teammates . Though Ruth insisted they 'd " settle this after the game " , Ruth and Pipp led the Yankees to a victory with their hitting , and when Pipp approached Ruth after the game , ready to fight , Ruth opted against it . Pipp said this resulted in reduced tension among the Yankees , which he attributed to their improved play from that point forward . Pipp batted .329 in 1922 and the Yankees again won the American League pennant . In a rematch , the Giants again defeated the Yankees in the 1922 World Series . Meanwhile , Pipp scouted Lou Gehrig , who was playing college baseball for Columbia University , and suggested to Miller Huggins , the Yankees ' manager , that he should sign Gehrig . Pipp personally helped develop Gehrig after he signed . Pipp had a strong 1923 season , but he injured his right ankle while stepping off of a train in Boston late in the year . The Yankees used Gehrig , whom they promoted from the minor leagues , to play the Yankees ' final four games . Though Huggins initially thought Pipp would not be able to play in the 1923 World Series , Pipp recovered sufficiently in time to play . The Yankees won the series in six games over the Giants . The Yankees finished in second place in the American League in 1924 , and Pipp led the American league with 114 RBIs and 19 triples . 
 = = = = 1925 : Removal from the Yankees ' starting lineup = = = = 
 The Yankees began the 1925 season struggling , and Huggins began to replace players in his lineup in response . Huggins benched starting shortstop Everett Scott on May 6 , replacing him with Pee Wee <unk> . At the time , Scott had the longest streak of consecutive games played , with 1 @,@ 307 . The Yankees continued to struggle . The Yankees entered play on June 2 on a five @-@ game losing streak . Their 15 – 26 win @-@ loss record had them in seventh place out of the eight teams in the American League , half a game better than the last place team , and 13 1 ⁄ 2 games out of first place in the standings . Before their game against the Washington Senators , Huggins replaced Pipp in the Yankees ' lineup with Gehrig , and benched second baseman Aaron Ward and catcher Wally Schang as well . Pipp was batting .244 with only three home runs and 23 RBIs , and had a .181 batting average over the previous three weeks . This was the first game of Gehrig 's then @-@ record 2 @,@ 130 consecutive games played , which lasted for 14 seasons . 
 According to the most popular version of the story , Pipp showed up at Yankee Stadium that day with a severe headache , and asked the team 's trainer for two aspirin . Miller Huggins , the Yankees ' manager , noticed this , and said " Wally , take the day off . We 'll try that kid Gehrig at first today and get you back in there tomorrow . " Gehrig played well and became the Yankees ' new starting first baseman . This story first appeared in a 1939 New York World @-@ Telegram on Gehrig 's career , in which Pipp was interviewed . Pipp was later quoted to have said , " I took the two most expensive aspirin in history . " 
 According to The Pride of the Yankees , the 1942 film about Gehrig 's life , Pipp asked out of the game because he was experiencing double vision from being hit in the head two days prior . By 1953 , Pipp reported to The New York Times that he was taken out of the lineup due to being hit in the head by a pitch thrown by Charlie Caldwell during batting practice . However , while Pipp was hit in the head by a pitch from Caldwell and was hospitalized , this event occurred on July 2 , a month after Pipp 's benching . 
 The New York Sun reported that the benching was due to Pipp 's struggles against left @-@ handed pitchers , as southpaw George <unk> was the scheduled starting pitcher for the Senators on June 2 . Other sources suggest Yankee manager Miller Huggins may have actually benched Pipp and other veterans in order to " shake up " the slumping lineup . According to another story , supported by Gehrig 's wife , Pipp was not at the game on June 2 because he was gambling on horse racing at a race track . His son Tom denied this rumor , stating that his father never bet on horses . When interviewed by Sports Illustrated , Pipp 's own children disagreed on the reason for their father 's benching , believing it was either due to Pipp being beaned , or struggling . One of his sons believes that Pipp told Huggins to play Gehrig in his place , as he knew that Gehrig had a future with the Yankees , while he likely did not . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Ruth had returned to the Yankees ' lineup on June 1 , the day before Pipp , Ward , and Schang were benched . Despite Ruth 's return and the strong play of Gehrig , who batted .295 with 20 home runs and 68 RBIs , the Yankees finished in seventh place . Pipp was hospitalized for a week after being hit in the head by Caldwell on July 2 , and he played sparingly during the remainder of the season . He ended the year with a .230 average , three home runs , and 24 RBIs . 
 Due to the team 's struggles , Huggins made personnel changes during the offseason . The Yankees attempted to trade Pipp to another American League team , but could not agree on the terms with any team . They put Pipp on waivers , and he was acquired by the Cincinnati Reds of the National League , who reportedly paid the Yankees a greater sum than the $ 7 @,@ 500 waiver price . The Reds , who had not had a strong starting first baseman since Jake Daubert died in 1924 , had attempted to acquire Bill Terry from the Giants , but refused to part with Edd Roush in the transaction , and so acquired Pipp instead . Pipp again attempted to acquire a portion of the purchase price , but was rebuffed . 
 Pipp played 372 games for the Reds over the next three seasons . In 1926 , he had a .291 batting average , and his 99 RBIs and 15 triples were both fourth @-@ best in the National League . He batted .260 with 41 RBIs in 1927 , and .283 in 1928 . 
 With first baseman George Kelly also on their roster , the Reds released Pipp before the 1929 season . Pipp signed with the Newark Bears of the International League for the season . He earned $ 40 @,@ 000 that year , more than he made during his major league career . He batted .312 for Newark , and retired after the season . 
 Pipp played 1 @,@ 872 games . He had three seasons with a .300 + batting average , and two seasons with 100 or more RBI . Pipp had a .281 career batting average . He led both the American and National leagues in fielding percentage . His 226 sacrifices as a Yankee remain a team record . Pipp was the first Yankee to lead the American League in home runs . Due to his famous replacement by Gehrig , players began to say they were " Wally <unk> " when replaced in a lineup , especially if it is due to a minor injury . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Pipp often attended Old @-@ Timers ' Day at Yankee Stadium and Tiger Stadium , playing in 12 Old @-@ Timers ' games . He was later hired by Sports Illustrated as one of the magazine 's first writers . 
 After retiring , Pipp invested in the stock market , but lost his wealth in the Wall Street Crash of 1929 . He authored a book , titled Buying Cheap and Selling Dear . He worked as a broadcaster on a pregame baseball show for the Tigers , wrote radio scripts , and worked in publishing . He organized baseball programs around his community for the National Youth Administration . He also spent time unemployed during the Great Depression . In 1940 , Pipp was on the verge of bankruptcy , but he managed to pay off his debts without going bankrupt . 
 During World War II , Pipp worked at the Willow Run manufacturing complex in Ypsilanti , building B @-@ 24 bombers . Following the war , Pipp worked for the Rockford Screw Products Corporation as a machine parts salesman , selling bolts and screws to automotive companies based in Detroit and Grand Rapids . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Pipp and his wife , Nora , had four children : three sons ( Walter , Tom , and Wally Jr . ) and a daughter ( Dorothy ) . Pipp 's brother , the Reverend W.B. Pipp , was a Catholic priest and golfer . 
 The <unk> moved to Lansing , Michigan , in 1949 . After suffering a number of strokes , Pipp moved to a nursing home in Grand Rapids in September 1963 . He died there on January 11 , 1965 , of a heart attack at the age of 71 . He is interred in Woodlawn Cemetery in Grand Rapids . 
 = Shin Megami Tensei = 
 Shin Megami Tensei ( 真 ・ 女神転生 , literally " True Goddess Reincarnation " ) is a post @-@ apocalyptic role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Atlus . Originally released for the Super Famicom in 1992 in Japan , it has been ported to multiple systems and eventually released in the West for iOS in 2014 . It is the third game in the Megami Tensei series and the first in the central Shin Megami Tensei series . The gameplay uses first @-@ person navigation of dungeons and turn @-@ based battles against demons . The player can recruit demons as allies by talking to them rather than fighting them , and two to three demons can be fused to create new demons . 
 The story follows a nameless protagonist who lives in near @-@ future Tokyo . When a portal to the realm of demons is opened , United States officials order a nuclear attack on Tokyo . Transported with two other supporting characters thirty years into the future , the protagonist finds the Earth ruined by a demon invasion , which is now the stage for an escalating conflict between the Order of Messiah and the Ring of Gaea , conflicting cults who wish to bring about kingdoms for their respective patron deities ( <unk> and Lucifer ) . The story is influenced by moral decisions the protagonist makes , aligning him either with the Order , the Ring of Gaea , or setting him up as an independent agent . 
 From the start of the production , Atlus staff saw Shin Megami Tensei as a chance to create a game with the company 's brand on it . The staff saw it as a remake of the previous Megami Tensei game ; because of this , they knew what was going to happen in the story , and the development went smoothly . The story went through multiple revisions , and many settings were inspired by the staff 's personal lives . The character and demon designs were done by Kazuma Kaneko , who used mythical figures and multiple clothing styles in his designs . Reception and sales for the game have been highly positive , and its success helped launch Atlus as a developer and publisher , along with popularizing the Megami Tensei series . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In Shin Megami Tensei , players take the role of an unnamed protagonist , a teenage boy who can communicate with demons using a computer program . The gameplay is similar to that of other games in the series : players make their way through dungeons and fight against demons in a first @-@ person perspective . The protagonist uses a variety of weapons and items , with the primary weapons being swords and guns . Such items are bought from merchants scattered around the world map . In special areas , the protagonist can use the in @-@ game currency to restore health and magic points for themselves and their demons , remove status ailments , and revive fallen demons . Special Terminals scattered across the world map allow the player to save their game , and they can use them to teleport between terminals in different areas of Tokyo . 
 Battles are turn @-@ based , and consist of players letting the characters in their party attack with swords or guns , summon demons , or cast magic spells ; both demons and humans , with the exception of the player character , are able to use magic . By participating in battles , human characters in the player 's party receive experience points ; by accumulating these points , the characters ' levels rise and new abilities are randomly learned . Players can choose to talk to demons instead of fighting them ; they can ask the demons for items or money , try to get them to go away , or try to form an alliance with them . At some places , called " Cathedrals of Shadows " , players can fuse two to three allied demons into one single , more powerful demon ; as demons do not receive experience points , this is the only way for the player to increase their demons ' power . Magnetite is used as a fuel for allied demons , and is used up by summoned demons as the player character walks around in the dungeons ; if players run out of magnetite , summoned demons take damage . 
 The way demons behave is based on their and the protagonist 's respective alignments . Alignments come in two types , Light @-@ Neutral @-@ Dark , and Law @-@ Neutral @-@ Chaos . A demon 's alignment can range across both alignments , resulting in nine possible stances that affect how they behave and what actions in battle or story progression pleases them . The protagonist 's alignment changes depending on choices made during the story , and in response the attitudes of people and demons change ; for instance , demons who are law @-@ aligned will refuse to form an alliance with chaos @-@ aligned players . Additionally , depending on their alignment , players will not be let into certain areas ; for instance , the Order of Messiah will not let chaos @-@ aligned players into their churches . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Shin Megami Tensei takes place in a postmodern Tokyo , first in the year " <unk> " , and then 30 years later in a post @-@ apocalyptic version of the city . A rift has been opened to another world , allowing demons to invade Tokyo ; by using a computer program , humans are able to communicate with and summon the demons . Across the story , moral alignments are portrayed in various ways : alongside the middle " neutral " pathway , the " law " faction believes in establishing a logical order at the expense of feeling and freedom , while the " chaos " faction espouses unlimited freedom for the individual while discarding the weak . 
 The game includes four human " heroes " : the player character , the Hero , who is a teenage boy living with his mother in Kichijōji in Tokyo ; the Heroine , who is the leader of a resistance force which tries to protect Tokyo ; and the Law Hero and Chaos Hero , who represent the alignments " law " and " chaos " , respectively . Among other characters are ambassador Thorman ( <unk> , <unk> ) and general Gotou ( <unk> ) , who lead the United States military and the Japan Self @-@ Defense Forces , respectively ; the archangel Michael ( <unk> , <unk> ) and the demon Asura @-@ ou ( <unk> ) , who lead the Order of Messiah and the Ring of Gaea , respectively ; and the demons Lilith ( <unk> , <unk> ) and Lucifer ( <unk> , <unk> ) , who use the pseudonyms Yuriko ( <unk> ) and Louis Cyphre ( <unk> ・ <unk> , Rui <unk> ) , respectively . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The game begins with the Hero dreaming that he meets the Law Hero , the Chaos Hero , and a woman named Yuriko ; she promises that she will become the Hero 's partner . He wakes up , and receives an e @-@ mail with a computer program for summoning demons attached . While out on an errand , he learns that a scientist has opened a portal to the Abyss , which allows demons to enter Tokyo . He also meets Yuriko , who says she will fulfill her promise . The next night , the Hero again dreams that he meets the Law Hero and Chaos Hero , and that they save the Heroine from a sacrificial ritual . The next day , he meets the Law Hero and Chaos Hero in reality ; they reveal that they had the same dreams . News of the demons spread , and the US military , led by ambassador Thorman , decides to intervene . The Japan Self @-@ Defense Forces , led by general Gotou , opposes them , as they see demons as the ancient spirits of the land . A third group , led by the Heroine , tries to prevent conflict between the other two . She gets captured by Gotou 's forces ; they are about to publicly execute her under supervision by Yuriko , but she is saved by the Hero , Law Hero , and Chaos Hero . Players can choose to support Thorman or Gotou , or to reject both ; regardless of what they choose , the conflict escalates until Thorman launches missiles towards Tokyo . The Heroine is killed , but saves the Hero , Law Hero , and Chaos Hero by using magic to teleport them to another plane of existence . 
 When they return to Tokyo , thirty years have passed , and the world lies in ruins . Both demons and humans live in Tokyo , and two warring groups have formed : the Order of Messiah , who is building a cathedral and wants to bring about the Thousand @-@ Year Kingdom , and the Ring of Gaea , who intends to summon Lucifer and wants freedom . While exploring the city , the Hero meets the Heroine , who has been reincarnated , and she joins the group . They keep traversing the ruins , until the Chaos Hero decides to leave , and fuses himself with a demon to gain power ; they move on without him , until the Law Hero 's soul gets taken by an attacking demon . The Chaos Hero joins the Ring of Gaea , while the Law Hero 's soul gets reincarnated as the new Messiah . Both try to get the Hero to join their respective side ; players can choose to support either , or to reject both . Regardless of what they choose , the Order of Messiah finishes building their cathedral , and a great flood appears , drowning people who were not inside the cathedral at the time . Survivors set up camps inside the cathedral ; the Order of Messiah takes control of the top floors , while the Ring of Gaea occupies the basement floors . 
 After this point , the story continues differently depending on the Hero 's alignment . If it is " law " , the Law Hero gets killed in a battle with the Chaos Hero , while the Hero and the Heroine go to the basement . On their way they have to kill the Chaos Hero and fight Yuriko , who turns out to be the demon Lilith in disguise ; she calls the Hero " Adam " , and says she wanted to create a new age and live with him forever , which is why she tried to execute the Heroine . After defeating her in battle , the Hero and the Heroine reach the basement and kill the demon Asura @-@ ou ; they then go to the cathedral 's roof , where they are thanked by a messenger from God . If the Hero 's alignment instead is " chaos " , he and the Heroine must go to the top floor and kill the archangel Michael , and on their way kill the Law Hero ; the Chaos Hero dies , too , because of the magical ring he has been wearing . On the roof , they meet Lucifer , who says that a new era will begin , where both demons and humans are free ; he also warns them that God still is alive . If the Hero 's alignment instead is " neutral " , he and the Heroine must kill the Law Hero , the Chaos Hero , Asura @-@ ou , and Michael , and fight Yuriko . On the roof , they meet Taishang Laojun , who thanks them and says that balance is needed to achieve happiness ; he asks the Hero and the Heroine to lead humanity to a future that doesn 't rely on gods or demons . The game ends with the Heroine saying that those who have died will be reborn , and that it is time for creation and rebuilding . 
 = = Development = = 
 From the beginning of production , Atlus staff saw Shin Megami Tensei as a chance to develop a game with the company 's brand on it . The main staff included director Yōsuke Niino , producer Hideyuki Yokoyama , programmer and future Megami Tensei director Kouji Okada , writers Ryutaro Ito and Kazunari Suzuki , and composer Tsukasa Masuko . Kazuma Kaneko worked on multiple aspects of the game , including character and sprite design , the world 's concept and visual design , and the creation of visual assets . Atlus saw the game as a remake of the previous game in the Megami Tensei series , Digital Devil Story : Megami Tensei II . As such , the staff knew what would happen with the story , so development went smoothly . An early factor in the game was the inclusion of a Law Hero and a Chaos Hero , and a protagonist who would initially be neutral and whose actions would affect their alignment . Kaneko defined this blending of different alignments as " a sort of hodgepodge " when compared to future games in the series . When designing it , the team slowly decided that they wanted to break the then @-@ current gaming status quo using its aesthetic and content . That feeling , along with granting it a sense of reality through use of dark imagery , would later define the series . The main theme of Shin Megami Tensei was a person waking up to inevitable destruction and being able to do nothing but rely on their own abilities . The scenario took a long time to finalize , being revised a number of times by multiple staff members . During earlier drafts , it was planned that the finale of the story would take place in Israel after an extensive journey across Japan . 
 One of the reasons the development team chose Tokyo as the main setting was that its turbulent history , going through multiple phases of development and often suffering severe damage in wars or due to natural disasters , made it comparable with the fantasy settings of other games at the time . In a later interview , an Atlus staff member stated that this setting and style made it the antithesis of traditional fantasy RPGs , adding that this resulted in the game developing a punk spirit . Because of the post @-@ apocalyptic setting of Megami Tensei II , the development team wanted to depict a time before the apocalypse . The decision to set the game in Tokyo was made by Suzuki and Kaneko , and was influenced by manga such as Violence Jack , Devilman , and Fist of the North Star . Kichijōji was decided to be the game 's starting point due to Kaneko , Suzuki , and Ito all having lived in or near the area , or having visited it often . The abandoned Terminal Echo building there fascinated them , making them wonder how a building in such a prime location could remain unoccupied ; Ito described it as two floors of arcade cabinets , with the rest of the building feeling like a ghost town . This fascination led to it being included as a dungeon in the game . While designing the maps , Kaneko wanted to use wire @-@ frame models , but the Super Famicom 's limited capacities meant this idea was scrapped . 
 By the end of development , multiple members of staff voiced dissatisfaction with the final product . Ito and Suzuki felt that the portrayals of the Law and Chaos Heroes were imbalanced , with the Chaos Hero being too emotional and the Law Hero being unsympathetic . They also saw the demon fusion system as too difficult for players to master . Okada , while commenting on what improvements would be made for the next game , stated that there were too many useless items in the game . Niino felt that the game 's pacing and flow needed to be addressed , as after naming the characters , the player immediately is prompted to divide their status points . 
 = = = Character designs = = = 
 In addition to handling the graphics , Kaneko designed the character and demon designs for the game . The Hero 's and the Heroine 's clothes were designed to be futuristic ; the Heroine was designed to be a protector , with clothes inspired by American football equipment . The Law Hero and Chaos Hero have ordinary clothes at first ; the Chaos Hero was designed to look unsophisticated , with a bad posture and military clothes . After their metamorphoses , the Law Hero wears clothes designed to look priestly ; Kaneko did not have a specific form in mind when designing them , but thought they looked " Gucci @-@ like " . The Chaos Hero 's clothes after his metamorphosis were designed to be similar to the character Piccolo from the Dragon Ball manga series ; his hair style was also based on Dragon Ball , specifically on that of the " super <unk> " transformations in that series . Kaneko wanted the Chaos Hero change back and forth between human and demon form to tie in more closely with this design theme , but the concept was abandoned . During production , all the characters had names attached to them to help with identification during event planning . The character Louis Cyphre was inspired by the character of the same name from the 1987 movie Angel Heart . Some characters , such as Stephen and General Gotou , are based on real @-@ life people ; in the game files , they are identified as " <unk> " and " <unk> " , respectively . According to Ito , the character Thorman 's name was originally inspired by the Norse god of thunder , but after release , he realized that the name was highly similar to that of Harry S. Truman , the American president who approved the atomic attacks against Japan . 
 For the demon design , Kaneko took inspiration from Medieval woodblock prints , wooden carvings from South America , masks from Micronesia , and terracotta figurines from the Middle East . His designs of angelic characters were influenced by descriptions from the Book of Ezekiel of angels having multiple strange forms , such as multiple arms or heads . In addition to traditional demons and monsters , Kaneko designed versions of less @-@ frequented figures from Celtic and Southeast Asian mythology . The theme he used when drawing them was " fear " , which extended to both obvious threats and the internal dread the creatures evoked . The graphics for most demons were directly drawn as sprites , without concept art , to make sure that the design and the graphics would work within the hardware limitations of the Super Famicom . Certain important characters , and some demons who the player would be guaranteed to meet , were drawn as concept art first . Several demons were designed in a way that allowed parts of their graphics to be reused ; for instance , the demon Cerberus ' body is also used for <unk> and Nue , with a different color palette . Demon fusions were designed around the dichotomy of Law and Chaos , but in hindsight it was stated that this provided little fusion variety . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The game 's music was composed by Tsukasa Masuko , with arrangements by Masuko and Tatsuya Nishiwaki . Masuko considered Shin Megami Tensei to be an experimental work : it was the first time he had created music for the Super Famicom , so he was not familiar with the console 's specifications . During composition , he needed to check the specifications repeatedly to see what he could do within the hardware limitations . For the PC Engine port , the music was arranged by Hitoshi Sakimoto . 
 A soundtrack album , Shin Megami Tensei Law & Chaos Disc , was released on February 24 , 1993 by Victor Entertainment under the catalog number <unk> @-@ <unk> / 7 . It includes two discs : the first contains the music as it sounds in @-@ game , and the second contains arrangements by Nishiwaki . A second album , Shin Megami Tensei Sound Collection , was released on March 5 , 2003 , by SME Visual Works under the catalog number SVWC @-@ <unk> / 6 . It includes music from the original and PlayStation versions of Shin Megami Tensei , Shin Megami Tensei II , and Shin Megami Tensei If ... , along with selected tracks from Shin Megami Tensei : Nine . 
 = = Release = = 
 Shin Megami Tensei was first released on the Super Famicom on October 30 , 1992 in Japan ; it remained exclusive to that region for 22 years . It was the first Megami Tensei title not to be published by Namco . Instead , it was published by Atlus , which caused some complaints as to why Namco was not publishing the game . A fan translation of the Super Famicom version has been developed . Subsequent ports were released on the PC Engine ( December 25 , 1993 ) , Mega @-@ CD ( February 25 , 1994 ) , the PlayStation ( May 31 , 2001 ) , and Game Boy Advance ( March 28 , 2003 ) . Atlus was responsible for the PlayStation port , and the staff were divided on whether to make it a complete port or something new . Those who wanted a direct port won through . The PC Engine port included added story scenes . SIMS Co . , Ltd. was in charge of the Mega CD port , which included additional demons . The Game Boy Advance version , which was the first time Shin Megami Tensei appeared on a portable platform , included the ability to exchange demons and items using the platform 's data exchange capacities . It also featured remastered music and alterations to ease the playing experience . The game was released in February 2012 for iOS and November of that year for Android . These mobile ports were based on the Game Boy Advance version , including all the port 's features . The iOS port was localized and released in North America and Europe in March 18 , 2014 . 
 = = = Localization = = = 
 Shin Megami Tensei , as with many other early Megami Tensei titles , was initially not localized for the West due to its controversial content such as the portrayal of religious elements . This content clashed with Nintendo 's strict content policy guidelines . The PlayStation port was also prevented from being localized by Sony 's then @-@ current approval policy . The possibility of later localization after the series became established in the West were stalled due to the age of the game , which would have put it at a disadvantage in the modern gaming market . 
 According to Nich Maragos , the editor of the English version of Shin Megami Tensei , it was already too late to localize the PlayStation and Game Boy Advance versions of the game by the time the Megami Tensei series had " taken off " in the US ; Atlus normally does not have an interest in localizing mobile games , but saw the iOS version of the game as a perfect opportunity to fill in one of the gaps in the series . The localization project was slow at first , as it took time to extract the files from the game , so the localization team started by playing the game in order to find out what kinds of dialogue text and system messages it contained . After receiving the files , they translated the text , which was then sent to the editors ; the edited text was sent back to the translators , who checked that nothing had been lost in translation , after which the text was inserted into the game . A challenge for the localization team was character limitations : only four rows of text , with 28 characters each , were able to be displayed at a time , and at some points this had to be limited even further in order to avoid graphical glitches . This was solved by modifying the game to allow for more text boxes as needed . Later Megami Tensei games , which had been localized before Shin Megami Tensei , influenced the localization , as several of them include terms or quotes from the game . For instance , the catastrophe in Shin Megami Tensei is referred to as the " Great Cataclysm " in Devil Summoner : Raidou Kuzunoha vs. The Soulless Army , while Persona 4 and Shin Megami Tensei IV include several quotes and terms from the game . The already translated Shin Megami Tensei quotes from the Persona 4 localization were reused verbatim in the localization of Shin Megami Tensei . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to Ito , the Super Famicom release was a great success for the company , helping establishing it as both a developer and publisher . While a success , the game also received criticism from players for its high encounter rate and difficulties using the map and in @-@ game instructions . At the end of 2001 , the PlayStation version was the 119th best selling video game of the year in Japan , with 85 @,@ 991 sold copies . 
 On release , Famitsu magazine gave the original Super Famicom version a score of 36 out of 40 , with all four reviewers giving it a 9 out of 10 . This made it one of their three highest @-@ rated games of 1992 , along with Dragon Quest V and World of Illusion Starring Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck . Shin Megami Tensei was also one of only eleven games to have received a Famitsu score of 36 / 40 or above up until 1992 . For subsequent console ports , Famitsu gave scores of 25 / 40 ( PCE ) , 28 / 40 ( MD ) , 30 / 40 ( PS ) , and 27 / 40 ( GBA ) . 
 The website Touch Arcade said that they loved the game , and that it was one of their favorite role @-@ playing games on iOS . They did however think that the game was bad at explaining things , including the system of saving one 's progress . Pocket Gamer , too , thought that things were not explained enough . For instance , they said that the game does not guide players from point A to point B , and often does not even let players know where to start looking for point B. RPGFan echoed this , and said that it is not uncommon for players to wander around , wondering where to go . Gamezebo said they did not think the battle system was particularly exciting , but appreciated how the conversation system and the demon fusion adds elements of risk and reward to the game . The British newspaper Metro found the game more entertaining than most role @-@ playing games from its time . Gamezebo found the iOS version 's touch screen @-@ based virtual buttons clumsy to use , while Pocket Gamer found the interface to work " reasonably well " while using the landscape mode , and RPGFan found the interface to be excellent . Both Gamezebo and Touch Arcade wished the game had been a " universal app " , so that it could have been played on other devices than iPhone and iPod Touch without having the graphics upscaled . 
 Several reviewers appreciated the game 's plot . Gamezebo said that it was an aspect of the game that stood out in a positive way , and pointed out how good they thought the English translation was . Touch Arcade called the story one of the game 's strengths , and said that it was impressive , despite how it had a tendency to be " ham @-@ fisted " . Metro appreciated how the game avoided role @-@ playing cliches , such as how it took place in a modern Japan rather than in a " Tolkien @-@ esque fantasy world " ; they also liked its " unrestrained style of storytelling " . RPGFan found the story to be good and macabre , and surprisingly relevant even in 2014 . They disliked that there was very little character development , and how scenes that " traditionally [ would ] be poignant " , especially death scenes , were handled in a nonchalant manner . 
 Touch Arcade called the graphics " good , but not great " , though reasonable given the game 's age , but that some demon designs were " spectacular works of art " . RPGFan found the majority of the game 's graphics to be " functional , but not too appealing " , and said that it was easy to get lost due to the bland textures of the walls and the floors . They did however like the graphics used in battles and story sections , which they found well @-@ drawn and detailed . They praised the designs of the game 's female characters , especially <unk> , Lamia , and Yuriko , but felt that the designs of the male characters were bland . Touch Arcade found the music to be fantastic . RPGFan said that every piece fits into the scene where it is played , but that few were memorable . They did note " Ginza " as an exception , which they felt was so well @-@ composed that it would sound good in any format . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The success of Shin Megami Tensei led to multiple sequels over the coming years and made the Megami Tensei franchise more popular . Development on a sequel began immediately after the success of Shin Megami Tensei . Shin Megami Tensei II , which directly continued the story of Shin Megami Tensei , was released in 1994 . Multiple other Shin Megami Tensei titles have followed and brought the series acclaim overseas . Kaneko 's concept of the Chaos Hero 's transformation was resurrected as the main gameplay mechanic of Shin Megami Tensei : Digital Devil Saga . 
 In 2015 , developer Toby Fox cited Shin Megami Tensei as inspiration for Undertale , specifically its talking system . 
 = Shadow the Hedgehog ( video game ) = 
 Shadow the Hedgehog ( Japanese : <unk> ・ ザ ・ <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> za Hejjihoggu ) is a 2005 third @-@ person shooter video game developed by Sega Studio USA , the former United States division of Sega 's Sonic Team , and published by Sega . The game is the first to feature Shadow the Hedgehog from Sega 's Sonic the Hedgehog series as the main character , and was revealed at the March 2005 Walk of Game event . Shadow the Hedgehog is the third developed by Sega Studio USA , and is the first Sonic game to be rated E10 + by the ESRB . 
 Following the trend of recent Sonic games such as Sonic Adventure and Sonic Heroes , Shadow the Hedgehog is a 3D platform game . Most levels have three possible missions — " Hero , " " Dark , " or " Normal " — that the player may choose to complete , while some have only " Hero " and " Dark " missions . The missions completed determine the game 's plot and subsequently playable levels , a feature referenced by the game 's tagline , " Hero or villain ? You decide . " The plot centers on the attempt of Shadow , a creation of Doctor Eggman 's grandfather , Professor Gerald Robotnik , to learn about his past while suffering from amnesia . To defeat enemies , Shadow can use various weapons and special attacks . 
 Shadow the Hedgehog was developed for the GameCube , PlayStation 2 and Xbox video game consoles . The game received polarizing reviews ; reviewers criticized its controls and " dark " theme , especially the addition of guns , and other weapons to traditional Sonic gameplay , but praised its replay value , while its level design was mixed . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Shadow the Hedgehog is a platform game that incorporates elements of action @-@ adventure gameplay . Like previous games in the Sonic series , basic gameplay involves running quickly , collecting rings , and destroying enemies . Shadow collects rings as a form of health ; when he is attacked by an enemy , ten of his rings bounce away from him in all directions . If he is hit by an enemy while not having any rings , he loses a life . Each level is completed by undertaking a mission , and each mission is labeled " Hero , " " Dark , " or " Normal . " The " Hero " missions involve completing tasks for the Sonic series ' heroic characters or on one occasion , Doctor Eggman and the " Dark " missions involve completing tasks for the Black Arms or Doctor Eggman . The " Normal " missions involve simply reaching the Chaos Emerald or goal at the end of the level . All enemies attack Shadow regardless of the mission chosen . The mission types selected affect the plot , the levels played , and the ending received out of ten possibilities . Each level features cutscenes that advance the story , and several levels also feature boss battles . 
 New gameplay features distinguish Shadow the Hedgehog from previous Sonic series games . For example , Shadow can use guns to combat enemies , adding an element of third @-@ person shooter gameplay . Parts of the scenery , such as traffic signs , can also be used as weapons . Another new feature is the ability to drive vehicles , such as motorcycles and alien aircraft . Although Shadow can outrun the game 's vehicles , the latter have unique capabilities , such as crushing enemies and traversing otherwise impassible acid @-@ covered areas . 
 As in most Sonic series games , the Chaos Emeralds play a major role ; they help Shadow remember his past and allow him to perform Chaos Control and Chaos Blast . Chaos Control allows Shadow to move more quickly in levels and slows time in boss battles , and Chaos Blast creates an explosion that destroys or severely damages all nearby enemies . Shadow can perform Chaos Control after the player fills the Hero Gauge by defeating Black Arms soldiers , and he can perform Chaos Blast after filling the Dark Gauge by defeating G.U.N. soldiers . 
 The game includes a two @-@ player mode that retains the single @-@ player mechanics but is set in one of three specially designed stages and uses a vertically split screen to separate each player 's view . Each player chooses one of the available characters — Shadow , two metallic versions of him , and palette @-@ swapped variants of each . The combatants attack each other and steal each other 's rings until one is eliminated . Additionally , in single @-@ player mode , a second player may take control of Shadow 's sidekick character in some stages . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Shadow the Hedgehog , the game 's titular protagonist , was created fifty years before the game 's events by Professor Gerald Robotnik in an orbital military research space station known as the ARK . Robotnik was trying to unlock the secrets of eternal life on the government 's orders and create the " Ultimate Life Form . " To that end , Robotnik designed Shadow to be able to harness the powers of the Chaos Emeralds . At the end of Sonic Adventure 2 , his first in @-@ game appearance , he was presumed dead , but he returned in Sonic Heroes with amnesia that persists into the events of Shadow the Hedgehog . 
 The Guardian Units of Nations ( G.U.N. ) is the military of Earth 's government , the United Federation , and it is directed by the G.U.N. Commander . When completing " Hero " missions , Shadow usually helps G.U.N. and heroic characters from the Sonic series , including Sonic , Tails , Knuckles , Amy , Rouge , Omega , Vector , Charmy and Espio . Their aim is to protect Earth from Eggman and the Black Arms aliens . In one " Hero " mission of Sky Troops , Shadow assists Eggman battle the Black Arms . Black Doom , the leader of the Black Arms , sends an extension of himself called " Doom 's Eye " to watch Shadow and help him complete missions . When completing " Dark " missions , Shadow helps either Black Doom or Eggman , each of who wants the Chaos Emeralds for himself . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 At the beginning , Shadow suffers from amnesia . Other than after the events of Sonic Heroes that took place three months prior , Shadow remembers only two things : his name and " that gruesome image " of his attempt to escape the space station ARK with his creator 's granddaughter Maria . He remembers her death by gunshot from soldiers of the military group G.U.N. Having gone through a room filled with androids that look like him in the events of Sonic Heroes , Shadow wonders if he too is an android . The game begins with Shadow reminiscing outside the city of <unk> when the alien race Black Arms drop out of the sky and invade the city . One Black Arms alien , Doom 's Eye , approaches Shadow , and the Black Arms leader Black Doom tells Shadow of an old agreement Shadow made : to bring Black Doom the Chaos Emeralds . Stunned that Black Doom knew his name , Shadow searches for the Chaos Emeralds to learn about his past . 
 The game progresses through the <unk> level and five more levels from the different paths Shadow may take . As missions are completed , Shadow learns more about his past and regains memories . He can choose to help Eggman or the Black Arms ( Dark ) , to help G.U.N. and the series ' heroic characters ( Hero ) , or to help neither and keep the Chaos Emeralds for himself ( Normal ) . The missions completed determine which one of ten possible endings will be seen after Shadow collects all the Chaos Emeralds and defeats one of the game 's final bosses . The possible ending events range from planning to defeat the Black Arms to planning to destroy the planet . 
 Completing all ten endings unlocks the game 's true ending in which Black Doom uses Chaos Control , enhanced by the power of all seven Chaos Emeralds , to bring the Black Comet to the Earth 's surface . Black Doom explains that the Black Arms intend to use humans as an energy source , and the Black Comet begins to release a nerve gas into the Earth 's atmosphere that causes total paralysis in those who inhale it . Shadow then confronts Black Doom after the " Last Way " level , where he discovers that Professor Gerald Robotnik created the ARK 's Eclipse Cannon weapon to destroy the Black Comet . During their confrontation , Black Doom reveals that Shadow was created using Black Doom 's blood , and Black Doom then attempts to control Shadow through mind control but fails . This prompts Black Doom to transform into Devil Doom . In response , Shadow uses the Chaos Emeralds to transform into Super Shadow and defeats Black Doom . Shadow then transports the Black Comet into outer space using Chaos Control and obliterates it using the ARK 's Eclipse Cannon . His friends are elated , as are people at G.U.N. headquarters . Shadow is then shown in the ARK 's control room holding up a photograph of Maria and Gerald . He tosses the photograph aside , declaring " Goodbye forever ... Shadow the Hedgehog , " and leaves the room . 
 = = Development = = 
 Shadow the Hedgehog was developed by Sega Studio USA , the now @-@ defunct United States division of Sega 's Sonic Team , and published by Sega . Sega first revealed the game and its tagline ( " Hero or villain ? You decide . " ) at the March 8 , 2005 inauguration of Sonic the Hedgehog into the Walk of Game . Sega formally announced development of the game for the Nintendo GameCube , PlayStation 2 , and Xbox video game consoles on March 23 , 2005 . The same year , Sega released the game in North America on November 15 , in Europe on November 18 , and in Japan on December 15 . 
 Sonic Team 's Takashi Iizuka , who had worked on the Sonic the Hedgehog series since 1993 , targeted a younger audience with previous Sonic games and wanted to target an older audience with Shadow the Hedgehog . The game 's development team wanted to make a game featuring Shadow to resolve plot mysteries that began with the character 's introduction in Sonic Adventure 2 . The team felt that Shadow 's design — inspired by films such as Underworld , Constantine , and the Terminator series — would make the story darker and allow for elements , such as vehicles and weapons , otherwise considered inappropriate for a Sonic game . Sonic Team 's Yuji Naka stated in an interview with GameSpy that he wanted to use Shadow as the game 's main character due to his popularity among fans and being the best fit for a " gun action " game . The game features several CG @-@ animated cutscenes produced by Blur Studio . The game also contains profanities , including instances of damn and hell spoken by Shadow and other characters such as Espio , the G.U.N. Commander , Knuckles , and Sonic . Profanity and the use of guns , both firsts for the Sonic series , generated some pre @-@ release controversy . The ESRB assigned the game a rating of E10 + for " fantasy violence " and " mild language . " 
 The game is the first in the series to use the 4Kids cast from Sonic X following the death of Doctor Eggman 's previous voice actor , <unk> Bristow . This cast continued to be used until late 2010 when all cast members except for Mike Pollock were replaced before the release of Sonic Free Riders . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 = = = = Lost and Found = = = = 
 Lost and Found : Shadow the Hedgehog Vocal Trax is a video game soundtrack album released on CD on February 22 , 2006 . The album contains seven vocal songs from the game , one of which is a remix rather than the original . 
 = = = = Original Soundtrack = = = = 
 Another soundtrack , Shadow the Hedgehog : Original Soundtrax , was also released on February 22 , 2006 . It contains both vocal and instrumental tracks from the game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Shadow the Hedgehog received generally unfavorable reviews from critics . Aggregating review websites GameRankings and Metacritic gave the GameCube version 53 @.@ 10 % and 51 / 100 , the Xbox version 52 @.@ 15 % and 49 / 100 and the PlayStation 2 version 49 @.@ 27 % and 45 / 100 . However , it was voted the best game of 2005 in the Official <unk> Magazine Reader Awards and named the " Best Platformer " of 2005 by Nintendo Power readers ( receiving more votes than the staff 's choice , Sonic Rush ) . It was also a commercial success : Sega Sammy 's 2006 financial report recorded sales of 1 @.@ 59 million units . The game was later released as a part of three budget lines : Greatest Hits and Platinum Range for the PlayStation 2 ( representing sales of at least 400 @,@ 000 in North America and Europe , respectively ) and Player 's Choice for the GameCube ( 250 @,@ 000 in North America ) . 
 Critics derided the game 's unwelcome sense of maturity for a Sonic series game , especially the addition of guns and other weapons . Game Informer staff writer Matt Helgeson said , " not only is this new ' adult ' interpretation of Sonic painfully dumb , it ’ s also ill @-@ advised and almost feels like a betrayal to longtime fans . " Eurogamer staff writer Tom Bramwell felt that " the game 's other selling point – its darker edge – [ is ] not really meant for us . " G4 's X @-@ Play and GameSpy staff writer Patrick Klepek thought similarly . In contrast , Nintendo Power staff writer Steve Thomason rated the game 8 @.@ 0 out of 10 , stating , " this darker take on the Sonic universe succeeds for the most part , giving the series a bit of an edge without going overboard on violence . " In addition , Official Xbox Magazine reassured readers , " Don 't worry , Shadow the Hedgehog isn 't half as ' urban ' or quite as ' gangsta ' as it first seems . " <unk> panned the game 's " laughable " plot , saying it " makes no sense " , while noting that various Sonic conventions undermined its attempts to be " mature " or " edgy " . 
 Reviewers also criticized the game 's controls , especially Shadow 's homing attack causing unexpected character deaths . Game Informer 's Matt Helgeson complained that the attack " frequently sends you careening off into nothingness , resulting in cheap death after cheap death . " Nintendo Power , X @-@ Play , Eurogamer , Official Xbox Magazine , and GameSpy agreed . Other complaints focused on the mechanics of weapons and vehicles . Greg Mueller of GameSpot felt that the guns were nearly useless because of a lack of a target lock or manual aim , combined with an ineffective auto @-@ aim . IGN staff writer Matt Casamassina , 1UP.com staff writer Greg Sewart , Game Informer , X @-@ Play , GameSpy , and London 's The Times also criticized the mechanics of Shadow 's weapons , vehicles , and other aspects of the game 's controls . However , Thomason claimed that " blasting Shadow 's foes with the wide variety of weapons at his disposal is just plain fun . " 
 The level design received mixed comments . Mueller called some of them " extremely frustrating " . Helgeson stated that the fast @-@ paced " levels are poorly designed " , and Andrew Reiner , who wrote a second @-@ opinion review for Game Informer , called the level design " disastrous " . Official Xbox Magazine was more mixed , balancing the possibility of getting lost in the large levels with the likely appeal of these stages to 3D Sonic gamers , particularly those who had enjoyed Sonic Heroes . GameTrailers found that " the levels are either dark and urban , or bright and psychedelic . Either way , they fit in well to the Sonic universe . They are loaded with speed ramps , loops and an assortment of other boosts that rocket Shadow like a pinball . " Bettenhausen included " the classic run @-@ like @-@ hell roller coaster design philosophy " of some stages in his limited praise . Casamassina deplored the " stupid level design " , adding that " Just because they dazzled players six years ago does not mean that Sonic Team can copy and paste exactly the same loops and spins into each new franchise iteration and expect everyone to be happy with the outcome . " GameSpy observed that " the areas are much less open than in previous Sonic games , but the level designers haven 't taken advantage of the constraints . " Nintendo Power singled out the difficulty of the missions that require the player to locate objects . 
 However , critics praised the game 's replay value , applauding the many possible paths that a player may take through the game . GameTrailers stated , " this choose @-@ your @-@ own @-@ adventure style gives the game replay value that many platformers lack . " The Melbourne , Australia , publication Herald Sun , Nintendo Power , and Official Xbox Magazine thought similarly . GameSpot praised the variety of alternate endings , but concluded that " the gameplay isn 't fun enough to warrant playing the game through multiple times . " Bettenhausen thought that the morality system felt artificial , although he conceded that it did extend the game 's replay value . 
 = The Greencards = 
 The Greencards are a progressive bluegrass band that formed in Austin , Texas , and are currently based in Nashville , Tennessee . The band was founded in 2003 in Texas by Eamon McLoughlin , an Englishman , and Australians Kym Warner and Carol Young . The musicians originally performed in local Austin bars , and soon found increasing acclaim . They have released one independent album , Movin ' On , in 2003 , and two albums , Weather and Water , and Viridian , on the Dualtone record label . Their fourth album , Fascination , was released on Sugar Hill in 2009 . Their fifth album , " Brick " , 2011 , was self @-@ produced with the direct support of their fans . Pre @-@ production donors were recognized with their names inscribed on the " bricks " that make @-@ up the cover art . 
 Their debut album , Movin ' On , was the recipient of local Texas awards and charted on Americana radio stations . Country Music Television named their follow @-@ up Weather and Water as one of the ten best bluegrass albums of 2005 , and The Greencards were invited to tour with Bob Dylan and Willie Nelson in the same year . Viridian would go on to take the number one position on the Billboard magazine 's Bluegrass Music Chart , making The Greencards the first international band to ever do so . Viridian was a critically praised album , and was nominated for Best Country Album by the Australian Recording Industry Association . The track " Mucky the Duck " from Viridian was nominated for a Grammy Award at the 50th Grammy Awards . 
 The Greencards are noted for their playing of American bluegrass with a worldly feel , and for their incorporation of other genres of music . Often labeled as part of , and said to be representative of , the " newgrass " movement , they draw from Irish folk music , gypsy music , rock ' n ' roll , folk balladry , and Latin American musical sources . The Greencards ' sound has been compared to progressive American folk rock , and they have been credited with helping to expand bluegrass music . 
 Eamon McLoughlin left the band in December 2009 , and currently resides in Nashville TN . Carl Miner , originally from Oregon , joined the group in May 2010 , playing acoustic guitar . Carl won the 1999 National <unk> Championship at the Walnut Valley Festival , and currently resides in Nashville , TN . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 The Greencards were initially composed of two Australians , Kym Warner on mandolin and Carol Young on bass , and an Englishman , Eamon McLoughlin on fiddle . Raised in South London , McLoughlin began to perform country music shows with his family on weekends , influenced by George Jones , George Strait , and Ricky Skaggs . Born to Irish parents , McLoughlin 's father was head of a London @-@ based country band . At age nine , McLoughlin moved away from piano lessons to play fiddle , and performed with his father 's band . McLoughlin had earlier relocated from Brighton to Austin in 1997 , after leaving Sussex University with a degree in Politics and American Studies . Trained in London studying Royal Schools of Music Grades before emigrating , McLoughlin also toured with the Asylum Street <unk> , Austin Lounge Lizards , Bruce Robison and Ray Wylie Hubbard after arriving in the United States . 
 Prior to the founding of The Greencards , Young won the Australian Independent Country Artist of the Year award in 2000 , and had recorded two No. 1 Australian @-@ charted country music singles . Young was a singer in Outback country bands and acts , including Gina Jeffreys . Young was previously nominated as " Best Female Vocalist " by the Country Music Association of Australia , and won the Australian independent country artist of the year award in 2000 due in part to her No. 1 singles " True Blue Fool " and " Part of the Past " . 
 Warner was an aspiring bluegrass musician ( which was unusual in Australia ) after inheriting the music from his father , an early Australian bluegrass pioneer . The winner of the Australian National Bluegrass Mandolin Championship for four consecutive years , Warner had toured with country music artists including Gina Jeffreys , and with Young in Kasey Chambers 's band . Young and Warner knew each other previously , and according to Warner , had been drawn to bluegrass and American roots music through an appreciation of George Jones and Merle Haggard . Warner and Young made the decision to emigrate to America to pursue musical careers in that country , after they met . Young and Warner later lived together in Sydney while trying to find work in the moribund Australian bluegrass scene . After leaving Australia , they spent time in West Texas before relocating to Austin . 
 On an early trip the pair took to Austin , Warner and Young met McLoughlin at a recording session . Warner was producing an album for the recording artist Bill Atkins and found they needed a fiddle player , which led to the recruitment of McLoughlin . Initially the immigrants came to know one another through their mutual love of Monty Python , Benny Hill , and Fawlty Towers . They began to have jam sessions afterwards and there was evident chemistry between the trio , which led to their writing songs together . They named themselves The Greencards in honor of the fact that all three band members carried United States green cards . They eventually began to perform shows locally in Austin to finance the recording of what would become their debut album , 2003 's Movin ' On . In the process , they became one of the most popular musical groups in Austin . Representative of an emerging " newgrass " movement , The Greencards ' acoustic sound was said to incorporate eclectic influences from Irish traditional , Romani gypsy , and Latin American musical sources . 
 Their first performance together as a band was at the Austin Irish pub , Mother Egan 's . Given a noon to 3 pm Central time slot , they surprisingly began to fill the pub with patrons week after week . Their fans at Mother Egan 's soon began calling them the " Bluegrass Bunch " . Several months later , The Greencards began performing an additional three to five times per week in Austin , in addition to their Mother Egan 's Sunday show . Warner credited the frantic pace of their performance schedule during their Austin formation to their cohesion as a group and with driving them to create more new original music . During their time performing locally in Austin , they toured with various local Texas musicians , including Robert Earl Keen . Warner said that during their early career performing together , audiences would always assume they were American musicians until they finally spoke between songs , revealing their English and Australian accents . 
 Mario Tarradell of <unk> @-@ TV news called the idea of an American bluegrass band composed of two Australians and an Englishman not as " outrageous " as it may seem . He quoted McLoughlin in an interview : 
 The ironic thing is that we grew up listening to primarily American music and fell in love with American music . I love country music . I grew up with George Jones and Charley Pride and Jim Reeves . All that stuff was playing in the house . That 's what I wanted to seek out . That 's what I wanted to play . Carol was into Tammy Wynette . Trev Warner is Kym 's dad , and he was the first person to bring bluegrass music to Australia . 
 = = = Movin ' On ( 2003 – 2004 ) = = = 
 In 2003 , The Greencards recorded and self @-@ released Movin ' On , their debut album , which sold 10 @,@ 000 copies at shows and online , and entered the top five on the Americana radio charts . Pat Flynn , one of the band members of the New Grass Revival , guested on the recording of Movin ' On as a session guitarist , and would return to do so again on Weather and Water . The album was said to break past traditional rules of bluegrass music by integrating a jam @-@ band mindset while blending classical folk balladry and rock ' n ' roll into the sound . Contrasting with that appraisal , the album was also cited as a traditional and successful " lo @-@ fi " approach to bluegrass music . Critics noted the virtuoso solos on mandolin , fiddle , and guitar on Movin ' On . 
 The Greencards gained more fans and became known by name quickly after the release of Movin ' On . The band was credited with performing the most energetic sets during the course of the 2004 Austin City Limits Music Festival , were said to bring a global sound to bluegrass , and — by drawing on influences such as Bob Dylan and The Beatles — were pushing the genre 's boundaries . Their live show during this period was ranked by the Houston Chronicle in the top five nights of live music for the year in 2004 . 
 Movin ' On earned The Greencards the 2004 Austin Music Award for Best New Band . Several months after the awards the band was signed by Dualtone Records and began work on their next album , Weather and Water . The label re @-@ released Movin ' On at the beginning of 2005 , generating still more airplay and sales . 
 = = = Weather and Water ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = 
 Their second Dualtone album , Weather and Water , was released on June 28 , 2005 . Warned stated that during the recording sessions , Dualtone Records let them record what they wanted , with no interference or changes requested . In a review of Weather and Water in The Washington Post , it was noted that on this album , unlike their debut , the focus was on the music supporting lyrics , rather than the blues virtuosity of Movin ' On . All three members of the band sang on Weather and Water , but Young 's voice was noted for its " dreamy , haunting quality " . Their music through the Weather and Water album had been called Celtic @-@ influenced and bluegrass @-@ flavored by John <unk> of the Rocky Mountain News , but he noted that the band had a distinctly American sound despite their overseas origins . In the spring of 2005 , The Greencards performed at South by Southwest in Austin for the first time , and afterwards made their debut at the prestigious MerleFest . 
 Jason <unk> of Glide Magazine noted that The Greencards ' debut Movin ' On didn 't capture the band 's live energy , but that Weather and Water overcame this , and was one of 2005 's best bluegrass albums . The music video for the band 's single " Time " from Weather and Water received heavy airplay and rotation on Country Music Television . " Time " was described as the centerpiece track of Weather and Water . Weather and Water was also cited as expanding the boundaries of the bluegrass genre . 
 Country Music Television named Weather and Water one of its ten favorite bluegrass albums of the year , saying , " At the nexus of bluegrass , country and pop , this charming trio immediately win over such diverse audiences in concert . Luckily , their winning personality translates to this disc — even with several melancholy , yet melodic , songs . Not for nothing did Bob Dylan and Willie Nelson choose them to open their summer tour of minor league ballparks . " The Greencards were the opening act for Dylan and Nelson on their 2005 summer tour . Kym Warner credits Gary Paczosa , an engineer who worked on Weather and Water , with helping them get the opportunity to tour with Dylan and Nelson . Paczosa had previously served as an engineer on recordings for Alison Krauss , Nickel Creek and Dolly Parton . " He makes the best @-@ sounding acoustic records in the world " , according to Warner . Throughout 2005 they toured extensively with Dylan and Nelson , and afterwards toured with Tommy Emmanuel . During the summer segment of the 2005 tour with Nelson and Dylan , Kym Warner wanted to have the opportunity to pick Dylan 's brain about music and performing . However , Warner did not get to spend much time alone with Dylan during their time on the road together . Dylan later told Warner at the end of the tour , " You 'll be fine from now on . " 
 At the end of 2005 , The Greencards relocated from Austin to Nashville , Tennessee to be closer to their production company and its staff . Coinciding with their move to Nashville and work on their second album Weather and Water , the changes in location and sound were observed by critics to be a deliberate move from the jam @-@ style of their debut album Movin ' On to instead concentrate on Americana @-@ focused music . By 2006 , The Greencards had an annual slot at <unk> , held yearly in Wilkesboro , North Carolina . The band was nominated in the Americana Music Association Awards for 2006 in the category of New / Emerging Artist of the Year , winning the award . In December 2006 , their tour van rolled over on a patch of ice after leaving a performance in Bryan , Texas , on the way back to Austin , but with no serious injuries . 
 = = = Viridian ( 2007 – 2008 ) = = = 
 On their previous albums , The Greencards had individually recorded their musical tracks separately in isolation booths of recording studios . For Viridian , however , the bandmembers recorded their album together in real time in an open room , which was said to be a factor in creating a spontaneous feel for some of the album . Most of the songs on Viridian are sung by Young , and all of the tracks on Viridian were written by The Greencards , with the exception of " Travel On " , which was penned by Kim Richey of Nashville . Their sound , through Viridian , was likened to the Canadian alternative country band The Duhks . After its release , Viridian claimed the No. 1 position on Billboard magazine 's Bluegrass Music Chart . Doug Lancio , a producer who had previously worked with Patty Griffin , was said to have been a positive factor in the success of Viridian . Prior to the 2007 album , Lancio had not previously worked with The Greencards . The Greencards are the first international musical act to ever reach No. 1 on the Bluegrass Music Chart . 
 In a review of Viridian , <unk> Blake of Hybrid Magazine noted Carol Young 's vocal skill , as she " effortlessly diphthongs cadence " on the track " Waiting On The Night " . According to ABC News in Dallas / Fort Worth , the album has a traditional bluegrass core , with a worldly flavor . Bruce Elder of the Sydney Morning Herald called Viridian a " tour de force " . 
 In the wake of Viridian , The Greencards have been internationally referred to as one of the most popular Americana musical acts in the United States . Bruce Elder went on to say that the band may , after Viridian , be the best country music performers to ever come out of Australia . In 2007 , they were nominated for Best Country Album at the 21st Australian Recording Industry Association awards , ultimately losing out to Keith Urban . In December 2007 , it was announced that their song " Mucky the Duck " from Viridian was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Country Instrumental Performance at the 50th Grammy Awards , but ultimately lost to Brad Paisley 's " <unk> " . Written by Warner , " Mucky the Duck " was inspired by one of the band 's favorite Houston musical venues , The Mucky Duck . Eamon McLoughlin is a regular blogger for Country Music Television . After the Grammy Awards , he wrote about the band 's experience at the event , noting that despite not winning , the bar had been raised for their next album . 
 The Greencards announced on their website in August 2008 that they had returned to the studio to record their fourth album with producer Jay Joyce . In September 2008 , again via their website , they announced that they signed with Sugar Hill Records for their fourth album , to be released in spring 2009 . 
 = = = Fascination ( from 2009 ) = = = 
 On April 21 , 2009 , The Greencards released their fourth studio album , Fascination . Warner describes the album as " their most focused " work . On their previous albums , the three band members had individually put forward ideas for the music , until enough <unk> into the finished work . For Fascination , he says they put aside their individual pride to create a stronger work . The years of touring experience The Greencards have accumulated since their earliest work has helped them , as well . Referring to when they formed the band , he said , " We just played in Austin . We just wrote probably anything , which was the only stuff we knew , which was more of a traditional thing . But since then , we 've had five or six years of touring , all of the experiences , all of the people you meet . We 've been so fortunate to play at all of these festivals which have a really eclectic form of music styles . " 
 According to Young , the music on Fascination was a progression for the band , and a challenge for them . Comparing their prior work to the new album , she said , " They 're probably a bit more bluegrass @-@ influenced than this one here . While we still have the bluegrass and roots music influences , we really wanted to push ourselves harder on this one , something a bit more challenging to play live . " She described their music through their fourth album as having evolved , explaining that it began as traditional roots and bluegrass , but after six years is " our own little sound " . The track , " The Crystal Merchant " , was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Country Instrumental Performance . 
 In 2009 , The Greencards continued to tour , performed again at MerleFest , the Strawberry Park Bluegrass Festival in Preston , CT , and were on the bill for Lollapalooza . 
 = = = Buy A Brick campaign = = = 
 On November 8 , 2010 The Greencards announced that they will self @-@ finance the production on their next album , set for May 2011 , rather than taking an advance from a record company . The Buy A Brick campaign is selling a package of an advance copy of the final CD , a digital image of the album artwork , video updates of the recording of the album and the subscriber 's name ( up to twenty characters ) on the album artwork . Subscriptions are either $ 100 or $ 200 US with the more expensive package getting the album one week earlier and the subscriber 's name on the front of the CD package . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Considered by critics to be part of the progressive bluegrass ( " newgrass " ) musical school , The Greencards draw from a wide variety of musical influences , ranging from Bob Dylan and the Beatles to the Celtic tone of Irish traditional music , gypsy themes , and Latin sounds . Despite the wide array of influences that shape their music , The Greencards have always maintained a distinctively Americana sound . While the various sounds that influence their work are always detectable , none ever dominate the band 's music . Jim Abbott , of the Tribune News Service , described The Greencards as polished , " earthy , charming roots music with a sophisticated sheen " , but noted that some bluegrass purists may miss the vocal idiosyncrasies that can be found on other acts such as the Del McCoury Band . Their appeal has been attributed to both their " instrumental dexterity " as well as the manner in which they both revere and flaunt bluegrass conventions . The progressive nature of The Greencards ' bluegrass sound has been compared to Nickel Creek and Alison Krauss & Union Station . 
 The Greencards ' work on Movin ' On had a looser , jam @-@ based feeling to it , which they later firmed into a more polished sound after relocating to Nashville from Austin for Weather and Water . John T. Davis in No Depression Magazine stated The Greencards ' best work on Weather and Water contained a " stillness " , which he felt contrasted with the speed and " frantic " pace of some of the songs on Movin ' On . While other critics had mentioned The Greencards in the context of jam bands , Davis went on to say that he felt the band was not one , and that they favored a leaner and " clean " sound driven more by Celtic roots . 
 During their 2005 tour with Dylan and Nelson , Buzz McClain of The Washington Post believed that The Greencards play traditional American music better than some Americans do , because of their deep respect for bluegrass and the Americana sound . According to David McPherson in Bluegrass Unlimited magazine , the band 's three @-@ part harmonies evoke the soul sounds of Gospel music . Kym Warner has said that Robert Earl Keen , Kelly Willis , and Patty Griffin were key influences musically in The Greencards 's sound during their time in Austin , with the previously unreleased Griffin song " What You Are " being covered on their album Weather and Water . The recordings on Viridian , in particular the songs " River of Sand " , " Waiting on the Night " and " When I Was in Love With You " , were said to evoke the sounds of progressive folk rock that emerged in the 1960s . In Nashville Scene , Edd Hurt noted the eclectic tone of the band 's overall body of recordings , and believed that their albums belonged to the tradition of singer @-@ songwriter musicians . 
 Their musical appeal to fans has been attributed to both their " instrumental dexterity " as well as the manner in which they both revere and flaunt bluegrass conventions . Naila Francis described The Greencards 's sound as having a mellow tone , with " tender <unk> and yarns " in their songs , but punctuated by bursts of energetic musical restlessness . Country Music Television in particular noted their melancholy but melodic sound . The Greencards have described their sound as " high energy acoustic music " . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = Antestor = 
 Antestor is a Norwegian unblack metal band formed in 1990 in Jessheim . Credited for starting the northern European Christian black metal scene , Antestor is the only Christian band to have an album released by Cacophonous Records , which has also released records by bands such as Dimmu Borgir , Sigh , and Cradle of Filth . The band 's only release on Cacophonous , The Return of the Black Death , proved influential for the Christian black metal movement , and has sold over 10 @,@ 000 copies . 
 In the late 1990s they dubbed their musical style as " sorrow metal " rather than black metal because the black metal movement was publicly affiliated with Satanism in Norway . According to HM magazine , the progressive elements on the debut album , Martyrium , were possibly ahead of their time in the Norwegian extreme metal scene . 
 The group has gone through several line @-@ up changes over the years , and currently Antestor consists of the founding guitarist Lars Stokstad ( <unk> ) , vocalist Ronny Hansen ( Vrede ) , bassist Erik Normann Aanonsen , guitarist Robert <unk> , and drummer Henning Børven . The original vocalist Kjetil Molnes ( Martyr ) and drummer Svein Sander ( Armoth ) left the band around 2000 , and the members of a fellow Norwegian black metal group , Vaakevandring , joined Antestor . The reputable Norwegian extreme metal drummer Jan Axel Blomberg ( Hellhammer ) played session drums for their 2005 album The Forsaken and Det tapte liv EP . A fourth studio album , Omen , was released in 2013 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Crush Evil era = = = 
 In 1990 , the band was formed under the name " Crush Evil " by Lars Stokstad , Kjetil Molnes , Øyvind Hope and Erling Jørgensen in Jessheim , Norway . Paul W joined them as a drummer later on . Back then , the band 's music style was a mixture of death metal , doom metal , and thrash metal . In 1991 , they recorded and released their first demo , The Defeat of Satan , which contains three songs and an outro . The band is Christian and over the course of their career have received death threats because of this . 
 The existence of the band itself caused a debate in the metal underground . For example , during the early 1990s , Bård Faust of Emperor brought up the subject when he discussed with Euronymous , guitarist / vocalist from the seminal black metal band Mayhem , in his zine <unk> about the Norwegian scene . Faust asked : " Don 't you think that something is terribly wrong when it has gone so far that we have a Christian " death metal " band here ( Crush Evil ) ? Any advice on how we should kill them ? " Euronymous replied to this : " It 's bad enough to have a couple of society bands , but a Christian band is too much . But don 't worry , we have plans . They will not continue for a very long time . " However , the band persevered despite these threats . Antestor was never forced to split apart , and in an almost ironic twist of fate , Jan Axel Blomberg ( better known as Hellhammer , the drummer for Mayhem ) was Antestor 's session drummer on their latest two releases . 
 = = = Martyrium ( 1993 – 1996 ) = = = 
 In 1993 , Vegard <unk> joined the band as a bassist and Svein Sander became their drummer . During that time , they changed the name Crush Evil to Antestor , which is ( Latin for " call to witness " or " testify " ) . Despair was their first self @-@ released demo , and was released under the band name Antestor . The demo starts with an intro and ends with a cover of an old Norwegian hymn , called Jesus , Jesus , Ver Du <unk> Meg ( " Jesus , Jesus , Be With Me " ) . Strawberry Records pressed 600 copies of the recording . 
 In December 1994 , Antestor recorded their first full @-@ length album titled Martyrium . Arctic Serenades Records was originally supposed to release that album , but because of unknown reasons that never happened , and the band tried to get another label to release the album . American @-@ based label Morphine Records would subsequently produce a limited quantity of bootleg copies of the album in 1997 . In an interview , the drummer Armoth said : " ... we were in contact with a label called Morphine Records . But that was about signing a deal for the Martyrium album . But we never signed a contract but that guy , Burrito , made several <unk> and sold every bit of it illegally ' cause he didn 't have a contract . " However , the tape copies circulated in up to fifth generation copies and their audience grew fast . Martyrium was the last album that emphasized the band 's death / doom direction . 
 On June 3 , 1994 , Antestor appeared on a local television program called " <unk> " where youth could practice and experience recording and video production . Usually local bands from Oslo played on that program which was broadcast on the television station <unk> . During the course of this program , Antestor played five songs from Martyrium . On June 6 , 1995 , Antestor was featured on the Norwegian weekly newspaper Morgenbladet 's article about the phenomenon of Christian black metal , surrounding the black metal parody controversy of the Australian unblack metal group Horde 's 1994 album Hellig Usvart . In the article , vocalist Kjetil Molnes explains the band 's stance on if a Christian band can play black metal : " We identify ourselves as black metal as a music style , not black metal as an ideology or belief . " 
 = = = The Return of the Black Death ( 1997 – 1998 ) = = = 
 In 1997 , Antestor recorded a promotional CD titled Kongsblod . The promo @-@ CD caught the interest of British Cacophonous Records , one of the biggest labels with experience in the black metal style and helped established groups such as Cradle of Filth and Dimmu Borgir start their career . Cacophonous signed a record deal for 2 albums with Antestor . In 1998 , Cacophonous released Kongsblod under a different name , The Return of the Black Death , and changed the original cover art of a famous Norwegian painting to artwork by Joe <unk> , a well @-@ known American heavy metal cover art creator . 
 Cacophonous being a secular label releasing material by a band that held Christian beliefs generated some interest in the metal scene . In an interview with Art for the Ears Webzine , published on December 12 , 1998 , Armoth said : " We sent the CD and a short biography . They just wanted to sign us because of the music . And that 's exactly what we wanted to do . " 2 years later in a 2000 interview with the Finnish The Christian Underground Zine issue 4 , the fanzine 's interviewer asked Antestor : " However , you had a record deal with Cacophonous Records ( ex @-@ Cradle of Filth , Bal @-@ <unk> ) . What kind of experiences did you get from that ? " The band replied : " Pretty bad , actually . I can not say they did anything else than released the album . No money , no royalties , nothing . " The interviewer also asked : " Did the record company set any demands concerning your image ? " Antestor replied : " Nothing like that . They just said that it is not recommendable for us to proclaim exactly everywhere that we are a Christian band , and they censored the words ' Lord ' and ' Jesus ' from our lyrics . We ourselves removed a few texts because we did not want to provoke unnecessarily . " 
 The Return of the Black Death was mostly well received by both Christian and non @-@ Christian black metal fans and critics . For example , the British metal magazines Kerrang ! and Terrorizer both gave the album 4 points out of 5 . Musically , The Return of the Black Death is a mixture of black metal and doom metal . The album relies on hypnotic , cold atmosphere and showcases influences from Norwegian folk music , which led some to label Antestor as Viking metal . Unlike previously , around this time the band themselves said they felt uncertain whether a Christian band can play black metal , because the movement was still strongly associated with Satanism . The drummer Svein Sander says in the 1998 interview : 
 = = = The Forsaken ( 2000 – 2009 ) = = = 
 In 2000 , Antestor was signed by Endtime Productions , a metal record label that also helped to start the career of the Norwegian metal band Extol . The original vocalist Kjetil Molnes ( Martyr ) left Antestor . However , the breakup of another Christian metal band in Norway , Vaakevandring , led to several former Vaakevandring members joining Antestor . Namely , Ronny Hansen , adopting the new moniker Vrede , became Antestor 's new vocalist , and Morten Sigmund <unk> ( known in Antestor as <unk> ) stepped in as the new keyboardist . Ann @-@ Mari Edvardsen , who has sung in the Norwegian gothic metal group The Third and the Mortal , joined the band as a female vocalist . For the first time in their career , Antestor began using the infamous corpse paint masks as a part of their live shows and overall image . 
 In 2000 , Endtime Productions released Martyrium with cover art done by the <unk> Swedish metal music cover artist Kristian <unk> . Antestor toured the United States with Extol that year , playing small venues and finally performing at Cornerstone Festival . Over the next several years , the band remained somewhat quiet ; they did not release any more albums until 2003 , when they re @-@ released their two earliest demos on one CD , titling it The Defeat of Satan . The drummer , Svein Sander ( in Antestor , Armoth ) , left the band during this time , and Antestor would not find a new full @-@ time drummer for several more years . 
 In 2004 , Antestor changed their style into a more modern black metal , and released their first set of new songs since The Return of the Black Death in an EP called Det tapte liv ( " The Lost Life " ) . Det tapte liv concentrated less on the black metal aspects of Antestor 's style , instead focusing more on instrumental songs . However , it hinted at what the band was preparing for their 2005 full @-@ length , The Forsaken . The cover arts for both releases were once again done by Kristian <unk> , and the cover for the EP depicts the <unk> Stave Church . Hellhammer played all drums on both of these releases . In an interview with the Russian metal site Metal Library on January 7 , 2007 , Blomberg was asked what did his Mayhem colleagues and record company think about his participation in Antestor , and he said : " To be honest , it was a big ' fuck off ! ' to them all . I will repeat again that I decide what I do and I play not only in black metal groups . " The band also asked Hellhammer to play live for them , but Blomberg refused . Hellhammer also went to state : " In my opinion , black metal today is just music . I will tell you that neither I nor other members of Mayhem never really were against religion or something else . We are primarily interested in music . " Ronny Hansen commented on Blomberg 's appearance : 
 New drummer Tony <unk> joined the band later in 2005 as live session drummer . The band played live shows rarely and only at explicitly Christian music festivals . Examples of performances the group have made in 2000s include the concerts at Bobfest in 2000 in Stockholm and 2004 in Linköping , and at the Nordic Fest 2004 in Oslo . 
 Some of the members still play in the black metal band Vaakevandring , who played a reunion concert in 2007 together with Antestor at the Endtime Festival held at the end of March 2007 in Halmstad . Antestor performed the concert with numerous session musicians . In this concert the band announced that this is their last live show for a while . 
 = = = Omen ( 2010 – present ) = = = 
 After three years of hiatus , on January 29 , 2010 , the band launched an official Facebook page . Later they announced new members : Bassist Thor Georg Buer ( Grave Declaration ) , guitarist Robert Bordevik ( Grievance , <unk> ) , drummer Jo Henning Børven ( Grave Declaration , <unk> ) and keyboardist Nickolas Main Henriksen ( <unk> , <unk> ) . With this line @-@ up , the band played a stage show at Nordic Fest 2010 in Oslo . On November 4 , 2010 they announced signing to Bombworks Records to record a new album and an EP . After some line @-@ up changes in mid @-@ 2011 , Erik Normann Aanonsen ( <unk> ) joined on bass while Thor Georg switched to guitar , and the show at the Norwegian Seaside Festival was with that line @-@ up . The album has been recorded and will be mixed and mastered in Sweden . Guitarist Thor also left the band to focus on his college education , but stated he may return if the opportunity arises . The fourth album , Omen , was released on November 30 , 2012 . A Brazilian tour was announced for early 2013 . During the Belo Horizonte leg of this tour , the band faced a protest organized by Black Metal / Anti @-@ Christianity radicals who rejected the possibility of a Christian black metal band to perform in the city . Since the radicals were already announcing their intentions via Internet , the local police had assigned one private policeman in addition to the 30 security guards present to help guaranteeing the security of the show . At one point , the officer had to fire some shots towards the sky to control the rioters . A video posted on YouTube shows a group of radicals screaming " Fuck You Antestor ! " outside the venue and the local police escorting the band members . 
 After the show , the band posted a public statement about the incident , thanking their fans for coming despite of the risks involved , and blessing the radicals : " We are proud to call you our brothers and sisters in Christ . Last but not least we must thank the gig <unk> and the Belo Horizonte police for escorting us though the angry mob . [ ... ] We do not hate the angry mob who came to hurt us . In fact , our message in our shows is to love your enemy . So God bless everybody who stood outside chanting : Fuck Antestor ! Hope we can talk like reasonable people someday over a fresh squeezed juice . Extra special hails to our fans who had the balls to come although they knew it could be dangerous . Antestor salutes you and be blessed . " In a newspaper interview with the Norwegian Christian newspaper Dagen two days following the band 's safe return to Norway , bassist Erik Normann Aanonsen said that he had prepared himself for the worst @-@ case scenario that the tour could end in death , and he reiterates the band 's gratitude to the aggressive Brazilian Satanists stating : " We 're now twice as big in Brazil as we were before we went there . " 
 = = Style = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 While the band 's style on the first publications was primarily death / doom with correspondingly slow songs and death growl singing , the band began playing black metal on the 1998 album The Return of the Black Death . On that album the band showcased screaming vocals , tremolo guitar riffs and drum passages with increased speed typical for the black metal genre . Keyboard is also in a central role , which for the typical black metal is used to perform epic interludes and dominates the soundscapes . For example , over the first three minutes of the song " Sorg " , only the keyboard melody leads the performance . 
 With the third album The Forsaken the band developed more in the direction of a more technical style , as it is apparent on the style of The Return of the Black Death . The band 's musical development resulted in that The Forsaken includes several guitar solos . Also the quality of production compared to The Return of the Black Death improved . Through the introduction of the two ex @-@ members of Vaakevandring , the style became more melodic and atmospheric . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Antestor 's lyrical themes include hope and despair , but also deal with the personal Christian faith of the band members . Therefore , many metal fans oppose classifying Antestor 's style to the category of black metal , as their lyrics are often contrary to the ideology of black metal . The lyrics are mostly in English . Norwegian texts are also rare for the group , but on the album The Return of the Black Death the Norwegian language dominates the lyrics . On this album , only part of the lyrics are listed in the booklet ; words directly referring to Jesus Christ and God were omitted . The song " A Sovereign Fortress " dealt with , for example , the acknowledgments of God who protects and supports the lyrical I since birth . It is portrayed in the chorus of this song as : 
 " Sorg " ( Norwegian for : grief , sorrow , sadness ) , however , deals with the themes of the sorrow and the search for hope , with the song based on darker imagery , and the lyrics are not explicitly Christian yet are not negative in the end . An example ( in the Norwegian language ) : 
 Another song that is also a dark , but this takes on Christian theme , is " Ancient Prophecy " . The lyrics tells that the man was sinful , and no one can escape the court of God . Antestor process in their lyrics also topics such as suicide , doubts about the certainty of salvation , and longing death , all of which are rare themes for a Christian band . An example from the text " Betrayed " from the album The Forsaken : 
 = = = Appearance = = = 
 Antestor are one of the few bands in the Christian metal scene who use corpse paint in their appearances and on photos . One example is the booklet photos in the album The Return of the Black Death , depicting Antestor in Norsemen outfits and black and white face paints at a snowy Norwegian mountain location . Sometimes the group uses art blood , as known for the session bassist <unk> <unk> 's ( <unk> ) appearance at the Bobfest 2004 concert . The band explains that corpse paint " is the same for us as masking is for actors or mimes ; One way to express certain feelings in the battle we are in . The main purpose is to concentrate on God and not to break a lance in side issues like these . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to Vrede in an interview with Intense Radio on December 13 , 2007 , " by various sources , The Return of the Black Death has sold over 10 @,@ 000 copies and still keeps selling . " 
 Very few published reviews of the band 's albums exist , yet the ones that are available are positive , often good and some excellent . Michael Bryzak writes in the liner notes of The Defeat of Satan / Despair that , although the first album was not officially released until 2000 , " Martyrium was rightfully considered a cult classic . " 
 The group 's position in the Norwegian metal scene was controversial from the beginning . Bryzak writes that " standing up for their faith in Life and Hope , Antestor received serious death threats during this time from some of the major bands and key players of the scene . " When asked if the band ever played with other groups in the black metal scene , Antestor said in a 2000 interview with <unk> zine : " We played with some early form of the band Old Man 's Child once . Apparently they expressed their opinion of us with their legs and walked out of the venue during our set . It was their way of saying ' screw you Christians . ' " In the liner notes of Martyrium , Antestor corresponds in a slightly bitter tone : " For those of you who despised us , disbelieved in us and misplaced your anger upon us , may God have mercy on your poor souls ! " 
 On Antestor 's achievements , Bryzak wrote that " The birth of northern Europe 's Christian extreme metal scene can be attributed to only one act , Antestor . " In 2010 , HM Magazine ranked The Return of the Black Death number 40 on their Top 100 Christian metal albums of all @-@ time list with Beck stating about the album , " <unk> dark , <unk> set the standard for Christian black metal . " Jamie Lee Rake of HM Magazine wrote of the Endtime Productions re @-@ release of Martyrium , wondering if the progressive elements of the album made the band unnoticed innovators in the early Norwegian extreme metal scene : 
 = = Members = = 
 Current 
 Ronny Hansen ( aka Vrede ) – vocals and lyrics ( 2000 – present ) 
 Lars Stokstad ( aka <unk> ) – guitars and sung vocals ( 1990 – ) , keyboards ( 1990 – 2000 , 2013 – present ) 
 Erik Normann Aanonsen – bass and acoustic instruments ( 2011 – present ) 
 Jo Henning Børven – drums and live programming ( 2010 – present ) 
 Former 
 Robert Bordevik – guitars ( 2010 – 2011 , 2012 – 2015 ) , backing vocals ( 2012 – 2015 ) 
 Nicholas Main Henriksen – keyboards ( 2010 – 2013 ) 
 Thor Georg Buer – guitars ( 2011 @-@ 2012 ) , bass ( 2010 – 2011 ) 
 Morten Sigmund <unk> ( aka <unk> ) – keyboards ( 1999 – 2007 ) 
 Vegard <unk> ( aka Gard ) – bass ( 1993 – 2005 ) 
 Tony <unk> – live drums ( 2003 – 2006 ) 
 Svein Sander ( aka Armoth ) – drums ( 1993 – 2000 ) 
 Stig <unk> ( aka <unk> ) – guitars ( 1995 – 1997 ) 
 Tom W. Holm Paulsen – drums ( 1990 – 1993 ) 
 Øyvind Hope – bass ( 1990 – 1993 ) 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> ( aka <unk> from <unk> ) – bass ( 2005 – 2006 ) 
 Pål <unk> – live drums ( 2001 – 2003 ) 
 Ole <unk> – guitars ( 1996 – 1997 ) 
 Kjetil Molnes ( aka Martyr ) – vocals ( 1990 – 1999 ) 
 Erling Jorgensen ( aka Pilgrim ) – guitars ( 1990 – 1993 ) 
 Bjørn <unk> – guitars ( 1990 – 1993 , 2003 – 2005 ) 
 Session musicians 
 Jan Axel Blomberg ( Hellhammer ) ( 2004 ) – session drums on The Forsaken 
 Ann @-@ Mari Edvardsen – session vocals on The Forsaken 
 Tora – session vocals on ' Martyrium 
 Timeline 
 Note : Martyrium was recorded in 1994 , with some bootleg copies leaked , but not officially released until 2000 
 = = Discography = = 
 The Defeat of Satan ( demo , 1991 ) 
 Despair ( demo , 1993 ) 
 Kongsblod ( promo , 1998 ) 
 The Return of the Black Death ( 1998 ) 
 Martyrium ( 2000 , recorded in 1994 ) 
 The Defeat of Satan ( compilation , 2003 ) 
 Det tapte liv ( EP , 2004 ) 
 The Forsaken ( 2005 ) 
 Omen ( 2012 ) 
 = Mike Capel = 
 Michael Lee Capel ( born October 13 , 1961 ) is a former Major League Baseball ( MLB ) right @-@ handed pitcher who played for the Chicago Cubs , Milwaukee Brewers , and Houston Astros . In 49 career games , Capel pitched 62 @.@ 1 innings , struck out 43 batters , and had a career win – loss record of 3 – 4 with a 4 @.@ 62 earned run average ( ERA ) . While he played in MLB , Capel stood at 6 feet 1 inch ( 185 cm ) and weighed 175 pounds ( 79 kg ) . A starting pitcher in college and parts of his minor league baseball career , he converted to relief pitching while in Chicago 's minor league system . 
 The Philadelphia Phillies chose Capel in the 24th round of the 1980 MLB draft , but Capel did not sign with the team : instead , he opted to attend the University of Texas . Capel played on the 1982 USA College All @-@ Star Team , which competed in the Amateur World Series in Seoul and placed third . The next year , Capel and the Texas Longhorns won the College World Series . After he was drafted by the Cubs , Capel left Texas and signed to play professional baseball ; he played in six seasons of minor league baseball before he made his MLB debut in 1988 . Capel spent the entire 1989 season in Triple @-@ A , one level below the majors , but the Cubs released him at the end of the year . He agreed to terms with the Brewers and played in MLB after an injury opened a spot on Milwaukee 's roster , but was again released at the end of the season . A free agent , the Astros signed Capel , and over the course of the season he pitched in 25 games for the team . He spent the final part of his career in the Astros farm system , and after he made the 1992 Triple @-@ A All @-@ Star team , Capel played his last season in 1993 . After retirement , Capel worked as the general manager of a car dealership in Houston , Texas . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Capel was born on October 13 , 1961 , in Marshall , Texas , and attended Spring High School in Harris County . As a child , he enjoyed watching the Astros play on weekends . During his senior year in 1979 , the Spring Lions won the AAAA conference state championship , and Capel was named to the All @-@ State team , composed of the best high school players in the state . He set several pitching records at Spring High School . Future teammate Calvin Schiraldi called Capel a " hard thrower when he came out of high school " and " the top guy out of the state in 1980 " ; Roger Clemens said he was " probably the best pitcher in the state at that time " . The Philadelphia Phillies drafted Capel with the 605th overall pick in the 1980 MLB Draft , but instead of signing with the Phillies , he chose to attend the University of Texas . 
 = = Collegiate career = = 
 Capel enrolled at the University of Texas in 1981 , but did not play baseball , as stretched ligaments in his elbow forced him to miss his freshman season . Capel pitched <unk> for the remainder of his collegiate career to compensate for a loss in the velocity of his fastball . In 1982 , he was named to the All @-@ Southwest Conference team and pitched to a 9 – 0 win – loss record with a 3 @.@ 68 ERA , as the Longhorns finished 59 – 6 . His 1982 winning percentage of 1 @.@ 000 ties him with 10 others for the best single @-@ season winning percentage in Longhorns history ( with a minimum of nine decisions ) . At the 1982 College World Series , Texas defeated the Oklahoma State Cowboys and the Stanford Cardinal , but losses to the Miami Hurricanes and the Wichita State Shockers eliminated them from play per the tournament 's double @-@ elimination format . Capel played on the United States team in the 1982 Amateur World Series overseen by the International Baseball Federation . Starting against Australia , he pitched a 14 – 4 complete game victory , as the match ended after seven innings per the championship 's ten @-@ run rule . The United States eventually placed third in the competition . 
 The 1983 Longhorns finished with a 61 – 14 record and were ranked as the number one team in the nation by Collegiate Baseball Magazine . That season , the Texas team featured four future MLB pitchers : Capel , Clemens , Bruce Ruffin , and Schiraldi . In the 1983 College World Series , Capel allowed four hits in a complete game against the Michigan Wolverines as the Longhorns advanced to the World Series finals . Facing the Alabama Crimson Tide , the Longhorns made Clemens their starting pitcher and won 4 – 3 . The championship was the fourth World Series title in University of Texas history , and their first since 1975 . Capel finished the season with a 13 – 1 record and a 2 @.@ 98 ERA . His career winning percentage ( <unk> ) ties him with Rick Burley for the fifth @-@ best in Texas Longhorns history . In June , before the College World Series , he was drafted by the Cubs with the 320th overall pick in the 1983 MLB draft . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Chicago Cubs = = = 
 After he signed a professional contract with the Cubs , Capel no longer threw <unk> . Capel began professional baseball with the Class A Quad Cities Cubs , but was promoted to the Double @-@ A Midland Cubs shortly into the season . Over 11 games , he finished with a 4 – 3 record and a 3 @.@ 51 ERA . In 1984 , Capel split playing time between the Class A @-@ Advanced Lodi Crushers and Midland ; he led Midland in losses ( 10 ) and wild pitches ( 11 ) and had the second @-@ worst ERA ( 6 @.@ 31 ) on the team . With Midland , Capel started 11 games out of the 16 in which he appeared . On his 0 – 7 record for the Crushers , Tom Alexander of the Lodi News @-@ Sentinel wrote that Capel 's luck " has been all bad when it comes to wins " . Both Lodi and Midland finished their seasons with losing records . 
 From 1985 – 86 , he played for the Double @-@ A Pittsfield Cubs of the Eastern League . In 1986 , Capel only pitched in relief , had a career @-@ best 1 @.@ 87 ERA over 62 @.@ 2 innings pitched , and led his team with 13 saves . After he was promoted to the Triple @-@ A Iowa Cubs , Capel split time between starting and relieving roles in 1987 . At 7 – 10 , Capel tied for Iowa 's lead in wins and losses , and led the team in strikeouts , with 75 ; his 7 wins became a career high , and his loss total matched a career high set in Midland three years earlier . After the season , Ray Sons of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times said Capel " may be ready for middle relief in Chicago " , and Dave van Dyck listed him as a prospect for the 1988 season . During winter , Capel , Greg Maddux , Manny Trillo , Damon Berryhill , and several other Cubs played for teams in the Caribbean . Capel played for the Águilas del Zulia of Venezuela and led the team with five saves . 
 Capel played in spring training ball as he tried to make Chicago 's opening day roster . After the Cubs acquired Mike Bielecki from the Pittsburgh Pirates on March 31 , 1988 , they assigned Capel to Triple @-@ A despite a Sun @-@ Times prediction that he would be on the MLB roster . Prior to the acquisition , when Al Nipper was supposed to become the Cubs ' fifth starter , Capel was to take his spot in the bullpen . The Cubs recalled Capel and Mark Grace to the majors on May 3 , while Drew Hall and Rolando Roomes were optioned to Iowa ; at the time , he had a 1 @.@ 54 ERA and two saves in Triple @-@ A ball . On May 7 , Capel made his MLB debut : he pitched the final 1 @.@ 2 innings of a game against the San Francisco Giants , allowing no runs and no hits but issuing a walk in a 2 – 1 Cubs loss . His first career win came the following day against the Giants , although he blew a save by giving up a two @-@ run home run to Bob Brenly and lost a 5 – 4 lead . The Cubs ultimately won 13 – 7 . Capel continued to pitch for the club until June 30 , when the Cubs optioned him to Iowa to open a roster spot for Rich " Goose " Gossage to come off the 15 @-@ day disabled list ( DL ) . 
 He returned to the MLB club on August 8 to replace Schiraldi , but was demoted on August 13 before making an appearance , as Chicago activated Les Lancaster from the DL . Capel rejoined the club on August 31 , and pitched in five more games before the season 's end . Over his first MLB season , Capel pitched in 20 games and allowed 16 earned runs over 29 @.@ 1 innings for a 4 @.@ 91 ERA . He pitched the entire 1989 season for Iowa , appearing in 64 games for the team . On October 15 , Capel was granted free agency by the Cubs ; he signed with the Brewers two months later . 
 = = = Milwaukee Brewers = = = 
 Capel competed against 22 other pitchers for an MLB roster spot in the Brewers ' spring training camp . The Brewers optioned Capel to their Triple @-@ A affiliate , the Denver Zephyrs , on April 5 , before the start of Milwaukee 's 1990 season . On May 17 , Denver placed Capel on the DL with a strained Achilles tendon , which opened a roster spot on the Zephyrs and allowed the Brewers to send Jaime Navarro back to Denver . When the Brewers needed a replacement for the injured Bill Wegman , Capel was called up to the major leagues . For his Brewers debut , Capel faced five batters and allowed four runs ( two charged to Capel ) against the Baltimore Orioles . His strikeout of Billy Ripken was the only MLB out Capel recorded in 1990 . On June 8 , he made his second and final outing with the Brewers and allowed four runs ( three charged to Capel ) against the Toronto Blue Jays ; combined , batters hit <unk> against Capel as he finished the season with a 135 @.@ 00 ERA . When Greg Vaughn , returning from a turf toe injury and a sprained left ankle , was activated from the DL on June 11 , Capel was sent to Triple @-@ A. He finished the season with Denver where he had a 4 – 3 record with a 4 @.@ 26 ERA . On October 4 , the Brewers granted Capel free agency ; he signed with the Astros on January 5 , 1991 . 
