 = = = Houston Astros = = = 
 Capel began his 1991 season with the Triple @-@ A Tucson Toros ; the Astros added Capel to their MLB roster on June 7 . Two days later , against the New York Mets , Capel allowed the game @-@ winning home run to Howard Johnson in the top of the 11th inning . Against the Mets on June 14 , Capel , starting pitcher Pete <unk> , and closer Jim Clancy combined for a four @-@ hitter . His final MLB appearance came on August 14 against the San Diego Padres , when he pitched one inning in relief of Jim Corsi in a 4 – 1 loss . Capel said that pitching for Houston was " the high point of my career " . Over 25 games pitched , Capel finished the season with a 1 – 3 record and a 3 @.@ 03 ERA . 
 To reduce their roster to 35 players , the Astros assigned Capel and seven others to the Toros prior to the 1992 MLB season . Capel was selected to the Triple @-@ A All @-@ Star Game to replace Tim Scott , whom the Padres promoted to MLB . He told Javier Morales of the Arizona Daily Star that " this is one of the greatest thrills of my career " , and he hoped it showed the Astros that he could pitch in MLB . Doug Jones worked as Houston 's closer in 1992 , however , and Capel never played for the MLB club . For the Toros , Capel had a 6 – 6 record and a 2 @.@ 19 ERA with a team @-@ leading 18 saves . The following season , the Montreal Expos invited Capel to their spring camp as a non @-@ roster invitee . Capel elected to remain with the Astros organization where he allowed 26 earned runs in 32 @.@ 2 innings and pitched the entire season in Triple @-@ A. The Toros , managed by Rick Sweet , finished first in the Pacific Coast League ( PCL ) South Division with an 83 – 60 record and made the playoffs . Unlike the 1993 MLB playoffs , in which four teams competed , only two teams could make the PCL playoffs . In the championship series , the Toros faced the Portland Beavers , champions of the North Division and holders of a PCL @-@ best 87 – 56 record . In a best @-@ of @-@ seven series , the Toros defeated the Beavers four games to two . After the season , the Astros did not re @-@ sign Capel . While playing in MLB , Capel stood at 6 feet 1 inch ( 185 cm ) and weighed 175 pounds ( 79 kg ) . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In February 1986 , Capel pitched in the University of Texas Alumni v. Varsity game , which ended in a 14 – 14 tie . Capel started to use dipping tobacco in 1976 and in March 1988 had a non @-@ cancerous lesion removed from his lip ; he tried to quit the product in March 1988 . Capel met his wife , Elizabeth , at Roger Clemens ' wedding . Outside of baseball , he is a " close " friend of Clemens , and during Clemens ' 2012 perjury trial , Capel testified on his work ethic and character . In 2012 , Capel worked as the general manager of a car dealership in Houston . 
 = The Covent @-@ Garden Journal = 
 The Covent @-@ Garden Journal ( modernised as The Covent Garden Journal ) was an English literary periodical published twice a week for most of 1752 . It was edited and almost entirely funded by novelist , playwright , and essayist Henry Fielding , under the pseudonym , " Sir Alexander Drawcansir , <unk> . Censor of Great Britain " . It was Fielding 's fourth and final periodical , and one of his last written works . 
 The Journal incited the " Paper War " of 1752 – 1753 , a conflict among a number of contemporary literary critics and writers , which began after Fielding declared war on the " armies of Grub Street " in the first issue . His proclamation attracted multiple aggressors and instigated a long @-@ lasting debate argued in the pages of their respective publications . Initially waged for the sake of increasing sales , the Paper War ultimately became much larger than Fielding had expected and generated a huge volume of secondary commentary and literature . 
 Further controversy erupted in June , when Fielding expressed support for a letter decrying the Government 's 1751 Disorderly Houses Act in the Journal . His remarks were viewed by the public as an endorsement of the legality of prostitution , and it soon became common opinion that the letter , initially attributed to a " Humphrey Meanwell " , was in fact written by Fielding . Fielding refuted this assertion in the 1 August issue of the Journal , while labelling prostitutes a source of social evils . 
 The final issue of the Journal was released on 25 November 1752 . In its last months , poor sales had resulted in a transition from semi @-@ weekly to weekly release . Ill @-@ health and a disinclination to continue led Fielding to end its run after the Number 72 issue . He died two years later while staying in Lisbon , Portugal . 
 = = Background = = 
 The first mention of The Covent @-@ Garden Journal dates to 5 December 1749 , when a broadsheet pamphlet was printed with the title " The Covent @-@ Garden Journal . No 1 . To be published 'd Once every Month , during the present Westminster Election by Paul <unk> , of the Fleet , Esq . " It was organized as a standard paper , with sections called " Introductory Essay " , " Foreign Affairs " , " Home Affairs " , and " Advertisement " . Published with a list of fake printers ( T. Smith , R. Webb , and S. Johnson ) , it claimed that the sellers were " all the People of London and Westminster " . It was later revealed that the paper was created as a hoax by the Duke of Bedford to mock Sir George <unk> , 2nd Baronet and his supporters . 
 The printer , Richard Francklin , ran off 13 @,@ 000 copies on 5 – 6 December , only one of which still survives . Although the true author of the pamphlet remains uncertain , it was believed at the time to be Fielding 's work ; later critics , such as Martin and Ruthe Battestin , cite a letter written on behalf of the Duke of Richmond that was used as evidence of Fielding 's involvement . Dated 7 December 1749 , the letter states : " The enclosed is a paper generally given to Mr. Fielding , as the author . The humor that is in it is at least akin to his . It may possibly divert you & your company . " Fielding 's authorship would have been limited to the paper 's introduction , which was used to target prominent Tories such as Paul Whitehead : a minor poet who had pseudonymously attacked Fielding before and was vocal on political issues . 
 In late 1751 , just before the publication of his novel , Amelia , Fielding began plotting his next literary work . He expressed a desire to use a periodical to promote the Universal Register Office – a business which connected service providers with consumers – and his other activities and views . Alluding to the earlier publication , he gave it the title The Covent @-@ Garden Journal , and announced in The Daily Advertiser that the first number would be issued on 23 November 1751 . The release was delayed until January because of work related to the publication of Amelia . 
 At the time of the publication of the journal , Covent Garden , although formally associated with the theatre industry , was more widely known as London 's red light district . Fielding had earlier written The Covent Garden Tragedy , a mock @-@ tragic play concerning the tale of two prostitutes . 
 = = Content = = 
 The first number of the periodical was published on 4 January 1752 , and sold at a price of three pence . For most of its run , the journal was issued twice a week , on Tuesday and Saturday . Each number consisted of an introductory remark or essay ( written by Fielding ) , domestic and foreign news with annotations , advertisements , an obituary , a births and marriages panel , and other sundries . One section , entitled " Covent Garden " , concerned Fielding 's position as a magistrate at Bow Street . The column ran in every issue until 27 June 1752 , appearing irregularly thereafter . It dealt with crime and legal matters and provided insight into the cases that Fielding dealt with on a regular basis , but the presentation was less organized and more informal than standard legal records . Most of the information on the cases was provided by Joshua Brogden , one of Fielding 's clerks . 
 Particularly in the opening comment and the news , Fielding injected a degree of wit or " liveliness " not seen in his previous publications ; he stated in the first number that he planned to avoid the " dullness " seen in other contemporary periodicals : 
 I do promise , as far as in me lies , to avoid with the utmost Care all Kind of Encroachment on that spacious Field , in which my ... Contemporaries have such large and undoubted Possessions ; and which , from Time immemorial , hath been called the Land of <unk> . 
 Discussion in the Journal was chiefly concerned with matters of literary criticism , and " the social and moral health of the body politic " . Most of the opening essays took a decidedly unpolitical tone . Exceptions were those in numbers 42 , 50 , and 58 . Number 42 mocked the Country Tories by imagining how an Ancient Greek or Roman would react to party politics : " ... convey [ him ] to a Hunting @-@ Match , or Horse Race , or any other Meeting of Patriots . Will he not immediately conclude from all the Roaring and Ranting , the Hallowing and the <unk> , the Gaming and Drinking , ... that he is actually present at the <unk> of Bacchus , or the Celebration of some such Festival ? " Number 50 blamed the growth of the London mob on poverty laws , and number 58 targeted the " Independent Electors of Westminster " . 
 In his literary reviews , Fielding often wrote with a biased hand . For instance , he gave immoderate praise to Charlotte Lennox 's The Female Quixote and Charles Macklin 's two @-@ act comic play The Covent Garden Theatre , or Paquin Turn 'd Drawcansir ; Lennox and Macklin were long @-@ time friends of Fielding , and Macklin 's play was based on Fielding 's life . Fielding had a noted tendency to be prejudiced toward certain authors too – Rabelais and Aristophanes were always met harshly , while Jonathan Swift , Cervantes , and Lucian were praised as a " great Triumvirate " . Samuel Richardson 's Clarissa – published in 1748 and one of the longest novels in the English language – is a noted exception : it was received well , even though Fielding considered Richardson a literary rival , and despite Richardson 's calling the periodical " The Common Garden Journal " . Fielding lauded the work of friend William Hogarth and poetry by Edward Young . He also promoted plays involving David Garrick and James Lacy ( among others ) . 
 Fielding frequently used the periodical to respond to criticism for his latest novel , Amelia , which was published in December 1751 . The 25 and 28 January issues featured a section in which Amelia 's most outspoken critics were depicted on trial and in which Fielding systematically repudiated their respective complaints . " Councillor Town " , the fictional prosecutor , summarised these complaints in saying , " The whole Book is a Heap of sad Stuff , Dulness , and Nonsense ; that it contains no Wit , Humour , Knowledge of human Nature , or of the World ; indeed , that the Fable , moral Character , Manners , Sentiments , and <unk> , are all alike bad and contemptible . " In his reply , Fielding posited a paternal relationship with Amelia , though conceded that it was not without flaws : 
 ... [ N ] ay , when I go father , and <unk> , that of all my Offspring she is my favourite Child . I can truly say that I bestowed a more than ordinary Pains in her Education ... I do not think my Child is entirely free from Faults . I know nothing human that is so ; but surely she doth not deserve the <unk> with which she hath been treated by the Public . 
 Fielding 's efforts only attracted further criticism , eventually resulting in his promise " to write no more novels " . 
 = = = Paper War = = = 
 The first four numbers of the Journal featured Fielding 's contributions to the " Paper War " , a conflict he instigated with writers of other contemporary periodicals to generate sales . In the first number , along with the promise to avoid the dullness of other periodicals , Fielding confronted " the armies of Grub Street " and proclaimed his disdain for the literary critics of the day : " As to my brother authors , who , like mere mechanics , are envious and jealous of a rival in their trade , to silence their jealousies and fears , I declare that it is not my intention to encroach on the business now carried on by them , nor to deal in any of those wares which they at present vend to the public . " Also given in the inaugural number was " An introduction to a journal of the present paper @-@ war between the forces under Sir Alexander Drawcansir , and the army of Grub Street " , written in the tradition of Jonathan Swift 's Battle of the Books . 
 The main response to Fielding 's words came from John Hill , an English author , botanist , and literary critic who wrote a column called " The Inspector " in the London Daily Advertiser . Hill used this column approximately one week later to attack Fielding and criticise Amelia . Fielding replied in much the same fashion in the second issue of the Journal , while attempting to defend his novel . The two engaged in a sustained dispute , as each used their respective publication to joust with the other . 
 Several others were quick to join Hill in his criticism of Fielding and the Grub Street campaign . Bonnell Thornton , a poet and essayist , was responsible for Have at you All ; or , the Drury Lane Journal , a production that satirised Fielding and his works . Particular attention was paid to Amelia in Have at you All ; the fifth number , for example , featured " a new chapter in Amelia , more witty than the rest , if the reader has but sense enough to find out the humour . " On 15 January , Tobias Smollett published a disparaging twenty @-@ eight @-@ page pamphlet entitled A Faithful Narrative of the base and inhuman Arts that were lately practised upon the Brain of Habbakuk Hilding , Justice , Dealer and Chapman , who now lies at his own House in Covent @-@ Garden , in a deplorable State of Lunacy ; a dreadful Monument of false Friendship and Delusion . The pamphlet was notorious for its viciousness , and variously accused " Habbakuk Hilding " ( Fielding ) of literary theft , <unk> , and <unk> , while deriding his marriage to Mary Daniels . It also posited that Fielding founded The Covent @-@ Garden Journal to further the ambitions of politician and statesman George Lyttelton , with whom Fielding had recently formed a friendship ; the source of this inference remains unclear , since Lyttelton received no particular mention in the first few numbers . 
 Fielding withdrew from the conflict after the fourth number , for the " war " had become more personal and hostile than he had originally intended . Although The Covent @-@ Garden Journal would no longer feature a section on the Paper War , a similar but more moderated commentary that Fielding termed the " Court of Criticism " later took its place . The Paper War continued without Fielding , ultimately embroiling a large number of other writers , among them Christopher Smart , William Kenrick , and Arthur Murphy . Having generated a significant amount of secondary literature ( including Smart 's The Hilliad and Charles Macklin 's aforementioned The Covent Garden Theater , or Pasquin Turn 'd Drawcansir ) , the Paper War ended without victor in 1753 . 
 = = = Meanwell affair = = = 
 In 1749 , a court decision made by Fielding – in his role as magistrate – provoked rumours that he was being paid to defend brothels . Three years later , a letter written by " Humphry Meanwell " voiced objection to the 1752 Disorderly House Act ( 25 Geo . II , c . 36 ) , which was intended to remove prostitutes and brothels from Britain . The public soon associated this letter with Fielding ; his publication of what was seen as an endorsement of the letter in the 22 June issue strengthened this feeling : " The following Letter which was sent to the Justice by an unknown Hand , hath been transmitted to us ; and tho ' perhaps some Points are carried a little too far , upon the whole I think it a very sensible Performance , and worthy the Attention of the Public . " The text of the letter itself followed this note and was published in the " Covent Garden " section of the journal . 
 Fielding responded to the claims that he wrote the letter in the 1 August issue of the Journal . While acknowledging that his association with the letter had made him popular with prostitutes , he went on to accuse them of being a source for social evils : 
 Prostitutes are the lowest and meanest , so are they the basest , vilest , and wickedest of all Creatures . It is a trite Observation , that when a Woman quits her Modesty , she discards with it every other Virtue . To extend this to every frail Individual of the Sex , is to carry it too far ; but if it be confined to those who are become infamous by public Prostitution , no Maxim , I believe , hath a greater Foundation in Truth , or will be more strongly verified by Experience . 
 Martin Battestin believes that this passage is indicative of the fact that while Fielding was opposed to prostitution , " when actually confronted with the pitiable wretches accused of such crimes and misdemeanors ... he acted toward them with the compassion and good @-@ humored tolerance that characterize the treatment of the ' lower orders ' in his novels . " To critic Lance Bertelsen , the passage " seems to reveal a lurking fascination with the oldest profession – one that , paired with his earlier endorsement of " Meanwell " , suggests a writer oscillating between outrage and sympathy , humor and lechery . " 
 = = End of publication = = 
 By the summer of 1752 , the Journal 's circulation was dropping steadily and it was losing popularity . After making the transition to weekly publication on 4 July , it was advertised less , and , in the final months of 1752 , its discussion of anything other than court decisions and political actions was minimal . In addition , Fielding 's health was deteriorating and his inclination to continue the periodical had declined . The 72nd and final number of The Covent @-@ Garden Journal was published on 25 November 1752 ; Fielding there confirmed his lack of interest : " I shall here lay down a paper which I have neither inclination nor leisure to carry on any longer . " He also directed readers to turn their attention to The Public Advertiser , a new periodical to be released on 1 December and to replace The Daily Advertiser . His final statement in the Journal was , " I solemnly declare that unless in revising my former Works , I have at present no Intention to hold any further Correspondence with the gayer Muses . " 
 Fielding died approximately two years later , his death caused by the gout and asthma that had , in part , compelled him to end the Journal 's run . In his final year , he travelled to Portugal in the hope of recovery . He wrote an account of his travels during this time , entitled The Journal of a Voyage to Lisbon , which was published in England in 1755 . Fielding died in Lisbon on 8 October 1754 , and was buried in the Os <unk> cemetery , a local English burial ground . 
 = Itachi Uchiha = 
 Itachi Uchiha ( <unk> <unk> , Uchiha Itachi ) is a fictional character in the Naruto manga and anime series created by Masashi Kishimoto . Itachi is the older brother of Sasuke Uchiha and is responsible for killing all the members of their clan , sparing only Sasuke . Though treated as an antagonist for much of the series , it is later revealed that Itachi slaughtered his clan in order to prevent a coup d 'état which would result in a war , and that he had been acting in both Konoha 's and Sasuke 's best interests for the entire series . 
 Itachi has been featured in the Naruto films , has appeared once in an original video animation of Naruto , and is a playable character in most of the video games from the series . Itachi 's character has been popular with readers of the manga , and has been positively received by critics . His appearance as an antagonist has been praised by several writers , although some have considered his initial appearance to be unsurprising . The gradual revelations of his past and its impact on the story has also received positive reception , and his fights were noted to be " one of the best " in the series . Numerous types of merchandise have been released in Itachi 's likeness , including keychains , plush dolls and figurines . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In Naruto = = = 
 Itachi is a member of the Uchiha Clan from the village of Konohagakure and the elder brother of Sasuke Uchiha . He grew up as the child prodigy of the Uchiha clan , establishing milestones for not only Sasuke , but also for future Uchiha to live up to . His early childhood was marred by war , the violence of which caused him to seek peace at any cost . Upon learning that his clan was planning a coup d 'état to take control of Konoha , after his clan was accused of attacking the village with the Nine Tails , Itachi provides Konoha with intelligence on his clan 's actions during his two years as a member of the ANBU . Over time , Itachi distances himself from his clan , as some clan members believed he murdered his best friend , Shisui Uchiha , to gain the Mangekyo Sharingan . 
 In reality , as Shisui possesses the ability to subliminally manipulate others and shares Itachi 's love for the village , he intended to use his gift on the Uchiha clan leader to stop the coup d 'état . However , Shisui is mortally wounded by the Leaf High Council member Danzo Shimura , who then takes his eye to achieve his own ideal of peace . When Shisui entrusts Itachi with his remaining eye , Itachi covers up Shisui 's death and made it appear it was his doing . Eventually , in return for Danzo 's offer to spare his younger brother , Itachi slaughters his entire clan . After creating the misconception that he murdered their family in cold blood to give Sasuke the mindset to become strong enough to kill him once he is capable , Itachi leaves the village , although he warns Danzo not to harm Sasuke . Meeting up with Konoha 's Third Hokage Hiruzen Sarutobi , who promises to do what he can to look after Sasuke , Itachi reveals his intentions to continue to protect the village from the shadows . Soon after perceiving them as a threat to Konoha , Itachi joins the Akatsuki to ensure they do not endanger his village . Itachi becomes good friends with his partner Kisame <unk> , who expresses concern for Itachi 's wellbeing . 
 Itachi debuts in Part I after Hiruzen 's death , when he uses his infiltration of Konoha to hunt down Naruto Uzumaki as an excuse to secretly check on Sasuke 's wellbeing . After engaging with Kakashi and some of Konoha 's forces , he reveals Akatsuki 's goal to gather the Jinchuriki of the nine tailed beasts . Itachi also learns that Naruto is under the protection of Jiraiya and sets up a trap to lure the experienced ninja away to grab the boy . However , as Jiraiya comes to Naruto 's aid , Itachi finds himself facing Sasuke and directs his brother back on the path of getting stronger by defeating him before he and Kisame fall back . 
 In Part II , Itachi uses one of Sasori 's informants as a clone of himself to hold off Naruto and the rest of his team while he and the others seal away Shukaku the One Tail . Itachi remains on the sidelines until learning that Sasuke has finally severed his ties to Orochimaru , having absorbed him and now being strong enough to settle matters . Prior to his fight with Sasuke , Itachi meets with Naruto and , after questioning his intentions to save Sasuke , ensures the youth 's safety with a crow with Shisui 's Sharingan as a countermeasure against Sasuke if he gains his Eternal Mangekyo Sharingan and attempts to attack Konoha . Sasuke ultimately tracks him down and they engage in their final battle , during the course of which he uses his Mangekyo Sharingan to push Sasuke to his limits . In doing so , Orochimaru is drawn out from Sasuke 's body , and Itachi seals him away with his Susanoo before finally dying . As his final act , Itachi implants his Amaterasu technique within Sasuke , meant as a protective measure that will kill Tobi in case he ever tries to manipulate Sasuke . Unfortunately , Tobi reveals the ' truth ' of Itachi 's actions to Sasuke as he resolves to destroy the village , eventually having his brother 's Mangekyo Sharingan implanted on him . 
 Itachi reappears later during the Fourth Great Ninja War , brought back by Kabuto Yakushi using the Reanimation Jutsu , a forbidden summoning jutsu that brings the dead back as immortal corpses , to fight on Tobi 's side . Paired with Nagato and forced to fight Naruto and Killer Bee against his will , Itachi learns of his brother 's intentions and summons the crow he gave Naruto to regain his free will . After sealing Nagato , Itachi heads out to stop Kabuto and encounters Sasuke , with his younger brother wanting to know the truth once it is over . 
 After a long battle , Itachi is pushed to use Izanami to trap Kabuto in an eternal time @-@ loop in his own mind , to have him break his jutsu . His soul beginning to fade , Itachi uses his Sharingan to project his memories to Sasuke to reveal the full story of the events leading to the Uchiha Clan Massacre . Telling his brother that he does not have to forgive him , Itachi tells Sasuke that he will always love him , no matter what choice he makes from then on . With his brother 's parting words , Sasuke decides against destroying the village and devotes the rest of his life to protecting it , fulfilling Itachi 's wish for his younger brother , and Itachi becomes the uncle of Sasuke 's daughter , Sarada Uchiha . Sasuke even adopts Itachi 's habit of poking on the forehead as a sign of affection , which Sasuke does with his wife and daughter . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 Itachi is present in the sixth Naruto : Shippuden movie , Road to Ninja , where he leads an alternate @-@ universe Akatsuki to help Naruto . He has a brief cameo in one of the original video animations , and is a playable character in nearly all Naruto video games , including the Clash of Ninja series and the Ultimate Ninja series . In some games , he utilizes variations of his techniques not seen in the anime or manga . Several merchandise items based on Itachi have been released , including key chains , plush dolls , and figurines . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Itachi has ranked high in the Weekly Shonen Jump popularity polls for the series , continuously placing in the top 10 . He was ranked in fifth position in the polls of 2011 , his highest ranking to date . The character received generally positive reviews from several publications for manga , anime , video games , and other related media . IGN reader Jason Van Horn characterized Itachi as " badass " and jokingly mentioned that he is a character to be afraid of since , in his first fight in the series , he does not make any remarkable move . He found that " there is just something about the cold and numb Itachi , " that makes the viewer " want to breakout in chills " . IGN 's Charles White liked the episode where the relationship between young Sasuke and Itachi is revealed , and hoped to see more of their past to resolve the mystery of Itachi 's character commenting that learning about their " past has been intriguing " . NTT customers voted him as their tenth favorite black haired male anime character . CyberConnect2 CEO Hiroshi Matsuyama referred to Itachi as one of his favorite characters from Naruto . 
 In the Shelf Life section from Anime News Network ( ANN ) Bamboo Dong comments that Itachi is one of her favorite characters from the series , noting his background and his introduction as the best parts of the series . <unk> writer Davey C. Jones celebrated Itachi 's fights as the best ones in the series , noting his abilities to be as amazing as a " sci @-@ fi ninja " . Holly Ellingwood from the same website agrees , citing his fight against Kakashi Hatake as one " few will be able to forget " . The reviewer also praised Itachi 's attitude , commenting that he " is as cold and as ruthless as any villain yet " . 
 In a review of Volume 16 of the manga , Deb Aoki from About.com listed Itachi 's introduction in the series as one of the cons from the volume . She praised his first fight in the series as very entertaining , meant to " whet readers ' appetites for future fights between Konoha ninja and the Akatsuki " . James Musgrove commented that Itachi and his partner Kisame " make a dramatic and well @-@ timed entrance into the story " . However , Jason Van Horn criticised the first battle between Itachi and Sasuke , as " good " but not " as epic as it should 've been " . His last fight with Sasuke before dying was considered " epic " by Casey Brienza from ANN . She found to be " a battle of minds " since , even after Itachi 's death , Sasuke changes his mind about him when he learns about his past . She also anticipated the impact of Itachi 's past revelations on the future storyline of Naruto . 
 = Italian ironclad Castelfidardo = 
 Castelfidardo was the third of four Regina Maria Pia @-@ class ironclad warships built in French shipyards for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in the 1860s . Castelfidardo was laid down in July 1862 , was launched in August 1863 , and was completed in May 1864 . She and her three sister ships were broadside ironclads , mounting a battery of four 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) and twenty @-@ two 164 mm ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) guns on the broadside . 
 Castelfidardo participated in the Battle of Lissa during the Third Italian War of Independence in 1866 . She was stationed in the van of the Italian fleet , which became separated from the rest of the fleet and was not heavily engaged . Her career was limited after the war , owing to the emergence of more modern ironclads and a severe reduction in the Italian naval budget following their defeat at Lissa . She was rebuilt as a central battery ship some time after Lissa , and was modernized several more times in the 1870s and 1880s . From 1900 to 1910 she served as a training ship before being broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Castelfidardo was 81 @.@ 8 meters ( 268 ft ) long overall ; she had a beam of 15 @.@ 16 m ( 49 @.@ 7 ft ) and an average draft of 6 @.@ 35 m ( 20 @.@ 8 ft ) . She displaced 4 @,@ 192 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 126 long tons ; 4 @,@ 621 short tons ) normally and up to 4 @,@ 527 t ( 4 @,@ 456 long tons ; 4 @,@ 990 short tons ) at full load . She had a crew of 480 – 485 officers and men . Castelfidardo was a broadside ironclad , and she was initially armed with a main battery of four 8 in ( 203 mm ) guns and twenty @-@ two 164 mm ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) guns , though her armament changed throughout her career . The ship was protected by iron belt armor that was 4 @.@ 3 in ( 109 mm ) thick and extended for the entire length of the hull at the waterline . The side armor extended up to the battery deck with the same thickness of iron plate . 
 Her propulsion system consisted of one single @-@ expansion steam engine that drove a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by eight coal @-@ fired , rectangular boilers . Her engine produced a top speed of 12 @.@ 1 knots ( 22 @.@ 4 km / h ; 13 @.@ 9 mph ) from 2 @,@ 125 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 585 kW ) . She could steam for 2 @,@ 600 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 800 km ; 3 @,@ 000 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . The ship was initially schooner @-@ rigged to supplement the steam engine , though her masts were later reduced to a barque rig . Ultimately , she lost her sailing rig completely , having it replaced with a pair of military masts with fighting tops . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Castelfidardo was laid down on 27 July 1862 at the <unk> et Guibert shipyard in St. Nazaire , France . She was launched on 1 August 1863 and completed in May 1864 . In June 1866 , Italy declared war on Austria , as part of the Third Italian War of Independence , which was fought concurrently with the Austro @-@ Prussian War . The Italian fleet commander , Admiral Carlo Pellion di Persano , initially adopted a cautious course of action ; he was unwilling to risk battle with the Austrian Navy , despite the fact that the Austrian fleet was much weaker than his own . Persano claimed he was simply waiting on the ironclad ram Affondatore , en route from Britain , but his inaction weakened morale in the fleet , with many of his subordinates openly accusing him of cowardice . 
 Rear Admiral Wilhelm von Tegetthoff brought the Austrian fleet to Ancona on June 27 , in an attempt to draw out the Italians . At the time , many of the Italian ships were in disarray ; several ships did not have their entire armament , and several others had problems with their engines . Castelfidardo was one of the few ironclads fit for action , so she , Regina Maria Pia , San Martino , and Principe di Carignano formed up to prepare to attack Tegetthoff 's ships . Persano held a council of war aboard Principe di Carignano to determine whether he should sortie to engage Tegetthoff , but by that time , the Austrians had withdrawn , making the decision moot . The Minister of the Navy , Agostino Depretis , urged Persano to act and suggested the island of Lissa , to restore Italian confidence after their defeat at the Battle of Custoza the previous month . On 7 July , Persano left Ancona and conducted a sweep into the Adriatic , but encountered no Austrian ships and returned on the 13th . 
 = = = Battle of Lissa = = = 
 On 16 July , Persano took the Italian fleet out of Ancona , bound for Lissa , where they arrived on the 18th . With them , they brought troop transports carrying 3 @,@ 000 soldiers ; the Italian warships began bombarding the Austrian forts on the island , with the intention of landing the soldiers once the fortresses had been silenced . In response , the Austrian Navy sent the fleet under Tegetthoff to attack the Italian ships . Castelfidardo was at that time assigned to the 1st Division , commanded by Admiral Giovanni Vacca , along with the ironclads Ancona and Principe di Carignano , the divisional flagship . After arriving off Lissa on the 18th , Persano ordered the 1st Division to bombard the Austrian fortresses protecting the island , but Vacca informed him that his ships ' guns could not elevate high enough to hit the high fortifications . Persano then sent Vacca 's division to Vis to force the harbor defenses , but by the time they arrived , night was approaching , and so he cancelled the attack . 
 The next morning , Persano ordered the ironclad Formidabile to enter the harbor Vis and attack the Madonna battery , supported by Castelfidardo and the rest of the 1st Division . Vacca found it impossible to employ his ships in the confined waters , and so he left Formidabile to handle the battery . With the day 's attacks again having yielded no results , Persano decided to make another attempt on the 20th . Vacca would take his three ships to patrol to the north @-@ east of the island while the rest of the fleet would again try to land the soldiers . Before the Italians could begin the attack , the dispatch boat Esploratore arrived , bringing news of Tegetthoff 's approach . Persano 's fleet was in disarray ; Vacca 's ships were three miles to the northeast from Persano 's main force , and three other ironclads were further away to the west . Persano immediately ordered his ships to form up with Vacca 's , first in line abreast formation , and then in line ahead formation . Castelfidardo initially reported trouble with her engines , but her crew was able to repair them before the battle began . 
 Shortly before the action began , Persano left his flagship , Re d 'Italia , and transferred to the turret ship Affondatore , though none of his subordinates on the other ships were aware of the change . They there thus left to fight as individuals without direction . More dangerously , by stopping Re d 'Italia , he allowed a significant gap to open up between Vacca 's three ships and the rest of the fleet . Tegetthoff took his fleet through the gap between Vacca 's and Persano 's ships , in an attempt to split the Italian line and initiate a melee . He failed to ram any Italian vessels on the first pass , so he turned back toward Persano 's ships , and took Re d 'Italia , San Martino , and Palestro under heavy fire . Vacca turned Principe di Carignano and Castelfidardo to port , taking them away from the Austrian ships hammering Persano 's division . He briefly attempted to engage the Austrian wooden ships in the rear , but was driven off by heavy fire from three steam frigates . 
 Castelfidardo , Principe di Carignano , and the coastal defense ship Varese engaged the wooden ship of the line Kaiser , but failed to inflict fatal damage to her before she withdrew . By this time , Re d 'Italia had been rammed and sunk , and Palestro had been set on fire , soon to be destroyed by a magazine explosion . Persano broke off the engagement , and though his ships still outnumbered the Austrians , Persano refused to counter @-@ attack with his badly demoralized forces . The Italian fleet began to withdraw , followed by the Austrians ; as night began to fall , the opposing fleets disengaged completely , heading for Ancona and Pola , respectively . Castelfidardo had emerged from the battle relatively unscathed , though the captain 's cabin had been set on fire by an Austrian shell . After the battle , Vacca replaced Persano ; he was ordered to attack the main Austrian naval base at Pola , but the war ended before the operation could be carried out . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 For the rest of her long career , Castelfidardo served in a variety of roles , both in the main fleet and in Italy 's colonial empire . After the end of the war , the government lost confidence in the fleet and drastically reduced the naval budget . The cuts were so severe that the fleet had great difficulty in mobilizing its ironclad squadron to attack the port of Civitavecchia in September 1870 , as part of the wars of Italian unification . Instead , the ships were laid up and the sailors conscripted to man them were sent home . Some time after 1866 , the ship was rebuilt as a central battery ship , with most of her guns located in a central , armored casemate . Two other guns were placed in the bow as chase guns , with a third mounted as a stern chaser . Around 1871 , her armament was also revised , to two 10 in ( 250 mm ) guns in the bow and eight 8 in guns , four on each broadside . By 1880 , her armament had been changed another time , with two 220 mm ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) guns replacing the 10 in guns , and a ninth 8 in gun being added in the stern . The ship was modernized in 1884 , with her armament replaced with eight 6 in ( 150 mm ) guns , six 4 @.@ 7 in ( 120 mm ) guns , four 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) quick firing ( QF ) guns , and eight 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss revolver cannons . 
 For the annual fleet maneuvers held in 1885 , Castelfidardo served in the " Eastern Squadron " , joined by the ironclad Principe Amedeo , the corvette Amerigo Vespucci , a sloop , and four torpedo boats . The " Eastern Squadron " defended against an attacking " Western Squadron " , simulating a Franco @-@ Italian conflict , with operations conducted off Sardinia . By 1899 , Castelfidardo had been assigned to the 2nd Division , which also included the ironclads Affondatore and Sicilia and the torpedo cruisers Partenope and Urania . The following year , she was converted into a torpedo training ship . Her armament now consisted of one 3 in ( 76 mm ) QF gun , one 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) gun , four 57 mm guns , one 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) gun , two of the 37 mm revolver cannons , and two torpedo tubes . She served in this capacity until she was stricken from the naval register in 1910 , thereafter being broken up for scrap . 
 = All things = 
 " all things " is the 17th episode of the seventh season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . Written and directed by lead actress Gillian Anderson , it first aired on April 9 , 2000 , on the Fox network . The episode is unconnected to the wider mythology of The X @-@ Files and functions as a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story . Watched by 12 @.@ 18 million people , the initial broadcast had a Nielsen household rating of 7 @.@ 1 . The episode received mixed reviews from critics ; many called the dialogue pretentious and criticized the characterization of Scully . However , viewer response was generally positive . 
 The series centers on Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called " X @-@ Files " . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal . The skeptical Scully was initially assigned to debunk his work , but the two have developed a deep friendship . In this episode , a series of coincidences lead Scully to meet Dr. Daniel Waterston ( Nicolas Surovy ) , a married man with whom she had an affair while at medical school . After Waterston slips into a coma , Scully puts aside her skepticism and seeks out alternative medicine to save Waterston . 
 The script for " all things " , the only episode of the series written by Anderson , was originally fifteen pages too long with no fourth act . It was only after Anderson worked with series creator Chris Carter and executive producer Frank Spotnitz that the script was finished . The cast and crew helped Anderson adjust to her directorial debut — the first time a woman directed an episode of The X @-@ Files . The episode makes heavy use of " The Sky Is Broken " , a song from Moby 's 1999 album Play , as well as a gong . The episode has been analyzed for its themes of pragmatism and feminist philosophy . 
 = = Plot = = 
 FBI special agent Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) is getting dressed in front of a mirror . As she leaves , her colleague Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) lies in his bed , half of his body covered by bedsheets . The narrative flashes back to a few days earlier : Scully arrives at a hospital and , after a series of coincidences , meets her former professor , Daniel Waterston ( Nicolas Surovy ) , with whom she had an affair while attending medical school . He is ill and suffering from an undiagnosed heart condition . She questions whether she made the right decision to leave him and abandon her medical career to pursue a career in the FBI . She meets Waterston 's daughter , Maggie ( Stacy <unk> ) , who is extremely resentful of Scully for the effect she had on Waterston 's family . 
 Mulder — on his way to England investigating heart chakra @-@ shaped crop circles — calls Scully and asks her to meet a contact of his , Colleen Azar ( Colleen Flynn ) , to obtain some information . As Scully speaks to Mulder on her cellphone while driving her car , a woman appears on a crosswalk . Scully brakes hard to avoid hitting the woman . As she does so , she narrowly avoids colliding with a diesel truck . She realizes that , had the woman not stepped in her path , the truck would have killed her . When she later arrives at the house of Azar , she observes that Scully is going through a personal crisis and tries to offer her guidance , but Scully is dismissive . 
 Later , Scully returns to apologize to Azar and agrees to listen to her ideas . Azar shares her knowledge of Buddhism , the concept of the collective unconscious , and the idea of personal auras . Azar believes these concepts might explain these strange occurrences . After a confrontation with Maggie at the hospital , Scully walks through Chinatown . Seeing the woman who appeared earlier at the crosswalk , she follows her to a small Buddhist temple before the mysterious woman seemingly vanishes . Inside the temple , Scully has a vision of what is ailing Waterston . She returns to the hospital with Azar to visit Waterston . 
 Azar and a healer provide alternative treatment for Waterston , who fully recovers . He announces that he still wants a relationship with Scully , but she realizes she is no longer the same person she was those many years ago and rejects him . As she sits outside the hospital on a bench , Scully thinks that she sees the mysterious woman again , but it turns out to be Mulder . Later , the two agents sit in Mulder 's apartment talking about the events of the last few days . Mulder begins to speak more existentially about what transpired , implying that fate has brought them together but , when he turns to look at Scully , he sees that she has fallen asleep . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and writing = = = 
 Sometime during the sixth season of The X @-@ Files , Anderson approached series creator Chris Carter and asked to write an episode . Anderson 's own beliefs in the power of spiritual healing and Buddhism provided inspiration ; she wanted to write a script in which Scully pursued a " deeply personal X @-@ File , one in which [ she ] is taken down a spiritual path when logic fails her " . She wrote the basic outline of what became " all things " in one sitting , and pitched the script to Carter the next day ; he later approved of the " personal and quiet " characteristics of the story . 
 The first draft of the script was 72 pages — 15 pages too long — and did not feature a fourth act . Carter and executive producer Frank Spotnitz worked closely with Anderson to finish the episode , although Carter and Spotnitz later acknowledged that the majority of the script " was all Gillian " . Despite her satisfaction with the final version , Anderson regrets a handful of the " necessary " script changes , most notably , the addition that Scully and Waterston 's affair was intimate . In the original script , the two came close to having an affair , but Scully ended the relationship when she discovered that Waterston was married . 
 In the commentary for the episode , Anderson elaborated on Scully and Waterston 's original backstory : after Scully and Waterston came close to having an affair , Scully left to study at Quantico to become an FBI agent . After she left , Waterston become depressed , and his family began to suspect the affair . The emotional turmoil was too much for Waterston 's wife , who killed herself , which made Waterston 's daughter , Maggie , resent Scully , as shown in the finished episode . Anderson felt that the removal of this backstory made it hard for the audience to understand why Maggie was so angry at Scully . 
 When Anderson first wrote the episode , she did not hint that Scully and Mulder had had sex . Spotnitz and the production crew , however , felt it was natural to suggest that Scully and Mulder 's relationship may have evolved into a romantic one . The idea of heart chakra crop circles was included because Anderson wanted " whatever Mulder was involved in that took him away from me , away from Washington , to somehow tie into what it was that I was going through — the journey that I was going through " . As such , Anderson dedicated much of her time researching both crop circles and heart chakras , but she later gave additional credit to Spotnitz , who she noted was also heavily involved during the researching process . 
 = = = Directing and music = = = 
 Around the same time that she approached Carter about writing an episode , Anderson was also receiving offers from several television networks to direct shows . She , however , had never directed before , and decided that she would first attempt to helm an episode of The X @-@ Files before branching out into other series . Anderson thus expressed her wish to direct the episode when she pitched the original idea for " all things " . Carter accepted her story , but did not appoint her as director until all the revisions and rewrites had been completed . Anderson worked with series director Kim Manners for the majority of the episode , later noting that if she had any questions , she would approach Manners first . To help Anderson , Manners gave her directing exercises , such as making a list of shots for every scene . The episode also marked the first time that a woman had helmed the direction of an episode of The X @-@ Files . 
 Anderson 's directing helped to energize the production , and the cast and crew worked more than usual to make sure that everything was in order for her . Production designer Corey Kaplan made sure that the episode featured a Buddhist temple at Anderson 's request , and casting director Rick Millikan helped Anderson choose the appropriate actors and actresses . Millikan later said that he particularly enjoyed working with Anderson , because it was " fun " for him to watch her go through the casting process , which was entirely new to her . On set , Anderson 's directing style was described as " right on the money " by Marc Shapiro in his book all things : The Official Guide to The X @-@ Files , Volume 6 . He later wrote that " Anderson wielded a deft hand in her directorial debut , prodding the actors to her will , making decisions on the fly , and handling the complex special effects sequences " . Fans of the show later wrote to express their appreciation of Anderson 's directing abilities . Anderson was also involved in post @-@ production editing , during which she was forced to cut the final conversation scene between Scully and Daniel Waterston by 10 minutes in order to meet the allotted episode length . 
 The meditation scene required clips from previous episodes to appear in flashback . Initially , Paul Rabwin and the special effects crew cut the necessary scenes and placed them in animated bubbles . According to Rabwin , at this point , the crew was just experimenting with ideas . Eventually , the crew decided that the bubbles were too " hokey " , so they adopted a more standard slit @-@ scan effect . In order to create the sequence of Scully visualizing Waterston 's heart condition , Nicolas Surovy had to lie naked on a platform surrounded by a blue screen . A sphere was matched via motion control as a marker for a prosthetic beating heart that was crafted and filmed separately . The two shots were then combined . 
 Anderson wanted to include " The Sky Is Broken " , a song from Moby 's 1999 album Play in the episode , having heard it while driving home from work . She later explained that the song 's lyrics " fit with [ the ] idea that was unfolding for the script " . Anderson crafted the first shot after the opening credits , which involved Scully getting ready while water dripped from a sink , to create a " continuation of sound , rhythmic sound " , because it was important to the show 's musical aspect . Anderson and series composer Mark Snow worked together in post @-@ production ; after filming , she sent Snow several CDs of music and asked him for compositions that were similar in style and feel . A certain melody that the two worked on later became " Scully 's Theme " , which was not broadcast until the eighth season episode " Within " . " all things " also featured the use of the gong , an instrument that Anderson called " very Tibetan " and " appropriate for this episode " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 In the chapter " Scully as a <unk> Feminist " of the book The Philosophy of The X @-@ Files , Erin McKenna argues that " all things " represents an " important shift " in Scully 's approach to science , knowledge acquisition , and the pursuit of the truth . She reasons that the events of the episode open Scully 's mind to new ways of knowing , specifically citing " auras , chakras , visions ... and the importance of coincidence " . McKenna notes that Scully 's shift in perspective is a shift to American pragmatism , a belief that reality is ever @-@ changing . Pragmatists believe " the truth is out there " — the motto of the series — in a manner similar to Mulder 's . In " all things " , Scully begins to embrace pragmatism , although she still clings to her skeptic roots . Mixing the two , Scully evolves from a mere skeptic who demands proof to validate a truth , to an empiricist who wants proof , but is open to other perspectives . 
 In addition , McKenna reasons that " all things " is heavily influenced by feminist philosophy and epistemology , schools of thought that try to criticize or re @-@ evaluate the ideas of traditional philosophy and epistemology from within a feminist framework . According to McKenna , feminism rejects dualistic ways of thinking , especially " typical male / female dualism " . Feminist philosophy , instead , calls for a pluralistic way of thinking , noting that there are many consistent sets of truths about the world . In the episode , Scully starts out " sure of her more rational scientific view and approach " . As the episode progresses , however , she decides to branch out . Eventually , she brings in a spirit healer to " corroborate or nullify the new beliefs she is encountering " . Despite dabbling in mysticism , a field generally stereotyped as feminine by the patriarchy , Scully engages in " protracted inquiry " , examining all sides of the issue , in order to return Waterston to health . 
 When Mulder and Scully talk at the end of the episode , Mulder questions the fact that he left " town for two days and [ Scully ] spoke to God in a Buddhist temple and God spoke back " . Scully retorts that , " I didn 't say God spoke back " . McKenna proposes that this is an example of Scully 's rational scientific approach meshing with her newer , <unk> pragmatism . The two modes of understanding are not " to be seen ... as competing systems , but as complementary , as are Scully and Mulder themselves " . McKenna concludes that this is represented in the opening scene , in which Mulder and Scully are implied to have had sex . This is meant as a metaphor , showing the full merging of Scully 's and Mulder 's different philosophies into pragmatic feminism . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 The episode originally aired in the United States on the Fox network on April 9 , 2000 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on Sky1 on July 9 , 2000 . In the U.S. , " all things " was watched by 12 @.@ 18 million viewers . It earned a Nielsen household rating of 7 @.@ 5 , with an 11 share , meaning that roughly 7 @.@ 5 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 11 percent of households watching television , tuned into the episode . In the U.K. , " all things " was seen by 580 @,@ 000 viewers , making it the seventh @-@ most watched program on Sky1 for that week . On May 13 , 2003 , the episode was released on DVD as part of the complete seventh season . 
 Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " C " and called it " a curious failure " . He felt that the writing was " pretentious " and composed of " some weird , weird bullshit " . VanDerWerff wrote that , although the episode was unsuccessful , there was something so " pure and unadorned at its center that I can 't outright hate it " . Furthermore , he admired the show and Anderson for " making the attempt " . Kevin Silber of Space.com gave the episode a negative review , critical of the script and characterization . He said , " nothing much seems to happen , and what does occur is substantially driven by coincidence and arbitrariness " . He did not like Azar and disapproved of Scully 's philosophical " reverie " , calling it " facile , and hard to reconcile with the determined rationalism she 's displayed over the years in the face of events no less strange than those that occur here " . 
 In their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson rated the episode one star out of five , calling the premise and characters dull . The two criticized Anderson for looking at the " minutiae of life too intensely " , which made many of the actors and actresses come off as ciphers . Furthermore , Shearman and Pearson were critical of Anderson 's directing style , calling it " pretentious " , noting that the plot 's significance was drowned out by unnecessary artistic flourishes and needless pizzazz . Paula Vitaris from CFQ gave the episode a negative review , awarding it one star out of four . She called Anderson 's directing " heavy @-@ handed " and bemoaned the storyline because it " plays havoc with Scully 's motivations and character as established in the past seven years " . 
 Not all reviews were negative . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations , gave the episode a largely positive review and called it " wonderful " . He praised Anderson 's tenacity in presenting a darker moment from Scully 's past and favorably compared the episode to " The Sixth Extinction II : Amor Fati " in terms of character development . Kinney Littlefield of The Orange County Register wrote that the " wistful , meditative episode " was " not bad for Anderson 's first directing effort " . He did , however , comment that it was not as " sly as the episode about an alien baseball player that Duchovny directed " . The Michigan Daily writer Melissa Runstrom , in a review of the seventh season , called the episode " interesting " . 
 While the episode received lukewarm reviews from critics , fans of the show reacted generally positively to " all things " , and the show 's producers received calls and letters from viewers stating that they " loved the vulnerability and quiet determination that Scully revealed in the unusual episode " . 
 = Rabiosa ( song ) = 
 " Rabiosa " ( English : " Rabid " ) is a song by Colombian singer @-@ songwriter Shakira , taken from her ninth studio album Sale el Sol . It was written by Armando Pérez , Edward Bello , and Shakira , and released by Epic Records as the third single from the album , on 8 April 2011 . Two versions of the song exist ; the English @-@ language version , which features American rapper Pitbull , and the Spanish @-@ language version , which features Dominican rapper El Cata . It is heavily influenced by merengue and dance music . Shakira and El Cata , or Pitbull , sing about each other 's sex appeal in the song . 
 Upon its release , " Rabiosa " received generally favourable reviews from music critics , some of whom deemed it as one of the strongest tracks on Sale el Sol . Commercially , the English version of the song became a worldwide success , peaking atop record charts of countries like Portugal and Spain , and reaching the top ten in Belgium , France , Italy , and Switzerland . In the United States , it was successful on the Latin record charts and peaked at number eight on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart . " Rabiosa " was certified double @-@ platinum in Mexico and platinum in Italy and Spain . 
 An accompanying music video for the song was directed by Jaume de Laiguana and features Shakira enjoying herself in an underground party ; scenes of her pole dancing are interspersed throughout the video . Critics were positive towards the video , and many noted its similarity to the music video of Shakira 's 2009 single " She Wolf " . The video went viral on video @-@ sharing website YouTube two days after its release and was later marked " Vevo Certified " by joint venture music video website Vevo for reaching more than 100 million views . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Rabiosa " was written by American rapper Armando Pérez , better known by his stage name Pitbull , Dominican rapper Edward Bello , and Shakira , for the singer 's ninth studio album Sale el Sol ( 2010 ) . The album marked the first time she worked with Bello , who is better known by his stage name El Cata , and their collaboration started after Shakira expressed her desire to experiment with merengue music , saying " I grew up listening to merengue — that was a big part of my life , and I was missing it " . Merengue is a type of music and dance originating in the Dominican Republic , and after being referred to Bello by Pitbull , Shakira travelled to the country and began recording sessions with him in his " tiny " studio in Santo Domingo . Bello talked about his collaboration with Shakira , saying " If I was thinking that this little studio was going to be in the world ’ s vision at this time , I wouldn 't believe it " . 
 Two versions of the song are present on the album ; the English @-@ language version features verses from Pitbull , while the Spanish @-@ language version features El Cata . " Rabiosa " was chosen to be the third single from the album by Epic Records , and Shakira 's official website revealed the artwork for the single on 18 April 2011 , the day it was sent to radio stations . Both versions were released for digital download on 8 April 2011 . Worldwide , the English version was released as a CD single on 27 May 2011 . 
 Primarily an uptempo latin pop track , " Rabiosa " additionally borrows influences from merengue and dance music . In the song , Shakira and Pitbull / El Cata trade verses regarding each other 's sex appeal . English and Spanish words are mixed together in various lines , such as when Shakira sings " Oye <unk> , if you like it mocha / Come get a little closer and bite me en la boca " . Jennifer Schaffer from The Stanford Daily described Shakira and Pitbull 's vocals as " sultry " and " raspy , " respectively . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The song received generally favourable reviews from music critics . James Reed from The Boston Globe appreciated Shakira 's " sly and vampy " vocals , and termed " Rabiosa " an " irresistible merengue hybrid " . Michelle Morgante from Boston.com called the track a " new merengue @-@ rock hybrid that lays down bare horn riffs over a driving beat in a groove that is irresistible " . Jennifer Schaffer from The Stanford Daily deemed it one of the " best tracks on the album " , praising its dance beats and calling it an " undeniably sexy song you ’ d expect from a Shakira / Pitbull collaboration " . Allison Stewart from The Washington Post also recommended the track , labelling it " giddy , rapid @-@ fire Latin pop " . Likewise , Mikael Wood from Entertainment Weekly picked the song as a highlight from Sale el Sol . Carlos Macias from Terra USA , however , gave the song a negative review , writing it off as a " cheaper version of " Loca " " and criticising Pitbull 's collaboration . In 2014 , Emily Exton of VH1 placed the track on her list of Shakira 's best duets , summarizing " It 's been scientifically proven that Mr. 305 cannot not make a hit " . 
 At the 2011 Los Premios 40 Principales awards ceremony , " Rabiosa " was nominated for " Mejor Canción Internacional en Español " ( " Best International Song in Spanish " ) . At the 2012 American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) Awards ceremony , Bello won an award for his composition of the song . At the 27th Annual International Dance Music Awards , " Rabiosa " was nominated for " Best Latin / Reggaeton Track " , but lost to Sak Noel 's " Loca People " . At the 2012 Latin Billboard Music Awards , " Rabiosa " was nominated for " Canción del Año , Digital " ( " Digital Song of the Year " ) , but lost to Don Omar 's " Danza Kuduro " . At the 2012 Premio Lo Nuestro awards ceremony , " Rabiosa " was nominated for " <unk> del Año " ( " Collaboration of the Year " ) and " Canción Pop Del Año " ( " Pop Song of the Year " ) , and won in the latter category . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 The English version of " Rabiosa " was a worldwide commercial success . In Austria , the song entered the Austrian Singles chart at number 36 and peaked at number six , spending a total of 17 weeks in the region . In both the Dutch @-@ speaking Flanders and French @-@ speaking Wallonia regions of Belgium , " Rabiosa " peaked at number five on the Ultratop charts , staying on the charts for a total of 16 and 19 weeks , respectively . In this region , it was certified gold by the Belgian Entertainment Association ( BEA ) for sales of 10 @,@ 000 units . In France , " Rabiosa " entered the French Singles chart at number 94 and peaked at number six for two weeks , and spent a total of 33 weeks on the chart . In Italy , the song entered the Italian Singles chart at number nine and peaked at number six , spending a total of seven weeks inside the top 20 of the chart . In this region , " Rabiosa " was certified platinum by the Federazione Industria Musicale Italiana ( FIMI ) for sales of 60 @,@ 000 units . In Mexico , the single was certified double @-@ platinum by the Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas ( AMPROFON ) for shipments of 120 @,@ 000 units . In Spain , the song entered the Spanish Singles chart at number 23 and peaked at number one for a total of five weeks , and spent a total of 33 weeks on the chart . In this region , it was certified platinum by the Productores de Música de España ( PROMUSICAE ) for shipments of 40 @,@ 000 units . In Switzerland , after initially charting at number 28 on the Swiss Singles chart , " Rabiosa " peaked at number three and spent a total of 21 weeks on the chart . In this region , the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) certified it gold for selling 10 @,@ 000 units . 
 In the United States , " Rabiosa " was successful on the Latin record charts . It peaked at number eight on the US Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart , spending a total of 25 weeks on the chart . It also reached number eight on the Latin Pop Airplay chart , spending a total of 28 weeks on the chart . On the Tropical Songs chart , it peaked at number 13 and spend a total of 20 weeks on the chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Rabiosa " was directed by Jaume de Laiguana and was shot on 24 April 2011 , in Barcelona . Laiguana had also directed the videos for the two previous single releases from the album , " Loca " and " Sale el Sol " . The music video premiered on Shakira 's official website on 7 June 2011 , and the English @-@ language version was made available for digital download on 8 June . The Spanish version was made available for digital download a day later . The video begins with Shakira walking into an underground party while sporting a brown bob haircut . Amidst " a party full of silly @-@ string and confetti @-@ flinging fun " , she begins dancing and flirting with a man , and at one point lies in a bathtub full of colourful balls . Scenes of Shakira pole dancing while wearing a black string bra and knickers and sporting her normal long blonde hair are inter @-@ cut throughout the video . The video ends with Shakira doing a split while holding onto the pole , and back inside the party she crowd surfs away . Neither Pitbull or El Cata appear in both versions of the video . 
 Upon its release , the music video went viral on video @-@ sharing website YouTube two days after its release and was the most @-@ viewed video of that day , gaining almost four million views in less than 48 hours . Critical reception towards the video was favourable . Jeff Benjamin from Billboard commented that Shakira continues " the fantasies that she started in her " She Wolf " video " and praised Shakira 's brunette hairstyle , concluding that " the Latin songstress brings the heat both musically and visually " . Becky Bain from Idolator found Shakira 's pole dancing sequence similar to the video of Britney Spear 's 2007 single " Gimme More " , but joked that it is " not terribly depressing and certainly not shot in about 15 minutes " . Ann Lee from Metro also found the video similar to the one for " She Wolf " and commended Shakira 's pole dancing ability , noting that she " ups the raunch factor " and " gets pulses racing " . Sadao Turner from Ryan <unk> praised Shakira 's " phenomenal " figure . The video was marked " Vevo Certified " by joint venture music video website Vevo for reaching more than 100 million views on YouTube . 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = Recurrent laryngeal nerve = 
 The recurrent laryngeal nerve ( RLN ) is a branch of the vagus nerve ( cranial nerve X ) that supplies all the intrinsic muscles of the larynx , with the exception of the cricothyroid muscles . There are two recurrent laryngeal nerves , right and left , in the human body . The right and left nerves are not symmetrical , with the left nerve looping under the aortic arch , and the right nerve looping under the right subclavian artery then traveling <unk> both travel alongside of the trachea . Additionally , the nerves are one of few nerves that follow a recurrent course , moving in the opposite direction to the nerve they branch from , a fact from which they gain their name . 
 The recurrent laryngeal nerves supply sensation to the larynx below the vocal cords , gives cardiac branches to the deep cardiac plexus , and branches to the trachea , esophagus and the inferior constrictor muscles . The posterior cricoarytenoid muscles , the only muscles that can open the vocal cords , are innervated by this nerve . 
 The recurrent laryngeal nerves are the nerves of the sixth pharyngeal arch . The existence of the recurrent laryngeal nerve was first documented by the physician Galen . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The recurrent laryngeal nerves branch from the vagus nerve , relative to which they get their names ; the term " recurrent " from Latin : re- ( back ) and <unk> ( to run ) , indicates they run in the opposite direction to the vagus nerves from which they branch . The vagus nerves run down into the thorax , and the recurrent laryngeal nerves run up to the larynx . 
 The vagus nerves , from which the recurrent laryngeal nerves branch , exit the skull at the jugular foramen and travel within the carotid sheath alongside the carotid arteries through the neck . The recurrent laryngeal nerves branch off the vagus , the left at the aortic arch , and the right at the right subclavian artery . The left RLN passes in front of the arch , and then wraps underneath and behind it . After branching , the nerves typically ascend in a groove at the junction of the trachea and esophagus . They then pass behind the posterior , middle part of the outer lobes of the thyroid gland and enter the larynx underneath the inferior constrictor muscle , passing into the larynx just posterior to the cricothyroid joint . The terminal branch is called the inferior laryngeal nerve . 
 Unlike the other nerves supplying the larynx , the right and left <unk> lack bilateral symmetry . The left RLN is longer than the right , because it crosses under the arch of the aorta at the <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Nucleus = = = 
 The somatic motor fibers that innervate the laryngeal and pharyngeal muscles are located in the nucleus ambiguus and emerge from the medulla in the cranial root of the accessory nerve . Fibers cross over to and join the vagus nerve in the jugular foramen . Sensory cell bodies are located in the inferior jugular ganglion , and the fibers terminate in the solitary nucleus . <unk> fibers to segments of the trachea and esophagus in the neck originate in the dorsal nucleus of the vagus nerve . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 During human and all vertebrate development , a series of pharyngeal arch pairs form in the developing embryo . These project forward from the back of the embryo towards the front of the face and neck . Each arch develops its own artery , nerve that controls a distinct muscle group , and skeletal tissue . The arches are numbered from 1 to 6 , with 1 being the arch closest to the head of the embryo , and the fifth arch only existing transiently . 
 Arches 4 and 6 produce the laryngeal cartilages . The nerve of the sixth arch becomes the recurrent laryngeal nerve . The nerve of the fourth arch gives rise to the superior laryngeal nerve . The arteries of the fourth arch , which project between the nerves of the fourth and sixth arches , become the left @-@ sided arch of the aorta and the right subclavian artery . The arteries of the sixth arch persists as the ductus arteriosus on the left , and is obliterated on the right . 
 After birth , the ductus arteriosus regresses to form the <unk> <unk> . During growth , these arteries descend into their ultimate positions in the chest , creating the elongated recurrent paths . 
 = = = Variation = = = 
 In roughly 1 out of every 100 – 200 people , the right inferior laryngeal nerve is <unk> , branching off the vagus nerve around the level of the cricoid cartilage . Typically , such a configuration is accompanied by variation in the arrangement of the major arteries in the chest ; most commonly , the right subclavian artery arises from the left side of the aorta and crosses behind the esophagus . A left <unk> inferior laryngeal nerve is even more uncommon , requiring the aortic arch be on the right side , accompanied by an arterial variant which prevents the nerve from being drawn into the chest by the left subclavian . 
 In about four people out of five , there is a connecting branch between the inferior laryngeal nerve , a branch of the RLN , and the internal laryngeal nerve , a branch of the superior laryngeal nerve . This is commonly called the anastomosis of Galen ( Latin : <unk> <unk> ) , even though <unk> usually refers to a blood vessel , and is one of several documented <unk> between the two nerves . 
 As the recurrent nerve hooks around the subclavian artery or aorta , it gives off several branches . There is suspected variability in the configuration of these branches to the cardiac plexus , trachea , esophagus and inferior pharyngeal constrictor muscle . 
 = = Function = = 
 The recurrent laryngeal nerves control all intrinsic muscles of the larynx except for the cricothyroid muscle . These muscles act to open and close the vocal cords , and include the posterior cricoarytenoid muscles , the only muscle to open the vocal cords . The nerves supply muscles on the same side of the body , with the exception of the <unk> muscle , which is innervated from both sides . 
 The nerves also carry sensory information from the mucous membranes of the larynx below the lower surface of the vocal fold , as well as sensory , secretory and motor fibres to the cervical segments of the esophagus and the trachea . 
 = = Clinical significance = = 
 = = = Injury = = = 
 The recurrent laryngeal nerves may be injured as a result of trauma , during surgery , as a result of tumour spread , or due to other means . Injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerves can result in a weakened voice ( hoarseness ) or loss of voice ( aphonia ) and cause problems in the respiratory tract . Injury to the nerve may paralyze the posterior cricoarytenoid muscle on the same side . This is the sole muscle responsible for opening the vocal cords , and paralysis may cause difficulty breathing ( dyspnea ) during physical activity . Injury to both the right and left nerve may result in more serious damage , such as the inability to speak . Additional problems may emerge during healing , as nerve fibres that re @-@ <unk> may result in vocal cord motion impairment , uncoordinated movements of the vocal cord . 
 = = = Surgery = = = 
 The nerve receives close attention from surgeons since during neck surgery , especially thyroid and parathyroid surgery , the nerve is at risk for injury . Nerve damage can be assessed by laryngoscopy , during which a stroboscopic light confirms the absence of movement in the affected side of the vocal cords . The right recurrent laryngeal nerve is more susceptible to damage during thyroid surgery because it is close to the bifurcation of the right inferior thyroid artery , variably passing in front of , behind , or between the branches . The nerve is permanently damaged in 0 @.@ 3 – 3 % of thyroid surgery , and transiently in 3 – 8 % of surgeries , and is one of the leading causes of medicolegal issues for surgeons . 
 = = = Tumors = = = 
 The RLN may be compressed by tumors . Studies have shown that 2 – 18 % of lung cancer patients develop hoarseness because of recurrent laryngeal nerve compression , usually left @-@ sided . This is associated with worse outcomes , and when found as a presenting symptom , often indicates inoperable tumors . The nerve may be severed intentionally during lung cancer surgery in order to fully remove a tumor . 
 = = = Other disease = = = 
 In Ortner 's syndrome or <unk> syndrome , a rare cause of left recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy , expansion of structures within the heart or major blood vessels impinges upon the nerve , causing symptoms of unilateral nerve injury . 
 = = Other animals = = 
 Horses are subject to equine recurrent laryngeal neuropathy , a disease of the axons of the recurrent laryngeal nerves . The cause is not known , although a genetic predisposition is suspected . The length of the nerve is a factor since it is more common in larger horses , and the left side is affected almost exclusively . As the nerve cells die , there is a progressive paralysis of the larynx , causing the airway to collapse . The common presentation is a sound , ranging from a musical whistle to a harsh roar or heaving gasping noise ( <unk> ) , accompanied by worsening performance . The condition is incurable , but surgery can keep the airway open . Experiments with nerve grafts have been tried . 
 Although uncommon in dogs , bilateral recurrent laryngeal nerve disease may be the cause of wheezing ( stridor ) when middle @-@ aged dogs inhale . 
 In sauropod dinosaurs , the vertebrates with the longest necks , the total length of the vagus nerve and recurrent laryngeal nerve would have been up to 28 metres ( 92 ft ) long in Supersaurus , but these would not be the longest neurons that ever existed : the neurons reaching the tip of the tail would have exceeded 30 metres ( 98 ft ) . 
 = = = Evidence of evolution = = = 
 The extreme detour of the recurrent laryngeal nerves , about 4 @.@ 6 metres ( 15 ft ) in the case of giraffes , is cited as evidence of evolution . The nerve 's route would have been direct in the fish @-@ like ancestors of modern tetrapods , traveling from the brain , past the heart , to the gills ( as it does in modern fish ) . Over the course of evolution , as the neck extended and the heart became lower in the body , the laryngeal nerve was caught on the wrong side of the heart . Natural selection gradually lengthened the nerve by tiny increments to accommodate , resulting in the circuitous route now observed . 
 = = History = = 
 Roman physician Galen demonstrated the nerve course and the clinical syndrome of recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis , noting that pigs with the nerve severed were unable to squeal . Galen named the nerve the recurrent nerve , and described the same effect in two human infants who had undergone surgery for goiter . In 1838 , five years before he would introduce the concept of homology to biology , anatomist Richard Owen reported upon the dissection of three giraffes , including a description of the full course of the left recurrent laryngeal nerve . Anatomists Andreas Vesalius and Thomas Willis described the nerve in what is now regarded as an anatomically standard description , and doctor Frank Lahey documented a way for its <unk> identification during thyroid operations . 
 = St. Joseph 's Church , Semarang = 
 St. Joseph 's Church ( Indonesian : <unk> Santo Yosef ) , also known as Gedangan Church , is a Catholic church in Semarang , Indonesia , the first such church in the city . Administratively , it is part of the St. Joseph 's Parish in the Archdiocese of Semarang . 
 Constructed between 1870 and 1875 to meet the needs of Semarang 's growing Catholic population , the red @-@ brick church building was designed by the Dutch architect W. I. van <unk> and built at a cost of 110 @,@ 000 gulden . The church grew extensively over the following fifty years , at first dominated by ethnic Europeans and persons of mixed descent but later having a majority indigenous congregation . As the Catholic population grew , the size of the parish diminished as new ones were established . 
 The church complex consists of , among other things , the church building , a presbytery , and a convent . St. Joseph 's itself is highly decorated , including nineteen stained glass windows ( including three dedicated to church 's patron saint , Joseph ) , carvings showing the fourteen Stations of the Cross , and an altar imported from Germany . The single tower is home to two bells produced by Petit & <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Catholicism in Semarang = = = 
 The Roman Catholic Church first entered Semarang , Dutch East Indies , in what is now Central Java , Indonesia , in the early 19th century . In 1808 Father <unk> Prinsen ( 1777 – 1840 ) was sent from the Netherlands to the Indies as the pastor for Semarang and several surrounding settlements , including Salatiga and Klaten . He quickly established a council for handling religious duties , and baptisms began the following year ; fourteen people , mostly Dutch , were baptised in 1809 . However , this congregation did not have a church in which they could pray . Until 1815 the congregation used the nearby Immanuel Church , a building intended for Protestants . Between 1815 and 1822 services were held at the homes of members of the congregation , then from 7 August 1822 Mass was held at Prinsen 's new home ( near Immanuel ) . 
 The congregation required its own church building , and already owned land which could be used : in 1828 the Catholics had purchased a former hospital and the surrounding land in Gedangan , near the harbour , and established an orphanage there . However , there were insufficient clergy for further development . Mgr . Joseph Lijnen ( 1815 – 82 ) , who had become the congregation 's pastor in 1858 , left the Indies for <unk> , Netherlands . There , he convinced several Franciscan nuns to join him in the Indies and develop the congregation through education and ministry . Upon returning to the Indies , designs were made for a church building across from the orphanage and convent established for the nuns . 
 = = = A new church = = = 
 The church was designed by Dutch architect W. I. van <unk> in a neogothic style . The construction costs of 110 @,@ 000 gulden were funded partly by the colonial government , as well as the sale of unused land and donations from Catholics throughout the colony . The first stone was laid by the pastor Lijnen on 1 October 1870 , and construction continued smoothly until 12 May 1873 , when the nearly completed tower collapsed ; various reasons have been put forward , including an insufficient frame and poor quality bricks . After the collapse , the design of the church was modified to be lower , and further construction was undertaken using bricks imported from the Netherlands as ballast for ships . The construction of the building was completed on 12 December 1875 , and the church was blessed by Lijnen . It was the first Catholic church in the city , and served mostly those of European or mixed descent . 
 Further additions to the interior were made over the next quarter @-@ century . A new Gothic altar , produced in Düsseldorf , Germany , was installed in 1880 . Two years later a communion bench was installed . The tower was also given a clock and bells during this period ; the clock was removed in 1978 since the machinery was broken . <unk> died in 1882 , and the Jesuit Joannes de Vries became the parish priest , the first in an unbroken line of Jesuit pastors which continues until the present day . De Vries was soon after elected provincial superior for the province , and thus he spent much of his time away from the church . By 1885 there were 1 @,@ 620 Catholics in Semarang , up from approximately a thousand four years earlier . Many of these were in the colonial military . 
 J. Keijzer replaced de Vries after the latter 's death in 1887 and headed the church for seven years . During his tenure , the church and surrounding grounds were expanded significantly . Construction of a multi @-@ story presbytery began in the 1880s and completed on 1 August 1890 . Across the street , in 1888 the nuns established an elementary school , and they also began construction of a chapel for the convent , which was opened on 6 August 1892 . During this period the church building received stained glass windows and new pews . Further construction continued into the 20th century . A pipe organ was installed in 1903 ; it was restored in 1993 , but remains in poor condition . Also installed that year were carvings depicting the fourteen Stations of the Cross . 
 = = = Growth and evangelism among the indigenous population = = = 
 At the close of the 19th century the Catholic church in the Indies began targeting the majority @-@ Muslim indigenous population . They were not alone ; Protestant missionaries such as Sierk Coolsma of the Netherlands Missionary Union and <unk> <unk> of the Netherlands Missionary Society had had some success with the Sundanese in Cianjur and Javanese in Ambarawa , respectively . Keijzer , before stepping down as head pastor in 1894 , sent a letter to the Netherlands asking that men be sent to learn the Javanese language , in order to enable them to preach to the people and translate the catechism and some prayer books . 
 Three Jesuits were sent - P. <unk> in 1895 and P. <unk> and Frans van Lith ( 1863 @-@ 1926 ) in 1896 . The three studied Javanese in Gedangan over a period of a year . Ultimately van Lith was the most successful , establishing a school in Muntilan to train teachers , who were hoped to further spread Catholicism through their teaching duties . This eventually led to the establishment of the Kanisius Foundation , which established a number of Catholic schools throughout Java . Furthermore , in 1904 he spearheaded a mass baptism at <unk> , Kulon Progo , near Yogyakarta . A total of 168 Javanese were baptised . Van Lith 's efforts eventually returned to Semarang , where he established a Kanisius school in the parish of Gedangan in 1924 . 
 By the early 20th century the Catholic population of Semarang had become large enough to support multiple parishes . In 1915 the chapel in Karangpanas , in the southern part of Semarang , was elevated to the status of parish church and dedicated to St. Athanasius . A third church , in the Randusari area of western Semarang , was established in 1927 and became a parish church in 1930 . Further parishes were established over the following decades , until in 2000 St. Joseph 's Church was one of nine parish churches in the city , serving the subdistricts of East Semarang , <unk> , <unk> , and parts of North Semarang . 
 In 1940 , under recommendation of Mgr . Petrus Willekens , the Apostolic Vicariate of Batavia was divided in two ; Semarang became the capital of the new vicariate . The newly appointed vicar apostolic , Mgr . Albertus Soegijapranata ( 1896 – 1963 ) , had his seat at the church in Randusari , but lived in the presbytery in Gedangan . 
 = = = After the colonial period = = = 
 In March 1942 the Indies were occupied by the Empire of Japan . The occupation government captured numerous ( mostly Dutch ) men and women , both clergy and laymen , and instituted policies that changed how services were held . They forbade the use of Dutch in services and in writing , and seized several church properties ; several others , including the presbytery at Gedangan , were protected by the clergy . After two European head pastors , G. <unk> and G. de Quay , were confined , ultimately on 27 August 1943 the ethnic Javanese Soegijapranata took on parish duties in addition to his work as vicar apostolic . Although he promoted non @-@ compliance with Japanese demands considered damaging to the church , Soegijapranata also endorsed some collaboration . For instance , on 28 February 1944 a Latin @-@ language Mass was delivered at Gedangan by Paul <unk> Yamaguchi , bishop of Nagasaki . 
 On 17 August 1945 , shortly after the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and with Japan 's defeat an increasing certainty , President Sukarno proclaimed the independence of the Indonesian state . During the ongoing revolution against returning Dutch forces , Europeans were detained ( although the Dutch head pastors remained ) . These detentions , and post @-@ revolution politics which decimated the European population in independent Indonesia , ensured that the congregation remained dominated by the Javanese and other indigenous peoples . 
 Throughout the 1950s and 1960s Gedangan remained a center of Catholic activity in Semarang . The Jesuit provincial superior continued to be placed in the Gedangan presbytery until 1949 , when he was moved to the church in Karangpanas , then again from 1954 to 1962 ( when he was sent to Karangpanas again ) . The central offices of the Kanisius Foundation remained on the church grounds until a new office was opened in 1970 . Further construction has continued as well : an office building , named Bintang Laut , was completed on 6 August 1988 , and renovations to the church building took place in the early 1990s . The church continues to hold regular services , including five on Sundays . 
 = = Description = = 
 St. Joseph 's Church is located on the east side of <unk> Warsito Street in Semarang , Central Java . Administratively , it is part of the parish of St. Joseph in the Archdiocese of Semarang . The red @-@ brick building can seat 800 people . It faces west and has windows on all sides , as well as five entrances ( two on the north side , two on the south side , and one on the west side ) . The roof is a white cross @-@ ribbed vault supported by ionic columns . 
 The interior of the church has nineteen stained glass windows , three behind the altar and eight along each side of the church building . The windows behind the altar focus on St. Joseph and depict , from right to left , the sojourn of the Holy Family in Egypt ; the daily lives of the Holy Family ; and the death of Joseph . Four of the sixteen windows on the sides of the church ( those closest to the altar and those closest to the doors ) depict lilies . The remaining twelve windows each depict a single saint , including Ignatius of Loyola , Stanislaus Kostka , and Saint Cecilia . Further ornamentation of the walls includes carvings depicting the fourteen Stations of the Cross as well as twelve <unk> holding paintings illustrating the Lord 's Prayer , the Bread of Life Discourse , and praise to Christ and Mary . On top of the altar , at the eastern end of the church , is a tabernacle . The altar , imported from Germany in 1880 , is decorated with statues of Abraham , Peter , Paul , and Melchizedek . 
 The tower is home to two cast iron bells , one measuring 93 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 36 @.@ 8 in ) in height and 90 centimetres ( 35 in ) wide at the base , and the other measuring 75 centimetres ( 30 in ) in height and 70 centimetres ( 28 in ) in diameter at the base . The bells were produced by Petit & <unk> in April 1882 and exported from Rotterdam by the <unk> brothers . Both are inscribed with a dedication , in Latin , stating that the bells were donated by a Semarang @-@ born Frenchman named Joseph <unk> . The bells are further decorated with engraved plants and crosses . When the bells were installed in 1882 , they were accompanied by a clock . However , over the years the machinery wore down , and in 1978 it was replaced with a round face decorated with the <unk> IHS ( short for " Iesus <unk> Salvator " , meaning " Jesus , Saviour of Men " ) . 
 To the north of the church proper is a presbytery , established on 1 August 1890 . The two @-@ story building has a high foundation and marble flooring . Both stories have high ceilings , 4 metres ( 13 ft ) above the floor . Further to the north is the Bintang Laut building , containing offices for the parish council and other administrative needs . On the west side of <unk> Warsito Street is a convent for the Franciscan nuns , which has a neo @-@ Gothic chapel . 
 = In Your Honor = 
 In Your Honor is the fifth studio album by American alternative rock band Foo Fighters , released on June 14 , 2005 by RCA Records . It is a double album , with one disc containing heavy rock songs and a second disc with mellower acoustic songs . Frontman Dave Grohl decided to do a diverse blend of songs as he felt that after ten years of existence , the band had to break new ground with their music . The album was recorded at a newly built studio in Northridge , Los Angeles , and featured guests such as John Paul Jones , Norah Jones and Josh Homme . The lyrics deal with both resonating and introspective themes , with a major influence from Grohl 's involvement on the campaign trail with John Kerry during the 2004 presidential election . 
 The promotional tour for the album included both rock shows in stadiums and acoustic gigs in smaller venues . Reviews for In Your Honor were mostly positive , praising the composition and sound , although some critics found the album overlong and inconsistent . The album was also nominated for five Grammy Awards , and topped the charts in five countries — including Australia — and reached the top five in five more , including number two in both the United States and the United Kingdom . In Your Honor also broke the band 's consecutive streak of Grammy Award for Best Rock Album wins that began in 1999 with There Is Nothing Left to Lose . 
 = = Background = = 
 After touring in support of One by One , Dave Grohl was uncertain on what to do next with the Foo Fighters . He felt that rushing to do another record would not be creatively rewarding . Grohl considered a possible film score , and began writing acoustic songs , eventually amassing a full album 's worth of songs . Grohl , not wanting to make a solo album and accepting the drift from his usual style , brought the songs to the Foo Fighters - " who 's to say what we should sound like ? " . Bassist Nate Mendel replied that the songs ' uncharacteristic sound was " why [ they ] should go on the record . " Grohl decided against an acoustic record , saying " I have to have loud rock music in my life somewhere " , and decided to make a double album , with " one CD that 's all the really heavy rock shit " and another " that 's really beautiful , acoustic @-@ based , lower dynamic stuff " , which Grohl described as " the bottle and the hangover " , and also with the rock record being " my Jack and Coke record " with songs that " I realise I cannot live without that " , and the acoustic being " my Sapphire @-@ and @-@ Martini @-@ with @-@ Kylie record " . Grohl also stated a decisive moment in making a double album was uploading demos to his computer and realizing he had five hours of music , adding that " we 've been a band for 10 years now , this is our fifth record , and I thought it would be boring to just keep making album after album and making videos and playing festivals , so I wanted to do something special . " 
 The album was recorded in a new recording studio built in a warehouse in Northridge , California , named Studio 606 West in contrast to the original Studio 606 in Grohl 's basement in Alexandria , Virginia . Development for In Your Honor took nine months with three and a half months installing equipment in the studio , and songs being written throughout 2004 . While waiting for 606 to get finished , the band rehearsed on North Hollywood 's Mates Rehearsal Studios , where " we ended up with three or four different versions of about 30 songs " , according to Raskulinecz who added that " it got to the point where I didn 't want them to play the rock songs anymore . I was afraid they were going to get stale . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 The recording sessions ran from January to March 2005 , with only two and a half weeks being spent on the acoustic record . Forty tracks were recorded - fifteen of them acoustic - with half of them ending on the final track list . Studio 606 was not finished as the band moved in , and the bandmembers even helped with the final stages of construction , " hammering , stuffing insulation — doing whatever to speed the process . " Eight of the rock songs were last @-@ minute compositions done after the acoustic record was finished , as " Dave started feeling that it was better than the rock record . " The songs were recorded on analog tape — which was reused over and over due to a tape shortage and a desire to save money — before being transferred to Pro Tools for overdubs , editing and mixing . Raskulinecz mixed the rock songs , while Elliot Scheiner mixed the stereo and 5 @.@ 1 versions of the acoustic sides . 
 The band entered the studio with most of the songs finished and rehearsed ; producer Nick Raskulinecz , who also worked on One by One , stated that while " One By One was very loose , " In Your Honor was more planned out . Dave was more meticulous on that one " . The electric album was done in segments by instrument , starting with the drums and guitars , then vocals , and finally bass . Mendel would write a bass line on Pro Tools at home before showing it to Grohl and Raskulinecz . The bass was recorded after the vocals , which Raskulinecz said was done because " By doing bass last , you can really tailor it for tuning , parts and sound . If you do the drums and then the guitars , you can fill the hole that 's left with bass . And sometimes that hole wants a certain frequency that isn 't traditional for bass , but you have to go with it , which is even more fun . " During the last three weeks of work in the rock songs , the band was in the studio " from noon to eight in the morning , making the rock record the most devastating thing we 've ever done " . After two months working with the rock songs , the band was approaching their established deadline and had a meeting where they decided that to finish the album " Everyone has to be here all day , we need to do one song a day and no one 's leaving until that song is done . " Grohl would listen to a click track , and " we 'd find a tempo and I 'd just roll an arrangement off the top of my head . " As the bandmembers recorded their parts , Grohl would write the lyrics . The rushed approach prevented Mendel from writing bass lines , so he ended up " concentrating on just finding the notes and getting the rhythm right . " 
 Grohl declared that " making this record revitalized this band " , particularly the acoustic songs , as they " showed ourselves what we 're capable of doing " and " [ made ] things scary again . You do something that you 've never done , and it makes you feel like a bigger band . " The frontman also stated the mellower acoustic disc was an opportunity to use " the acoustic tracks we wrote in the past eight or nine years , but never put on albums because they never seemed to fit " , particularly because Grohl felt that " it 's hard to put an acoustic song in the middle of a rock record , because sometimes it <unk> up the sequence . " The tracks include Grohl 's first composition " Friend of a Friend " - done in 1990 , and previously recorded under the pseudonym ' Late ! ' on the cassette Pocketwatch ; " Razor " , which Grohl wrote for a benefit concert at the Wiltern Theater ; and drummer Taylor Hawkins ' composition " Cold Day in the Sun " , which after an attempt to do an electric version became an unplugged track , featuring Hawkins on vocals and tambourine and Grohl in the drums . 
 While preparing the acoustic album , Grohl decided that he would improve it with guest appearances , and made a list of musicians that he would like to work with , such as Warren Haynes and Grant Hart . The guests that appeared on the record included Norah Jones , John Paul Jones of Led Zeppelin fame , and Josh Homme of Queens of the Stone Age . John Paul Jones agreed to appear as he was in Los Angeles for the Grammy Awards , and Grohl described his appearance as the " second @-@ greatest thing to happen to me in my life " behind his marriage . Norah Jones was brought for the bossa nova " Virginia Moon " after Grohl heard her record and considered that his song was " her vibe " and Jones ' voice " was so smooth and warm that I figured it would work out great with mine . " The song features Grohl 's guitar technician Joe Beebe on lead guitar as he was the only one in the crew with jazz experience . The Wallflowers ' keyboard player Rami Jaffee and that dog . ' s violinist Petra Haden also contributed to the album , and were later drafted for the Foo Fighters ' touring band . After the album was finished , Grohl stated that he hoped that the Foo Fighters were most remembered for this record , describing it as " just the most fucking kick @-@ ass thing we 've ever done " , and saying that " If someone asked me which Led Zeppelin album to buy , I would tell them Physical Graffiti , because it has such a wide dynamic and it shows the range that band had . And that 's what we wanted to do with this album . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 The double album has a disc of rock songs and another with acoustic ones , which Grohl said demonstrated his artistic freedom - " It 's not one specific genre of music , it 's not one specific style . I 'm just a musician . I can play all these different instruments , I can write a bossa nova , I can write a thrash tune . " He also stated that he tried to fit the Foo Fighters sound even with stylistic differences : " It 's still the same four guys playing it so it just is a Foo Fighters song , whether it sounds like Carcass or fucking Ry Cooder . " 
 The band tried to do the albums without a " middle ground " sound , with " the acoustic record far more delicate and beautiful and atmospheric " , and " the rock CD far more brutal and aggressive " than their previous work . The arrangements were aiming for complexity : " This record is much more elaborate than just an acoustic guitar and a vocal . And the songs were written to hold more orchestration . We 've never had accordions and pump organs and cellos and stand up bass . " The acoustic guitar sound has influences of Rush guitarist Alex Lifeson , with open notes in conjunction with fretted notes . 
 The lyrics on the rock album tried to focus on " general themes that everyone can get their hands on " , while the acoustic had introspective lyrics that are " vulnerable and revealing " , with things Grohl " wouldn 't say out loud , wouldn 't even admit to myself . " Grohl declared that " when you 're writing songs that have a sort of anthemic quality , you can 't really go lighthearted and sing about bullshit . You have to dig into a deeper place to find the words " , and that " I don 't know what it is about , this album , that makes it sound more heartfelt or deeper or more emotional , but when I listen to it , it really is . " These include " Friend of a Friend " , a song which Grohl wrote in the 1990s about himself and his former Nirvana bandmate Kurt Cobain during the time they shared an apartment together in 1990 , and " Still " , talking about a suicide Grohl saw when he was ten in Virginia , by a boy who jumped on the train tracks . Much of the album 's theme and content , including the title , came after Grohl spent time on the campaign trail with John Kerry during the 2004 presidential election . " We 'd pull in to small towns , and thousands of people would come to be rescued by this man , " said Grohl . " It 's not a political record , but what I saw inspired me . " 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The price of the album was just one dollar above what is paid for a regular single @-@ disc CD , as Grohl thought the albums " complemented each other in one package , and I don 't need any more money " . The first 25 @,@ 000 US copies were in a special edition DualDisc set containing a " making of " documentary in the first disc , and the second disc in 5 @.@ 1 surround sound . RCA also issued limited 5 @,@ 000 copies of a quadruple vinyl LP record . Distributor Sony BMG issued the album with the copy protection software <unk> CD @-@ 3 , which later lead to a scandal as its <unk> @-@ like nature made computers vulnerable to malware . 
 The promotional campaign included the MTV special 24 Hours of Foo . Lead single " Best of You " was released on May 30 , 2005 , and became the band 's highest @-@ charting single at the main American , British , and Australian charts . Follow @-@ up " DOA " was released in August 22 , after an early debut as a ringtone for Cingular cell phones . Like " Best of You " it proceeded to top Billboard 's Modern Rock Songs chart . " Resolve " and a double A @-@ side of " No Way Back " and " Cold Day in the Sun " were also issued as singles . " No Way Back " was included in the video game Madden NFL 06 . 
 The release was promoted with the In Your Honor Tour . The tour began in the summer of 2005 , and ran through to June 2006 . It featured two shows per city , an electric one in arenas and an acoustic in smaller venues . The late 2005 concerts included the <unk> tour co @-@ headlined with Weezer . Among the additional band for the acoustic shows was guitarist Pat Smear , who had been in the Foo Fighters from 1995 to 1997 , and followed the In Your Honor Tour with another five years as a touring musician before rejoining as a full @-@ time member for the recording of Wasting Light . The acoustic shows from August 29 , 30 and 31 , 2006 at the Pantages Theater in Los Angeles were turned into the live album Skin and Bones . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 The album entered the Billboard 200 and the UK Albums Chart at number two behind Coldplay 's X & Y ( the worldwide best selling album of 2005 ) with the strongest initial sales of their entire career this far — 310 @,@ 500 copies in the United States and 159 @,@ 179 in the UK . In Your Honor also topped the charts in Australia , Finland , New Zealand and Ireland , and reached the top five in Canada , Austria and Denmark . 
 As of December 2011 , In Your Honor has sold 1 @,@ 442 @,@ 000 units in North America , being their third most successful album behind Foo Fighters and The Colour and the Shape . It was also certified Platinum by the RIAA . The album reached multi @-@ platinum status in Canada , Australia and the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 In Your Honor was generally met with positive reviews . At Metacritic , a website that assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 70 , based on 26 reviews . 
 Writing for The New York Times , Jon Pareles considered the album " an unexpected magnum opus " , and while Pareles felt that " the rock CD overpowers the acoustic one " , he considered that " among the quieter songs , there are enough supple melodies and hypnotic guitar patterns to suggest fine prospects for a follow @-@ through album " . Tom Sinclair of Entertainment Weekly described the discs of In Your Honor as " the outdoors and indoors sides " , with the rockers " pack [ ing ] an intoxicating wallop : 90 @-@ proof rock for 90 @-@ degree weather , they 'll sound terrific blasting from convertibles , open windows , boom boxes , and at barbecues and beach parties " and the acoustic songs " all very pretty — sometimes scarily so " , ultimately concluding that " you 'll probably revisit the rockin ' half more often " . Allmusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine considered that the record " showcases a reinvigorated band that is eager to stretch out and experiment " , with the rock record having a " fluid musicality and a new found sense of drama that gives it a nearly cinematic sense of scope " , and the acoustic album being " quieter , but it also has a similar flow and easy grace that makes it a fitting complement to the harder first record . " Reviewer Joe Gross of Spin described the hard rock disc as " the most consistent rockers of Grohl 's career " and considered that the album as a whole " chronicle [ s ] the physical and mental graffiti of figuring out how to emerge from some very large shadows , including his own , with nerve and power " . While Mike Schiller of PopMatters considered that " In Your Honor has some great tunes , but it is by no means perfect " , he praised the rock songs for " indications of just how loud this band can get " , and regarding the acoustic tracks , wrote that " despite the down @-@ tempo feel , the songs are infectious " . 
 Some reviewers found In Your Honor overlong and inconsistent . Writing for Rolling Stone , Barry Walters praised the acoustic songs , while considering that In Your Honor " could have been easily pruned down to one disc " , claiming the rock songs besides " Resolve " " strain so hard that the melody gets lost " and went in a " cartoonish headbanging fashion " that " accentuates the band 's self @-@ inflicted one @-@ dimensionality " , and that the " sameness and vagueness of [ Grohl 's ] love lyrics blunt their impact " . Noel Murray of The A.V. Club criticized the acoustic disc as " gooey , undercooked , and embarrassingly unpalatable " and " reveal [ ing ] Dave Grohl 's songwriting shortcomings " , but praised the rock songs which are " as loud and assaultive as just about anything Grohl has ever recorded " , and considered that the " first 10 @-@ song set sounds especially tight and ferocious ; it 's not all that diminished by the unfortunate revelations of disc two " . BBC Music reviewer Tanya Byrne found the track list lacking , with " several songs on this double disk that stand head and shoulders above the rest and truly represent how the Foo Fighters have developed " while others " let the album down " and the record ultimately " doesn 't live up to the hype . " Bram <unk> of Billboard felt that " by isolating the electric and acoustic sides , the concept comes off as repetitious " and ultimately concluding that " by scaling back their ambitions , the Foos could have made one great album instead of two average ones . " Pitchfork Media 's Amanda Petrusich described the record as " sterile and controlled " , the double disc conceit as " heavy handed , the segregation too deliberate " and the rock songs as repetitive . Edna Gundersen of USA Today gave the album two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four and said , " Though its most smartly crafted tunes and liveliest performances don 't measure up to the band 's finest , Honor is an honorable effort , full of the brawn and vigor that keeps the Foos in fighting shape . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The album was up to five Grammy Awards at the 48th Grammy Awards : Best Rock Album , Best Surround Sound Album , both Best Rock Song and Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal for " Best of You " , and Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals for " Virginia Moon " . It ultimately lost all awards , the band 's first album since The Colour and the Shape to not receive a Grammy . Kerrang ! ranked In Your Honor as the 9th best album of 2005 , while Rolling Stone put it as 30th best . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Dave Grohl , Taylor Hawkins , Nate Mendel and Chris Shiflett except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 | } 
 = = = Singles charts = = = 
 A ^ Charted only on the Belgian combined sales and airplay chart ( Ultratip ) 
 = Cú Chulainn = 
 Cú Chulainn , also spelt Cú <unk> or Cúchulainn ( [ <unk> ] ; Irish for " Culann 's Hound " ) and sometimes known in English as <unk> / <unk> / , is an Irish mythological hero who appears in the stories of the Ulster Cycle , as well as in Scottish and Manx folklore . He is believed to be an incarnation of the god Lugh , who is also his father . His mother is the mortal Deichtine , sister of Conchobar mac Nessa . 
 Born Sétanta , he gained his better @-@ known name as a child , after killing Culann 's fierce guard @-@ dog in self @-@ defence and offered to take its place until a replacement could be reared . At the age of seventeen he defended Ulster single @-@ handedly against the armies of queen Medb of Connacht in the famous Táin Bó Cúailnge ( " Cattle Raid of Cooley " ) . It was prophesied that his great deeds would give him everlasting fame , but his life would be a short one . He is known for his terrifying battle frenzy , or ríastrad ( translated by Thomas Kinsella as " warp spasm " and by Ciaran Carson as " torque " ) , in which he becomes an unrecognisable monster who knows neither friend nor foe . He fights from his chariot , driven by his loyal charioteer <unk> and drawn by his horses , Liath Macha and Dub <unk> . In more modern times , Cú Chulainn is often referred to as the " Hound of Ulster " . 
 Cú Chulainn shows striking similarities to the legendary Persian hero Rostam , as well as to the Germanic Lay of Hildebrand and the labours of the Greek epic hero Heracles , suggesting a common Indo @-@ European origin , but lacking in linguistic , anthropological and archaeological material . 
 = = Legends = = 
 = = = Birth = = = 
 There are a number of versions of the story of Cú Chulainn 's miraculous birth . In the earliest version of Compert C ( h ) on Culainn ( " The Conception of Cú Chulainn " ) , his mother Deichtine is the daughter and charioteer of Conchobar mac Nessa , king of Ulster , and accompanies him as he and the nobles of Ulster hunt a flock of magical birds . As snow begins to fall , Ulstermen seek shelter in a nearby house . As the host 's wife goes into labour , Deichtine assists in the birth of a baby boy . While a mare gives birth to twin colts . The next morning , the Ulstermen find themselves at the <unk> na <unk> ( the Neolithic mound at Newgrange ) — the house and its occupants have disappeared , but the child and the colts remain . Deichtine takes the boy home and begins raising him as her own , but the boy falls ill and dies . The god Lug appears to her and tells her he was their host that night , and that he has put his child in her womb , who is to be called Sétanta . Her pregnancy turns into a scandal as she is betrothed to <unk> mac Róich , and the Ulstermen suspect Conchobar of being the father , so she aborts the child and goes to her husband 's bed " virgin @-@ whole " . She then conceives a son whom she names Sétanta . 
 In the later and better @-@ known version of Compert Con Culainn , Deichtine is Conchobar 's sister , and disappears from Emain Macha , the Ulster capital . As in the previous version , the Ulstermen go hunting a flock of magical birds , are overtaken by a snowstorm and seek shelter in a nearby house . Their host is Lug , but this time his wife , who gives birth to a son that night , is Deichtine herself . The child is named Sétanta . 
 The nobles of Ulster argue over which of them is to be his foster @-@ father , until the wise <unk> decides he should be fostered by several of them : Conchobar himself ; <unk> mac Ailella , who will teach him judgement and eloquent speech ; the wealthy <unk> <unk> , who will protect and provide for him ; the noble warrior Fergus mac Róich , who will care for him and teach him to protect the weak ; the poet <unk> , who will educate him , and his wife <unk> , who will nurse him . He is brought up in the house of <unk> and <unk> on Muirthemne Plain in modern County Louth ( at the time part of Ulster ) , alongside their son Conall Cernach . 
 The County Louth town of Dundalk has the motto Mé do rug Cú Chulainn <unk> ( Irish ) " I gave birth to brave Cú Chulainn " . 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 The stories of Cú Chulainn 's childhood are told in a flashback sequence in Táin Bó Cúailnge . As a small child , living in his parents ' house on Muirthemne Plain , he begs to be allowed to join the boy @-@ troop at Emain Macha . However , he sets off on his own , and when he arrives at Emain he runs onto the playing field without first asking for the boys ' protection , being unaware of the custom . The boys take this as a challenge and attack him , but he has a ríastrad and beats them single @-@ handed . Conchobar puts a stop to the fight and clears up the misunderstanding , but no sooner has Sétanta put himself under the boys ' protection than he chases after them , demanding they put themselves under his protection . 
 Culann the smith invites Conchobar to a feast at his house . Before going , Conchobar goes to the playing field to watch the boys play hurling . He is so impressed by Sétanta 's performance that he asks him to join him at the feast . Sétanta has a game to finish , but promises to follow the king later . But Conchobar forgets , and Culann lets loose his ferocious hound to protect his house . When Sétanta arrives , the enormous hound attacks him , but he kills it in self @-@ defence , in one version by smashing it against a standing stone , and in another by driving a <unk> ( hurling ball ) down its throat with his <unk> . Culann is devastated by the loss of his hound , so Sétanta promises he will rear him a replacement , and until it is old enough to do the job , he himself will guard Culann 's house . The druid Cathbad announces that his name henceforth will be Cú Chulainn — " Culann 's Hound " . 
 One day at Emain Macha , Cú Chulainn overhears Cathbad teaching his pupils . One asks him what that day is auspicious for , and Cathbad replies that any warrior who takes arms that day will have everlasting fame . Cú Chulainn , though only seven years old , goes to Conchobar and asks for arms . None of the weapons given to him withstand his strength , until Conchobar gives him his own weapons . But when Cathbad sees this he grieves , because he had not finished his prophecy — the warrior who took arms that day would be famous , but his life would be short . Soon afterwards , in response to a similar prophecy by Cathbad , Cú Chulainn demands a chariot from Conchobar , and only the king 's own chariot withstands him . He sets off on a foray and kills the three sons of Nechtan <unk> , who had boasted they had killed more Ulstermen than there were Ulstermen still living . He returns to Emain Macha in his battle frenzy , and the Ulstermen are afraid he will slaughter them all . Conchobar 's wife <unk> leads out the women of Emain , and they bare their breasts to him . He averts his eyes , and the Ulstermen wrestle him into a barrel of cold water , which explodes from the heat of his body . They put him in a second barrel , which boils , and a third , which warms to a pleasant temperature . 
 = = = Emer and Cú Chulainn 's training = = = 
 In Cú Chulainn 's youth he is so beautiful the Ulstermen worry that , without a wife of his own , he will steal their wives and ruin their daughters . They search all over Ireland for a suitable wife for him , but he will have none but Emer , daughter of Forgall Monach . However , Forgall is opposed to the match . He suggests that Cú Chulainn should train in arms with the renowned warrior @-@ woman Scáthach in the land of Alba ( Scotland ) , hoping the ordeal will be too much for him and he will be killed . Cú Chulainn takes up the challenge , travelling to her residence Dún <unk> ( Fortress of Shadows ) on the Isle of Skye . In the meantime , Forgall offers Emer to Lugaid mac <unk> , a king of Munster , but when he hears that Emer loves Cú Chulainn , Lugaid refuses her hand . 
 Scáthach teaches Cú Chulainn all the arts of war , including the use of the <unk> <unk> , a terrible barbed spear , thrown with the foot , that has to be cut out of its victim . His fellow trainees include <unk> , who becomes Cú Chulainn 's best friend and foster @-@ brother . During his time there , Scáthach faces a battle against Aífe , her rival and in some versions her twin sister . Scáthach , knowing Aífe 's prowess , fears for Cú Chulainn 's life and gives him a powerful sleeping potion to keep him from the battle . However , because of Cú Chulainn 's great strength , it only puts him to sleep for an hour , and he soon joins the fray . He fights Aífe in single combat , and the two are evenly matched , but Cú Chulainn distracts her by calling out that Aífe 's horses and chariot , the things she values most in the world , have fallen off a cliff , and seizes her . With his sword at her throat , he agrees to spare her life on the condition that she call off her enmity with Scáthach , and bear him a son . 
 Leaving Aífe pregnant , Cú Chulainn returns from Scotland fully trained , but Forgall still refuses to let him marry Emer . Cú Chulainn storms Forgall 's fortress , killing twenty @-@ four of Forgall 's men , abducts Emer and steals Forgall 's treasure . Forgall himself falls from the ramparts to his death . Conchobar has the " right of the first night " over all marriages of his subjects . He is afraid of Cú Chulainn 's reaction if he exercises it in this case , but is equally afraid of losing his authority if he does not . Cathbad suggests a solution : Conchobar sleeps with Emer on the night of the wedding , but Cathbad sleeps between them . 
 = = = Cú Chulainn kills his son = = = 
 Eight years later , Connla , Cú Chulainn 's son by Aífe , comes to Ireland in search of his father , but Cú Chulainn takes him as an intruder and kills him when he refuses to identify himself . Connla 's last words to his father as he dies are that they would have " carried the flag of Ulster to the gates of Rome and beyond " , leaving Cú Chulainn grief @-@ stricken . The story of Cú Chulainn and Connla shows a striking similarity to the legend of Persian hero Rostam who also kills his son Sohrab . Rostam and Cú Chulainn share several other characteristics , including killing a ferocious beast at a very young age , their near invincibility in battle , and the manner of their deaths . Another similar myth is found in the <unk> , in which Hildebrand kills his son , <unk> . 
 = = = Lugaid and Derbforgaill = = = 
 During his time abroad , Cú Chulainn had rescued Derbforgaill , a Scandinavian princess , from being sacrificed to the Fomorians . She falls in love with him , and she and her handmaid come to Ireland in search of him in the form of a pair of swans . Cú Chulainn , not realising who she is , shoots her down with his sling , and then saves her life by sucking the stone from her side . Having tasted her blood , he cannot marry her , and gives her to his foster @-@ son Lugaid <unk> <unk> . Lugaid goes on to become High King of Ireland , but the Lia Fáil ( stone of destiny ) , fails to cry out when he stands on it , so Cú Chulainn splits it in two with his sword . When Derbforgaill is mutilated by the women of Ulster out of jealousy for her sexual desirability and dies of her wounds , Lugaid dies of grief , and Cú Chulainn avenges them by demolishing the house the women are inside , killing 150 of them . 
 = = = The Cattle Raid of Cooley = = = 
 At the age of seventeen , Cú Chulainn single @-@ handedly defends Ulster from the army of Connacht in the Táin Bó Cúailnge . Medb , queen of Connacht , has mounted the invasion to steal the stud bull Donn Cúailnge , and Cú Chulainn allows her to take Ulster by surprise because he is with a woman when he should be watching the border . The men of Ulster are disabled by a curse , so Cú Chulainn prevents Medb 's army from advancing further by invoking the right of single combat at fords . He defeats champion after champion in a stand @-@ off lasting months . 
 Before one combat a beautiful young woman comes to him , claiming to be the daughter of a king , and offers him her love , but he refuses her . The woman reveals herself as the Morrígan , and in revenge for this slight she attacks him in various animal forms while he is engaged in combat against <unk> mac <unk> . As an eel , she trips him in the ford , but he breaks her ribs . As a wolf , she stampedes cattle across the ford , but he puts out her eye with a sling @-@ stone . Finally she appears as a heifer at the head of the stampede , but he breaks her leg with another <unk> . After Cú Chulainn finally defeats <unk> , the Morrígan appears to him as an old woman milking a cow , with the same injuries he had given her in her animal forms . She gives him three drinks of milk , and with each drink he blesses her , healing her wounds . 
 After one particularly arduous combat Cú Chulainn lies severely wounded , but is visited by Lug , who tells him he is his father and heals his wounds . When Cú Chulainn wakes up and sees that the boy @-@ troop of Emain Macha have attacked the Connacht army and been slaughtered , he has his most spectacular ríastrad yet : 
 The first warp @-@ spasm seized Cúchulainn , and made him into a monstrous thing , hideous and shapeless , unheard of . His shanks and his joints , every knuckle and angle and organ from head to foot , shook like a tree in the flood or a reed in the stream . His body made a furious twist inside his skin , so that his feet and shins switched to the rear and his heels and calves switched to the front ... On his head the temple @-@ sinews stretched to the nape of his neck , each mighty , immense , <unk> knob as big as the head of a month @-@ old child ... he sucked one eye so deep into his head that a wild crane couldn 't probe it onto his cheek out of the depths of his skull ; the other eye fell out along his cheek . His mouth weirdly distorted : his cheek peeled back from his jaws until the gullet appeared , his lungs and his liver flapped in his mouth and throat , his lower jaw struck the upper a lion @-@ killing blow , and fiery flakes large as a ram 's fleece reached his mouth from his throat ... The hair of his head twisted like the tangle of a red thornbush stuck in a gap ; if a royal apple tree with all its kingly fruit were shaken above him , scarce an apple would reach the ground but each would be spiked on a bristle of his hair as it stood up on his scalp with rage . 
 He attacks the army and kills hundreds , building walls of corpses . 
 When his foster @-@ father Fergus mac Róich , now in exile in Medb 's court , is sent to face him Cú Chulainn agrees to yield , so long as Fergus agrees to return the favour the next time they meet . Finally , he fights a gruelling three @-@ day duel with his best friend and foster @-@ brother , <unk> , at a ford that was named <unk> <unk> <unk> ( <unk> , County Louth ) after him . 
 The Ulstermen eventually rouse , one by one at first , and finally en masse . The final battle begins . Cú Chulainn stays on the sidelines , recuperating from his wounds , until he sees Fergus advancing . He enters the fray and confronts Fergus , who keeps his side of the bargain and yields to him , pulling his forces off the field . Connacht 's other allies panic and Medb is forced to retreat . At this inopportune moment she gets her period , and although Fergus forms a guard around her , Cú Chulainn breaks through as she is dealing with it and has her at his mercy . However , he spares her because he does not think it right to kill women , and guards her retreat back to Connacht as far as Athlone . 
 = = = Bricriu 's Feast = = = 
 The troublemaker Bricriu once incites three heroes , Cú Chulainn , Conall Cernach and Lóegaire <unk> , to compete for the champion 's portion at his feast . In every test that is set Cú Chulainn comes out top , but neither Conall nor Lóegaire will accept the result . Cú Roí mac <unk> of Munster settles it by visiting each in the guise of a hideous churl and challenging them to behead him , then allow him to return and behead them in return . Conall and Lóegaire both behead Cú Roí , who picks up his head and leaves , but when the time comes for him to return they flee . Only Cú Chulainn is brave and honourable enough to submit himself to Cú Roí 's axe ; Cú Roí spares him and he is declared champion . This beheading challenge appears in later literature , most notably in the Middle English poem Sir Gawain and the Green Knight . Other examples include the 13th century French Life of Caradoc and the English romances The Turke and Gowin , and Sir Gawain and the Carle of Carlisle . 
 = = = The Death of Cú Roí = = = 
 Cú Roí , again in disguise , joins the Ulstermen on a raid on Inis Fer <unk> ( probably the Isle of Man ) , in return for his choice of the spoils . They steal treasure , and abduct Blathnát , daughter of the island 's king , who loves Cú Chulainn . But when Cú Roí is asked to choose his share , he chooses Blathnát . Cú Chulainn tries to stop him taking her , but Cú Roí cuts his hair and drives him into the ground up to his armpits before escaping , taking Blathnát with him . Like other heroes such as the Biblical Samson , Duryodhana in the Mahabharata and the Welsh <unk> <unk> <unk> , Cú Roí can only be killed in certain contrived circumstances , which vary in different versions of the story . <unk> discovers how to kill him and betrays him to Cú Chulainn , who does the deed . However , <unk> , Cú Roí 's poet , enraged at the betrayal of his lord , grabs Blathnát and leaps off a cliff , killing her and himself . 
 = = = Emer 's only jealousy = = = 
 Cú Chulainn has many lovers , but Emer 's only jealousy comes when he falls in love with Fand , wife of Manannán mac Lir . Manannán has left her and she has been attacked by three Fomorians who want to control the Irish Sea . Cú Chulainn agrees to help defend her as long as she marries him . She agrees reluctantly , but they fall in love when they meet . Manannán knows their relationship is doomed because Cú Chulainn is mortal and Fand is a fairy ; Cú Chulainn 's presence would destroy the fairies . Emer , meanwhile , tries to kill her rival , but when she sees the strength of Fand 's love for Cú Chulainn she decides to give him up to her . Fand , touched by Emer 's magnanimity , decides to return to her own husband . <unk> shakes his cloak between Cú Chulainn and Fand , ensuring the two will never meet again , and Cú Chulainn and Emer drink a potion to wipe the whole affair from their memories . 
 = = = Cú Chulainn 's death = = = 
 ( Irish : Aided con Culainn ) Medb conspires with Lugaid , son of Cú Roí , Erc , son of <unk> Nia Fer , and the sons of others Cú Chulainn had killed , to draw him out to his death . His fate is sealed by his breaking of the <unk> ( taboos ) upon him . Cú Chulainn 's <unk> included a ban against eating dog meat , but in early Ireland there was a powerful general taboo against refusing hospitality , so when an old crone offers him a meal of dog meat , he has no choice to break his <unk> . In this way he is spiritually weakened for the fight ahead of him . 
 Lugaid has three magical spears made , and it is prophesied that a king will fall by each of them . With the first he kills Cú Chulainn 's charioteer <unk> , king of chariot drivers . With the second he kills Cú Chulainn 's horse , Liath Macha , king of horses . With the third he hits Cú Chulainn , mortally wounding him . Cú Chulainn ties himself to a standing stone to die on his feet , facing his enemies . This stone is traditionally identified as one still standing at <unk> , Dundalk , County Louth . Due to his ferocity even when so near death , it is only when a raven lands on his shoulder that his enemies believe he is dead . Lugaid approaches and cuts off his head , but as he does so the " hero @-@ light " burns around Cú Chulainn and his sword falls from his hand and cuts Lugaid 's hand off . The light disappears only after his right hand , his sword arm , is cut from his body . 
 Conall Cernach had sworn that if Cú Chulainn died before him he would avenge him before sunset , and when he hears Cú Chulainn is dead he pursues Lugaid . As Lugaid has lost a hand , Conall fights him with one hand tucked into his belt , but he only beats him after his horse takes a bite out of Lugaid 's side . He also kills Erc , and takes his head back to Tara , where Erc 's sister <unk> dies of grief for her brother . 
 = = = Later stories = = = 
 The story is told that when Saint Patrick was trying to convert king Lóegaire to Christianity , the ghost of Cú Chulainn appeared in his chariot , warning him of the torments of hell . 
 In Irish folklore , Cú Chulainn was later reimagined as an evil giant at odds with Fionn mac <unk> ( or Finn McCool ) . According to the most famous folk tale , Cú <unk> 's power was contained in his middle finger . Wishing to defeat Finn , he came to Finn 's house , but Finn disguised himself as a baby while his wife Oona baked cakes , some with griddle irons inside , some without . When Cú Chulainn could not bite through his cake ( which had an iron in it ) but the baby could ( Finn 's cake had no iron ) , in amazement Cú Chulainn felt to see how sharp the baby 's teeth were , allowing Finn to bite his middle finger off and deprive Cú Chulainn of both his strength and size . 
 = = = Appearance = = = 
 Cú Chulainn 's appearance is occasionally remarked on in the texts . He is usually described as small , youthful and beardless . He is often described as dark : in The Wooing of Emer and Bricriu 's Feast he is " a dark , sad man , <unk> of the men of Erin " , in The Intoxication of the Ulstermen he is a " little , black @-@ browed man " , and in The Phantom Chariot of Cú Chulainn " [ h ] is hair was thick and black , and smooth as though a cow had licked it ... in his head his eyes gleamed swift and grey " ; yet the prophetess <unk> in the Táin Bó Cúailnge describes him as blond . The most elaborate description of his appearance comes later in the Táin : 
 And certainly the youth Cúchulainn mac <unk> was handsome as he came to show his form to the armies . You would think he had three distinct heads of hair — brown at the base , blood @-@ red in the middle , and a crown of golden yellow . This hair was settled strikingly into three coils on the cleft at the back of his head . Each long loose @-@ flowing strand hung down in shining splendour over his shoulders , deep @-@ gold and beautiful and fine as a thread of gold . A hundred neat red @-@ gold curls shone darkly on his neck , and his head was covered with a hundred crimson threads matted with gems . He had four dimples in each cheek — yellow , green , crimson and blue — and seven bright pupils , eye @-@ jewels , in each kingly eye . Each foot had seven toes and each hand seven fingers , the nails with the grip of a hawk 's claw or a <unk> 's clench . 
 = = Cultural depictions of Cú Chulainn = = 
 = = = Images = = = 
 The image of Cú Chulainn is invoked by both Irish nationalists and Ulster unionists . Irish nationalists see him as the most important Celtic Irish hero , and thus he is important to their whole culture . A bronze sculpture of the dead Cú Chulainn by Oliver Sheppard stands in the Dublin General Post Office ( GPO ) in commemoration of the Easter Rising of 1916 . By contrast , unionists see him as an Ulsterman defending the province from enemies to the south : in Belfast , for example , he is depicted in a mural on Highfield Drive , and was formerly depicted in a mural on the <unk> Road , as a " defender of Ulster from Irish attacks " , both murals ironically based on the Sheppard sculpture . He is also depicted in murals in nationalist parts of the city and many nationalist areas of Northern Ireland . The statue 's image was also used on the ten shilling coin produced for 1966 . The 1916 @-@ 1966 Survivors Medal and the Military Star for the Irish Defence Forces all have the image of Cú Chulainn on their <unk> . 
 A statue of Cú Chulainn carrying the body of Fer <unk> stands in <unk> , County Louth , traditionally the site of their combat in the Táin Bó Cúailnge . A sculpture by Martin Heron , entitled " For the Love of Emer " , depicting Cú Chulainn balancing on a tilting 20 @-@ foot pole , representing the feat of balancing on the butt of a spear he learned from Scáthach , was installed in Armagh in 2010 . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Augusta , Lady Gregory retold many of the legends of Cú Chulainn in her 1902 book Cuchulain of Muirthemne , which paraphrased the originals but also romanticized some of the tales and omitted most of the more violent content . This first translation was very popular , supported by the Celtic Revival movement . It featured an introduction by her friend William Butler Yeats , who wrote several pieces based on the legend , including the plays On Baile 's Strand ( 1904 ) , The Green Helmet ( 1910 ) , At the Hawk 's Well ( 1917 ) , The Only Jealousy of Emer ( 1919 ) and The Death of Cuchulain ( 1939 ) , and a poem , Cuchulain 's Fight with the Sea ( 1892 ) . 
 = = = Texts in translation = = = 
 The Birth of Cú Chulainn 
 Tidings of Conchobar son of Ness 
 The Boyhood Deeds of Cú Chulainn 
 The Wooing of Emer 
 The Death of Aífe 's Only Son 
 The Cattle Raid of <unk> 
 Bricriu 's Feast 
 The Cattle Raid of Cooley : Recension 1 , Recension 2 
 The Battle of Ross na <unk> 
 The Death of Cú Roí 
 The Sick @-@ Bed of Cuchulain 
 The Pursuit of <unk> <unk> 
 The Death of Cú Chulainn 
 The Phantom Chariot of Cú Chulainn 
 = = = Modern retellings = = = 
 Cuchulain of Muirthemne , by Lady Gregory 
 The Boys ' <unk> by Eleanor Hull ( 1904 ) at The Baldwin Project 
 = Emeric , King of Hungary = 
 Emeric , also known as Henry or Imre ( Hungarian : Imre , Croatian : <unk> , Slovak : <unk> ; 1174 – 30 November 1204 ) , was King of Hungary and Croatia between 1196 and 1204 . In 1184 , his father , Béla III of Hungary , ordered that he be crowned king , and appointed him as ruler of Croatia and Dalmatia around 1195 . Emeric ascended the throne after the death of his father . During the first four years of his reign , he fought his rebellious brother , Andrew , who forced Emeric to make him ruler of Croatia and Dalmatia as appanage . 
 Emeric cooperated with the Holy See against the Bosnian <unk> , whom the Catholic Church considered to be heretics . Taking advantage of a civil war , Emeric expanded his suzerainty over Serbia . He failed to prevent the Republic of Venice , which was assisted by crusaders of the Fourth Crusade , from seizing Zadar in 1202 . He also could not impede the rise of Bulgaria along the southern frontiers of his kingdom . Emeric was the first Hungarian monarch to use the " Árpád stripes " as his personal coat of arms and to adopt the title of King of Serbia . Before his death , Emeric had his four @-@ year @-@ old son , Ladislaus III , crowned king . 
 = = Early life ( 1174 – 1196 ) = = 
 Emeric was the eldest child of Béla III of Hungary and Béla 's first wife , Agnes of Antioch . His tutor was an Italian priest , Bernard . Nicholas , Archbishop of Esztergom , crowned the eight @-@ year @-@ old Emeric king on 16 May 1182 , which confirmed Emeric 's right to succeed his father . Emeric was betrothed to a daughter of Holy Roman Emperor Frederick I , but she died in 1184 . Béla III appointed Emeric to administer Croatia and Dalmatia around 1195 . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Struggles with his brother ( 1196 – 1200 ) = = = 
 Emeric succeeded his father , who died on 23 April 1196 . Béla III had bequeathed estates and money to Emeric 's younger brother , Andrew , under the condition that Andrew should lead a crusade to the Holy Land . Instead , Andrew turned against Emeric , demanding a separate duchy for himself in 1197 . Leopold VI , Duke of Austria , intervened on behalf of Andrew , and at the end of the year , their combined forces routed Emeric 's troops at <unk> , Slavonia . In early 1198 , Emeric was forced to make Andrew Duke of Croatia and Dalmatia as an appanage . 
 Andrew continued to conspire against Emeric , although Pope Innocent III continued urging Andrew to launch a crusade . On 10 March 1199 , Emeric forced Boleslaus , Bishop of Vác , who was a supporter of Andrew , to give him documents that proved the conspiracy against him . In the summer of that year , Emeric defeated Andrew 's army near Lake Balaton , which made Andrew flee to Austria . A papal legate named Gregory arrived in Hungary to mediate a reconciliation between the two brothers . According to the brothers ' treaty , Emeric once again granted Croatia and Dalmatia to Andrew in the summer of 1200 . 
 = = = Wars in the Balkans ( 1200 – 1203 ) = = = 
 From around 1200 , Emeric was deeply involved in the affairs of the Balkan Peninsula . On 11 October 1200 , Pope Innocent urged him to take measures to liquidate the " heretics " in Bosnia . Upon Emeric 's request , the Pope refused to send a royal crown to Grand Prince Stephen of Serbia . Emeric invaded Serbia in 1201 or 1202 , and helped Stephen 's brother <unk> seize the throne . As a token of his suzerainty over Serbia , Emeric became the first Hungarian monarch to adopt the title of King of Serbia in 1202 . He was also the first king to use a royal seal depicting the so @-@ called " Árpád stripes " , which eventually became part of the coat of arms of Hungary . 
 In the summer of 1202 , the Venetian doge Enrico Dandolo signed a treaty with the leaders of the Fourth Crusade , who agreed to help the Venetians recapture Zadar , a town in Dalmatia , which had accepted the Hungarian monarchs ' suzerainty since 1186 . Even though Pope Innocent III forbade the crusaders to besiege Zadar , they seized the town on 24 November and gave it to the Venetians . Although the Pope excommunicated the Venetians and the crusaders upon Emeric 's demand , Zadar remained under Venetian rule . 
 In fear of a crusade by Emeric , Ban Kulin of Bosnia held a synod of the Church of Bosnia at <unk> Polje on 6 April 1203 . The synod acknowledged papal primacy and ordered the reform of the rites . Kulin also acknowledged Emeric 's suzerainty . In a letter written in 1203 , the Bulgarian tsar Kaloyan informed Pope Innocent that Emeric had occupied five districts in Bulgaria , and Kaloyan demanded the Pope 's intervention . 
 = = = Last years ( 1203 – 1204 ) = = = 
 Duke Andrew once again rose up in open rebellion against Emeric in the autumn of 1203 . Their armies met at Varaždin on the river Drava in October . Emeric walked into his brother 's camp unarmed , stating , " Now I shall see who will dare to raise a hand to shed the blood of the royal lineage ! " , according to the nearly contemporaneous Thomas the Archdeacon . Nobody ventured to stop the king ; thus , he approached Andrew and seized him without resistance . Duke Andrew was held in captivity for months , but his supporters released him in early 1204 . 
 Taking advantage of the civil war in Hungary , Kaloyan invaded and captured Belgrade , Barancs ( now Braničevo in Serbia ) , and other fortresses . Emeric made preparations for a campaign against Bulgaria , but he disbanded his army upon Pope Innocent 's demand . The Pope , who had been negotiating a church union with Kaloyan , sent a royal crown to him , but Emeric imprisoned the papal legate who was delivering the crown to Bulgaria when the legate was passing through Hungary . 
 Having fallen seriously ill , Emeric had his four @-@ year @-@ old son , Ladislaus , crowned king on 26 August 1204 . He also released the papal legate . He reconciled with his brother , " entrusting to him the guardianship of his son and the administration of the entire kingdom until the ward should reach the age of majority " , according to Thomas the Archdeacon . Emeric died on 30 November , according to the Illuminated Chronicle . Emeric was buried in the cathedral of Eger . 
 = = Family = = 
 Emeric 's wife , Constance , was the daughter of King Alfonso II of Aragon . Their marriage took place between 1196 and 1200 . Their only known child , Ladislaus , was born around 1200 and died on 7 May 1205 . Queen Constance , who outlived both her husband and their son , was later married to Frederick II , Holy Roman Emperor . 
 = New York State Route 9L = 
 New York State Route 9L ( NY 9L ) is a state highway in Warren County , New York , in the United States . The road is 18 @.@ 58 miles ( 29 @.@ 90 km ) long and is a suffixed highway of U.S. Route 9 ( US 9 ) . NY 9L goes through three municipalities in Warren County : the city of Glens Falls , the town of Queensbury and the town of Lake George . It starts at an intersection with US 9 and NY 32 in Glens Falls and ends at a junction with US 9 and NY 9N in Lake George . NY 9L is a scenic route for people traveling to Lake George as the road provides many views of the lake . The route was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York along the path of an old military road originally built during the American Revolution . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 9L begins at an intersection with US 9 and NY 32 in downtown Glens Falls . It heads north , intersecting with local roads as it exits the city and enters the town of Queensbury . At the city line , maintenance of the route shifts from the city of Glens Falls to the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) . Just north of the city limits , NY 9L intersects NY 254 . The route continues northward through Queensbury , passing Floyd Bennett Memorial Airport and running parallel to the Washington County line on its way toward and eventually across the Blue Line into Adirondack Park . NY 9L intersects NY 149 , an east – west arterial connecting Interstate 87 ( I @-@ 87 ) to Vermont , just north of the park limits . 
 The route continues into Brayton , a hamlet situated in northeast Queensbury . At a junction 11 @.@ 3 miles ( 18 @.@ 2 km ) northeast of Glens Falls and 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of Brayton , NY 9L meets Pilot Knob Road ( County Route 38 or CR 38 ) , a local roadway serving several communities located on the shores of Lake George and along the base of Pilot Knob . NY 9L turns southwest here , roughly paralleling the southern shore of Lake George . A mile west of Brayton , NY 9L intersects with <unk> Road , a road serving the small island hamlet of <unk> . Just afterward , it passes an open area called Joshua 's Rock , with a cluster of buildings . This is Owl 's Nest , the home of early realist novelist Edward Eggleston , a designated National Historic Landmark . 
 After passing the community of <unk> , the route intersects Assembly Point Road , another local road serving a minor peninsula and Assembly Point on its tip . Past this point , NY 9L tightly parallels the southern shore of Lake George southwest into the town of Lake George . The route comes to an end at a junction with US 9 and NY 9N south of the village of Lake George at the southwestern extent of the lake . 
 = = History = = 
 Modern NY 9L follows the length of the Old Military Road , which was the first road to connect to what is now the town of Queensbury . It was first built in 1755 as the Colonial Army headed north from Albany . The construction of the road helped to increase development in the town . In 1832 , the Glens Falls Feeder Canal opened , further improving transportation in Queensbury . Sixteen years later , in 1848 , a plank road was built over the old Military Road . 
 NY 9L was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York to its current alignment . The bridge carrying NY 9L over Halfway Creek in Queensbury was originally built in 1923 . On August 27 , 2007 , the New York State Department of Transportation announced that the bridge would be replaced at a cost of $ 1 @.@ 3 million . Initially , work on the project was to begin in September of that year ; however , the start of construction was delayed until April 21 , 2008 . The new bridge was completed in September . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Warren County . 
 = Avery Coonley School = 
 The Avery Coonley School ( ACS ) , commonly called Avery Coonley , is an independent , coeducational day school serving academically gifted students in preschool through eighth grade ( approximately ages 3 to 14 ) , and is located in Downers Grove , Illinois . The school was founded in 1906 to promote the progressive educational theories developed by John Dewey and other turn @-@ of @-@ the @-@ 20th @-@ century philosophers , and was a nationally recognized model for progressive education well into the 1940s . From 1943 to 1965 , Avery Coonley was part of the National College of Education ( now National @-@ Louis University ) , serving as a living laboratory for teacher training and educational research . In the 1960s , ACS became a regional research center and a leadership hub for independent schools , and began to focus on the education of the gifted . 
 The school has occupied several structures in its history , including a small cottage on the Coonley Estate in Riverside , Illinois , and another building designed by Frank Lloyd Wright . It moved to Downers Grove in 1916 and became the Avery Coonley School in 1929 , with a new 10 @.@ 45 @-@ acre ( 4 @.@ 23 ha ) campus designed in the Prairie and Arts and Crafts styles , landscaped by Jens Jensen , who was known as " dean of the world 's landscape architects " . The campus has been expanded several times since the 1980s to create more space for arts , technology , and classrooms . Avery Coonley was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2007 , citing the " long @-@ lasting influence on schools throughout the country " of the educational program and the design of the building and grounds . 
 The progressive legacy is still evident in the modern curriculum , which retains many traditions and educational activities dating back to the beginning of the school . Students work a minimum of one year above their current grade level , and explore broad themes allowing them to learn across subjects and engage in creative and collaborative projects , using instructional technology extensively . Opportunities to build on classroom studies are offered through a range of extracurricular activities . Admission is competitive and an IQ score of at least 120 is required . ACS is notable for its record of success in academic competitions at the state and national levels in mathematics , science , geography , and other subjects . ACS was recognized as a Blue Ribbon School by the United States Department of Education in 1988 . Avery Coonley attracted national media attention in 1994 when the school was banned from competition in the Illinois State Science Fair after winning for the fourth year in a row . Although the decision was later reversed , the controversy was decried by the press as an example of the " dumbing down " of education and the victory of self @-@ esteem over excellence in schools . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding and Cottage School ( 1906 – 1916 ) = = = 
 In 1906 , Queene Ferry Coonley , wife of wealthy Riverside industrialist and publisher Avery Coonley , decided to start a kindergarten program to allow children younger than five years old to attend . Queene Coonley was trained as a social worker and kindergarten teacher at the Detroit Normal School ( now Wayne State University ) and was impressed by the theories of Friedrich Fröbel , who believed children 's early education should be an extension of their lives at home . Fröbel 's theories captured the three main principles of what John Dewey would later call the " kindergarten attitude " , which applied not just to kindergartners but to children of all ages . Dewey wrote that the primary role of the school is to train children in cooperative living , the root of all learning is the activity of the child and not external material , and directing children 's spontaneous impulses towards maintaining the collective life of the school is how they become prepared for adult life . Convinced of these principles , Coonley sought to enroll her four @-@ year @-@ old daughter in the Riverside School , one of the few public kindergartens in the area , but was disappointed when the child was not eligible because she had not yet turned five . 
 Coonley persuaded the director of the Riverside program , Lucia Burton Morse , and her assistant , Charlotte Krum , to help launch a new school . Morse and Krum had attended Elizabeth Harrison 's Kindergarten College , which " championed the concept of kindergarten teaching in America and was one of the first teacher 's colleges in the country to offer a four @-@ year program culminating in the bachelor of education degree " . There they had studied the educational theories of John Dewey and others , who stood opposed to the more traditional pedagogical practices of the day , which saw education as the business of transmitting long @-@ standing bodies of information to new generations and inculcating moral training based on rules and standards of conduct . Their new progressive views of education emphasized an individualized approach to education and an integrated curriculum where children learned from experience and social interaction . According to Dewey , " it is a cardinal precept of the newer school of education that the beginning of instruction shall be made with the experience learners already have ; that this experience and the capacities that have been developed during its course provide the starting point for all further learning . " These ideas laid the foundations of what would become the " progressive movement " in education . Coonley , Morse , and Krum brought these ideas with them to the new school , which Coonley described as " a Children 's Community . Its purpose was not so much to teach what others had thought or grown @-@ ups had done , but for the children themselves to do something . " 
 A small cottage on the Coonley estate served as the first school building , reflected by its original name , the Cottage School . The designer was Charles Whittlesey , who had apprenticed under Louis Sullivan . The estate 's main building , the Avery Coonley House , designed by Frank Lloyd Wright , is now a National Historic Landmark . Over the years , many of the estate 's buildings would be pressed into use as classrooms and residences for teachers . As new grades were added the school grew , and in 1911 Coonley commissioned Wright to design a larger space for the students . The new building was completed in 1912 and became known as the Coonley Playhouse , and featured dozens of brightly colored art glass windows , evoking flags , balloons , and confetti in what Wright referred to as a " kinder @-@ symphony " . " Their bright primary colors and lively geometric designs make them some of Wright 's most famous windows . " 
 Two years of kindergarten were offered , beginning at age four , and students progressed through to first grade with other students their age . The Cottage School was free to all students , and was supported both by Coonley 's own resources and funds raised by the Kindergarten Education Association . The Association , of which Coonley was president , promoted new educational ideas and raised money to help support them . In 1915 , John Dewey and his daughter Evelyn featured the Cottage School in their book , The Schools of To @-@ Morrow , which examined how progressive schools around the country put new educational ideas into action . They were especially struck by how prominently nature featured in school life , noting that " they have , for example , a rare bird that is as much a personality in school life as any of the children , and the children , having cared for him and watched his growth and habits , have become much more interested in wild birds . In the backyard is a goat , the best liked thing on the place , where the children have raised him from a little kid ; and they still do all the work of caring for him . " The <unk> held the Cottage School as an example of training in good citizenship , commenting on its mock elections , self @-@ government , and public service : " The school organized by the pupils into a civic league has made itself responsible for the conditions of the streets in certain portions of town , and is not only cleaning up but trying to get the rest of the town interested in the problem . " The teaching of English was also noted , as it was not taught as a separate subject but as part of history lessons , journal @-@ keeping , and other exercises . Dewey wrote , " The emphasis is put on helping the child to express his ideas ; but such work provides ample opportunity for the required drill in the mechanics of writing . " 
 = = = Junior Elementary School ( 1916 – 1929 ) = = = 
 At the same time the Playhouse was built , Coonley agreed to build a kindergarten in the nearby town of Downers Grove , which did not have a public school . Coonley purchased land on Grove Street and commissioned the architectural firm of Perkins , Fellows & Hamilton to design the building . The school , led by Lucia Morse , was launched as the Kindergarten Extension Association School in 1912 . In 1916 , the Cottage School was closed and a first grade program was launched at the Downers Grove kindergarten , which was renamed the Junior Elementary School . To accommodate older students , a second grade class was added in 1920 for students around seven years old , a third grade in 1926 for eight @-@ year @-@ olds , and a fourth grade for nine @-@ year @-@ old students shortly thereafter . 
 The <unk> moved to Washington , D.C. in 1916 , and while Queene continued to devote her time and money , she left the day @-@ to @-@ day direction of the school to Morse . Under her direction , the Junior Elementary School built upon the educational foundations established at the Cottage School , with its focus on the active participation of the students . Drama , music , and dance were important parts of the curriculum , and nature study remained an integral component of students ' activities . These ideas , and nature study in particular , were largely the creation of Colonel Francis Wayland Parker , whom John Dewey once referred to as " the father of progressive education " . The Junior Elementary School was a proving ground for these principles , which called for a new way of relating to students , allowing them to freely experience their lessons on their own terms . No distinction was made between boys ' and girls ' activities , which included gardening , carpentry , and cooking . Coonley recalled that " [ w ] e had boys and girls . We made no distinction , boys and girls cooked , boys and girls did carpenter work , boys and girls took an equal part in all matters of government . " Students re @-@ enacted history and literature , composed their own music , and spent much of their time outdoors . In 1924 , Coonley and Morse helped found a journal entitled Progressive Education , in which they published their own practical experiences at the school , accompanied by articles written by leading educational theorists , including John Dewey . It became the leading professional journal of the progressive education movement and was published until 1957 . 
 = = = Avery Coonley School ( 1929 – 1960s ) = = = 
 Enrollment continued to grow , and a second building was added to the Junior Elementary School campus in the late 1920s , but still larger facilities were deemed necessary to accommodate future growth and additional grade levels . Coonley chose a wooded tract in Downers Grove , adjacent to the Maple Grove Forest Preserve , as the site for the new building , and her son @-@ in @-@ law , Waldron Faulkner , became the architect of the new building project . Over one hundred students attended school in the opened building on September 30 , 1929 , and it was renamed The Avery Coonley School , in honor of Coonley 's late husband , who had died in 1920 . Coonley chose an unusual mascot to represent the ideals of the school . She felt a seahorse was an example of a unique creature who was also a member of a larger community — an analogy for her vision for Avery Coonley . The seahorse swims upright , from which derives the school motto : " Onward and Upward " , and representations of seahorses are reflected in decorative ironwork and the weather vane on the 1929 building . 
 Progressive education , a pedagogy promoting learning through real @-@ life experiences , was at its zenith in the United States in the 1920s and 30s , and the Avery Coonley School was a widely known model of these theories in action . Avery Coonley was featured regularly in Progressive Education and other professional journals , and in 1938 , the editor of Progressive Education , Gertrude Hartman , published a profile of the Avery Coonley School in her book Finding Wisdom : Chronicles of a School of Today . She noted , " [ v ] <unk> from all parts of the United States and from foreign countries [ came ] to see the school — sometimes as many as thirty in a day . " Hartman described in great detail the curriculum and daily life of the school , which had by then added a seventh and eighth grade , commenting that " the most noticeable thing about it is the spirit of earnestness and joy which pervades it ... There is a fundamental philosophy of life and education underlying the work of the school , which gives clear direction to all its activities . Broad areas are planned , which form the framework of the curriculum . These however are flexible and subject to modification depending upon conditions . " The book described the progress of the students from their first year of kindergarten through their ten years of study , capturing in photos , stories , and examples of students ' work their encounters with nature , history , art and other subjects through creative play and collaborative projects . She concluded with observations about the importance of the daily life of the school in developing social responsibility : " It is the belief of those concerned with the school that out of the kind of education described here will emerge more socially enlightened members of society than the education of our generation has produced ... The method in which those in the school place their faith is the building into the very nature of growing boys and girls , through their growing years , those qualities of mind and spirit from which alone a new attitude towards human relations can evolve . " Finding Wisdom became a classic in the education field and solidified the Avery Coonley School 's national reputation as a model of progressive education . 
 Morse died in 1940 , after 34 years as director , and several years went by without a strong local leadership . To ensure a sounder footing for the future , Coonley merged Avery Coonley with the National College of Education ( NCE , formerly the Chicago Kindergarten College and now National @-@ Louis University ) in Evanston , Illinois , in 1943 . The two institutions had close ties dating back to Morse 's Kindergarten College days , and the arrangement took advantage of the NCE 's financial and teaching resources while Avery Coonley provided a living laboratory for teacher training and educational research . Under NCE management , ACS continued to offer a curriculum that emphasized practical learning , outdoor education — including farming — and hands @-@ on activities like automobile repair . German and French were added in 1949 , with students beginning conversational French in first grade . 
 Coonley died in 1958 ; ACS had looked to Coonley for her leadership over the years but even more so for her philanthropy . ACS began charging tuition in 1929 , but still relied on Coonley 's financial support , and her death caused serious financial hardship . Under the direction of newly appointed headmaster John Malach , a summer program was launched in 1960 , open to all children from the surrounding area , to increase revenues and visibility . A swimming pool was added in 1961 to bolster the program . Enrollment had declined over the years and Malach marketed the program aggressively , personally interviewing prospective students . In 1964 enrollment again reached 200 students , which brought in additional tuition and much needed financial stability . 
 In 1965 , the benefits of the National College of Education partnership were less evident and the Administrative Board purchased Avery Coonley from the NCE . Under Malach 's leadership , ACS continued to experiment and innovate . Despite widespread skepticism among contemporary educators that kindergartners were ready to read , ACS launched an early reading program in the early 1960s . Malach 's stance was that " we don 't believe a child should be taught because he or she is now 6 years old or in 1st grade . Our children begin to learn to read when the teacher determines the child is ready . Then the teacher works individually with the child at his or her own pace . " By this time , however , the once @-@ radical ideas of progressive education had become " conventional wisdom " and kindergarten was a ubiquitous feature of American public schools . As part of Malach 's " bid to reforge the leadership role that Avery Coonley School had played during its early years " , ACS joined the Independent Schools Association of the Central States ( ISACS ) in 1961 . ISACS was founded in 1908 to promote best practices in independent schools , and instituted a mandatory accreditation program for member schools in 1961 . Avery Coonley served as the headquarters of ISACS from 1970 until the central office was dissolved in 2000 . 
 Malach also established the Institute for Educational Research ( <unk> ) in 1964 as a center for educational experimentation . The Institute , headquartered at ACS , was a joint venture with more than thirty public school districts , which collaborated on research projects and shared in the findings . The large number of schools involved ensured that statistically significant research samples were available and multiple projects could be pursued at one time . In one of the first projects of the Institute , 36 history teachers wrote over 2 @,@ 000 test questions to help demonstrate that " many teachers want assistance in writing better evaluation items based on behavioral objectives " . Examples of other projects include kindergarten speech programs , elementary science programs , and speed reading in junior high school . 
 = = = Gifted education ( 1960s – present ) = = = 
 The kindergarten reading program was the first step in the Avery Coonley School 's transition to a new focus on the education of the gifted , which coincided with a growing public awareness of the needs of gifted children in the late 1960s . The increasing focus on gifted education was symbolized by the 1972 Marland Report to the United States Congress , which was the first acknowledgment of the characteristics of gifted children and their specific educational needs . The report found that " gifted children are , in fact , deprived and can suffer psychological damage and permanent impairment of their abilities to function well which is equal to or greater than the similar deprivation suffered by any other population with special needs " . The report highlighted the necessity for educational services for the gifted , and the near total lack of such programs in the public schools at the time . Malach believed that the educational philosophy of Avery Coonley was well aligned with the most important objectives of a gifted program , namely , " the stimulation of individual interests ... the development of student initiative , the development of self @-@ acceptance , concept development , and recognition of the early ability to undertake complex learning tasks . " 
 In 1960 , ACS began screening applicants for high intellectual potential , requiring a tested IQ above 120 , achievement test results one and a half grade levels above national norms in reading and math , and intensive in @-@ person evaluations . At the same time , the teachers began adapting the curriculum to meet the goals of a gifted program , allowing even more differentiation for each student , accommodating different learning styles , and incorporating enough flexibility for all students to progress at their own pace . 
 More accelerated classes were added , but the core of the gifted curriculum remained the individualized approaches and learning by doing that had long been central to the Avery Coonley curriculum . Nature study was still prominent in the student 's activities , with music , art , and drama . The traditional learning themes and school projects involving maple trees , Native Americans , ancient Egypt and other topics were preserved but adapted to serve the gifted curriculum . In early 1980 , an early childhood ( EC ) program for three @-@ year @-@ olds was launched , designed to cater to the needs of gifted preschool children and prepare them to transition from home to kindergarten . Again departing from the prevailing educational theory , Avery Coonley introduced academics in the EC program , with the same focus on nature , music , movement , and practical skills as the higher grades . 
 = = Campus = = 
 = = = 1929 building = = = 
 The campus occupies 10 @.@ 45 acres ( 4 @.@ 23 ha ) off of Maple Avenue in Downers Grove . It borders the Maple Grove Forest Preserve , created in 1919 , one of the oldest forest preserves in the Forest Preserve District of DuPage County system . The 82 @-@ acre ( 33 ha ) preserve protects " the largest remaining remnant of the vast maple forest that became Downers Grove " , and has been categorized a globally endangered ecosystem . Its black maple and upland sugar maple communities are host to many threatened and endangered plant species , and bloom with trillium , trout lilies , violets , buttercups , and wild geraniums in the spring . The forest is a refuge for a wide range of birds , including Great Horned Owls and several species of hawks , as well as a stopover for several species of migratory birds , including the Indigo Bunting , which nests there during the warm breeding season and migrates south by night in the winter . A 1 @.@ 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 8 km ) hiking trail winds through the preserve , crossing a small creek and passing a nearby pond . The preserve is used by students in their science and nature activities . 
 The designer of the grounds , Jens Jensen , was known as the " dean of the world 's landscape architects " , and " the father of the Chicago park system " , for his creation of Humboldt Park , Garfield Park , the Cook County Forest Preserves , and his masterpiece , Columbus Park , in Chicago . Jensen 's work became famous for his exclusive use of plants and materials native to the local region , and was characterized by his use of open spaces , flowing water , gently curving lines , and " council rings " , or low circular benches where people can gather . All of these features are evident on the Avery Coonley campus , which makes use of wholly natural settings in lieu of formal gardens . The original landscaping was largely forgotten over the years and poorly maintained . A complete restoration of Jensen 's landscape design was completed in 2006 as part of the ACS centennial celebration . 
 The building was designed by Coonley 's son @-@ in @-@ law Waldron Faulkner , who , with his son ( also an architect ) Avery Coonley Faulkner , later became significant contributors to the design of George Washington University and American University in Washington , D.C. The design ties the building to the land in the style of the Prairie School , at the same time employing the handcrafted features and human scale typical of the American Arts and Crafts ( or American Craftsman ) style . The easy access to the outdoors , ground floor classrooms , separate science laboratories , and planned outdoor play area are among the features of the design that would later be adopted by schools throughout the US after World War II . 
 The building surrounds a courtyard with a large reflecting pool . The classrooms are oriented outward , to provide views of the surrounding forest . There are no interior passages in this part of the building ; each class area has an exit to the outside , and students pass between rooms via the covered cloister , even in inclement weather . The design is meant to reinforce the " home and school " atmosphere that dates back to the Cottage School , with child @-@ sized classrooms , ten working fireplaces , draperies , and other home @-@ like details . 
 Decorative tiles designed by Henry Chapman Mercer — one of the leading figures of the Arts and Crafts Movement in the U.S. — are placed throughout the building . These tiles ( known as Moravian tiles after Mercer 's Moravian Pottery and Tile Works ) feature deep colors and a handmade appearance that complement the simple brick buildings . The tiles on the fireplaces and entry floors boast patterns in literary and educational themes , such as The Canterbury Tales in the old library . A large , tripartite tile mural on the north wall of the courtyard , also by Mercer , depicts the eastern and western hemispheres united by a ship on an allegorical journey of education . 
 In 1970 , exploring new designs in school furniture , the Institute for Educational Research worked with the Design Department of Southern Illinois University to create a series of interconnected truncated octahedrons known as " learning spaces " , which resembled an oversized beehive . Each child had his or her own semi @-@ private space with a fold @-@ down seat , reading light , and bookshelf . The goal was to provide private spaces where third grade ( eight @-@ year @-@ old ) children could develop good study habits , and the school found that the children spent 90 percent of their work time in their learning spaces . The structures were featured in local news stories and in Life magazine . ACS patented the invention and sold models to several local schools . The original structures are still in use in the third grade classroom in 2014 . 
 The Avery Coonley School was designated a historical site by the Downers Grove Historical Society in 2006 , and was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2007 , which cited the educational program along with the building and grounds for their " unique design and features that have exerted a long @-@ lasting influence on schools throughout the country " . 
 = = = Recent additions = = = 
 A new wing was added in early 1980 to provide additional space for the arts , with a large room for orchestra and music and another for studio art . Filling in the previously open east side of the courtyard , the design is nearly identical in design to the original school , built of red and white @-@ washed brick with a cloister on the courtyard side . The Gatehouse , which was built in 1929 and had served as the headmaster 's residence , was remodeled to house the early childhood program in 1988 . 
 Increased enrollment in the late 1980s and the need for more space led to another addition in 1992 . This addition included a new 17 @,@ 500 @-@ volume library , a 16 @-@ station computer lab , and a 236 @-@ seat Performing Arts Center ( PAC ) . Moravian tiles around the new foyer fireplace and library doors pay homage to the original building . The PAC " is known for its excellent acoustics " , and hosts student productions and outside artistic groups , including the Beck Institute for the Arts , which stages musical recitals there . 
 Avery Coonley added a full @-@ day kindergarten program in 2005 , again requiring more space , and a $ 4 million , 15 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 400 m2 ) middle school wing was constructed , financed through tax @-@ exempt bonds from the Village of Downers Grove . Its cream and red bricks , hipped roof , deep eaves , and detailed brickwork harmonize with the style of the earlier building . The project added modernized math and science labs , two computer labs , and seven wireless classrooms using tablet computer technology , videoconferencing , and computer controlled overhead projectors . 
 = = Curriculum = = 
 The founding educational philosophy is still evident in the modern day curriculum in the focus on learning by doing , teaching based on broad themes that cross subjects , an emphasis on collaborative projects , and a de @-@ emphasis of textbooks . There remains a close integration of art and nature in daily activities and a focus on the development of social skills and education for social responsibility . These principles , adapted in the 1970s for gifted students , have been further extended to accommodate new developments in technology and educational research . 
 ACS refers to grade levels as groups , a practice rooted in progressive education that dates back at least to the Junior Elementary School . There are three divisions of students : the early school , which includes the early childhood Program ( EC ) for three @-@ year @-@ olds and junior kindergarten ( JK ) for four @-@ year @-@ olds ; the lower school for kindergarten through group four , and middle school for groups five through eight . Each class in kindergarten through group eight has 32 students . Each lower school class is team taught by two teachers . The student @-@ to @-@ teacher ratio in the lower and middle school is 16 to 1 , 11 to 1 in kindergarten , 8 to 1 in junior kindergarten , and 7 to 1 in the early childhood program . 
 = = = Academic program = = = 
 As of 2009 , the curriculum is accelerated for each group , which is separated by grade and age ; students are instructed a minimum of one year above their current grade level . ( For example , the first group is taught at a second grade level . ) Students are grouped within their class to allow each of them work at the level of their ability , and they may work several years beyond their current level if they can do so . Students may join older groups to study subjects , which they are exceptionally advanced ; however , age groups are usually kept together " for social and emotional values " . All middle school students complete a high school level honors course in mathematics in either algebra or geometry . 
 Students explore broad learning themes at each level that allow them to learn across subjects and engage them in creative and collaborative projects . The second group , for example , spends much of their year on the study of trees , using trees as a focus for biology , mathematics , art , and creative writing . Students adopt and study a personal space in the nearby forest preserve . The year culminates with the tapping of maple trees to make syrup , which they share with the rest of the school . Each group engages different themes and group projects . Lower school students simulate an airplane flight to Paris and host a Japanese luncheon . The fourth group holds a Native American Fair , the fifth group creates an original Egyptian style mastaba , the sixth group presents a World 's Fair , and the eighth group organizes an Immigration and Ethnic Fair . 
 Science studies are enhanced by nature and outdoor experiences . Students participate in nature programs sponsored by the Forest Preserve District of DuPage County and the Illinois Department of Natural Resources , such as adopting a " Bass in the Class " , and monitoring the growth of macroinvertebrates in the DuPage River . Competition in regional and state science fairs and Science Olympiad is considered an integral part of the science program . All students are strongly encouraged to participate , and the seventh group students are required to do so . 
 All students study French , which is taught by language immersion , a technique in which they only speak French during language study . All signs in the building are written in both French and English . Students begin French instruction in junior kindergarten , and continue on to study French four times a week in groups one through eight . They culminate their study with a week @-@ long experience in Quebec in group eight , during which they only speak French . 
 Visual art study begins with drawing and painting and then advances to more complex techniques such as sculpture , stained glass , architecture , photography , and pottery . Students learn in a variety of media , including watercolor , oil pastels , charcoal , and clay . Music study begins in the early childhood program . As they progress , Avery Coonley students participate in vocal music , playing Orff instruments and recorders , dancing , and public performance . In middle school , students develop music literacy by reading and writing music , playing choir chimes , and choral singing . The study of music in culture and the history of jazz and opera are taught alongside theory and performance . 
 The drama program begins engaging students in acting and dramatic writing , directing , and the technical arts in the fourth group . Students practice both rehearsed and improvised performances to create pantomimes , monologues , films , and short plays . Their theatrical work culminates in the eighth group with the performance of one @-@ act plays the students write and direct themselves and the production of a professionally scripted full @-@ length play . Artistically inclined students can extend their arts studies outside of class in optional activities including Art Club , Chorus , Orchestra , Tech Club , Drama Club , and the Variety Show . 
 Avery Coonley teaches eight core values : appreciation of the individual , civility , gratitude , honesty , kindness and consideration , responsibility , and volunteerism . These ideals are part of the character development program as " building blocks " , which are reinforced daily on the campus and in the family through literature selections sent home for parent participation . 
 = = = Technology = = = 
 Avery Coonley began using computers for instruction in 1971 and offering computer programming to students as young as the fourth group in 1976 . Desktop computers were brought into the classrooms to teach math , language arts , music , art , and computer programming , in 1978 . Students begin learning basic keyboard and mouse skills in kindergarten and progress to multimedia presentations , data management , and software coding in the eighth group . 
 In what ACS calls " one @-@ to @-@ one computing " , every student in the fifth group through the eighth group receives a tablet computer , which they use to manage their daily schedules , work on class assignments , and prepare special projects . Students in early childhood and junior kindergarten have shared tablets available , and each kindergarten through the fourth group class has at least four . Students study in classrooms equipped with wireless overhead projectors , manipulate programs and presentations on touchscreen @-@ equipped SMART board systems , and engage in self @-@ paced classroom learning using <unk> wireless response systems . Students , teachers , and parents communicate and interact online via a school @-@ wide intranet and an <unk> for parents . Sixteen dual platform <unk> were added in 2009 for computer lab work . 
 = = Traditions = = 
 A hallmark of the curriculum in the earliest days was study organized around major themes — trees , Shakespeare , Egypt and other subjects — that built over the school year into major class projects , performances , and all @-@ school gatherings . Many of these themes and events have grown into lasting school traditions , with which the school community has come to identify each group and certain times of year . One the school 's most cherished traditions , tapping maple trees to make syrup , began with the move to the new building in 1929 . The Spring Fair , in which groups one through five each prepare and perform their own dance , has been held annually since the 1930s — the Maypole dance by the fifth group dates back to the beginning of the Cottage School . 
 The annual third group overnight nature trip to Wisconsin , dates back to 1974 , and the eighth group French immersion trip began in the 1970s with trips to Paris and since the mid @-@ 1990s to Quebec . Other lower school traditions , such as the Native American Fair and class visit to the Coonley Estate , also have a long history at Avery Coonley . Middle school traditions include the alternating annual Greek and Shakespeare <unk> , the sixth group World 's Fair , and a seventh group trip to Washington , DC . 
 In the annual Thanksgiving Program , the students , in identical brown capes , silently construct a large cornucopia of fruits and vegetables in a ceremony choreographed to music prepared by each class . The food is later donated to the Salvation Army . It is the most treasured of the school traditions , and has been performed every year , virtually unchanged , since 1929 . 
 = = Extracurricular activities = = 
 Many of the extracurricular activities offered at ACS offer an extension of classroom subjects and an opportunity for students to pursue those studies in additional depth . Within the arts program , chorus , creative writing , drama , art , and three levels of orchestra are offered as optional activities . Students in these groups have opportunities to perform and exhibit their work throughout the year . The Book Club is available to students in groups six and above to extend the reading program . Computer Club , Creative Writing Club , Art Club , French Film Club , and Drama Club also offer opportunities to build on classroom activities . 
 Student Council is primarily a service organization , which organizes charitable fund raising and community service opportunities in which all students can participate . Two representatives are elected from each group , one through eight , for each school year . Students may also volunteer for the Annual staff , which edits and produces the yearbook , Reflections . 
 Intramural sports are offered to students in group five and interscholastic sports are available in groups five through eight . ACS competes in the West DuPage Elementary School Association ( <unk> ) Conference . Team sports include co @-@ ed soccer and girls ' volleyball in the fall , boys ' and girls ' basketball in the winter , and co @-@ ed track in the spring . There are no team tryouts and all students are free to participate . 
 ACS students participate actively in academic competitions at the state and national level , including <unk> , Science Olympiad , and other math and science competitions , as well spelling bees , geography bees , and contests in other subjects . The Chess Club competes locally , and won the first @-@ place trophy in the Naperville Chess Tournament in 2009 . 
 = = Student body and finances = = 
 Admission is competitive and decisions are based on evaluations of applicants ' intellectual ability , social and emotional maturity , and readiness for the accelerated program of study . Applicants for kindergarten through eighth group must submit IQ test results at or above the 91st percentile ( over 120 on the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence ( <unk> ) or Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children ( <unk> ) ) , with consistent <unk> scores , to qualify for consideration . Evaluations are based on report cards , parent questionnaires , teacher recommendations , and in @-@ person assessments by the faculty . Early childhood through kindergarten applicants are screened in one @-@ hour play sessions . Applicants for groups one and two are invited for a half @-@ day school visit , and older applicants for an entire day , where they are assessed by teachers in the actual classroom setting . 
 Avery Coonley serves 378 students aged 3 through 14 as of 2010 , with a nearly even ratio of males to females in each grade . ACS seeks to achieve ethnic diversity in every group , and offers limited need @-@ based aid to families of children who would otherwise be unable to attend . The student body is " primarily middle- and upper @-@ class white suburban children " , and students " come from some of the most affluent families " in Chicago 's western suburbs , but thirty percent of the students are non @-@ white . 
 Tuition for kindergarten through group eight was $ 16 @,@ 750 , junior kindergarten was $ 9 @,@ 500 , and early childhood $ 4 @,@ 850 in 2009 . The Annual Giving Fund makes up 3 @.@ 5 percent and the Annual Auction another 5 percent of the operating budget ( $ 5 @.@ 9 million in 2008 – 2009 ) . 
 = = Academic achievement = = 
 " Avery Coonley reports that scores on the Iowa Test of Basic Skills , an exam given in schools across the United States , are in the top 1 percent in the nation " , with average scores of 99 in all eight grades and all four test sections ( vocabulary , comprehension , language arts , and mathematics ) . Avery Coonley was one of seventeen Illinois schools recognized as a Blue Ribbon School by the United States Department of Education in 1987 – 88 for " excellence in student success , school philosophy , curriculum , leadership , and climate " . Over five percent of Avery Coonley graduates since 1989 have been admitted to the nationally recognized Illinois Math and Science Academy ( IMSA ) , Illinois ' public , competitive @-@ entry , boarding school for top math and science students . 
 Avery Coonley students have a record of top honors at the state and national level in science , math , geography and other subjects stretching back as far as 1989 . In recent competitions , students won 24 Gold Medals at the 2009 Illinois Junior Academy of Science ( IJAS ) Science Fair , and won the Science Olympiad Jr . High State Championship . Avery Coonley won the 2009 IMSA Junior High Mathematics Competition ( with four out of five first place awards ) and placed second in the 2009 Illinois State <unk> competition . In 2008 , a seventh group student placed in the top 0 @.@ 2 percent of competitors from around the world with a perfect score in the 24th annual American Mathematics Contest . 
 In 2009 , the seventh and eighth group Social Studies teams both placed third in the nation at the National Social Studies League contest and an ACS student won the Illinois Geography Bee , The same year , two eighth group students received perfect scores on Le Grand Concours — the National French Contest of the American Association of Teachers of French . Of the 40 Avery Coonley students who took Le Grand Concours , 32 placed in the top ten in the nation at their grade level . Avery Coonley third group students " won highest honors in the <unk> Challenge , a national language arts competition " in 2007 , placing eighth in the nation out of more than 200 teams . 
 Controversy erupted in 1994 , when ACS won the Illinois State Science Fair team competition for the fourth year in a row , prompting the IJAS " to banish the school from team competition for [ the ] next year , on the grounds that their students were ' just too good . ' " The incident attracted national attention and was decried as an example of the " dumbing down " of education and the victory of self @-@ esteem over excellence in schools . The IJAS relented under pressure from the media , but eliminated the team competition altogether in future years . Avery Coonley students won 24 top individual awards the following year . 
 = SMS Cormoran ( 1892 ) = 
 SMS Cormoran ( " His Majesty 's Ship Cormorant " ) was an unprotected cruiser of the Bussard class , the fifth member of a class of six ships . She was built for the Imperial German Navy for overseas duty . The cruiser 's keel was laid down in Danzig in 1890 ; she was launched in May 1892 and commissioned in July 1893 . Cormoran was armed with a main battery of eight 10 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns , and could steam at a speed of 15 @.@ 5 knots ( 28 @.@ 7 km / h ; 17 @.@ 8 mph ) . 
 Cormoran spent the majority of her career abroad , usually in Germany 's South Pacific colonies in the Samoan Islands . Her duties there typically consisted of survey work and suppressing colonial unrest . She briefly cruised in South African waters in late 1894 and early 1895 before steaming to the Pacific . She participated in the seizure of the Kiautschou Bay concession in the Shandong Peninsula in China in 1897 . Cormoran returned to Germany in 1903 and was modernized in 1907 – 08 . The following year , she returned to the South Pacific , where she remained until the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 . Docked in Tsingtau for repairs at the onset of hostilities , she was unable to actively take part in the fighting . She was therefore disarmed and scuttled in the harbor ; her guns were used to strengthen the defenses of the port . 
 = = Description = = 
 Cormoran was 82 @.@ 6 meters ( 271 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 12 @.@ 7 m ( 42 ft ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 42 m ( 14 @.@ 5 ft ) forward . She displaced 1 @,@ 864 t ( 1 @,@ 835 long tons ; 2 @,@ 055 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two horizontal 3 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines powered by four coal @-@ fired cylindrical boilers . These provided a top speed of 15 @.@ 5 kn ( 28 @.@ 7 km / h ; 17 @.@ 8 mph ) and a range of approximately 2 @,@ 950 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 460 km ; 3 @,@ 390 mi ) at 9 kn ( 17 km / h ; 10 mph ) . She had a crew of 9 officers and 152 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with eight 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 35 quick @-@ firing ( QF ) guns in single pedestal mounts , supplied with 800 rounds of ammunition in total . They had a range of 10 @,@ 800 m ( 35 @,@ 400 ft ) . Two guns were placed side by side forward , two on each broadside , and two side by side aft . The gun armament was rounded out by five Hotchkiss guns . She was also equipped with two 35 cm ( 14 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes , both of which were mounted on the deck . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Cormoran was built by the Kaiserliche Werft ( Imperial Shipyard ) in Danzig . Her keel was laid in 1890 and her completed hull was launched on 17 May 1892 . Kaiser Wilhelm II attended the launching ceremony with the senior director of the Kaiserliche Werft . Work was completed by 25 July 1893 , when she was commissioned into the Imperial German Navy . Following her commissioning , she underwent two months of sea trials , which were completed on 22 September . Starting in 1894 , Cormoran was assigned to overseas service in Germany 's colonial possessions . She was initially ordered on 2 October to the East Asia Station to replace the gunboat SMS Wolf , but the rising tensions in South Africa led the Navy to send the new cruiser to German East Africa to secure German interests in the region instead . 
 On 16 October , Cormoran and her newly commissioned sister ship Condor left Germany , bound for East Africa . They arrived in Lourenço Marques , the capital of Portuguese Mozambique , on 15 December . Cormoran remained there for the next seven months . In January 1895 , she towed the Portuguese cruiser Afonso de Albuquerque back to Lourenço Marques . In July , Condor arrived there to replace Cormoran ; the latter was now free to return to her original deployment to East Asian waters . She left East Africa on 5 July . While en route , she stopped in Muscat , Oman , where she paid an official visit to the sultan . On 5 August while steaming in the Strait of Hormuz , the safety valve on the starboard low @-@ pressure cylinder of the starboard engine was damaged . As a result , Cormoran had to put into Bushehr , Persia , for repairs . Following completion of the repair work , Cormoran cruised to Basra via the Shatt al @-@ Arab , where she paid visits to the local German consul and Turkish authorities . 
 = = = First deployment to the Pacific = = = 
 On 13 September 1895 , Cormoran arrived in Singapore and joined the East Asia Division under the command of Rear Admiral Hoffmann , who flew his flag in the armored cruiser SMS Kaiser . In July 1896 , she participated in the recovery of the stranded gunboat Iltis . In October and November 1897 , Cormoran steamed up the Yangtze River to Hankow . She was also involved in the occupation of the Kiautschou Bay concession . She went to the Philippines during the Spanish – American War in May 1898 ; the American cruiser USS Raleigh prevented Cormoran from entering Cavite . In November , she towed Kaiser from <unk> Bay in Fujian to Hong Kong for repairs . The tense political situation in German Samoa prompted the Admiralstab ( Admiralty Staff ) to send Cormoran to reinforce her sisters Bussard and Falke there . 
 While en route to Samoa on the night of 23 – 24 March 1899 , Cormoran ran aground on the Whirlwind Reef , north of the western tip of New Pomerania . She was stuck on the reef amidships , so that her bow was sticking about a meter out of the water . The crew attempted to lighten the ship by removing coal and ammunition , but she remained grounded on the reef . The ship 's commander , Korvettenkapitän Hugo Emsmann , sent the steam pinnace and a dinghy with two officers and eleven men , towing a load of coal , to Friedrich @-@ Wilhelmshafen , some 162 nautical miles ( 300 km ; 186 mi ) away . There , they met the steamer Stettin , which arrived on the scene on 29 March . Emsmann then decided to remove all unnecessary coal and ammunition — some of which was put ashore and the rest simply thrown overboard — to cut away the fore and mainmast , and to move the stern guns forward . These measures allowed the ship to float free from the reef . The crew then re @-@ stowed the supplies that had been sent ashore before returning to Friedrich @-@ Wilhelmshafen . There , her seaworthiness was inspected , and additional supplies were brought aboard . Cormoran then steamed to Sydney for dry @-@ docking ; a full inspection of her hull revealed that it had only been slightly damaged . Repairs lasted until early June . 
 Cormoran returned to Sydney in mid @-@ June 1900 for her annual overhaul . Part of her crew was replaced ; these men were then sent to China to take part in the suppression of the Boxer Rebellion . On 2 October , Cormoran anchored in Apia , before embarking on a tour of the German Pacific colonies . Another overhaul in Sydney followed , which lasted from 15 March to 1 May 1901 . During this period , she and the protected cruiser Hansa represented Germany during the first Parliament of Australia in Melbourne . While on the return journey to Samoa , Cormoran was sent to the St Matthias Islands in the Bismarck Archipelago , where a German researcher named <unk> had been murdered , along with his assistant . There , Cormoran and the survey vessel Möwe attacked the islanders responsible for the murders . On 28 July , Cormoran had returned to Apia , and through November , the ship was occupied with survey work and trips to the other islands . 
 In 1902 , she again visited the Bismarck Archipelago and the Marshall Islands . Further repairs were effected in Sydney , and the cruiser was back in Apia by 18 August . Another tour of Germany 's colonies began on 23 September . She returned to Sydney for periodic maintenance in mid @-@ March 1903 , and there she received the order to return to Germany . Cormoran departed Sydney on 23 May , bound for Germany ; she reached Kiel on 13 September . While in Germany , she served a stint in the main fleet . The ship was modernized during a lengthy reconstruction that started in 1907 at the Kaiserliche Werft in Danzig . New boilers manufactured by J W Klawitter in Danzig were installed , and her sailing rig was reduced . A new , larger conning tower was also installed . Work was completed in 1908 , and on 1 May 1909 , Cormoran was recommissioned for service in the Pacific . 
 = = = Second deployment to the Pacific = = = 
 While in Malta on 8 June 1909 , she received orders to proceed to Asia Minor , where unrest in Turkey and violence against Armenians was prompting German intervention . She joined the cruisers Stettin and Lübeck , and took on some 300 Armenians to protect them from harassment . On 9 July , while moored in Port Said , she received the order to resume her voyage to the Pacific . Cormoran was forced to stop in Jeddah for repairs to her boilers . After reaching the Pacific , she began coastal survey work , and her landing party led a punitive expedition against cannibals in Kaiser @-@ Wilhelmsland . On 3 November , she took part in a flag raising ceremony in Blanche Bay commemorating the German possession of New Pomerania . Three days later , her crew participated in the groundbreaking ceremony for a Bismarck tower in Toma , a town southwest of the capital , Herbertshöhe . 
 On 13 November , Cormoran embarked the governor in Herbertshöhe , and went first to Friedrich @-@ Wilhelmshafen , then to Hansa @-@ Hafen , and then to the Kaiserin @-@ Augusta River . The cruiser steamed 183 nautical miles ( 339 km ; 211 mi ) up the river before being ordered to reverse course . By 22 November , she had reached the mouth of the river , and by 8 January 1910 , she had moored in Apia once again . She participated in the celebrations for the tenth anniversary of the German annexation of the islands , which lasted from 28 February to 3 March . While on a trip to Hong Kong , she was caught in a hurricane , which did significant damage to the cruiser . Her sides were slightly pushed in and all of her boats were damaged by the storm . Temporary repairs were effected in Nouméa in New Caledonia . Cormoran finally arrived in Hong Kong on 3 May ; by 15 July , she had returned to Apia . She was thereafter joined by her sister Condor , the armored cruiser Scharnhorst and the light cruisers Emden and Nürnberg from the East Asia Squadron . The five ships cruised together until , on 13 December while in Rabaul , they were ordered to proceed to Ponape to suppress the Sokehs Rebellion . They arrived on 19 December and operated in the area until 22 February , with Cormoran , Emden and Nürnberg landing shore parties in support of Polizei @-@ Soldaten ( a force of police officers ) deployed from German New Guinea . 
 On 23 March , Cormoran returned to Sydney for yet another annual overhaul . Afterward , she resumed her typical cruising duties in the German Pacific colonies . In September , she and the steamer Planet pulled free the Norwegian barque Fram , which had run aground . She received another major overhaul in Tsingtau in May 1912 , which was followed by surveying cruises in the German colonies . She did not return to Apia until 10 January 1913 . Cormoran was reclassified as a gunboat on 24 February 1913 by order of Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz , the State Secretary of the Reichsmarineamt ( Imperial Navy Office ) . From 4 June to 5 July , she underwent repairs in Sydney . She was then obliged to stop in Bougainville due to tribal feuds on the island . She landed her shore party to assist the <unk> in suppressing the conflict . She departed for Tsingtau for further repair work in early 1914 , arriving on 30 May . 
 As the political situation in Europe worsened in July 1914 , the senior officer in Tsingtau at the time , Fregattenkapitän ( Frigate Captain ) Karl von Müller , the commander of Emden , ordered the repair work to Cormoran to be accelerated . After the outbreak of war in early August , Emden captured the Russian steamer Ryazan and brought her back to Tsingtau . Since Cormoran was still out of service , she was decommissioned and her crew was used to man Ryazan , which was commissioned as the auxiliary cruiser Cormoran . Men from the gunboats Iltis and Vaterland , along with some war volunteers , joined them aboard the new auxiliary cruiser . Much of her weaponry was removed to strengthen the shore defenses at Tsingtau on 6 August 1914 to protect the concession from British attack . She was scuttled in the harbor on the night of 28 – 29 September 1914 by the staff of the Imperial Dockyard to prevent her from being captured . 
 = Right Thoughts , Right Words , Right Action = 
 Right Thoughts , Right Words , Right Action ( also known simply as Right Action ) is the fourth studio album by Scottish indie rock band Franz Ferdinand . It was released through the Domino Recording Company on 26 August 2013 in the United Kingdom and on 27 August in the United States . It is the band 's first studio album since Tonight : Franz Ferdinand , which was released four years earlier . 
 Recorded during 2013 , the album was recorded in multiple studios in different locations . It also features production from multiple different musicians . Similar to Tonight , the album features more of a dance @-@ oriented sound throughout . The band focused on making a generally positive and uplifting album with Right Thoughts , Right Words , Right Action . Band member Alex Kapranos , who provided production on the album , labeled it the band 's " most positive record " , stating that the album title reflects the mood of the album as well as the mood of the band members during the recording of the album . 
 The album received generally favourable reviews from music critics upon its release . It also had a significant commercial performance , with the album charting in the top 10 in several countries , including the band 's home country of Scotland , where it peaked at number 2 , and the UK , where it peaked at number 6 . The album spawned six singles : " Right Action " , " Love Illumination " , " Evil Eye " , " Bullet " , " Fresh Strawberries " , and " Stand on the Horizon " . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 The band previewed many of their new tracks at live performances over 2012 and 2013 . The album was recorded during 2013 at Alex Kapranos ' Black Pudding Studio in Glasgow , Scotland , Nick McCarthy 's Sausage Studios and Mark Ralph 's Club Ralph in London , England , and Björn <unk> 's Ingrid Studio in Stockholm , Sweden . Kapranos described the album direction as " forward " and revealed that the band decided to keep a low profile about things as their last album was " tainted " by misinformation prior to its release . Regarding the lyrics , Kapranos said : 
 the idea of the cynic 's search for optimism and the sceptic 's search for a manual crop up here and there . I 've always liked the lead character in Alasdair Gray 's Lanark growing the hard scales to defend the soft inner @-@ self from the world . Socially awkward asthmatic with a self @-@ consuming imagination . My 19 @-@ year @-@ old self was electrified . Maybe the album is about how to shed those scales . " 
 = = = Album title = = = 
 Kapranos had talked about the background of the album title in a documentary about the album : 
 I think when you name a record , you have to choose something which you feel reflects the record or that collection of songs . You also want to choose something that reflects not just the mood of the record , but the mood of the people who made it ... the mood of those people when they recorded it , and there were quite a few things that sort of came up as ideas , but Right Thoughts , Right Words , Right Action seemed to sum it up best . It 's probably the most positive record we 've made , and the band have been , yeah , the most optimistic we 've been since before we had any encounter with the music industry ... probably because we 've been sort of keeping a low profile for a while and not talking about ourselves too much . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 For Right Thoughts , Right Words , Right Action , Franz Ferdinand collaborated with other artists for parts of the album . Hot Chip band members Joe Goddard and Alexis Taylor produced the opening track " Right Action " and co @-@ produced the final track " Goodbye Lovers and Friends " , Norwegian DJ Todd Terje co @-@ produced the tracks " Evil Eye " and " Stand on the Horizon " , and Peter Bjorn and John band member Björn <unk> produced " Treason ! Animals . " and co @-@ produced " The Universe Expanded " . All tracks on the album were written by Alex Kapranos and Nick McCarthy , with additional writing from Bob Hardy on " Right Action " and " The Universe Expanded " as well as Alexander <unk> on " Bullet " . Kapranos also co @-@ produced the majority of the album under the pseudonym " Prince House Rabbit " , with the exception of " Right Action " and " Treason ! Animals . " 
 Right Thoughts , Right Words , Right Action features indie rock , dance @-@ punk , and disco @-@ rock . The opening line to " Right Action " was inspired by a postcard Alex Kapranos had found in London , which featured the phrase " Come home , practically all is nearly forgiven " . The following line " Right thoughts , right words , right action " was thought of as a " great response " to the former by Kapranos . " Evil Eye " is about the evil eye and all @-@ seeing eye , which are things that Kapranos was very interested about . The guitar riff to " Love Illumination " was created by Kapranos and originally thought of as " too rocky " by Nick McCarthy , but he later claimed that he enjoyed playing it . The song was fully written and recorded during a weekend session at McCarthy 's Sausage Studio . Kapranos explained the meaning of the song by stating : 
 We all feel as sensitive to satisfaction at times . We can look outside us and see nothing but destruction , avarice , and boredom . So we look to find that love where we can find it . Some people look to Hollywood , some people look to Blackpool and the bright lights of Blackpool . That 's probably where I would look . 
 " Stand on the Horizon " was labeled by Kapranos as something neither Franz Ferdinand or Todd Terje , the co @-@ producer of the song , have done before . He also called the ending of the song " a beautiful , uplifting piece of music " . For " Fresh Strawberries " , the band called upon Roxanne Clifford of Veronica Falls to provide additional vocals for the song . The band originally wanted a falsetto section for the song , but they were not able to reach the necessary high notes themselves , which is why they wanted Clifford to provide vocals . The idea for " The Universe Expanded " comes from the theory of universe expansion . Kapranos calls the song both " heartbreaking " and " funny " at the same time . The song also features a heartbeat for a kick drum and scratches of stubble for hi @-@ hats . 
 = = Release = = 
 The album was announced on 14 May 2013 with a teaser trailer video along with updates from the band 's social networks , revealing the cover art , the album title and the full track listing . On the same day , the album was also made available to pre @-@ order from Domino in various versions . The album became available for free streaming on the NPR Music website . The album is also available to stream on Spotify . The album was released as a digital download , CD , deluxe double CD , 12 " vinyl , and deluxe double 12 " vinyl packaged in a hand numbered die @-@ cut gatefold sleeve . The exclusive bonus disc in both the double CD and double vinyl LP , entitled Right Notes , Right Words , Wrong Order , is a live session recording captured at Konk Studios in London . Right Thoughts , Right Words , Right Actions - The Passport Edition is a deluxe package limited to 500 copies worldwide and features a deluxe edition of each physical format of the album , all 7 " and 12 " singles and access to the highest quality audio files possible as well as exclusive tracks and content . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 The first two singles from the album were " Right Action " and " Love Illumination " . The official audio tracks for the songs were released on 27 June 2013 onto YouTube . The two songs were also released as a pink double A @-@ side 7 " single on 29 June . On 18 August 2013 , an EP titled Right Action , featuring " Right Action " , " Love Illumination " and two live tracks , was released digitally . To date , " Right Action " has had moderate success , reaching number 39 on the UK Indie Chart , number 28 on the US Alternative music Billboard Chart , and number 22 on the Japanese Singles Chart . The third single from the album , " Evil Eye " , was released on 28 October 2013 . The song received radio airplay on multiple stations , including BBC Radio 2 . The fourth single to promote the album was " Bullet " , released on 17 January 2014 in New Zealand , and on 20 January 2014 in the UK . " Fresh Strawberries " was digitally released as the fifth single on 4 April 2014 in Australia and New Zealand , and on 7 April 2014 in the UK . A 7 " vinyl release was released on 7 May 2014 , featuring a song titled " <unk> Mund " as the B @-@ side , which is sung entirely in German by Nick McCarthy . The sixth single , " Stand on the Horizon " , was released on 28 July 2014 . 
 = = = Music videos = = = 
 The " Right Action " official video was released on 7 July 2013 , directed by Jonas Odell , and the video for " Love Illumination " was released on 24 July 2013 , directed by Tim <unk> . On YouTube , the " Right Action " music video has received over 3 million views and the " Love Illumination " music video has received over 4 million views . The " Evil Eye " official music video was released on 8 September 2013 and was directed by Diane Martel , who is known for directing videos for various Top 3 hits such as " Blurred Lines " , " Just Give Me a Reason " , " We Can 't Stop " , and one of the bands ' hit singles , " Do You Want To " . The band released the official video for " Bullet " on 18 November 2013 and was directed by Andy Knowles . The official music video for " Fresh Strawberries " was released on 12 March 2014 and was directed by Margarita <unk> . The official music video for " Stand on the Horizon " was released on 3 August 2014 and was directed by Karan <unk> . 
 = = = Concerts = = = 
 On 20 August 2013 , the band played at Electric Brixton in London , for a crowd of approximately 1 @,@ 500 fans . The opening song was " Right Action " and the concert featured several songs of the new album . A concert in Glasgow followed on 21 August 2013 . The band went on a world tour until the near end of 2014 , performing both regular shows as well as concerts at several music festivals . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Right Thoughts , Right Words , Right Action received positive reviews from music critics . On the critic review aggregator site Metacritic , the album holds a score of 71 / 100 , based on 39 reviews , indicating " generally favourable " reviews . At Digital Spy , Adam Silverstein commends that " more often than not , Right Thoughts , Right Words , Right Action is this band sharpening their particular surefire indie to glittering distinction . " Commenting on the band 's future , he says that the " half @-@ sorry , half @-@ bitter ' Goodbye Lovers & Friends ' is probably not Franz Ferdinand 's very last act , even if Kapranos proclaiming in the final seconds ' But this really is the end ' would make one awesome blowout . Although after delivering a record as good as this , they can take as long as they want " . At The A.V. Club , Annie Zaleski wrote positively of the musical differences between many of this album 's tracks compared to the band 's prior work , adding : " Admittedly , these more nuanced Right Thoughts , Right Words , Right Action sounds aren 't as easily accessible ; it 's much easier to gravitate toward more familiar raucous post @-@ punk ( ' Bullet , ' ' Right Action ' ) or the Clash @-@ reminiscent punk @-@ funk of ' Evil Eye . ' But by expanding its worldview , Franz Ferdinand has very nicely settled onto a path toward career longevity . " 
 Writing for Mojo , Victoria Segal says that " Franz Ferdinand remain in robust good health , athletic aesthetes who have yet to break their stride . There 's no great leap forward here but the spring in their step is unmistakable . All present , all correct . " At Alternative Press , Reed Fischer called the title " resolute " , and said that " fortunately , his cruelty translates into charming melodies here that almost excuse the long wait for them . " Conversely , Tim Stegall in The Austin Chronicle wrote : " [ T ] he satisfaction appears sonic alone : Not a song sticks . It 's sheer style that carries this disc . " Caleb Caldwell for Slant Magazine wrote : 
 More or less the Scottish answer to American bands like Interpol and the Strokes , Franz Ferdinand , with their du @-@ jour cool and deft combination of insular art flair and dance @-@ floor populism , was hailed by British hype machine New Musical Express as the dawn of a new rock revolution . The band 's blue @-@ <unk> appeal , however , started to slip after 2009 's overly serious concept album Tonight : Franz Ferdinand . Four years later , the zeitgeist may prefer its rock stars with suspenders and banjos , but Franz Ferdinand 's Right Thoughts , Right Words , Right Action is an unapologetically swaggering disco @-@ rock album that refuses to overstay its welcome . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Personnel adapted from album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Make Way for Ducklings = 
 Make Way for Ducklings is a children 's picture book written and illustrated by Robert McCloskey . First published in 1941 , the book tells the story of a pair of mallards who decide to raise their family on an island in the lagoon in Boston Public Garden , a park in the center of Boston . 
 Make Way for Ducklings won the 1942 Caldecott Medal for McCloskey 's illustrations , executed in charcoal then lithographed on zinc plates . As of 2003 , the book had sold over two million copies . The book 's popularity led to the construction of a statue by Nancy Schön in the Public Garden of the mother duck and her eight ducklings , which is a popular destination for children and adults alike . In 1991 , Barbara Bush gave a duplicate of this sculpture to Raisa Gorbachev as part of the START Treaty , and the work is displayed in Moscow 's Novodevichy Park . 
 The book is the official children 's book of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts . Praise for the book is still high over 70 years since its first publication , mainly for the enhancing illustrations and effective pacing . It was criticised for having a loose plot , however . The book is popular worldwide . 
 The names of the ducklings mentioned in the story are : Jack , <unk> , Lack , Mack , Nack , <unk> , Pack and Quack . 
 = = Background = = 
 Make Way for Ducklings , published in 1941 , was McCloskey 's second book and was the winner of the Caldecott Medal in 1942 . In his acceptance speech , McCloskey explained his motivation for the story . While attending the Vesper George Art School in the early 1930s , he would spend time in the Public Garden feeding the ducks . After some time away , he returned to Boston to paint a mural and created a draft of the book after inspiration from May Massee . To better illustrate the story , McCloskey spent time at the American Museum of Natural History in New York , visited an ornithologist , and eventually brought home for models six ducklings to live in his studio at 280 West 12th Street , apartment 4C , in New York 's West Village . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story begins as Mr. and Mrs. Mallard fly over various potential locations around the city of Boston , Massachusetts ( United States ) to start a family . Each time Mr. Mallard selects a location , Mrs. Mallard finds something wrong with it . Tired from their search , the mallards land at the Public Garden Lagoon to spend the night . In the morning , a swan boat passes by the mallards . The mallards mistake the swan boat for a real bird and enjoy peanuts thrown by the people on the boat . Mrs. Mallard suggests that they build their nest in the Public Garden . However , just as she says this , she is nearly run down by a passing bicyclist . The mallards continue their search , flying over Boston landmarks such as Beacon Hill , the Massachusetts State House , and Louisburg Square . The Mallards finally decide on an island in the Charles River . From this island , the Mallards visit a policeman named Michael on the shore , who feeds them peanuts every day . 
 Shortly thereafter , the Mallards molt , and would not be able to fly until their new wings grew again , and Mrs. Mallard hatches eight ducklings named Jack , <unk> , Lack , Mack , Nack , <unk> , Pack , and Quack . After the ducklings are born , Mr. Mallard decides to take a trip up the river to see what the rest of it is like . Mr. and Mrs. Mallard agree to meet at the Public Garden in one week . In the meantime , Mrs. Mallard teaches the eight ducklings all they need to know about being ducks , such as swimming , diving , marching along , and to avoid dangers such as bicycles and other wheeled objects . 
 One week later , Mrs. Mallard leads the ducklings ashore and straight to the highway in hopes of crossing to reach the Garden , but she has trouble crossing as the cars will not yield to her . Michael , the policeman who the Mallards visited , stops traffic for the family to cross . Michael calls police headquarters and instructs them to send a police car to stop traffic along the route for the ducks . The ducks cross the highway , Embankment Road ( Storrow Drive had yet to be constructed when the book was written ) , then proceed down Mount Vernon Street to Charles Street where they head south to the Garden . The people on the streets admire the family of ducks . When the family must cross Beacon Street to enter the Garden , there are four policeman standing in the intersection stopping traffic to make way for the ducklings . Mr. Mallard is waiting in the Public Garden for the rest of the family . Finally , the family decides to stay in the Garden and lives happily ever after . They end each day searching for peanuts and food , and when night falls , they swim to their little island and go to sleep . 
 = = Illustrations = = 
 Illustrated with sepia drawings rather than the traditional black @-@ and @-@ white pictures found in most children ’ s books of the day , the book , which received the 1942 Caldecott Medal for its illustrations , has continued to garner praise years after its first publishing . The drawings of Boston represent a duck 's eye view of the city . Each of the individual ducklings is " bored , inquisitive , sleepy , or they are scratching , talking over their backs one to another , running to catch up with the line " . Children identify with the ducklings because they behave as children do . The comforting message shows parents as caretakers , protectors , and teachers . According to fellow Caldecott winner Paul O. <unk> , " I realized that if the action in the drawings were to move from left to right , the ducks could not have been shown passing the Corner Book Shop , which is a wonderful detail in the story ... He clearly knew these streets very well . " " ' Robert McCloskey 's unusual and stunning pictures have long been a delight for their fun as well as their spirit of place . ' -- The Horn Book " 
 = = Reaction = = 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Make Way for Ducklings has been continuously in print since it was first published . As of 2003 , the book had sold over two million copies . In September 2006 the hardcover edition of the book ranked # 2 @,@ 182 in sales at Amazon.com and # 1 @,@ 838 in sales at Barnes & Noble . The story has also been published in paperback and audiobook . 
 When it was first released in 1941 , Ellen Buell of The New York Times called the book " one of the merriest we have had in a long time " , praising the understated comedic aspect of the procession down Beacon Street , as well as McCloskey 's " fine large pictures " which simultaneously demonstrate " economy of line " and " wealth of detail " . 
 Viking publishing planned to release a 75th @-@ anniversary edition of the classic in March 2016 . 
 = = = Critical commentary = = = 
 One critic , Alice Fannin , says the " loosely plotted " story gives no true explanation for why Mr. Mallard leaves the island in the Charles River or why the Mallards did not simply stay on the lagoon island in the first place and avoid the bicyclists on the shore . However , McCloskey has stated himself that he thinks of himself as an artist who writes children 's books and not vice versa . Fannin also finds the characterization lacking , that is , the Mallards represent " rather stereotypically concerned parents " , often showing the same facial expressions and rarely showing expressiveness . 
 Another critic has positively commented on McCloskey 's use of page breaks as a pacing technique . McCloskey 's use of one @-@ sentence pages forces the reader to quickly turn the page , enhancing the sense of motion , especially during the home search and when Mrs. Mallard teaches the ducklings their basic skills . McCloskey also employs this page break method to heighten surprise . When searching for a home , Mr. and Mrs. Mallard seem to have found a home on page eleven . 
 " ' Good , ' said Mr. Mallard , delighted that at last Mrs. Mallard had found a place that suited her . But — " ( p . 11 ) 
 Then , they encounter a sudden problem with the chosen location when Mrs. Mallard is nearly run over by a bicyclist on page thirteen . 
 = = = Gender roles = = = 
 Make Way for Ducklings was published in the 1940s . Many books of the time portray a male dominated society , a trend which Make Way for Ducklings does not follow . In context , the story takes place during wartime as fathers were being drafted and sent to Europe , requiring more social support for single parent families . McCloskey presented Mrs. Mallard as an " independent and <unk> female character . " 
 When Mr. Mallard leaves on questionable purpose , Mrs. Mallard is charged with raising their ducklings alone . McCloskey portrays Mrs. Mallard as a capable woman who does not need the support of a male character . This strong portrayal has led one critic to label the book as " pre @-@ feminist " . 
 = = = Surveys = = = 
 Based on a 2007 online poll , the National Education Association named Make Way for Ducklings one of its " Teachers ' Top 100 Books for Children . " In 2012 it was ranked number six among the " Top 100 Picture Books " in a survey published by School Library Journal . 
 = = Cultural effects = = 
 The city of Boston , the setting of the book , has whole @-@ heartedly embraced the story . In the Public Garden , where the Mallards eventually settled , a bronze statue has been erected of Mrs. Mallard and her eight ducklings . While the tallest statue stands only 38 inches ( <unk> meters ) tall , the caravan of bronze ducks set in Boston cobblestone spans 35 feet ( 10 @.@ 67 m ) from front to back . The statue , installed October 4 , 1987 , was a tribute to Robert McCloskey " whose story ... has made the Boston Public Garden familiar to children throughout the world . " 
 Since 1978 , the city has hosted an annual Duckling Day parade each spring , with children and their parents dressed as ducklings . Part of the route retraces the path taken by Mrs. Mallard and her ducklings to get to the Public Garden . 
 In 2000 , schoolchildren from Canton , Massachusetts decided that the book was worthy of being the official children 's book of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and went to their state legislature to get a bill passed declaring it so . However , legislators from Springfield , Massachusetts blocked the legislation on the grounds the official book should be by Springfield native Dr. Seuss . Legislators reached a compromise when they agreed to make Dr. Seuss the official children 's author of the commonwealth and Make Way for Ducklings the official children 's book . 
 A statue similar to the one in the Boston Public Garden was erected in Novodevichy Park in Moscow as part of the START Treaty by Acton , Massachusetts landscape and construction company <unk> & Co . Inc. on July 30 , 1991 . The equipment , statues , cobblestones , and workers were all flown by the US Air Force in a C5 containing the heavy equipment , diesel fuel , and other assorted tools they would need . The individual statues , which were in total length , 40 feet ( 12 m ) long , were presented by then United States First Lady Barbara Bush to Russian First Lady Raisa Gorbachev as a gift to the children of the Soviet Union . Four of the ducks were stolen , one in 1991 and three in February 2000 . Thieves hoping to sell the ducks as scrap metal cut the statues off at the legs . The ducks were replaced in September 2000 at a rededication ceremony attended by former President of the Soviet Union Mikhail Gorbachev . 
 = = Films = = 
 Make Way for Ducklings was adapted into an 11 @-@ minute black @-@ and @-@ white cartoon created by Weston Woods in 1955 . Founded by educator Morton <unk> in 1953 , Weston Woods Studios , Inc . ( named after the wooded area outside his home in Weston , Connecticut ) specializes in animating children 's picture books on film . The program is centered toward young struggling readers who , after watching the movie , are encouraged to read the books themselves . 
 In 1964 , <unk> and Weston Woods Studios made the 18 @-@ minute Robert McCloskey , a documentary which is sometimes screened in art schools . The film shows McCloskey sitting in Boston Public Garden and intercuts pages from his sketchbook drawings for Make Way for Ducklings . The illustrator discusses experiences that have influenced his work and the relationship of craftsmanship to inspiration . 
 = The Breeders Tour 2014 = 
 The 2014 tour by American alternative rock group the Breeders comprised a series of thirteen concerts in central and western United States in September 2014 . The Breeders ' line @-@ up for their successful 1993 album Last Splash consisted of Josephine Wiggs , Jim Macpherson , Kim Deal , and Kelley Deal ; however , Wiggs and Macpherson were not in the band for the group 's next albums , Title TK and Mountain Battles , released in 2002 and 2008 , respectively . In 2013 , the foursome reunited for a tour to commemorate Last Splash 's 20th anniversary , and the following year , they began working on new songs together . The band Neutral Milk Hotel invited the Breeders to open for them at a September 18 concert at the Hollywood Bowl . The Breeders decided to go on a tour leading up to this show , and to use the opportunity to practice some of their new compositions . 
 Between September 2 and September 17 , the Breeders performed in eleven cities , including St. Louis , Denver , Seattle , Portland , San Francisco , and Las Vegas . Support groups the <unk> and the <unk> opened for them at five and six of these eleven shows , respectively . The Breeders then played at the Hollywood Bowl concert , and wrapped up the tour on September 20 at the Goose Island 312 Urban Block Dance Party event in Chicago . On the tour , the Breeders performed four new songs , as well as the compositions " Off You " and " Safari " , and numerous selections from the albums Last Splash and Pod . Among these were " Cannonball " , " No Aloha " , " Saints " , " Divine Hammer " , " Doe " , and " Iris " . The tour received good reviews from critics ; appraisal included comments that the performances were rousing , and that the band was as good as — or better than — in its heyday . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1993 , the Breeders released their second album , Last Splash . At this time , the group ’ s line @-@ up consisted of sisters Kim and Kelley Deal on guitar and vocals , Josephine Wiggs on bass and vocals , and Jim Macpherson on drums . Last Splash went silver in the United Kingdom , gold in Canada , and platinum in the United States , and the group toured extensively , including participating in Lollapalooza 1994 . In November 1994 , Kelley Deal was arrested on heroin @-@ related charges , and in 1995 Wiggs decided to pursue other musical projects . Macpherson continued playing with Kim Deal in her side @-@ project group , the Amps , and then in the 1996 incarnation of the Breeders , but quit the band in 1997 . The Breeders ’ line @-@ ups for their albums Title TK ( 2002 ) and Mountain Battles ( 2008 ) included the Deal sisters , Mando Lopez , and Jose Medeles . In 2013 , Wiggs and Macpherson rejoined the Deals to tour the 20th anniversary of Last Splash — the LSXX Tour . 
 On December 31 , 2013 , the Breeders performed their final concert on the 60 @-@ date tour in Austin , Texas . The foursome enjoyed the LSXX concerts , and decided that they would like to record new music together . Throughout 2014 , Wiggs traveled from her home in Brooklyn , New York to Dayton , Ohio , which Macpherson and both of the Deals live in or near . The group began practicing new material in Kim Deal ’ s basement , including one composition by Wiggs and others by Deal . By August of that year , there were three songs that they could play well , two less so , and others that they had not yet practiced . Titles of new songs included “ Skinhead Number 2 ” , “ Simone ” , “ All Nerve ” , and “ Launched ” . The group Neutral Milk Hotel asked the Breeders to open for them at a Hollywood Bowl concert to be held on September 18 . The Breeders decided to go on a tour leading up to this concert and to perform some new compositions to prepare for the songs ’ eventual recording . 
 = = Performances and reception = = 
 The September 2014 tour comprised thirteen American dates , all in western and central states . Support groups included the <unk> , the <unk> , and Kelley Stoltz . The tour began in early September with dates in St. Louis and Kansas City , Missouri , and then continued west to Denver , Salt Lake City , and Garden City . On September 10 , the Breeders started a short Pacific Coast stretch , performing in Seattle , Portland , and San Francisco . These shows were followed by the inland cities Las Vegas and Phoenix , then San Diego , California , leading up to their concert on September 18 at the Hollywood Bowl with Neutral Milk Hotel and Daniel Johnston . Following the Hollywood concert , the Breeders finished their tour at the Goose Island 312 Urban Block Dance Party event in Chicago on September 20 , with groups such as Unknown Mortal Orchestra and Thao & The Get Down Stay Down . 
 In addition to the four new compositions " Simone " , " Skinhead Number 2 " , " All Nerve " , and " Launched " , the Breeders performed many songs from their albums Pod and Last Splash . These included " Saints " , " Hag " , " SOS " , " New Year " , " Cannonball " , " No Aloha " , and " Divine Hammer " from Last Splash , as well as " Doe " , " Limehouse " , " Hellbound " , and " Iris " from Pod . They also played " Off You " from Title TK and the title track from the Safari EP . Another composition they performed was " Walking with a Killer " , which had originally been released — with the B @-@ side " Dirty Hessians " — as the first in a series of solo 7 " singles by Kim Deal , and which the Breeders had also played in 2013 on their LSXX Tour . 
 The Breeders ' performances on their 2014 tour were generally well received by critics . Regarding their September 3 performance in Kansas City , Danny Phillips of Blurt magazine wrote that the Breeders " like wine , seem to improve with age " , commenting that " everything [ was ] perfect " about the show ; The Kansas City Star 's Timothy Finn likewise summed the night up as " an evening that exceeded its promise " . Tim <unk> , also of Blurt , wrote that in Denver two nights later , the Breeders did " not [ play ] a classic set by any stretch , but it was fun and hardly any of the set slipped into boring noodling " . In Portland on September 11 , 94 / 7 's Yume <unk> heard the group 's performance as " delightfully raw and [ having ] a great deal of heart " but felt that some of the new songs " fell flat " . Critic Lissa Townsend Rodgers of Vegas Seven magazine praised the band 's " knockout punch " performance of the songs " New Year " and the " irresistibly throbbing ... ' Cannonball ' " at their Las Vegas concert on September 16 ; Leslie Ventura of Las Vegas Weekly also liked the show , and described their overall performance as " decisive " . Critic Alex Packard of <unk> , who attended the September 17 concert in San Diego , opined that the Breeders " deliver [ ed ] the classics like they wrote them yesterday and new material in no less of a moving way " . For their September 18 show at Hollywood Bowl , reviewer Keith Plocek of LA Weekly felt that the group played a set of " solid tunes " , while Consequence of Sound 's Philip Cosores rated a few of the songs as " pretty @-@ perfect @-@ sounding renditions " , and commented that Kim Deal 's " rock and roll soul is still as strong as ever " . 
 = = Dates = = 
 = Émile Lemoine = 
 Émile Michel Hyacinthe Lemoine ( French : [ emil <unk> ] ; 1840 – 1912 ) was a French civil engineer and a mathematician , a geometer in particular . He was educated at a variety of institutions , including the <unk> National Militaire and , most notably , the École Polytechnique . Lemoine taught as a private tutor for a short period after his graduation from the latter school . 
 Lemoine is best known for his proof of the existence of the Lemoine point ( or the <unk> point ) of a triangle . Other mathematical work includes a system he called Géométrographie and a method which related algebraic expressions to geometric objects . He has been called a co @-@ founder of modern triangle geometry , as many of its characteristics are present in his work . 
 For most of his life , Lemoine was a professor of mathematics at the École Polytechnique . In later years , he worked as a civil engineer in Paris , and he also took an amateur 's interest in music . During his tenure at the École Polytechnique and as a civil engineer , Lemoine published several papers on mathematics , most of which are included in a fourteen @-@ page section in Nathan <unk> Court 's College Geometry . Additionally , he founded a mathematical journal titled , L <unk> des <unk> . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1840 – 1869 ) = = = 
 Lemoine was born in Quimper , Finistère , on 22 November 1840 , the son of a retired military captain who had participated in the campaigns of the First French Empire occurring after 1807 . As a child , he attended the military <unk> of La Flèche on a scholarship granted because his father had helped found the school . During this early period , he published a journal article in Nouvelles <unk> de mathématiques , discussing properties of the triangle . 
 Lemoine was accepted into the École Polytechnique in Paris at the age of twenty , the same year as his father 's death . As a student there , Lemoine , a presumed trumpet player , helped to found an amateur musical group called La Trompette , for which Camille Saint @-@ Saëns composed several pieces . After graduation in 1866 , he considered a career in law , but was discouraged by the fact that his advocacy for republican ideology and liberal religious views clashed with the ideals of the incumbent government , the Second French Empire . Instead , he studied and taught at various institutions during this period , studying under J. <unk> at the École d 'Architecture and the École des Mines , teaching Uwe <unk> at the same schools , and studying under Charles @-@ Adolphe <unk> at the École des Beaux Arts and the École de Médecine . Lemoine also lectured at various scientific institutions in Paris and taught as a private tutor for a period before accepting an appointment as a professor at the École Polytechnique . 
 = = = Middle years ( 1870 – 1887 ) = = = 
 In 1870 , a laryngeal disease forced him to discontinue his teaching . He took a brief vacation in Grenoble and , when he returned to Paris , he published some of his remaining mathematical research . He also participated and founded several scientific societies and journals , such as the Société Mathématique de France , the Journal de Physique , and the Société de Physique , all in 1871 . 
 As a founding member of the Association Française pour l <unk> des Sciences , Lemoine presented what became his best @-@ known paper , Note sur les propriétés du centre des médianes antiparallèles dans un triangle at the Association 's 1874 meeting in Lille . The central focus of this paper concerned the point which bears his name today . Most of the other results discussed in the paper pertained to various <unk> points that could be constructed from the Lemoine point . 
 Lemoine served in the French military for a time in the years following the publishing of his best @-@ known papers . Discharged during the Commune , he afterwards became a civil engineer in Paris . In this career , he rose to the rank of chief inspector , a position he held until 1896 . As the chief inspector , he was responsible for the gas supply of the city . 
 = = = Later years ( 1888 – 1912 ) = = = 
 During his tenure as a civil engineer , Lemoine wrote a treatise concerning compass and straightedge constructions entitled , La Géométrographie ou l 'art des constructions géométriques , which he considered his greatest work , despite the fact that it was not well @-@ received critically . The original title was De la mesure de la simplicité dans les sciences mathématiques , and the original idea for the text would have discussed the concepts Lemoine devised as concerning the entirety of mathematics . Time constraints , however , limited the scope of the paper . Instead of the original idea , Lemoine proposed a simplification of the construction process to a number of basic operations with the compass and straightedge . He presented this paper at a meeting of the Association Française in Oran , Algeria in 1888 . The paper , however , did not garner much enthusiasm or interest among the mathematicians gathered there . Lemoine published several other papers on his construction system that same year , including Sur la mesure de la simplicité dans les constructions géométriques in the <unk> <unk> of the Académie française . He published additional papers on the subject in <unk> ( 1888 ) , Journal des mathématiques élémentaires ( 1889 ) , Nouvelles <unk> de mathématiques ( 1892 ) , and the self @-@ published La Géométrographie ou l 'art des constructions géométriques , which was presented at the meeting of the Association Française in Pau ( 1892 ) , and again at Besançon ( 1893 ) and Caen ( 1894 ) . 
 After this , Lemoine published another series of papers , including a series on what he called transformation continue ( continuous transformation ) , which related mathematical equations to geometrical objects . This meaning stood separately from the modern definition of transformation . His papers on this subject included , Sur les transformations <unk> des <unk> relatives au triangle ( 1891 ) , Étude sur une nouvelle transformation continue ( 1891 ) , Une <unk> d <unk> dans le triangle et la <unk> de <unk> analogies à une transformation dite transformation continue ( 1893 ) , and Applications au <unk> de la transformation continue ( 1894 ) . 
 In 1894 , Lemoine co @-@ founded another mathematical journal entitled , L <unk> des <unk> along with Charles Laisant , a friend whom he met at the École Polytechnique . Lemoine had been planning such a journal since early 1893 , but thought that he would be too busy to create it . At a dinner with Laisant in March 1893 , he suggested the idea of the journal . Laisant cajoled him to create the journal , and so they approached the publisher Gauthier @-@ Villars , which published the first issue in January 1894 . Lemoine served as the journal 's first editor , and held the position for several years . The year after the journal 's initial publication , he retired from mathematical research , but continued to support the subject . Lemoine died on 21 February 1912 in his home city of Paris . 
 = = Contributions = = 
 Lemoine 's work has been said to contribute towards laying the foundation of modern triangle geometry . The American Mathematical Monthly , in which much of Lemoine 's work is published , declared that " To none of these [ geometers ] more than Émile @-@ Michel @-@ Hyacinthe Lemoine is due the honor of starting this movement [ of modern triangle geometry ] ... " At the annual meeting of the Paris Academy of Sciences in 1902 , Lemoine received the 1 @,@ 000 @-@ franc <unk> prize , which he held for several years . 
 = = = Lemoine point and circle = = = 
 In his 1874 paper , entitled Note sur les propriétés du centre des médianes antiparallèles dans un triangle , Lemoine proved the concurrency of the <unk> of a triangle ; the reflections of the medians of the triangle over the angle bisectors . Other results in the paper included the idea that the <unk> from a vertex of the triangle divides the opposite side into segments whose ratio is equal to the ratio of the squares of the other two sides . 
 Lemoine also proved that if lines are drawn through the Lemoine point parallel to the sides of the triangle , then the six points of intersection of the lines and the sides of the triangle are <unk> , or that they lie on a circle . This circle is now known as the first Lemoine circle , or simply the Lemoine circle . 
 = = = Construction system = = = 
 Lemoine 's system of constructions , the Géométrographie , attempted to create a methodological system by which constructions could be judged . This system enabled a more direct process for simplifying existing constructions . In his description , he listed five main operations : placing a compass 's end on a given point , placing it on a given line , drawing a circle with the compass placed upon the aforementioned point or line , placing a straightedge on a given line , and extending the line with the straightedge . 
 The " simplicity " of a construction could be measured by the number of its operations . In his paper , he discussed as an example the Apollonius problem originally posed by Apollonius of Perga during the Hellenistic period ; the method of constructing a circle tangent to three given circles . The problem had already been solved by Joseph Diaz Gergonne in 1816 with a construction of simplicity 400 , but Lemoine 's presented solution had simplicity 154 . Simpler solutions such as those by Frederick Soddy in 1936 and by David <unk> in 2001 are now known to exist . 
 = = = Lemoine 's conjecture and extensions = = = 
 In 1894 , Lemoine stated what is now known as Lemoine 's conjecture : Every odd number which is greater than three can be expressed in the form 2p + q where p and q are prime . In 1985 , John <unk> and Peter Young conjectured an extension of the conjecture which they called the " refined Lemoine conjecture " . They published the conjecture in a journal of the Mathematical Association of America : " For any odd number m which is at least 9 , there are odd prime numbers p , q , r and s and positive integers j and k such that m 
 = 2p + q , 2 + pq = 
 <unk> + r and <unk> + p = 2k + s . [ ... ] the study has directed our attention to more subtle aspects of the additive theory of prime numbers . Our conjecture reflects this , dealing with interactions of sums involving primes whereas Goldbach 's conjecture and Lemoine 's conjecture deal with such sums only individually . This conjecture and the open questions about numbers at levels two and three are of interest in their own right because of the issues they raise within this fascinating and often baffling additive realm of the prime numbers . " 
 = = Role in modern triangle geometry = = 
 Lemoine has been described by Nathan <unk> Court as a co @-@ founder ( along with Henri <unk> and Joseph Neuberg ) of modern triangle geometry , a term used by William <unk> , among others . In this context , " modern " is used to refer to geometry developed from the late 18th century onward . Such geometry relies on the abstraction of figures in the plane rather than analytic methods used earlier involving specific angle measures and distances . The geometry focuses on topics such as <unk> , concurrency , and <unk> , as they do not involve the measures listed previously . 
 Lemoine 's work defined many of the noted traits of this movement . His Géométrographie and relation of equations to tetrahedrons and triangles , as well as his study of concurrencies and <unk> , contributed to the modern triangle geometry of the time . The definition of points of the triangle such as the Lemoine point was also a staple of the geometry , and other modern triangle geometers such as <unk> and Gaston Tarry wrote about similar points . 
 = = List of selected works = = 
 Sur quelques propriétés d 'un point <unk> du triangle ( 1873 ) 
 Note sur les propriétés du centre des médianes antiparallèles dans un triangle ( 1874 ) 
 Sur la mesure de la simplicité dans les <unk> géométriques ( 1889 ) 
 Sur les transformations <unk> des <unk> relatives au triangle ( 1891 ) 
 Étude sur une nouvelle transformation continue ( 1891 ) 
 La Géométrographie ou l 'art des constructions géométriques ( 1892 ) 
 Une <unk> d <unk> dans le triangle et la <unk> de <unk> analogies à une transformation dite transformation continue ( 1893 ) 
 Applications au <unk> de la transformation continue ( 1894 ) 
 " Note on Mr. George Peirce 's Approximate Construction for π " . Bull . Amer . Math . Soc . 8 ( 4 ) : 137 – 148 . 1902 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1090 / <unk> @-@ 9904 @-@ 1902 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 = Xtort = 
 Xtort ( stylized as <unk> ) , released on June 25 , 1996 on Wax Trax ! / TVT , is the ninth studio album by industrial rock group KMFDM . It was recorded in Chicago , Illinois , from the end of 1995 through early 1996 , shortly after the death of Wax Trax ! co @-@ founder and band friend Jim Nash . Xtort features a variety of guest artists from the industrial music scene and studio musicians from other genres , but includes limited participation from core member En Esch . 
 The album was massively promoted by TVT Records , which pressed tens of thousands of free copies of the first single , " Power " . Band leader Sascha Konietzko created his own form of promotion , issuing a press release that both disparaged and lauded the coming set . Xtort was generally well received by critics , with many calling it superlative , and is the highest charting and best @-@ selling KMFDM album to date . After the original release went out of print , a remastered version was released in 2007 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In late 1995 , KMFDM had completed the " Beat by Beat " and " In Your Face " tours in support of their last album , Nihil . KMFDM frontman and founder Sascha Konietzko described Nihil as " the crown " , and said the band had come as close to mainstream popularity as he wanted . He felt the band needed to move away from its success . In 2007 , Konietzko recalled that he had " hated all the attention , interviews , photo shoots , etc . " . After the tours , Konietzko returned to Chicago in order to be with his friend , Jim Nash , co @-@ founder of Wax Trax ! Records , who was dying from AIDS . Konietzko referred to the death of Nash that October as " the end of an era " . 
 En Esch , one of the longtime core members of KMFDM , had almost nothing to do with Xtort , contributing to just two songs . With regard to Esch 's lack of participation , Konietzko said , " En Esch is just En Esch . He never made himself available to do this album , and so it 's always my belief that the thing must keep moving ; I had to do it without him . " He also said the two were not in communication around the time of the album 's release . 
 = = Production = = 
 Xtort was pre @-@ produced and tracked in Seattle at Hole in the Wall Studio , and recorded and mixed in Chicago at Chicago Recording Company . Konietzko contacted F. M. Einheit and had him come to Chicago in January 1996 to work on some tracks together . Konietzko also brought in a number of Wax Trax ! alumni , such as Chris Connelly of Revolting Cocks and Bill Rieflin of Ministry , to help with the album 's creation , along with assistance from more than a dozen studio musicians . Konietzko required all the album 's contributors to be on call thirteen hours a day during production , saying " I don 't care what they do on their own time , but when they do KMFDM , if they don 't comply with the schedule , they 're out . " 
 Konietzko said the ideas for songs began with individual sounds , which he then modified until he created a looped rhythm . " Craze " , for example , Konietzko called " an homage to Atari Teenage Riot , a band with two guys , one girl , a couple <unk> [ sic ] drum machines and a bass machine . " He said he was inspired by touring with the band in Europe in support of Nihil in 1995 . After creating the base tunes , the songs went to Günter Schulz , another longtime member , to add guitars . With the completed songs , Konietzko then allowed guest artists , such as Connelly , to pick songs they wanted to contribute to , and added their vocals or other instrumentation . For Xtort , Konietzko used Macintosh products to do all the synchronization . 
 Connelly contributed to four tracks , including " Blame " , which also featured the horn section from the Oakland , California based group Tower of Power . Nicole Blackman , KMFDM 's publicist at the time , contributed spoken word vocals to the track " Dogma " , which was adapted from the ten @-@ minute live performance she provided while touring with the band . " Power " , meanwhile , was made to fulfill a request by the band 's label , Wax Trax ! , for a radio promo song . Konietzko said he 'd heard " radio didn 't like big female choruses " , so he got voiceover commercial singer Cheryl Wilson to help with the song , which he called " dumb and catchy " . The hidden track of the album , " Fairy " , is a story narrated by Jr . Blackmail , who had worked with the band previously in the 1980s . Konietzko said it was inspired by Blackmail 's " dirty fantasies " . He also said it was not a serious track : " it was more like kids at play " . For the background sounds , the group did things like roll screws on the floor while Schulz played piano . 
 = = Release = = 
 The first track on the album , " Power " , was featured on the " Wax Trax ! Summer Swindle " , a cassette sampler included with 45 @,@ 000 issues of the July 1996 issue of Alternative Press . Another 50 @,@ 000 copies of the sampler were to be handed out at summer college and beach events and given away at radio stations . 90 @,@ 000 pre @-@ release posters and information sheets were mailed out to fans . 
 Blackman wrote the promotional piece for the album 's press kit , and at Konietzko 's request , wrote the first half of the promo as an insulting take down of the album rather than as a standard promo . The first letter of each line of the first section of the promo spelled out the phrase " April Fools Day Fucker " and included lines such as " It 's been 100 years and fifty albums for the German / American rock squad — are they running out of gas or what ? " and " KMFDM can 't suck hard enough " , a quote from the track " Inane " . The second half of the promo included phrases such as " <unk> is a supersonic soundtrack " and " The new album is the sound of a band at the height of their powers . " Carrie <unk> of Billboard stated KMFDM was " poised to make a significant commercial breakthrough . " Konietzko said at the time there were no plans to tour in support of the album 's release . He later said this was due to the fact that the band as a touring unit had ceased to exist . 
 Xtort was released on June 25 , 1996 on Wax Trax ! / TVT on cassette , CD , and vinyl . The album was also released in CD format in Europe and Japan . In addition to being the first KMFDM album to chart in the Billboard 200 , staying there for three weeks and peaking at No. 92 the week of July 13 , 1996 , Xtort sold over 200 @,@ 000 copies , making it the best @-@ selling album in the band 's history . The song " Son of a Gun " was made into an animated video by visual artist Aidan " Brute ! " Hughes , who also did the album 's cover artwork . On March 6 , 2007 , Metropolis Records released a digitally remastered version of the album on CD and MP3 . Looking back on the album at the time of its re @-@ release , Konietzko said it was his favorite album of the 1990s . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Reviews for Xtort were almost universally positive . Jon Wiederhorn of Entertainment Weekly called it " the heaviest and most danceable disc in [ KMFDM 's ] 12 @-@ year career " while giving it an A- . Heidi MacDonald of CMJ New Music Monthly compared Xtort to getting hit with a wrecking ball , saying , " When KMFDM does what it does best , it is the best at what it does , namely jack @-@ hammer industrial anthems that hit with stunning precision and power . " Sandy Masuo of Rolling Stone called the album " the product of a first @-@ rate lineup , " and praised the album 's diversity , saying , " The 10 tracks on Xtort are grounded in KMFDM 's smart synthesis of metallic crunch , swiveling rhythms and sophisticated electronics , but it 's the organic elements that give the album a zesty twist . " Kevin M. Williams of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the album an " essential " rating , and said , " KMFDM has some major mojo working with Xtort " <unk> Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic was less enthusiastic , saying , " it would be nice to hear [ KMFDM ] branch out and start to experiment a little bit more " , and commenting that while Xtort did not sound much different from previous releases , " KMFDM sounds as good as they ever have , and several tracks rank among their best . " Liz Armstrong of the Daily Herald thought the guest contributors added significant differences to their individual songs . 
 Larry Flick of Billboard said " Power " , the opening track , " finds front man Sascha Konietzko snarling and growling with palpable force , while Cheryl Wilson softens the edges with splashes of soul @-@ mama vamping during the chorus . " Williams called the song " irresistible " . Masuo noted in particular the use of horns and the Hammond B3 organ , and concluded by stating , " In their insidiously arty and intellectually sassy music , KMFDM continue to bring diverse elements together to create a unified whole . " Armstrong called " Dogma " a song that crossed over from being industrial to " frightening " , while MacDonald described it as " blistering " and Williams said it was " captivating " . Armstrong said " Son of a Gun " was the album 's " truly explosive track " , but Williams thought " Inane " was the best song . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All information from 2007 release CD booklet . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 All information from 2007 release CD booklet except where noted . 
 = Military camouflage = 
 Military camouflage is the use of camouflage by a military force to protect personnel and equipment from observation by enemy forces . In practice , this means applying colour and materials to military equipment of all kinds , including vehicles , ships , aircraft , gun positions and battledress , either to conceal it from observation ( crypsis ) , or to make it appear as something else ( mimicry ) . The French slang word camouflage came into common English usage during World War I when the concept of visual deception developed into an essential part of modern military tactics . In that war , long @-@ range artillery and observation from the air combined to expand the field of fire , and camouflage was widely used to decrease the danger of being targeted or to enable surprise . As such , military camouflage is a form of military deception . 
 Camouflage was first practiced in simple form in the mid 18th century by <unk> or rifle units . Their tasks required them to be inconspicuous , and they were issued green and later other drab colour uniforms . With the advent of longer range and more accurate weapons , especially the repeating rifle , camouflage was adopted for the uniforms of all armies , spreading to most forms of military equipment including ships and aircraft . Many modern camouflage textiles address visibility not only to visible light but also near infrared , for concealment from night vision devices . Camouflage is not only visual ; heat , sound , magnetism and even smell can be used to target weapons , and may be intentionally concealed . Some forms of camouflage have elements of scale invariance , designed to disrupt outlines at different distances , typically digital camouflage patterns made of pixels . 
 Camouflage for equipment and positions was extensively developed for military use by the French in 1915 , soon followed by other World War I armies . In both world wars , artists were recruited as camouflage officers . Ship camouflage developed via conspicuous dazzle camouflage schemes during WWI , but since the development of radar , ship camouflage has received less attention . Aircraft , especially in World War II , were often painted with different schemes above and below , to camouflage them against the ground and sky respectively . 
 Military camouflage patterns have been popular in fashion and art from as early as 1915 . Camouflage patterns have appeared in the work of artists such as Andy Warhol and Ian Hamilton Finlay , sometimes with an anti @-@ war message . In fashion , many major designers have exploited camouflage 's style and symbolism , and military clothing or imitations of it have been used both as street wear and as a symbol of political protest . 
 = = Principles = = 
 Military camouflage is part of the art of military deception . The main objective of military camouflage is to deceive the enemy as to the presence , position and intentions of military formations . Camouflage techniques include concealment , disguise , and dummies , applied to troops , vehicles , and positions . 
 Vision is the main sense of orientation in humans , and the primary function of camouflage is to deceive the human eye . Camouflage works through concealment ( whether by countershading , preventing casting shadows , or disruption of outlines ) , mimicry , or possibly by dazzle . In modern warfare , some forms of camouflage , for example including CADPAT textiles , also offer concealment from radar and from infrared sensors . 
 = = = Compromises = = = 
 While camouflage tricks are in principle limitless , both cost and practical considerations limit the choice of methods and the time and effort devoted to camouflage . Paint and uniforms must also protect vehicles and soldiers from the elements . Units need to move , fire their weapons and perform other tasks to keep functional , some of which run counter to camouflage . Camouflage may be dropped altogether . Late in the Second World War , the USAAF abandoned camouflage paint for some aircraft to lure enemy fighters to attack , while in the Cold War , some aircraft similarly flew with polished metal skins , to reduce drag and weight , or to reduce vulnerability to radiation from nuclear weapons . 
 No single camouflage pattern is effective in all terrains . The effectiveness of a pattern depends on contrast as well as colour tones . Strong contrasts which disrupt outlines are better suited for environments such as forests where the play of light and shade is prominent , while low contrasts are better suited to open terrain with little shading structure . Patterns made to match the local terrain may be more effective in that terrain than more general patterns . However , unlike an animal or a civilian hunter , military units may need to cross several terrain types like woodland , farmland and built up areas in a single day . While civilian hunting clothing may have almost photo @-@ realistic depictions of tree bark or leaves ( indeed , some such patterns are based on photographs ) , military camouflage is designed to work in a range of environments . With the cost of uniforms in particular being substantial , most armies operating globally have two separate full uniforms , one for woodland / jungle and one for desert and other dry terrain . An American attempt at a global camouflage pattern for all environments ( the 2004 UCP ) was however withdrawn after a few years of service . On the other end of the scale are terrain specific patterns like the " Berlin <unk> " , applied to British vehicles operating in Berlin during the Cold War , where square fields of various gray shades was designed to hide vehicles against the mostly concrete architecture of post @-@ war Berlin . 
 Seasons may play a role in some regions . A dramatic change in colour and texture is created by seasonal snowy conditions in northern latitudes , necessitating repainting of vehicles and separate snow oversuits . The Eastern and northern European countries have a tradition for separate winter uniforms rather than oversuits . During the Second World War , the Waffen @-@ SS went a step further , developing reversible uniforms with separate schemes for summer and autumn , as well as white winter oversuits . 
 = = = Movement = = = 
 While patterns can provide more effective crypsis than solid colour when the camouflaged object is stationary , any pattern , particularly one with high contrast , stands out when the object is moving . Jungle camouflage uniforms were issued during the Second World War , but both the British and American forces found that a simple green uniform provided better camouflage when soldiers were moving . After the war , most nations returned to a <unk> uniform for their troops . Some nations , notably Austria and Israel , continue to use solid colour combat uniforms today . Similarly , while larger military aircraft traditionally had a disruptive pattern with a darker top over a lighter lower surface ( a form of countershading ) , modern fast fighter aircraft often wear gray overall . 
 = = = Digital camouflage = = = 
 Digital camouflage provides a disruptive effect through the use of pixellated patterns at a range of scales , meaning that the camouflage helps to defeat observation at a range of distances . Such patterns were first developed during the Second World War , when Johann Georg Otto Schick designed a number of patterns for the Waffen @-@ SS , combining micro- and macro @-@ patterns in one scheme . The German Army developed the idea further in the 1970s into Flecktarn , which combines smaller shapes with dithering ; this softens the edges of the large scale pattern , making the underlying objects harder to discern . <unk> shapes pre @-@ date computer aided design by many years , already being used in Soviet Union experiments with camouflage patterns , such as " <unk> " developed in 1944 or 1945 . 
 In the 1970s , US Army officer Timothy R. O 'Neill suggested that patterns consisting of square blocks of colour would provide effective camouflage . By 2000 , O 'Neill 's idea was combined with patterns like the German Flecktarn to create pixellated patterns such as CADPAT and MARPAT . Battledress in digital camouflage patterns was first designed by the Canadian Forces . The " digital " refers to the coordinates of the pattern , which are digitally defined . The term is also used of computer generated patterns like the non @-@ pixellated <unk> and the Italian fractal <unk> pattern . <unk> does not in itself contribute to the camouflaging effect . The pixellated style , however , simplifies design and eases printing on fabric . 
 = = = Non @-@ visual = = = 
 With the birth of radar and sonar and other means of detecting military hardware not depending on the human eye , came means of camouflaging against them . Collectively these are known as stealth technology . Aircraft and ships can be shaped to reflect radar impulses away from the sender , and covered with radar @-@ absorbing materials , to reduce their radar signature . The use of heat @-@ seeking missiles has also led to efforts to hide the heat signature of aircraft engines . Methods include exhaust ports shaped to mix hot exhaust gases with cold surrounding air , and placing the exhaust ports on the upper side of the airframe . Multi @-@ spectral camouflage attempts to hide objects from detection methods such as infra @-@ red , radar , and millimetre @-@ wave imaging simultaneously . 
 Auditory camouflage , at least in the form of noise reduction , is practised in various ways . The rubberized hull of military submarines absorbs sonar waves and can be seen as a form of auditory camouflage . Some modern helicopters are designed to be quiet . Combat uniforms are usually equipped with buttons rather than snap fasteners or <unk> to reduce noise . 
 Olfactory camouflage is said to be rare ; examples include ghillie suits , special garments for military snipers made from strips of hessian cloth , which are sometimes treated with mud and even manure to give them an " earthy " smell to cover the smell of the sniper . 
 Magnetic camouflage in the form of " degaussing " coils has been used since the Second World War to protect ships from magnetic mines and other weapons with magnetic sensors . Horizontal coils around the whole or parts of the ship generate magnetic fields to " cancel out " distortions to the earth 's magnetic field created by the ship . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Reconnaissance and riflemen = = = 
 Ship camouflage was occasionally used in ancient times . Vegetius wrote in the 4th century that " Venetian blue " ( bluish @-@ green , like the sea ) was used for camouflage in the years 56 – 54 BC during the Gallic Wars , when Julius Caesar sent his scout ships to gather intelligence along the coast of Britain . The bluish @-@ green scout ships carried sailors and marines dressed in the same colour . 
 The emphasis on hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat , and the short range of weapons such as the musket , meant that recognition and cohesion was more important than camouflage in combat clothing well into the baroque period . The introduction of infantry weapons with longer range , especially the Baker rifle , opened up new roles which needed camouflaged clothing . In the colonial Seven Years ' War ( 1756 – 1763 ) , the rifle @-@ armed Rogers ' Rangers wore gray or green uniforms . John Graves Simcoe , one of the unit 's later commanders , noted in 1784 : 
 Green is without comparison the best colour for light troops with dark accouterments ; and if put on in the spring , by autumn it nearly fades with the leaves , preserving its characteristic of being scarcely discernible at a distance . 
 The tradition was continued by British Rifle Regiments who adopted rifle green for the Napoleonic Wars . 
 During the Peninsular War , Portugal fielded light infantry units known as Caçadores , who wore brown @-@ jackets which helped conceal them . The brown color was considered to be more adequate for a concealment in the landscape of most of Portuguese regions , in general more arid than the greener landscapes of Central and Northern Europe . 
 Other nations soon followed suit , dressing their rifle regiments and sometimes also light troops in suitable drab tones , usually variations of green or gray . 
 The first introduction of drab general uniform was by the British Corps of Guides in India in 1848 . Initially the drab uniform was specially imported from England , with one of the reasons being to " make them invisible in a land of dust " . However , when a larger quantity was required the army improvised , using a local dye to produce uniform locally . This type of drab uniform soon became known as khaki ( Urdu for dusty , soil @-@ coloured ) by the Indian soldiers , and was of a similar colour to a local dress of cotton coloured with the <unk> palm . The example was followed by other British units during the mutiny of 1857 , dying their white drill uniforms to inconspicuous tones with mud , tea , coffee or coloured inks . The resulting hue varied from dark or slate grey through light brown to off @-@ white , or sometimes even lavender . This improvised measure gradually became widespread among the troops stationed in India and North @-@ West Frontier , and sometimes among the troops campaigning on the African continent . 
 = = = Rifle fire = = = 
 While long range rifles became the standard weapon in the 1830s , armies were slow to adapt their tactics and uniforms , perhaps as a result of mainly fighting colonial wars against less well armed opponents . Not until the First Boer War of 1880 / 81 did a major European power meet an opponent well equipped with and well versed in the use of modern long range repeating firearms , forcing an immediate change in tactics and uniforms . Khaki @-@ coloured uniform became standard service dress for both British and British Indian Army troops stationed in British India in 1885 , and in 1896 khaki drill uniform was adopted by British Army for the service outside of Europe in general , but not until the Second Boer War , in 1902 , did the entire British Army standardise on khaki ( officially known as " drab " ) for Service Dress . 
 The US military , who had green @-@ jacketed rifle units in the Civil War , were quick to follow the British , going khaki in the same year . Russia followed , partially , in 1908 . The Italian Army used <unk> @-@ verde ( " grey @-@ green " ) in the Alps from 1906 and across the army from 1909 . The Germans adopted <unk> ( " field grey " ) in 1910 . By the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 , France was the only major power to still field soldiers dressed in traditional conspicuous uniforms . 
 = = = The First World War = = = 
 The First World War was the first full scale industrial conflict fought with modern firearms . The casualty rate on the Western Front forced the French to finally relinquish their blue coats and red trousers , adopting a grayish " horizon blue " uniform . 
 The use of rapid firing machine guns and long range breech loading artillery quickly led to camouflaging of vehicles and positions . Artillery pieces were soon painted in contrasting bold colours to obscure their outlines . Another early trend was building observation trees , made of steel with bark camouflage . Such trees became popular with the British and French armies in 1916 . The observation tree was invented by French painter Lucien @-@ Victor Guirand de Scévola , who led the French army 's camouflage unit , the first of its kind in any army . He also invented painted canvas netting to hide machine gun positions , and this was quickly taken up for hiding equipment and gun positions from 1917 , 7 million square yards being used by the end of the war . 
 The First World War also saw the birth of aerial warfare , and with it the need not only to conceal positions and vehicles from being spotted from the air , but also the need to camouflage the aircraft themselves . In 1917 , Germany started using a lozenge camouflage covering Central Powers aircraft , possibly the earliest printed camouflage . A similarly disruptive splinter pattern in earth tones , <unk> 1918 , was introduced for tanks in 1918 , and was also used on the Stahlhelm ( steel helmet ) , becoming the first use of a standardized camouflage pattern for soldiers . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In 1909 an American artist and amateur zoologist , Abbott Thayer published a book , Concealing @-@ Coloration in the Animal Kingdom , which was widely read by military leaders , though his advocacy of countershading was unsuccessful , despite his patent for countershading submarines and surface ships . 
 The earliest camouflage artists were members of the Post- Impressionist and <unk> schools of France . Contemporary artistic movements such as cubism , <unk> and impressionism also influenced the development of camouflage as they dealt with disrupting outlines , abstraction and colour theory . The French established a Section de Camouflage ( Camouflage Department ) at Amiens in 1915 , headed by Lucien @-@ Victor Guirand de Scévola . His camoufleurs included the artists Jacques Villon , André <unk> de Segonzac , Charles <unk> and André Mare . 
 Camouflage schemes of the First World War and Interwar periods that employed dazzle patterns were often described as " cubist " by commentators , and Picasso claimed with typical hyperbole " Yes , it is we who made it , that is cubism " . Most of the artists employed as camoufleurs were traditional representative painters , not <unk> , but de Scévola claimed " In order to deform totally the aspect of the object , I had to employ the means that <unk> use to represent it . " 
 Other countries soon saw the advantage of camouflage , and established their own units of artists , designers and architects . The British established a Camouflage Section in late 1916 at Wimereux , and the U.S. followed suit with the New York Camouflage Society in April 1917 , the official Company A of 40th Engineers in January 1918 and the Women 's Reserve Camouflage Corps . The Italians set up the <unk> di <unk> in 1917 . By 1918 de Scévola was in command of camouflage workshops with over 9 @,@ 000 workers , not counting the camoufleurs working at the front itself . 
 = = = From the Second World War = = = 
 Printed camouflage for shelter halves was introduced for the Italian and German armies in the interwar period , the " <unk> " <unk> <unk> <unk> in Italy and the angular <unk> 31 in Germany . During the War , both patterns were used for paratrooper uniforms for their respective countries . The British soon followed suit with a brush @-@ stroke type pattern for their paratrooper 's Denison smock , and the Soviets introduced an " amoeba " pattern <unk> for their snipers . 
 Hugh Cott 's 1940 book Adaptive Coloration in Animals systematically covered the different forms of camouflage and mimicry by which animals protect themselves , and explicitly drew comparisons throughout with military camouflage : 
 The principle is one with many applications to modern warfare . In the Great War it was utilized by the Germans when they introduced strongly marked incidents of white or black tone to conceal the fainter contrasts of tone made by the sloping sides of overhead camouflage @-@ screens , or roofing , as seen from the air . The same principle has , of course , a special application in any attempt to reduce the visibility of large objects of all kinds , such as ships , tanks , buildings , and aerodromes . 
 Both British and Soviet aircraft were given wave @-@ type camouflage paintwork for their upper surfaces throughout the war , while American ones remained simple two @-@ colour schemes ( different upper and under sides ) or even dispensed with camouflage altogether . Italian and some Japanese aircraft wore sprayed @-@ on spotted patterns . German aircraft mostly used an angular splint @-@ pattern camouflage , but Germany experimented with different schemes , particularly in the later stages of the war . They also experimented with various spray @-@ on camouflage patterns for tanks and other vehicles , while Allied vehicles remained largely uni @-@ coloured . 
 The British Middle East Command Camouflage Directorate , consisting mainly of artists recruited into the Royal Engineers , developed the use of camouflage for large @-@ scale military deception . Operations combined the disguise of actual installations , vehicles and stores with the simultaneous display of dummies , whether to draw fire or to give a false idea of the strength of forces or likely attack directions . In Operation Bertram for the decisive battle at El Alamein , a whole dummy armoured division was constructed , while real tanks were disguised as soft @-@ skinned transport using " Sunshield " covers . The capabilities so developed were put to use not only in the western desert , but also in Europe as in the Operation Bodyguard deception for the Invasion of Normandy , and in the Pacific campaign , as in the Battle of Goodenough Island . 
 The introduction of strategic bombing led to efforts to camouflage airfields and strategic production centres . These forms of position camouflages could be quite elaborate , and even include false houses and cars . With the threat from nuclear weapons in the post @-@ war era such elaborate camouflage was no longer seen as useful , as a direct hit would not be necessary with strategic nuclear weapons to destroy infrastructure . The Soviet Union 's military doctrine of maskirovka ( literally : disguise , camouflage , concealment ) defines the need for surprise through deception , including camouflage , based on experiences such as the Battle of Kursk where camouflage helped the Red Army to overwhelm a powerful enemy . 
 = = Application = = 
 = = = Uniforms = = = 
 The role of uniform is not only to hide each soldier , but also to identify friend from foe . Issue of the " <unk> " uniforms to US troops in Europe during the Second World War was halted as it was too often mistaken for the disruptively patterned German uniform worn by the Waffen @-@ SS . Camouflage uniforms need to be made and distributed to a large number of soldiers . The design of camouflage uniforms therefore involves a tradeoff between camouflaging effect , recognizability , cost , and <unk> . 
 Armies facing service in different theatres may need several different camouflage uniforms . Separate issues of temperate / jungle and desert camouflage uniforms are common . Patterns can to some extent be adapted to different terrains by adding means of fastening pieces of vegetation to the uniform . Helmets often have netting covers ; some jackets have small loops for the same purpose . Being able to find appropriate camouflage vegetation or in other ways modify the issued battle uniform to suit the local terrain is an important skill for infantry soldiers . 
 Countries in boreal climates often need snow camouflage , either by having reversible uniforms or simple overgarments . Such simple overgarments can be used for other terrains too . The Austrian and Israeli armies use solid colour field uniforms , relying on simple overgarments for camouflage . 
 = = = Land vehicles = = = 
 The purpose of vehicle and equipment camouflage differs from personal camouflage in that the primary threat is aerial reconnaissance . The goal is to disrupt the characteristic shape of the vehicle , to reduce shine , and to make the vehicle difficult to identify even if it is spotted . 
 Paint is the least effective measure , but forms a basis for other techniques . Military vehicles often become so dirty that pattern @-@ painted camouflage is not visible , and although matt colours reduce shine , a wet vehicle can still be shiny , especially when viewed from above . Patterns are designed to make it more difficult to interpret shadows and shapes . The British Army adopted a disruptive scheme for vehicles operating in the stony desert of the North African Campaign and Greece , retrospectively known as the Caunter scheme . It used up to six colours applied with straight lines . 
 The British Army 's Special Air Service used pink as the primary colour on its desert @-@ camouflaged Land Rover Series IIA patrol vehicles , nicknamed Pink Panthers ; the colour had been observed to be indistinguishable from sand at a distance . 
 Nets can be effective at defeating visual observation . Traditional camouflage nets use a textile ' garnish ' to generate an apparent texture with a depth of shadow created beneath it , and the effect can be reinforced with pieces of vegetation . Modern nets tend to be made of a continuous woven material , which is easier to deploy over a vehicle and lack the " windows " between patches of garnish of traditional nets . Some nets can remain in place while vehicles move . Simple nets are less effective in defeating radar and thermal sensors . Heavier , more durable " mobile camouflage systems " , essentially conformal <unk> with thermal and radar properties , provide a degree of concealment without the delay caused by having to spread nets around a vehicle . 
 = = = Ships = = = 
 Until the 20th century , naval weapons had a short range , so camouflage was unimportant for ships , and for the men on board them . Paint schemes were selected on the basis of ease of maintenance or aesthetics , typically buff upperworks ( with polished brass fittings ) and white or black hulls . Around the start of the 20th century , the increasing range of naval engagements , as demonstrated by the Battle of Tsushima , prompted the introduction of the first camouflage , in the form of some solid shade of gray overall , in the hope that ships would fade into the mist . 
 First and Second World War dazzle camouflage , pioneered by English artist Norman Wilkinson , was used not to make ships disappear , but to make them seem smaller and / or faster , to encourage misidentification by an enemy and to make the ships harder to hit . 
 After the Second World War , the use of radar made camouflage generally less effective . However , camouflage may have helped to protect US warships from Vietnamese shore batteries using optical rangefinders . 
 Coastal patrol boats such as those of the Norwegian , Swedish and Indonesian navies continue to use terrestrial style disruptively patterned camouflage . 
