 = = = Aircraft = = = 
 Aircraft camouflage faces the challenge that an aircraft 's background varies widely , according to whether the observer is above or below the aircraft , and with the background , e.g. farmland or desert . Aircraft camouflage schemes have often consisted of a light colour underneath and darker colours above . 
 Other camouflage schemes acknowledge that aircraft may be seen at any angle and against any background while in combat , so aircraft are painted all over with a disruptive pattern or a neutral colour such as gray . 
 Second World War maritime patrol aircraft such as the Consolidated PBY Catalina flying boat were painted white , as aircraft generally appear dark against the sky ( including at night ) , and hence are least visible when painted in as light a colour as possible . The problem of appearing dark against the sky was explored in the U.S. Navy 's Yehudi lights project in 1943 , using counter @-@ illumination to raise the average brightness of a plane , when seen head @-@ on , from a dark shape to the same as the sky . The experiments worked , enabling an aircraft to approach to within 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) before being seen , whereas aircraft without the lights were noticed 12 miles ( 19 km ) away . 
 The higher speeds of modern aircraft , and the reliance on radar and missiles in air combat have reduced the value of visual camouflage , while increasing the value of electronic " stealth " measures . Modern paint is designed to absorb electromagnetic radiation used by radar , reducing the signature of the aircraft , and to limit the emission of infrared light used by heat seeking missiles to detect their target . Further advances in aircraft camouflage are being investigated in the field of active camouflage . 
 = = In fashion and art = = 
 = = = Fashion and the " Dazzle Ball " = = = 
 The transfer of camouflage patterns from battle to exclusively civilian uses is not recent . Dazzle camouflage inspired a trend of <unk> patterns used on clothing in England , starting in 1919 with the " Dazzle Ball " held by Chelsea Arts Club . Those attending wore dazzle @-@ patterned black and white clothing , influencing twentieth @-@ century fashion and art via postcards ( see illustration ) and magazine articles . The Illustrated London News announced 
 The scheme of decoration for the great fancy dress ball given by the Chelsea Arts Club at the Albert Hall , the other day , was based on the principles of ' Dazzle ' , the method of ' camouflage ' used during the war in the painting of ships ... The total effect was brilliant and fantastic . 
 = = = Camouflage in art = = = 
 While many artists helped to develop camouflage during and since World War I , the disparate sympathies of the two cultures restrained the use of " militaristic " forms other than in the work of war artists . Since the 1960s , several artists have exploited the symbolism of camouflage . For example , Andy Warhol 's 1986 camouflage series was his last major work , including Camouflage Self @-@ Portrait . Alain Jacquet created many camouflage works from 1961 to the 1970s . <unk> <unk> 's 1966 / 67 work " <unk> " ( camouflage ) was simply a section of the pioneering Italian <unk> <unk> camouflage fabric on a frame , as part of his Arte <unk> program . Ian Hamilton Finlay 's 1973 Arcadia was a <unk> of a <unk> @-@ camouflaged tank , " an ironic parallel between this idea of a natural paradise and the camouflage patterns on a tank " , as the Tate Collection describes it . <unk> , the pseudonym of Vera von <unk> and Holger <unk> , created " Nature , Signs & Animals " and " Mimicry @-@ Dress @-@ Art " in 1970 – 73 . Thomas Hirschhorn made Utopia : One World , One War , One Army , One Dress in 2005 . 
 = = = War protesters and fashionistas = = = 
 In the US in the 1960s , military clothing became increasingly common ( mostly olive drab rather than patterned camouflage ) ; it was often found worn by anti @-@ war protestors , initially within groups such as Vietnam Veterans Against the War but then increasingly widely as a symbol of political protest . 
 Fashion often uses camouflage as inspiration - attracted by the striking designs , the " patterned disorder " of camouflage , its symbolism ( to be celebrated or subverted [ vide its use by Hello Kitty ] ) , and its versatility . Early designers include <unk> ( 1960s ) , Jean @-@ Charles de Castelbajac ( <unk> ) , Stephen Sprouse ( using Warhol prints , 1987 – 1988 ) , and Franco Moschino ( 1986 ) , but it was not until the 1990s that camouflage became a significant and widespread facet of dress from streetwear to high @-@ fashion labels - especially the use of " faux @-@ camouflage " . Producers using camouflage in the 1990s and beyond include : John Galliano for Christian Dior , Marc Jacobs for Louis Vuitton , Comme des Garçons , Chanel , Tommy Hilfiger , Dolce & Gabbana , Issey Miyake , Armani , Yves Saint @-@ Laurent . 
 Companies closely associated with camouflage patterns include <unk> , A Bathing Ape , Stone Island , <unk> , Maharishi , <unk> , Zoo York , Addict , and <unk> , using and overprinting genuine military surplus fabric ; others use camouflage patterns in bright colours such as pink or purple . Some , such as Emma Lundgren and <unk> , have created their own designs or integrated camouflage patterns with other symbols . 
 = = = Restrictions = = = 
 Some countries such as Barbados , Aruba , and other Caribbean nations have laws prohibiting camouflage clothing from being worn by non @-@ military personnel , including tourists and children . Civilian possession of camouflage is still banned in Zimbabwe . 
 = The Naked Brothers Band : The Movie = 
 The Naked Brothers Band is a 2005 American musical comedy film written and directed by Polly Draper which stars her sons , Nat Wolff and Alex Wolff , who portray members of a fictional rock group . It tells of the boys ' struggles with their fame and an internal dispute that causes the band to split before reuniting in the end . The film was emboldened by Nat 's genuine band , The Silver Boulders , which he created in preschool with his friends who all portray themselves alongside Nat 's faux female interest , the siblings ' real life cousin as the babysitter , and their real life father as their inept accordion @-@ playing dad . 
 Draper shot the film in the style of a mockumentary — a parody in documentary format — that depicts the daily activities of the characters . Nat composed and performed the music , though one song had been written by Alex . Principal photography took place in mid @-@ 2004 on location in New York City , and the interior scenes were vastly filmed in the family 's Manhattan apartment . Draper 's brother , Tim , a venture capitalist , provided financial incentives for the shoot . 
 In late 2005 , Polly Draper , star of Thirtysomething , and her jazz musician husband Michael Wolff , entered the film in the Hamptons International Film Festival , where it won the audience award for a family feature film . Albie Hecht , former Nickelodeon president and founder of Spike TV , was in the audience and commissioned the movie , in affiliation with his Worldwide Biggies label . It became the pilot for the potential Nickelodeon show of the same name , airing in the United States on January 27 , 2007 . The series was created and produced by Draper and premiered in February 2007 , to the channel 's highest ratings in seven years for viewers in the 6 – 11 age group . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film begins with an introduction to the documentary from the boys . Nat and Alex Wolff , aged nine and six respectively , are members of the fictional band The Silver Boulders which also consists of Thomas , David , Josh , and their manager Cooper . The band found success after a music executive ( John B. Williams ) signed them to his label , Who 's the Man Records . The band performs their new song " Motormouth " at a concert in the Hammerstein Ballroom . After the show , the band members describe how their group started and a clip from their music video " Crazy Car " is shown . 
 The bandmates get along well until Thomas composes the song " Boys Rule , Girls Drool " , which Nat dislikes . Nat writes a song called " Rosalina " that is about Josh 's elder half @-@ sister . Thomas and Josh ridicule Nat because the song shows his feelings for her . Moreover , Josh composes another song that Nat also dislikes , titled " I 'm the God of Rock and Roll " , set to the tune of " Twinkle , Twinkle , Little Star " . The band has a food fight in a restaurant , prompting Thomas , David , and Josh to leave and form a new group , The Gold Boulders , managed by the scornful Mort Needleman ( Jonathan Pillot ) . 
 After watching media reports of the band 's split on television , Nat and Alex go into a state of depression . Alex begins to binge on lemon @-@ lime soda and falls asleep , while he lies curled in the midst of aluminum cans . Nat simultaneously writes a song by the piano titled " If There Was a Place to Hide " as the band 's fans gather outside his apartment , pleading for them to reunite . Despite the absence of the formers , Alex persuades a reluctant Nat to revive the band , and subsequently , they change the band 's title to its original , The Naked Brothers Band . Through a line @-@ up of auditions , Nat , Alex , and Cooper select Rosalina as their cellist and Cole Hawkins — a member of the original Naked Brothers Band — as the guitarist . 
 The newly established band embark on a tour to Chicago , though Nat discovers that The Gold Boulders is their opening act . The Gold Boulders start the show with " Boys Rule , Girls Drool " and are immediately booed off the stage . After their performance , The Naked Brothers Band perform " Hardcore Wrestlers ( with Inner Feelings ) " and " Rosalina " , which are greeted with a loud applause from the audience . After the concert , Nat hosts a party for the band in his apartment . In the midst of the party , David , Thomas , and Josh arrive at his front door , asking to join the reconstructed band . <unk> , a surprised Nat welcomes them to join the celebration . The film concludes with the outfit performing " Crazy Car " on the roof of the <unk> ' apartment while fireworks detonate in the background . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Adults over the age of 18 are nonsensical , and therefore , the children are responsible for undertaking challenging circumstances . Nat is the lead singer @-@ songwriter and keyboardist , while his younger brother Alex is the flamboyant drummer . Alex invented a distinctive outfit : a red , white , and blue do @-@ rag with socks tied around his ankles . He has a crush on the band 's nanny and tutor , the 19 @-@ year @-@ old Jesse Cook ( Jesse Draper ) . Nat is called " The Girl Magnet " and tends to speak with an English accent in front of 11 @-@ year @-@ old Rosalina ( Allie <unk> ) . The group also features Nat 's preschool friends – David ( David Levi ) as the keyboardist , Thomas ( Thomas <unk> ) as the cellist , Josh ( Joshua Kaye ) as the guitarist – and Cooper ( Cooper Pillot ) is the band 's manager . The brothers ' father ( Michael Wolff ) is an inept accordionist . 
 Principal Schmoke ( Tim Draper ) leads Amigo Elementary School . The Timmerman Brothers is a band consisting of brothers Donnie ( Adam Draper ) , Johnny ( Coulter Mulligan ) , and Billy ( Billy Draper ) . They had a hit single titled " <unk> <unk> Soap Bubble " , but their careers ended when their voices changed during puberty . Music critic ( Barbara <unk> @-@ Young ) describes The Silver Boulders ' music as " nostalgic " . The romantic couple ( James Badge @-@ Dale and Gretchen <unk> ) recall the group performing " Crazy Car " at their wedding ceremony . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Through their father , Nat and Alex were exposed to music from birth . As a four @-@ year @-@ old , Nat showed musical gifts that astounded his father . He easily taught himself piano chords , which he called " ' my proud chords ' " . As a five @-@ year @-@ old , he began to compose songs after listening to music by The Beatles and Alex began playing the saxophone when he was two . Nat and his brother once shouted , " We 're the naked brothers band ! " after having a bath , which inspired the name of the movie . As a pre @-@ schooler , Nat and his friends formed a band called The Silver Boulders . 
 Following the September 11 terrorist attacks , Nat wrote a song titled " Firefighters " when he was six years old , which he performed with his band for charity . The benefit concert was staged behind his family 's apartment and raised over US $ 45 @,@ 000 , which was donated to the children of the personnel from New York City Fire Department 's Squad 18 who were killed as a result of the attacks . After the successful concert , the band began to perform at gay and lesbian Christmas celebrations , one @-@ year @-@ old birthday parties , and restaurants . Then Alex , emboldened by Ringo Starr , chose to play drums in the band . 
 After the break @-@ up of The Silver Boulders , the siblings decided to revive The Naked Brothers Band . Draper did not want her children to be actors ; she explained , " Nat kept putting signs on his door : ' I want to be a child actor ! ' I said , ' No , it 's too brutal . ' " However , Nat wrote and directed a sitcom called Don 't Eat Off My Plate , which Draper presented in documentary style by interviewing his friends . 
 Michael Wolff set up a recording session in the music studio along with Nat , Alex , and himself . Draper was impressed by the recording and contemplated making a mockumentary about the band , presenting the boys as music icons akin to The Beatles . In a TV Guide interview in early 2007 , Draper explained , " What originally happened was that Nat and Alex had a band , and the idea evolved based on that . Spinal Tap meets The Little Rascals was my concept ... I wanted to have that Help ! or A Hard Day 's Night kind of feeling . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The film was originally intended as an extended family project , and was shot over five weeks in mid @-@ 2004 for less than US $ 1 million . Filming took place on location in New York City — where , according to Draper , the crew " would sneak into locations and run " — and at the Draper @-@ Wolff family apartment in Manhattan . Draper wrote and directed the film , which was produced by Ken H. Keller , Caron Rudner , Jonathan Pillot , Michael Wolff and Draper herself . The film was co @-@ produced by <unk> <unk> and edited by Craig Cobb , who also served as the associate producer . The executive producers were Draper , Wolff , and Draper 's brother , Tim , who oversaw the budget . Keller used a color framing , high @-@ definition video camera . Rudner served as the line producer , while John M. Davis was the music editor . Rick Butler served as the production designer , Frederick Howard was the supervising sound editor , and Deb Temco oversaw the casting . Moreover , David Levi 's father , Robert , provided footage of the real @-@ life preschool band 's daily antics ; they sang and played instruments in the <unk> ' apartment , and Nat wrote the music . 
 When Polly Draper told her friend Julianne Moore and her husband , writer and director Bart Freundlich , about the film , Freundlich responded , " Julia would love to be in your movie . " Moore changed her schedule at late notice to participate in filming , and Draper wrote Moore 's scene as it was being filmed ; Draper quickly created a set that depicted the backstage green room of the talk show , Late Night with Conan O 'Brien . Moore and Nat filmed the scene in one take , and Draper was impressed with her son 's performance , while saying that Moore 's presence added credibility to the project . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Most of the cast were friends or relatives of the Draper @-@ Wolff clan . Tim Draper is Polly 's brother and John B. Williams is the cellist for Michael Wolff 's band Impure Thoughts . Barbara <unk> @-@ Young , James Badge @-@ Dale , Gretchen <unk> , and Cooper Pillot had previously performed with Draper in her playwriting Getting Into Heaven in 2003 . Jesse Draper is Tim 's daughter and thus Polly 's niece , and Nat and Alex 's cousin . Billy and Adam Draper are Tim 's sons , and Coulter Mulligan is Jesse 's cousin and Polly 's nephew . 
 Many of Wolff and Draper 's show business friends appeared in the film . Wolff had been the music director for jazz singer Nancy Wilson and she introduced him to Arsenio Hall , who later chose Wolff as the bandleader of his talk show . Tony Shalhoub portrayed Phil in Draper 's screenwriting debut The Tic Code , which was emboldened by Wolff 's difficulties with Tourette syndrome as well as his exploits as a jazz pianist . Draper guest starred in the first season of Shalhoub 's hit sitcom Monk . Other guest stars in the movie include Cyndi Lauper , David Thornton , Brent <unk> , Cindy Blackman , and Ricki Lake . In addition , Draper had also made a cameo alongside her Thirtysomething co @-@ stars Tim <unk> , Mel Harris , Peter Horton , Melanie <unk> , Ken Olin , and Patricia Wettig . 
 David Levi , Thomas <unk> , and Joshua Kaye were preschool friends of Nat . Moore 's son , Cal , has been a classmate of Alex since preschool , while Uma Thurman 's daughter was also a preschool friend of Alex . Ann Curry 's son Walker , an original member of The Silver Boulders , was Nat 's friend in preschool . Cole Hawkins , an actor who also starred as Leonard in the 2003 musical comedy film School of Rock , had no previous involvement with the band . The actress Allie <unk> was also not a member of the group ; she auditioned for her role . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Nat wrote most of the songs performed in the film . As a six @-@ year @-@ old , he composed a melody without lyrics , which he later used as the basis for the bubblegum pop piece " Crazy Car " . The song was meant to emulate the music of The Beach Boys . " Firefighters " , the song written by Nat for a local 9 / 11 fundraiser , was later retitled to " Rosalina " for the movie . Nat wrote " Motormouth " while he was angry at Alex . Another song , " That 's How It Is " , was written by Alex after an unsuccessful dating attempt with a teenager ten years his senior . Additional songs Nat performed in the film include " Got No Mojo " , " Hardcore Wrestlers ( with Inner Feelings ) " , " I Need You " , " Sorry Girl " , and " If There Was a Place to Hide " . 
 Michael Wolff contributed the underscore and produced the music with Michael A. Levine . In the film , Wolff performed the songs " Rathskeller Polka " , " Rathskeller Waltz " , " Naked Party Polka " , and " Naked Tango " . He played the underscore for " Shakey Shakey " ( lyrics by Alex ) , and " Boys Rule , Girls Drool " and " <unk> <unk> ( Timmerman Song ) " , both written by Draper . The elder Wolff was once the musical director for jazz artist Nancy Wilson ; in the movie , Wilson sang a rendition of the song " Crazy Car " . 
 = = Releases and debuts = = 
 = = = Television spin @-@ off = = = 
 According to Michael Wolff , the family made the film without expecting a television series spin @-@ off . Their agent believed the film would be lucrative and market research showed a positive reaction with a young audience . After the film was shown at the Hamptons International Film Festival , Nickelodeon bought it . Moreover , " Albie Hecht had an independent production deal with Nickelodeon " and believed the film suited the network and that a television show was feasible . Draper and Wolff did not want their children in show business at such a young age but agreed when Hecht 's agent promised to work within the boy 's schedule , so that they would not miss school . This meant a summer shooting schedule in New York and short , 13 @-@ episode seasons . Nonetheless , after three seasons , despite the extremely high ratings , network executives urged the family to lengthen the 13 episode season to 60 . Draper and Wolff refused , and as a result , the series was cancelled without any public announcement made by the network . 
 Tom <unk> , the executive vice president and general manager of Nickelodeon explained , " At first , we were intrigued by the idea , but we weren 't sure kids would get the vague tongue @-@ and @-@ cheek @-@ of @-@ it . Then a bunch of us took it home to our own children and they loved it . " The Naked Brothers Band television series ran from 2007 to 2009 . Draper was the creator , head writer , executive producer , and director , while Hecht was the other executive producer and his production company Worldwide Biggies produced the series . Later , made @-@ for @-@ TV movies were created and aired as the series continued — a total of eight have been screened on Nickelodeon . The latter films often consisted of an extended , two @-@ part episode — Nickelodeon usually uses the " movie " definition for these hour @-@ long episodes — and were usually broadcast as part of a holiday event or on weekends . 
 = = = International debuts = = = 
 The film aired worldwide , debuting in the <unk> Canada on September 10 , 2007 on YTV and in Germany on October 20 , 2007 . The film received a Region 1 DVD release on April 3 , 2007 through Nickelodeon and Paramount Home Entertainment . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The film won the audience award for a family feature film at the Hamptons International Film Festival in 2005 . It also received a nomination at the Young Artist Awards in 2008 for Best Television Movie or Special . When it premiered on the network , it was seen by an average of 2 @.@ 7 million viewers . The movie was also broadcast four times , producing a total viewership of 14 million ; it was placed on the top 10 spot of Nielsen VideoScan children 's non @-@ theatrical DVD charts . The song " Crazy Car " was downloaded more than 100 @,@ 000 times on iTunes ; and it peaked at number eighty @-@ three on the Billboard Hot 100 for one week and the track was featured on the Nickelodeon 's Kids ' Choice , Vol 3 . 
 Ronnie <unk> , of Variety , wrote : " <unk> faithful to kids ' rhythms and speech patterns , and featuring several catchy if one @-@ chorus numbers , this bouncy , feel @-@ good <unk> , with targeted release strategy , could rock peers and parents alike . " Felicia R. Lee from The New York Times called the film " an ebullient mock documentary " . Tami Horiuchi of Amazon.com said that this " funny spoof of the Hollywood rockumentary genre is so over @-@ done that some viewers might find it distasteful , offensive , and / or inappropriate for children " and recommended an age group between the ages of 9 and 13 . 
 = Drug Testing ( The Office ) = 
 " Drug Testing " is the twentieth episode of the second season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the twenty @-@ sixth episode overall . It was written by Jennifer Celotta and directed by Greg Daniels , who is also an executive producer , and the series ' show runner . It first aired in the United States on April 27 , 2006 on NBC . The episode guest stars Marilyn Brett as the urine tester and Hugh Dane as Hank the security guard . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) finds pieces of a joint in the parking lot , and begins an investigation to find the owner . Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) , worrying that he may not pass a drug test , pressures Dwight for a cup of clean urine to pass the drug test . Failing to find the culprit and guilty over providing the urine to Michael , Dwight resigns as a volunteer sheriff . Later , Michael assigns Dwight the title of " Honorary Security Adviser " . 
 Several of the scenes were based on the actors ' real @-@ life talents , such as Krasinski 's ability to impersonate people . The episode was also the final episode of the season to be filmed , though not the last to air . " Drug Testing " was watched by 7 @.@ 8 million viewers and received mostly positive reviews from critics , although one review did criticize the plot for not quite coming together . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) finds half of a joint in the parking lot of the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the Dunder Mifflin Paper Company , and takes advantage of his volunteer sheriff deputy status to investigate its source with Jim saying " Dwight finding drugs is more dangerous than people using drugs . " Meanwhile , when Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) and Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) say the same thing simultaneously , Pam calls " jinx " , meaning that Jim cannot talk until he buys her a Coke . Unfortunately , the vending machine is sold out . When Dwight sets up urine testing , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) worries that a " clove cigarette " he smoked at a concert will show up . 
 Michael conducts an anti @-@ drug meeting for the entire office in an unsuccessful attempt to avoid the drug test . Jim continues to hold up his end of the jinx , even as Pam teases him . When she says " you can tell me anything " , an awkward silence follows . Michael pressures Dwight for a cup of his " clean " urine , which he uses to pass the drug test . Dwight turns in his volunteer sheriff badge , feeling guilty for helping Michael . Pam buys Jim his Coke , which he buys off of her so she can find out what 's been happening with Dwight the whole day . Michael feels guilty , so he makes Dwight an " Honorary Security Advisor " for Dunder Mifflin Scranton . 
 The episode ends with talking head interview with Jim , discussing Dwight 's actions for Michael . There is a quick cut @-@ away to a visual of Jim talking to Pam in the <unk> . He states , " I just don 't get it . What does he get out of that relationship ? " The camera emphasizes his own relationship with Pam , and why he went through with the jinx all day . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Drug Testing " was written by Jennifer Celotta and directed by show runner and executive producer Greg Daniels . Fischer noted that the subplot featuring Jim unable to talk was important because " Pam and Jim can say a lot to one another without any words at all " , a reference to the " 27 seconds of silence " the two shared in the earlier episode " Booze Cruise " . Michael has a bandage around his finger in this episode because Steve Carell hurt his finger during the week and was unable to remove his wedding ring due to the swelling . Instead of cutting off his ring , the crew simply wrapped a bandage around it . 
 Several of the scenes were based on the actor 's real @-@ life talents as well as improvised . When Michael tells Pam to " write this down " , Jenna Fischer 's response to the camera was improvised . " I thought it was funny that I didn 't have a pad of paper but Michael was telling me to take notes , " she explained in her MySpace blog , " so I just looked to the camera and showed my lack of pen and paper . " Jim 's impression of Stanley in this episode was inspired by John Krasinski 's actual talent of doing impressions on the set . 
 This was the final episode of the season to be filmed , though not the last to air . According to Jenna Fischer , everybody on the set was excited in a manner that she likened to students on the last day of school . The giddiness particularly shows in Fischer 's performance : Pam skips after Jim into the break room , she bounces on her toes at the end of the " fake crying " talking head , and she taps the soda can three times to get Jim to release the jinx . 
 The Season Two DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include Jim doing impressions of Kevin and Angela for Pam , Dwight noting that he is so determined to find the culprit that he is prepared to pray " to Thor himself " , Toby saying that he does not think Michael is taking drugs , Jim secretly doing an impression of Dwight right in front of him , Dwight talking about Jim and concluding that , " If that were my life , I 'd do drugs " , Pam toying with Dwight by admitting that she " was a teensy bit high ... in the parking lot at the Quick and Easy " , Meredith coming to Jim because Pam told her he had something to tell her . Jim is under the jinx and says nothing , Kelly putting a customer on hold when she is called by Dwight and forgetting to return , Dwight taking notes during the conference , Pam showing the camera the flyer that Michael made up for the conference , and Lee and Gino , the workers at Vance Refrigeration , discarding a joint in the parking lot . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Michael notes that he had gotten high at an Alicia Keys concert . During Michael 's anti @-@ drug meeting , he misidentifies hookah as an illegal drug ; Toby points out the fact that it is merely a pipe . Dwight notes that he 'll have to bring in his bō staff , a long staff weapon used in Okinawa and feudal Japan , to protect the office . Jim later notes that Dwight was dressed like a member of the disco group the Village People . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Drug Testing " originally aired on NBC in the United States on April 26 , 2006 . " Drug Testing " received 3 @.@ 9 / 10 in the ages 18 – 49 demographic in the Nielsen ratings . This means that 3 @.@ 9 percent of all households with an 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old living in it watched the episode , and ten percent had their television tuned to the channel at any point . " Drug Testing " was watched by 7 @.@ 8 million viewers . 
 " Drug Testing " was generally well received by critics . Lindsey Thomas of Rolling Stone named Dwight interrogating the workers in the Office after finding the joint in the parking lot one of the top twenty @-@ five scenes from the show , ranking it at number fifteen . Alan Sepinwall of The Seattle Times wrote that " ' Drug Testing ' ( in which Rainn Wilson 's supercilious Dwight paraded around the office wearing a Smokey Bear hat and carrying a coffee cup filled with undrinkable liquid ) " allowed the show to finally make " The Leap . " Brendan Babish of DVD Verdict was pleased with the entry and awarded it an " A – " . He was pleased with the episode 's emphasis on Dwight and called it " a far better showcase for Dwight 's many charms than ' Dwight 's Speech ' . " M. Giant of Television Without Pity awarded the episode an " A " . Not all reviews were so glowing . Michael Sciannamea of AOL TV was more critical of the episode and wrote that he " didn 't think this episode was so hot " , calling the premise " a good idea that didn 't really take off " . He also disliked Jim and Pam 's subplot and called it " rather childish " and wrote that it " didn 't seem to go anywhere " . 
 = Chrissie Watts = 
 Christine " Chrissie " Watts is a fictional character from the BBC soap opera EastEnders , played by Tracy @-@ Ann Oberman . She first appeared in April 2004 as the second wife of the show 's " most enduring character " , Den Watts , becoming a prominent regular for the next 18 months . In 2005 she was the focus of one of " the programme 's biggest and most high @-@ profile narratives " when she killed her husband in a fit of rage during the special 20th anniversary episode . The broadcast , airing on 18 February , was watched by 14 @.@ 34 million people , with " almost 60 % of possible viewers " tuning in to see Chrissie take revenge . The character was credited by former head of BBC Drama Serials , Mal Young , as " anchoring the success of the anniversary storyline " , and was described on the news programme BBC Breakfast as the " centrepiece " of the show , with the on @-@ screen drama playing out over the course of the year and culminating in Chrissie 's departure in December . 
 Chrissie Watts was created by the production team to be more the " equal " of her notorious and villainous husband than his long @-@ suffering first wife , Angie . The character was described by Oberman as being like Angie " but with 15 more years of feminism behind her " , and was hailed by the TV editor of the Evening Standard as " the only strong woman left in Walford " . She became well known for her deviousness and " scheming " , echoing the traits of her husband , with the official EastEnders website characterising her as " happy to play mind games " and " often two steps ahead " of Den . As part of the Watts family , her story lines centre on her tumultuous marriage to Den , her relationship with his children , and the ongoing feud with the rival Mitchell family . She was involved in numerous clashes with other female characters , Oberman noting that Chrissie had " had more fights on EastEnders than most women have in their whole lives " , and was constantly scheming against those who got in her way , earning her the sobriquet of " super @-@ bitch " . 
 Oberman won praise for her " three @-@ dimensional portrayal of a classic soap bitch " , with Chrissie hailed as " helping revive the show 's fortunes that had been lagging somewhat in recent years " . According to the Daily Mirror reporter Elizabeth Hassell , the character became a " national TV heroine " to viewers shortly after arriving , for standing up to the antics of her dastardly husband , and is most often cited as a " strong " and " clever " woman ; " hard as nails " in " the grand tradition of landladies of the Queen Vic " . Although generally well received by viewers , the character was described as a " ludicrous Lady MacBeth wannabe " by Jim Shelley of the Daily Mirror . Other critics have variously called Chrissie a " witch " , " venomous " , and the show 's resident " black widow " . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = Backstory = = = 
 Chrissie Watts first appears in EastEnders on 29 April 2004 . She and Den ( Leslie Grantham ) had met in Spain and married some years earlier , during which time he was believed to be dead by his family and associates . Their marriage was tumultuous , with Chrissie eventually leaving Den after she saw him " pawing all over that tourist guide . " She then learnt that Den had sold their bar and returned to the UK with " some girl " ; Chrissie followed intent on recovering her share of the money . 
 = = = 2004 – 05 = = = 
 Chrissie arrives in Walford in search of her husband Den . Their marriage has turned sour and he has sold their bar in Spain and taken the money . Den manages to persuade her to give their marriage another try , and to stay in Walford with him . She is shocked to discover he has children , Sharon Watts ( Letitia Dean ) , Dennis Rickman ( Nigel Harman ) and Vicki Fowler ( Scarlett Johnson ) , and that while he was in Spain with her , he was in exile after faking his own death . She starts work as a hairdresser in Kate Mitchell 's ( Jill Halfpenny ) nail salon and helps stepdaughter Vicki with her plans to enter fashion school . However , Den 's elusive behaviour raises her suspicions that he is having an affair . He almost convinces her that she is mistaken , but she eventually learns that her fears were correct and uncovers the affair between Den and Kate . Feigning friendship , she hacks off most of Kate 's hair and smashes up the beauty salon in a rage . She leaves Walford distraught at Den 's betrayal . 
 Den departs for Spain on business , and Chrissie returns to the salon as she remains the co @-@ owner . She remains hostile to Kate for some time , but eventually calls a truce . She then becomes concerned over Vicki 's much older boyfriend Tommy Grant ( Robert Cavanah ) , and exposes him as a liar . At this point , Den returns intent on securing her forgiveness . However , she does not succumb to his charm offensive , and so as a demonstration of his affection he confides in her of his plans to bankrupt the Mitchell family and take control of The Queen Victoria public house , declaring that he can 't do it without her . She relents , but warns if he ever cheats again she will kill him . Together , they scam the Mitchell family out of their holdings and move into the Vic on Christmas Day , 2004 . 
 In January , Dennis catches Den and his girlfriend Zoe Slater ( Michelle Ryan ) in bed together and tells Chrissie who is stunned . Zoe discovers she is pregnant by Den . Chrissie persuades her to abort the baby , and later reveals that she knows it was Den 's baby . Chrissie , Zoe and Sam Hunter ( Kim Medcalf ) plan revenge on Den ; Chrissie for his lies and adultery , Zoe for forcing her to fake a pregnancy and then sleep with him , and Sam for losing her pub to Den in a corrupt scheme that both he and Chrissie were involved in . Chrissie plans to intimidate Den into signing the pub over to her . They confront Den but he takes it in his stride and openly talks about his sins , unaware that Sharon is hiding at the other side of the pub , listening to her father 's confessions . Sharon berates Chrissie for tricking her into coming back to Walford with the lie that her father is ill . She storms out of the pub and Den follows . Chrissie knows that Sharon is the one person Den truly loves and cares about and knows that losing Den the love of his favourite child will destroy him . Den walks back in and she taunts him that he now knows what it is like to lose what he loves most . Unable to contain his rage , Den attacks his wife and hits her head against a fruit machine . Zoe picks up the nearest object ( a metal , dog @-@ shaped doorstop ) and hits Den over the head with it and he falls to the ground . Perceiving him to be dead , Zoe and Sam go out the back to turn all the lights off and lock all the doors . A smug Chrissie starts to gloat that Den is dead , as if to say she has won . Den suddenly grabs her leg and hisses , " You 'll never get me out of the Vic . " so Chrissie picks up the doorstop and delivers a fatal blow to his head , secretly watched by Sam . The three women bury him in a hole in the pub 's cellar , which is filled with cement the next morning . 
 Despite knowing that she is innocent , Chrissie allows Zoe to believe that she has killed Den . Consequently , a power struggle breaks out between Sam – who wants her pub back in return for her silence – and Chrissie , with each woman trying to gain control of Zoe . In the meantime , Chrissie publicly accounts for Den 's sudden absence by declaring that he has run off with another woman and attempts to make her story convincing by throwing his clothes into the street and engaging in a bogus phone conversation with him in front of a packed pub . She successfully removes Zoe from the Square for a time , and begins a relationship with Jake Moon ( Joel Beckett ) ; however , Sam has taken the doorstop and hidden it in her flat . She then proceeds to blackmail Chrissie by saying that unless the pub is given back to her , she will inform the police . Chrissie stalls for time , and eventually calls Sam 's bluff , declaring that she will take Sam down with her if she goes to the police . Desperate , Sam tries to corner Chrissie by telling Zoe the truth . Zoe confronts Chrissie before fleeing to Spain , telling her mother Kat Slater ( Jessie Wallace ) what has happened before she goes . 
 Dennis and Sharon return to Walford in search of their father . On their wedding day , a drunken Sam grows frustrated and smashes up Den 's grave and digs up his body in the hope that Chrissie will be sent down for his death . This backfires and Sam is arrested on suspicion of murder as Den 's bloodstains are found under her sink and her story constantly changes . Chrissie asks Kat to get her cousin , Stacey Slater ( Lacey Turner ) , to give a false alibi that Zoe and Chrissie were with her on the night Den died , and Kat agrees as it means that Zoe is safe from the police . Sam 's mother , Peggy Mitchell , returns to Walford to free Sam , and slaps Chrissie during Den 's funeral . The slap causes Chrissie to fall into Den 's grave on top of the coffin . 
 Chrissie plans to sell the pub to Johnny Allen ( Billy Murray ) and a mystery second buyer , and flee the country , although Phil and Grant Mitchell try to taunt her . Chrissie though , is unfazed , as Sharon still supports her – however , Grant finally convinces Sharon to visit Sam in prison . Sharon still believes Chrissie is innocent , but finally learns the truth when Chrissie makes an innocuous , but telling , comment . Realising that Sharon knows , Chrissie becomes distraught as she felt that so long as Sharon , Den 's daughter , thought well of her , she could think well of herself . Panicking , she begins to make mistakes , arguing with Jake outside of Johnny 's club . Chrissie had confessed her role in Den 's death to Jake , and lets information regarding her guilt slip as they argue . This is caught on CCTV by Johnny , who delights in telling Jake that he has a recording . Chrissie asks to get the money for The Queen Victoria right away , and Johnny takes advantage , saying the only way she will get the money is if she sleeps with him . Chrissie resists , saying that she will not hurt Jake . Johnny tells her that she will not receive the money , and tells Phil and Grant about the tape . 
 Chrissie discovers that Ian Beale ( Adam Woodyatt ) is the mystery buyer of the pub , and she and Jake make a quick sale to Ian before fleeing the Square . At the airport , they see Sharon , Phil and Grant with the police . Sharon confronts and then punches Chrissie , who is then arrested for Den 's murder . Chrissie says that she will only co @-@ operate in exchange for a meeting with Sharon . This is earned , and she tries to make Sharon realise why she killed her father , to no avail . She reveals that she forged Den 's signature on the document in which Den handed over the pub to Chrissie , thus the pub legally belongs to Sharon . Jake visits Chrissie in jail and asks her to marry him . She finds out that he has lost the £ 25 @,@ 000 that was to be her bail money , and storms out of the visiting room , calling Jake an idiot . She begins plotting revenge on Sharon for sending her to prison by trying to force her to testify in court about what Den was really like , wanting to see Sharon crumble at confessing how he cheated and supposedly beat her mother ( which he never did ) . After a week in prison , she gives up and dismisses her solicitor , and decides to plead guilty to murder . After an emotional farewell to Jake , she walks into her cell with a contented smile . 
 Though Chrissie has not been seen or heard of since , when Sam ( now played by Danniella Westbrook ) returns to Walford in September 2009 , she is arrested for her role in Den 's murder and expresses a fear of running into Chrissie in prison . 
 = = Creation and casting = = 
 The creation of a second wife for Den Watts ( Leslie Grantham ) , the show 's " most enduring character " and " one of the best @-@ loved villains in soap history " , came 15 years after his first wife had departed the screen . Angie Watts ( Anita Dobson ) was an iconic character in British television history , with her troublesome marriage to Den largely anchoring EastEnders extraordinary success when it was launched in the mid @-@ 80s . In an interview shortly after she first appeared on @-@ screen as Chrissie Watts , Tracy Ann Oberman noted how coming into the show after Angie was an intimidating prospect and " a big act to follow " . 
 Casting for the character was hectic , with Oberman describing the process as a " whirlwind " affair . The role of the second Mrs Den Watts was highly sought after with Oberman eventually beating out high profile stars like Patsy Kensit , Cheryl Baker and Joanna Lumley for the part . In a 2004 ' Star Chat ' interview featured in The People , Oberman commented on her casting : " I couldn 't have wished for a better part . I mean the Watts family are a national institution . When I realised I was auditioning for the role of Dirty Den 's wife , my jaw just dropped . I never thought I 'd get it . Amazing , swanky actresses , like Joanna Lumley and Patsy Kensit , were all considered , but Leslie Grantham and I had great chemistry from the off and I think he said : ' I want her . ' " Oberman was on holiday when she received a call saying she had been cast in the role and was required to be on set the next Tuesday . All told the audition process had taken just two weeks , with Oberman beginning filming a mere ten days after her initial screen test . In fact the schedule was so tight that Oberman was on set and taping scenes before a contract had even been signed . 
 The arrival of Chrissie Watts was announced barely a month before she was set to first appear on @-@ screen , and came at a time when EastEnders was undergoing immense media criticism and falling ratings . The rush of casting meant Oberman had little time to process the enormity of the part she had taken on , declaring : " my feet haven 't even touched the ground yet . [ ... ] I haven 't had time to think about what this role is going to do to my life ! I 'm very excited to be part of such a fantastic show and one I have been a fan of for many years . " She admitted , however , to being " slightly intimidated " by the high media profile and press interest surrounding the show at the time . Indeed , joining EastEnders " proved to be something of a baptism of fire for Oberman " , as she was playing opposite Leslie Grantham whose recent return to the show had been a highly publicised event . Twenty @-@ four hours after Chrissie 's first episode went to air a scandal surrounding Grantham hit the tabloid papers . According to Oberman , the atmosphere on set the next day " was a bit tense " but , she added , " the Watts are pulling together and we 're getting on with it and working " . However Oberman was also reportedly finding things difficult , having walked into a highly complicated situation : " Tracy @-@ Ann is still really finding her feet on the show ... she feels really left out because all the cast are blackballing Grantham and refusing to talk to him . Since most of her scenes are with Grantham , it 's really hard for her . " Looking back on the incident after she had left EastEnders , Oberman remarked , " I respect Leslie for fronting it out ; he emerged from his dressing room and started working . No one mentioned the story . That 's life in EastEnders ; the machine never stops . " 
 The increasing prominence of Chrissie in EastEnders meant that Oberman , more than most , had to endure the gruelling schedule of working on a soap , taping up to twenty scenes a day . Although she was only in EastEnders for 18 months , such was the centrality of Chrissie to the show and storylines Oberman felt she had done 4 years worth of acting , noting that by the time of her departure " Chrissie has packed into a year what most soap characters do in three . " This all came during a period of great uncertainty for the show ; media criticism and negative publicity created immense pressure behind @-@ the @-@ scenes , with large @-@ scale cast culls and speculation in the press and on the set over who may be next . In an interview with the Sunday Mirror , Oberman described the atmosphere as like a " vacuum " , with the cast " just waiting to see what the next stage is – It can be a bit tense but it 's exciting . I really don 't know what 's going to happen . " However , the prominent role of Chrissie in the show as it moved forward meant that Oberman came out of the uncertainty with more to show than most , receiving an improved deal and extending her contract for a year , with the BBC 's head of drama John Yorke declaring he had " big plans " for Chrissie . 
 = = Character development = = 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 Unlike Angie , Den 's first wife , Chrissie " has a strong will and fights for what she wants " . However , as Oberman noted , " there is enough of Angie in Chrissie to see that Den likes a certain type of strong woman . Chrissie is Angie with 15 years of feminism behind her " , explaining in an interview with Radio 4 : " I like to think of Chrissie as Angie with benefits ... She 's his [ Den 's ] equal a bit more than Angie was . " Oberman later expanded : " Chrissie , unlike Angie , won 't hit the bottle as soon as Den starts playing away . She 's proved she 's ready to sit and wait for her revenge . She 's a great , strong character " . Talking to the Daily Mirror shortly after appearing on @-@ screen for the first time in April , Oberman declared , " Chrissie is the sort of woman I 'd really like to be friends with ... She 's an Essex girl who was brought up in a family of brothers , so she knows how to work men . She understands that what they say is not always what they mean . " In her official character profile , Chrissie is portrayed as someone " happy to play mind games " and " often two steps ahead of her husband " , being described as " the type of person to be your best friend . But if you cross her , she 'll get her own back in the end . " Her strong @-@ willed persona has led reviewers to label the character as " venomous " , " sinister " " devious " , and " hard as nails " in " the grand tradition of landladies of the Queen Vic " , manipulating others to ensure matters go her way . As the " scheming " figure of the show , she was described as a " witch " and " super @-@ bitch " , but was also represented as " strong " and " clever " woman . Executive producer Kate Harwood characterised Chrissie as a survivor , someone who " thinks on her feet " whatever the situation . Oberman has stated that she was thrilled to be " playing such a strong female character " , whom she described as not a bad person at heart but one willing to stand and " fight in her corner " . 
 An aspect of Chrissie 's personality is her wardrobe and style , with EastEnders costume designer Di Humphreys noting that " Chrissie 's clothes reflect her strong , upfront character . " According to Oberman the production team was keen to emphasise this in the manner of her dress : " For Chrissie 's wardrobe , we decided she is dressy and over co @-@ ordinated " , explaining how the character 's fashion sense was informed by her own observations of British expatriates : " When I heard I had the part of Chrissie I was on holiday in Spain , where she had been living , and I remember looking at all the ex @-@ pat women , and thinking how co @-@ ordinated they are . Their hair is always perfect , their bags match their gloves and shoes and scarves . " The show 's make @-@ up artist , Elizabeth Armistead , has also spoken of the way Chrissie 's " glamorous , polished look " informs her characterisation and personality : " Chrissie 's a confident person who rarely leaves anything to chance . Even in moments of despair , though her facial expression reflects her turmoil , she never has a hair out of place . " The look was part of a desire to represent the character as a " strong " and " forceful " figure , with one interviewer describing Chrissie as " quite flashy " and " glam " . According to <unk> this is manifested in " Chrissie ’ s outfits , [ which ] are a mixture of designer and High Street ... Chrissie 's got a great sense of style . She makes High Street clothes look made to measure . " Oberman felt Chrissie 's fashion sensibilities to be a critical element of the character : " she 's like Angie with 15 more years of Sex and The City thrown in " , referring to an American <unk> serial notable for fashion . Even before stepping foot on set Oberman spent eight hours with Humphreys shopping for Chrissie 's clothes at Selfridges where they " spent a fortune ! " The character 's highly stylised representation on @-@ screen earned Oberman the award for best @-@ dressed soap star in 2005 , and reflected Chrissie 's new @-@ found role as the " voluptuous landlady " of The Queen Vic . In the media the character was widely regarded as the show 's ultimate femme fatale and resident " sex symbol " , being described by John Dingwall of the Daily Record as Walford 's " black widow " . 
 In an interview with the Sunday Mirror , Oberman revealed that she was attracted to the mesh of sexuality and humour in the personality of Chrissie , declaring , " What I really like is she 's got the sex and dry sarcasm " . Speaking to the official EastEnders website , she expanded on the importance of Chrissie 's sense of humour and wit to her " feisty " characterisation : " What I love about Chrissie is that she 's a good strong , funny female character ... she 's got a really good sense of humour which is necessary to deal with Den . She 's very good at wisecracks . Den has the one @-@ liners , but Chrissie bats them right back . " Chrissie 's barbed and biting remarks became a prominent feature of the character ; even when cornered by Den 's adopted daughter Sharon Watts ( Letitia Dean ) after attempting to flee the country , she remarks : " You really are your father 's daughter , Sharon . No shaking you off either . " 
 = = = Mrs Den Watts = = = 
 Chrissie entered the show as the estranged wife of " one of the most iconic characters in soap history " , Den Watts , and was deliberately presented as " very different to the first Mrs. Watts . " When EastEnders began in 1985 viewers had watched Den 's affairs and manipulation gradually take their toll on his wife , Angie , who was unable to compete in the games he played . Chrissie was intended to be a contrast to her predecessor ; where Angie turned to alcohol , Chrissie was more Den 's " equal " and could be just as devious and calculating , with Oberman observing how " Angie was all knee @-@ jerk reaction , but Chrissie is more of a plotter and schemer – just like Den . " Comparing Den 's two wives , Oberman remarked : " Chrissie 's much cooler than Angie . Her motto is , ' revenge is a dish best served cold ' . She 's tougher than Angie and she can hold it together much better . " Indeed , according to Oberman , producers deliberately wanted to take Den 's second marriage down a different path to his first ; whereas the relationship between Den and Angie had been likened to Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor , that between Den and Chrissie was modelled on Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn . Like Den , Chrissie had an acerbic tongue and their relationship was marked by verbal fencing in the manner of Hepburn and Tracy : " What 's great is that they 've written Den an equal " , Oberman noted , " It 'll be interesting to see their little sparring matches . " The attraction was intended to be mutual , unlike Den 's one @-@ sided marriage to Angie . Trying to win Chrissie around into giving their marriage another try , Den declared : " I know we 've got a great relationship even when we 're tearing lumps out of each other , you give as good as you get and that 's the sort of marriage I 've always wanted " . Commenting on the complicated nature of their relationship , Oberman observed , 
 The equality of their marriage was dramatically underscored towards the end of 2004 , when Den , as a sign of faith and in an effort to win back her sympathies , revealed to Chrissie his plans to reclaim The Queen Victoria public house by scamming the rival Mitchell family : " If you ever needed proof that we 're in this together or how badly I need you in my life , this is it . I wasn 't going to show this to another soul , but I 'm showing you because you 're my wife ; because it 's me and you together . " 
 In an interview with the official EastEnders website , Oberman detailed the background dynamic to Chrissie and Den 's relationship as it existed before their appearance on the show : " They were a real match for each other and ran a successful wine bar . The couple made a good team , but he was always going off with other women . She 'd end up leaving him , but they 'd always end up back together . " Den 's womanising and philandering nature was deliberately set against Chrissie 's strong and forceful personality , and culminated on @-@ screen in his affair with Kate Mitchell ( Jill Halfpenny ) . The plot was praised by television editor Ru Green as being one of the " better storylines " during an otherwise weak year for the show , with media attention at the time profiling Chrissie 's dramatic plans for revenge . Commenting on the storyline 's climax , a report in The Sun spotlighted how " instead of collapsing in tears " as many female characters in EastEnders are wont to do , Chrissie " proves that hell hath no fury like a woman scorned " . The climax , which saw Chrissie cut off Kate Mitchell 's hair in retribution for the affair , was a highlight for Oberman and an important dramatic milestone for her character : " cutting off Jill Halfpenny 's hair in the salon ... was a really great episode . I loved working with Jill and I think that put Chrissie on the map . " 
 Chrissie left Den but was eventually convinced to give their marriage another try . Oberman revealed in the Daily Mail that she drew on a famous real @-@ life model to reconcile the dichotomous behaviour of a strong woman taking back her cheating husband : " I based Chrissie on Hillary : an intelligent , attractive woman who was publicly humiliated . People ask why she stays with that awful man . A lot of strong women are like that . " She also saw the ebb and flow of Den and Chrissie 's marriage as a reflection of the mental <unk> that was so prominent in their characterisations : " I think there 's a challenge in it , and I think she would like to be the one who would ultimately tame him . " As Den 's equal , Chrissie was intended to be a challenge to his propensity for intellectual games , having already outwitted the show 's prior top dog , Phil Mitchell ( Steve McFadden ) . Den had seen little threat in his first wife 's aptitude , but considered Chrissie to be " as sharp as they come " . Indeed , Den 's extra @-@ marital dalliances were used by writers to showcase and highlight Chrissie 's " strong @-@ willed persona " . When Zoe Slater ( Michelle Ryan ) chastised Den for caring only about Chrissie 's reaction should she learn of their affair , Den fired back : " And so should you . You think I 've treated you badly ? Well you don 't have a clue what 's going to happen if she ever finds out ! The best thing you can do is keep your mouth shut . " By the time Chrissie left the Square , Oberman dryly observed that she had " had more fights on EastEnders than most women have in their whole lives . " 
 = = = Witches of Walford = = = 
 In November 2004 it was announced that Leslie Grantham had not renewed his contract and that Den Watts would depart EastEnders in what was described by The Mirror as an " explosive " and final exit . The storyline became one of " the program 's biggest and most high @-@ profile narratives " , dominating the entire year , and made the character of Chrissie Watts the " centrepiece " of the show . The lead @-@ up to the 20th anniversary episode in February was an immensely high profile affair , with Imogen Ridgway and Richard Godwin of the Evening Standard dryly observing that " unless you 've been living on Titan you probably know that EastEnders is 20 years old and Dirty Den is once again leaving Albert Square . " Events in the show centre around Chrissie manipulating Sam Mitchell and Zoe Slater in a plot of revenge against Den , the three women being dubbed the " Witches of Walford " by the popular press in reference to Shakespeare 's play , Macbeth . The prelude to Den 's death further highlighted and showcased Chrissie 's manipulative character and conniving personality in her representation as a " strong " and " forceful " figure . When she secretly learns that Zoe is pregnant by Den , she plays on Zoe 's insecurities and vulnerabilities and " coerces " her into having an abortion . The pregnancy represented a double blow to Chrissie as Den had always resisted having children with her , and as with Kate Mitchell , Chrissie determines to teach Zoe a harsh lesson about " messing with other people 's husbands " . The possessive nature of his wife was noted by Den , who warns Zoe that Chrissie " tends to blame the women that lead me astray . " 
 The final confrontation between husband and wife played out during the special episode marking the show 's 20th anniversary . Such was public interest in the storyline that the production team reportedly took to " fiercely guarding " scripts , " so that even the cast weren 't sure how they would play out " , with " the show 's producers shooting multiple endings to ensure the cast couldn 't leak the plot . " During the hour @-@ long broadcast Chrissie leads Sam and Zoe into facing Den , with 14 @.@ 34 million people watching her deliver the fatal blow to her husband after a violent struggle . Oberman " begged the producers to let Chrissie do it to prove she wasn 't a sap " , adding " It was a real rush for me . " In the aftermath of Den 's death , Chrissie became an increasingly " transformed " and colder figure , as the character " played " and " spun " her way " out of every situation " . She proceeds to trick Zoe into taking the blame for Den 's murder , and continuously <unk> Sam in the latter 's efforts to get back the Vic . Oberman felt this to be a noticeable shift in Chrissie 's characterisation , with the show 's writers taking " her down a darker route " , as in one notable scene depicting Chrissie standing over Den 's grave , and confiding to him of her plans . 
 The storyline commenced its conclusion with the return of the Mitchell family to help Sam , who had been framed by Chrissie for the murder of Den ; events were to culminate in Chrissie 's " explosive " departure from the show , with producers telling Oberman that when she leaves " later this year , it 's going to be one of the most explosive storylines ever . Like Den before her , Chrissie had little trouble outsmarting the Mitchells , her clashes with Peggy ( Barbara Windsor ) , Phil , and Grant ( Ross Kemp ) part of the final showdown between the Watts and Mitchells that , in the words of one presenter , " grips the nation " . The story 's climax , resulting in Chrissie 's exit from Walford , was such a considerable moment for the show that BBC bosses took the highly unusual step of keeping the " manner of her departure " a " complete mystery even to the soap 's [ own ] producers " , with reports claiming that " no less than four separate storylines [ are ] to be filmed for her departure from EastEnders " . Commenting at the time to NOW , Oberman said , " I think Chrissie deserves to get away with murder . She was heavily provoked . I 'd love to see her make it to Argentina ... [ and ] run a beach bar with a young Latin lover by her side . " The immense public focus on the figure of Chrissie was used by executives in the intensifying ratings war , with the BBC " using the Chrissie Watts departure as the major weapon in our armoury ... to snatch back viewers " from rival soaps . 
 = = = Victim or villain = = = 
 To mark Chrissie 's departure from the show , BBC Three aired a special episode of EastEnders Revealed on 22 September 2005 . Entitled " Chrissie Watts : Victim or Villain ? " the episode featured comments from Oberman , Grantham , Dean , Kim Medcalf , and Barbara Windsor profiling Chrissie and exploring the nuanced nature of the character . " A lot of viewers , and myself , " Oberman later remarked , " really wanted Chrissie to get away with it , especially as Den was such a monster . But soap and film noir have a lot in common – the bad girls have to be punished . " However , critics considered Chrissie to be a " three @-@ dimensional soap bitch " , rather than a flat pantomime figure . Despite having killed her father , Chrissie highly valued her friendship with Sharon , declaring at one point : " my friendship with you is the only good thing to come out of my relationship with Den , and I mean that ! " Oberman characterised Chrissie as " part victim part villain " , declaring " I think of her as a villain with a heart " . She felt that , although " no excuse " for murder , Chrissie was driven to what she did : " She 's not a cold blooded murderer , it was all done in a fit of pique " , and that " these characters are made , not born . " Chrissie was haunted by the alcoholic fate of Den 's first wife , which she vowed at Angie 's grave to avoid . But in spite of her efforts , and indeed because of them , she failed , as she came to recognise : " You know it 's funny ; when Den used to talk about Ange he used to describe her as this weak sad , cow . And I used to think ' not like me , oh no , not like me ' . Who 's having the last laugh now , Ange ? " 
 = = Reception = = 
 As the wife of Den Watts , one of British soap 's biggest figures , Chrissie was a high profile character , with the turns in her storylines regularly splashed across the tabloid papers . According to Steve Hendry of the Daily Mail ( Glasgow ) , Oberman was an " overnight success " in the role of Chrissie , and successfully " exorcised the iconic ghost of long @-@ dead Queen Vic lush Angie Watts " , becoming , in the words of reporter Katherine Hassell , " a national TV heroine after she arrived in Albert Square in 2004 as the wife of the resurrected Dirty Den " . The character 's tough and steely persona was widely cited by TV critics , such as Imogen Ridgway of The Evening Standard , who felt Chrissie to be the " dominant female character " in the show , maintaining an increasingly threatened EastEnders tradition of the independent , forceful female figure : " For a soap originally underpinned by dominant female characters , it seems odd that Chrissie Watts is apparently the only strong woman left in Walford " . 
 The storyline involving Den 's death was among the most prominent of the decade , and generated intense media and public interest . Looking back on the period , Oberman noted the remarkable nature of the story : 
 The special 1 @-@ hour 20th anniversary episode where Chrissie killed Den was watched by 14 @.@ 34 million people on the night it was broadcast , attracting " almost 60 % of possible viewers " , with a peak share of 57 @.@ 8 % . It was the highest rated episode of EastEnders that year , and has since only been bested by a showing on Christmas Day 2007 ( which drew anomalous large audiences for all BBC One programmes that year ) , and the 25th anniversary episode . However final figures for the broadcast , which factored in digital and recorded viewings , rose to over 17 million making it the highest rated screening of a British soap since 2003 . The episode received a massive amount of media interest , and was highly praised for displaying " some of the tightest , funniest dialogue this soap has seen " . Oberman revealed that she could not stop laughing during filming of the scenes , as Grantham 's hair was stuck to the floor : " We did lots of takes and poor Leslie was on his back for hours with fake blood all around his head . The liquid dried and his hair was glued to the floor . When he got up it ripped his hair out ! " 
 The aftermath dominated EastEnders in 2005 and helped to revive the fortunes of the show . According to the former head of BBC Drama Serials , Mal Young , this was dependent on the character of Chrissie , who was responsible for " anchoring the success of the anniversary storyline " . A similar sentiment was expressed by Ian Hyland in the Sunday Mirror , who although critical of the <unk> plot felt EastEnders was improving " mainly because Chrissie is doing her best to rescue the fallout from the storyline dirty bomb Den 's murder has become " , and described the character as performing a " rescue act " on the show . However , Jim Shelley of the Daily Mirror was highly critical of Chrissie , calling her " the ludicrous Lady MacBeth wannabe " , and felt her departure was <unk> EastEnders to move forward . In contrast , the TV editor of the Telegraph hailed Chrissie as " helping revive the show 's fortunes that had being lagging somewhat in recent years " . 
 Oberman has described her time on the show as " hectic " . During Chrissie 's tenure there was constant shuffling behind the scenes , with three different executive producers taking the reins , with each new producer bringing in new writing teams . Uncertainty came to be manifested in writing and scripts , with character inconsistencies and plot holes working their way into production . One notable example was ownership of The Queen Victoria , with Chrissie legally owner of half the pub after Den legitimately signed over the deed before they renewed their vows in February . However , in November this fact was forgotten , with Chrissie represented as forging Den 's signature to nullify her ownership of the pub which legally became Sharon 's . Problems with the script did not escape Oberman , who criticised her character 's storylines after she left the show , saying the writers " must have been on crack " , adding how " plots didn 't make logical or emotional sense – but they said , ' That 's the soap convention , dear , get used to it ' " . She also considered some scenes to be irresponsible , saying " I was worried when four @-@ year @-@ olds said to me , ' I saw you kill Den . ' I don 't agree with censorship but there has to be a level of responsibility . " 
 One of the consequences of all the uncertainty behind the scenes was Chrissie 's final fate , which was left largely unresolved . Oberman revealed in July 2009 that originally there were plans for a trial , but that poor timing ultimately shelved the storyline . She recalled how the storyline " was put on hold and then there was a whole different team involved after that . I know that if they couldn 't get me , Michelle and Kim together , [ they wouldn 't do it ] . And I 'd moved straight on to Doctor Who , too . Nobody was available until the following year , by which point Michelle was in Bionic Woman , I was pregnant and Kim was in Cabaret . " Because of this " I never felt it was finished off and I would have loved to have wrapped it up . " She went on to declare her desire to return for a proper resolution . " I 'd love to finish off Chrissie 's storyline because I love the character and I do feel that she was left in limbo . To know what happened to her would be great . Even if she went back to say goodbye or wanted to make peace with Sam . Or maybe we could see her in prison ? " 
 However , Oberman has continuously affirmed that she loved playing Chrissie , and of all her roles misses playing her the most . In a 2009 interview she commented on the significance of the character to EastEnders and viewers , saying " I can 't believe that I 'm still recognised so much as Chrissie . I still get a lot of letters about her , too . I think that she had as much of an impact as Janine ( Charlie Brooks ) did , which surprised me . Chrissie wasn 't around for that long but she was an amazing character with an epic storyline . " 
 Oberman was nominated for a number of awards for her portrayal of Chrissie Watts . In 2004 for Most Popular Newcomer at the National Television Awards ; She also received four nominations at the British Soap Awards , for Best Newcomer in 2004 , Villain of the Year in 2005 and 2006 , and Soap Bitch of the Year in 2006 . In 2005 , she was nominated for Best Actress and Best Bitch at the Inside Soap Awards . 
 = LW2 ( classification ) = 
 LW2 is a para @-@ Alpine and para @-@ Nordic standing ski sport class defined by the International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) . Competitors in this class have severe disability in a lower limb , which may be a result of an amputation , or arthrodesis in the leg and hip . Depending on the type of skiing , the international classification process for LW2 skiers is handled by the IPC Alpine Skiing Technical Committee and IPC Nordic Skiing Technical Committee . National sport federations handle classification on the lower levels . 
 In para @-@ Alpine , skiers use one ski and two ski poles while para @-@ Nordic skiers use two skis and two ski poles . Other equipment may be used such as outriggers . Specific skiing and training techniques have been developed for this LW2 skiers that address their disability type and equipment use . A factoring system is used in both para @-@ Alpine and para @-@ Nordic to allow different classes to compete against each other when there are too few individual competitors in one class in a competition . These factors may change from ski season to ski season . 
 This classification has been included in a number of medal events at major competitions since the 1980s . It was sometimes later grouped with other classes for medal events . Skiers in this sport class include Australians Michael Milton , Toby Kane and Cameron Rahles Rahbula , and American Allison Jones . 
 = = Definition = = 
 This is a standing classification used in para @-@ Alpine skiing and para @-@ Nordic skiing , where LW stands for Locomotor Winter . It is for people with a severe disability in a lower limb , which may be a result of an amputation , arthrodesis in the leg and hip , or a disease like polio . Competitors in this class would score 20 or less on a strength test for one leg . The International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) explicitly defined this classification for para @-@ Alpine skiing as " Competitors with severe disabilities in one lower limb ... Typical disability profile of the class is single above @-@ knee amputation . " For para @-@ Nordic skiing , the IPC defines this class as " those with impairment in one entire lower limb ( involving pelvis structures distal ) . " In 2002 , the Australian Paralympic Committee described this classification for para @-@ Alpine as a standing skiing classification with " One ski , two poles , disability in one leg above the knee . " Cross Country Canada defined this classification for para @-@ Nordic skiing as " Impairment in one entire lower limb ( leg ) involving pelvis and structures distal " in 2012 . 
 For international para @-@ Alpine skiing competitions , classification is done through IPC Alpine Skiing Technical Committee . A national federation such as Alpine Canada handles classification for domestic competitions . For para @-@ Nordic skiing events , classification is handled by IPC Nordic Skiing Technical Committee on the international level and by the national sports federation such as Cross @-@ Country Canada on a country by country level . When being assessed into this sport class , a number of things are considered including reviewing the skiers medical history and medical information on the skier 's disability , having a physical and an in person assessment of the skier training or competing . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 In para @-@ Alpine , skiers in this classification compete with one skis and two ski poles . The para @-@ Alpine ski configuration is sometimes called a 3 track . FIS rules for para @-@ Alpine ski boots and binding heights are modified for this class from rules applied to able bodied competitor 's equipment . In para @-@ Nordic , skiers compete with two skis and two poles . Skiers use skis that would be slightly longer than if they were able bodied . Skiers in this classification may use outriggers . Outriggers are forearm crutches with a miniature ski on a rocker at the base , and are fitted for the skier based the height of the skier 's hip joint when the skier is standing . In the biathlon , athletes with amputations can use a rifle support while shooting . 
 = = Technique = = 
 One of the para @-@ Alpine skiing techniques used by this class is called the three track method , and was developed as part of the American Training System . One of the first skills learned using this technique is how to walk with the ski so the skier can learn how to flex the ankle , knee and hip . This allows the skier to determine their centre of gravity . The skier is then taught how hop turn in order to understand arm and leg coordination while on skis . This technique is only used while stationary and is not a competition skill . The skier next learns how to fall down and get back up again . The next skill learned is climbing gentle terrain , followed by learning to go down a straight run and learning to stop . After this , the skier learns how to get on and off a ski lift . This is followed by learning how to traverse the fall line , which teaches the skier how to maintain the ski edge . Other skills are then taught including the Uphill Christie , beginning turns , parallel turns , short swings and moguls . 
 When falling , skiers in this class with above the knee amputations are taught to try to prevent the stump of their leg from hitting the snow as it can cause more damage to that leg than the one that is not partially missing . When working on side stepping , the skier is supported to keep the stump of their leg on the uphill side . Elite skiers are taught to avoid using outriggers as crutches . Skiers are taught to turn using their leg instead of their ski poles . Skiers in this class can use the outrigger to assist in maintaining their balance as they turn on the hill . A skier with an above the knee amputation may have a better ability to complete turns on the opposite of their amputation . In getting on ski lifts , skiers with above the knee amputations in this classification should lift their outriggers off the ground and point them forward . 
 When using the outrigger , skiers do not rotate their arms as this changes the location of the ski on the snow . Outriggers are used to stop using a technique that involves bringing the skiers elbows from their raised position down to their hips while pushing the outriggers down . 
 In the biathlon , all Paralympic athletes shoot from a prone position . 
 = = Sport = = 
 A factoring system is used in the sport to allow different classes to compete against each other when there are too few individual competitors in one class in a competition . The factoring system works by having a number for each class based on their functional mobility or vision levels , where the results are calculated by multiplying the finish time by the factored number . The resulting number is the one used to determine the winner in events where the factor system is used . For the 2003 / 2004 para @-@ Nordic skiing season , the percentage for the classic technique was 91 % and percentage for free was 86 @-@ 91 % . The percentage for the 2008 / 2009 and 2009 / 2010 ski seasons was 91 @-@ 93 % for classic and 86 @-@ 91 % for the free technique . In para @-@ Nordic skiing , the percentage for the 2012 / 2013 ski season was 91 @-@ 93 % for classic and 86 @-@ 91 % for free . For para @-@ Alpine skiers , during the 2005 / 2006 season , the giant slalom had a factor of 0 @.@ <unk> and men 's slalom had a factor of 1 @.@ 000 . The factoring for LW2 alpine skiing classification during the 2011 / 2012 skiing season was 1 for slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for giant slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for super @-@ G and 0 @.@ <unk> for downhill . 
 In disability skiing events , sometimes this classification is grouped with standing classes who are seeded to start after visually impaired classes and before sitting classes in the slalom and giant slalom . In downhill , super @-@ G and super combined , this same group competes after the visually impaired classes and sitting classes . In cross @-@ country and biathlon events , this classification is grouped with other standing classes . The IPC advises event organisers to run the men 's standing ski group after the blind men 's group and before the blind women 's group . Women 's standing classes are advised to go last . 
 For alpine events , a skier is required to have their ski poles or equivalent equipment planted in the snow in front of the starting position before the start of the race . During competition , the para @-@ Alpine skier cannot use a limb not in a ski for competitive advantage to gain speed or keep balance by putting it in the snow . If they do so , they rules state they will be disqualified from the event . 
 Skiers in this class may injure themselves while skiing . Between 1994 to 2006 , the German national para @-@ Alpine skiing team had four skiers in LW2 who had an injury while skiing . One injury occurred in 1996 and was an " injury of the <unk> brachialis . " In 1998 at the Winter Paralympics , LW2 skier , Alexander Spitz , broke his leg in the downhill event . In 2000 , a skier had a " distorsion of the plexus brachialis and anterior luxation of the shoulder " . In 2001 , a skier had a " fracture shoulder <unk> majus and anterior luxation " . This class has a higher rate of " plexus brachialis distorsion and a higher rate of shoulder injuries " compared to able bodied skiers . 
 = = Events = = 
 This classification has been included in a number of medal events at major competitions since the 1980s . It was sometimes later grouped with other classes for medal events . At the 1984 Winter Olympics Exhibition Competition , disciplines included on the programme were downhill and giant slalom , where it was not grouped with others for medal events for men and women . At the 1988 World Winter Games for the Disabled , disciplines represented included slalom , and the classification was not grouped with others for medal events for women . At the 1990 Disabled Alpine World Championships , LW2 skiers were in their own medal events . At the 1992 Winter Paralympics , this classification was eligible for the slalom and super @-@ G events . At the 1994 Winter Paralympics , events for this classification included the giant slalom , downhill , super @-@ G and slalom . 
 At the 2002 Winter Paralympics , disciplines for this classification were eligible for included the downhill , giant slalom , slalom and super @-@ G. At the 2002 Winter Paralympics in alpine @-@ skiing , this classification was not grouped with others for the men 's giant slalom , giant slalom , super @-@ G , and downhill events , and women 's slalom , super @-@ G , and downhill events . Two years later , at the 2004 World Championships , LW2 women had their own medal events in para @-@ Alpine for events including the downhill . At the 2005 IPC Nordic Skiing World Championships , this class was grouped with other standing skiing classifications . In cross country , this class was eligible to compete in the men and women 's 5 km , 10 km and 20 km individual race . In the men and women 's biathlon , this classification was again grouped with standing classes in the 7 @.@ 4 km race with 2 shooting stages 12 @.@ 5 km race which had four shooting stages . At the 2006 Winter Paralympics , events for this classification included the downhill and super @-@ G. At the 2009 World Championships , this classification was grouped with other standing classes , with 3 of the 10 female skiers in the standing downhill event were from this class and the highest placed female finishing fifth . In the men 's standing downhill , there were nine skiers from this class . 
 = = Competitors = = 
 Skiers in this class include Australians Michael Milton , Toby Kane and Cameron Rahles Rahbula , American Allison Jones , and 1990 World Championships New Zealand competitor Lorraine Te <unk> . 
 = Val Logsdon Fitch = 
 Val Logsdon Fitch ( March 10 , 1923 – February 5 , 2015 ) was an American nuclear physicist who , with co @-@ researcher James Cronin , was awarded the 1980 Nobel Prize in Physics for a 1964 experiment using the Alternating Gradient Synchrotron at Brookhaven National Laboratory that proved that certain subatomic reactions do not adhere to fundamental symmetry principles . Specifically , they proved , by examining the decay of K @-@ mesons , that a reaction run in reverse does not retrace the path of the original reaction , which showed that the reactions of subatomic particles are not indifferent to time . Thus the phenomenon of CP violation was discovered . This demolished the faith that physicists had that natural laws were governed by symmetry . 
 Born on a cattle ranch near Merriman , Nebraska , Fitch was drafted into the U.S. Army during World War II , and worked on the Manhattan Project at the Los Alamos Laboratory in New Mexico . He later graduated from McGill University , and completed his Ph.D. in physics in 1954 at Columbia University . He was a member of the faculty at Princeton University from 1954 until his retirement in 2005 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Val Logsdon Fitch was born on a cattle ranch near Merriman , Nebraska , on March 10 , 1923 , the youngest of three children of Fred Fitch , a cattle rancher , and his wife Frances née Logsdon , a school teacher . He had an older brother and sister . The family farm was about 4 square miles ( 10 km2 ) in size , and was about 40 miles ( 64 km ) from the site of the Wounded Knee Massacre . The ranch was a small one ; his father specialized in raising breeding stock . Soon after his birth , his father was badly injured in a horse riding accident and could no longer work on his ranch , so the family moved to the nearby town of Gordon , Nebraska , where his father entered the insurance business . It was here that he attended school , graduating from Gordon High School in 1940 as valedictorian . 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 Fitch attended <unk> State College for three years , then transferred to Northwestern University ; but this was during World War II , and his studies were interrupted by being drafted into the U.S. Army in 1943 . After he had completed basic training , the Army sent him to Carnegie Institute of Technology for training under the Army Specialized Training Program . Under this program , some 200 @,@ 000 soldiers attended colleges for intensive courses . Fitch was in the program for less than a year before the manpower requirements of the war became too great , and the Army terminated the program . Most of the soldiers in the ASTP were posted to combat units , but Fitch was one of a hundred or so ASTP soldiers who joined the Special Engineer Detachment ( SED ) , which provided much @-@ needed technicians to the Manhattan Project . 
 The Army sent Fitch to the Manhattan Project 's Los Alamos Laboratory in New Mexico . By mid @-@ 1944 , about a third of the technicians at Los Alamos were from the SED . While there , he met many of the greats of physics including Niels Bohr , James Chadwick , Enrico Fermi , Isidor Isaac Rabi , Bruno Rossi , Emilio Segrè , Edward Teller and Richard C. Tolman , in some cases attending courses on physics taught by them . He worked in the group headed by Ernest Titterton , a member of the British Mission , and became well @-@ acquainted with the techniques of experimental physics . He participated in the drop testing of mock atomic bombs that was conducted at Wendover Army Air Field and the Salton Sea Naval Auxiliary Air Station , and worked at the Trinity site , where he witnessed the Trinity nuclear test on July 16 , 1945 . He was discharged from the Army in 1946 , but continued to work at Los Alamos as a civilian for another year in order to earn some money . He would briefly return to Los Alamos in 1948 . 
 = = Academic career = = 
 His wartime experiences led Fitch to decide to become a physicist . Robert Bacher , the head of the physics division at Los Alamos , offered him a graduate assistantship at Cornell University , but first he needed to complete his undergraduate degree . Rather than return to Northwestern or Carnegie Mellon , he elected to enter McGill University , which Titterton had recommended . Fitch graduated from McGill with a bachelor 's degree in electrical engineering in 1948 . On the advice of Jerry Kellogg , who had been a student of Rabi 's at Columbia University , and was a division head at the Los Alamos , Fitch decided to pursue his doctoral studies at Columbia . Kellogg wrote him a letter of introduction to Rabi . James Rainwater became his academic supervisor . Rainwater gave him a paper by John Wheeler concerning mu @-@ mesic atoms , atoms in which an electron is replaced by a muon . These had never been observed ; they were completely theoretical and there was no evidence that they existed , but it made a good thesis topic . 
 Fitch designed and built an experiment to measure the gamma rays emitted from mu @-@ mesic atoms . As it turned out , this was a good time to search for them . Columbia had recently commissioned a cyclotron at the Nevis Laboratories that could produce muons ; Robert Hofstadter had developed the thallium @-@ activated sodium iodide gamma ray detector ; and wartime advances in electronics yielded advances in components such as new <unk> needed to bring it all together . Initially nothing was found , but Rainwater suggested expanding the search beyond the energy range predicted by Wheeler on the basis of the then @-@ accepted size of the radius of the atomic nucleus as around 1 @.@ 4 × 10 − 15 m . When this was done , they found what they had been looking for , discovering in the process that the nucleus was closer to 1 @.@ 2 × 10 − 15 m . He completed his Ph.D. in 1954 , writing his thesis on " Studies of X @-@ rays from mu @-@ <unk> atoms " . The thesis was published in the Physical Review in November 1953 . 
 In 1949 , Fitch married Elise Cunningham , a secretary who worked in the laboratory at Columbia . They had two sons . Elise died in 1972 , and in 1976 he married Daisy Harper Sharp , thereby acquiring two stepdaughters and a stepson . After obtaining his doctorate , Fitch 's interest shifted to strange particles and K mesons . He took a position at Princeton University , where he spent the rest of his career . He became a professor in 1960 , Fogg Brackett Professor in 1976 , and McDonnell Distinguished University Professor of Physics in 1987 , retaining this position until his retirement in 2005 . He was chair of the Physics Department from 1976 to 1981 . 
 Fitch conducted much of his research at the Brookhaven National Laboratory , where he became acquainted with James Cronin . The two of them played bridge at nights while they waited for the Cosmotron to become available . Cronin had built a new kind of detector , a spark chamber spectrometer , and Fitch realized that it would be perfect for experiments with K mesons ( now known as <unk> ) , which Yale University physicist Robert Adair had suggested had interesting properties worth investigating . They could decay into either matter or antimatter . Along with two colleagues , James Christenson and René <unk> , they set up their experiment on the Alternating Gradient Synchrotron at Brookhaven . They discovered an unexpected result . The decay of neutral K mesons did not respect CP symmetry . K mesons that decayed into positrons did so faster than those that decayed into electrons . The importance of this result was not immediately appreciated ; but as evidence of the Big Bang accumulated , Andrei Sakharov realized in 1967 that it explained why the universe is largely made of matter and not antimatter . Put simply , they had found " the answer to the physicist ’ s ' Why do we exist ? ' " For this discovery , Fitch and Cronin received the 1980 Nobel Prize in Physics . 
 In addition to the Nobel Prize , Fitch received the Ernest Orlando Lawrence Award in 1968 , the John Price Wetherill Medal in 1976 and the National Medal of Science in 1993 . He was a member of the Board of Sponsors of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists and the JASON defense advisory group . He was president of the American Physical Society from 1988 to 1989 , and he served on a number of governmental science and science policy committees , including the President 's Science Advisory Committee from 1970 to 1973 . He died at his home in Princeton , New Jersey , at the age of 91 on February 5 , 2015 . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Fitch , V. " Some Notes on <unk> Feedback Amplifiers " , Los Alamos National Laboratory , United States Department of Energy ( through predecessor agency the Atomic Energy Commission ) , ( March 16 , 1949 ) . 
 Fitch , V. " A High Resolution Scale @-@ of @-@ four " , Columbia University , United States Department of Energy ( through predecessor agency the Atomic Energy Commission ) , ( August 25 , 1949 ) . 
 Fitch , V. L. " CP Violation , Neutral Currents , and Weak Equivalence " , Princeton University , United States Department of Energy ( through predecessor agency the Atomic Energy Commission ) , ( March 23 , 1972 ) . 
 Cester , R. ; Fitch , V. L. ; Montag , A. ; Sherman , S. ; Webb , R. C. & M. S. <unk> . " Results on the Performance of a Broad Band <unk> Cherenkov Counter " , Princeton University , United States Department of Energy , ( 1980 ) . 
 = Nico Ditch = 
 Nico Ditch ( occasionally Mickle Ditch or <unk> ) is a linear earthwork , six miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) long , running between Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne and Stretford in Greater Manchester , England . It may have been dug as a defensive fortification , or possibly a boundary marker . It was constructed some time between the 5th and 11th centuries AD . 
 The ditch is still visible in short sections , such as a 330 @-@ yard stretch in Denton Golf Course . In the parts which survive , the ditch is 4 – 5 yards wide and up to 5 feet deep . Part of the earthwork is protected as a Scheduled Ancient Monument . 
 = = Course = = 
 Nico Ditch stretches six miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) from Ashton Moss ( grid reference <unk> ) in Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne to Hough Moss ( grid reference <unk> ) , just east of Stretford . It passes through Denton , Reddish , Gorton , Levenshulme , Burnage , Rusholme , Platt Fields Park in Fallowfield , Withington and Chorlton @-@ cum @-@ Hardy , crossing four metropolitan boroughs of present @-@ day Greater Manchester . The ditch coincides with the boundaries between the boroughs of Stockport and Manchester , and between Tameside and Manchester as far as Denton golf course . A section is now beneath the Audenshaw Reservoirs , which were built towards the end of the 19th century . The ditch may have extended west beyond Stretford , to Urmston ( grid reference <unk> ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Nico Ditch was constructed some time between the end of Roman rule in Britain in the early 5th century and the Norman conquest in 1066 . Its original purpose is unclear , but it may have been used as a defensive fortification or as an administrative boundary . It possibly marked a 7th @-@ century boundary for the expansionist Anglo @-@ Saxons , or it may have been a late 8th or early 9th century boundary marker between the kingdoms of Mercia and Northumbria . In the early medieval period , the Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms of Northumbria , Mercia and Wessex struggled for control over North West England , along with the Britons and the Danes . Whatever its earlier use , the ditch has been used as a boundary since at least the Middle Ages . 
 Legend has it that Nico Ditch was completed in a single night by the inhabitants of Manchester , as a protection against Viking invaders in 869 – 870 ; Manchester may have been sacked by the Danes in 870 . It was said that each man had an allocated area to construct , and was required to dig his section of the ditch and build a bank equal to his own height . According to 19th century folklore , the ditch was the site of a battle between Saxons and Danes ; the battle was supposed to have given the nearby towns of Gorton and Reddish their names , from " Gore Town " and " Red @-@ Ditch " , but the idea has been dismissed by historians as a " popular fancy " . The names derive from " dirty farmstead " and " reedy ditch " respectively . 
 Antiquarians and historians have been interested in the ditch since the 19th century , but much of its course has been built over . Between 1990 and 1997 , the University of Manchester Archaeological Unit excavated sections of the ditch in Denton , Reddish , Levenshulme and Platt Fields , in an attempt to determine its age and purpose . Although no date was established for the ditch 's construction , the investigations revealed that the bank to the north of the ditch is of 20th century origin . Together with the ditch 's profile , which is U @-@ shaped rather than the V @-@ shape typically used in military ditches and defences , this suggests that the purpose of the earthwork was to mark a territorial boundary . The conclusion of the project was that the ditch was probably a boundary marker . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The earliest documented reference to the ditch is in a charter detailing the granting of land in Audenshaw to the monks of the Kersal Cell . In the document , dating from 1190 to 1212 , the ditch is referred to as " <unk> " , and a magnum <unk> , Latin for " large ditch " . 
 The name Nico ( sometimes <unk> ) for the ditch became established in the 19th and 20th centuries . It may have been derived from the Anglo @-@ Saxon <unk> , a water spirit who seized and drowned unwary travellers , but the modern name is most likely a corruption of the name <unk> and its variations , as the Anglo @-@ Saxon word <unk> meant " big " or " great " , harking back to the early 13th century description of the ditch as magnum <unk> . An alternative derivation is that Nico comes from <unk> , an Anglo @-@ Saxon verb meaning " kill " . 
 = = Current status = = 
 Despite heavy weathering , the ditch is still visible in short sections , which can be 4 – 5 yards wide and up to 5 feet deep . A 330 @-@ yard stretch through Denton Golf Course , and a section running through Platt Fields Park , are considered the best preserved remains . In 1997 , a segment of the ditch 150 @-@ yard long in Platt Fields was protected as a Scheduled Ancient Monument . The rest of the ditch remains unprotected . 
 = Nickel = 
 Nickel is a chemical element with symbol Ni and atomic number 28 . It is a silvery @-@ white lustrous metal with a slight golden tinge . Nickel belongs to the transition metals and is hard and ductile . Pure nickel , powdered to maximize the reactive surface area , shows a significant chemical activity , but larger pieces are slow to react with air under standard conditions because an oxide layer forms on the surface and prevents further corrosion ( passivation ) . Even so , pure native nickel is found in Earth 's crust only in tiny amounts , usually in ultramafic <unk> and in the interiors of larger nickel – iron meteorites that were not exposed to oxygen when outside Earth 's atmosphere . 
 <unk> nickel is found in combination with iron , a reflection of the origin of those elements as major end products of supernova nucleosynthesis . An iron – nickel mixture is thought to compose Earth 's inner core . 
 Use of nickel ( as a natural meteoric nickel – iron alloy ) has been traced as far back as 3500 BCE . Nickel was first isolated and classified as a chemical element in 1751 by Axel Fredrik Cronstedt , who initially mistook the ore for a copper mineral . The element 's name comes from a mischievous sprite of German miner mythology , Nickel ( similar to Old Nick ) , that personified the fact that copper @-@ nickel ores resisted refinement into copper . An economically important source of nickel is the iron ore limonite , which often contains 1 – 2 % nickel . Nickel 's other important ore minerals include garnierite , and pentlandite . Major production sites include the Sudbury region in Canada ( which is thought to be of meteoric origin ) , New Caledonia in the Pacific , and Norilsk in Russia . 
 Nickel oxidizes slowly at room temperature and is considered corrosion @-@ resistant . Historically , it has been used for plating iron and brass , coating chemistry equipment , and manufacturing certain alloys that retain a high silvery polish , such as German silver . About 6 % of world nickel production is still used for corrosion @-@ resistant pure @-@ nickel plating . Nickel @-@ plated objects sometimes provoke nickel allergy . Nickel has been widely used in coins , though its rising price has led to some replacement with cheaper metals in recent years . 
 Nickel is one of four elements that are ferromagnetic around room temperature . Alnico permanent magnets based partly on nickel are of intermediate strength between iron @-@ based permanent magnets and rare @-@ earth magnets . The metal is valuable in modern times chiefly in alloys ; about 60 % of world production is used in nickel @-@ steels ( particularly stainless steel ) . Other common alloys and some new superalloys comprise most of the remainder of world nickel use , with chemical uses for nickel compounds consuming less than 3 % of production . As a compound , nickel has a number of niche chemical manufacturing uses , such as a catalyst for hydrogenation . Nickel is an essential nutrient for some microorganisms and plants that have enzymes with nickel as an active site . 
 = = Properties = = 
 = = = Atomic and physical properties = = = 
 Nickel is a silvery @-@ white metal with a slight golden tinge that takes a high polish . It is one of only four elements that are magnetic at or near room temperature , the others being iron , cobalt and gadolinium . Its Curie temperature is 355 ° C ( 671 ° F ) , meaning that bulk nickel is non @-@ magnetic above this temperature . The unit cell of nickel is a face @-@ centered cube with the lattice parameter of 0 @.@ 352 nm , giving an atomic radius of 0 @.@ 124 nm . This crystal structure is stable to pressures of at least 70 GPa . Nickel belongs to the transition metals and is hard and ductile . 
 = = = = Electron configuration dispute = = = = 
 The nickel atom has two electron configurations , [ Ar ] 3d8 4s2 and [ Ar ] 3d9 4s1 , which are very close in energy – the symbol [ Ar ] refers to the argon @-@ like core structure . There is some disagreement on which configuration has the lowest energy . Chemistry textbooks quote the electron configuration of nickel as [ Ar ] 4s2 3d8 , which can also be written [ Ar ] 3d8 4s2 . This configuration agrees with the Madelung energy ordering rule , which predicts that 4s is filled before 3d . It is supported by the experimental fact that the lowest energy state of the nickel atom is a 3d8 4s2 energy level , specifically the 3d8 ( 3F ) 4s2 3F , J = 4 level . 
 However , each of these two configurations gives rise to several energy levels , and the two sets of energy levels overlap . The average energy of states with configuration [ Ar ] 3d9 4s1 is actually lower than the average energy of states with configuration [ Ar ] 3d8 4s2 . For this reason , the research literature on atomic calculations quotes the ground state configuration of nickel as [ Ar ] 3d9 4s1 . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 The isotopes of nickel range in atomic weight from 48 u ( 48Ni ) to 78 u ( <unk> ) . 
 Naturally occurring nickel is composed of five stable isotopes ; <unk> , 60Ni , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , with <unk> being the most abundant ( 68 @.@ 077 % natural abundance ) . Isotopes heavier than <unk> cannot be formed by nuclear fusion without losing energy . 
 Nickel @-@ 62 has the highest nuclear binding energy of any nuclide , at 8 @.@ <unk> MeV / nucleon . Its binding energy is greater than both 56Fe , often incorrectly cited as the most tightly @-@ bound nuclide , and it is also more tightly bound than <unk> . 
 Stable isotope nickel @-@ 60 is the daughter product of the extinct radionuclide 60Fe , which decays with a half @-@ life of 2 @.@ 6 million years . Because 60Fe has such a long half @-@ life , its persistence in materials in the solar system may generate observable variations in the isotopic composition of 60Ni . Therefore , the abundance of 60Ni present in extraterrestrial material may provide insight into the origin of the solar system and its early history . 
 Some 18 nickel radioisotopes have been characterised , the most stable being 59Ni with a half @-@ life of 76 @,@ 000 years , <unk> with 100 @.@ 1 years , and 56Ni with 6 @.@ 077 days . All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half @-@ lives that are less than 60 hours and the majority of these have half @-@ lives that are less than 30 seconds . This element also has one meta state . 
 Radioactive nickel @-@ 56 is produced by the silicon burning process and later set free in large quantities during type Ia supernovae . The shape of the light curve of these supernovae at intermediate to late @-@ times corresponds to the decay via electron capture of nickel @-@ 56 to cobalt @-@ 56 and ultimately to iron @-@ 56 . Nickel @-@ 59 is a long @-@ lived cosmogenic radionuclide with a half @-@ life of 76 @,@ 000 years . 59Ni has found many applications in isotope geology . 59Ni has been used to date the terrestrial age of meteorites and to determine abundances of extraterrestrial dust in ice and sediment . Nickel @-@ 78 's half @-@ life was recently measured at 110 milliseconds , and is believed an important isotope in supernova nucleosynthesis of elements heavier than iron . The nuclide 48Ni , discovered in 1999 , is the most proton @-@ rich heavy element isotope known . With 28 protons and 20 neutrons 48Ni is " double magic " ( like 208Pb ) and therefore unusually stable . 
 = = = Occurrence = = = 
 On Earth , nickel occurs most often in combination with sulfur and iron in pentlandite , with sulfur in <unk> , with arsenic in the mineral <unk> , and with arsenic and sulfur in nickel galena . Nickel is commonly found in iron meteorites as the alloys <unk> and taenite . 
 The bulk of the nickel is mined from two types of ore deposits . The first is laterite , where the principal ore minerals are <unk> limonite : ( Fe , Ni ) O ( OH ) and garnierite ( a hydrous nickel silicate ) : ( Ni , Mg ) 
 3Si 
 2O 
 5 ( OH ) 
 4 . The second is magmatic sulfide deposits , where the principal ore mineral is pentlandite : ( Ni , Fe ) 
 <unk> 
 8 . 
 Australia and New Caledonia have the biggest estimate reserves ( 45 % all together ) . 
 Identified land @-@ based resources throughout the world averaging 1 % nickel or greater comprise at least 130 million tons of nickel ( about the double of known reserves ) . About 60 % is in laterites and 40 % in sulfide deposits . 
 On geophysical evidence , most of the nickel on Earth is believed to be in the Earth 's outer and inner cores . <unk> and taenite are naturally occurring alloys of iron and nickel . For <unk> , the alloy is usually in the proportion of 90 : 10 to 95 : 5 , although impurities ( such as cobalt or carbon ) may be present , while for taenite the nickel content is between 20 % and 65 % . <unk> and taenite are also found in nickel iron meteorites . 
 = = Compounds = = 
 The most common oxidation state of nickel is + 2 , but compounds of <unk> , Ni + , and <unk> + are well known , and the exotic oxidation states <unk> − , <unk> − , and <unk> + have been produced and studied . 
 = = = Nickel ( 0 ) = = = 
 Nickel tetracarbonyl ( Ni ( CO ) 
 4 ) , discovered by Ludwig Mond , is a volatile , highly toxic liquid at room temperature . On heating , the complex decomposes back to nickel and carbon monoxide : 
 Ni ( CO ) 
 4 ⇌ Ni + 4 CO 
 This behavior is exploited in the Mond process for purifying nickel , as described above . The related nickel ( 0 ) complex bis ( cyclooctadiene ) nickel ( 0 ) is a useful catalyst in <unk> because the cod ligands are easily displaced . 
 = = = Nickel ( I ) = = = 
 Nickel ( I ) complexes are uncommon , but one example is the tetrahedral complex <unk> ( PPh3 ) 3 . Many nickel ( I ) complexes feature Ni @-@ Ni bonding , such as the dark red diamagnetic K 
 4 [ Ni 
 2 ( CN ) 
 6 ] prepared by reduction of K 
 2 [ Ni 
 2 ( CN ) 
 6 ] with sodium amalgam . This compound is oxidised in water , liberating H 
 2 . 
 It is thought that the nickel ( I ) oxidation state is important to nickel @-@ containing enzymes , such as [ NiFe ] <unk> , which catalyzes the reversible reduction of protons to H 
 2 . 
 = = = Nickel ( II ) = = = 
 Nickel ( II ) forms compounds with all common anions , including sulfide , sulfate , carbonate , hydroxide , carboxylates , and halides . Nickel ( II ) sulfate is produced in large quantities by dissolving nickel metal or oxides in sulfuric acid , forming both a <unk> and <unk> useful for electroplating nickel . Common salts of nickel , such as the chloride , nitrate , and sulfate , dissolve in water to give green solutions of the metal aquo complex [ Ni ( H 
 2O ) 
 6 ] 2 + . 
 The four halides form nickel compounds , which are solids with molecules that feature octahedral Ni centres . Nickel ( II ) chloride is most common , and its behavior is illustrative of the other halides . Nickel ( II ) chloride is produced by dissolving nickel or its oxide in hydrochloric acid . It is usually encountered as the green hexahydrate , the formula of which is usually written <unk> • 6H2O . When dissolved in water , this salt forms the metal aquo complex [ Ni ( H 
 2O ) 
 6 ] 2 + . Dehydration of <unk> • 6H2O gives the yellow anhydrous <unk> 
 2 . 
 Some tetracoordinate nickel ( II ) complexes , e.g. bis ( triphenylphosphine ) nickel chloride , exist both in tetrahedral and square planar geometries . The tetrahedral complexes are paramagnetic , whereas the square planar complexes are diamagnetic . In having properties of magnetic equilibrium and formation of octahedral complexes , they contrast with the divalent complexes of the heavier group 10 metals , palladium ( II ) and platinum ( II ) , which form only square @-@ planar geometry . 
 <unk> is known ; it has an electron count of 20 , making it relatively unstable . 
 = = = Nickel ( III ) and ( IV ) = = = 
 Numerous Ni ( III ) compounds are known , with the first such examples being Nickel ( III ) <unk> ( <unk> ( PPh3 ) X3 ) . Further , Ni ( III ) forms simple salts with fluoride or oxide ions . Ni ( III ) can be stabilized by σ @-@ donor ligands such as thiols and phosphines . 
 Ni ( IV ) is present in the mixed oxide <unk> 
 3 , while Ni ( III ) is present in nickel ( III ) oxide , which is used as the cathode in many rechargeable batteries , including nickel @-@ cadmium , nickel @-@ iron , nickel hydrogen , and nickel @-@ metal hydride , and used by certain manufacturers in Li @-@ ion batteries . Ni ( IV ) remains a rare oxidation state of Nickel and very few compounds are known to date . 
 = = History = = 
 Because the ores of nickel are easily mistaken for ores of silver , understanding of this metal and its use dates to relatively recent times . However , the unintentional use of nickel is ancient , and can be traced back as far as 3500 BCE . Bronzes from what is now Syria have been found to contain as much as 2 % nickel . Some ancient Chinese manuscripts suggest that " white copper " ( cupronickel , known as <unk> ) was used there between 1700 and 1400 BCE . This <unk> white copper was exported to Britain as early as the 17th century , but the nickel content of this alloy was not discovered until 1822 . 
 In medieval Germany , a red mineral was found in the <unk> ( Ore Mountains ) that resembled copper ore . However , when miners were unable to extract any copper from it , they blamed a mischievous sprite of German mythology , Nickel ( similar to Old Nick ) , for besetting the copper . They called this ore Kupfernickel from the German Kupfer for copper . This ore is now known to be <unk> ( aka <unk> ) , a nickel arsenide . In 1751 , Baron Axel Fredrik Cronstedt tried to extract copper from <unk> at a cobalt mine in the Swedish village of Los , and instead produced a white metal that he named after the spirit that had given its name to the mineral , nickel . In modern German , Kupfernickel or Kupfer @-@ Nickel designates the alloy cupronickel . 
 Originally , the only source for nickel was the rare Kupfernickel . Beginning in 1824 , nickel was obtained as a byproduct of cobalt blue production . The first large @-@ scale smelting of nickel began in Norway in 1848 from nickel @-@ rich <unk> . The introduction of nickel in steel production in 1889 increased the demand for nickel , and the nickel deposits of New Caledonia , discovered in 1865 , provided most of the world 's supply between 1875 and 1915 . The discovery of the large deposits in the Sudbury Basin , Canada in 1883 , in Norilsk @-@ <unk> , Russia in 1920 , and in the Merensky Reef , South Africa in 1924 , made large @-@ scale production of nickel possible . 
 Nickel has been a component of coins since the mid @-@ 19th century . Birmingham forged nickel coins in about 1833 for trading in Malaya . In the United States , the term " nickel " or " nick " originally applied to the copper @-@ nickel Flying Eagle cent , which replaced copper with 12 % nickel 1857 – 58 , then the Indian Head cent of the same alloy from 1859 – 1864 . Still later , in 1865 , the term designated the three @-@ cent nickel , with nickel increased to 25 % . In 1866 , the five @-@ cent shield nickel ( 25 % nickel , 75 % copper ) appropriated the designation . Along with the alloy proportion , this term has been used to the present in the United States . Coins of nearly pure nickel were first used in 1881 in Switzerland , and 99 @.@ 9 % nickel five @-@ cent coins were struck in Canada ( the world 's largest nickel producer at the time ) during non @-@ war years from 1922 – 1981 ; the metal content made these coins magnetic . During the wartime period 1942 – 45 , most or all nickel was removed from Canadian and U.S. coins to save it for strategic armor . Canada used 99 @.@ 9 % nickel from 1968 in its higher @-@ value coins until 2000 . In the 21st century , the high price of nickel has led to some replacement of the metal in coins around the world . Coins still made with nickel alloys include one- and two @-@ euro coins , 5 ¢ , 10 ¢ , 25 ¢ and 50 ¢ U.S. coins , and 20p , 50p , £ 1 and £ 2 UK coins . Nickel @-@ alloy in 5p and 10p UK coins was replaced with nickel @-@ plated steel began in 2012 , causing allergy problems for some people and public controversy . 
 = = World production = = 
 The Philippines , Indonesia , Russia , Canada and Australia are the world 's largest producers of nickel , as reported by the US Geological Survey . The largest deposits of nickel in non @-@ Russian Europe are located in Finland and Greece . Identified land @-@ based resources averaging 1 % nickel or greater contain at least 130 million tons of nickel . About 60 % is in laterites and 40 % is in sulfide deposits . In addition , extensive deep @-@ sea resources of nickel are in manganese crusts and nodules covering large areas of the ocean floor , particularly in the Pacific Ocean . 
 The one locality in the United States where nickel has been profitably mined is Riddle , Oregon , where several square miles of nickel @-@ bearing garnierite surface deposits are located . The mine closed in 1987 . The Eagle mine project is a new nickel mine in Michigan 's upper peninsula . Construction was completed in 2013 , and operations began in the third quarter of 2014 . In the first full year of operation , Eagle Mine produced 18 @,@ 000 tonnes . 
 = = Extraction and purification = = 
 Nickel is obtained through extractive metallurgy : it is extracted from the ore by conventional roasting and reduction processes that yield a metal of greater than 75 % purity . In many stainless steel applications , 75 % pure nickel can be used without further purification , depending on the impurities . 
 Traditionally , most sulfide ores have been processed using <unk> techniques to produce a matte for further refining . Recent advances in <unk> techniques resulted in significantly purer metallic nickel product . Most sulfide deposits have traditionally been processed by concentration through a froth flotation process followed by <unk> extraction . In <unk> processes , nickel sulfide ores are concentrated with flotation ( differential flotation if Ni / Fe ratio is too low ) and then smelted . The nickel matte is further processed with the <unk> @-@ Gordon process . First , copper is removed by adding hydrogen sulfide , leaving a concentrate of cobalt and nickel . Then , solvent extraction is used to separate the cobalt and nickel , with the final nickel content greater than 99 % . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 A second common refining process is leaching the metal matte into a nickel salt solution , followed by the electro @-@ winning of the nickel from solution by plating it onto a cathode as electrolytic nickel . 
 = = = Mond process = = = 
 The purest metal is obtained from nickel oxide by the Mond process , which achieves a purity of greater than 99 @.@ 99 % . The process was patented by Ludwig Mond and has been in industrial use since before the beginning of the 20th century . In this process , nickel is reacted with carbon monoxide in the presence of a sulfur catalyst at around 40 – 80 ° C to form nickel carbonyl . Iron gives iron pentacarbonyl , too , but this reaction is slow . If necessary , the nickel may be separated by distillation . <unk> <unk> is also formed in nickel distillation as a by @-@ product , but it decomposes to <unk> dodecacarbonyl at the reaction temperature to give a non @-@ volatile solid . 
 Nickel is obtained from nickel carbonyl by one of two processes . It may be passed through a large chamber at high temperatures in which tens of thousands of nickel spheres , called pellets , are constantly stirred . The carbonyl decomposes and deposits pure nickel onto the nickel spheres . In the alternate process , nickel carbonyl is decomposed in a smaller chamber at 230 ° C to create a fine nickel powder . The byproduct carbon monoxide is recirculated and reused . The highly pure nickel product is known as " carbonyl nickel " . 
 = = = Metal value = = = 
 The market price of nickel surged throughout 2006 and the early months of 2007 ; as of April 5 , 2007 , the metal was trading at US $ 52 @,@ 300 / tonne or $ 1 @.@ 47 / oz . The price subsequently fell dramatically , and as of September 19 , 2013 , the metal was trading at $ 13 @,@ 778 / tonne , or $ 0 @.@ 39 / oz . 
 The US nickel coin contains 0 @.@ 04 ounces ( 1 @.@ 1 g ) of nickel , which at the April 2007 price was worth 6 @.@ 5 cents , along with 3 @.@ 75 grams of copper worth about 3 cents , with a total metal value of more than 9 cents . Since the face value of a nickel is 5 cents , this made it an attractive target for melting by people wanting to sell the metals at a profit . However , the United States Mint , in anticipation of this practice , implemented new interim rules on December 14 , 2006 , subject to public comment for 30 days , which criminalized the melting and export of cents and nickels . Violators can be punished with a fine of up to $ 10 @,@ 000 and / or imprisoned for a maximum of five years . 
 As of September 19 , 2013 , the melt value of a U.S. nickel ( copper and nickel included ) is $ 0 @.@ <unk> , which is 90 % of the face value . 
 = = Applications = = 
 The global production of nickel is presently used as follows : 46 % in nickel steel ; 34 % nonferrous alloys and superalloys ; 14 % electroplating , and 6 % other uses . 
 Nickel is used in many specific and recognizable industrial and consumer products , including stainless steel , <unk> magnets , coinage , rechargeable batteries , electric guitar strings , microphone capsules , plating on plumbing fixtures , and special alloys . It is used for plating and as a green tint in glass . Nickel is <unk> an alloy metal , and its chief use is in nickel steels and nickel cast irons , of which there are many varieties . It is widely used in many other alloys , including nickel brasses and bronzes and alloys with copper , chromium , aluminium , lead , cobalt , silver , and gold ( Inconel , <unk> , Monel , <unk> ) . 
 Because it is resistant to corrosion , nickel was occasionally used as a substitute for decorative silver . Nickel was also occasionally used in some countries after 1859 as a cheap coinage metal ( see above ) , but in the later years of the 20th century was replaced by cheaper stainless steel ( i.e. , iron ) alloys , except in the United States and Canada . 
 Nickel is an excellent alloying agent for certain precious metals and is used in the fire assay as a collector of platinum group elements ( PGE ) . As such , nickel is capable of fully collecting all 6 PGE elements from ores , and of partially collecting gold . High @-@ throughput nickel mines may also engage in PGE recovery ( primarily platinum and palladium ) ; examples are Norilsk in Russia and the Sudbury Basin in Canada . 
 Nickel foam or nickel mesh is used in gas diffusion electrodes for alkaline fuel cells . 
 Nickel and its alloys are frequently used as catalysts for hydrogenation reactions . <unk> nickel , a finely divided nickel @-@ aluminium alloy , is one common form , though related catalysts are also used , including <unk> @-@ type catalysts . 
 Nickel is a naturally magnetostrictive material , meaning that , in the presence of a magnetic field , the material undergoes a small change in length . The magnetostriction of nickel is on the order of 50 ppm and is negative , indicating that it contracts . 
 Nickel is used as a binder in the cemented tungsten carbide or <unk> industry and used in proportions of 6 % to 12 % by weight . Nickel makes the tungsten carbide magnetic and adds corrosion @-@ resistance to the cemented parts , although the hardness is less than those with a cobalt binder . 
 = = Biological role = = 
 Although not recognized until the 1970s , nickel plays important roles in the biology of some microorganisms and plants . The plant enzyme urease ( an enzyme that assists in the hydrolysis of urea ) contains nickel . The NiFe @-@ hydrogenases contain nickel in addition to iron @-@ sulfur clusters . Such [ NiFe ] <unk> characteristically oxidise H 
 2 . A nickel @-@ <unk> coenzyme , <unk> F430 , is present in the methyl coenzyme M reductase , which powers methanogenic archaea . One of the carbon monoxide dehydrogenase enzymes consists of an Fe @-@ Ni @-@ S cluster . Other nickel @-@ bearing enzymes include a rare bacterial class of superoxide dismutase and <unk> I enzymes in bacteria and several parasitic eukaryotic <unk> parasites ( this enzyme in higher organisms , including yeast and mammals , contains divalent zinc , Zn2 + ) . 
 Nickel is implicated in the catalytic formation of the hard calcium carbonate plates of the spiny tests on larval sea urchins . 
 Nickel can affect human health through infections by nickel @-@ dependent bacteria . Nickel released from Siberian Traps volcanic eruptions ( site of the modern city of Norilsk ) is suspected of assisting the growth of <unk> , a genus of <unk> archaea that produced methane during the biggest extinction event on record . 
 = = Toxicity = = 
 The major source of nickel exposure is oral consumption . Nickel is found naturally in both food and water , and may be increased by human pollution . For example , nickel @-@ plated faucets may contaminate water and soil ; mining and smelting may dump nickel into waste @-@ water ; nickel – steel alloy cookware and nickel @-@ pigmented dishes may release nickel into food . The atmosphere may be polluted by nickel metal refining and fossil fuel combustion . Humans may absorb nickel directly from tobacco smoke and skin contact with jewelry , shampoos , detergents , and coins . A less @-@ common form of chronic exposure is through hemodialysis as traces of nickel ions may be absorbed into the plasma from the chelating action of albumin . 
 The average daily exposure does not pose a threat to human health . Most of the nickel absorbed every day by humans is removed by the kidneys and passed out of the body through urine or is eliminated through the gastrointestinal tract without being absorbed . Nickel is not a cumulative poison , but larger doses or chronic exposure may be toxic , even carcinogenic , and constitute an occupational hazard . 
 In the US , the minimal risk level of nickel and its compounds is set to 0 @.@ 2 µg / m3 for inhalation during 15 – 364 days . Nickel sulfide fume and dust are believed carcinogenic , and various other nickel compounds may be as well . Nickel carbonyl [ Ni ( CO ) 
 4 ] is an extremely toxic gas . The toxicity of metal carbonyls is a function of both the toxicity of the metal and the off @-@ gassing of carbon monoxide from the carbonyl functional groups ; nickel carbonyl is also explosive in air . 
 People can be exposed to nickel in the workplace by inhalation , ingestion , and contact with skin or eye . The Occupational Safety and Health Administration ( OSHA ) has set the legal limit ( permissible exposure limit ) for the workplace at 1 mg / m3 per 8 @-@ hour workday , excluding nickel carbonyl . The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health ( NIOSH ) specifies the recommended exposure limit ( REL ) of 0 @.@ 015 mg / m3 per 8 @-@ hour workday . At 10 mg / m3 , nickel is immediately dangerous to life and health . 
 In the US , the Tolerable Upper Limit of dietary nickel is 1000 µg / day , while estimated average ingestion is 69 – 162 µg / day . Large amounts of nickel ( and chromium ) – comparable to the estimated average ingestion above – leach into food cooked in stainless steel . For example , the amount of nickel leached after 10 cooking cycles into one serving of tomato sauce averages 88 µg . 
 <unk> individuals may show a skin contact allergy to nickel known as a contact dermatitis . Highly sensitized individuals may also react to foods with high nickel content . Sensitivity to nickel may also be present in patients with <unk> . Nickel is the top confirmed contact allergen worldwide , partly due to its use in jewelry for pierced ears . Nickel allergies affecting pierced ears are often marked by itchy , red skin . Many earrings are now made without nickel or low @-@ release nickel to address this problem . The amount allowed in products that contact human skin is now regulated by the European Union . In 2002 , researchers found that the nickel released by 1 and 2 Euro coins was far in excess of those standards . This is believed to be the result of a galvanic reaction . Nickel was voted <unk> of the Year in 2008 by the American Contact <unk> Society . In August 2015 , the American Academy of Dermatology adopted a position statement on the safety of nickel : " Estimates suggest that contact dermatitis , which includes nickel sensitization , accounts for approximately $ 1 @.@ 918 billion and affects nearly 72 @.@ 29 million people " . 
 Reports show that both the nickel @-@ induced activation of hypoxia @-@ inducible factor ( HIF @-@ 1 ) and the up @-@ regulation of hypoxia @-@ inducible genes are caused by depletion of intracellular ascorbate . The addition of ascorbate to the culture medium increased the intracellular ascorbate level and reversed both the metal @-@ induced stabilization of HIF @-@ 1- and HIF @-@ 1α @-@ dependent gene expression . 
 = The Circus Starring Britney Spears = 
 The Circus Starring Britney Spears , commonly referred to as the Circus Tour , was the seventh concert tour by American singer Britney Spears . It was launched in support of her sixth studio album , Circus ( 2008 ) . Rumors of a tour arose as early as October 2007 , after Spears released her fifth studio album Blackout ; however , it was cancelled due to unknown reasons . The tour was officially announced in December 2008 , with dates for American and British venues revealed . The stage was composed of three rings and set in @-@ the @-@ round to resemble an actual circus . Fashion designers Dean and Dan Caten created the costumes . A giant cylinder screen was set above the stage to showcase videos and backdrops . Effects were provided by Solotech . Magician Ed Alonzo joined Spears during the second act . The setlist was composed generally from her albums In the Zone , Blackout and Circus . Spears announced she would tour Australia for the first time in June 2009 . 
 The Circus Starring Britney Spears was described as a " pop extravaganza " . It was divided into five segments . The Circus featured a metamorphosis of Spears from as a ringmaster to a slave , while being surrounded by different performers . House of Fun ( Anything Goes ) displayed a series of upbeat numbers with different themes , including magic and military . It ended with a Bollywood @-@ inspired performance and a ballad in which Spears performed while floating on a giant umbrella . Freakshow / Peepshow featured a video interlude set to heavy metal music , and continued with dark and sexual performances . Electro Circ displayed energetic dance routines , and the encore consisted of a video montage of Spears 's music videos and a police @-@ themed performance . Some changes were made to the show throughout the tour . Several songs were remixed ; Spears also performed " Mannequin " in selected European shows and covers of Duffy and Alanis Morissette songs on some North American dates . 
 The Circus Starring Britney Spears generated positive to mixed reception from critics . While some praised its aesthetics and deemed it as an entertaining show , others criticized Spears ' lack of involvement during some segments . The tour was a commercial success , with a total gross of $ 131 @.@ 8 million . A great number of tickets were sold within a week of the tour 's announcement , which prompted supporters to add more dates . The tour also broke attendance records in many cities and all the North American shows were sold out . It became the fifth highest grossing tour of 2009 , and the sixth highest grossing tour ever by a female artist . The show generated controversy on the Australian leg after a reporter said that a great number of fans had walked out during the performances . 
 = = Background = = 
 On September 9 , 2007 , Spears performed " Gimme More " , the lead single from her fifth studio album Blackout ( 2007 ) at the MTV Video Music Awards . Her last live performance had been during The M + M 's Tour in May of the same year . Her singing , her dancing and even her wardrobe were all commented on extensively , and it was considered hurtful for her career . In October 2007 , it was reported that Spears was planning to go on tour to promote the album and was holding open dance auditions , but this was later denied by Jive Records . In February 2008 , similar reports surfaced that Spears had already rehearsed in private for a month at Millennium Dance Complex in Los Angeles , and would be leaving to Europe during the following weeks for a worldwide tour . However , it was finally cancelled due to unknown reasons . In September 2008 , after New York City radio station Z100 premiered her single " Womanizer " , Spears made a surprise appearance on the show and announced she would be going on a worldwide tour during 2009 to support her sixth studio album , Circus ( 2008 ) . The concert promoter was AEG Live . Former director of the tour , Australian choreographer Wade Robson , said that the tour would visit the United States , the United Kingdom , and would also reach Australia . 
 After her live performances in the Big Apple Circus tent at Lincoln Center for Good Morning America on December 2 , 2008 , Spears officially announced a first leg of twenty @-@ five dates in the US and two dates in the UK , with the tour launching on March 3 , 2009 , in New Orleans . Big Apple Circus performers supported Spears during her performance , and ultimately went on to open for her throughout the tour . The Pussycat Dolls were also selected in October 2008 as the opening act of the first North American leg . Spears 's manager Larry Rudolph claimed that the show would " blow people 's minds and promises to show Britney 's fans something they will never forget . " He later added , " she goes full @-@ speed the whole show – about an hour and a half . It 's pretty intense . This is a full @-@ blown , full @-@ out Britney Spears show . It is a pop extravaganza . It is everything everybody expects from her — and more ! " On April 28 , 2009 , eight European dates were added . The following day , four more dates were announced in Russia , Poland and Germany . On June 9 , 2009 , Spears announced that she would tour Australia for the first time in November . Six dates were initially announced . Spears stated , " I 've wanted to tour Australia for quite some time and now it 's finally happening . My Circus tour is the best show I have ever created and I can 't wait to perform it for all of my Australian fans . See you guys soon ! " The following day , it was announced on her official website that she would return to North America for a second leg , visiting twenty cities . The Circus Starring Britney Spears was also rumored to reach South America , however , Spears 's manager Adam Leber denied this despite their efforts to do so . 
 = = Development = = 
 In October 2008 , Spears hired Wade Robson , who had previously worked as director for her Dream Within a Dream Tour , to direct the tour ; he announced that rehearsals would start in January . His wife , Amanda Robson , was also hired as co @-@ creative director . Andre Fuentes was chosen as the lead choreographer . However , on December 23 , 2008 , the <unk> and Fuentes were replaced due to unknown reasons by Jamie King , who previously collaborated with Spears in her Oops ! ... I Did It Again World Tour . He did the casting of the dancers and acrobats , and worked with Spears on the setlist and the choreography . King described the show saying it was " sexy , fun , explosive , and full of surprises . While avoiding such traditional circus elements as live animals , we 've created something innovative and exciting using contortionists , dancers , lighting , fire and other special effects " . Simon Ellis was hired as the musical director . The production design was done by Road Rage , a formed alliance between Nick Whitehouse , Bryan Leitch , William Baker and Steve Dixon . Lightning design was done by Visual Light , conformed by Whitehouse and Leitch . The stage was designed by Road Rage and set in @-@ the @-@ round , with a big stage in the center painted to look like a target . There were also two satellite stages in the sides unified by small catwalks , to resemble an actual three @-@ ring circus . The stage was built by Tait Towers and included nine lifts , which had a cost of $ 10 million . It traveled in 3 @,@ 000 rolling cases packed into 32 semis and a crew of 150 people was needed to set it up . There was a semi @-@ transparent Element Labs Stealth cylinder screen above the stage , comprising 960 panels that Solotech built into custom frames . The backdrops were designed by Dirk <unk> . There were three new film sequences shot exclusively for the tour : an opening video featuring Perez Hilton , a video of Spears set to Marilyn Manson 's " Sweet Dreams Are Made of This " and a final montage . The three videos were created by Veneno . Props , including swings , couches , unicycles , stripper poles , a gold cage and giant picture frames , were designed by <unk> Inc . ; they also provided custom VIP couch seating that lined the perimeter of the stage . VYV provided the video control , which included two Photon Show media servers and two Photon Controllers . The servers took timecode for the show and wrapped the images around the Stealth screen . <unk> Epstein of VYV explained , " The servers and software permits us to control a large number of video layers on the 360 ˚ LED screen , composite the layers in realtime , and transform the final output so that everything look seamless after going through the LED controllers . There is also an astounding 3D preview of the stage and video screens in the software so you can control or re @-@ program the show without being inside the arena bowl " . 
 The sound was provided by Solotech . Front of house engineer Blake Suib explained that , " [ Me ] and Solotech were asked to come up with a design that blocked the least amount of seats but provided the quality and coverage that [ Spears ] expects and that we were looking for " . The public address ( PA ) was made of 64 Milos that split into four hangs of 16 per hang . Two at the 50 yard line pointed one way and directly behind , two at the 50 yard line pointed the opposite way . Also present were 32 <unk> ; 16 per hang , pointing to the sides . Each one of the four hangs had its own equalization ( EQ ) and level control , so in case one of the speakers were louder there would be a separate EQ to compensate for any change in the tone due to the distance . All the components and tools used in the public address were designed by Meyer Sound Laboratories , including a software called Mapp , used to decide where to point the PA ; the Simm , to analyze and time align the PA accurately ; and the Galileo , used to EQ and balance all the sections of the PA . The speakers were self @-@ powered with amplifiers also built by Meyer Sounds . There were 24 <unk> subwoofers positioned all over the arena floor , and the Simm and Galileo were used to time align . Spears used a Crown CM @-@ <unk> headset microphone wearing the mic 's <unk> ( usually hidden in color matching material ) on her top or pants , she did not use in @-@ ear monitors ; instead 12 Meyer <unk> were positioned , eight flown around the center ring and two on each of the smaller stages . Spears specifically asked Suib to make the show sound similar to a dance club . Solotech provided the lighting package , including a mostly Vari @-@ Lite rig , with 80 each <unk> and <unk> in various positions , and 60 <unk> built into the stage deck . Whitehouse also had 18 PRG Bad Boy luminaires , 16 of which sat in pods that hung in various positions lower than the rest of the rig , with two more at either end of the stage . Each of the eight pods housed two Bad Boys , two of the <unk> , one Robert <unk> Ivanhoe <unk> with scroller under DMX control , and a <unk> . Fifty Martin Professional Atomic Color strobes and four front of house Robert <unk> Aramis followspots rounded out the lighting package . The lightning team had to rehearse for a month to prepare . The tour was also the first to use the touring version of the PRG Virtuoso <unk> console to control the system , which was used from the beginning of the European leg until the end of the tour . Pyrotechnics and jets of smoke used in the show were created by Lorenzo <unk> of <unk> Special Effects and Tait Towers . 
 Spears explained that since she did not tour to promote Blackout , she was excited about having to include songs from that album into the setlist . The finished setlist would include three songs from Circus , six songs from Blackout and five songs from In the Zone ( 2003 ) ; other parts of the setlist consist of a medley of " Breathe on Me " and " Touch of My Hand " , both from In the Zone ; and a remix of " ... Baby One More Time " , the only song performed off the album of the same name ( 1998 ) . " Everytime " was the only song not included in the released setlist but was performed regularly on the show . Magician Ed Alonzo joined Spears in one of the acts , and she played as his assistant . Alonzo stated , " We 're going to be doing the classics of magic but a little high @-@ tech . We 'll be doing a little dissection , transposition , a vanish , an appearance — and if I do a trick , she doesn 't just hold the props , she 's actually getting inside the big boxes or I am slicing her up . ... Some of it 's pretty scary , but she gets right in there with no reservations . " The costumes were designed by Dean and Dan Caten from DSquared2 . They recreated classic circus outfits , like clowns , jugglers and trapeze artists in a more provocative way . They commented that , 
 " We are enormous fans of Britney , and have been waiting for the perfect moment to collaborate with her . It 's going to be wild . We wanted to create something much more provoking and indecent ... something animalistic and primal . We are confident that this tour partnership , an autobiographical tribute for one who has always been in the spotlight : scrutinized , watched , imitated , photographed , criticized and loved , will be an enormous success " . 
 The costumes of the first segment were selected to show a metamorphosis . The cheetah headdress represented an animal . The jacket and whip represented both a ringmaster and a lion tamer . She took the headdress off at the end of the first song to reveal a Swarovski @-@ crystal corset , fishnets , and boots and entered the cage to represent a slave . The wardrobe for the song " Mannequin " included black jeans from True Religion and a yellow tank top with rhinestones designed by Spears herself . Spears 's outfits had a duplicate set in case of any problem and were numbered in sequence . The total number of costumes was approximately 350 , kept in order by six full @-@ time women . The wardrobe was also revealed to have $ 150 @,@ 000 worth of <unk> crystals . 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 The show was mainly divided into four acts with different themes : The Circus , House of Fun ( Anything Goes ) , Freakshow – Peepshow , Electro Circ and ended with the encore . It began with " Welcome to the Circus " , a video introduction featuring Perez Hilton as Queen Elizabeth I. In the middle of the video , the cylinder screen started to rise , while Spears appeared on the video and shot Hilton with a crossbow , causing him to fall backwards onto the floor . As the video ended , Spears descended from the ceiling on a suspended platform , wearing the headdress , a ringmaster jacket , black shorts , high @-@ heeled boots and carrying a whip . She started with a performance of " Circus " , which featured acrobats taking the stage and spun on giant rings in the air . The song ended with Spears taking off her ringleader jacket to reveal the <unk> @-@ crystal corset and running into the center of the main stage , as she was surrounded by jets of smoke . She entered a golden cage , where she performed " Piece of Me " , dancing and attempting to escape from her dancers . A brief interlude followed , featuring a performance by acrobats twirling from suspended fabric , simulating a <unk> before Spears went into " Radar " which featured her pole dancing on each of the stage 's rings . The first intermezzo showcased her dancers doing a martial arts inspired dance to the <unk> remix of " Gimme More " . In the next section , Ed Alonzo took the stage and Spears played her assistant in " Ooh Ooh Baby " entering a box and being sawed in half . After she came out , she entered another box in the middle of the stage and the performance ended with Alonzo dropping the curtains and showing that Spears had escaped from it , while the top of the box exploded in a shower of sparks . At the same time , Spears reappeared with four female dancers in one of the satellite stages , dancing to " Hot as Ice " . The next song was the Co @-@ Ed Remix of " Boys " , which Spears performed wearing a military costume , while surrounded by her dancers , some of them riding bicycles . At the end of the song she performed a military drill with her male dancers before moving into " If U Seek Amy " , which featured her pushing them with a giant pink mallet , in a similar way to Whac @-@ A @-@ Mole . After a brief interlude , she returned to continue the act with a Bollywood @-@ inspired remix of " Me Against the Music " . She briefly talked with the audience before she sat on a giant umbrella and was lifted into the air to perform " Everytime " . 
 The show continued with a video interlude featuring Marilyn Manson 's cover of " Sweet Dreams ( Are Made of This ) " , showing Spears in a classically decadent party @-@ setting , in which everyone except her was wearing masks . A distorted voice welcomed spectators to the third act and Spears appeared onstage to perform " Freakshow " and " Get Naked ( I Got a Plan ) " . A video spoofing late @-@ night chat lines featuring " Britney 's Hotline " played , while clowns took a person from the audience and goofed around with them . Spears returned to perform " Breathe on Me " , dancing on a giant picture frame , and " Touch of My Hand " , in which she sported a blindfold while being lifted on the air sitting in the backs of two aerialists . In the fourth section , there was a band interlude , and Spears appeared on stage to perform " Do Somethin ' " , with a gun that shot sparks in her hand . This was followed by a remix of " I 'm a Slave 4 U " , in which she was raised on a platform as a ring of fire started below her . In the " Heartbeat " interlude , the dancers showcased their individual moves . Spears performed " Toxic " with moving jungle gyms and surrounded by green sci @-@ fi lightning effects . The act ended with Spears and her dancers performing a remix of " ... Baby One More Time " . After a brief pause , the encore began with the " Break the Ice " video interlude , which included various clips of Spears 's music videos . Spears returned for a performance of " Womanizer " dressed as a policewoman . Spears and the dancers bowed to each side of the arena and left with " Circus " playing in the background . Some changes were made to the setlist throughout the tour . During opening night in New Orleans , Spears was supposed to perform a cover of Duffy 's " I 'm Scared " after " Everytime " . However , the lyric sheet went missing onstage and she started performing from below the stage , leaving two backup singers in the main stage . It was later dropped from the show . " Mannequin " was added on the second Paris date and performed after " Get Naked ( I Got a Plan ) " , with a brief <unk> introduction . The song was performed until July 26 , 2009 . A cover of " You Oughta Know " by Alanis Morissette was performed on select shows during the second North American leg , starting on September 5 , 2009 . In addition , " Piece of Me " , " Radar " , " Ooh Ooh Baby " , " Do Somethin ' " , " I 'm a Slave 4 U " , " ... Baby One More Time " and " Womanizer " were remixed at the beginning of the European leg . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 After Spears 's premiere performance , the tour received mixed to positive reviews from several critics . Stacey Plaisance of the Associated Press commented that the tour was " another strong step in the right direction " and that Spears delivered " a tightly choreographed , if perfunctory performance " . Ann Powers of the Los Angeles Times stated , " despite that first @-@ night stumble and several numbers in which her dancing was no more than adequate , Spears can safely call this performance a success " . Jon Caramanica of The New York Times said that " [ the show ] was less a concert than a Las Vegas @-@ style revue of intimidating complexity . Throughout , though she spoke little , Ms. Spears appeared radiant and unfettered , often smiling and never uncommitted " . Dixie Reid of The Sacramento Bee commented that the show was " a mesmerizingly big production with entertaining videos ( including the infamous Spears @-@ Madonna kiss ) , confetti , sparklers and even a stilt @-@ walker . Who could ask for more ? Everyone seemed to have a good time at the circus " . Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph said Spears is " the queen of production line pop and reclaims that <unk> crown with the most perfectly plastic pop show ever staged " . 
 People writer Chuck Arnold wrote that Spears " never really hit her old stride [ .. ] there was a lot more strutting than real choreographic feats from [ her ] " . Jeff Montgomery of MTV both praised and dismissed Spears 's performance saying , " Yes , welcome to Britney 's Circus , a big , huge , loud , funny , nonsensical three @-@ ring affair ... She looks great in her myriad of outfits , and she can still move with the best of them . [ ... ] It 's just , well , she 's almost lost in the sheer hugeness of the production around her " . Jane Stevenson of Toronto Sun gave Spears 's performance three out of five stars stating there was " so much was going on – there were also martial artists , bicyclists , etc . – there was no time to really assess Spears other than to note that she looked great . [ .. ] She could lip @-@ synch the words ( one can assume ) and strut around the stage well enough , but there was little in the way of genuine passion , joy , or excitement on her part " . The Hollywood Reporter 's Craig Rosen claimed that " in the end , Britney and company delivered an entertaining spectacle , but one couldn 't help but wish that she would strip it all down and show a little more of herself " . Sean Daly of St. Petersburg Times summed up all the reviews by stating , " When Britney , touring behind her new Circus album , plays the Times Forum , there will be as many people rooting for her success as her failure . [ .. ] But in the end , we 're all envious and thankful , jealous and applauding . We like them / us and hate them / us for the very same reasons " . 
 = = Commercial response = = 
 A week after The Circus Britney Spears was announced , 400 @,@ 000 tickets were purchased for the North American shows , which prompted promoters to add seven more dates in Los Angeles , Toronto , New Jersey , Chicago , Long Island , Anaheim and Montreal . Due to demand in the UK , six more shows were added to the initial two , selling more than 100 @,@ 000 tickets in a week . Spears performance at the American Airlines Arena broke the attendance record previously held by Celine Dion , with a crowd of 18 @,@ 644 people . The first North American leg , which was sold out , resulted in an average of 20 @,@ 498 tickets per show and a gross of $ 61 @.@ 6 million , becoming the highest grossing tour of the first semester of 2009 in the continent . In addition , the tour grossed $ 13 million from the London , Manchester and Dublin shows , with a total gross of $ 74 @.@ 6 million , ranking as the third highest grossing tour worldwide . The Copenhagen show at Parken gathered 40 @,@ 000 people , Spears 's largest audience since her 2002 concerts in Mexico City . 
 The second North American leg was also sold out , with a gross of $ 21 @.@ 4 million and it was reported that the tour had grossed $ 94 million . Her first three shows in Melbourne were also sold out . The four shows at Acer Arena in Sydney sold 66 @,@ 247 tickets , making Spears the highest selling act ever in the arena . The tour was ranked at number seven on Billboard 's Top 25 Tours of 2009 , with a previously reported gross of $ 94 million . However , only 70 of the 97 shows were counted . The Circus Starring Britney Spears also made Spears rank at number twenty one on the Top Touring Artists of the Decade , becoming the youngest artist in the list and also the fourth female artist , behind Madonna , Celine Dion and Cher . The tour was also ranked as the fourth highest grossing tour of the year in North America , becoming the highest grossing tour of the year by a solo artist . In February 2010 , Pollstar released their Top 50 Worldwide Concert Tours of 2009 . The tour ranked as the fifth highest @-@ grossing tour , worldwide , of the year , with a gross of $ 131 @.@ 8 million . In May 2010 , Hollyscoop ranked the tour at the fifth position in their 15 Most Profitable Female Tours Ever list . 
 = = Australian leg controversies = = 
 Before the first of the Australian shows , Minister for Fair Trading for New South Wales Virginia Judge , said she was aware that Spears would lipsync during the concerts and was considering to include disclaimers on promotional materials and tickets , indicating that portions of the show would be pre @-@ recorded . This measures would mean a change in the country 's legislation similar to the debacle of the 2008 Summer Olympics opening ceremony . Judge further explained her position saying , " Let 's be clear – live means live . If you are spending up to $ 200 I think you deserve better than a film clip " . Tour director Steve Dixon defended Spears , claiming , " This is a pop spectacular , this is a showband show . You come for the experience . There is a lot to see about this show , there 's nothing like this in the world . Britney Spears will entertain you , that 's what people come for . We absolutely give them a show " . After opening night in Perth , The Advertiser writer Rebekah Devlin reported that a number of fans had walked out of the show . They were apparently " disappointed " and " outraged " regarding Spears 's lip syncing and subdued dancing . Australian tour promoter Paul Dainty talked about the situation saying , 
 " It 's the biggest lie I 've ever heard . I 'm so angry . We can take heat if there 's something wrong and people can review shows badly – that 's something you have to live with – but to say people stormed out of the show was an absolute fabrication . Britney is aware of all this and she 's extremely upset by it . She 's a human being . I 'm embarrassed , with such a big international entourage here with Britney , to be part of the Australian media when I see that kind of totally inaccurate reporting . It 's been all over the internet for nine months , the inference is that we tried to hide this . It 's been the opposite . This show is about an incredible spectacle , which it is " . 
 Spears 's manager Adam Leber responded in his Twitter account , saying , " It 's unfortunate that one journalist in Perth didn 't enjoy the show last night . Fortunately the other 18 @,@ 272 fans in attendance did " . Spears 's official website also posted a list of positive reviews from a number of fans . Burswood Dome also issued a <unk> reading , " Last night 's concert ( Friday ) saw record crowds turn out for her first performance in Perth and from Burswood 's perspective the event was a huge success . Early media reports that hundreds of fans left the concert early cannot be substantiated and Burswood has received no complaints about the concert " . Finally , Spears addressed the situation according to BBC Online . She was quoted as saying , " I hear there is a lot of controversy in the media about my show . Some reporters have said they love it and some don 't . I came to Australia for my fans " . The negative media attention continued after her show in Melbourne when it was alleged that fans had placed tickets for the remaining Australian shows on sale on the online shopping website eBay , for as little as 99 cents . However , Dainty said that the holders of the tickets were not Spears 's fans , stating " They 're just profiteers . They buy tickets for $ 200 and think they that when the concerts sell @-@ out they will offload them for $ 500 " . 
 = = Broadcast and recordings = = 
 During the tour , there were many speculations that the shows in Las Vegas on September 26 , 27 , 2009 would be recorded in 3D . Professional footage also surfaced online of the Copenhagen show . On November 12 , 2009 , Britney 's manager , Adam Leber , posted on his Twitter account that there were " ... No plans for a Circus Tour DVD at the moment . " On June 26 , 2012 , rumours arose on celebrity blogger Perez Hilton 's website stating that there was a DVD to be released after what appeared to be a trailer of unseen concert footage surfaced online . Despite this , no official DVD or recording has been released of the concert tour . 
 = = Set list = = 
 The set list for the tour , as revealed by Spears ' official website on March 2 , 2009 . It is not representative of all concerts for the duration of the tour . 
 Other songs performed in select dates include : " Mannequin " , " You Oughta Know " and " I 'm Scared " . 
 " Touch of My Hand " was removed in the middle of the tour . 
 = = Shows = = 
 = = Cancelled shows = = 
 = 47 Ursae Majoris = 
 47 Ursae Majoris ( abbreviated 47 UMa ) , also named Chalawan ( Thai : <unk> , pronounced [ t ͡ <unk> ] ) , is a yellow dwarf star approximately 46 light @-@ years from Earth in the constellation of Ursa Major . As of 2011 , three extrasolar planets ( designated 47 Ursae Majoris b , c and d ; the first two later named Taphao Thong and Taphao Kaew ) are believed to orbit the star . 
 The star is located fairly close to the Solar System : according to astrometric measurements made by the Hipparcos astrometry satellite , it exhibits a parallax of 71 @.@ 11 milliarcseconds , corresponding to a distance of 45 @.@ 913 light @-@ years . With an apparent magnitude of + 5 @.@ 03 , it is visible to the naked eye and its absolute magnitude of + 4 @.@ 29 implies a visual luminosity around 60 % greater than the Sun . A solar analog , with a spectral type of G1V , it has a similar mass to that of the Sun but is slightly hotter at around 5 @,@ 882 K. and slightly more metal @-@ rich with around 110 % of the solar abundance of iron . 
 Like the Sun , 47 Ursae Majoris is on the main sequence , converting hydrogen to helium in its core by nuclear fusion . Based on its chromospheric activity , the star may be around 6 @,@ 000 million years old , though evolutionary models suggest an older age of around 8 @,@ 700 million years . Other studies have yielded estimates of 4 @,@ 400 and 7 @,@ 000 million years for the star . 
 = = Nomenclature = = 
 47 Ursae Majoris is the Flamsteed designation . On their discoveries the planets were successively designated 47 Ursae Majoris b , c and d . In July 2014 the International Astronomical Union launched a process for giving proper names to certain exoplanets and their host stars . The process involved public nomination and voting for the new names . In December 2015 , the IAU announced the winning names were Chalawan for this star and Taphao Thong and Taphao Kaew for two of the planets ( b and c , respectively ) . 
 The winning names were submitted by the Thai Astronomical Society , Thailand . Chalawan is a mythological crocodile king from a Thai folktale and Taphaothong and Taphaokaeo are two sisters associated with the tale . 
 Chalawan is also the name give an extinct genus of crocodylian . It contains a single species , Chalawan thailandicus . 
 = = Planetary system = = 
 In 1996 an exoplanet ( 47 UMa b ) was announced in orbit around 47 Ursae Majoris by Geoffrey Marcy and R. Paul Butler . The discovery was made by observing the Doppler shift of the star 's spectrum corresponding to changes in the star 's radial velocity as the planet 's gravity pulled it around . The planet was the first long @-@ period extrasolar planet discovered . Unlike the majority of known such planets , it has a low @-@ eccentricity orbit . The planet is at least 2 @.@ 53 times the mass of Jupiter and takes 1 @,@ 078 days or 2 @.@ 95 years to orbit its star . If it were to be located in the Solar System , it would lie between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter . 
 In 2001 , preliminary astrometric measurements made by the Hipparcos probe suggested the orbit of 47 UMa b is inclined at an angle of 63 @.@ 1 ° to the plane of the sky , implying the planet 's true mass is around 2 @.@ 9 times that of Jupiter . However , subsequent analysis suggested the Hipparcos measurements were not precise enough to accurately determine the orbits of substellar companions , and the inclination and true mass remain unknown . 
 A second planet ( 47 UMa c ) was announced in 2002 by Debra Fischer , Geoffrey Marcy , and R. Paul Butler . The discovery was made using the same radial velocity method . According to Fischer et al . , the planet takes around 2 @,@ 391 days or 6 @.@ 55 years to complete an orbit . This configuration is similar to the configuration of Jupiter and Saturn in the Solar System , with the orbital ratio ( close to 5 : 2 ) , and mass ratio roughly similar . Subsequent measurements failed to confirm the existence of the second planet , and it was noted that the dataset used to determine its existence left the planet 's parameters " almost unconstrained " . Analysis of a longer dataset spanning over 6 @,@ 900 days suggests that while a second planet in the system is likely , periods near 2 @,@ 500 days have a high false alarm probability , and the best fit model gives an orbital period of 7 @,@ 586 days at a distance of 7 @.@ 73 AU from the star . Nevertheless , the parameters of the second planet are still highly uncertain . On the other hand , the Catalog of Nearby Exoplanets gives a period of 2 @,@ 190 days , which would put the planets close to a 2 : 1 ratio of orbital periods , though the reference for these parameters is uncertain : the original Fischer et al. paper is cited as a reference in spite of the fact that it gives different parameters , though this solution has been adopted by the Extrasolar Planets Encyclopaedia . 
 In 2010 , the discovery of a third planet ( 47 UMa d ) was made by using the Bayesian Kepler <unk> . Using this model of this planetary system it was determined that it is 100 @,@ 000 times more likely to have three planets than two planets . This discovery was announced by Debra Fischer and P.C. Gregory . This 1 @.@ 64 MJ planet has an orbital period of 14 @,@ 002 days or 38 @.@ 33 years and a semi @-@ major axis of 11 @.@ 6 AU with a moderate eccentricity of 0 @.@ 16 . It would be the longest @-@ period planet discovered by the radial velocity method , although longer @-@ period planets had previously been discovered by direct imaging and pulsar timing . 
 Simulations suggest that the inner part of the habitable zone of 47 Ursae Majoris could host a terrestrial planet in a stable orbit , though the outer regions of the habitable zone would be disrupted by the gravitational influence of the planet 47 UMa b . However , the presence of a giant planet within 2 @.@ 5 AU of the star may have disrupted planet formation in the inner system , and reduced the amount of water delivered to inner planets during accretion . This may mean any terrestrial planets orbiting in the habitable zone of 47 Ursae Majoris are likely to be small and dry . As of 2008 , there have been two METI messages sent to 47 Ursae Majoris . Both were transmitted from Eurasia 's largest radar — 70 @-@ meter ( 230 @-@ foot ) Eupatoria Planetary Radar . The first message , the Teen Age Message , was sent on September 3 , 2001 , and it will arrive at 47 Ursae Majoris in July 2047 . The second message , Cosmic Call 2 , was sent on July 6 , 2003 , and it will arrive at 47 Ursae Majoris in May 2049 . 
 Because of its planetary system , 47 Ursae Majoris was listed as one of the top 100 target stars for NASA 's former Terrestrial Planet Finder mission . 
 = 1879 Navy Midshipmen football team = 
 The 1879 Navy Midshipmen football team represented the United States Naval Academy in the 1879 college football season . The team was the first intercollegiate football squad to represent the United States Naval Academy . The team had no coach , as it was entirely student @-@ operated ; however , it was captained by squad member Bill Maxwell . The team played just a single game , which was a scoreless tie with the Baltimore Athletic Club . The team was entirely student operated , and was not supported by the Naval Academy 's faculty . The school would not have another football squad until 1882 . 
 = = Background = = 
 It is widely believed by football researchers that the playing of intercollegiate football began in November 1869 , when a player at Rutgers University challenged another player at the nearby College of New Jersey ( now Princeton ) . The contest more closely resembled soccer , with teams scoring by kicking a ball into the opponent 's net , and lacked a uniform rules structure . The game developed slowly ; the first rules were drafted in October 1873 , and only consisted of twelve guidelines . Even though the number of teams participating in the sport increased , the game was still effectively controlled by the College of New Jersey , who claimed eight national championships in ten years . Only Yale presented any form of challenge , claiming four national championships in the same time period . 
 The birth of football at the Naval Academy is debated among historians . The most accepted occurrence was in 1869 , when a midshipman ( a student ) returned from his leave with a football . While throwing the ball with a friend , it was dropped and a group of fellow midshipmen attempted to take it . A contest was eventually organized , which ended abruptly when the ball was kicked into the Severn River . However , biographer C. Douglas Kroll stated that the first evidence of a form of football at the United States Naval Academy came in 1857 , but the school 's cadets lost interest in the game shortly afterward , a theory supported by journalist Jack Clary . Regardless , the sport had been banned for several years prior to 1879 . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 = = Season summary = = 
 There were two separate efforts to establish a Naval Academy football team in 1879 . The first was guided by first @-@ classman J.H. Robinson , who developed it as a training regiment to help keep the school 's baseball team in shape . The team played the sport under rules that made it much closer to soccer , where the players were permitted only to kick the ball in order to advance it . The second effort , headed by first @-@ classman William John Maxwell was more successful in its efforts . Maxwell met with two of his friends , Tunstall Smith and Henry Woods , who played for the Baltimore Athletic Club and officially challenged their team to a game with the Naval Academy . A team was formed from academy first @-@ classmen , which Maxwell led as a manager , trainer , and captain . The team would wake up and practice before reveille and following drill and meals . The squad received encouragement from some of the faculty , who allowed them to eat a late dinner and skip final drill for additional practicing . This was against the direct orders of the school superintendent , who had banned football and similar activities . 
 The year 's sole contest was played on December 11 against the Baltimore Athletic Club . The opposition 's team was reportedly composed of players from Princeton , Yale , Pennsylvania , and Johns Hopkins . The Naval Academy hosted the Baltimore team on a temporary field drawn on part of the superintendent 's cow pasture . Rules decided upon between the teams established that the game was to be played under rugby rules . The Baltimore American and Chronicle , which covered the contest , described it as such : 
 The game , played under rugby rules , was a battle from beginning to end — a regular knock down and drag out fight . Both sides became immediately excited and the audience was aroused to the highest pitch of enthusiasm by the spirited contest . The ball oscillated backward and forward over the ground without any material result . 
 The scrimmages were something awful to witness — living , kicking , scrambling masses of humanity surging to and fro , each individual after the leather oval . If a Baltimorean got the ball and started for a run , he was unfailingly caught by one of the brawny Cadets and dashed to earth with five or six men falling on him . 
 The game was closely fought and was finally declared a scoreless tie by the referee about an hour after it began . Navy reportedly never gained possession of the ball . However , the Naval Academy managed to keep the Baltimore Athletic Club from ever being in a scoring position . On three separate occasions , Navy forced Baltimore back into its own end zone for a safety ; these were not worth any points until 1882 , however , so they offered Navy no benefit . The American and Chronicle reported that Maxwell , Craven , and Sample of Navy gave the strongest performances , but were also reckless in their play and were repeatedly penalized for jumping offside or kicking the ball out of play , a form of delay of game . 
 Some time after the game , Walter Camp , known as the " Father of American Football " , credited Maxwell as the inventor of the first football uniform . After he was informed that the Baltimore team he was playing outweighed his by an average of ten pounds , Maxwell looked for a way to make the teams more evenly matched . Using his knowledge of sailing , he decided to design a sleeveless canvas jacket which would make his players " difficult to grasp when they began to sweat " . He presented the design to the academy 's tailor , who created the double @-@ lined jackets which " were laced down the front and drawn tightly to fit snugly around a player 's body " . The weighted suits were worn by the team , which was confused by the " strangle , heavy , newfangled getups " . 
 = = Players = = 
 The 1879 Naval Academy team was made up of fifteen players at four different positions . The squad consisted of ten forwards , two halfbacks , two <unk> , and one three @-@ quarterback . Maxwell , in addition to playing as a rusher , served as team manager and captain . John F. <unk> , a first @-@ classman , served as an unofficial assistant coach . Only first @-@ classmen were asked to participate on the team . The age of the players , however , ranged several years due to the academy 's admission policy ; the school allowed for men between the ages of 14 and 18 to be admitted as first year students , which future player John B. Patton remarked made it " just a boys ' school " . 
 = = Postseason and aftermath = = 
 The first postseason college football game would not be played until 1902 , with the Pasadena Tournament of Roses ' establishment of the east @-@ west tournament game , later known as the Rose Bowl . The Midshipmen would not participate in their first Rose Bowl until the 1923 season , when they went 5 – 1 – 2 and tied with the Washington Huskies 14 – 14 in the match . According to statistics compiled by the National Championship Foundation , Parke Davis , and the Billingsley college football research center , Yale was declared the 1882 season champion , giving them their eighth overall . 
 The Naval Academy would not produce another football team until the 1882 season . The 1882 team would be the first with a coach , being supported by Academy officials . The 1879 season was the last time that a Navy squad would play the Baltimore Athletic Club . Navy would finish the 1880s with four winning seasons , and an overall record of 14 – 12 – 2 , with one of those ties being the game against the Baltimore Athletic Club . Navy would outscore their opponents 292 – 231 , and would finish the 19th century with an overall record of 54 – 19 – 3 . The lack of a coach for the 1879 season was one of the two times the Naval Academy squad lacked one , the other time being from 1883 through 1891 . 
 = Early life of Ricky Ponting = 
 Ricky Ponting is an Australian Test cricketer who was born on 19 December 1974 . He made his One Day International ( ODI ) debut for the Australian cricket team against the South Africa cricket team in New Zealand at the age of 20 on 15 February 1995 . The eldest of three children , Ponting emulated the feats of his father , playing cricket in summer and Australian rules football in winter , before breaking his arm while playing the latter sport for a junior North Launceston Football Club team as a 14 @-@ year @-@ old . He was educated in the Tasmanian state school system , studying at Mowbray Heights Primary and Brooks High School . 
 Ponting received a bat sponsorship with Kookaburra Sport at 14 , before being acclaimed the best 17 @-@ year @-@ old batsman that Australian Cricket Academy coach Rod Marsh had ever seen . At 17 years and 337 days , Ponting made his first @-@ class cricket debut for Tasmania , breaking David Boon 's record as the youngest player to represent the state . Later in the season , he became the youngest Tasmanian to score a first @-@ class century at 18 years and 40 days , eclipsing Boon 's record of 19 years and 356 days . Further into the 1992 – 93 season , Ponting scored two centuries in a match against Western Australia — the youngest player in Sheffield Shield history to do so . He played non @-@ international games against national teams for Australia A in the 1994 – 95 World Series Cup , before making his Australian debut . 
 = = Birth = = 
 Born in Launceston , Tasmania , on 19 December 1974 , Ricky Thomas Ponting is the eldest of Graeme and Lorraine Ponting 's three children . His brother Drew is two years younger , while sister Renee was born when Ponting was six . Their uncle Greg Campbell played cricket for Australia in 1989 and 1990 . Graeme was " a good club cricketer " and played Australian rules , while Lorraine was a state vigoro champion . " Fiercely contested " in the 1950s and 1960s , vigoro is a mix between cricket and baseball , primarily played in the Australian states of Tasmania , New South Wales and Queensland . Ponting 's parents first lived in Prospect 4 @.@ 1 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) south of the city centre , before moving into the working @-@ class area of Newnham , 6 km ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) north of central Launceston . The suburb is near York Park , Tasmania 's largest capacity stadium and its only Australian Football League venue . Residents of the area were generally known as " <unk> " because the land was previously swamp on the banks of the Tamar River . 
 = = Junior ranks = = 
 Introduced to cricket by father Graeme and uncle Greg , Ponting was able to play for the Mowbray Under – 13s team at the age of 11 in 1985 – 86 . In January 1986 , he took part in the five @-@ day annual Northern Tasmania junior cricket competition . On the Monday , he struggled to trouble the scorers , however , he bounced back with a century on Tuesday . Wednesday saw him make 117 not out and he continued his form into Thursday and Friday , scoring centuries on both days . Afterwards , bat manufacturer Kookaburra gave Ponting a sponsorship contract when he was still only 14 years old . Ponting took this form into the Under @-@ 16s week @-@ long competition less than a month later , scoring an even century on the final day . Ted Richardson , the former head of the Northern Tasmanian Schools Cricket Association said : " Ricky is certainly the equal of David Boon at this level . At his age he 's the best I 've seen in the north . His technique , application , and temperament are all excellent and he has the modesty he will need to progress further . " 
 Australian Rules football was also a big part of Ponting 's sporting life ; during winter he played junior football for North Launceston and until he was 14 , it could have become a possible sporting option , before he broke the humerus in his right arm playing for North Launceston Under – 17s . Ponting 's arm was so badly damaged that it had to be pinned . Told to endure a 14 @-@ week lay @-@ off , he never played competitive football again . He later wrote : " At one stage I was concerned that the arm injury might also stop me from playing cricket but they [ the doctors ] did a pretty good job on pinning the bones — and it hasn 't bothered me since . " 
 In 1986 , Ponting said : " I 'd love to play for Australia [ ... ] I look up to David Boon because he 's from here [ Launceston ] . " During Tasmanian Sheffield Shield matches at the Northern Tasmanian Cricket Association Ground ( NTCA Ground ) , Ponting served as a scoreboard assistant , thereby surrounding himself with first @-@ class and international cricketers . After leaving school at the end of year 10 as a 16 @-@ year @-@ old in 1990 , he began work as a groundsman at Scotch <unk> College , a private school in Launceston . In 1991 , the Northern Tasmanian Cricket Association sponsored Ponting so that he could attend a fortnight 's training at the Australian Institute of Sport 's Cricket Academy in Adelaide . The two weeks turned into a full two @-@ year scholarship as he was acclaimed to be the best 17 @-@ year @-@ old batsman Academy coach Rod Marsh had ever seen . 
 Playing five games for Tasmania in the 1992 Under – 19 tournament in Perth , Ponting scored 350 runs , earning him selection in the 13 @-@ man national Under – 19 development squad for the upcoming tour of South Africa — the first Australian cricket team to make an official tour to the country since Bill Lawry 's team in 1970 ; South Africa were banned from international sport soon after because of their government 's policy of apartheid , and were not readmitted until the 1990s . Under the captaincy of Adam Gilchrist , the Australians played four one @-@ day and four three @-@ day games , winning five and drawing three . Ponting scored 430 runs at an average of 45 @.@ 67 . Later recalling the excitement of the experience , Ponting wrote : 
 It dawned on me when I was being fitted for my traveling uniform that I was about to represent my country . When that hit home it was a very proud moment in my life . Even though it was not a real representative tour it felt like it to me [ ... ] It wasn 't until we all gathered at the airport that I got the real rush of excitement because there I was , this sixteen year @-@ old kid about to take off and play cricket in a strange country , and from what we had been told it would be in conditions like we had never experienced before . We were all excited with the prospect of taking on the South Africans and we had been told about the wickets being bouncy and fast , similar to the WACA strip in Perth . 
 = = Early Australian domestic career = = 
 After scoring 114 not out in a club match against Riverside , Ponting became the youngest player to appear for Tasmania in a Sheffield Shield match , breaking Boon 's record by 14 days . In November 1992 , at the age of 17 years and 337 days , he batted at number four in the order against South Australia at the Adelaide Oval . Despite scoring 56 in a 127 @-@ run partnership with Boon , he could not prevent defeat , scoring just four in Tasmania 's second innings . In his first match in Tasmania — this time against New South Wales — Ponting contributed 32 and 18 in a draw , before scoring 25 against Western Australia in a narrow loss . His first match in Sydney also marked the debut of future Australian opening bowler Glenn McGrath . At the end of the first day 's play , Tasmania were 6 / 200 , and Ponting was the only player to resist , reaching 98 not out . He eventually reached three figures the next morning , having endured three rain breaks and 54 minutes in the nineties . The century made him the youngest Tasmanian to score a first @-@ class century , at 18 years and 40 days , eclipsing Boon 's record of 19 years and 356 days . The next day he spoke about the achievement : " I knew I had to be patient and wait for it to come [ ... ] I wasn 't that nervous last night , but I was a bit nervous this morning . " Dismissed for 125 out of a total of 298 , Ponting scored 17 boundaries in his five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ hour stay at the crease . Coach Greg Shipperd was impressed in what he saw : " It was an excellent innings , one of classical stroke play . The way he freely put together a good , solid innings , showed that his potential is being realised . It was an indication , for him , of what it 's like to go the extra step . " These performances lead Ponting to his List A debut on 13 December against Victoria in Devonport . He struggled , however , scoring 22 from 45 balls in Tasmania 's defeat . His form , nonetheless , remained strong in first @-@ class cricket , scoring another half @-@ century , Ponting scored back @-@ to @-@ back centuries against Western Australia in Perth , the nation 's fastest wicket , thus becoming the youngest batsmen in Shield history to score two centuries in a match . After setting a goal of scoring 500 first @-@ class runs in the season , Ponting finished with 781 runs at 48 @.@ 81 . But his form in List A games were not as strong , aggregating 99 at 33 in four matches . Still , Ponting hit an unbeaten 59 from 52 balls against a touring England A side in Hobart . After the season 's end , still aged 18 , Ponting played seven four @-@ day games for the Australian Academy , scoring 484 runs at 96 @.@ 70 . 
 Speculation ignited that Ponting was an outsider to be selected for the Australian squad on their 1993 tour to England . Of the speculation , Ponting said " At the start of the season I was wondering whether or not I 'd play Shield cricket this year and all of a sudden there 's talk in the papers that I 'm a chance go on an Australian tour of England . I think it 's way out of reach — there are blokes like [ South Australian ] Jamie Siddons who have scored 20 or 30 first @-@ class centuries who are ahead of me . Nevertheless , Shipperd thought Ponting could handle the experience : " A lot of attention affects different people in different ways , but Ricky is such a well @-@ rounded young fella that it hasn 't changed him . I 've told him to enjoy the all the attention and if he just keeps on being himself I 'm sure he 'll cope well with all the success that I imagine he will achieve . " The selectors eventually chose Western Australian batsman Damien Martyn for the tour , with Ponting selected in the Academy squad captained by Justin Langer , which toured India and Sri Lanka for seven games in August and September in 1993 . Australian success was limited , with only a few wins . No batsman scored a century , but Ponting reached 99 not out in a one @-@ day game in Colombo . He finished the tour second highest in the run @-@ scorers behind Langer . Before the start of the 1993 – 94 Sheffield Shield season , Ponting spoke of his goals for the summer . " I 've got myself the goal of making 1 @,@ 000 runs in the season . Hopefully , I can stay in the middle long enough or do that . You can 't worry about other people 's expectation . I don 't care at all what is written in the press . I like to read it but it doesn 't go too far into my head . " In Tasmania 's final round @-@ robin match of the season , they needed to defeat South Australia outright to qualify for the final . Set 366 runs to win in 102 overs , Ponting joined Dene Hills at the crease with the score at 2 / 35 . Ponting scored 161 in a 290 @-@ run partnership that ended with Tasmania needing just 41 runs for victory . Despite Tasmania losing four quick wickets after his dismissal , they won with four wickets in hand . Disappointingly for Ponting , he could not repeat the performance in the final against New South Wales . He scored just one and 28 , as Tasmania were defeated by an innings and 61 runs . The season saw Ponting score 965 runs at 48 @.@ 25 , close to his 1 @,@ 000 run goal . 
 A month after the final , he was again selected for the Academy squad for three limited overs matches against a touring Indian team . Queenslander Stuart Law captained the Australian side that included former Australian keeper Rod Marsh . In Australia 's victory in the first match in Canberra , Ponting top @-@ scored with 71 , before making 52 in a victory in Sydney . The last match was also successful for the home team , with Ponting not required to bat . 
 Ponting started his 1994 – 95 campaign with a century against eventual Shield champions Queensland in Brisbane , in a performance that impressed Queensland captain Allan Border , who had just retired from international cricket after leading the national team for a decade . Border said of Ponting : " He 's just an outstanding prospect . The thing I like about him is he 's very aggressive , he plays all the shots , he 's equally at home on the front foot as the back foot . He cuts and pulls well , and he drives well . You don 't often see that , the ability to get on [ the ] front foot and back foot and play equally well . " Speculation once again arose that Ponting could be selected for the upcoming tour to the West Indies . When Tasmania played Western Australia at Bellerive Oval on 4 November 1994 , Ponting was 117 not out at stumps . That century was his fifth successive triple @-@ figure score against Western Australia ; Sir Donald Bradman is the only other batsman to score five consecutive centuries against another state in Shield history . He continued to 211 , sharing a 319 @-@ run stand with captain Rod Tucker in the process . Ten days after the double century , Ponting was named in the Australian XI to play England at Bellerive Oval in a match that was used as practice for fringe Australian players before the upcoming series in the West Indies . Future Australian representatives Matthew Hayden , Langer , Greg Blewett and Martyn were also selected . In a drawn match , Ponting compiled a half @-@ century , but Martyn scored a century . 
 A fourth team was introduced to the World Series Cup in 1994 – 95 — Australia A — for the only time . The Australian selectors re @-@ shuffled both teams so that some players stepped up from the A team to the main Australian team , and vice versa , during the competition , depending on their performance . The Australian captain Mark Taylor was not a fan of the innovation : " ... out there , on the field there was an ultra @-@ competitive attitude by blokes of both teams , spurred on by the crows who were predominately [ sic ] barracking for against Australia and supporting the underdog Australia A , who were <unk> up and firing . Of course it gave the Australia A guys a chance to break into the Australian team , but to me the focus of the summer was on beating the Poms [ England ] in the Tests and winning the World Series , not beating our own Australian mates . " Despite the negative feedback , the concept gave Ponting a chance on the international stage , and he scored 161 runs at 26 @.@ 83 with one half @-@ century . Two weeks after the World Series , Ponting was selected in the squad for the upcoming one @-@ day tri @-@ series involving South Africa , India and hosts New Zealand . Trent Bouts , a cricket writer for The Australian said : " His selection at age 20 would normally represent a bold gamble on youth but so precocious are his talents it amounts to a routine progression . " Ponting made his ODI debut against South Africa at the Basin Reserve in Wellington on 15 February 1995 . 
 = Blood ( OSI album ) = 
 Blood is the third studio album by American progressive rock band OSI , released by InsideOut Music on April 27 , 2009 in Europe and May 19 , 2009 in North America . 
 Guitarist Jim Matheos and keyboardist and vocalist Kevin Moore started work on the album in 2008 , collaborating by email . Matheos would send Moore a song idea which Moore would edit and send back to Matheos . Mike Portnoy of Dream Theater , who performed drums on Office of Strategic Influence and Free , was replaced by Porcupine Tree drummer Gavin Harrison on Blood . Matheos played bass guitar on the album , having hired guest musicians to perform bass duties on the first two OSI albums . Mikael Åkerfeldt of Opeth and Tim Bowness of No @-@ Man wrote lyrics and performed vocals on one track each . 
 Critical reception of Blood was generally positive . The more atmospheric and ambient tracks were praised ; the more metal @-@ oriented tracks received mixed reactions . Moore 's lyrics and Harrison 's drumming , in particular , were met with acclaim . 
 = = Background = = 
 On September 4 , 2008 , keyboardist and vocalist Kevin Moore posted a news update to the official Chroma Key website . In it , he stated that he had been working with guitarist Jim Matheos on a third OSI album " for several months now , slowly but surely . " Moore later stated that with OSI , he and Matheos " usually play it by ear . We never really know if we 're going to do another OSI , we never agree on it . I don 't remember ever agreeing to start a new one , really . But Jim will send me an idea or something and we just start talking about it . " 
 Blood was written and recorded in the same way as the first two OSI albums . Matheos and Moore worked together on the album long @-@ distance , mainly by emailing each other files . Matheos would send Moore song ideas , " from just a guitar riff to elaborate , almost completed songs , " Moore said . " Then I ask what I can do , and I mess around , complete a verse and add a chorus , do editing , add some vocals , and send it back to him . " 
 Moore considered the writing of Blood to be harder compared to previous OSI albums . Previously , Matheos would send Moore guitar parts to work with , allowing Moore to " work with editing them , pitching them , and fucking about them different ways , and then programming drums and keyboards . " When working on Blood , Matheos also provided programming , keyboard and drum parts . " If he sent me stuff that already had drums and keyboard parts , and it wasn 't a complete idea , I had to figure out a way to elaborate on it without having that same equipment that he has there , " Moore said . Overall , he considered the writing process to be " smoother because we got on a roll and we 're more fluid together " . 
 Mike Portnoy of Dream Theater played drums on Office of Strategic Influence and Free , but found the experience frustrating . Moore regarded Portnoy 's contributions to the first two albums as " great " , but he and Matheos decided to recruit a different drummer for Blood . " We were continuing to try to get new voices involved with the album " , he explained . Matheos , a fan of Porcupine Tree , was in control of personnel on Blood and asked Porcupine Tree drummer Gavin Harrison to perform drums on the album . Harrison had a schedule gap in the fourth quarter of 2008 , so agreed to work on the album . He never met Matheos and Moore , recording his drums parts in his recording studio in England and exchanging files with them over the Internet . Most songs were sent to Harrison with programmed drums . " For the most part , we usually told him to try to stay away from the programmed drums and come up with his own parts , and he did . So much of that is his taking it in a different direction , " Moore said . " There was probably at least one song , maybe two , where we said ' We 'd like you to keep closer to the programmed drums , ' but he had a lot of say in what went on . " Matheos and Moore were " very happy " with Harrison 's work on Blood , and hoped to work with him on the fourth OSI album . Blood marked the first time Matheos played bass on an OSI album instead of recruiting an outside bassist . 
 Matheos asked Opeth vocalist and guitarist Mikael Åkerfeldt to write lyrics and perform vocals on one track , which would become " Stockholm " . Matheos and Moore sent him the track they wanted him to work on , and he sent back a rough mix of his vocals . " We were really happy with it , " Moore said . " We didn 't do any revisions or ask for any changes , like we were expecting to ... It was a different approach than I would have taken , and that 's what was refreshing about it . That 's why we wanted to get somebody else to do some vocals on the album . " Tim Bowness of No @-@ Man wrote lyrics and performed vocals on " No Celebrations " , a bonus track . 
 = = Music = = 
 Moore regarded Blood as " [ distilling ] the OSI vibe that we 've been going for all along with this album " . He noted that there was " conflict " due to his and Matheos ' different musical tastes , " but it 's not a personality conflict . It 's a musical conflict where we want different things to happen and have to work it musically . " Moore considered this conflict to be " pretty much the only thing that makes OSI relatively original . If it was just one way or the other , like the singer @-@ songwriter stuff , electronic music or progressive metal , there 's a lot of people doing those things already . " 
 Moore stated that he found writing songs which combined progressive metal and electronic music easier than writing songs confined to one genre . " There 's people who do that better . Working with the two genres , they 're different enough from each other – almost natural enemies – that it keeps it interesting , " he said . " It doesn 't feel like being in conquered territory , it feels like there 's still room to explore . There 's always conflicts between the two writing elements that keeps it interesting . " 
 When writing lyrics for previous releases , Moore would " start mumbling and I try to figure out what I 'm saying and then try to make it make sense " . With Blood , he " really wrote them down and tried to make them coherent . I didn 't want it to be like ' Oh , you get your own impression of the lyrics . Everybody has their own idea ! ' I wanted to have an idea that I wanted to communicate , and something communicable . " Moore noted that he did occasionally use his " mumbling " method as it " puts you in the right direction as far as sounds , vowel sounds , and stresses on certain syllables . And if you can write some words and lyrics that match that , sometimes it flows really well . " He described all the songs as based on " personal experiences " . " I 'll start writing a song that has a little bit of a world view or political view or something , " he said , " but then by the time I 'm finished the lyrics it 'll be about a relationship or something like that . " 
 Matheos recorded his parts in Pro Tools using a <unk> Saffire PRO 40 preamp . Matheos primarily used PRS guitars and Mesa Boogie amplifiers . Moore used Ableton Live to write music and record his vocals . The only keyboard he used was a Minimoog Voyager . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Blood was released by InsideOut Music on April 27 , 2009 in Europe and May 19 in North America . Matheos and Moore unsuccessfully tried to organise a tour in support of Free . " We sort of disappointed people by saying that we were trying to making [ a tour ] happen and we wanted to make it happen , " Moore said , " so this time we 're not going to say that stuff . " Moore stated that OSI would remain a studio @-@ only project " until further notice " . 
 The special edition of Blood came with a bonus disc featuring three extra tracks . Tim Bowness ( of No @-@ Man ) wrote lyrics and performed vocals on the first song , " No Celebrations " . The second track is a cover of " Christian Brothers " by Elliott Smith . The third track is " Terminal ( Endless ) " , an extended version of the regular CD track " Terminal " . " It still has something interesting drum stuff where Gavin just plays steady beats with variations on it , " Moore said . " We had some mercy on the album version , but on the bonus CD , we don 't have any mercy and we just let it go . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception of Blood was generally positive . Writing for Blogcritics , Marty Dodge praised the album as " jaw droppingly impressive " , considering it to " [ have ] the potential to be up there in top albums of the year " . Andrew Reilly of <unk> lauded Blood as OSI 's best album , although considered other individual songs from the band 's catalog to be stronger than those on the album . Alex Henderson of Allmusic regarded Blood as " an album that falls short of earth @-@ shattering but is still solid and worthwhile " . 
 Reilly described Blood as " fully mastering the techno @-@ informed brand of progressive metal so many others have pursued to no avail ... with Blood the two have finally found the stylistic fusion their first two discs hinted at " . Henderson described the sound of the album as " Pink Floyd and King Crimson by way of Radiohead , Nirvana , grunge , alt @-@ metal and alt rock . " 
 Reilly lauded Moore 's lyrics , describing them as closer to his work in Dream Theater and Chroma Key than on the first two OSI albums . " Moore turns conventional phrases ... into thinly @-@ veiled warnings to some unknown subject , " Reilly commented . " OSI has long been Moore 's avenue for exploring the political as the personal , but here those two subjects fully cannibalize each other which , given this group 's past efforts and considerable talents , would not at all be an impossible intention or unforeseen consequence . " He praised Gavin Harrison 's drum performance , describing it as " phenomenal " . He considered " Stockholm " and " Blood " to be the highlights of the album . Dodge praised " <unk> " as " stunning " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Kevin Moore , except where noted , all music composed by Jim Matheos and Kevin Moore , except where noted . 
 Special edition bonus disc 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Jim Matheos – guitar , bass , keyboards , programming 
 Kevin Moore – vocals , keyboards , programming 
 Gavin Harrison – drums 
 Mikael Åkerfeldt – vocals on " Stockholm " 
 Tim Bowness – vocals on " No Celebrations " 
 Produced by Jim Matheos and Kevin Moore 
 Mixed by Phil Magnotti , Jim Matheos and Kevin Moore 
 = Queen 's Pier = 
 Queen 's Pier , named after Queen Victoria , was a public pier in front of City Hall in Edinburgh Place , Central , Hong Kong . For three generations it served not only as a public pier in day @-@ to @-@ day use but also as a major ceremonial arrival and departure point . The pier witnessed the official arrival in Hong Kong of all of Hong Kong 's governors since 1925 ; Elizabeth II landed there in 1975 , as did the Prince and Princess of Wales in 1989 . 
 The second and final pier structure , built along the newly reclaimed waterfront , was designed in a modern utilitarian style and was opened by Maurine Grantham , wife of Governor Alexander Grantham , in June 1954 . 
 On 26 April 2007 , the pier was closed by the government to enable land reclamation , soon after the adjacent Star Ferry pier was closed . There was fierce opposition by conservationists , who carried over their campaign to preserve the landmark . Police officers evicted some 30 protesters from the site on 1 August 2007 ; activists filed for a judicial review , and the High Court hearing began on 7 August . On 10 August , the court dismissed the request . 
 Finally , the Queen 's Pier was completely demolished in February 2008 . Its base piles were also removed in March 2008 . In 2008 , since dismantling , the government attempts to create the appearance of public support for reassembling the pier at the new waterfront has been criticised by conservationists . 
 = = History = = 
 A former wooden pier at the site known as " Queen 's Statue Wharf " was replaced in 1925 . It was a ceremonial landing area for the British Royal Family visiting Hong Kong , and for successive governors to assert their authority on arrival . The first governor to land there was Cecil Clementi , in November 1925 . The preceding governor , Reginald Stubbs , boarded the Victoria from the pier at the end of his term on 31 October 1925 . 
 = = = 1925 pier = = = 
 The 1925 pier was originally named " Statue Pier " , but was renamed " Queen 's Pier " in honour of Queen Victoria on 31 July 1924 . It was a sheltered pier made of concrete and steel , with round pillars and arches , built on the waterfront at Pedder Street on the site of the present Mandarin Oriental Hotel at a cost of HK $ 20 @,@ 000 . Intended to be opened in time for the arrival of Edward , the Prince of Wales , construction delays postponed its completion until October 1925 . It was demolished in January 1955 . 
 = = = 1954 pier = = = 
 As part of post @-@ war reclamation , the old pier was demolished . Work commenced in February 1954 on a new pier on the new waterfront designed in a modern utilitarian style . The structure was described as a U @-@ shaped plan , with an open @-@ sided superstructure . It consisted of tiled reinforced concrete base and pillars , and was modelled after previous piers in the area . Its flat roof was also made of concrete , topped with bitumen waterproofing . Five sets of stairs allowed boat passengers to board and disembark , three located on the north side , one on the east and one on the west . 
 The pier was considered " an integral part " of the ceremonial cluster including City Hall and Edinburgh Place which was being formed at the time , and the entrance to the City Hall formed an axis with the Pier to lend a sense of occasion to visiting dignitaries . The secondary design goal was to maximise public access to the very limited open space in Central in contrast with the city bustle . 
 The pier was opened by Maurine Grantham , wife of Governor Alexander Grantham , on 28 June 1954 . 
 = = Function = = 
 The pier 's primary role was ceremonial . It was the traditional landing place of successive governors , who would arrive at Central on board the official Governor 's Yacht which would dock at Queen 's Pier . From the 1960s , governors would inspect a guard of honour at Edinburgh Place , followed by the swearing @-@ in at City Hall . 
 HM The Queen landed there on 4 May 1975 on her first visit , after arriving by plane at Kai Tak Airport . The Prince and Princess of Wales landed there in November 1989 . 
 The pier 's secondary role was as a public pier , where pleasure craft were allowed to dock . Tour boats offering a view of the Kowloon side of the harbour used the pier for passenger boarding . Up to 1978 , it was the finishing line for the annual cross @-@ harbour swimming race . As the ceremonies declined , the pier 's secondary purpose became the main one : people met and strolled in the area , and others fished . 
 On 26 April 2007 , the pier was closed in order to facilitate land reclamation in Central . 
 = = Future = = 
 From the outset , the fate of the pier has been intimately linked with the central reclamation project which was unveiled in 1989 but not explicitly spelled out as such . However , the scale of reclamations has only been slightly cut back following significant legal battles . 
 = = = Government 's position = = = 
 Following the controversy and the demolition of the Star Ferry Pier in Edinburgh Place in early 2007 , activists declared Queen 's Pier the next battle @-@ ground against the conservation policy of the Government of Hong Kong . The criticism received over its handling of the Star Ferry Pier caused Michael Suen , the Secretary for Housing , Planning and Lands , to propose a piece @-@ by @-@ piece relocation of the pier to a new location on the reclaimed waterfront during a Legco session on 21 March 2007 . The Government later unveiled four design options for such relocation . The intended closure of the pier was 26 April 2007 . 
 At the end of January 2007 , the government declared it would postpone the demolition of Queen 's Pier until a consensus could be reached on the course of action ; consultations with the Hong Kong Institute of Architects , the Hong Kong Institute of Engineers , and the Conservancy Association were held . The Institute of Architects , whose members opposed dismantling the pier , originally maintained the pier should remain untouched . However , it was reported that after meeting the government , the Institute and the Conservancy Association were persuaded by the government that the pier could first be dismantled , and then reassembled at another location after completion of the reclamation . This change of heart was heavily criticised by Winston Chu , founder of the Society for Protection of the Harbour . The HKIA clarified that their opposition had not in fact changed . 
 Chief Executive Donald Tsang said that being overzealous in saving the past may hurt Hong Kong 's competitiveness , and called on activists to take a more balanced view toward economic growth and conservation . Soon after Tsang 's re @-@ election as Chief Executive , on 26 March , the Government pressed ahead with plans to dismantle and move the entire pier , piece by piece , enabling the reclamation to go ahead . 
 The government said that the in @-@ situ preservation , though apparently viable on paper , would risk irreversible damage to the pier . Furthermore , it argued that important underground facilities such as the Airport Railway Extended Overrun Tunnel would be affected , saying a natural curvature of the track was required . " Setting aside the technical difficulties and the huge risk involved in the works , underpinning for the construction of the extended overrun tunnel would cost about HK $ 500 million and take more than two years to complete " . 
 Appearing before a public forum at the pier on 29 July , Secretary for Development Carrie Lam Cheng Yuet @-@ <unk> repeated the government 's insistence that keeping the pier was not an option . She said she would " not give the people false hope " . Although Lam 's performance in public debates was praised , the Secretary for Development 's conflict of interest as the head of the Antiquities Authority was criticised . Lam said the AAB did not have governmental authority , and that it had not suggested keeping the pier in its totality . 
 = = = = Dismantling and storing = = = = 
 At the end of July 2007 , the Development Bureau issued a paper for the Legislative Council 's lands and works panel . <unk> to be erected by the end of July , and the target for completing " preservation works " by November . It was suggested for the pier 's pitched roof to be disassembled into halves and the 34 concrete columns to be cut at roof and deck level . The pieces would be labeled and then lifted by a crane barge and transported to the government 's explosives depot in Kau <unk> Wan , Lantau Island , where it would be stored under guard . The paper suggested that reassembling it in the same location might not take place until December 2012 , as re @-@ alignment of the proposed Road P2 would be involved . 
 = = = = District councils = = = = 
 The government polled 16 District Councils , fourteen of which voted in support of relocating the pier to the new water @-@ front . However , in July 2008 activists cried foul when eight councils revealed that the preservation of the pier in its existing location was not put forth as one of the options ; the vice @-@ chairmen of two councils which voted to support also objected that their decision may have not been an informed one as not all possible options were on the table . The chief town planner said that the omitted proposal " was not an efficient option and would create unnecessary construction waste " . 
 After it was revealed in August 2008 that the government was behind the 13 concerted District Councils ' motions in 2008 supporting the relocation of the pier to the new waterfront , Albert Ho condemned the government of tampering with District Councils in order to " create public opinion . " Convenor of the Urban Design Alliance doubted the openness of consultation , saying that " the government had engineered its results " . Dr Li Pang @-@ <unk> , of Lingnan University , said that the problematic framework of the councils has led them to work too closely with government . He said the ' copy and paste ' Queen 's Pier motions passed by 13 councils to support government decisions was a rubber @-@ stamp , and a clear sign that councils lacked independence . 
 = = = Conservationists ' position = = = 
 Ron Phillips , original designer of the pier , backed preservation , saying that any loss of the City Hall and the adjacent open space would be something " future generations will come to regret " . The Hong Kong Institute of Architects denounced the government 's insistence that dismantling and reassembling of the pier was the only feasible option , in disregard of the pier 's " grade 1 " status . The architects concluded that the " technical difficulties were not irresolvable , and the government 's reasons for not revising the current infrastructural design were not at all convincing " . 
 Environmental groups were angered by the government 's technobabble , and for inflating the costs and technical difficulties of keeping the pier at the original site . The proposed 40 @-@ metre @-@ wide road , planned in the 1980s , was now " obsolete " , and would make the waterfront " inaccessible to the public " . Albert Lai , Chairman of the Hong Kong People 's Council for Sustainable Development , drew attention to the fact that the budgeted spending for infrastructure over the past three years of HK $ 90 billion contrasted poorly with HK $ 90 million spent on acquiring and renovating heritage sites . 
 The Civic Party accused the government of misleading the public : the development plans for the North Island Line precluded the restoration the pier before 2016 . Christine Loh criticised Donald Tsang for failing to grasp the economical , cultural and social importance of heritage . 
 = = = Preservation campaign battlefronts = = = 
 = = = = Public and media = = = = 
 In September 2004 , legislator Law Chi @-@ <unk> took a swim in Victoria Harbour bearing a plaque saying " Goodbye to the Queen " , to protest the Central and Wan Chai Reclamation , particularly the loss of Queen 's Pier . 
 Soon after the unsuccessful attempt to save the Star Ferry pier in early 2007 , a campaign to preserve the pier in situ was launched . Ahead of the closure , members of the public , environmentalists , and some lawmakers arrived to tie blue ribbons to indicate their desire to preserve the harbour . On 22 April , about 100 protesters once again rallied at the pier , launching farewell voyages in a last @-@ ditch attempt to urge the Government to reconsider : a petition of over 400 signatures from the Arts community was collected . 
 An occupation of the pier was started by ten activists on the designated closure date . The campaign was boosted by the appearance of Chow Yun @-@ fat early on the morning of 28 April to sign the petition , and to appeal pre @-@ emptively to the police not to hurt protesters . Some activists , like Chu Hoi @-@ dick , have been involved in the Star Ferry pier protest , and took turns to maintain a round @-@ the @-@ clock presence . Leung Chun @-@ <unk> spent three nights a week at the site , despite working a full @-@ time job , vowing to block the demolition non @-@ violently in any way he could . 
 On 27 July , three students , as part of a group called Local Action started a hunger strike at the pier . Hunger striker Chan King @-@ fai said : " The government wasn 't chosen by us . All we can do is to use our humble and limited voices . " The government responded with a communications offensive , announcing that Secretary for Development Carrie Lam would appear on RTHK 's City 's Forum and at a public forum on 29 July at the pier . 
 On 30 July , the Government ordered an end to the " unlawful occupation " of government land by midnight . Activists vowed to defy the order ; a candlelight vigil held at the pier was attended by 200 sympathisers . The Government did not risk a violent confrontation immediately on the expiry of the eviction deadline . In an operation which lasted ten hours during daylight hours on 1 August 2007 , 300 Police officers cleared away the 30 or so protesters from the site , amid scuffles . Hong Kong Human Rights Monitor complained that its observers were denied access to the area during the eviction . 
 = = = = Legislative Council = = = = 
 An application for HK $ 50 million to fund the dismantling and relocating of the pier was scheduled for debate by the Public Works sub @-@ committee on 9 May 2007 , the same day the Antiquities Advisory Board would hold a public hearing to decide on the historical grading of the pier . Government stressed the timing was " a coincidence " , and steadfastly refused to defer the vote pending an outcome of the AAB vote . 
 On 9 May , after an hour @-@ long heated debate , the government was forced to withdraw its motion due to the lack of support . Choy So @-@ yuk , from the usually pro @-@ Government DAB , called for the vote to be postponed , and the Liberal Party equally did not back the Government . However , Government ministers declared that it had " no plans to list the pier as a declared monument " , and insisted that there was " no direct relationship between the grading and whether we will demolish and relocate the pier " . During the debate , the Director of Leisure and Cultural Services also said that even if the site was pronounced a first @-@ class monument , there remained no legally binding prohibition against its demolition . Liberal Party Chairman James Tien said that , in failing to muster support to implement its policies , " the Government is like a crab with weak legs " . 
 The government claimed that its handling of the issue had been " in line with pledges made by Chief Executive Donald Tsang Yam @-@ <unk> during his recent re @-@ election campaign " to regain the moral high ground regarding heritage preservation , following the mistakes of the Star Ferry saga . Civic Party legislative councillor Fernando Cheung Chiu @-@ hung said that there was " no sincerity [ from the government ] to preserve historic venues " . 
 The public works subcommittee approved the Government 's re @-@ submitted request for funds to dismantle and relocate Queen 's Pier on 23 May in a 10 @-@ 7 vote . Choy So @-@ yuk , who voted against the appropriation on 9 May , abstained . She revealed that she had been lobbied by Michael Suen and Donald Tsang ; party whips did not allow her to cast an opposing vote . The Hong Kong Institute of Architects said it " regretted the funding approval " . 
 = = = = Antiquities Advisory Board grading vote = = = = 
 The Antiquities Advisory Board ( AAB ) held a public hearing 9 May , and Board members voted a ' Grade 1 ' listing for the pier by a majority . Twelve members voted for Grade 1 listing , and ten voted for Grade 2 listing . However , the status is not @-@ binding on the Government . 
 After the hearing , an activist from ' Local Action ' declared the AAB 's decision a victory for the people , and warned the government " not to treat the voice of the people lightly " . 
 = = = = Legal challenge = = = = 
 As Lands Department officials arrived on 30 July to put up notices ordering an end to the " unlawful occupation " of government land , the activists filed for a judicial review , claiming that the decision of the Secretary for Home Affairs not to declare the structure a monument was unreasonable and illegal . The High Court set the date for the case to be heard as 7 August . Judge Johnson Lam said that the case about the future of Queen 's Pier should be heard as there is great public interest in the outcome and justified a one @-@ week respite for the site . 
 On 10 August , the High Court dismissed the request for judicial review , thus giving the go @-@ ahead for the government to demolish it . The judge ruled that the applicants had failed to establish that the government had acted perversely . 
 = = = = Institute of Planners controversy = = = = 
 The Hong Kong Institute of Planners , the majority of whose members work in government departments , had backed the in @-@ situ preservation of the pier . There was uproar in May 2008 when it made an apparent U @-@ turn in a position paper submitted to the government backing the relocation to a waterfront location , based on a sparsely attended meeting . It then submitted a revised paper presenting that a majority of its members supported such a move as a conclusion prior to the completion of a survey . A former vice @-@ president of the institute questioned how the institute had become allies of the government . 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 The pier is featured in the following programmes and videos : 
 My Date with a Vampire ( ATV ) 
 Life Made Simple ( TVB ) 
 Glittering Days ( TVB ) 
 the music video of " Goodbye Bell " , a song by Sam Hui 
 in the 2010 movie Dream Home set in Hong Kong in the year 2007 . 
 in the 1988 television miniseries Noble House ( TV miniseries ) starring Pierce Brosnan . 
 = Wizkid ( musician ) = 
 <unk> Ibrahim <unk> ( born 16 July 1990 ) , better known by his stage name Wizkid ( sometimes stylised as <unk> ) , is a Nigerian recording artist , songwriter and performer . He started his musical career at age 11 , releasing a collaborative album with Glorious Five entitled Lil Prinz ( 2001 ) . In 2009 , he signed a record deal with Banky W. ' s imprint Empire Mates Entertainment . He rose to prominence in 2010 with the release of the song " Holla at Your Boy " from his debut studio album , Superstar ( 2011 ) . " Tease Me / Bad Guys " , " Don 't Dull " , Gidi Girl , " Love My Baby " , " <unk> " and " <unk> Lo Ni " were also released as singles from the Superstar album . Wizkid 's self @-@ titled second studio album , Ayo ( 2014 ) , was preceded by the singles " Jaiye Jaiye " , " On Top Your Matter " , " One Question " , " Joy " , " Bombay " and " Show You the Money " . 
 In addition to his solo work , Wizkid has collaborated with several artists and was featured on the hits " Girl " ( with Bracket ) , " Fine Lady " ( with <unk> ) , " Sexy Mama " ( with <unk> ) , " Slow Down " ( with <unk> ) , " The Matter " ( with Maleek Berry ) , " Pull Over " ( with <unk> ) and " Bad Girl " ( with Jesse Jagz ) . He was ranked 5th on Forbes and Channel O 's 2013 list of the Top 10 Richest / <unk> African Artists . In February 2014 , Wizkid became the first ever Nigerian musician to have over 1 million followers on Twitter . 
 = = Life and music career = = 
 = = = 1990 – 2010 : Early life and Lil Prinz = = = 
 Wizkid was born on 16 July 1990 in Surulere , a residential and commercial area of Lagos . In a 2012 interview with Tim Westwood , he said that his father has three wives . Wizkid started singing at age 11 , releasing a 7 track album entitled Lil Prinz ( 2001 ) . During an interview with <unk> of Factory 78 TV , Wizkid described his life in a nutshell . He said he formed a group called the Glorious Five with a couple of his church friends . The group dropped an album prior to dismembering . Wizkid later met <unk> Jezreel , a record producer who prevented him from recording for a year . While visiting Jezreel 's studio frequently , he watched 2 Face Idibia record Grass 2 Grace and Sound Sultan record <unk> . A year later , Wizkid started recording . His first song featured <unk> Jezreel . The song was met with great reception throughout Surulere . Wizkid cited <unk> C as one of the people who mentored and coached him while he was 15 years old . Wizkid also told Factory 78 TV that his parents weren 't receptive of his music from the onset . In order to gain his father 's trust , he had to work hard and spent lots of time in the studio . Wizkid has a great relationship with Banky W. He told Factory 78 TV that he and Banky became friends prior to starting a professional relationship . He co @-@ wrote Banky W 's " <unk> You Too Much " , a song off the The W Experience album . In 2006 , he collaborated with <unk> C and Ikechukwu . In 2009 , Wizkid became a household name within Nigeria 's musical landscape ; he was featured on <unk> 's " Fast Money , Fast Cars " and Kel 's " Turn by Turn " . 
 = = = 2010 – 11 : Superstar = = = 
 In 2010 , Wizkid began recording his debut studio album Superstar ( 2011 ) . On 2 January 2010 , he released " Holla at Your Boy " ( sometimes stylized as Holla @ Ur Boi ) as the album 's lead single . The song earned Wizkid a Next Rated award at The Headies 2011 , and was nominated for Best Pop Single at The Headies 2011 . The music video for " Holla at Your Boy " was nominated for Most Gifted Newcomer Video at the 2011 Channel O Music Video Awards . The music video was also nominated for Best Afro Pop Video at the 2011 Nigeria Music Video Awards ( <unk> ) . On 2 April 2010 , Wizkid released " Tease Me / Bad Guys " as the album 's second single ; it was initially released as a freestyle . " Don 't Dull " , the album 's third single , was released on 6 December 2010 . 
 The album , recorded in English and Yoruba , was released on 12 June 2011 by Empire Mates Entertainment . It incorporates elements of R & B , dancehall , and reggae . Wizkid collaborated with a wide range of music producers , including E @-@ Kelly , Jay <unk> , <unk> , DJ Klem , Sunny <unk> , Q @-@ Beats and Samklef . The album features guest appearances from Banky W. , Skales , D <unk> and Wande Coal . It was initially scheduled for release on 14 February 2011 , but was later pushed back . On 12 June 2011 , Wizkid hosted an album launch party at the Expo Hall of the Eko Hotel and Suites . The album 's launch party featured performances from Banky W , Skales , <unk> Idibia , Samklef , Wande Coal , D <unk> , Olamide , <unk> , Jesse Jagz , Ice Prince , <unk> and <unk> Shay . Superstar garnered Best Album of the Year at the 2012 Nigeria Entertainment Awards , and was nominated for Album of the Year at The Headies 2012 . 
 = = = 2012 – 2014 : Ayo and other recordings = = = 
 Work on Wizkid 's second studio album , Ayo , began in 2012 and continued through 2014 . It features guest appearances from Femi Kuti , Banky W. , <unk> Shay , Phyno , Tyga , Akon and Wale . The album 's production was handled by <unk> , <unk> , Uhuru , Del B , Dr <unk> , Maleek Berry , <unk> Beatz and <unk> . It was initially titled Chosen . According to MTV Base , the album suffered from a pushed back release date . It was earlier reported that the album would feature Don Jazzy , <unk> and Olamide . On 6 September 2014 , Wizkid revealed the album 's cover art and track listing . 
 Prior to announcing plans for a second studio album , Wizkid had plans of releasing a mixtape in April 2013 . In an interview with Ok ! Nigeria TV at Disturbing Headquarters in London , he said that the mixtape would be released in April . He also said that the mixtape would feature Wale and Tinie Tempah . Wizkid later announced that he would be releasing his second studio album on 12 June 2013 . In an interview with <unk> , Banky W revealed the album 's title and commented on the delayed album . In addition , he gave an estimated time @-@ frame for the album 's release . 
 On 2 May 2013 , Wizkid and Starboy Entertainment released the album 's lead single " Jaiye Jaiye " featuring Femi Kuti . Wizkid told Showtime Celebrity that he collaborated with Femi Kuti in order to prevent people from depicting him as an artist whose lyrics revolve around girls , cars and materialistic things . " On Top Your Matter " was released as the album 's second single on 26 October 2013 ; it was produced by Del B. The music video for the single , released on 13 February 2014 , was shot and directed in South Africa by <unk> . In July 2014 , Wizkid visited The Beat 99 @.@ 9 FM studio in Lagos and told <unk> that he collaborated with Barbadian singer Rihanna . 
 = = = 2015 – present : Sounds From the Other Side EP = = = 
 On 5 January 2015 , Wizkid released the music video for " Ojuelegba " , a song that highlights the struggles he endured in the early years of his recording career . The official remix to the song features vocals from Drake and Skepta ; it premiered on OVO Sound Radio in July 2015 . Wizkid first announced that he was working on a new album during his visit to London in October 2014 . He revealed his collaborative single with Chris Brown titled " African Bad Girl " , and said that it would be the lead single off the upcoming album . In April 2015 , both Wizkid and Chris Brown performed the song together at the latter 's concert in Durban , South Africa . In May 2015 , Wizkid released " Expensive Shit " , an Afrobeat song built on light guitars , saxophone lines and acoustic percussion ; the song was reported as being a likely inclusion on the album . In July 2015 , Wizkid announced via Twitter that Angélique <unk> will be featured on the album . In September 2015 , Wizkid revealed that he was dropping his EP and postponing the release of his third studio album . He made the announcement via Instagram shortly after the conclusion of <unk> Idibia 's " Fortified " tribute concert . Wizkid was quoted as saying , " I celebrated the legend <unk> Idibia last night ! Epic ! It made me realize how much work I need to do . " According to an interview published by The Fader magazine , Wizkid 's upcoming EP would be titled Sounds From the Other Side . Although much information were not revealed , The Fader did report that Wizkid is squeezing in edits to the EP . On April 5 , 2016 , Wizkid became Nigeria 's first artist to emerge on Billboard ’ s Twitter Last 24 hours chart following his guest feature on Drake 's " One Dance " single , which charted at number 21 . On May 12 , 2016 , the song reached number 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . On 5 June 2016 , Wizkid released the promotional single " Like This " . The song made its premiere on Drake 's OVO Sound Radio in June 2016 . It was produced by Amsterdam @-@ based Ghanaian producer DJ Henry X. Sheldon Pearce of Pitchfork Media described the song as a " frolicking , summery jam that revels in all the work he [ Wizkid ] ’ s put in . " 
 = = = World tours and notable performances = = = 
 After releasing their compilation album Empire Mates State of Mind , EME acts toured the United States . The tour kicked off on 4 July 2012 and ended on 2 September 2012 . EME acts performed in several different cities , including Houston , Dallas , Toronto , Vancouver , New York City , Providence , Calgary , Atlanta , Washington DC , and Chicago . Wizkid toured London in 2012 and performed at the HMV Apollo on 4 June 2012 . On 12 November 2012 , he performed at the BBC Radio 1Xtra Live 02 Academy in Brixton alongside Trey Songz , Tulisa , Kendrick Lamar and Angel . On 17 October 2013 , Wizkid performed at the 2013 edition of <unk> , a yearly concert dedicated to the late Fela Kuti . On 2 November 2013 , he performed at the Guinness Colorful World of More concert alongside D <unk> , Tiwa Savage , P @-@ Square , <unk> , Ice Prince , Burna Boy , Olamide and Phyno , among others . The concert took place at the Eko Convention Centre of the Eko Hotels and Suites . On 23 November 2013 , Wizkid performed at the Guinness Big Eruption Concert . Wizkid was invited as a special guest for some shows in Tinie Tempah 's tour of the UK in 2014 . Wizkid joined Chris Brown on his " One Hell of a Nite " world tour in May 2016 . 
 = = = Endorsements = = = 
 In 2012 , Wizkid signed a one @-@ year endorsement deal with Pepsi reportedly worth 350 @,@ 000 U.S dollars . He travelled to Beirut , Lebanon with Tiwa Savage for a Pepsi commercial shoot . On 28 May 2013 , Premium Times reported that Wizkid signed a one @-@ year deal with MTN Nigeria . Moreover , the news source reported that <unk> 's Pepsi contract was renewed for another two years . On 23 October 2013 , <unk> reported that Wizkid signed an endorsement deal with Guinness for the " Guinness World of More " concert . The concert was held at the Eko Convention Centre of the Eko Hotel and Suites in Victoria Island , Lagos on 3 November 2013 . On 18 June 2015 , Pulse reported that Wizkid ditched MTN and signed a ₦ 128 million <unk> deal with GLO . 
 = = = The Next Rated prize = = = 
 Wizkid won the award for Next Rated at The Headies 2011 . In addition to winning the award , he was awarded a 2012 Hyundai Sonata courtesy of The Headies and its affiliates . The car 's presentation ceremony took place at the Silverbird Galleria in Victoria Island , Lagos . Guy Murray Bruce , Bola Salako and Ayo <unk> were present during the ceremony . Wizkid joined the list of past winners , including <unk> , Overdose , <unk> , Wande Coal and <unk> . 
 = = Fashion style = = 
 In a February 2015 interview with Alex Frank of Vogue magazine , Wizkid stated that he wears a mixture of street @-@ wear and traditional Nigerian clothes . He cited Pharrell Williams as one of his fashion style icons . Moreover , he revealed plans to establish a clothing line following the release of his upcoming debut EP . 
 = = Starboy Entertainment = = 
 On 5 March 2013 , Charles <unk> ( a writer for Vanguard ) reported that Wizkid established his label imprint Starboy Entertainment . During an interview with Silverbird Television , Wizkid told Yvonne Vixen <unk> that he planned on signing new acts to the label . Wizkid told Showtime Celebrity that he established his own record label to give up @-@ and @-@ coming artists a platform to showcase their talent . On 17 April 2013 , Wizkid signed Maleek Berry to Starboy Entertainment . Wizkid and Maleek Berry 's work credits include " Lagos to Soweto " and " The Matter " , among others . On 29 April 2013 , Premium Times reported that Wizkid signed producers <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> , popularly known as <unk> Beatz , to his imprint . He made the announcement via Twitter . On 9 May 2013 , he unveiled photos of himself with the aforementioned acts signed . On 20 August 2013 , Wizkid signed recording artist <unk> to the label . He made the announcement moments after debuting the music video for " Caro " , the label 's first official single . On May 7 , 2016 , Wizkid announced the signings of <unk> , <unk> , and Mr <unk> to Starboy Entertainment . He made the announcement shortly after his performance at the 17th edition of the Ghana Music Awards . 
 = = EME 's breakup , reunion and departure = = 
 After Wizkid tweeted a subliminal message and tweaked his Twitter account , reports about his departure from E.M.E went viral . Wizkid moved out of the E.M.E mansion in Lagos and acquired his own home in the Lekki Phase 1 area . Prior to Wizkid 's subliminal tweets , Banky W pacified fans by assuring them that nothing was amiss . Furthermore , it was reported that troubles within E.M.E started as early as the 2012 E.M.E all stars concert . It was also reported that money was at the centre of the controversy . On 20 February 2013 , Information Nigeria reported that Wizkid was getting 25 percent from every performance , while Banky W and Segun <unk> were getting 50 percent . <unk> , Wizkid 's former manager , was getting the remaining 25 percent . After firing <unk> and hiring Godwin Tom ( whom he parted ways with in April 2014 ) , Wizkid wanted a 50 – 50 share with Banky W. The source revealed that Banky W refused to accept Wizkid 's proposal . Moreover , it was reported that Banky W wanted to find a manager for Wizkid who would accept 25 percent . It was also reported that things started getting sour as a result of both parties disagreement . Information Nigeria went on to report that Wizkid was doing three shows weekly and bringing in close to <unk> million monthly . On 30 April 2013 , Nigerian Entertainment Today reported that Wizkid and E.M.E reunited after contract negotiations . The news source also reported that Wizkid performed alongside label mates <unk> and DJ <unk> in The Republic of Benin . In August 2014 , Wizkid told <unk> <unk> that he will depart the label following the release of his second studio album , Ayo . 
 = = A victim of impersonation = = 
 On 19 June 2013 , Wizkid and his management were invited by men from the Nigerian Police Force for questioning . <unk> charges were levelled against them by a group of Unilag students . The students claimed that Wizkid agreed to perform at the <unk> Sports Centre on 21 May 2013 for a total sum of <unk> . They also claimed that he didn 't show up for the show and didn 't return their money . After conducting a thorough investigation , Police determined that Unilag students were bamboozled by con artists pretending to be affiliates of <unk> In the aforementioned interview with Showtime Celebrity , Wizkid commented on the events that transpired after the accusations . He told the media that the police were investigating the case . The masterminds behind the impersonation were later detained by law enforcement agents in Lagos . In addition to duping Unilag students , the culprits set up fake email and social media accounts . Wizkid also elaborated on how one can go about booking him . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Car accident and Porsche acquisition = = = 
 On 15 June 2013 , Wizkid was involved in a non @-@ life @-@ threatening car accident along the Lekki @-@ Epe Expressway in Lekki , Lagos . According to an article posted on Silverbird Television , Wizkid was hospitalised for a minor concussion resulting from the wreck . According to eyewitness reports compiled by MTV Base , Wizkid 's Porsche <unk> was spotted speeding down the road ; the car 's front tires blew out and resulted in the driver of the vehicle losing control and crashing into a road barrier . Eyewitness reports also added that the car 's airbag suspension system deployed on impact , shielding Wizkid and the driver instantaneously . At the time of the incident , Wizkid and other passengers in the car were returning from the <unk> Nokia <unk> Party . The accident allegedly occurred around 3 : 30am in front of the GET Arena . As a result of the wreck , the car was badly damaged . Pictures of the damaged vehicle surfaced on Instagram and Facebook . Vanguard reported that Wizkid acquired a Porsche Cayenne two weeks after the accident . He posted pictures of his new acquisition onto his Instagram page and tagged the pictures with the caption " # Blessed " . 
 = = = Fatherhood controversy = = = 
 On 22 August 2011 , Nigerian Entertainment Today reported that Wizkid fathered his first child at age 21 . After a thorough investigation , the news source concluded that Wizkid impregnated an undergraduate student named <unk> <unk> . Moreover , the news source added that multiple sources familiar with the " baby mama " and her family told them that they knew about the relationship between both parties . When the story broke out , close friends and associates of Wizkid didn 't confirm the story due to DNA results that were pending at the time . Wizkid broke his silence on the story in several interviews . In an interview with a Nigerian Entertainment Today editor , Wizkid denied having a child . In another interview held at <unk> @-@ GRA in Lagos , Wizkid said he really doesn 't want to find himself in that peculiar situation . A week before denying the aforementioned allegations , Wizkid tweeted from his official Twitter handle . In December 2012 , he denied the baby scandal during an interview with <unk> Ben @-@ Nwankwo of The Punch . In October 2013 , Wizkid uploaded a picture of he and his 2 @-@ year @-@ old son , <unk> <unk> , onto his Instagram account . The photo confirmed the alleged rumours and allegations that were harboured for 2 years . The photo also vindicated Nigerian Entertainment Today , the news source that first covered the story . 
 = = = Feuds = = = 
 Wizkid became engulfed in rifts with several artists including his erstwhile boss Banky W and former label mate Skales . Other artists include <unk> , <unk> Krane , <unk> , Tonto <unk> , Samklef and blogger Linda <unk> . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Wizkid 's contribution to the Nigerian Music Industry has earned him several achievements , including a BET Award , a MOBO Award , five The Headies Awards , two Channel O Music Video Awards , six Nigeria Entertainment Awards , two Ghana Music Awards , two <unk> All Youth Awards , two City People Entertainment Awards , and a Future Award . He has received three nominations at the MTV Europe Music Awards . He has also been nominated four times at the World Music Awards . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Lil Prinz ( 2001 ) 
 Superstar ( 2011 ) 
 Empire Mates State of Mind ( 2012 ) ( with EME ) 
 Ayo ( 2014 ) 
 Sounds From the Other Side ( TBD ) 
 = Babe Ruth = 
 George Herman Ruth Jr . ( February 6 , 1895 – August 16 , 1948 ) , better known as Babe Ruth , was an American professional baseball player whose career in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) spanned 22 seasons , from 1914 through 1935 . Nicknamed " The Bambino " and " The Sultan of Swat " , he began his MLB career as a stellar left @-@ handed pitcher for the Boston Red Sox , but achieved his greatest fame as a slugging outfielder for the New York Yankees . Ruth established many MLB batting ( and some pitching ) records , including career home runs ( 714 ) , runs batted in ( RBIs ) ( 2 @,@ 213 ) , bases on balls ( 2 @,@ 062 ) , slugging percentage ( .690 ) , and on @-@ base plus slugging ( OPS ) ( 1 @.@ 164 ) ; the latter two still stand today . Ruth is regarded as one of the greatest sports heroes in American culture and is considered by many to be the greatest baseball player of all time . In 1936 , Ruth was elected into the Baseball Hall of Fame as one of its " first five " inaugural members . 
 At age seven , Ruth was sent to St. Mary 's Industrial School for Boys , a reformatory where he learned life lessons and baseball skills from Brother Matthias <unk> of the Christian Brothers , the school 's disciplinarian and a capable baseball player . In 1914 , Ruth was signed to play minor @-@ league baseball for the Baltimore Orioles but was soon sold to the Red Sox . By 1916 , he had built a reputation as an outstanding pitcher who sometimes hit long home runs , a feat unusual for any player in the pre @-@ 1920 dead @-@ ball era . Although Ruth twice won 23 games in a season as a pitcher and was a member of three World Series championship teams with Boston , he wanted to play every day and was allowed to convert to an outfielder . With regular playing time , he broke the MLB single @-@ season home run record in 1919 . 
 After that season , Red Sox owner Harry Frazee controversially sold Ruth to the Yankees , an act that , coupled with Boston 's subsequent championship drought , popularized the " Curse of the Bambino " superstition . In his 15 years with New York , Ruth helped the Yankees win seven American League ( AL ) championships and four World Series championships . His big swing led to escalating home run totals that not only drew fans to the ballpark and boosted the sport 's popularity but also helped usher in the live @-@ ball era of baseball , in which it evolved from a low @-@ scoring game of strategy to a sport where the home run was a major factor . As part of the Yankees ' vaunted " Murderer 's Row " lineup of 1927 , Ruth hit 60 home runs , extending his MLB single @-@ season record . He retired in 1935 after a short stint with the Boston Braves . During his career , Ruth led the AL in home runs during a season twelve times . 
 Ruth 's legendary power and charismatic personality made him a larger @-@ than @-@ life figure in the " Roaring Twenties " . During his career , he was the target of intense press and public attention for his baseball exploits and off @-@ field penchants for drinking and womanizing . His often reckless lifestyle was tempered by his willingness to do good by visiting children at hospitals and orphanages . He was denied a job in baseball for most of his retirement , most likely due to poor behavior during parts of his playing career . In his final years , Ruth made many public appearances , especially in support of American efforts in World War II . In 1946 , he became ill with cancer , and died two years later . 
 = = Early years = = 
 George Herman Ruth Jr. was born in 1895 at 216 Emory Street in <unk> , a working @-@ class section of Baltimore , Maryland , named for its meat @-@ packing plants . Its population included recent immigrants from Ireland , Germany and Italy , and African Americans . Ruth 's parents , George Herman Ruth , Sr. ( 1871 – 1918 ) , and Katherine <unk> , were both of German American ancestry . According to the 1880 census , his parents were born in Maryland . The paternal grandparents of Ruth , Sr. were from Prussia and Hanover , respectively . Ruth , Sr. had a series of jobs , including lightning rod salesman and streetcar operator , before becoming a <unk> in a family @-@ owned combination grocery and saloon on Frederick Street . George Ruth Jr. was born in the house of his maternal grandfather , Pius <unk> , a German immigrant and trade unionist . Only one of young George 's seven siblings , his younger sister Mamie , survived infancy . 
 Many aspects of Ruth 's childhood are undetermined , including the date of his parents ' marriage . When young George was a toddler , the family moved to 339 South <unk> Street , not far from the rail yards ; by the time the boy was 6 , his father had a saloon with an upstairs apartment at 426 West Camden Street . Details are equally scanty about why young George was sent at the age of 7 to St. Mary 's Industrial School for Boys , a reformatory and orphanage . As an adult , Babe Ruth suggested that not only had he been running the streets and rarely attending school , he was drinking beer when his father was not looking . Some accounts say that , after a violent incident at his father 's saloon , the city authorities decided this environment was unsuitable for a small child . At St. Mary 's , which George Jr. entered on June 13 , 1902 , he was recorded as " incorrigible " ; he spent much of the next twelve years there . 
 Although St. Mary 's inmates received an education , students were also expected to learn work skills and help operate the school , particularly once the boys turned 12 . Ruth became a <unk> , and was also proficient as a carpenter . He would adjust his own shirt collars , rather than having a tailor do it , even during his well @-@ paid baseball career . The boys , aged 5 to 21 , did most work around the facility , from cooking to shoemaking , and renovated St. Mary 's in 1912 . The food was simple , and the Xaverian Brothers who ran the school insisted on strict discipline ; corporal punishment was common . Ruth 's nickname there was " <unk> " , as he had large facial features and was darker than most boys at the all @-@ white reformatory . 
 Ruth was sometimes allowed to rejoin his family , or was placed at St. James 's Home , a supervised residence with work in the community , but he was always returned to St. Mary 's . He rarely was visited by his family ; his mother died when he was 12 and by some accounts , he was permitted to leave St. Mary 's only to attend the funeral . How Ruth came to play baseball there is uncertain : according to one account , his placement at St. Mary 's was due in part to repeatedly breaking Baltimore 's windows with long hits while playing street ball ; by another , he was told to join a team on his first day at St. Mary 's by the school 's athletic director , Brother Herman , becoming a catcher even though left @-@ handers rarely play that position . During his time there he also played third base and shortstop , again unusual for a left @-@ hander , and was forced to wear mitts and gloves made for right @-@ handers . He was encouraged in his pursuits by the school 's Prefect of Discipline , Brother Matthias <unk> , a native of Nova Scotia . A large man , Brother Matthias was greatly respected by the boys both for his strength and for his fairness . For the rest of his life , Ruth would praise Brother Matthias , and his running and hitting styles closely resembled his teacher 's . Ruth stated , " I think I was born as a hitter the first day I ever saw him hit a baseball . " The older man became a mentor and role model to George ; biographer Robert W. Creamer commented on the closeness between the two : 
 Ruth revered Brother Matthias ... which is remarkable , considering that Matthias was in charge of making boys behave and that Ruth was one of the great natural <unk> of all time . ... George Ruth caught Brother Matthias ' attention early , and the calm , considerable attention the big man gave the young <unk> from the waterfront struck a spark of response in the boy 's soul ... [ that may have ] blunted a few of the more savage teeth in the gross man whom I have heard at least a half @-@ dozen of his baseball contemporaries describe with admiring awe and wonder as " an animal . " 
 The school 's influence remained with Ruth in other ways : a lifelong Catholic , he would sometimes attend Mass after carousing all night , and he became a well @-@ known member of the Knights of Columbus . He would visit orphanages , schools , and hospitals throughout his life , often avoiding publicity . He was generous to St. Mary 's as he became famous and rich , donating money and his presence at fundraisers , and spending $ 5 @,@ 000 to buy Brother Matthias a Cadillac in 1926 — subsequently replacing it when it was destroyed in an accident . Nevertheless , his biographer Leigh Montville suggests that many of the off @-@ the @-@ field excesses of Ruth 's career were driven by the deprivations of his time at St. Mary 's . 
 Most of the boys at St. Mary 's played baseball , with organized leagues at different levels of proficiency . Ruth later estimated that he played 200 games a year as he steadily climbed the ladder of success . Although he played all positions at one time or another ( including infield positions generally reserved for right @-@ handers ) , he gained stardom as a pitcher . According to Brother Matthias , Ruth was standing to one side laughing at the bumbling pitching efforts of fellow students , and Matthias told him to go in and see if he could do better . After becoming the best pitcher at St. Mary 's , in 1913 , when Ruth was 18 , he was allowed to leave the premises to play weekend games on teams drawn from the community . He was mentioned in several newspaper articles , for both his pitching prowess and ability to hit long home runs . 
 = = Professional baseball = = 
 = = = Minor league , Baltimore Orioles = = = 
 In early 1914 , Ruth was signed to a professional baseball contract by Jack Dunn , owner and manager of the minor @-@ league Baltimore Orioles , an International League team . The circumstances of Ruth 's signing cannot be stated with certainty , with historical fact obscured by stories that cannot all be true . By some accounts , Dunn was urged to attend a game between an all @-@ star team from St. Mary 's and one from another Xaverian facility , Mount St. Mary 's College . Some versions have Ruth running away before the eagerly awaited game , to return in time to be punished , and then pitching St. Mary 's to victory as Dunn watched . Others have Washington Senators pitcher Joe Engel , a Mount St. Mary 's graduate , pitching in an alumni game after watching a preliminary contest between the college 's freshmen and a team from St. Mary 's , including Ruth . Engel watched Ruth play , then told Dunn about him at a chance meeting in Washington . Ruth , in his autobiography , stated only that he worked out for Dunn for a half @-@ hour , and was signed . According to biographer Kal Wagenheim , there were legal difficulties to be straightened out as Ruth was supposed to remain at the school until he turned 21 . 
 The train journey to spring training in Fayetteville , North Carolina , in early March was likely Ruth 's first outside the Baltimore area . The rookie ballplayer was the subject of various pranks by the veterans , who were probably also the source of his famous nickname . There are various accounts of how Ruth came to be called Babe , but most center on his being referred to as " <unk> 's babe " or a variant . " Babe " was at that time a common nickname in baseball , with perhaps the most famous to that point being Pittsburgh Pirates pitcher and 1909 World Series hero Babe Adams , who appeared younger than he was . 
 Babe Ruth 's first appearance as a professional ballplayer was in an intersquad game on March 7 , 1914 . Ruth played shortstop , and pitched the last two innings of a 15 – 9 victory . In his second at bat , Ruth hit a long home run to right , which was reported locally to be longer than a legendary shot hit in Fayetteville by Jim Thorpe . His first appearance against a team in organized baseball was an exhibition against the major @-@ league Philadelphia Phillies : Ruth pitched the middle three innings , giving up two runs in the fourth , but then settling down and pitching a scoreless fifth and sixth . The following afternoon , Ruth was put in during the sixth inning against the Phillies and did not allow a run the rest of the way . The Orioles scored seven runs in the bottom of the eighth to overcome a 6 – 0 deficit , making Ruth the winning pitcher . 
 Once the regular season began , Ruth was a star pitcher who was also dangerous at the plate . The team performed well , yet received almost no attention from the Baltimore press . A third major league , the Federal League , had begun play , and the local franchise , the Baltimore Terrapins , restored that city to the major leagues for the first time since 1902 . Few fans visited Oriole Park , where Ruth and his teammates labored in relative obscurity . Ruth may have been offered a bonus and a larger salary to jump to the Terrapins ; when rumors to that effect swept Baltimore , giving Ruth the most publicity he had experienced to date , a Terrapins official denied it , stating it was their policy not to sign players under contract to Dunn . 
 The competition from the Terrapins caused Dunn to sustain large losses . Although by late June the Orioles were in first place , having won over two @-@ thirds of their games , the paid attendance dropped as low as 150 . Dunn explored a possible move by the Orioles to Richmond , Virginia , as well as the sale of a minority interest in the club . These possibilities fell through , leaving Dunn with little choice other than to sell his best players to major league teams to raise money . He offered Ruth to the reigning World Series champions , Connie Mack 's Philadelphia Athletics , but Mack had his own financial problems . The Cincinnati Reds and New York Giants expressed interest in Ruth , but Dunn sold his contract , along with those of pitchers Ernie Shore and Ben Egan , to the Boston Red Sox of the American League ( AL ) on July 4 . The sale price was announced as $ 25 @,@ 000 but other reports lower the amount to half that , or possibly $ 8 @,@ 500 plus the cancellation of a $ 3 @,@ 000 loan . Ruth remained with the Orioles for several days while the Red Sox completed a road trip , and reported to the team in Boston on July 11 . 
 = = = Boston Red Sox ( 1914 – 19 ) = = = 
 = = = = Developing star = = = = 
 Ruth arrived in Boston on July 11 , 1914 , along with Egan and Shore . Ruth later told of meeting the woman he would first marry , Helen Woodford , that morning — she was then a 16 @-@ year @-@ old waitress at Landers Coffee Shop , and Ruth related that she served him when he had breakfast there . Other stories , though , suggest the meeting happened on another day , and perhaps under other circumstances . Regardless of when he began to woo his first wife , he won his first game for the Red Sox that afternoon , 4 – 3 , over the Cleveland Naps . He pitched to catcher Bill Carrigan , who was also the Red Sox manager . Shore was given a start by Carrigan the next day ; he won that and his second start and thereafter was pitched regularly . Ruth lost his second start , and was thereafter little used . As a batter , in his major @-@ league debut , Ruth went 0 @-@ for @-@ 2 against left @-@ hander Willie Mitchell , striking out in his first at bat , before being removed for a pinch hitter in the seventh inning . Ruth was not much noticed by the fans , as Bostonians watched the Red Sox 's crosstown rivals , the Braves , begin a legendary comeback that would take them from last place on the Fourth of July to the 1914 World Series championship . 
 Egan was traded to Cleveland after two weeks on the Boston roster . During his time as a Red Sox , he kept an eye on the inexperienced Ruth , much as Dunn had in Baltimore . When he was traded , no one took his place as supervisor . Ruth 's new teammates considered him brash , and would have preferred him , as a rookie , to remain quiet and inconspicuous . When Ruth insisted on taking batting practice despite his being both a rookie who did not play regularly , and a pitcher , he arrived to find his bats sawn in half . His teammates nicknamed him " the Big Baboon " , a name the swarthy Ruth , who had disliked the nickname " <unk> " at St. Mary 's , detested . Ruth had received a raise on promotion to the major leagues , and quickly acquired tastes for fine food , liquor , and women , among other temptations . 
 Manager Carrigan allowed Ruth to pitch two exhibition games in mid @-@ August . Although Ruth won both against minor @-@ league competition , he was not restored to the pitching rotation . It is uncertain why Carrigan did not give Ruth additional opportunities to pitch . There are legends — filmed for the screen in The Babe Ruth Story ( 1948 ) — that the young pitcher had a habit of signaling his intent to throw a curveball by sticking out his tongue slightly , and that he was easy to hit until this changed . Creamer pointed out that it is common for inexperienced pitchers to display such habits , and the need to break Ruth of his would not constitute a reason to not use him at all . The biographer suggested that Carrigan was unwilling to use Ruth due to poor behavior by the rookie . 
 On July 30 , 1914 , Boston owner Joseph Lannin had purchased the minor @-@ league Providence Grays , members of the International League . The Providence team had been owned by several people associated with the Detroit Tigers , including star hitter Ty Cobb , and as part of the transaction , a Providence pitcher was sent to the Tigers . To soothe Providence fans upset at losing a star , Lannin announced that the Red Sox would soon send a replacement to the Grays . This was intended to be Ruth , but his departure for Providence was delayed when Cincinnati Reds owner Garry Herrmann claimed him off waivers . After Lannin wrote to Herrmann explaining that the Red Sox wanted Ruth in Providence so he could develop as a player , and would not release him to a major league club , Herrmann allowed Ruth to be sent to the minors . Carrigan later stated that Ruth was not sent down to Providence to make him a better player , but to help the Grays win the International League pennant ( league championship ) . 
 Ruth joined the Grays on August 18 , 1914 . What was left of the Baltimore Orioles after Dunn 's deals had managed to hold on to first place until August 15 , after which they continued to fade , leaving the pennant race between Providence and Rochester . Ruth was deeply impressed by Providence manager " Wild Bill " Donovan , previously a star pitcher with a 25 – 4 win – loss record for Detroit in 1907 ; in later years , he credited Donovan with teaching him much about pitching . Ruth was called upon often to pitch , in one stretch starting ( and winning ) four games in eight days . On September 5 in Toronto , Ruth pitched a one @-@ hit 9 – 0 victory , and hit his first professional home run , his only one as a minor leaguer , off Ellis Johnson . Recalled to Boston after Providence finished the season in first place , he pitched and won a game for the Red Sox against the New York Yankees on October 2 , getting his first major league hit , a double . Ruth finished the season with a record of 2 – 1 as a major leaguer and 23 – 8 in the International League ( for Baltimore and Providence ) . Once the season concluded , Ruth married Helen in Ellicott City , Maryland . Creamer speculated that they did not marry in Baltimore , where the newlyweds boarded with George Ruth , Sr. , to avoid possible interference from those at St. Mary 's — both bride and groom were not yet of age and Ruth remained on parole from that institution until his 21st birthday . 
 Ruth reported to his first major league spring training in Hot Springs , Arkansas , in March 1915 . Despite a relatively successful first season , he was not slated to start regularly for the Red Sox , who had two stellar left @-@ handed pitchers already : the established stars Dutch Leonard , who had broken the record for the lowest earned run average ( ERA ) in a single season ; and Ray Collins , a 20 @-@ game winner in both 1913 and 1914 . Ruth was ineffective in his first start , taking the loss in the third game of the season . Injuries and ineffective pitching by other Boston pitchers gave Ruth another chance , and after some good relief appearances , Carrigan allowed Ruth another start , and he won a rain @-@ shortened seven inning game . Ten days later , the manager had him start against the New York Yankees at the Polo Grounds . Ruth took a 3 – 2 lead into the ninth , but lost the game 4 – 3 in 13 innings . Ruth , hitting ninth as was customary for pitchers , hit a massive home run into the upper deck in right field off of Jack Warhop . At the time , home runs were rare in baseball , and Ruth 's majestic shot awed the crowd . The winning pitcher , Warhop , would in August 1915 conclude a major league career of eight seasons , undistinguished but for being the first major league pitcher to give up a home run to Babe Ruth . 
 Carrigan was sufficiently impressed by Ruth 's pitching to give him a spot in the starting rotation . Ruth finished the 1915 season 18 – 8 as a pitcher ; as a hitter , he batted .315 and had four home runs . The Red Sox won the AL pennant , but with the pitching staff healthy , Ruth was not called upon to pitch in the 1915 World Series against the Philadelphia Phillies . Boston won in five games ; Ruth was used as a pinch hitter in Game Five , but grounded out against Phillies ace Grover Cleveland Alexander . Despite his success as a pitcher , Ruth was acquiring a reputation for long home runs ; at Sportsman 's Park against the St. Louis Browns , a Ruth hit soared over Grand Avenue , breaking the window of a Chevrolet dealership . 
 In 1916 , there was attention focused on Ruth for his pitching , as he engaged in repeated pitching duels with the ace of the Washington Senators , Walter Johnson . The two met five times during the season , with Ruth winning four and Johnson one ( Ruth had a no decision in Johnson 's victory ) . Two of Ruth 's victories were by the score of 1 – 0 , one in a 13 @-@ inning game . Of the 1 – 0 shutout decided without extra innings , AL President Ban Johnson stated , " That was one of the best ball games I have ever seen . " For the season , Ruth went 23 – 12 , with a 1 @.@ 75 ERA and nine shutouts , both of which led the league . Ruth 's nine shutouts in 1916 set a league record for left @-@ handers that would remain unmatched until Ron Guidry tied it in 1978 . The Red Sox won the pennant and World Series again , this time defeating the Brooklyn Superbas ( as the Dodgers were then known ) in five games . Ruth started and won Game 2 , 2 – 1 , in 14 innings . Until another game of that length was played in 2005 , this was the longest World Series game , and Ruth 's pitching performance is still the longest postseason complete game victory . 
 Carrigan retired as player and manager after 1916 , returning to his native Maine to be a businessman . Ruth , who played under four managers who are in the National Baseball Hall of Fame , always maintained that Carrigan , who is not enshrined there , was the best skipper he ever played for . There were other changes in the Red Sox organization that offseason , as Lannin sold the team to a three @-@ man group headed by New York theatrical promoter Harry Frazee . Jack Barry was hired by Frazee as manager . 
 = = = = Emergence as a hitter = = = = 
 Ruth went 24 – 13 with a 2 @.@ 01 ERA and six shutouts in 1917 , but the Sox finished in second place in the league , nine games behind the Chicago White Sox in the standings . On June 23 at Washington , Ruth made a memorable pitching start . When the home plate umpire ' Brick ' Owens called the first four pitches as balls , Ruth threw a punch at him , and was ejected from the game and later suspended for ten days and fined $ 100 . Ernie Shore was called in to relieve Ruth , and was allowed eight warm @-@ up pitches . The runner who had reached base on the walk was caught stealing , and Shore retired all 26 batters he faced to win the game . Shore 's feat was listed as a perfect game for many years ; in 1991 , Major League Baseball 's ( MLB ) Committee on Statistical Accuracy caused it to be listed as a combined no @-@ hitter . In 1917 , Ruth was used little as a batter , other than his plate appearances while pitching , and hit .325 with two home runs . 
 The entry of the United States into World War I occurred at the start of the season , and overshadowed the sport . Conscription was introduced in September 1917 , and most baseball players in the big leagues were of draft age . This included Barry , who was a player @-@ manager , and who joined the Naval Reserve in an attempt to avoid the draft , only to be called up after the 1917 season . Frazee hired International League President Ed Barrow as Red Sox manager . Barrow had spent the previous 30 years in a variety of baseball jobs , though he never played the game professionally . With the major leagues shorthanded due to the war , Barrow had many holes in the Red Sox lineup to fill . 
 Ruth also noticed these vacancies in the lineup , and , dissatisfied in the role of a pitcher who appeared every four or five days , wanted to play every day at another position . Barrow tried Ruth at first base and in the outfield during the exhibition season , but as the team moved towards Boston and the season opener , restricted him to pitching . At the time , Ruth was possibly the best left @-@ handed pitcher in baseball ; allowing him to play another position was an experiment that could have backfired . 
 Inexperienced as a manager , Barrow had player Harry Hooper advise him on baseball game strategy . Hooper urged his manager to allow Ruth to play another position when he was not pitching , arguing to Barrow , who had invested in the club , that the crowds were larger on days when Ruth played , as they were attracted by his hitting . Barrow gave in early in May ; Ruth promptly hit home runs in four consecutive games ( one an exhibition ) , the last off of Walter Johnson . For the first time in his career ( disregarding pinch @-@ hitting appearances ) , Ruth was allowed a place in the batting order higher than ninth . 
 Although Barrow predicted that Ruth would beg to return to pitching the first time he experienced a batting slump , that did not occur . Barrow used Ruth primarily as an outfielder in the war @-@ shortened 1918 season . Ruth hit .300 , with 11 home runs , enough to secure him a share of the major league home run title with Tillie Walker of the Philadelphia Athletics . He was still occasionally used as a pitcher , and had a 13 – 7 record with a 2 @.@ 22 ERA . 
 The Red Sox won their third pennant in four years , and faced the Chicago Cubs in the 1918 World Series , beginning on September 5 , the earliest in history . The season was shortened as the government had ruled that baseball players eligible for the military would have to be inducted or work in critical war industries , such as armaments plants . Ruth pitched Game One for the Red Sox , a 1 – 0 shutout . Before Game Four , Ruth injured his left hand in a fight ; he pitched anyway . He gave up seven hits and six walks , but was helped by outstanding fielding behind him and by his own batting efforts , as a fourth @-@ inning triple by Ruth gave his team a 2 – 0 lead . The Cubs tied the game in the eighth inning , but the Red Sox scored to take a 3 – 2 again in the bottom of that inning . After Ruth gave up a hit and a walk to start the ninth inning , he was relieved on the mound by Joe Bush . To keep Ruth and his bat in the game , he was sent to play left field . Bush retired the side to give Ruth his second win of the Series , and the third and last World Series pitching victory of his career , against no defeats , in three pitching appearances . Ruth 's effort gave his team a three @-@ games @-@ to @-@ one lead , and two days later the Red Sox won their third Series in four years , four games to two . Before allowing the Cubs to score in Game Four , Ruth pitched 29 2 ⁄ 3 consecutive scoreless innings , a record for the World Series that stood for more than 40 years until 1961 , broken by Whitey Ford after Ruth 's death . Ruth was prouder of that record than he was of any of his batting feats . 
 With the World Series over , Ruth gained exemption from the war draft by accepting a nominal position with a Pennsylvania steel mill . Many industrial establishments took pride in their baseball teams and sought to hire major leaguers . The end of the war in November set Ruth free to play baseball without such contrivances . 
 During the 1919 season , Ruth pitched in only 17 of his 130 games , compiling an 8 – 5 record as Barrow used him as a pitcher mostly in the early part of the season , when the Red Sox manager still had hopes of a second consecutive pennant . By late June , the Red Sox were clearly out of the race , and Barrow had no objection to Ruth concentrating on his hitting , if only because it drew people to the ballpark . Ruth had hit a home run against the Yankees on Opening Day , and another during a month @-@ long batting slump that soon followed . Relieved of his pitching duties , Ruth began an unprecedented spell of slugging home runs , which gave him widespread public and press attention . Even his failures were seen as majestic — one sportswriter noted , " When Ruth misses a swipe at the ball , the stands quiver " . 
 Two home runs by Ruth on July 5 , and one in each of two consecutive games a week later , raised his season total to 11 , tying his career best from 1918 . The first record to fall was the AL single @-@ season mark of 16 , set by Ralph " Socks " <unk> in 1902 . Ruth matched that on July 29 , then pulled ahead toward the major league record of 24 , set by Buck Freeman in 1899 . Ruth reached this on September 8 , by which time , writers had discovered that Ned Williamson of the 1884 Chicago White Stockings had hit 27 — though in a ballpark where the distance to right field was only 215 feet ( 66 m ) . On September 20 , " Babe Ruth Day " at Fenway Park , Ruth won the game with a home run in the bottom of the ninth inning , tying Williamson . He broke the record four days later against the Yankees at the Polo Grounds , and hit one more against the Senators to finish with 29 . The home run at Washington made Ruth the first major league player to hit a home run at all eight ballparks in his league . In spite of Ruth 's hitting heroics , the Red Sox finished sixth , 20 1 ⁄ 2 games behind the league champion White Sox . 
 = = = Sale to New York = = = 
 As an out @-@ of @-@ <unk> from New York City , Frazee had been regarded with suspicion by Boston 's sportswriters and baseball fans when he bought the team . He won them over with success on the field and a willingness to build the Red Sox by purchasing or trading for players . He offered the Senators $ 60 @,@ 000 for Walter Johnson , but Washington owner Clark Griffith was unwilling . Even so , Frazee was successful in bringing other players to Boston , especially as replacements for players in the military . This willingness to spend for players helped the Red Sox secure the 1918 title . The 1919 season saw record @-@ breaking attendance , and Ruth 's home runs for Boston made him a national sensation . In March 1919 Ruth was reported as having accepted a three @-@ year contract for a total of $ 27 @,@ 000 , after protracted negotiations Nevertheless , on December 26 , 1919 , Frazee sold Ruth 's contract to the New York Yankees . 
 Not all of the circumstances concerning the sale are known , but brewer and former congressman Jacob Ruppert , the New York team 's principal owner , reportedly asked Yankee manager Miller Huggins what the team needed to be successful . " Get Ruth from Boston " , Huggins supposedly replied , noting that Frazee was perennially in need of money to finance his theatrical productions . In any event , there was precedent for the Ruth transaction : when Boston pitcher Carl Mays left the Red Sox in a 1919 dispute , Frazee had settled the matter by selling Mays to the Yankees , though over the opposition of AL President Johnson . 
 According to one of Ruth 's biographers , Jim Reisler , " why Frazee needed cash in 1919 — and large infusions of it quickly — is still , more than 80 years later , a bit of a mystery " . The often @-@ told story is that Frazee needed money to finance the musical No , No , Nanette , which was a Broadway hit and brought Frazee financial security . That play did not open until 1925 , however , by which time Frazee had sold the Red Sox . Still , the story may be true in essence : No , No , Nanette was based on a Frazee @-@ produced play , My Lady Friends , which opened in 1919 . 
 There were other financial pressures on Frazee , despite his team 's success . Ruth , fully aware of baseball 's popularity and his role in it , wanted to renegotiate his contract , signed before the 1919 season for $ 10 @,@ 000 per year through 1921 . He demanded that his salary be doubled , or he would sit out the season and cash in on his popularity through other ventures . Ruth 's salary demands were causing other players to ask for more money . Additionally , Frazee still owed Lannin as much as $ 125 @,@ 000 from the purchase of the club . 
 Although Ruppert and his co @-@ owner , Colonel Tillinghast Huston , were both wealthy , and had aggressively purchased and traded for players in 1918 and 1919 to build a winning team , Ruppert faced losses in his brewing interests as Prohibition was implemented , and if their team left the Polo Grounds , where the Yankees were the tenants of the New York Giants , building a stadium in New York would be expensive . Nevertheless , when Frazee , who moved in the same social circles as Huston , hinted to the colonel that Ruth was available for the right price , the Yankees owners quickly pursued the purchase . 
 Frazee sold the rights to Babe Ruth for $ 100 @,@ 000 , the largest sum ever paid for a baseball player . The deal also involved a $ 350 @,@ 000 loan from Ruppert to Frazee , secured by a mortgage on Fenway Park . Once it was agreed , Frazee informed Barrow , who , stunned , told the owner that he was getting the worse end of the bargain . Cynics have suggested that Barrow may have played a larger role in the Ruth sale , as less than a year after , he became the Yankee general manager , and in the following years made a number of purchases of Red Sox players from Frazee . The $ 100 @,@ 000 price included $ 25 @,@ 000 in cash , and notes for the same amount due November 1 in 1920 , 1921 , and 1922 ; Ruppert and Huston assisted Frazee in selling the notes to banks for immediate cash . 
 The transaction was contingent on Ruth signing a new contract , which was quickly accomplished — Ruth agreed to fulfill the remaining two years on his contract , but was given a $ 20 @,@ 000 bonus , payable over two seasons . The deal was announced on January 6 , 1920 . Reaction in Boston was mixed : some fans were embittered at the loss of Ruth ; others conceded that the slugger had become difficult to deal with . The New York Times suggested presciently , " The short right field wall at the Polo Grounds should prove an easy target for Ruth next season and , playing seventy @-@ seven games at home , it would not be surprising if Ruth surpassed his home run record of twenty @-@ nine circuit <unk> next Summer . " According to Reisler , " The Yankees had pulled off the sports steal of the century . " 
 According to Marty Appel in his history of the Yankees , the transaction , " changed the fortunes of two high @-@ profile franchises for decades " . The Red Sox , winners of five of the first sixteen World Series , those played between 1903 and 1919 , would not win another pennant until 1946 , or another World Series until 2004 , a drought attributed in baseball superstition to Frazee 's sale of Ruth and sometimes dubbed the " Curse of the Bambino " . The Yankees , on the other hand , had not won the AL championship prior to their acquisition of Ruth . They won seven AL pennants and four World Series with Ruth , and lead baseball with 40 pennants and 27 World Series titles in their history . 
 = = = New York Yankees ( 1920 – 34 ) = = = 
 = = = = Initial success ( 1920 – 23 ) = = = = 
 As a Yankee , Ruth 's transition from a pitcher to a power @-@ hitting outfielder became complete . In his fifteen @-@ season Yankee career , consisting of over 2 @,@ 000 games , Ruth broke many batting records , while making only five widely scattered appearances on the mound , winning all of them . 
 At the end of April 1920 , the Yankees were 4 – 7 , with the Red Sox leading the league with a 10 – 2 mark . Ruth had done little , having injured himself swinging the bat . Both situations began to change on May 1 , when Ruth hit a home run with the ball going completely out of the Polo Grounds , a feat believed only to have been previously accomplished by Shoeless Joe Jackson . The Yankees won , 6 – 0 , taking three out of four from the Red Sox . Ruth hit his second home run on May 2 , and by the end of the month had set a major league record for home runs in a month with 11 , and promptly broke it with 13 in June . Fans responded with record attendance : on May 16 , Ruth and the Yankees drew 38 @,@ 600 to the Polo Grounds , a record for the ballpark , and 15 @,@ 000 fans were turned away . Large crowds jammed stadiums to see Ruth play when the Yankees were on the road . 
 The home runs kept coming ; Ruth tied his own record of 29 on July 15 , and broke it with home runs in both games of a doubleheader four days later . By the end of July , he had 37 , but his pace slackened somewhat after that . Nevertheless , on September 4 , he both tied and broke the organized baseball record for home runs in a season , snapping Perry <unk> 's 1895 mark of 44 in the minor Western League . The Yankees played well as a team , battling for the league lead early in the summer , but slumped in August in the AL pennant battle with Chicago and Cleveland . The championship was won by Cleveland , surging ahead after the Black Sox Scandal broke on September 28 and led to the suspension of many of the team 's top players , including Joe Jackson . The Yankees finished third , but drew 1 @.@ 2 million fans to the Polo Grounds , the first time a team had drawn a seven figure attendance . The rest of the league sold 600 @,@ 000 more tickets , many fans there to see Ruth , who led the league with 54 home runs , 158 runs , and 137 runs batted in ( RBIs ) . 
 Ruth was aided in his exploits , in 1920 and afterwards , by the fact that the A.J. Reach Company , maker of baseballs used in the major leagues , was using a more efficient machine to wind the yarn found within the baseball . When these went into play in 1920 , the start of the live @-@ ball era , the number of home runs increased by 184 over the previous year across the major leagues . Baseball statistician Bill James points out that while Ruth was likely aided by the change in the baseball , there were other factors at work , including the gradual abolition of the spitball ( accelerated after the death of Ray Chapman , struck by a pitched ball thrown by Mays in August 1920 ) and the more frequent use of new baseballs ( also a response to Chapman 's death ) . Nevertheless , James theorizes that Ruth 's 1920 explosion might have happened in 1919 , had a full season of 154 games been played rather than 140 , had Ruth refrained from pitching 133 innings that season , and if he were playing with any other home field but Fenway Park , where he hit only 9 of 29 home runs . 
 Yankees business manager Harry Sparrow had died early in the 1920 season ; to replace him , Ruppert and Huston hired Barrow . Ruppert and Barrow quickly made a deal with Frazee for New York to acquire some of the players who would be mainstays of the early Yankee pennant @-@ winning teams , including catcher Wally Schang and pitcher Waite Hoyt . The 21 @-@ year @-@ old Hoyt became close to Ruth : 
 The outrageous life fascinated Hoyt , the don 't @-@ give @-@ a @-@ shit freedom of it , the nonstop , pell @-@ mell charge into excess . How did a man drink so much and never get drunk ? ... The puzzle of Babe Ruth never was dull , no matter how many times Hoyt picked up the pieces and stared at them . After games he would follow the crowd to the Babe 's suite . No matter what the town , the beer would be iced and the bottles would fill the bathtub . 
 Ruth hit home runs early and often in the 1921 season , during which he broke Roger Connor 's mark for home runs in a career , 138 . Each of the almost 600 home runs Ruth hit in his career after that extended his own record . After a slow start , the Yankees were soon locked in a tight pennant race with Cleveland , winners of the 1920 World Series . On September 15 , Ruth hit his 55th home run , shattering his year @-@ old single season record . In late September , the Yankees visited Cleveland and won three out of four games , giving them the upper hand in the race , and clinched their first pennant a few days later . Ruth finished the regular season with 59 home runs , batting .378 and with a slugging percentage of .846 . 
 The Yankees had high expectations when they met the New York Giants in the 1921 World Series , and the Yankees won the first two games with Ruth in the lineup . However , Ruth badly scraped his elbow during Game 2 , sliding into third base ( he had walked and stolen both second and third bases ) . After the game , he was told by the team physician not to play the rest of the series . Despite this advice , he did play in the next three games , and pinch @-@ hit in Game Eight of the best @-@ of @-@ nine series , but the Yankees lost , five games to three . Ruth hit .316 , drove in five runs and hit his first World Series home run . 
 After the Series , Ruth and teammates Bob Meusel and Bill Piercy participated in a barnstorming tour in the Northeast . A rule then in force prohibited World Series participants from playing in exhibition games during the offseason , the purpose being to prevent Series participants from replicating the Series and undermining its value . Baseball Commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis suspended the trio until May 20 , 1922 , and fined them their 1921 World Series checks . In August 1922 , the rule was changed to allow limited barnstorming for World Series participants , with Landis 's permission required . 
 On March 6 , 1922 , Ruth signed a new contract , for three years at $ 52 @,@ 000 a year . The largest sum ever paid a ballplayer to that point , it represented 40 % of the team 's player payroll . Despite his suspension , Ruth was named the Yankees ' new on @-@ field captain prior to the 1922 season . During the suspension , he worked out with the team in the morning , and played exhibition games with the Yankees on their off days . He and Meusel returned on May 20 , to a sellout crowd at the Polo Grounds , but Ruth batted 0 @-@ for @-@ 4 , and was booed . On May 25 , he was thrown out of the game for throwing dust in umpire George Hildebrand 's face , then climbed into the stands to confront a heckler . Ban Johnson ordered him fined , suspended , and stripped of his captaincy . In his shortened season , Ruth appeared in 110 games , batted .315 , with 35 home runs , and drove in 99 runs , but compared to his previous two dominating years , the 1922 season was a disappointment . Despite Ruth 's off @-@ year , Yankees managed to win the pennant to face the New York Giants for the second straight year in the World Series . In the Series , Giants manager John McGraw instructed his pitchers to throw him nothing but curveballs , and Ruth never adjusted . Ruth had just two hits in seventeen at bats , and the Yankees lost to the Giants for the second straight year , by 4 – 0 ( with one tie game ) . Sportswriter Joe Vila called him , " an exploded phenomenon " . 
 After the season , Ruth was a guest at an Elks Club banquet , set up by Ruth 's agent with Yankee team support . There , each speaker , concluding with future New York mayor Jimmy Walker , censured him for his poor behavior . An emotional Ruth promised reform , and , to the surprise of many , followed through . When he reported to spring training , he was in his best shape as a Yankee , weighing only 210 pounds ( 95 kg ) . 
 The Yankees 's status as tenants of the Giants at the Polo Grounds had become increasingly uneasy , and in 1922 Giants owner Charles Stoneham stated that the Yankees 's lease , expiring after that season , would not be renewed . Ruppert and Huston had long contemplated a new stadium , and had taken an option on property at 161st Street and River Avenue in the Bronx . Yankee Stadium was completed in time for the home opener on April 18 , 1923 , at which the Babe hit the first home run in what was quickly dubbed " the House that Ruth Built " . The ballpark was designed with Ruth in mind : although the venue 's left @-@ field fence was further from home plate than at the Polo Grounds , Yankee Stadium 's right @-@ field fence was closer , making home runs easier to hit for left @-@ handed batters . To spare Ruth 's eyes , right field – his defensive position – was not pointed into the afternoon sun , as was traditional ; left fielder Meusel was soon suffering headaches from squinting toward home plate . 
 The Yankees were never challenged , leading the league for most of the 1923 season and winning the AL pennant by 17 games . Ruth finished the season with a career @-@ high .393 batting average and major @-@ league leading 41 home runs ( tied with Cy Williams ) . Another career high for Ruth in 1923 was his 45 doubles , and he reached base 379 times , then a major league record . For the third straight year , the Yankees faced the Giants in the World Series , which Ruth dominated . He batted .368 , walked eight times , scored eight runs , hit three home runs and slugged 1 @.@ 000 during the series , as the Yankees won their first World Series championship , four games to two . 
 = = = = Batting title and " bellyache " ( 1924 – 25 ) = = = = 
 In 1924 , the Yankees were favored to become the first team to win four consecutive pennants . Plagued by injuries , they found themselves in a battle with the Senators . Although the Yankees won 18 of 22 at one point in September , the Senators beat out the Yankees by two games . Ruth hit .378 , winning his only AL batting title , with a league @-@ leading 46 home runs . 
 Ruth had kept up his efforts to stay in shape in 1923 and 1924 , but by early 1925 weighed nearly 260 pounds ( 120 kg ) . His annual visit to Hot Springs , Arkansas , where he exercised and took saunas early in the year , did him no good as he spent much of the time carousing in the resort town . He became ill while there , and suffered relapses during spring training . Ruth collapsed in Asheville , North Carolina , as the team journeyed north . He was put on a train for New York , where he was briefly hospitalized . A rumor circulated that he had died , prompting British newspapers to print a premature obituary . In New York , Ruth collapsed again and was found unconscious in his hotel bathroom . He was taken to a hospital where he suffered multiple convulsions . After sportswriter W. O. McGeehan wrote that Ruth 's illness was due to binging on hot dogs and soda pop before a game , it became known as " the bellyache heard ' round the world " . However , the exact cause of his ailment has never been confirmed and remains a mystery . Glenn Stout , in his history of the Yankees , notes that the Ruth legend is " still one of the most sheltered in sports " ; he suggests that alcohol was at the root of Ruth 's illness , pointing to the fact that Ruth remained six weeks at St. Vincent 's Hospital but was allowed to leave , under supervision , for workouts with the team for part of that time . He concludes that the hospitalization was behavior @-@ related . Playing just 98 games , Ruth had his worst season as a Yankee ; he finished with a .290 average and 25 home runs . The Yankees finished next to last in the AL with a 69 – 85 record , their last season with a losing record until 1965 . 
 = = = = Murderer 's Row ( 1926 – 28 ) = = = = 
 Ruth spent part of the offseason of 1925 – 26 working out at Artie McGovern 's gym , getting back into shape . Barrow and Huggins had rebuilt the team , surrounding the veteran core with good young players like Tony Lazzeri and Lou Gehrig . But New York was not expected to win the pennant . 
 Babe Ruth returned to his normal production during 1926 , batting .372 with 47 home runs and 146 RBIs . The Yankees built a ten @-@ game lead by mid @-@ June , and coasted to win the pennant by three games . The St. Louis Cardinals had won the National League with the lowest winning percentage for a pennant winner to that point ( <unk> ) and the Yankees were expected to win the World Series easily . Although the Yankees won the opener in New York , St. Louis took Games Two and Three . In Game Four , Ruth hit three home runs , the first time this had been done in a World Series game , to lead the Yankees to victory ; in the fifth game Ruth caught a ball as he crashed into the fence , described by baseball writers as a defensive gem . New York took that game , but Grover Cleveland Alexander won Game Six for St. Louis to tie the Series at three games each , then got very drunk . He was nevertheless inserted into Game Seven in the seventh inning and shut down the Yankees to win the game , 3 – 2 , and win the Series . Ruth had hit his fourth home run of the Series earlier in the game , and was the only Yankee to reach base off Alexander , walking in the ninth inning before being caught stealing to end the game . Although Ruth 's attempt to steal second is often deemed a baserunning blunder , Creamer pointed out that the Yankees ' chances of tying the game would have been greatly improved with a runner in scoring position . 
 The 1926 Series was also known for Ruth 's promise to Johnny Sylvester , a hospitalized 11 @-@ year @-@ old , that he would hit a home run on his behalf . Sylvester had been injured in a fall from a horse , and a friend of Sylvester 's father gave the boy two autographed baseballs signed by Yankees and Cardinals , and relayed a promise from Ruth , who did not know the boy , to hit a home run for him . After the Series , Ruth visited the boy in the hospital . When the matter became public , the press greatly inflated it , and by some accounts , Ruth saved a dying boy 's life by visiting him , emotionally promising to hit a home run , and doing so . 
 The 1927 New York Yankees team is considered one of the greatest squads that ever took the field . Known as Murderer 's Row because of the power of its lineup , the team won a then @-@ AL @-@ record 110 games , and took the AL pennant by 19 games , clinching first place on Labor Day . With little suspense as to the pennant race , the nation 's attention turned to Ruth 's pursuit of his own single @-@ season home run record of 59 . He was not alone in this chase : Gehrig proved to be a slugger capable of challenging Ruth for his home run crown , tying Ruth with 24 home runs late in June . Through July and August , they were never separated by more than two home runs . Gehrig took the lead , 45 – 44 , in the first game of a doubleheader at Fenway Park early in September ; Ruth responded with two of his own to take the lead , as it proved permanently — Gehrig finished with 47 . Even so , as of September 6 , Ruth was still several games off his 1921 pace , and going into the final series against the Senators , had only 57 . He hit two in the first game of the series , including one off of Paul Hopkins , facing his first major league batter , to tie the record . The following day , September 30 , he broke it with his 60th homer , in the eighth inning off Tom Zachary to break a 2 – 2 tie . " Sixty ! Let 's see some son of a bitch try to top that one " , Ruth exulted after the game . In addition to his career @-@ high 60 home runs , Ruth batted .356 , drove in 164 runs and slugged <unk> . In the 1927 World Series , the Yankees swept the Pittsburgh Pirates in four games ; the National Leaguers were disheartened after watching the Yankees take batting practice before Game One , with ball after ball leaving Forbes Field . According to Appel , " The 1927 New York Yankees . Even today , the words inspire awe ... all baseball success is measured against the ' 27 team . " 
 Before the 1928 season , Ruth signed a new contract for an unprecedented $ 80 @,@ 000 per year . The season started off well for the Yankees , who led the league in the early going . But the Yankees were plagued by injuries , erratic pitching and inconsistent play . The Philadelphia Athletics , rebuilding after some lean years , erased the Yankees ' big lead and even took over first place briefly in early September . The Yankees , however , regained first place when they beat the Athletics three out of four games in a pivotal series at Yankee Stadium later that month , and clinched the pennant in the final weekend of the season . Ruth 's play in 1928 mirrored his team 's performance . He got off to a hot start and on August 1 , he had 42 home runs . This put him ahead of his 60 home run pace from the previous season . He then slumped for the latter part of the season , and he hit just twelve home runs in the last two months . Ruth 's batting average also fell to .323 , well below his career average . Nevertheless , he ended the season with 54 home runs . The Yankees swept the favored Cardinals in four games in the World Series , with Ruth batting .625 and hitting three home runs in Game Four , including one off Alexander . 
 = = = = " Called shot " and final Yankee years ( 1929 – 34 ) = = = = 
 Before the 1929 season , Ruppert , who had bought out Huston in 1923 , announced that the Yankees would wear uniform numbers to allow fans at cavernous Yankee Stadium to tell one player from another . The Cardinals and Indians had each experimented with uniform numbers ; the Yankees were the first to use them on both home and away uniforms . As Ruth batted third , he was given number 3 . According to a long @-@ standing baseball legend , the Yankees adopted their now @-@ iconic pinstriped uniforms in hopes of making Ruth look slimmer . In truth , though , they had been wearing pinstripes since Ruppert bought the team in 1915 . 
 Although the Yankees started well , the Athletics soon proved they were the better team in 1929 , splitting two series with the Yankees in the first month of the season , then taking advantage of a Yankee losing streak in mid @-@ May to gain first place . Although Ruth performed well , the Yankees were not able to catch the Athletics — Connie Mack had built another great team . Tragedy struck the Yankees late in the year as manager Huggins died of erysipelas , a bacterial skin infection , on September 25 , only ten days after he had last led the team . Despite past differences , Ruth praised Huggins and described him as a " great guy " . The Yankees finished second , 18 games behind the Athletics . Ruth hit .345 during the season , with 46 home runs and 154 RBIs . 
 The Yankees hired Bob Shawkey as manager , their fourth choice . Ruth <unk> for the job of player @-@ manager , but was not seriously considered by Ruppert and Barrow ; Stout deems this the first hint Ruth would have no future with the Yankees once he was done as a player . Shawkey , a former Yankees player and teammate of Ruth , was unable to command the slugger 's respect . The Athletics won their second consecutive pennant and World Series , as the Yankees finished in third place , sixteen games back . During that season Ruth was asked by a reporter what he thought of his yearly salary of $ 80 @,@ 000 being more than President Hoover 's $ 75 @,@ 000 . His response was , " I know , but I had a better year than Hoover . " In 1930 , Ruth hit .359 with 49 home runs ( his best in his years after 1928 ) and 153 RBIs , and pitched his first game in nine years , a complete game victory . At the end of the season , Shawkey was fired and replaced with Cubs manager Joe McCarthy , though Ruth again unsuccessfully sought the job . 
 McCarthy was a disciplinarian , but chose not to interfere with Ruth , and the slugger for his part did not seek conflict with the manager . The team improved in 1931 , but was no match for the Athletics , who won 107 games , 13 1 ⁄ 2 games in front of the Yankees . Ruth , for his part , hit .373 , with 46 home runs and 163 RBIs . He had 31 doubles , his most since 1924 . In the 1932 season , the Yankees went 107 – 47 and won the pennant . Ruth 's effectiveness had decreased somewhat , but he still hit .341 with 41 home runs and 137 RBIs . Nevertheless , he twice was sidelined due to injury during the season . 
 The Yankees faced the Cubs , McCarthy 's former team , in the 1932 World Series . There was bad blood between the two teams as the Yankees resented the Cubs only awarding half a World Series share to Mark Koenig , a former Yankee . The games at Yankee Stadium had not been sellouts ; both were won by the home team , with Ruth collecting two singles , but scoring four runs as he was walked four times by the Cubs pitchers . In Chicago , Ruth was resentful at the hostile crowds that met the Yankees 's train and jeered them at the hotel . The crowd for Game Three included New York Governor Franklin D. Roosevelt , the Democratic candidate for president , who sat with Chicago Mayor Anton Cermak . Many in the crowd threw lemons at Ruth , a sign of derision , and others ( as well as the Cubs themselves ) shouted abuse at Ruth and other Yankees . They were briefly silenced when Ruth hit a three @-@ run home run off Charlie Root in the first inning , but soon revived , and the Cubs tied the score at 4 – 4 in the fourth inning . When Ruth came to the plate in the top of the fifth , the Chicago crowd and players , led by pitcher Guy Bush , were screaming insults at Ruth . With the count at two balls and one strike , Ruth gestured , possibly in the direction of center field , and after the next pitch ( a strike ) , may have pointed there with one hand . Ruth hit the fifth pitch over the center field fence ; estimates were that it traveled nearly 500 feet ( 150 m ) . Whether or not Ruth intended to indicate where he planned to ( and did ) hit the ball , the incident has gone down in legend as Babe Ruth 's called shot . The Yankees won Game Three , and the following day clinched the Series with another victory . During that game , Bush hit Ruth on the arm with a pitch , causing words to be exchanged and provoking a game @-@ winning Yankee rally . 
 Ruth remained productive in 1933 , as he batted .301 , with 34 home runs , 103 RBIs , and a league @-@ leading 114 walks , as the Yankees finished second , seven games behind the Senators . He was selected to play right field by Athletics manager Connie Mack in the first Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game , held on July 6 , 1933 , at Comiskey Park in Chicago . He hit the first home run in the All @-@ Star Game 's history , a two @-@ run blast against Bill Hallahan during the third inning , which helped the AL win the game 4 – 2 . During the final game of the 1933 season , as a publicity stunt organized by his team , Ruth was called upon and pitched a complete game victory against the Red Sox , his final appearance as a pitcher . Despite unremarkable pitching numbers , Ruth had a 5 – 0 record in five games for the Yankees , raising his career totals to 94 – 46 . 
 In 1934 , Ruth played in his last full season . By this time , years of high living were starting to catch up with him . His conditioning had deteriorated to the point that he could no longer field or run . He accepted a pay cut from Ruppert to $ 35 @,@ 000 , but was still the highest @-@ paid player in the major leagues . He could still handle a bat , recording a .288 batting average with 22 home runs , statistics Reisler described as " merely mortal " . Ruth was selected to the AL All @-@ Star team for the second consecutive year . During the game , New York Giants pitcher Carl Hubbell struck out Ruth and four other future Hall @-@ of @-@ Famers consecutively . The Yankees finished second again , seven games behind the Tigers . 
 = = = Boston Braves ( 1935 ) = = = 
 Although Ruth knew he was nearly finished as a player , he desired to remain in baseball as a manager . He was often spoken of as a possible candidate as managerial jobs opened up , but in 1932 , when he was mentioned as a contender for the Red Sox position , Ruth stated that he was not yet ready to leave the field . There were rumors that Ruth was a likely candidate each time when the Cleveland Indians , Cincinnati Reds , and Detroit Tigers were looking for a manager , but nothing came of them . 
 Just before the 1934 season , Ruppert offered to make Ruth the manager of the Yankees ' top minor @-@ league team , the Newark Bears , but he was talked out of it by his wife , Claire , and his business manager , Christy Walsh . Shortly afterward , Tigers owner Frank Navin made a proposal to Ruppert and Barrow — if the Yankees traded Ruth to Detroit , Navin would name Ruth player @-@ manager . Navin believed Ruth would not only bring a winning attitude to a team that had not finished higher than third since 1923 , but would also revive the Tigers ' sagging attendance figures . Navin asked Ruth to come to Detroit for an interview . However , Ruth balked , since Walsh had already arranged for him to take part in a celebrity golf tournament in Hawaii . Ruth and Navin negotiated over the phone while Ruth was in Hawaii , but those talks foundered when Navin refused to give Ruth a portion of the Tigers ' box office proceeds . 
 Early in the 1934 season , Ruth began openly campaigning to become manager of the Yankees . However , the Yankee job was never a serious possibility . Ruppert always supported McCarthy , who would remain in his position for another 12 seasons . Ruth and McCarthy 's relationship had been lukewarm at best , and Ruth 's managerial ambitions further chilled their relations . By the end of the season , Ruth hinted that he would retire unless Ruppert named him manager of the Yankees . For his part , Ruppert wanted his slugger to leave the team without drama and hard feelings when the time came . 
 During the 1934 – 35 offseason , Ruth circled the world with his wife , including a barnstorming tour of the Far East . At his final stop before returning home , in the United Kingdom , Ruth was introduced to cricket by Australian player Alan Fairfax , and after having little luck in a cricketer 's stance , stood as a baseball batter and launched some massive shots around the field , destroying the bat in the process . Although Fairfax regretted that he could not have the time to make Ruth a cricket player , Ruth had lost any interest in such a career upon learning that the best batsmen made only about $ 40 per week . 
 Also during the offseason , Ruppert had been sounding out the other clubs in hopes of finding one that would be willing to take Ruth as a manager and / or a player . However , the only serious offer came from Athletics owner @-@ manager Connie Mack , who gave some thought to stepping down as manager in favor of Ruth . However , Mack later dropped the idea , saying that Ruth 's wife would be running the team in a month if Ruth ever took over . 
 While the barnstorming tour was under way , Ruppert began negotiating with Boston Braves owner Judge Emil Fuchs , who wanted Ruth as a gate attraction . Although the Braves had enjoyed modest recent success , finishing fourth in the National League in both 1933 and 1934 , the team performed poorly at the box office . Unable to afford the rent at Braves Field , Fuchs had considered holding dog races there when the Braves were not at home , only to be turned down by Landis . After a series of phone calls , letters , and meetings , the Yankees traded Ruth to the Braves on February 26 , 1935 . Ruppert had stated that he would not release Ruth to go to another team as a full @-@ time player . For this reason , it was announced that Ruth would become a team vice president and would be consulted on all club transactions , in addition to playing . He was also made assistant manager to Braves skipper Bill McKechnie . In a long letter to Ruth a few days before the press conference , Fuchs promised Ruth a share in the Braves ' profits , with the possibility of becoming co @-@ owner of the team . Fuchs also raised the possibility of Ruth succeeding McKechnie as manager , perhaps as early as 1936 . Ruppert called the deal " the greatest opportunity Ruth ever had " . 
 There was considerable attention as Ruth reported for spring training . He did not hit his first home run of the spring until after the team had left Florida , and was beginning the road north in Savannah . He hit two in an exhibition against the Bears . Amid much press attention , Ruth played his first home game in Boston in over 16 years . Before an opening @-@ day crowd of over 25 @,@ 000 , including five of New England 's six state governors , Ruth accounted for all of the Braves ' runs in a 4 – 2 defeat of the New York Giants , hitting a two @-@ run home run , singling to drive in a third run and later in the inning scoring the fourth . Although age and weight had slowed him , he made a running catch in left field that sportswriters deemed the defensive highlight of the game . 
 Ruth had two hits in the second game of the season , but it quickly went downhill both for him and the Braves from there . The season soon settled down to a routine of Ruth performing poorly on the few occasions he even played at all , and the Braves losing most games . As April passed into May , Ruth 's deterioration became even more pronounced . While he remained productive at the plate early on , he could do little else . His condition had deteriorated to the point that he could barely trot around the bases . His fielding had become so poor that three Braves pitchers told McKechnie that they would not take the mound if he was in the lineup . Before long , Ruth stopped hitting as well . He grew increasingly annoyed that McKechnie ignored most of his advice . For his part , McKechnie later said that Ruth 's huge salary and refusal to stay with the team while on the road made it nearly impossible to enforce discipline . 
 Ruth soon realized that Fuchs had deceived him , and had no intention of making him manager or giving him any significant off @-@ field duties . He later stated that his only duties as vice president consisted of making public appearances and autographing tickets . Ruth also found out that far from giving him a share of the profits , Fuchs wanted him to invest some of his money in the team in a last @-@ ditch effort to improve its balance sheet . As it turned out , both Fuchs and Ruppert had known all along that Ruth 's non @-@ playing positions were meaningless . 
 By the end of the first month of the season , Ruth concluded he was finished even as a part @-@ time player . As early as May 12 , he asked Fuchs to let him retire . Ultimately , Fuchs persuaded Ruth to remain at least until after the Memorial Day doubleheader in Philadelphia . In the interim was a western road trip , at which the rival teams had scheduled days to honor him . In Chicago and St. Louis , Ruth performed poorly , and his batting average sank to .155 , with only three home runs . In the first two games in Pittsburgh , Ruth had only one hit , though a long fly caught by Paul <unk> probably would have been a home run in any other ballpark besides Forbes Field . 
 Ruth played in the third game of the Pittsburgh series on May 25 , 1935 , and added one more tale to his playing legend . Ruth went 4 @-@ for @-@ 4 , including three home runs , though the Braves lost the game 11 – 7 . The last two were off Ruth 's old Cubs nemesis , Guy Bush . The final home run , both of the game and of Ruth 's career , sailed over the upper deck in right field and out of the ballpark , the first time anyone had hit a fair ball completely out of Forbes Field . Ruth was urged to make this his last game , but he had given his word to Fuchs and played in Cincinnati and Philadelphia . The first game of the doubleheader in Philadelphia — the Braves lost both — was his final major league appearance . On June 2 , after an argument with Fuchs , Ruth retired . He finished 1935 with a .181 average — easily his worst as a full @-@ time position player — and the final six of his 714 home runs . The Braves , 10 – 27 when Ruth left , finished 38 – 115 , at .248 the worst winning percentage in modern National League history . Insolvent like his team , Fuchs gave up control of the Braves before the end of the season ; the National League took over the franchise at the end of the year . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 = = = 1935 – 46 = = = 
 Although Fuchs had given Ruth his unconditional release , no major league team expressed an interest in hiring him in any capacity . Ruth still hoped to be hired as a manager if he could not play anymore , but only one managerial position , Cleveland , became available between Ruth 's retirement and the end of the 1937 season . Asked if he had considered Ruth for the job , Indians owner Alva Bradley replied negatively . 
 The writer Creamer believed Ruth was unfairly treated in never being given an opportunity to manage a major league club . The author believed there was not necessarily a relationship between personal conduct and managerial success , noting that McGraw , Billy Martin , and Bobby Valentine were winners despite character flaws . Team owners and general managers assessed Ruth 's flamboyant personal habits as a reason to exclude him from a managerial job ; Barrow said of him , " How can he manage other men when he can 't even manage himself ? " 
 Ruth played much golf and in a few exhibition baseball games , demonstrating a continuing ability to draw large crowds . This appeal contributed to the Dodgers hiring him as first base coach in 1938 . But Brooklyn general manager Larry MacPhail made it clear when Ruth was hired that he would not be considered for the manager 's job if , as expected , Burleigh Grimes retired at the end of the season . Although much was said about what Ruth could teach the younger players , in practice , his duties were to appear on the field in uniform and encourage base runners — he was not called upon to relay signs . He got along well with everyone except team captain Leo Durocher , who was hired as Grimes ' replacement at season 's end . Ruth returned to retirement , never again to work in baseball . 
 On July 4 , 1939 , Ruth spoke on Lou Gehrig Appreciation Day at Yankee Stadium as members of the 1927 Yankees and a sellout crowd turned out to honor the first baseman , forced into premature retirement by ALS disease , which would kill him in two years . The next week , Ruth went to Cooperstown , New York , for the formal opening of the Baseball Hall of Fame . Three years earlier he was one of the first five players elected to it . As radio broadcasts of baseball became popular , Ruth sought a job in that field , arguing that his celebrity and knowledge of baseball would assure large audiences , but he received no offers . During World War II , he made many personal appearances to advance the war effort , including his last appearance as a player at Yankee Stadium , in a 1943 exhibition for the Army – Navy Relief Fund . He hit a long fly ball off Walter Johnson ; the blast left the field , curving foul , but Ruth circled the bases anyway . In 1946 , he made a final effort to gain a job in baseball , contacting new Yankees boss MacPhail , but was sent a rejection letter . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Ruth met Helen Woodford ( 1897 – 1929 ) , by some accounts , in a coffee shop in Boston where she was a waitress , and they were married on October 17 , 1914 ; he was 19 and she was 17 . They adopted a daughter , Dorothy ( 1921 – 1989 ) , in 1921 . Ruth and Helen separated around 1925 , reportedly due to his repeated infidelities . Their last public appearance together came during the 1926 World Series . Helen died in January 1929 at age 31 in a house fire in Watertown , Massachusetts , in a house owned by Edward Kinder , a dentist with whom she had been living as " Mrs. Kinder " . In her book , My Dad , the Babe , Dorothy claimed that she was Ruth 's biological child by a mistress named Juanita Jennings . She died in 1989 . 
 On April 17 , 1929 , only three months after the death of his first wife , Ruth married actress and model Claire Merritt Hodgson ( 1897 – 1976 ) and adopted her daughter Julia ; he was 34 and she was 31 . It was the second and final marriage for both parties . By one account , Julia and Dorothy were , through no fault of their own , the reason for the seven @-@ year rift in Ruth 's relationship with teammate Lou Gehrig . Sometime in 1932 , Gehrig 's mother , during a conversation which she assumed was private , remarked , " It 's a shame [ Claire ] doesn 't dress Dorothy as nicely as she dresses her own daughter . " When the comment inevitably got back to Ruth , he angrily told Gehrig to tell his mother to mind her own business . Gehrig in turn took offense at what he perceived as Ruth 's comment about his mother . The two men reportedly never spoke off the field until they reconciled at Yankee Stadium on Lou Gehrig Appreciation Day in 1939 . 
 Although Ruth was married through most of his baseball career , when Colonel Huston asked him to tone down his lifestyle , the player said , " I 'll promise to go easier on drinking and to get to bed earlier , but not for you , fifty thousand dollars , or two @-@ hundred and fifty thousand dollars will I give up women . They 're too much fun . " 
 = = Cancer and death ( 1946 – 48 ) = = 
 As early as the war years , doctors had cautioned Ruth to take better care of his health , and he grudgingly followed their advice , limiting his drinking and not going on a proposed trip to support the troops in the South Pacific . In 1946 , Ruth began experiencing severe pain over his left eye , and had difficulty swallowing . In November 1946 , he entered French Hospital in New York for tests , which revealed that Ruth had an inoperable malignant tumor at the base of his skull and in his neck . It was a lesion known as nasopharyngeal carcinoma , or " <unk> . " His name and fame gave him access to experimental treatments , and he was one of the first cancer patients to receive both drugs and radiation treatment simultaneously . He was discharged from the hospital in February , having lost 80 pounds ( 36 kg ) , and went to Florida to recuperate . He returned to New York and Yankee Stadium after the season started . The new commissioner , Happy Chandler ( Judge Landis had died in 1944 ) , proclaimed April 27 , 1947 , Babe Ruth Day around the major leagues , with the most significant observance to be at Yankee Stadium . A number of teammates and others spoke in honor of Ruth , who briefly addressed the crowd of almost 60 @,@ 000 . 
 Around this time , developments in chemotherapy offered some hope . The doctors had not told Ruth that he had cancer because of his family 's fear that he might do himself harm . They treated him with <unk> , a folic acid derivative ; he may have been the first human subject . Ruth showed dramatic improvement during the summer of 1947 , so much so that his case was presented by his doctors at a scientific meeting , without using his name . He was able to travel around the country , doing promotional work for the Ford Motor Company on American Legion Baseball . He appeared again at another day in his honor at Yankee Stadium in September , but was not well enough to pitch in an old @-@ timers game as he had hoped . 
 The improvement was only a temporary remission , and by late 1947 , Ruth was unable to help with the writing of his autobiography , The Babe Ruth Story , which was almost entirely ghostwritten . In and out of the hospital in New York , he left for Florida in February 1948 , doing what activities he could . After six weeks he returned to New York to appear at a book @-@ signing party . He also traveled to California to witness the filming of the book . 
 On June 5 , 1948 , a " gaunt and hollowed out " Ruth visited Yale University to donate a manuscript of The Babe Ruth Story to its library . On June 13 , Ruth visited Yankee Stadium for the final time in his life , appearing at the 25th anniversary celebrations of " The House that Ruth Built " . By this time he had lost much weight and had difficulty walking . Introduced along with his surviving teammates from 1923 , Ruth used a bat as a cane . Nat Fein 's photo of Ruth taken from behind , standing near home plate and facing " <unk> " ( right field ) became one of baseball 's most famous and widely circulated photographs , and won the Pulitzer Prize . 
 Ruth made one final trip on behalf of American Legion Baseball , then entered Memorial Hospital , where he would die . He was never told he had cancer , but before his death , had surmised it . He was able to leave the hospital for a few short trips , including a final visit to Baltimore . On July 26 , 1948 , Ruth left the hospital to attend the premiere of the film The Babe Ruth Story . Shortly thereafter , Ruth returned to the hospital for the final time . He was barely able to speak . Ruth 's condition gradually became worse ; only a few visitors were allowed to see him , one of whom was National League president and future Commissioner of Baseball Ford Frick . " Ruth was so thin it was unbelievable . He had been such a big man and his arms were just skinny little bones , and his face was so haggard " , Frick said years later . 
 Thousands of New Yorkers , including many children , stood vigil outside the hospital in Ruth 's final days . On August 16 , 1948 , at 8 : 01 p.m. , Ruth died in his sleep at the age of 53 . Instead of a wake at a funeral home , his casket was taken to Yankee Stadium , where it remained for two days ; 77 @,@ 000 people filed past to pay him tribute . His funeral Mass took place at St. Patrick 's Cathedral ; a crowd estimated at 75 @,@ 000 waited outside . Ruth was buried on a hillside in Section 25 at the Gate of Heaven Cemetery in Hawthorne , New York . An epitaph by Cardinal Spellman appears on his headstone . His second wife , Claire Merritt Ruth , would be interred with him 28 years later in 1976 . 
 = = Memorial and museum = = 
 On April 19 , 1949 , the Yankees unveiled a granite monument in Ruth 's honor in center field of Yankee Stadium . The monument was located in the field of play next to a flagpole and similar tributes to Huggins and Gehrig until the stadium was remodeled from 1974 – 1975 , which resulted in the outfield fences moving inward and enclosing the monuments from the playing field . This area was known thereafter as Monument Park . Yankee Stadium , " the House that Ruth Built " , was replaced after the 2008 season with a new Yankee Stadium across the street from the old one ; Monument Park was subsequently moved to the new venue behind the center field fence . Ruth 's uniform number 3 has been retired by the Yankees , and he is one of five Yankees players or managers to have a granite monument within the stadium . 
 The Babe Ruth Birthplace Museum is located at 216 Emory Street , a Baltimore row house where Ruth was born , and three blocks west of Oriole Park at Camden Yards , where the AL 's Baltimore Orioles play . The property was restored and opened to the public in 1973 by the non @-@ profit Babe Ruth Birthplace Foundation , Inc . Ruth 's widow , Claire , his two daughters , Dorothy and Julia , and his sister , Mamie , helped select and install exhibits for the museum . 
 = = Contemporary impact = = 
 Ruth was the first baseball star to be the subject of overwhelming interest by the public . Baseball had developed star players before , such as Cobb and " Shoeless Joe " Jackson , but both men had uneasy relations with fans , in Cobb 's case sometimes marked by violence . Ruth 's biographers agree that he benefited from the timing of his ascension to " Home Run King " , with an America hit hard by both the war and the 1918 flu pandemic longing for something to help put these traumas behind it . He also resonated in a country which felt , in the aftermath of the war , that it took second place to no one . Montville argues that as a larger @-@ than @-@ life figure capable of unprecedented athletic feats in the nation 's largest city , Ruth became an icon of the significant social changes which marked the early 1920s . Glenn Stout notes in his history of the Yankees , " Ruth was New York incarnate — uncouth and raw , flamboyant and flashy , oversized , out of scale , and absolutely unstoppable " . 
 Ruth became such a symbol of the United States during his lifetime that during World War II , Japanese soldiers yelled in English , " To hell with Babe Ruth " , to anger American soldiers . ( Ruth replied that he hoped that " every Jap that mention [ ed ] my name gets shot " ) . Creamer recorded that " Babe Ruth transcended sport , moved far beyond the artificial limits of baselines and outfield fences and sports pages " . Wagenheim stated , " He appealed to a deeply rooted American yearning for the definitive climax : clean , quick , <unk> . " According to Glenn Stout , " Ruth 's home runs were exalted , uplifting experience that meant more to fans than any runs they were responsible for . A Babe Ruth home run was an event unto itself , one that meant anything was possible . " 
 Ruth 's penchant for hitting home runs altered how baseball is played . Prior to 1920 , home runs were unusual , and managers tried to win games by getting a runner on base and bringing him around to score through such means as the stolen base , the bunt , and the hit and run . Advocates of what was dubbed " inside baseball " , such as Giants manager McGraw , disliked the home run , considering it a blot on the purity of the game . According to sportswriter W. A. <unk> after the 1920 season , Ruth 's breakout performance that season and the response in excitement and attendance , " settled , for all time to come , that the American public is nuttier over the Home Run than the Clever Fielding or the <unk> Pitching . Viva el Home Run and two times viva Babe Ruth , exponent of the home run , and overshadowing star . " Bill James noted , " When the owners discovered that the fans liked to see home runs , and when the foundations of the games were simultaneously imperiled by disgrace [ in the Black Sox Scandal ] , then there was no turning back . " While a few , such as McGraw and Cobb , decried the passing of the old @-@ style play , teams quickly began to seek and develop sluggers . 
 According to contemporary sportswriter Grantland Rice , only two sports figures of the 1920s approached Ruth in popularity — boxer Jack Dempsey and racehorse Man o ' War . One of the factors that contributed to Ruth 's broad appeal was the uncertainty about his family and early life . Ruth appeared to exemplify the American success story , that even an uneducated , unsophisticated youth , without any family wealth or connections , can do something better than anyone else in the world . Montville notes that " the fog [ surrounding his childhood ] will make him forever accessible , universal . He will be the patron saint of American possibility . " Similarly , the fact that Ruth played when a relatively small portion of his fans had the opportunity to see him play , in the era before television coverage of baseball , allowed his legend to grow through word of mouth and the hyperbole of sports reporters . Reisler notes that recent sluggers who surpassed Ruth 's 60 @-@ home run mark , such as Mark McGwire and Barry Bonds , generated much less excitement than when Ruth repeatedly broke the single @-@ season home run record in the 1920s ; Ruth dominated a relatively small sports world , while Americans of the present era have many sports available to watch . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Creamer termed Ruth " a unique figure in the social history of the United States " . Ruth has even entered the language : a dominant figure in a field , whether within or outside sports , is often referred to as " the Babe Ruth " of that field . Similarly , " <unk> " has come to mean in sports , " colossal , dramatic , prodigious , magnificent ; with great power . " 
 More books , Montville noted in 2006 , have been written about Ruth than about any other member of the Baseball Hall of Fame . At least five of these books ( including Creamer 's and Wagenheim 's ) were written in 1973 and 1974 , timed to capitalize on the increase in public interest in Ruth as Henry Aaron approached his career home run mark , which he broke on April 8 , 1974 . Aaron stated as he approached Ruth 's record , " I can 't remember a day this year or last when I did not hear the name of Babe Ruth . " 
 Montville suggests that Ruth is probably even more popular today than he was when his career home run record was broken by Aaron . The <unk> era that Ruth started continues in baseball , to the delight of the fans . Owners build ballparks to encourage home runs , which are featured on SportsCenter and Baseball Tonight each evening during the season . The questions of performance @-@ enhancing drug use , which have dogged recent home run hitters such as McGwire and Bonds , do nothing to diminish Ruth 's reputation ; his <unk> with beer and hot dogs seem part of a simpler time . 
 Ruth has been named the greatest baseball player of all time in various surveys and rankings . In 1998 , The Sporting News ranked him number one on the list of " Baseball 's 100 Greatest Players " . In 1999 , baseball fans named Ruth to the Major League Baseball All @-@ Century Team . He was named baseball 's Greatest Player Ever in a ballot commemorating the 100th anniversary of professional baseball , in 1969 . The Associated Press reported in 1993 that Muhammad Ali was tied with Babe Ruth as the most recognized athletes in America . In a 1999 ESPN poll , he was ranked as the second @-@ greatest U.S. athlete of the century , behind Michael Jordan . In 1983 , the United States Postal Service honored Ruth with the issuance of a twenty @-@ cent stamp . 
 One long @-@ term survivor of the craze over Ruth may be the Baby Ruth candy bar . The original company to market the confectionery , the Curtis Candy Company , maintained that the bar was named after Ruth Cleveland , daughter of former president Grover Cleveland . She died in 1904 and the bar was first marketed in 1921 , at the height of the craze over the slugger . The slugger later sought to market candy bearing his name ; he was refused a trademark because of the Baby Ruth bar . Corporate files from 1921 are no longer extant ; the brand has changed hands several times and is now owned by the Nestlé company . The Ruth estate licensed his likeness for use in an advertising campaign for Baby Ruth in 1995 . Due to a marketing arrangement , in 2005 , the Baby Ruth bar became the official candy bar of Major League Baseball . 
 Montville notes the continuing relevance of Babe Ruth in American culture , over three @-@ quarters of a century after he last swung a bat in a major league game : 
 The fascination with his life and career continues . He is a bombastic , sloppy hero from our bombastic , sloppy history , origins undetermined , a folk tale of American success . His moon face is as recognizable today as it was when he stared out at Tom Zachary on a certain September afternoon in 1927 . If sport has become the national religion , Babe Ruth is the patron saint . He stands at the heart of the game he played , the promise of a warm summer night , a bag of peanuts , and a beer . And just maybe , the longest ball hit out of the park . 
 = John Davis ( Massachusetts governor ) = 
 John Davis ( January 13 , 1787 – April 19 , 1854 ) was an American lawyer , businessman and politician from Massachusetts . He spent 25 years in public service , serving in both houses of the United States Congress and for three non @-@ consecutive years as Governor of Massachusetts . Because of his reputation for personal integrity he was known as " Honest John " Davis . 
 Born in Northborough , Massachusetts , Davis attended Yale College before studying law in Worcester , Massachusetts , where he established a successful law practice . He spent 10 years ( 1824 – 34 ) in the United States House of Representatives as a National Republican ( later Whig ) , where he supported protectionist tariff legislation . He won election as Governor of Massachusetts in a three @-@ way race in 1833 that was decided by the state legislature . After two terms he was elected to the United States Senate , where he served most of one term , resigning early in 1841 after he was once again elected governor . 
 His second term as governor was undistinguished , but he split with fellow Whig Daniel Webster over a variety of issues , and lost the 1843 election to Democrat Marcus Morton . He was reelected to the Senate in 1845 , where he served until 1851 . He opposed the Mexican @-@ American War , and worked to prevent the extension of slavery to the territories , although he did not take a hard line on the matter , voting for most of the provisions of the Compromise of 1850 . He retired from public service in 1853 , and died the next year . 
 = = Early life = = 
 John Davis was born in Northborough , Massachusetts to Deacon Isaac Davis and Anna ( Brigham ) Davis . He attended local schools and then Leicester Academy before attending Yale College . He graduated in 1812 , and then studied law with Worcester lawyer Francis Blake , gaining admission to the bar three years later . 
 He was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1821 . 
 = = Lawyer and Congressman = = 
 Davis first practiced law in Spencer , Massachusetts , but soon returned to Worcester , where he eventually took over Blake 's practice . He was briefly in partnership with Levi Lincoln , Jr. before the latter was appointed to the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court in 1824 . Davis also entered politics in 1824 , winning election to the United States Congress . He represented Massachusetts from 1825 to 1833 in the House of Representatives in the 19th , 20th , 21st , 22nd and 23rd Congresses . He supported John Quincy Adams in his successful bid for the presidency , and favored conservative fiscal policies . In keeping with the state 's ( and Worcester 's ) increasingly industrial character , he favored protectionist tariff legislation ; his speeches in support of the Tariff of 1828 were widely reprinted . He opposed the policies of President Andrew Jackson , and was politically aligned with Henry Clay , although he was against Clay 's proposed compromise tariff of 1833 . 
 = = Governor and Senator = = 
 In 1833 Davis was encouraged by National Republican Party leaders to run for Governor of Massachusetts , against former President John Quincy Adams , who was running on the Anti @-@ Masonic ticket , and Democrat Marcus Morton . His political support came from textile interests and a faction of the National Republicans ( later Whigs ) led by Abbott Lawrence , as well as outgoing Governor Levi Lincoln , Jr . In the election Davis gained a plurality of votes , but not the majority that was then required . As a result , the state legislature decided the election , choosing Davis when Adams withdrew , preferring him over Morton . The Whig @-@ controlled legislature did nothing to reward the Anti @-@ Masons for Adams ' move , breaking up any chance that the two parties would form a working relationship . Davis was reelected in 1834 , aided by a general dislike in Massachusetts for President Jackson 's attacks on the Second Bank of the United States . During these two terms , Davis made no particular initiatives of his own , continuing Lincoln 's business @-@ friendly fiscal and economic policies . The state continued to grow economically , expanding its transportation infrastructure and industry . 
 Senator Nathaniel Silsbee , whose term ended in 1835 , decided not to run for reelection . Davis was approached by Whig leader Daniel Webster about running for the seat in December 1834 , as part of a bid to oppose Adams , who had announced his interest in the seat . The idea was that Davis , a strong candidate , would be positioned against Adams ( a long @-@ standing rival of Webster who was again running as an Anti @-@ Mason ) in the vote , which would be made by the state legislature , while Edward Everett would have the opportunity to run for governor when Davis vacated that seat . The state house and senate deadlocked on the two choices until a speech by Adams in Congress arguing in favor of Jackson 's foreign policies alarmed enough senators to change their votes in favor of Davis . The deadlock was not resolved until February 1835 ; Davis , who had been reelected governor , resigned that post to assume the Senate seat . Everett went on to win the governor 's seat in the next election . ( Adams ' son Charles Francis believed that Webster and Everett conspired to achieve this end , but there is no evidentiary support for the idea . ) Webster , in exchange for his advocacy on behalf of Davis , expected Davis ' faction in the Whig Party to support him in a future bid for the presidency . 
 Davis ' term in the Senate was unexceptional , except for the notably hard line he took on the question of the nation 's northeastern boundary . This dispute with the United Kingdom concerned the boundary between Maine and the British ( now Canadian ) province of New Brunswick , and had only been partially resolved after the 1794 Jay Treaty . In the 1830s both sides pushed development into the disputed area , leading to petty conflicts ( and by 1839 the possibility of war ) . Massachusetts , which Maine had been a part of prior to 1820 , maintained a property interest in some of the disputed land ; Davis took a hard line on the matter , insisting that the United States should not surrender any of the territory it claimed . 
 In 1836 Davis sat on a special committee formed to consider legislative responses to a flood of allegedly inflammatory abolitionist materials being sent into southern slave states from northern anti @-@ slavery organizations . Davis , the only northerner on the committee , opposed any sort of legislation , and the committee was unable to reach a consensus . When John C. Calhoun introduced legislation criminalizing the mailing of such materials , Davis spoke out against it , pointing out that it would effectively act as an unconstitutional gag on people seeking to speak out against slavery . The bill was rendered moot by administrative actions in the United States Post Office . 
 While serving in the Senate , Davis appeared before the United States Supreme Court in 1837 , representing the defendants in Charles River Bridge v. Warren Bridge . The plaintiffs were proprietors of the Charles River Bridge , a toll bridge constructed between Boston and Charlestown in 1786 , and the defendants were proprietors of a competing bridge to which the state had issued a charter in 1828 . The plaintiffs argued that the defendant 's charter infringed on their charter , in which they claimed the state granted them an exclusive right to control the crossing . Davis and <unk> Simon Greenleaf argued that the rights granted to the Charles River proprietors had to be interpreted narrowly , and that the state had not granted them an exclusive right . The court found for the defendants , with Chief Justice Roger B. Taney 's decision echoing the defendant 's reasoning . The Charles River Bridge charter would be acquired by the state in 1841 , during Davis ' next term as governor . 
 During the early years of his political career Davis was on good terms with Daniel Webster , who was highly influential in party politics both at the state and national levels , and to whom he looked up . However , in the late 1830s Davis and other Massachusetts Whigs ( notably Abbott Lawrence ) came to believe that Webster lacked broad @-@ based national support to successfully contend with Henry Clay and William Henry Harrison after his weak showing in the 1836 Whig convention . This introduced a rift between Webster and Davis that deepened in 1838 when the two split on western land policies . The split between Davis and Webster became permanent after Webster harshly criticized Lawrence in an 1842 speech celebrating his successful negotiation of the Webster @-@ Ashburton Treaty with Great Britain , which resolved ( among other matters ) the northeast boundary . 
 = = Governor and Senator , again = = 
 Not long after Marcus Morton won the 1839 gubernatorial election , Whig leadership prevailed on Davis to run again for governor . In the 1840 election Davis rode the coattails of Harrison 's landslide presidential victory into office . Harrison 's death in April 1841 reenergized the Democrats , who attacked Davis in that year 's election . They charged that protectionist tariffs he supported taxed the poor , and that his opposition to western land policies was hypocritical because he also speculated in those lands . Davis won a narrow majority over Morton , and was reelected in 1841 . This period in office , like his first term as governor , also did not contain any new programs or initiatives , but was overshadowed by the ongoing negotiations between Daniel Webster ( now Secretary of State ) and Lord Ashburton over the boundary issue . Davis and Webster had contentious disagreements over the negotiations , although Webster was finally able to convince Davis to accept the final agreement . The matter deepened the division between the two men , who stopped speaking to each other . 
 In 1842 the anti @-@ slavery Liberty Party had risen to sufficient prominence in the state that neither Morton nor Davis was able to secure a majority . The state senate , which had a Democratic majority , elected Morton . Davis ' showing in the election was undoubtedly harmed by his ongoing feud with Webster , who refused to campaign on his behalf . 
 Davis was considered as a potential vice presidential nominee in the 1844 Whig Party convention . He was nominated by the state Whig convention over Webster 's opposition , but Webster worked to ensure he was not chosen at the national convention . Webster forces successfully got Webster elected to the Senate in early 1845 , despite opposition from the Lawrence @-@ Davis faction . Davis was himself elected to the Senate again later in 1845 to fill the vacancy caused by the death of Isaac C. Bates , and was elected to a full term in 1847 . He opposed the annexation of Texas on the grounds that it would expand slaveholding territory , but was not willing to split the party over the issue of slavery . Davis was one of only two senators who voted against the Mexican @-@ American War . 
 Davis was opposed to slavery and its extension into the territories , but he voted for most of the provisions of the Compromise of 1850 , including the bill on Texas borders , shocking some anti @-@ compromise Whigs . He regularly voted in favor of the Wilmot Proviso , a measure to ban slavery from territories won in the Mexican war which was frequently attached to legislation in the late 1840s but was never adopted . In one notable debate , Davis used procedural measures to delay vote on an amendment to remove it from a military appropriations bill , hoping to force a vote without time to conference on differences between the House and Senate versions before Congress adjourned . However , due to a difference in the clocks in the respective chambers , the House adjourned before he finished speaking , scuttling the bill . Salmon P. Chase wrote of the episode , " Ten political lives of ten John Davises , spent in the best direction , could not compensate for this half @-@ hour 's mischief " , and Polk noted that if the loss of the bill delayed the end of the Mexican war , Davis would " deserve the <unk> of the country . " Scholarship is divided on whether Davis ' claimed strategy would really have worked . 
 Davis ' weak stance on slavery began to cause a decrease in his popularity as abolitionist sentiment in the state gained ground during the 1840s . He also refused to support Webster in his 1852 presidential bid , campaigning on behalf of Winfield Scott . He declined renomination for election in 1852 , and retired from public life . 
 In his later years Davis was associated with the American Antiquarian Society , where he served as president for many years . He died in Worcester on April 19 , 1854 , and was interred in the Worcester Rural Cemetery . He was known as " Honest John " Davis , because of an impeccable reputation for personal integrity . 
